Lynch said Tasmania should feel “confident” about it chances of securing a stand-alone license and dismissed former Collingwood president Eddie McGuire’s scheme for a combined North Melbourne-Tasmania team.
“From what I can see, it’s all very exciting and Tasmania should feel confident, albeit not over the line, that we are well-position for our best crack at getting a team,” said Lynch before the Carbine Club lunch at Wrest Point.
“This is a legitimate case the Taskforce has put forward to the AFL with backing of $150m from the state government.
“There is no other government in Australia putting in that kind of money to an AFL team. It is remarkable support to have a team that is government-backed.
“If we present a compelling business case it will give the AFL presidents nowhere else to go.”
AFL boss Gill McLachlan said in Hobart last week Tasmania was bidding for a 19th not a shared license or a relocated team.
“If you were starting a new competition you probably wouldn’t have an odd number of teams and probably not the number of teams there are in Melbourne, but the reality is it’s not that,” Lynch said.
“Tasmania wants its own stand-alone team, not a relocated team, and the one that has popped up about North Melbourne relocating, North fans don’t want that either.
“That doesn’t really help anyone. North Melbourne’s supporters would be disengaged and Tasmanians wouldn’t have the same sort of engagement for that team, so it needs to be a 19th team.”
Lynch says where ever he goes the vibe is positive toward Tasmania.
“The massive majority of the general AFL supporter is that Tassie should have a team,” he said.
“You could have argued that we deserved a team before the 17th and 18th teams came in, but we understand why the Gold Coast and GWS got a team, which was about the business of growing the AFL.
“On the flip side, if we can present a business case that is going to not only be sustainable but vibrant and strong, I can’t see where the case falls down and the general AFL punter thinks Tassie deserves a team.
“It has been such a contributor for well over 100 years. You only have to look at the Team of the Century and how many Tasmanians are in that.
“We need the presidents to support it so Tasmania finally gets a team.”
The deciding factor will be the financial strength of the business model.
“The AFL presidents have an obligation to make sure the sustainability of the competition is there,” Lynch said.
“They can’t be ripping up money to put a team in.
“If the business case ticks the right boxes from a financial point of view I can’t see why they won’t back it in.”
McLachlan also told the state government no stadium, no license, so the $750m indoor venue proposed for Hobart’s waterfront is critical to the equation.
“It looks incredible,” Lynch said. “I’ve lived in Hobart and played footy here, and I come down for business quite a lot.
“Being around Hobart over the past couple of days, it is a magnificent city,” Lynch said.
“It is vibrant city and if you had that multi-purpose indoor stadium on the docks, that is going to generate even more interest for Tassie, and Hobart is going to be an even more vibrant city.”
Clubs yet to take up Rockliff offer as big day looms - June 13
AFL chief executive Gillon McLachlan will give all 18 club presidents an update on Tasmania’s big league push on Tuesday in what is yet another pivotal day in the campaign.
It comes as it is revealed not one of the club presidents has officially accepted an invitation from Tasmanian Premier Jeremy Rockliff to head south to see the state.
Tuesday’s meeting will be the first opportunity between the AFL and club leaders since Mr McLachlan had his first face-to-face contact with Mr Rockliff in Hobart last Thursday.
In that meeting, not only did Mr McLachlan confirm a new licence must include a commitment to a new roofed stadium in Hobart, but that the AFL would also commit its resources and expertise in designing, building and sourcing funding for such a project.
A number of presidents have voiced some concerns about the financial sustainability and the impact of another club on the league recently, and Tuesday’s update is seen as a vital step in getting them back in the room for a 19th club.
The Tasmanian Government has an offer of $10m on the table for 10 years to help fund the club, plus a $50m start up grant for a high performance centre.
Hawthorn president Jeff Kennett — who has a vested interest given the Hawks are the biggest beneficiary of playing home games in the state — believes it needs to be a $20m commitment each season for at least 15 years for a Tasmanian club.
While a number of presidents, including Adelaide’s John Olsen and Port Adelaide’s David Koch, have indicated they will accept the invitation south, they are yet to officially do so ahead of Tuesday’s meeting Mr Rockliff said.
“The purpose of the letter sent to President’s was to outline Tasmania’s offer to the AFL, which is at the top range of the recommendations made in the independent (Colin) Carter report,” Mr Rockliff said.
“The letter also invited Presidents seeking any further detail to discuss the merits of the offer, because there is no doubt that the AFL and its clubs will benefit as a result of admitting Tasmania to the AFL and AFLW.
“While no one is yet to confirm travel to Tasmania, early responses to the letter have been positive.”
For Tasmania to enter the league, it must gain approval from the AFL commission before going to club presidents for a final vote in August.
brett.stubbs@news.com.au
Twitter follow Brett Stubbs
Word count: 947
