Race 1 Very likely we’ll be racing on a soft track at Morphettville and DIXON STREET heads betting in the first on the back of a strong first-up win in similar conditions. Had a good run in transit at Gawler and the result never really looked in doubt, clearing out to score by three lengths. This is a step up, but there are no champions engaged here and the weight has been kept in check with Georgina Cartwright taking two off. Fair bet at $3.80. THE GENERAL scored back to back wins earlier this campaign but missed out on his hat-trick at Cranbourne last start finishing third behind Pariano despite beating him home the run prior. Looked a bit out of sorts in the run that night but did close off late to go across the line in the leading bunch. Paying for his consistency here with 60.5kg even after the claim for Neindorf and is at risk of some early bad luck from the draw. TOO EASY SIS was very impressive on debut at Kyneton, racing outside the leader before putting on a show over the last furlong when asked for an effort. Her pick-up was very impressive to the naked eye, and although this is obviously tougher she has drawn well and John Allen sticks with her. Worth a small saver at $9.00.
Race 2 ECUMENICAL is a very promising filly who looks the bet of the day at $2.45 here in the Sires’. She has won three of four to date, picking up black type in the Dequetteville in early April before stepping up to Group Three level in the Breeders Stakes and giving the boys a galloping lesson. Travelled well in behind the lead pair before peeling out in the straight and she really opened up the last 100m or so running through the line. Obviously handles the wet easily and I don’t see a problem with her stretching it out to 1400m. Lobs in the same spot from a better draw and although this is stronger she definitely has more in the tank. INDICTMENT is on the second line at $4.60 after trying hard behind Flying Award in the Anzac Day Stakes at Flemington. Caught up to the leaders a long way from home and did look the winner until he got bloused near the line. Genuine threat but I am confident the filly has more upside. THE LAST CHARGE ran a good race behind Forever Free on the heavy track at Caulfield before breaking through at Bendigo and should get conditions to suit. Drops 3kg off his latest win and can add some value to your multiples at around $13.
Race 3 There aren’t many chances in this Bm80 and the $21 available about AWAKE IN GRINZING looks big overs to my eye. Raced nothing like a 60/1 pop first-up where he travelled well from the good gate before passing a whole bunch in the straight. No disgrace to finish second to One More Jack who has been building a picket fence for months, and this bloke certainly prefers this longer trip. Worth noting that all of his victories have been on wet tracks, and although he will need a touch of luck from the draw, if he gets it he will give us a great sight at big odds. ONE MORE JACK is going to be hard to get past again, lining up here searching for his seventh win on the trot. He has been moving up steadily through the grades but is certainly facing his toughest test to date. It’s a similar line-up to the group he beat three weeks ago but is up to 60.5kg and has to be some sort of a risk. Fairly priced at $3.50. JACOBITE PRINCE led all the way to win impressively here in mid-April but disappointed last start when beaten out of a place in easier grade. Tracked a pretty solid tempo but got run over by the swoopers over the last 100m or so. Drawn awkwardly and poor value at $4.80 but can improve.
Race 4 Happy enough to run with the pack here who have ALMADRAVA on the top line at $3.50 looking to make it two in a row. Made a winning debut for the Phillip Stokes yard at Gawler last month, leading all the way as the red-hot fave and opening up to win by a big space on the line. It’s very hard to know where that puts her stepping up to a Bm64 given that she didn’t beat a lot and the time wasn’t flash on the soft-6, but this isn’t a particularly strong assignment and Kayla Crowther will give her every hope punching forward early from the widish draw. Not one to go all-in on but is a strong chance. MOI CHOUX has to give the filly 7.5kg but to be fair he has won three out of four including one at this level. Led all the way at Sale last start to score an easy win over the short course and has drawn underneath the top pick here so Neindorf will have options. Bred to be a swimmer and and will keep Almadrava honest. SIDESTREET is searching for a hat-trick tomorrow after posting victories at Gawler and Murray Bridge. Another leader to throw into the mix here, though I suspect he will ease out of any speed battle those top two might want to initiate.
Race 5 SASUN has been in super form this year and at around the $10 looks as good as any in a wide open Bm75 where they’re betting $6 the field. Notched up his hat-trick on April Fool’s Day beating Adatto on the line with a whirlwind finish from the back to grab victory on the post. Tried it on again over the longer trip here last time and produced another withering run but fell a length short. He gave the winner six lengths on the bend so it was a monster run and the shorter trip here in the final will suit. Meets him 1.5kg better and looks a big hope. MANZALA shades Adatto for favouritism here at $6.00 and with two wins from his three appearances since returning from a long spell I have to include him. Needs to find someone’s back from the barrier and has 61kg to contend with but he did have some very appealing formlines when last in work, and did okay in the wet last start. ADATTO’s solid recent form is all around Sasun and their chances here are very much intertwined. He doesn’t mind settling off the speed if need be but from the low draw tomorrow I’d be very surprised if Ethan Brown doesn’t take advantage under the 60kg and have him up in the first half dozen. He’ll be getting a start on my bloke and will give him something to chase.
Race 6 EXCELIDA is a dual acceptor who is closing in on a win and if they decide to come here she’s going to take some beating. Showed up at the end of her spring campaign, running fairly at Group Two level in the Edward Manifold before picking up some black type in the Twilight Glow behind Xilong. Enjoyed the soft conditions at Lakeside second-up to beat the older girls before running on in the Nitschke Stakes here last time and is ready for the mile trip. She shouldn’t be out at $8.50 and here’s hoping they decide to give her a chance to pick up another stakes race by coming to Adelaide. KOOWEERUP is a frustrating filly and while I accept that if Excelida is scratched she’ll be my ontopper, I won’t be backing her. Saw them all on straightening at Flemington last run before unleashing a super burst down the outside and just refused to go past Kuramae over the last 100m. She’ll probably win one eventually without me but in the interim we should have her in the minors across all of our business as she does have talent around this level. REALLY DISCREET ran a top race in the Nitschke last start and has to be included among the chances, but she’s by Helmet and more often than not they don’t fancy it too wet. If we get down close to a good-4 she’d be right in the picture.
Race 7 Not a fan of this contest and I’m going to stick with BEAUTY, though she is awfully hard to catch. She has been thereabouts at each run this calendar year but was a little flat last start when dropping back sharply in distance and finishing four lengths from G1 starlet Bella Vella. Has excellent recent form around Runson at this track and distance and goes okay in soft ground. She’ll do at the $7.00 each way. DEBT COLLECTOR is vying for favouritism here at around the $5.50 mark and will strip fitter for his first-up fifth behind Mum’s My Hero over the 1050m dash. Drops a whopping 7kg into this tougher assignment which will help no end, and he does like it wet. My biggest concern with him is that he has finished a beaten favourite on nine occasions from just 23 career starts, so he does perform below expectations an awful lot. TERBIUM would win this by 10 lengths on his best form but he hasn’t reproduced his early brilliance. Encouraging run first-up before a very disappointing result at Caulfield on the soft-6. I don’t know much about the Terangos on a wet track, but he did go okay in the Euclase Stakes here last year in soft going, and he has drawn well. Some hope.
Race 8 We’ve been waiting a very long time for everything to be in place for RUSSIAN CAMELOT to show us what he’s made of and tomorrow in the SA Derby he gets his chance. Very encouraging fresh run at Flemington back in March, then was freshened up before winning like a champion in a lowly Bm64 against the older horses at the provincials. He missed his third-up run with a sore throat and they’ve opted to head straight into the Derby from 1600m up to the 2500m tomorrow, and I think he can do it. I know he only beat restricted horses last time but Oliver was deadset swinging and he had to give them weight as effectively an early threeyear-old. They cleaned out his pipes in a jumpout the other day and he is bred to enjoy plenty of give in the ground. This race will be a great guide for us vis a vis his spring prospects as there are a couple of genuine stars engaged here, but at $4.00 I am loading up. WARNING is the Vic Derby winner from the spring who hasn’t broken through since, but was doing his best work late in the Chairman’s here a fortnight ago over 2035m. Gets through the ground without a worry and while I am very bullish about the Russian there’s no doubting this bloke is a genuine threat now that he’s coming good. DALASAN didn’t quite live up to expectations in the spring but has progressed impressively through his campaign this time in and comes into this gunning for a hat-trick. Latest was too strong in the Chairman’s as the odds-on fave and he does rate a genuine chance with a penchant for the soft ground, but I’m not convinced he will be strong at the end of 2500m here against two horses who should be. Certainly capable of winning but is a very layable commodity at $3.00 on a track where 2500m will feel more like 2800m at the death.
Race 9APPALACHIAN was a tough watch here two weeks ago, being a bit sluggish early on and overracing in parts before getting hopelessly boxed in down the straight. Got out with about 25 metres to run and it hurts to do your money that way. He’s drawn the carpark here so I am expecting a very different run in transit, and while there is some query about him on a wet track, he at least has some experience on it in his trials and I’m not willing to let him go round at $7.00 without trying to get my money back for the other day. MUM’S MY HERO is good value at $9.00 considering he’s finished in the first two at each of six runs this preparation, including a super debut win for the Darren Magro team last start. Up a kilo for his troubles here but has drawn well again and he is saver material for sure at the good quote. SEEMINGLY DISCREET is another of the lime green brigade who knows where the line is and she is looking to extend her winning streak to five tomorrow. Her two 1000m efforts here off a letup have been excellent, but she has drawn a shocker here and will need plenty of luck.
CREDIT: GREG SPLETTER
Word count: 2164
