Angry heritage advocates and councils fear thousands of historic properties will be at risk from the State Government’s plans to revamp South Australia’s planning rules
For more than a decade Chris Bates-Brownsword transformed a disused bowling green at North Plympton into a native garden. She planted the area which abutted her 1863 mansion Moorfield with grevillea, bottlebrushes and gums in a passion project to provide a haven for birds and bees in an area undergoing rapid urban infill.
Her happy place was an autumn night on the veranda of the grand old bay window villa on Mooringe Ave watching lorikeets fighting for space on the fish pond.
“The light was beautiful,” Bates-Brownsword says of the house she and husband Harold, both in their seventies, bought in 1985. “Looking to the west and there were marvellous sunsets and even though you were on a main road you were lost completely in another space.” But in June, Moorfield, its garden and birdsong fell victim to progress, a bulldozer and a lack of heritage protection.
The Bates-Brownswords, who had downsized to a smaller but similar villa in Cumberland Park, sold Moorfield in March to a developer for $1.83 million who has subdivided the 3000sq m block for eight houses.
“It’s a real loss to the community, it was a breathing space,” says Bates-Brownsword, who hoped the building wouldn’t be demolished.
At about the same time, a 1950s sawtooth shed at Port Adelaide was being dismantled after Environment Minister David Speirs used his executive powers to revoke the building’s state heritage status and scuttle efforts to save the building.
Protesters lobbied for the retention of Shed 26, saying its demise would be a missed opportunity to reuse the building as part of a new housing development. Others argued it was just a shed which nobody cared about until it was threatened with demolition.
The loss of Moorfield and Shed 26, separated by nearly a century of construction, provoked public outrage and became lightning rods for the paucity of the state’s heritage protection, which many say is now facing one of its greatest threats.
The latest battleground, however, is not one building but entire streets – from St Peters to Port Adelaide, Gilberton to Gawler – and thousands of historic cottages, villas, bungalows and Tudor buildings dotted across the state.
The weapons of mass destruction heritage advocates fear are new planning rules they say threaten South Australia’s built history.
In the push for economic development, the State Government by July 2020 will roll out a single planning and design rule book replacing the 68 council development plans which regulate everything from minimum block sizes, to building heights – and demolition controls of identified heritage buildings.
The reforms, which started under Labor in 2014, are being sold as a means to streamline the planning system, fast track approvals, remove ambiguity and unlock economic investment.
But critics fear a casualty of a “one-size-fits-all” approach will be the state’s historic buildings, particularly 11,810 so-called contributory items – clusters of buildings of a similar vintage and character – which are markers of the historic development of areas such as Cheltenham, Brompton, Unley, Tusmore, Toorak Gardens and Woodville.
Concern about the reforms led to the launch of a heritage alliance uniting residents groups, the National Trust and Conservation Council to campaign against the planning laws and, they say, safeguard historic neighbourhoods which councils have fought for many years to protect.
Alliance convener and former thorn in the side of the Labor Government’s Transforming Health agenda, Professor Warren Jones, says “bottom line” advice from heritage experts is that heritage protections will be weakened.
Current demolition controls for contributory items vary, but generally policies discourage knocking down a building without good reasons such as it being in a state of disrepair.
It is proposed these buildings, presently mapped within historic conservation zones and listed in council development plans, will not transfer into the new planning and design code because there is no statutory authority for their creation – unlike local and state heritage places.
Instead, the planning reform’s architect, the State Planning Commission, is proposing a “consistent set of policies” to regulate development of historic buildings. The specifics of how these overlays will operate will be released in October together with the draft planning and design code for public consultation.
City of Norwood Payneham & St Peters Mayor Robert Bria says the commission’s proposed reforms will rewrite history “not with a pen, but a bulldozer”.
“It’s absolute madness,” the 50-year-old says. “The commission has got this wrong and the commission has failed to understand the impact of what this (removing contributory items) is going to do to our suburbs.
“There will be a slow, incremental and methodical erosion of the character dwellings in our state that have been a key part of SA’s history.” His nervousness is understandable as his municipality in Adelaide’s east has 1463 contributory items consisting of predominantly Victorian and Edwardian-era stone cottages and villas, which Bria says have helped to make the council among Adelaide’s most desirable with property prices to match.
Among its best examples of retained historic subdivisions is the Avenue’s precinct, between First and Sixth Ave, St Peters – a collection of 1870s and early 1900s single-storey double-fronted villas, on tree-lined streets.
The historic conservation area states that any development will “conserve and enhance the historic streetscape character”, which, like much of Adelaide’s 19th century housing stock, was built using locally-sourced stone, setting Adelaide apart from other capital cities.
Bria says people buy houses in such areas because they sit among a cluster of similar properties each governed by similar development controls. Contributory items, combined with use of historic conservation zones, have given development certainty to homeowners and buyers, he says.
“When they move in, they are not going to have a McMansion built next to them,” he says. He points out that contributory items represent 3 per cent of the state’s housing stock and says it's a “ridiculous proposition” to suggest they are a barrier to development. Rather, owners have spent thousands restoring and renovating their homes using existing policies.
Contributory items, he argues, were identified through an exhaustive consultative process, ratified by the government, using the government’s own policy manual for retaining these buildings.
He says rewriting the rules will confuse homeowners, developers and councils. He wants existing contributory items and heritage conservation zones to be included in the new code.
Heritage consultant and former Adelaide City councillor Sandy Wilkinson, 51, points his finger at the “development lobby” wanting contributory items removed, so it’s easier to build new houses in tightly-held blue-ribbon suburbs.
Wilkinson, who has a design practice specialising in restoration and renovation of character homes, warns if demolition controls are relaxed in existing historic areas it could lead to a “devaluing” of suburbs. “Once the whole feel of the street’s changed because the project homes aren’t between the villas anymore, they are in lieu of the villas and there’s no villas left, then it’s just a modern street,” he says.
Bria has branded the reforms “Lennon’s Lemon”, in reference to State Planning Commission chairman Michael Lennon, a Scottish emigrant with a 25-year international career in housing, planning and urban development, who has stewardship of the reforms.
The former chief of the Glasgow Housing Association was appointed last October to head the commission, which aims to act in the “best interests of all South Australians” and to encourage “statewide economic growth and liveability”.
Lennon, 62, says he’s no enemy to heritage. He cites his work for the National Trust, supervision of the redevelopment of the East End Produce Markets and his former chairmanship of the Civic Trust having given “awards and brickbats” for conservation and preservation of the built environment.
His other day job is as chief of affordable housing provider Housing Choices Australia, which is restoring a state heritage-listed church hall on Light Square as part of an affordable housing project.
He understands the emotion towards the reforms and that loss of contributory items is an “understandable human response” whether “it’s factually based or not”.
“There’s a fundamental problem in that people think their protection has been guaranteed by this listing when everyone knows that it hasn’t,” he says.
He says it would be irresponsible of the commission to transfer contributory items into the new planning code given they have no basis in law and have been created inconsistently across councils.
No more contributory items and historic conservation zones were created after 2012 for this reason, he says.
He argues the new planning system will provide certainty to existing and future homeowners.
“If you went through the 11,810 items that are listed, some of them have gone through architectural studies, heritage surveys, and some of them are lists of addresses with no buildings listed on them – what is it we’re conserving?” he asks.
“People have come to believe that the preservation of their suburbs is guaranteed by the listing of these individual properties and addresses. That is not the case and has never been the case – it is the policy, the zoning and the demolition controls that give the protections.
“That is why we have focused upon those in the new system and we think that the system we are proposing is more consistent, is fairer and in almost every test we can apply gives at least as much protection – arguably more – than present.” Under the proposed planning and design code, historic conservation areas will be rebranded historic area overlays. Any bid to alter or demolish a building will be assessed against criteria including the building’s heritage value, structural integrity and its “potential to be repaired economically”.
The commission listened to concerns and removed a test that could have allowed demolition based on how well the building’s theme was represented.
Pat Gerace, head of the SA branch of the Urban Development Institute of Australia, which represents planners, and developers, says his understanding is that the proposed reforms will make it harder to knock down properties within the new heritage zones.
But National Trust’s Darren Peacock disagrees and says the commission has failed to provide any evidence or detail to support the heritage reforms.
“Lennon will keep saying they are strengthening heritage protection, but when you unpack it he is playing a lot of semantics, he will argue that contributory items are not even heritage,” he says. “But you go on the state heritage places register and contributory items are there; governments have approved them and have been happy to go along with them for the best part of 25 years.” Peacock says protection for local and state heritage items will also be weakened as demolition applications will no longer be noncomplying development, rather based on a proposal’s merit of the proposal.
“That is a fundamental shift,” he says. “That opens up the gates to anyone being able to argue demolition of anything, even state heritage.” But the commission counters that seven of SA’s 68 councils already consider demolition of state heritage places as noncomplying development, in what it argues is a “further example” of the need for reform.
In another proposed change, opponents will lose the right to appeal demolition approval of a state heritage building, but the applicant will retain the right to challenge a decision. And the commission says anyone will be able to make a submission on an application affecting a state heritage item, unlike at present.
Following an outcry over the potential loss of the contributory items, Planning Minister Stephan Knoll gave councils until December 2020 to identify any buildings they want elevated to local heritage.
Some have taken up the offer while others, including Norwood Payneham & St Peters and West Torrens, have declined, citing costs of up to $400,000 to undertake heritage reviews.
Katrina McDougall and Elizabeth Vines have for more than 30 years undertaken heritage surveys and conservation reports across SA, including the mapping of the Avenues’ precinct in St Peters. They say their key concern is the government listening to developers and not the community.
“We are concerned that there has been no comprehensive effective consultation on this issue to this point of the planning reform process, only public meetings where this recommendation is presented as a fait accompli,” they say in a joint response to SAWeekend.
“It should be noted that the approach of identifying heritage areas and scheduling contributory items is used in Melbourne and Sydney, where property prices are considerably higher than in Adelaide, so it is unsettling that the SA planning reform is opposed to this approach.” McDougall and Vines say in recent years the government has restricted councils’ “genuine attempts” to protect local heritage by refusing to endorse historic conservation areas or contributory items.
Under the Development Act 1993 local heritage management was put under the auspices of the planning department and its minister, who has ultimate veto on any council heritage listings.
Former SA heritage branch chief, Dr Peter Bell, who left the public service in 1993 to establish his own heritage consultancy, says this reform laid the groundwork for an ongoing power struggle between councils and a planning bureaucracy that, he says, has slowly taken control of development from councils.
“I think local heritage is going to be worse off and I think councils are being set up to lose more power,” he says of the planning overhaul.
But he says the use of historic conservation zones and contributory items needs revision because they have created confusion across councils.
“Contributory items were a mistake and they’ve run out of hand,” he says. Bell says there has never been an explanation for the creation of historic conservation zones: are they meant to conserve the heritage or character of an area, or both?
“In some council plans a contributory item, within a (historic conservation) zone is subject to more protection than a place in the SA Heritage Register,” he says.
Warren Jones believes a state election could be won or lost on the depth of concern about impact of urban infill on communities.
He says the level of anger was evidenced by 500 people who attended a hastily convened pro-heritage forum at Norwood Concert Hall this month.
Jones, 81, who is chair of the Friends of the City of Unley Society, says fears over heritage protection was tied to loss of open space fuelled through urban renewal policies that have disregard for existing communities.
“There’s a groundswell (of discontent) across communities,” he says. At the forum, cultural historian Denise Schumann implored the crowd to threaten their local MPs if they want to strengthen heritage protection.
“It can’t be an argument about contributory items,” she said. Washington DC-based heritage economist Donovan Rypkema has spent 30 years spruiking the economic, cultural, social and environmental benefits of keeping and restoring heritage buildings. He has presented to SA councils on how a city’s economic transformation goes hand-in-hand with safeguarding and building upon its heritage and culture.
He told SAWeekend that start-up companies and young entrepreneurs preferred working in historic buildings or a city’s historic areas. Research out of the US has proven, he says, restoring older buildings is more sustainable and created more jobs than new builds.
“A basic question ought to be asked every time a new building is proposed and that is: does this make Adelaide more distinctive or less distinctive?” he says. “If the answer is less, it’s the wrong building.
“You don’t compete economically by being the same as other places, you compete economically by being contrasted with other places, that in part includes the built environment.
“I’m not saying never demolish anything, but we ought to be getting rid of the crappy stuff, not the good stuff or we’re just reducing the quality of the whole.” In May, a parliamentary committee proposed an overhaul of the state’s heritage system including simplifying heritage listing, improving funding for heritage conservation and bringing heritage under the control of a single minister and a single piece of legislation.
At the time of printing, the State Government was yet to table its response to the heritage inquiry.
But SA Weekend understands there is an appetite within its senior ranks to reform the system.
A consistent message to the heritage inquiry – which received 144 submissions and heard evidence from 29 witnesses – was the process for nominating, assessing and listing, specifically local heritage items, was confusing, time consuming and expensive.
It was a process that perhaps left Moorfield vulnerable. The building was inadvertently overlooked during West Torrens Council’s last local heritage study in 1998.
McDougall and Vines, who undertook the heritage survey, say it was a mistake but say nobody in the community or council had alerted them to Moorfield’s existence.
McDougall could not say if they would have recommended Moorfield for heritage protection.
The building’s demolition was temporarily halted by an anonymous but ill-fated bid to state heritage list the property.
An assessment by the heritage branch of the Environment Department said though Moorfield was a rare example of a bay window villa in Plympton it was not a state significant building.
And former owner Harold Bates-Brownsword says a heritage listing would have made it harder to sell the house.
“All the comments were, ‘It’s lovely but it’s too big’, ‘It hasn’t got another bathroom’ or, ‘Oh, if it was only in Unley Park’,” he recalls of property’s open inspection.
Eventual buyer Manu Gupta, who runs a building company in Modbury, says he would not have bought Moorfield if it had a local heritage. “I was always attracted to the land, which held the value,” he says.
Chris Bates-Brownsword says the rapid and total destruction of the house was devastating, but she has no ill-feeling toward Gupta.
She points out he was the only person who made a “reasonable” offer for the property and had every right to do what he wanted with the building. “Its size was its best thing and its curse in many ways,” she says.
As the bulldozer moved in, the Bates-Brownswords rescued some plants from Moorfield’s grounds and a lich gate they intend to erect in their new home.
“I knew it would be hard. I wanted, if you like, to hold the house’s hand until the end,” Chris Bates-Brownsword says of her decision to witness Moorfield’s demolition.“I wanted to be with it because our heart and soul was in it, we had given it much and it had given us much. Perhaps the loss of this grand old house will be a catalyst for change.”
CREDIT: WORDS RENATO CASTELLO MAIN PHOTOGRAPH ROY VANDERVEGT URBAN DEVELOPMENT EDITOR
Word count: 3096
