ACCOUNTING firm dmca advisory has launched an employee share scheme (ESS) for its staff, and the head of the practice believes similar arrangements at other SME companies would support their post-Covid recovery while also helping them to retain staff.
While the Adelaide-based firm of 20 staff has advised on several ESS schemes for its clients, the firm’s director Tania Tonkin believes dmca has become one of the first professional services firms to offer a share scheme to its own staff.
She said ESSs could play a key role in the local economy’s recovery from Covid-19 if simpler regulations and more generous tax policies were introduced to encourage wider adoption, particularly across the SME sector.
“Having a scheme for employee buy-in makes for a more equitable environment – one where employees, the C-suite, and all shareholders have aligned interests,” she said. “As the country recovers from the crisis of Covid-19, any reduction in red tape that encourages higher productivity should be actively encouraged, especially in family and SME businesses.” The opportunity for dmca staff to buy into the firm came as former director Adam Griffiths left the firm earlier this year.
It meant dmca had to be restructured from a partnership to a corporate entity, with a shareholders agreement created to document how shares are valued and what happens if an employee leaves.
A series of changes to regulatory and tax arrangements for ESS’s are progressively being introduced as part of a federal government commitment in the 2021-22 budget, but Ms Tonkin believes more can be done to make it easier for SMEs to participate.
She said there were still too many onerous compliance rules for employers, while tax concessions were limited to start-up businesses, meaning many SMEs didn’t qualify.
Those barriers, she said, resulted in less than 1 per cent of Australian companies currently having an ESS in place.
Nanotechnology start-up Ferronova is one of those, having benefited from the streamlining of ESS’s for early stage companies.
Chief executive Stewart Bartlett said it was time to “wake up” to the benefits of allowing employees to share in a company’s success.
“Share options are obviously vital for start-ups, but they should be widely embraced and better understood as a lever for future growth by other industries too, regardless of size,” he said.
“In the US, 22 per cent of private sector employees participate in some kind of ESS. We need to do everything we can to reduce red tape and encourage more innovation in this area.” Ms Tonkin said ESSs could also help with succession planning. “We often suggest business owners consider their own employees when planning to sell a business,” she said. “It’s a form of succession planning that ensures a business can preserve what has been built up over years, and it can often save jobs too.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 471
