THEY have two world titles, a Commonwealth Games medal and nearly 200 Australian caps between them.
But Scott Thulborn and Wayne Ruediger say putting SA back on the map at bowls’ answer to Twenty20 cricket is every bit as important as their past accolades.
The Croweaters will line up for the new Adelaide Pioneers franchise in the opening match of the $100,000 Bowls Premier League in Pine Rivers, Queensland, today.
It came two years on from the state’s last appearance at the sport’s highest-profile national event and the demise of the Bowls SA-funded Adelaide Endurance.
“It’s pretty exciting for South Australia,” Thulborn, 35, said. “We got a lot of feedback when the Endurance pulled the pin and people saying ‘that’s a bit average’.
“They enjoyed following it, just because we had a South Australian team in it, so there’s a big buzz around us now that we’re back.
“BPL victory has always eluded us, so it’s something we’re definitely striving for.
“We’re not here to run second or make up the numbers.” The Pioneers were launched in September, after Adelaide Bowling Club accepted an invitation from Bowls Australia to buy a three-year licence in the fast-paced, four-day tournament.
Thulborn, who has represented the eastern Parklands-based outfit in the local top flight for the past decade, was MVP at the inaugural BPL in 2013 as Adelaide finished runner-up. Grange player Ruediger was again aiming high, having helped the Endurance to two more second-place finishes before its withdrawal.
“We’ve missed out on a little bit of exposure,” said 163-cap Jackaroo Ruediger, who claimed fours world championship gold in 2012 and Commonwealth bronze two years later.
“But as a state, we fight above our weight with the results we get. “It has been a little bit disappointing to miss the BPL in the last couple of years but it’s fantastic to be back here again and representing Adelaide.
“It’s been a bit of a happy hunting ground for us.” Tasmania’s dual-Commonwealth Games gold medallist Rebecca Van Asch will complete the Pioneers’ side, which will be coached by long-time state mentor Les Carter.
Adelaide opens its campaign against fellow start-up team Tweed Heads Ospreys in the first of 14 pool clashes, with night sessions broadcast live on Fox Sports and Kayo Sports.
Thulborn said embracing the roller-coaster nature of the condensed five-end, two-set, format was key to securing a berth in Friday’s finals.
“It’s a dangerous brand of bowls,” said Thulborn, the 2016 singles World Champion of Champion.“Every game’s not decided until nearly the last end of every set, as the game is always on the line.”
CREDIT: ROB GREENWOOD
Word count: 437
