BACK TO BUSINESS Entrepreneurship isn’t just for the young – more and more older Australians are taking the plunge and starting up their own business, writes Lynn Cameron Entrepreneurship: it’s the buzz word of South Australia at the moment. From Tonsley Innovation Centre to the redevelopment of Lot Fourteen, the appointment of South Australia’s first chief entrepreneur and the creation of the Entrepreneur Advisory Board, start-ups are springing up throughout the state.
But, while many associate start-ups with the younger generation, figures show that senior members of the population are leading the way when it comes to running their own businesses. Researchers from Swinburne University carried out the first ever study of Australian seniorpreneurs in 2015 and discovered about a third of all new firms in Australia were being led by senior entrepreneurs at that time. Today, the rate of entrepreneurship for the 55-64 age group sits at eight per cent and is the fastest-growing segment in the country.
“We’re seeing a growing number of people of an older age creating businesses for the first time,” says Julianne Parkinson, CEO at the Global Centre for Modern Ageing. “It could be attributed to a few things: they have the wisdom, the wherewithal, the life experiences to take shape as they decide to create a future that’s more on their terms and on their time; or perhaps the traditional fixed employment models don’t appeal as much as being able to forge new and inventive fertile ground.” Many seniors embark upon entrepreneurship after decades spent working stressful jobs in the corporate world; some are seeking more flexible working arrangements; others are forced into start-ups after redundancy or retrenchment. For, while there is little doubt of the value of the skills and experience acquired through decades of employment, many senior candidates come up against closed doors trying to land a new job.
“A lot of people were trying to get back into the workforce and we could see this was becoming a greater issue,” says Bambi Price, co-founder of the War on Wasted Talent, a conglomeration of professionals aged 45 and over with backgrounds across recruitment, HR, PR, tech and research.
“Many were out there having trouble with recruitment organisations, saying ‘We’re not even getting past the gatekeeper’.
“Some people have reached 65 and want to keep working but it’s not an option where they are. They say, ‘I feel fine and I have this knowledge, skills and experience and what am I supposed to do now? Nothing?’.” War on Wasted Talent runs workshops and information sessions to help those in the older age category looking to start up their own business.
“What we quickly realised is that, while people were subject matter experts in their area of business and had identified a potential business they could start up, they didn’t know how to run a business,” Price says.
Next year the company will also launch an online platform on which seniors can publish their business profiles in order to help them find meaningful work.
“There’s a huge amount of people out there with knowledge and skills that aren’t being utilised,” Price says. HELP IS AT HAND Strengthening its support for entrepreneurs, the State Government has also appointed two entrepreneurship facilitators for South Australia, whose role it is to provide practical assistance to support and encourage individuals to start a business as a way to create their own job. As entrepreneurship facilitator for Adelaide – West, Wendy Perry understands the value of keeping seniors in the workforce. “We need to create more jobs and propel the need for people to create their own job,” she says. “Aside from that, there are lots of people who have deep expertise and knowledge about their industry, particularly if they are more mature.” And while the term “entrepreneur” may conjure images of science and technology, start-ups in South Australia are covering all areas of industry.
“Health and wellbeing is really popular, but lots of people are in personal and life coaching and mental health,” Perry says.
“Also education, food, fashion, farming, finance, accounting ...” Kerry Sutton, manager, entrepreneurship and learning at Business SA, which offers Encore, a 12-month business workshop and mentoring program to over 35s, agrees. “If you look at the entrepreneurial space over the past five years, for a while it was all about technology. But it’s an emerging area and we cater for all areas – it doesn’t matter whether you’re into developing an app, starting your own cooking school or making homemade jam.
We’ve had brewers, marketing people, consultants, cleaning businesses – it’s really quite diverse.” The key to success, Sutton advises, is investing in the right education before investing your savings into launching your company.
“I think it’s really important that, regardless of your age, you invest in getting the business education to build your business skillsets,” she says. “Lots of people are under the assumption they’ll automatically know how to run a business.
You can be a successful chef but, to be a successful business owner, you need to understand how to run your business.” PASSION PROJECT Vanessa Comley’s business is something of a passion project. The 52-year-old former Telstra employee launched OrganicBox, a certified organic home delivery service, 10 years ago after a health setback. “I was diagnosed with undefined infertility from the age of 27 when my ex-husband and I were trying to have children,” she says. “We went down the medical route, then went down the natural, organic path and ended up having two children. I decided to start OrganicBox to help other people who are struggling with illness.” Working with local farmers in the Adelaide Hills, Comley now provides organic produce to the wider Adelaide metropolitan area, with further expansion on her mind. “We would like to increase primary production, increase our service to Adelaide homes and the bigger picture would be to branch out interstate and look at being able to do it nationally,” she says.
For anyone looking down the entrepreneurship route, Comley has one simple piece of advice. “The biggest lesson I’ve learned is that it’s OK to make mistakes because that’s the only way you learn and grow,” she says. “And never give up – if you’re really passionate about what you’re doing, you’ll always be able to drag yourself out of bed when you just want put the covers over your head.” RIGHT BALANCE After almost four decades working in education, Chris Mesecke took the leap into entrepreneurship earlier this year, launching, Career Designs SA, which proEntrepreneurship isn’t just for the young – more and more older Australians are taking the plunge and starting up their own business, writes Lynn Cameron Start me up: experience leads to new challenges [ CONTINUED NEXT PAGE ] vides career coaching for individuals and families, covering all ages from school leavers to those in employment looking to make a career change. “I’d been thinking of this for the past 10 years and made the decision to leave,” the 59-yearold says. “The department was going through a restructure. I thought, ‘I’m at a point in my life when I can do this’.” Mesecke admits that the business aspects of entrepreneurship did come as a bit of a shock. “All of a sudden you need to create invoices, spreadsheets, databases ... ,” he says. “It is challenging and hard work. You’ll go through a period where it’s all very daunting, you’re flat out and never seem to be on top of it, but you get to the point where you work out what it is you want to do and things start to fall into place.” As well as helping shape the careers and futures of his clients, Mesecke revels in the freedom business ownership brings. “Once you’re in your 50s, you start to see friends or family who get sick and you think, ‘I’ve worked damn hard. If I want a few days here and there to enjoy my hobbies, spend some time with friends and family, now’s the time to do it’,” he says. “It’s a really good time to get the balance right.” FUTURE PLANNING Retired preschool teacher Ann Muckersie is also investing the skills of a 30-year-working life in her business, It’s Not Garbage, which turns recycled materials into creative play resources. Muckersie, 72, launched the business in 2015 and it has been expanding ever since, moving from local markets to premises in Camden Park, where she is helped by husband Ian, 75.
“One of my aims was to create a job for myself but I think I have also kept other businesses going as well,” she says. “And in time I will be able to pass it on to someone who can make it bigger.” As well as the freedom to dictate her own working hours, Muckersie’s greatest joy comes from providing a service that is close to her heart. “I have fun turning garbage into creative play resources,” she says. “I really enjoy what I’m doing: I’m passionate about it and love the people I meet.
“I’m providing a service which fills a pressing need to do something about reducing landfill by the need to reduce materials and be resourceful and creative.” The next Encore intake is March 2020. For details, call 8300 0000 For details on entrepreneurship facilitators, log on to employment.gov.au/entrepreneurship-facilitatorsWar on Wasted Talent: waronwastedtalent.com.au
CREDIT: Lynn Cameron
Word count: 1558
