THE world’s biggest cryptocurrency exchange has launched a world-first trial of a new bitcoin scheme in South Australia, and is considering establishing a permanent presence at the Lot Fourteen start-up hub.
Hong Kong-based Binance has partnered with a network of local newsagents, which will offer customers the ability to acquire bitcoin at 66 locations across the state.
Known as Binance Lite, the system will allow customers to pay for bitcoin using cash, with the digital currency deposited directly into the person’s digital wallet.
Speaking to The Advertiser on the sidelines of the ADC Global Blockchain Summit in Adelaide yesterday, Binance chief financial officer Wei Zhou said the system was live in South Australia and would soon be expanded to 1400 locations across the nation.
“We’re encouraged by the vision of South Australia and the Premier Steven Marshall in terms of trying to build out the blockchain ecosystem here and I think that commitment and vision – we’re very encouraged by that and we want to support that,” he said.
“Blockchain is a global technology but adoption is a local process and you need buy in from not just the business side of it.
“But the government side is just as important in terms of working with companies to help drive commerce.” Mr Zhou also confirmed the company had employed its first local representative in Adelaide and was interested in establishing a larger presence at Lot Fourteen.
“We’ve taken a walk around and we’re really excited by that location, given the centrality of it,” he said.
“Right now it’s under construction, but what we’ve seen around other parts of the world is that once you put a physical face to innovation, it’s easier for people to see. “You need that physical presence and we want to do our part to help to contribute to that. It’s very early stages but we like the location and we have people here that we’ve been looking at (for potential employment) so we’re very happy that everything has meshed together.” In October, Binance invested $US2.5 million in Queensland start-up TravelbyBit to help expand its network of cryptocurrency payment terminals across Australia.
TravelbyBit, which also runs an online travel booking platform, allows customers to pay for goods and services at locations across the country using the cryptocurrency of their choice. Payments are instantly converted to Australian dollars at the time of purchase, avoiding mark-up and conversion costs associated with traditional currency exchange.
TravelbyBit chief executive Caleb Yeoh said his company was targeting the international traveller market, and supported more than 300 merchants across the country.“We’ve only just enabled our first few merchants in Adelaide, probably about a dozen or so, but we would love to establish ourselves in SA because there are some fantastic tourist assets here,” he said.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 467
