ADELAIDE would become a global leader in cyber technology development, training and testing under a plan Premier Steven Marshall will pitch to Prime Minister Scott Morrison today.
Mr Marshall wants Lot Fourteen, at the old Royal Adelaide hospital site, to be the home of a cyber centre that would draw people from all over the world.
The Premier is meeting Mr Morrison and Communications and Cyber Safety Minister Paul Fletcher in Canberra today to make the case. Cyber technology covers a wide range of computing and communications devices – from standalone computers, to “connected” or networked computing and communications technologies, to the internet itself.
“There is more demand currently than are qualified people globally and it is going to get massively out of whack,” Mr Marshall said. “I really want to position South Australia as the logical home for Australia’s cyber sector.” Mr Marshall is pushing for a “cyber range, where SA can test new ideas and new models in a controlled way.” He also wants Adelaide to be a major centre for cyber education. “Cyber education, to me, is the crucial aspect, of creating long-term, sustainable jobs in South Australia.” “I think SA has a great opportunity to become a global centre for defence, space and cyber – they go together really well. We already have great expertise in these areas but we now need to take it to the next level.” Jobs in cyber can generate significant incomes. Last year, a salary guide by global recruitment company Experis showed a chief information officer in SA could earn $180,000 to $270,000 a year. Junior IT security managers can earn $100,000 rising to $165,000.
Job website Seek is advertising almost 1000 vacancies for candidates with cyber skills - including about 40 jobs in South Australia.
Business SA head Martin Haese said South Australia should lead the nation in terms of cyber technology.
“It is well documented that Tallinn, the capital city of Estonia in Europe, is the cyber security centre of Europe,” Mr Haese said.
“South Australia has a similar, but different, opportunity in Australia. “With the growth in defence and space industries, healthcare, legal, finance, insurance, start-up, technology and government sectors, cyber networks only become more important.
“This is an opportunity for knowledge intensive jobs in South Australia. “This is also an opportunity for Lot Fourteen.” Mr Marshall has been inspired by the potential of the cyber sector following a recent trip to the United Kingdom and a trip to the US earlier in the year.In January, Mr Marshall struck a deal so that SA cyber companies could learn from US experts. A delegation of Silicon Valley tech, start-up and business leaders travelled to SA to network with local government and business stakeholders in February.
CREDIT: MATT SMITH NATIONAL AFFAIRS EDITOR
Word count: 463
