Space, defence, cyber ... now filmmaking is the latest string in South Australia’s impressive bow
Leah McKeown has deconstructed horror as she forges a career in a captivating industry. After experiencing the “tough gig” of freelancing as a sound production technician in filmmaking, McKeown has landed a job at the Artisan Post Group, a post-production studio at Lot Fourteen.
There’s a solid pipeline of work ahead for Artisan Post Group so McKeown feels confident about her career prospects in Adelaide. “It’s a big positive to be able to stay close to family and friends,” she says. “I think my career path would normally have needed me to go interstate.” McKeown, 23, studied a BA at UniSA where she met filmmakers and developed an interest in the craft. She went on to study a diploma in sound production at the Adelaide campus of SAE Creative Media Institute. There she met Michael Darren, one of the leaders of Artisan Post Group, who took her on as an intern to work on The Hunting, an SBS production. She was offered full-time employment in June and most recently worked on horror feature film Dembanger.
Artisan Post Group was founded by brothers Anton and Carlo Andreacchio who set up the group to provide centrally located facilities and a focus for sound and vision artisans who had previously been working across Adelaide in various locations. APG has installed state-of-the-art postproduction facilities and individual offices in the historic Eleanor Harrald Building overlooking Frome Rd.
The Hunting, which screened on SBS TV in August, was created by SA company Closer Productions and filmed in Adelaide, with post production shared with another SA company, Kojo. Artisan Post Group has also produced a virtual reality experience of the 2018 AFL Grand Final and is embarking on the TV series, Stateless, with executive producer Cate Blanchett for Matchbox Pictures.
Dembanger was made by Hollywood filmmakers Brian Frager and John Berardo. “SA is an amazing place and, honestly, there’s a burgeoning film scene here,” Frager says. “Lot Fourteen is a very cool space, very innovative in that it’s bringing many different industries together and I believe that’s going to be more and more relevant to the future of content – learning from start-up culture, from technology companies that approach scale.” As well as new jobs in companies taking up tenancy in Lot Fourteen, the site is supporting hundreds of jobs in the construction industry. Among the more than 500 construction workers on site is plumbing apprentice Scott Gear, 23. At Lot Fourteen, he’s working under Hindmarsh Plumbing on refurbishing the heritage buildings. “It’s been interesting working here because the site is so busy and there are challenges of working on a heritage listed building,” he says.
Looking ahead Gear, right, wants to stay in SA: “As long as people keep building things,there will be work.”
CREDIT: Words Chris Russell
Word count: 478
