WELLBEING CROWDSOURCED REPORTS OF SEXUAL ASSAULTS AND HARASSMENT ARE MAKING OUR CITIES SAFER If you are a woman, you may have been groped on the train during peak hour, copped whistles and jeers when passing a construction site, or been harassed walking home from a night out. Chances are, you brushed off the discomfort, stayed quiet, and continued on your way feeling rather powerless.
Almost 90 per cent of Australian women who have experienced sexual assault don’t report the incident to police, according to ABS figures, and beyond serious criminal offences, many also shoulder street harassment as an uncomfortable part of the city life hustle.
Zoe Condliffe is among the one in five women who have experienced sexual assault, and, having decided to speak out, has so far inspired more than 100,000 victims to do the same. Condliffe’s efforts go beyond #MeToo awareness raising and personal catharsis. Through her social enterprise start-up, She’s a Crowd, she uses crowdsourced stories to create a data-driven map of gender-based violence, assault and harassment.
COLLECTIVE POWER She’s a Crowd data has been used by the likes of Transport for NSW and Department of Transport Victoria to pinpoint hot spots, themes and trends, and inform safety policies.
“I identified a huge data gap with sexual assault and gender-based violence, even though it’s a prolific issue,” says the 31 year-old from Melbourne, now based on the NSW south coast.
Through the She’s a Crowd platform, women and gender-diverse people can report their incidents, which are later summarised into key issues, and added to a map, with names and identifying features removed for anonymity.
Whether it’s a daytime groping incident in Sydney’s inner-city, being followed home in Melbourne’s outer suburbs, or catcalling on a Brisbane bike path, the site’s interactive map paints a clear picture of occurrences that are often otherwise untold.
“It’s the power of the collective,” Condliffe says. “We know this type of stuff happens, but seeing it on a map together, seeing stories represented as data, is really impactful for decision makers.” BUILDING MOMENTUM Since its 2018 launch, She’s a Crowd has collected more than 100,000 stories, with around half of the reports from Australia, and others from as far afield as the US and UK.
Reports range from incidents in private and public spaces, with public transport one of the hot spots.
“To date, a lot of personal safety policies on transport do not have a gender lens, and don’t take into account the specific nature of gendered violence,” Condliffe says.
“Sometimes it’s subtle – covert picture taking, being followed off a tram, or opportunistic touching in peak hour. Policies can’t address these incidents if we don’t know what’s going on.” FORCE FOR HOPE Taking out the Accelerating Women gong in last month’s Telstra Best of Business Awards saw She’s a Crowd stand out from more than 24,000 nominations, and has been an immense source of encouragement and exposure for the start-up.
However, for Condliffe, the tangible change her data can bring about, along with the personal impact on those who speak up, are rewards in themselves.
“One survivor told us the recurring nightmares she’d had after being sexually assaulted stopped after sharing her story,” she says. “Getting stuff off their chest is really important for survivors, and really impactful.” Like the #MeToo movement has proven, speaking out can have a snowball effect, and Condliffe hopes more people will be inspired to speak up through her site.
“With the more stories that come through, the more data we’ll have, so we can really scale our impact,” she says. To share your story, or see a map of incidents in your city, visit shesacrowd.com
CREDIT: Laura Albulario
Word count: 613
