Oscars sledge – but SA studio boss defends film’s creativity
IN the wake of the weirdly whiskered humanoid felines from the film musical Cats being lampooned at this week’s Academy Awards , the Adelaide-based company that worked on the production has leapt to its defence.
Mark Thorley, Australian managing director of Mill Film, on North Tce, city, strongly supported the US Visual Effects Society which issued a post-Oscars defence, saying the industry was not to blame for the movie’s poor performance, blaming instead “a story told badly”.
Mr Thorley, who moved to Adelaide 18 months ago to set up Mill Film, with the help of a $6 million State Government investment grant, said he was proud of the visual effects done on Cats here and around the globe. “They executed absolutely to (director) Tom Hooper’s vision and that’s what our business is all about,” Mr Thorley said.
“It’s realising the director’s vision for the screen.” Mr Thorley, who grew up in Queensland and has worked in Singapore and Toronto, said Mill Film’s involvement with the film – which was criticised for its creepy animation and bombed at the box office – had not damaged the company’s reputation.
He fully supported Hooper’s desire to try something different. “I think that it is really important to push the industry forward and to push capability and creativity forward,” Mr Thorley said.
“Not all of it is going to get a positive reaction but I am incredibly proud of what the team achieved here.” While owned by Technicolor, Mill Film is effectively an Australian VFX start-up that also has studios Montreal, Berlin and Bangalore.
It has invested for the long haul in South Australia with office space but has yet to hit job targets of about 500 people promised by the previous Weatherill government when it approved the $6 million investment grant. It was also expected to inject $250 million into the economy in 10 years.
Mr Thorley said jobs peaked in October with about 480 workers but had dropped back to 280, though this was expected to rise again later this year.
“We assembled a very large crew for Cats,” he said.
“We probably had a head count here of at least 250 and there were two other shows running alongside that for different studios.
“One of those finishes this week and the other in about eight weeks’ time.” Mr Thorley defended job-hire practices, which could include contracts that varied at short notice after work began.
“Movies change, timelines change, release dates change,” he said. “We very much work on a set of assumptions on paper and once a project is shot and a director is in the studio to make the edits, the variation can be vastly different.” Mr Thorley said Mill Film was required to meet performance targets under its agreement with the Government and these were monitored.
“We do have milestones that we need to achieve and we monitor them on an annual basis,” he said. “It’s all on track.” Mr Thorley welcomed the announcement that Mill Film had won some post-production visual effects work from the Warner Bros action feature film Mortal Kombat – along with Adelaide’s Rising Sun Pictures, KOJO, and Resin and Artisan Post Group – and other work was in the pipeline.
“We are really thankful to be working on that project and it is a great moment for us to collaborate with other companies in SA,” he said.“We’ve been looking for opportunities to do this. We couldn’t be more proud to contribute to a show that is being shot here in SA.”
CREDIT: PENELOPE DEBELLE FILM WRITER
Word count: 603
