URBAN RENEWAL A PIPELINE of several billion dollars worth of major construction projects across South Australia is poised to soften the blow to the state’s economy from the COVID-19 pandemic.
But as dire economic forecasts point to a crash in demand for new homes, rising unemployment and cuts to private investment, there are fears many projects will be delayed or cancelled altogether.
The Federal Government’s $688 million HomeBuilder program, offering $25,000 grants for major renovations and new homes, has been welcomed by the sector. But developers of major projects in SA say more is needed to support local industry.
Construction is one of the few industries to escape relatively unscathed during the coronavirus crisis, as developments across the state keep the local economy moving.
Thousands of construction workers have continued to work on major housing projects in the suburbs; new office, apartment and hotel towers in the CBD, and health and education upgrades backed by State Government funding.
The state’s biggest home builder, Hickinbotham Group, is overseeing the $1.2 billion Liberty and Eden housing projects at Two Wells, and is awaiting final state government approval for a $215 million estate at Seaford Meadows.
Managing director Michael Hickinbotham said restricted access to sales offices and display villages during the coronavirus shutdown had affected sales of new homes.
He welcomed last week’s stimulus package but feared nervousness would continue to depress the sector.
“Other stimulus measures for the sector could include a stamp duty exemption for new home and land packages, and fast-tracked land rezonings and development approvals to drive both metropolitan and regional growth and job creation,” he said.
“Every dollar spent in the construction industry grows to become five dollars spent in the broader community, which drives economic growth and job creation like nothing else.” Last month, the HIA released new forecasts pointing to an expected 25.7 per cent decline in SA home building activity, down from 10,600 new homes in the past 12 months to just 7900 next financial year.
In SA, thousands of construction workers are currently employed on housing projects, including the $1 billion West development at the former Football Park site, the $400 million Glenside estate, Peet’s $265 million Tonsley Village project and Fairland’s Vista development, building more than 1100 homes at Seaford Heights.
At Port Adelaide, Starfish Developments and Cedar Woods have commenced early work on their Dock One and Fletcher’s Slip projects.
And local developer Arcadian Property is overseeing the $500 million Springwood estate at Gawler East, a 10-year project that will create around 1000 jobs during construction and almost 2000 homes.
Arcadian chief executive Warwick Mittiga said while short-term stimulus measures were welcomed, the State Government needed to focus on long-term growth strategies, including boosting the state’s population.
He said he did not believe the industry “should just be putting our hand out for money – we want appropriate incentives to help us grow the wider economy and a real focus from State Government on growing our population will support that.
“Make it easier for developers to unlock land, help support home building with the right stimulus, and incentivise new industry to relocate to South Australia.” While housing developments bubble along, apartment, hotel and office projects in the CBD employ thousands of construction workers.
Flagship’s $85 million Penny Place apartment tower, Palumbo’s $140 million Sofitel hotel and apartments project, IHG’s $60 million Indigo Hotel and SkyCity’s $330 million expansion of the Adelaide Casino are all well under way.
Cbus Property’s $300 million office tower at the former Planet nightclub site and Commercial & General’s $320 million SAHMRI 2 project in the city’s biomedical precinct are slated to commence next year.
In the regions, several major developments are under way, many aimed at tourists, including Monopoly Property Group’s $42 million tourist resort at Wallaroo and EDP Hotels’ $45 million redevelopment of the Bridgeport Hotel in Murray Bridge.
Winemaking giant Seppeltsfield recently unveiled plans for a new $50 million luxury hotel, aimed at attracting 150,000 visitors over the first five years.
But downturns in the tourism and retail sectors have prompted other developers to put the brakes on projects.
Singapore’s Chip Eng Seng has pushed construction of a new Hyatt hotel on Pirie St into next year.
The $360 million redevelopment of the Burnside Village Shopping Centre has also been put on hold “until there’s greater clarity within the economic environment”, its developer says.
While ruling out additional grants or stamp duty cuts, the State Government has hinted that further measures to help stimulate the construction industry could be on the way.
It too has been rolling out its $1.3 billion capital works program to upgrade more than 100 public schools, and continuing its transformation of the old Royal Adelaide Hospital site into the Lot Fourteen start-up and innovation hub. PAGE 20: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 802
