“MOHAWK Man” Scotty McInnes walked through the gates of the Gold Coast 600 with his spiky red hair at 7.20am yesterday.
“I’m a single man now so there’s no one here to hold me back,” he said at the Surfers Paradise street circuit for day one of the Gold Coast’s most famous motorsport event.
“I’m going to spend the whole weekend here. Check out all the entertainment tonight.
“I’m excited to see (Australian rock band) Mental As Anything, they’re awesome. I’ve seen them a couple of years ago when they were here and they were great.” Mr McInnes has been attending the GC600 with his red mohawk for almost a decade. “I got it done (Thursday morning),” he said about his haircut. “I had to sleep with it hanging over the bed. It wasn’t the most comfortable sleep. Probably not going to get much sleep for the next couple of nights.
“It’s 47cm this year. Still a bit to go – the record is 107cm.” Nicole Reneke wasn’t sporting a funky haircut. She had a more permanent reminder – a tattooed signature of driver Craig Lowndes on her arm.
The Gold Coast grandmother of two says she met the Supercars hero last century and has “followed him everywhere” since.
“I met him at his first race 22 years ago and I just loved him,” she said. “He’s tattooed on my arm. I got it tattooed about four years ago. I hated tattoos but I wanted to keep it on me.” Ms Reneke has attended “countless” Supercar events over the years. “I go to all of his races. Wherever he is, I’ll be there.” She was in Surfers Paradise with her son-in-law, Jesse Davis and her two grandchildren, Charlie, 4, and Henri, 3. They were all dressed in Holden and Lowndes merchandise.
Declan King, from central Victoria, fronted the three-day festival in a khaki-coloured trench coat covered in racing badges.
“It’s a tradition. I’ve been collecting badges the past decade,” he said. “Usually people give them to me at Supercars events, but they are not too expensive to collect – about $10.
“It does get a bit hot but I’ve never been burnt.” It was Mr King’s first time attending the GC600. “I’ve come up to the Goldie for two weeks. The first week is all about the cars, the second week I’ll celebrate my honeymoon.” Close by, a Supercars-obsessed couple from South Australia, Lisa and Ben Moloney, were celebrating their seventh wedding anniversary with cold beers dressed in Castrol Racing merchandise.
“We flew in yesterday,” Mrs Moloney said. “This is our first time at the Gold Coast 600.
“It’s our wedding anniversary this weekend so we flew up to spend the day at the races.
“We spent our honeymoon at the races seven years ago in Dubai, so we thought we’d spend this year on the Gold Coast.
“I love the atmosphere here. The sound of the V8s – there’s nothing better when they start up.” Mr Monoley said the track was different to the one they attended for the Adelaide leg of the Supercars championship.
“We’ve been going to the race at Adelaide for years. It’s a lot smaller here. Adelaide is a lot more spread out,” he said.
The Moloneys are also fans of Lowndes, and Rick Kelly gets a mention too. Gold Coast 600 event manager Melissa Stephens said: “The atmosphere around the track is amazing.
“The sun was shining, the fans were lapping up the energy from the track and everyone’s excited for a weekend full of racing.
“The Vodafone Club 600 entertainment area is pumping.
“Our new Rosé bar on pit lane was hugely popular, giving fans something they’ve never seen before here.
“There’s no better location being in the heart of the city, opposite the beach. It’s a unique event.” Supercars chief operating officer Shane Howard said he was impressed with the opening day.
“We’ve made some major changes to the event and made it an amazing GA (general admission) experience,” he said.
“We’ve introduced The Palms garden bar, which is basically in pit lanes. “We’ve improved and lifted the kids zone, created Ibiza on the Gold Gold with the Club 600 where all the DJs and acts are performing.
“That’s the first step. We’ve opened it all up, we’ve taken out a lot of clutter and really made it fan friendly. It was great to see so many people enjoying it.”KEEP UP TO DATE WITH ALL THE ACTION WITH LIVE COVERAGE FROM OUR TEAM OF REPORTERS AND PHOTOGRAPHERS ALL WEEKEND ATGOLDCOASTBULLETIN.COM.AU
CREDIT: EMILY HALLORAN
Word count: 762
