Space is opening up to exciting new ventures – and SA is at the forefront for opportunities No longer controlled by governments, space has opened up to the private sector, creating a bold new frontier for both start-ups and prime international firms – and South Australia is leading the way.
Headlined by winning the Australian Space Agency headquarters, our state has revived its heritage of being home to the 1967 launch at Woomera which made Australia only the third country in the world to launch a satellite from its own territory.
The catalyst came when Adelaide won the rights to host the 2017 International Astronautical Congress, the world’s largest gathering of space professionals.
With a global spotlight shining on Adelaide, a space office was set up in 2016 by the State Government, later becoming the SA Space Industry Centre.
“The South Australian Space Industry Centre started building international relationships,” says Richard Price, the centre’s chief executive. “Then, the more we looked at it the more we realised there was already a strong ecosystem here. It’s actually unique – we had the pedigree of the people from SA who advocated to get the International Astronautical Congress here, we have strong capability in our universities and we had a lot of start-up companies.” The start-ups included companies working on propulsion, communication, mini-satellites and launch. Now, Mission Control, and SmartSat Cooperative Research Centre and Space Discovery Centre are located at Lot Fourteen.
Globally, the space sector is now worth about $US380 billion.
Director of Defence SA’s space division, electronics engineer Nicola Sasanelli, cites Morgan Stanley forecasts that the global industry will be worth more than $US1 trillion by 2040, with rampant growth expected in satellite broadband and Earth observation services.
Currently in SA, about 80 companies or organisations and more than 800 people are employed in the space sector.
Between 2000 and 2017, the number of private sector space companies in SA more than tripled from nine to 34. In the past three years, around $80 million investment has been committed to the space industry – including funding support from venture capital, industry, the Commonwealth and SA Government.
To expedite growth, the State Government is funding a Defence and Space Landing Pad offering foreign companies free rent for three months plus free advice on migration issues, real estate, regulatory and legal requirements for setting up a business, plus guidance on financing introductions to local enterprises which could be customers or suppliers.
“The whole idea is to make it as easy as possible to do business inSA,” Price says.
CREDIT: Words Chris Russell
Word count: 430
