Acting Prime Minister and Minister for Defence Richard Marles has officially launched a new supercomputer program which is up to a million times faster than a standard computer.
The state-of-the-art tech, which is the first of its kind in Australia, will enable Defence scientists to analyse large data sets and rapidly perform complex calculations to tackle some of the trickiest scientific and engineering problems.
Expected to play a role in the design, development and analysis of modern weapon systems and national security systems, the new gadget is set to boost our ability to develop key AUKUS priorities, including nuclear powered submarines, quantum technologies and artificial intelligence.
Mr Marles said the handy new tool would be crucial for our experts.
“For much of the work done by our defence scientists, data is critical,” he said.
“But even more important than the data itself is the ability to rapidly and reliably analyse and process that data.”
This high performance computing facility provides a secure and sovereign capability to do just that.”
The advanced new powers will be used at the Defence Science and Technology Group site at the Edinburgh Defence Precinct in South Australia.
In a statement released by the federal government on Tuesday, Mr Marles explained the new computing infrastructure is known as “Taingiwilta”, meaning “powerful” in the language of the Kaurna people – the First Nations people of Adelaide.
It is also housed in a purpose-built secure facility called “Mukarntu”, meaning “computer” the statement said.
The Defence Minister said by acquiring the technology, Australia will be able to assist its allies.
“The high performance computing capability not only provides Australia with a sovereign capability that allows us to pursue activities in our national interest, it also gives us a strong foundation for even closer collaboration with partner nations,” he said.
Mr Marles also sought to recognise the assistance provided by representatives of the US Department of Defence’s High Performance Computing Modernisation Program, “who willingly shared their 30 years of knowledge and experience to support Australia’s work to establish this world-class capability.”
Word count: 329
