The application and resume that the former deputy premier lodged in his successful bid to be hired for a $500,000-a-year trade job in New York was released by the NSW parliament on Monday.
At the bottom of the resume, Mr Barilaro described himself as a “board director” of an entity called Smarter Regions CRC.
The CV, which was dated January 19, 2022, said Mr Barilaro’s position was “current”.
But the would-be Smarter Regions CRC chief executive said the project never got off the ground and the concept was being wound down by that time.
“Board director wouldn't have been exactly the correct term. We called ourselves a board but it was really an interim board of potential board members,” University of Adelaide business development manager and former Smarter Regions interim chief executive Paul Dalby said.
“There was never an organisation to be a board of … it doesn’t exist.”
Mr Dalby said Smarter Regions was a project that began being planned about two years ago.
The intention was to seek federal funding through a program called Cooperative Research Centres.
The project would have focused on harnessing the potential of artificial intelligence to assist regional businesses.
Mr Dalby said he and his colleagues approached Mr Barilaro in November last year to be a future board member.
But by December the funding application was rejected and the project faltered.
Had the funding bid succeeded, the plan would have been to incorporate Smarter Regions CRC as a not-for-profit company with oversight from a board of directors.
Mr Dalby said the group was still meeting in January, trying to decide how to move forward, before canning the idea the following month.
“(Mr Barilaro) was keen to join the board if it was funded, but it was an honorary title, there was nothing for him to be a board member of,” Mr Dalby said.
A website for Smarter Regions CRC that was previously online has since been taken down.
However, an information brochure that was captured by an internet archiving service said an “interim board” had been established by August last year that included an economist, an AI entrepreneur and a “leading regional specialist communicator”.
Mr Barilaro’s CV was released as part of a parliamentary inquiry into the hiring process for the role of senior trade and investment commissioner to the Americas.
It came along with a recruitment panel report that revealed Mr Barilaro was not initially seen as the best candidate for the role.
But his assessment was later changed so that he came out on top.
By June, when the recruitment panel penned a second report that was more positive towards Mr Barilaro, the former state Nationals leader had already signed the contract for the job.
He later gave up the role after the appointment caused outrage among former colleagues and opposition MPs.
Investment NSW, which was responsible for the hiring process, did not answer questions about whether it sought to contact Smarter Regions CRC before hiring Mr Barilaro.
“(Investment NSW chief executive) Amy Brown will provide further information to the Legislative Council inquiry on Wednesday, 3 August 2022, and as such is not appropriate to make any further comment at this time,” a spokesperson said.
Mr Barilaro was contacted for comment.
Word count: 516
