They will be wooed by universities, they will be offered scholarships and internships, and they’ll be sought by law firms, banks, consultancies, government organisations and even finance advisers when they graduate. The kids on the stage at the end of year 12 often end up with their photos in media, scientific journals or in the foyer of institutions.
Not so much in the future. The value of intelligence, the sort of intelligence celebrated with prizes, is being re-evaluated as scientists learn more about how we think and as organisations reassess the sort of talents they need.
The idea that we’re not as bright as we think when we think about intelligence has been gathering momentum. It was first mooted decades ago when Edward de Bono wrote about the intelligence trap, describing how “many highly intelligent minds are trapped in poor ideas because they can defend them so very well”.
More recently, the number of books that challenge traditional concepts of the fine mind has proliferated.
Two years ago, David Robson resurrected some of de Bono’s ideas in his book The Intelligence Trap. His book shows how top graduates often become “good technicians with no common sense” and how renowned professionals and thinkers can end up believing in hoaxes and conspiracy theories. The brightest among us, he concludes, are more prone, not less, to foolish thinking.
A few weeks ago, animal behaviourist Justin Gregg cast aspersions on the primacy of human intelligence with his quirkily titled book If Nietzsche were a Narwhal: What Animal Intelligence Reveals about Human Stupidity. Taking a naturalist’s approach, Gregg says animals get by fine on learned associations: “They link actions to results, without having to understand why something is happening.”
Humans are “why specialists” and that sort of complex thought often turns out to be a long-term liability, he says.
The assault on the rational, focused and podium-oriented type of smarts has been carried out by behavioural economists for at least two decades. Spearheaded by the likes of Dan Ariely and Daniel Kahneman, social scientists have been demolishing the concept that we are rational beings who always act in our own self-interests. This brittle model that underpinned economic thinking for so long now has 200 recognised quirks or biases. The holes in the homo economicus are now so numerous that scholars are suggesting the original model should be laid to rest.
The science of the gut has thrown up more complications. The idea that the gut holds another form of intelligence, one that should be listened to, is still controversial. But those old adages – gut instinct, do what your gut says, I have a gut feeling – are irresistible. Among the dozens of books on this subject are The You Beyond You, Never Go With Your Gut, The Second Brain, Powered by Instinct and Malcolm Gladwell’s Blink: The Power of Thinking Without Thinking.
Still on controversial soil, the re-evaluation of the role of emotions is upsetting the rationalist movement that began with Descartes and barely faltered for 400 years. Philosopher Martha Nussbaum went there 20 years ago with her book Upheaval of Thought: The Intelligence of Emotions. Rejecting the notion that emotions were animal energies with no connection to thoughts, she held that they were a source of deep awareness and understanding.
But it’s only recently that the shibboleth that emotions were the enemy of good decision-making has been shattered by theories and evidence.
One of the most commonly cited studies on the role of emotions was conducted on more than 100 traders a decade ago. Examining how traders treated their emotions in their work life, the study found the less successful ones denied or suppressed their emotions and the successful ones were willing to reflect on their emotions. Accepting that emotions were necessary for high performance, they “tended to reflect critically about the origin of their intuitions and the role of emotion”, the study concluded. Earlier this year, Leonard Mlodinow tapped into these insights with his book Emotional: How Feelings Shape Our Thinking. Rejecting the idea that emotions get in the way of critical thinking, he wrote, “we now know that, on the contrary, emotions enhance our process of reasoning and aid decision-making. In fact, we can’t make decisions, or even think, without being influenced by our emotions.”
It’s obvious that the inquiries of scientists, aided by tools such as imaging and data, are expanding the boundaries of intelligence and our understanding of its limits. Even schools, where rote learning and focused thinking were the norm for decades, now embrace the concept that there are eight forms of intelligence and students should be guided to find their strengths. (The eight are: logical-mathematical, linguistic, spatial, musical, kinesthetics, intrapersonal, interpersonal and naturalistic.)
The fact institutions are looking at this research and wanting to incorporate it in their management indicates this is not just a scientific interest. There’s something going on inside institutions that is making a re-evaluation necessary.
The first application of the new science of smart that springs to mind is the need to restructure companies and institutions. For years companies have recognised that the hierarchical, top-down, rules-oriented way of doing business doesn’t cut it in an era that requires them to be nimble, open and collaborative.
They recognise that, instead of being run and staffed by people who proved efficient at taking in lots of information, processing it systematically and delivering rational responses, they need to have other skills on board. Empathy, agility, open-mindedness, collaboration – these are the skills that companies are now valuing.
In the post-pandemic world of hybrid working arrangements and distributed workforces, other qualities such as trust, self-starting and self-regulating are being thrown into the mix of desirable attributes. Companies speak a lot about having a diverse workforce and, while that has meant they’ve focused on having a diverse mix of genders, cultures, ages and backgrounds, recently more attention is being paid to building a diverse thinking workforce.
After all, the dux of a girls school often can have a similar approach as the dux of a boys school.
The quest for neuro-diversity includes hiring people who have very different mental abilities, such as those on the Asperger’s spectrum. This may have begun as an HR tick-a-box exercise but companies now are reporting the benefits of having the neuro-diverse on board.
But the biggest disruption to business (and hiring) as normal is the arrival of artificial intelligence.
Already AI is replacing jobs in lower skilled areas; it’s replacing work done in administration and it’s moving into higher skills areas. And AI is replacing exactly the sort of thinking once recognised as intelligence – the collation of lots of information, the processing of it and the production of outcomes.
Jobs will go under AI; jobs will be created, too. But the sort of jobs that will be created will require different intellectual skills to the ones that were eradicated. The World Economic Forum in 2020 forecast that AI would replace 85 million jobs by 2025. But it also will create 97 million jobs.
A more calibrated study of the impact of AI was done last year by BCG when it studied Australia, the US and Germany with an AI analytics firm, Faethm. It found that AI will wipe out both unskilled and white-collar jobs in Australia.
For instance, by 2030, the number of surplus jobs in production will rise slightly to 118,000 and the number of surplus jobs in office administration will increase to 180,000. The incursion also will move into professional services. “The removal of mundane, repetitive tasks in legal, accounting, administrative and similar professions opens the possibility for employees to take on more strategic roles,” the report says.
But, if this transition is to succeed, it will require a different mindset. “Core human abilities – such as empathy, imagination, creativity and emotional intelligence, which cannot be replicated by technology – will become more valuable.”
The report concludes “governments need to refocus education systems to develop so-called metaskills, such as logical thinking, reasoning, curiosity, open-mindedness, collaboration, leadership, creativity and systems thinking”.
The same recommendation applies to individuals, while HR “may need to shift the recruitment focus from hiring for skill to hiring for will”.
The recalibration of skills might catch some employers short. Some of the most sought-after employers – especially legal firms – traditionally have nabbed their candidates from the annual list of high achievers.
They got the brains, but they didn’t necessarily get the best brains for today’s business environment. And those students who are called to the podium to collect their prizes may find the stuff they learnt and the stuff they delivered in exams won’t count as much as how they played in a team, how they coped with setbacks and how well they read the room.
Word count: 1433
