FIVECAST’S ability to “shine a light into the darkest places” using artificial intelligence and machine learning has vaulted it to the top of BDO’s Fast Movers list for 2022, with the program brimming with tech companies this year.
The Kent Town-based intelligence solutions company has grown by an average 250 per cent per year for the past three years, expanding from fewer than 10 staff in mid-2019 to more than 70. Fivecast’s technology uses automated data collection across images, text and video, with that data then analysed and interpreted to identify threats, risks and behavioural changes. Co-founder and chief executive Brenton Cooper said the company expected its rapid growth trajectory to continue, with Fivecast likely to grow to 130 staff globally in the next 12 months.
The company has offices in Adelaide, Canberra and the US’s defence capital, Arlington Virginia, and is just starting to recruit in London. Mr Cooper said Fivecast’s mission was “all about enabling a safer world”.
“We do that by collecting and analysing digital information and uncovering threats relevant for our customers,” Dr Cooper said.
“Those threats might be across counter-terrorism, monitoring online extremism, looking at human trafficking.” Fivecast sucks in data from the “surface, deep, and dark web” Dr Cooper said, and analyses what it finds through a process of natural language processing and machine learning. About 90 per cent of the work was government-related, while the company also had customers in finance and cryptocurrency, Dr Cooper said.
Game developer ODD Games was the second fastest-growing company on the list, with 177 per cent per year over the past three years, with Diverse Mechanical Solutions rounding out the top three with 160 per cent growth.
BDO partner Tim Sandow said businesses on the list were “representative of our transformation in South Australia to a thriving, world-leading technology hub at the cutting edge of solution delivery”.
“Our Fast Movers all have big plans for the coming year, aiming to be best in class for their respective markets and industries while continuing their growth journeys,” he said. To see the full list of Fast Movers, visit TheAdvertiser.com.au
CREDIT: ENTREPRENEURS CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 354
