THE nuclear watchdog has given Australia the green light to power ahead with its plans to acquire nuclear-powered submarines, as Defence Minister Richard Marles reveals the boats will be built faster if ­Aussie workers are involved.
Speaking on the first anniversary of the landmark AUKUS pact, Mr Marles says Australia is getting close to finalising its plans with the US and Britain.
The Advertiser understands a bespoke submarine design is off the table, as Australia seeks to bolster its defence capability during the most complex strategic environment since World War II.
“The optimal pathway is taking shape, we can now begin to see it,” Mr Marles said.
“We are on track for an ­announcement early next year, there is a power of work which is being done to meet that time frame.” The International Atomic Agency is due to publicly ­release a report on Saturday saying it is “satisfied with the level of engagement” between the three countries.
China has criticised the watchdog for not acknowledging the international community’s “major concerns” about the co-operation, which it has demanded be brought to a halt.
A high-level US delegation of national security council ­officials and navy, joined their British counterparts in Australia this week to work on several sticking points before a ­decision about which submarine is made.
In a new report, the Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) urged Australia to ­rapidly ­develop hypersonic missiles, artificial intelligence and cyber warfare capabilities as China threatens to invade Taiwan. “Twelve months on from the signing of the AUKUS agreement, we face the most dangerous strategic outlook since the end of the Cold War.” ASPI warns Chinese President Xi Jinping is looking “increasingly willing” to invade and control Taiwan.
“This risks a wider war between China and the US, which could involve other countries in the region, including Australia,” the report said. The AUKUS pact already facilitates collaboration in hypersonic missiles, electronic warfare, artificial intelligence and more. But ASPI argues these capabilities should be elevated as an urgent priority to boost Australia’s long-range strike power.
CREDIT: JADE GAILBERGER GABRIEL POLYCHRONIS
Word count: 345
