DALL-E MINI Free, Google Android If you’ve ever wanted to know what Queen Elizabeth looks like riding a hoverboard (spoiler: she’s elegant, as ever) you can use the artificial intelligence built into this wacky app. Like the DALL-E website, this app lets users create images based on the text they input, such as ‘Hello Kitty using a laptop’. The results can be strange or compelling, and takes about two minutes to generate.
CALENDAR NOTIFICATION $7.99, Google Android If you’re someone with a hectic calendar, this app could help you stay across it better than most. Calendar Notification lets Android phone users see their daily agenda, weekly plans, or monthly calendar from the notification screen. It can be customised with colours and text styles, and the prominence of the notifications can range from maximum to barely visible. Users who upgrade to a premium subscription can import existing appointments.
NIGHTCAP CAMERA $4.49, Apple iOS Night time is the trickiest time to take photographs, whether using your smartphone or a DSLR. This app is designed just for that occasion, though, and uses artificial intelligence to make the most of lowlight photos, videos, and 4K time lapses. NightCap users can simply point and shoot with this app or use modes like long exposure, light trails, or stars mode for a particular scene. Its software removes image noise and bumps up the exposure.
BOTWORLD ADVENTURE Free, Apple iOS/Google Android This open-world role-playing game lets players choose to play as one of four species – cats, dogs, buffalo and lizards – and roam across the land seeking experiences and battles. Those lands include swamps and beaches, deserts and forests and hide adventures like bot battles with other players online. You can even join or create guilds to team with others.
SLEEP RESET $39 trial, Google Android/Apple iOS In a crowded market of apps designed to measure or record your sleep, this one is different. Sleep Reset is based on research from Stanford Medicine and is designed to assess your slumber and either help you fall asleep faster or wake up feeling more rested. The app first takes users through a questionnaire to assess their needs, and then charges for a seven-day trial with the goal of giving them better sleep within six weeks.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 380
