THEY’RE THE INNOVATORS WHO ARE CHANGING OUR WORLD A USTRALIAN start-ups are booming. Investors sunk $10bn into fresh Australian ventures last year – more than triple the investments made in 2020. And the number of “unicorns” in the Australian market, or tech start-ups worth more than $1bn, soared from just one in 2019 (Canva) to six in 2022. But a new generation of entrepreneurs is now emerging, with innovative, problem-solving ideas, international appeal and trend-making concepts. These start-ups are producing non-alcoholic spirits, changing our diet with new takes on meat alternatives, and “disrupting death” with low-cost funeral services. To identify Australia’s top 50 start-ups, we looked for enterprises created since 2019 with fewer than 100 employees that were still privately owned and engaging in investment rounds. Start-ups typically go through preseed, seed and series A, B and C funding rounds with venture capital firms and individual investors to get their operations off the ground and closer to an Initial public offering. These start-ups were ranked by business platform Crunchbase, which uses an algorithm to determine a company’s influence based on factors such as funding, acquisitions, current trends, connections, media buzz and community engagement. And there’s every chance Australia’s next start-up unicorn could be among these creations.
AUSTRALIA’S BEST 50 START-UPS
50CALVEN Founded: 2020 Investment: $7.2m Founders: Daniel Jackson, Jeremy Pollak Created after working from home during the pandemic, Calven is a platform to help businesses and employees manage hybrid working. The start-up’s software includes a dashboard for employees to register where and when they’re working, and ways for employers to manage safety issues, workspaces and events for their entire workforce. Calven won $6.8m in seed funding, including backing from Aussie unicorn Canva.
49DRIVA Founded: 2019 Investment: $9m Founders: Scott Montarello, William Brown With car prices skyrocketing, this start-up is in high gear. Driva lets potential car, motorcycle and caravan buyers see loan offers from 30 lenders on the one site, and has struck deals with Cars24 and carsales.com.au. A March 2022 investment round secured another $6m for the company.
48MGA THERMAL Founded: 2019 Investment: $9m Founders: Alexander Post, Erich Kisi This NSW start-up is helping companies store energy in shoebox-sized thermal blocks, even turning decommissioned coal plants into green-energy hubs using its technology. MGA Thermal raised $8m in its latest funding round, which will be used to build a manufacturing plant to create more than 1000 battery-like blocks a day by the end of 2022.
#47 Zero Co founder Mike Smith amid a pile of plastic waste 47ZERO CO Founded: 2019 Investment: $13m Founder: Mike Smith This eco-friendly Byron Bay start-up aims to banish single-use plastic or, as its logo says, “Untrash the planet”. Its 43,000 customers order personal and cleaning products in pouches to fill their “forever bottles” before sending empty pouches back to be reused. The concept is so popular that Zero Co set an Aussie crowd-funding record, raising $5m in less than seven hours.
46BETACARBON Founded: 2021 Investment: $5.5m Founders: Guy and Jules Dickinson This environmentally friendly start-up sits at the crossroads of carbon credits and cryptocurrency. BetaCarbon tokenises Australian Carbon Credit Units into the BCAU coin that businesses can use as an investment or to offset their emissions. The company recently won the Finnies People’s Choice Award for emerging fintech of the year and boasts ASIC former deputy chairman Daniel Crennan as a key backer.
45 ANILITY Founded: 2018 Investment: $600,000 Founder: Patrick Connolly This tech-savvy start-up uses machine learning and artificial intelligence to crunch the numbers on companies and swiftly assess whether they’re financially healthy. Anility, which graduated from the University of NSW’s 10x Accelerator program, can also identify business risks and whether a company is growing, and compare one business with others in the same industry.
44TogetherAI Founded: 2021 Investment: $3.7m Founder: Josh Wilson TogetherAI is an app designed to assist kids in finding the support they need and help parents ask the right questions. The Sydney start-up, backed by Scalare Partners, offers an app for kids that pairs them with an artificially intelligent companion to gauge how they’re feeling, and an app for parents that lets them look at the moods they’ve logged and suggest conversations.
#43 Parpera founder Daniel Cannizzaro has created a banking app 43PARPERA Founded: 2020 Investment: $2.3m Founder: Daniel Cannizzaro Created as an all-in-one banking app for sole traders, freelancers and entrepreneurs, Parpera lets users see their finances in one place, issue and track invoices from within the app, and manage tax and other reports. The Sydney start-up, which attracted $1.3m at its October 2021 app launch, is looking for a new banking partner after the closure of Volt.
42PROPHERO Founded: 2021 Investment: $1.6m Founders: Mickael Roger, Pablo Gil Brusola Australia’s real estate industry remains hot property and this new start-up combines 40 million data points, 240 variables, artificial intelligence and human appraisals to identify, recommend and manage properties for investors. The “next-gen” buyer’s agent firm raised $1.6m in seed funding and charges fixed fees for its services.
#41 Tom Caska’s company uses drones for aerial photography 41AEROLOGIX Founded: 2019 Investment: $5.7m Founders: Rakesh Routhu, Tom Caska This Sydney start-up calls itself “Uber for drones” and connects licensed drone pilots with companies that need aerial photography. Established by former Qantas pilot Tom Caska and tech consultant Rakesh Routhu, it employs more than 10,000 pilots across Australia. In May 2022, it sealed a $4.2m investment.
40WLTH Founded: 2019 Investment: $18m Founders: Brodie and Drew Haupt Creators of this “non-bank” aim to issue more than $1.2bn in residential and commercial loans by the end of 2022. The Brisbane-based creation of brothers Brodie and Drew Haupt offers low-interest loans with quick applications for homebuyers as well as businesses. A partnership with US-based Parley promises 50sq m of beach cleaned with every loan.
39LOOPIT Founded: 2019 Investment: $3.6m Founders: Michael and Paul Higgins Not everyone wants to own a car: that’s the idea behind mobility platform Loopit that recently raised $3.6m to expand into more countries. The Sydney start-up provides software that allows car dealerships, manufacturers and rental companies to offer access to vehicles on subscriptions. Loopit now operates in New Zealand, Australia and the UK.
38CAKE Founded: 2018 Investment: $4m Founders: Jason Atkins, Kim Hansen This Gold Coast start-up is helping other new companies succeed by packaging equity offers for them to lure and retain top talent and helping them raise capital. Cake, which boasts more than 2000 companies on its books, won another $3m in seed funding in March 2022 to support an expansion into a further 20 countries after launching in Singapore, the US, UK and India.
37CHIPPIT Founded: 2022 Investment: $190,000 Founders: Eli Muse, Harry Mann Saving money with up to 10 friends is the idea behind this financial app that also lets friends and family members borrow or lend money to another with no interest. Founded in May, the Melbourne-based company has recently launched a closed beta version of its app that is designed for budget-conscious users, overseas students and temporary residents.
#36 WeMoney founder Dan Jovevski is helping people avoid debt 36WEMONEY Founded: 2020 Investment: $9m Founder: Dan Jovevski Despite tough times, the future of Perth start-up WeMoney’s finances is looking bright after a $7m cash injection in July 2022. WeMoney is an app designed to help gen Z and millennials better tackle their finances and lets users automatically add accounts and debts from major Australian financial institutions.
35TRADESQUARE Founded: 2020 Investment: $30.5m Founders: Einat Sukenik, Nati Harpaz This start-up – created to connect small businesses with suppliers – is now Australia’s largest wholesale marketplace. Founded by entrepreneur Einat Sukenik and former Catch chief executive Nati Harpaz, the company won a $28m investment in January 2022 from US firm Tiger Global after pre-launch funding of $2.5m.
34 UPFLOWY Founded: 2020 Investment: $6.6m Founders: Alex Girard, Guillame Ang, Matthew Browne Created in 2020 to help other businesses, Upflowy is a no-code-required, drag-and-drop software solution for signing up new customers online. The local start-up secured a $6.6m investment from a San Francisco-based venture capital fund in February 2022, which its founders said would be used for more “predictive personalisation” to keep consumers engaged.
336CLICKS Founded: 2019 Investment: $12.7m Founders: Andrew Robinson, Anthony Stevens, Louis Strauss Named for the number of mouse clicks its founders want it to take to issue a risk assessment, this Melbourne start-up is focused on managing dangers to business, including cybersecurity risks. The firm, which raised another $5m in funding late in 2021, has now set up offices in Washington DC and Manchester.
32CANIBUILD Founded: 2019 Investment: $8m Founders: Stella and Timothy Cocaro, Deepankur Malhotra, Shuvajeet Nag Used when someone wants to build a pool, a granny flat, a shed or a house, software from this start-up helps builders and their clients see what’s possible. Canibuild, which attracted $8m in series A funding, will check planning rules and setbacks for a block, and even be used to create architectural plans. It’s currently used by 3000 customers daily in Australia, New Zealand, Canada and the US.
31QUANTUM BRILLIANCE Founded: 2019 Investment: $13.4m Founders: Dr Andrew Horsley, Dr Marcus Doherty, Mark Luo They are the powerful computers set to make the next generation of satellites and autonomous cars a reality, among other things – and this Canberra start-up could help create them in Australia. Quantum Brilliance, which spun out of the Australian National University, creates quantum accelerators based on synthetic diamonds which, unlike other quantum computers, do not require cryogenic cooling.
30MASTT Founded: 2019 Investment: $11.7m Founders: Doug Vincent, Jamie Cerexhe, Raman Nambiar This Sydney start-up, which co-founder Doug Vincent says is designed to kill spreadsheets, provides software to better manage all aspects of construction projects. Mastt is currently used across 500 projects around the world worth more than $25bn. It secured another $9.5m of funding in 2022.
29CARTED Founded: 2021 Investment: $13m Founder: Holly Cardew Making everything “shoppable” is the aim of Carted, the creation of start-up veteran Holly Cardew who previously created Vop to sell goods in TikTok videos. Her newest venture recently secured $13m in seed funding to create a universal commerce API that will allow shopping across more social media and websites.
#28 Bare co-founders Cale Donovan and Sam McConkey offer lowcost funerals 28BARE Founded: 2019 Investment: $15m Founders: Cale Donovan, Sam McConkey Created to “‘disrupt” Australia’s funeral and end-of-life industry, this Melbourne-based start-up has grown from offering low-cost cremation services to organising wills, probates, memorials and prepaid send-offs. The company raised $10m in series A funding in 2022 and has been used by more than 15,000 families.
27VOUCH Founded: 2020 Investment: $8m Founders: David Stirk, Gary Zurnamer This Australian video-sharing platform is gathering plenty of buzz – and $8m seed funding – for its ability to collect videos. Vouch’s system, which is now used in 82 countries, was first used to gather video testimonials from customers but now delivers company-wide messages and feedback from employees in internal communication.
26 BLOCK EARNER Founded: 2021 Investment: $6.4m Founders: Charlie Karaboga, Jordan Momtazi Cryptocurrency isn’t known for its stable returns but that’s something this Aussie start-up is seeking to change. Veterans Charlie Karaboga and Jordan Momtazi have launched a fintech offering fixed annual yields on investments, with products for USD Coin and digital gold (PAXG) so far. Their concept earned $6.4m seed funding.
TOMORROW Top 25: Australia’s best tech start-ups revealed
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON NATIONAL TECHNOLOGY EDITOR
Word count: 1892
