LAND FORCES 2022 SPECIAL REPORT While the Australian Army might not be able to match the strength of a potential adversary in terms of manpower or materiel, it hopes to harness the rapid development of autonomous systems and artificial intelligence to close the gap.
The army’s Robotics and Autonomous Systems Implementation and Coordination Office (RICO) has a number of projects under way to use emerging technologies to solve problems such as logistics resupply and reduction in energy consumption.
It is also turning to quantum computing to push the boundaries of technology in an attempt to solve difficult problems that cannot be done with conventional technology.
“We are employing autonomy today; we are learning by doing and autonomy is one of four key emerging technology areas that we are applying across all aspects of army capability,” Chief of Army Lieutenant General Simon Stuart said recently.
“These are robotics and autonomous systems, artificial intelligence and machine learning, quantum technology, and a range of technologies that contribute to optimise human performance.
“Our key partners are the Defence Science and Technology Group and a range of academic institutions and industry. Industry is really important in this and we have partnered with a … range of phenomenally innovative enterprises that exist in the Australian defence industry ecosystem and beyond. It’s a team effort.” Some of these technologies were on display in Brisbane at the Chief of Army Symposium, which also incorporated the Army Innovation Day (AID 2022), Army Robotics Exposition (ARX 2022) and Quantum Technology Challenge (QTC) 2022.
Each year the Army Innovation Day sees a number of companies and organisations invited to display their solutions to a particular challenge. This year the focus was on uncrewed systems, particularly working in the areas of casualty evacuation and autonomous resupply.
Now in its second year, the Army Quantum Technology Challenge is considering an initial three problems which it hopes to solve with the assistance of quantum sensing, quantum computing and quantum communications technologies.
At the Army Robotics Exposition in 2021, RICO unveiled the $3.5m “Leader-Follower” concept it is developing with Deakin University’s Institute for Intelligent Systems Research and Innovation (IISRI). The concept demonstrated the capability of logistics resupply by a convoy of HX77 trucks of which only the lead vehicle is manned.
This year, one of the technologies on display was the Automated Resupply Mechanical Handling System (ARMHS) developed by Canberra-based ECLIPS, which is intended to provide an autonomous reloading capability for the AS10 Armoured Ammunition Resupply Vehicles (AARV) being acquired from Hanwha Defense Australia (HDA).
The ARMHS is being developed in conjunction with RICO and if successful, it will remove around 20 personnel from the reloading process. HDA itself is developing an autonomous variant of the AS10 vehicle, dubbed AX10, and when these two technologies are combined with the existing “Leader-Follower” concept, they have the potential to almost completely automate the resupply of Army’s AS9 Huntsman 155mm self-propelled howitzers.
According to Army sources, an estimated 80 per cent of the logistics resupply efforts in the war in Ukraine is directed towards the delivery of 155mm ammunition to the guns. If an end-to-end solution to this problem can be found by using autonomous systems, the advantages to an Army on the battlefield become obvious.
Other technologies unveiled at the ARX 2022 exhibition included an electrically-powered version of Army’s ubiquitous Bushmaster Protected Mobility Vehicle, the ePMV, developed by Newcastle-based 3ME Technology; and a solar-enhanced Bushmaster developed by Praxis Labs in Adelaide.
The ePMV is a technology demonstrator that will lead to a hybrid propulsion system for the Bushmaster with the potential to completely replace the current diesel engine without any significant loss of performance; while the solar-enhanced version uses conformal solar panels to harvest energy from the sun and reduce the burden on fuel consumption in the field. “Robotics and autonomous systems and those other key emerging technologies are being applied today and enhancing the capability of our Army,” Lieutenant General Stuart said.
CREDIT: Nigel Pittaway
Word count: 659
