Over the course of his 17-year AFL career, Indigenous player Adam Goodes' performance on the field was tracked 10 times per second by a small device he wore on his back.
The vast data set, retained by the league and his former club the Sydney Swans since the two-time Brownlow Medal winner retired in 2015, has now been deployed in a multimedia installation, Ngapulara Ngarngarnyi Wirra or "Our Family Tree" in the Adnyamathanha/Yura Ngarwala language of the Flinders Ranges in South Australia.
"I never really thought about it when I was playing, but I have a very different opinion of that tracking now," Goodes tells the Herald.
While the data was aimed at enhancing the player's future performances, Goodes says only around half a dozen of those outputs informed his individual key performance indicators: "Things like distance travelled, speed at certain times, number of sprints over 25 kilometres ... But all this other data was being captured too."
The four-year collaborative process to develop the installation helped Goodes understand how the data measured far more intimate details about him on the field - an environment that became increasingly confronting at the tail end of his career as he was targeted with racist insults by spectators and high-profile AFL pundits alike.
"This data really is me in that moment, at that point in time, when all that stuff was going on ... For me now, it is very personal [data]," Goodes says.
At the height of the abuse, he took a hiatus and returned home to Country to be with family, speak to respected cultural custodians, and to sit beside an ancient wirra, or tree, in a dry riverbed.
Ngapulara Ngarngarnyi Wirra repatriates Goodes' on-field data set to the traditional Adnyamathanha kinship system, and the same special site on Country. The artwork raises questions about the surveillance of Aboriginal bodies: who owns and retains our data, who is entitled to it, and how to return that data, the exhibit's creators say.
"What does it mean when data is not technically from Country as a place, but through the body? How do you return it in a way that isn't just like, 'Here's a thumb drive - have a good time'?" says digital artist Baden Pailthorpe.
Goodes and Pailthorpe - who has produced earlier work from player datasets retained by the AFL and the Sydney Swans football club - worked alongside Trawlwoolway woman Angie Abdilla, a designer, filmmaker and technologist.
The work uses artificial intelligence and data visualisation graphics to merge a moving image of the on-field data with a 3D digital reproduction of the 500-year-old wirra. The overall image is animated, revolving in a shifting landscape of data points as the sound of Ararru (north wind) and Mathari (south wind) swirl around the exhibit.
After viewing the projection, visitors can step behind the image as though entering the hollowed tree trunk to listen to the Adnyamathanha Yura Muda (creation story) spoken in language by Goodes and Uncle Terrence Coulthard, who represent the two wind moieties.
Goodes says the work is part of a 20-year process of reconnecting to his Aboriginal heritage.
"I grew up knowing I was Aboriginal, but not connected to Country," he says. "Doing these projects is me asking more questions, having deeper and stronger relationships with my mothers and fathers back on Country, learning more of my language, rituals and protocols.
"Every time I stand in front of the data projection, listening to the wind and the language, I feel connected."
The installation is part of Science Gallery Melbourne's Swarm exhibition, which explores what drives us to be social. The work first appeared at South Australia's Museum of Discovery earlier this year.
CREDIT: Jack Latimore
Word count: 617
