Australia’s newest major event, Illuminate Adelaide, features a program of light, music, art, innovation and immersive experiences.
Taking place until July 31, the second iteration of Illuminate Adelaide is enticing locals, interstate and international visitors to the city as it warms the streets of Adelaide with a bright and intriguing light this winter.
Despite wild weather and a Covid lockdown impacting the inaugural year, Illuminate Adelaide managed to attract more than 500,000 attendances and contribute more than $40 million to the South Australian economy in 2021.
“After an overwhelming response to our inaugural program, 2022 (features) an expanded program of experiences, installations and performances showcasing the very best examples of the convergence of art and technology our city and the world has to offer right now,” Illuminate Adelaide co-founders and creative directors Rachael Azzopardi and Lee Cumberlidge said.
“We are looking forward to welcoming hundreds of thousands of South Australians and visitors to our state into our city to participate in a massive program of free and ticketed events this month.” In an Australian premiere and Illuminate Adelaide exclusive, the Istanbul-based visionaries at Ouchhh Studio feature their work with NASA and CERN as well as the work of Leonardo da Vinci in their major exhibition Wisdom of AI Light, an AI-driven, multisensory experience that’s putting the art in artificial intelligence.
Housed in a massive, specially designed projection pavilion constructed in the East End of the CBD, it’s a work of extraordinary scale and vision from the pioneers of data paintings and sculptures, which takes the viewer on a journey through art and science from the Renaissance to the future.
Ouchhh Studio is Illuminate Adelaide’s 2022 Luminary Artist in Residence and, in addition to Wisdom of AI Light, the Studio will present Ocean Data at Light Adelaide as part of the City Lights program.
Long before online concerts and festivals became a thing, Gorillaz founders Damon Albarn and Jamie Hewlett seamlessly meshed art, music and technology together to create the world’s greatest virtual band.
Now, having turned this playful experiment into an enduring and innovative global phenomenon 2D, Murdoc Niccals, Noodle and Russel Hobbs are set to perform for one night only in Adelaide, on July 28, at the Adelaide Entertainment Centre.
Illuminate Adelaide’s free city-wide centrepiece City Lights returns with a new series of immersive installations, artworks and large-scale activations set to turn Adelaide’s most iconic streetscapes into a night-time adventure of colour and sound.
With more than 40 free works over 17 days, it will be a brand new program of boundary-pushing local and international artists who will reimagine laneways, street-fronts and open spaces across the city in three precincts: north, east and west.
The runaway hit of Illuminate Adelaide’s inaugural program, Light Cycles, is back by popular demand, returning to Adelaide Botanic Gardens until July 31.
This Australian-first production from celebrated Montreal studio Moment Factory enchants the senses in a series of installations using lights, audio, video and special effects to take audiences on a magical journey.
In an Australian premiere, Joanna Dudley’s operatic video installation We Will Slam You With Our Wings steals from some of history’s most notoriously sexist speeches and recasts them into a feminist war cry echoing through the ages. A seven-channel video piece, each screen depicts a 19th-century colonial imperialistic portrait, with one noticeable difference: instead of a lavish depiction of white powerful men, six young girls, each from a different continent, stand in their own room and own frame with Dudley in the seventh.
And, after a sold-out 2021 world premiere season, Light Creatures is back to take audiences behind the gates of Adelaide Zoo after dark. This captivating twist on the animal kingdom is brought to life by the talents of local and interstate artists, commissioned to create lanterns and illuminations. illuminateadelaide.com.au
Word count: 631
