$300,000 illuminated sculpture planned for park
A GIANT illuminated ring is planned for the Adelaide square named after the British surveyor who designed the city, Colonel William Light.
Funding of $300,000 from the Adelaide City Council will be used to create the artwork as part of the Illuminate Adelaide winter festival.
The 8m-high sculpture will be positioned at the southern part of Light Square so it can frame Colonel Light’s historic grave and memorial.
Based on a similar piece of artwork in Mexico City, The Eye of Mexico, it will be produced by a Turkish-based media collective, Ouchhh Studio.
Rundle Rd has been closed until September to accommodate a large pavilion hosting the company’s flagship production, Wisdom of AI Light.
As this year’s Illuminate Adelaide artist-in-residence, Ouchhh Studio was asked by the council to create a piece of legacy artwork.
The studio boasts 50 public art projects in cities across the world, including London, New York, Berlin, Tokyo, Seoul, Abu Dhabi and Paris.
Earlier this month, one of its ­numerous light shows driven by artificial intelligence opened on a new science museum in Singapore.
Ouchhh Studio’s proposal to put the illuminated ring in Light Square will be presented to the Kadaltilla/Park Lands Authority on Thursday.
A council staff report said it was a “major opportunity” for Adelaide to be the first city in Australia to secure a significant artwork by the studio.
“The artwork will sit below the canopy of the trees and will frame Light’s Memorial when viewed along the north-south axis,” it said.
“The Ouchhh Studio public artwork will amplify and add value to Light Square/Wauwi as a cultural destination – driving tourism and attendance in the west end of the city.” The report said the artwork would be located near various cultural facilities including the JamFactory, Samstag Museum of Art, Nexus Arts, The Lions Arts Centre, Museum of Discovery (MOD) and Guildhouse. It was expected to have a life of around 25 years and cost about $10,000 a year to maintain. PAGE 21: BROELMAN’S CARTOON
CREDIT: COLIN JAMES
Word count: 341
