The cloud implementation company, which works with partners Google Cloud, Amazon Web Services and Salesforce, has already started advertising for roles locally, aiming to hire 500 staff to work out of its South Australian office.
MTX will be based out of Adelaide‘s Lot Fourteen precinct – already home to Google and Amazon – joining its existing offices across New York, Texas, Canada, and India. The company, through a partnership with Salesforce, is helping manage the COVID-19 vaccine rollout across Chicago and Houston.
“We‘ve set an ambitious target to create 2,500 jobs in Australia in the next five years, supporting our growth here, throughout the Asia Pacific region and around the globe,” MTX Australia chief executive Ben Papps said.
“There‘s tremendous tech momentum in Australia with significant attention being placed in developing key skills and capabilities at the federal and state level. We’re excited to be part of that agenda from the point of view of developing talent and also providing meaningful outcomes for our customers and the communities they serve.”
Mr Papps added that his company‘s Australian operations will create opportunities to export services and technological solutions to the Asia Pacific region and back to the US. He said MTX’s aim is to modernise technology with outcomes focused around the happiness, health, and economy of the communities they serve.
“One of the unique things about our Australian launch is that the people we employ will be immediately engaged on customer projects in the US and other parts of the world,” he said.
“We‘ll be exporting from day one, providing unique opportunities for Australian talent while helping us to build scale in this part of the world.”
MTX Chairman and Founder Das Nobel said Australia’s focus on the jobs of the future made it an attractive location for the company to build a team across Australia.
“Helping advance the quality of life for our communities around the globe is central to our values, and our culture and MTX’s commitment to the Australian and South Australian community will be evident from day one.”
South Australian Premier Steven Marshall said the announcement by MTX Group to establish in Adelaide cements South Australia’s hi-tech ecosystem as one of the world’s best, with the state continuing to attract leading global technology companies.
“MTX Group is yet another global company that is choosing South Australia as its home. For the company to be creating 500 local jobs in the next three to five years is a big coup for our State when it needs it the most,“ he said.
“Today’s announcement by MTX Group adds to a long list of companies like Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud and Accenture, who have all decided to invest and create jobs in Adelaide. As a government, we have linked two of the world’s leading artificial intelligence and data analytics capabilities here in Adelaide – the Australian Institute for Machine Learning and MIT bigdata Living Lab – and that is a big attraction to companies such as MTX.”
Word count: 487
