REGIONAL centres including Kapunda and Mount Gambier are set to feel the brunt of South Australia’s escalating rental crisis.
Artificial intelligence company HOOD.ai analysed rent and vacancy rates over a 12-month period to find the 20 places where prices could skyrocket, and found rural areas were likely to be hit hard.
An annual median rental increase of 32.8 per cent was predicted for Kapunda (currently $385 a week) and 16.7 per cent for Mount Gambier (currently $245 a week).
Mount Gambier real estate agent Bianca Taylor said interstate buyers with “deeper pockets” were responsible for driving the price surge.
“Unfortunately, instead of slowly increasing over five years, it’s just gone bang and increased over the past 18 months to two years,” she said.
Ms Taylor said that until demand for housing stabilised, prices would continue to rapidly grow.
“We need longer-term solutions, including an increase to JobSeeker and rent assistance, to lift people out of poverty, and more investment in community and public housing,” she said.
Local Government Minister Geoff Brock said the regional rental crisis had been brewing for some time.
“The demand for housing in Port Pirie, Port Augusta and Peterborough in particular is absolutely phenomenal,” said Mr Brock, the independent member for Stuart.
“There are a lot of people coming from interstate looking at relocating in our regions and that’s now causing problems because those houses are no longer available for rental.
“That’s being compounded by the attraction to come back into the regions – the Upper Spencer Gulf in particular … we’re attracting the workers for (major projects) but there are no rentals available for them.” Campbelltown (a 30.9 per cent increase from $445), Paradise (a 30.2 per cent increase from $410), Lobethal (a 28.6 per cent increase from $450) and Findon (a 28.6 per cent increase from $360) rounded out the top five suburbs and towns for annual rent increase.
HOOD.ai chief executive Tommy Fraser said the report highlighted the depth of SA’s rental affordability crisis and blamed low vacancy rates for pushing up prices.
“Traditionally, when renters get priced out of an area, they tend to shift to a cheaper suburb nearby,” Mr Fraser said.
“But that’s become increasingly hard in the current market, which is forcing tenants to move even further in search of affordable accommodation.” Mr Fraser warned tenants in the top 20 suburbs and towns that there was “high chance” landlords would increase rent at their next review.
Earlier this year, hardworking Mount Gambier mum Jodie Redman told The Advertiser how the rental crisis had torn her apart from her children because she could not find a home to house them. SEE THE FULL LIST OF ANNUAL RENTAL INCREASES AT ADVERTISER.COM.AU
CREDIT: EMILY OLLE ARJ GANESAN
Word count: 455
