Batteries in mix THERE is always someone willing to tout the nuclear option as being the only viable option for our future growth and prosperity.
This is nonsense and MP James Stevens should be aware of that. Advances in nuclear technology are decades away and current technology is failing both economic and environmental tests.
The pursuit of the nuclear option would be better aimed at battery stations like the Hornsdale Power Reserve. While these technologies are still in the early days of refinement, they are already proving themselves viable.
One solar and battery farm could be operational in a year or two, whereas we couldn’t build a nuclear plant in 20 years. About 10 solar and battery plants would provide South Australia with energy to export.
Adding the proposed hydrogen processing plant, SA could have energy security without any nuclear risks.
To me, this is a far more practical, economically and environmentally viable option.
DAVID JANNSEN, Adelaide
Leader dangers AN excuse used to argue against Australia becoming a republic is that we might elect a Donald Trump-like person to be our president.
There is a similar argument against the existing model too. Before World War II suspected Nazi sympathiser King Edward VIII became Australia’s head of state for a brief time.
Both situations can be avoided. Australia does not need a head of state. The constitutional functions of the head of state can be assigned to the judges of the High Court of Australia.
The decisions would be impartial, without influence by political parties, lobbyists or money. There would be no need for wasteful elections.
LES PAYNE, Willunga
PM performing CONGRATULATIONS to Anthony Albanese for his great start as Prime Minister, as indicated by popular support (“Record satisfaction with PM: Newspoll”, The Advertiser, Monday, August 1).
Cometh the hour, cometh the man.
PHIL SAUNDERS, Belair
Truck stop THE steep decline at the final stretch of the South Eastern Freeway is a notorious safety hazard for heavy haulage vehicles.
I don’t understand why it’s not law for all such vehicles to be required to come to a complete stop at the start of the decline. A side slip lane should be created solely for this purpose.
Before proceeding, it should be compulsory to then engage the lowest gear and stay in that gear until reaching the bottom.
DON VENN, Norwood
Train Aussies WITH the current skills shortage, surely nobody could argue with the proposal gaining ground that, for every skilled migrant we grant a visa to, there should be a place made to train a local person.
Our young people need more support to get trained for the careers of the future. R. WOOD, Valley View
Jobs market SINCE some are having a go at naughty jobseekers who are ghosting prospective employers, let’s look at the big picture.
A couple of years ago an articulate and employable friend applied for about 240 jobs, got replies from 30, interviews with three and job offers from none. That’s 200-plus ghosts.
Jobseekers have, for years, been sending letters to employers with no response. The Centrelink requirements of 20 applications per month, coupled with not enough jobs, forced people to apply for jobs they were not qualified for.
Enter artificial intelligence software that zap through 1000 job applications in a few minutes, then spit out a shortlist of 10 or so. Why the software couldn’t go one simple step further and spit out a “Dear John” email to those 990 unsuccessful people to put them out of their misery quickly is beyond me.
So, now the tables have turned and employees are in the driver’s seat. May I suggest the ghosting is behaviour that they have been subjected to and are now mirroring. Ideal? Perhaps not. Understandable, though? Absolutely.
KAREN ZASKOLNY, Ashford
Cut prices HAVE you seen the price of a haircut these days?
I walked past a barber shop in a busy suburban shopping mall about 11am and not a single customer was inside.
A glance at the sign revealed $40 for a haircut. Four years ago, when the price at my local barber hit $20, my form of protest was to buy a set of electric hair clippers for the princely sum of $16. I still use those same clippers to this day.
In those four years I’ve given myself about 10 haircuts per year. So my $16 investment means that the 40 haircuts since have cost me about 40c per haircut.
Why would I pay $40 for a haircut when I can get it done myself for 40c? Vote with your feet people. A set of electric hair clippers is the answer. We can’t accept these extortionate prices. MARK TAYLOR, Somerton Park
Word count: 780
