MEDICAL technology start-up Fertilis has taken another step towards commercialising its IVF micro-device with the arrival of a high-speed 3D printer and promising new ­research that shows its tech­nology improves IVF success rates.
Fertilis’s 3D-printed device has been more than 20 years in the making. Co-founder and reproductive biologist Professor Jeremy Thompson has been developing the technology since the 1990s, when he first came up with the idea of automating the IVF process.
The patented micro-device – smaller than a pinhead in size – allows for the culturing of cells, such as an embryo, in ­environments that more closely resemble the conditions in the human body.
Fertilis then uses automation to monitor and control the cell culturing process, removing the need for IVF practitioners to move cells between petri-dishes, thereby reducing the chances of human error.
Through a partnership with the University of South Australia and the Australian National Fabrication Facility (ANFF), the company has ­secured access to what’s described as the world’s fastest 2PP (two-photon polymerisation) 3D printer.
The $800,000 3D printer arrived at the ANFF’s new ­Precision Engineering Centre at UniSA’s Mawson Lakes campus last month and is the first of its kind in Australia and one of just 15 globally.
Mr Thompson said the 3D printer could manufacture the micro-devices in minutes, while the process to manu­facture the microfluidic chips that were used in conjunction with those devices was also rapidly improving.
“We see it as not only just a research tool, but a manufacturing tool, and the advances in 2PP technology, like all these things, it’s rapid,” Mr Thompson said.
“And we suggest that 2PP will start dominating the ­microfluidic chip area simply because of the capabilities that it offers, which have always been hamstrung by the capacity for the size and the slowness of the technology.
“These are going to be overcome in the next few years.” Technology entrepreneur Marty Gauvin joined Fertilis as chief executive in 2019 to help commercialise the technology, while veteran embryology and stem cell biology expert Alexandra Harvey recently started working with the company in an advisory role.
Fertilis is backed by Horizon Ventures, the venture capital firm of Hong Kong ­tycoon Li Ka-shing, which led a $2.75m seed funding round last year.
Mr Thompson said that the company was in talks with ­investors to raise more funds ahead of a product launch in the next couple of years. “We have been doing a lot of prototyping and we’ve made the ­decision that over the next two years we’ll have a product in the marketplace,” he said.
“We’re quite convinced that we can do this.
“We’ve done a lot of work on the regulatory requirements, we’ve done a lot of work on the size of the market and we’re very confident that we’ll meet those milestones.” Mr Thompson said regulatory regimes in the US and Japan, and the demand for IVF treatment in those two countries, made them particularly attractive. Fertilis says its technology can also be used in other cell culture treatments for chronic conditions, such as cancer, ­diabetes, spinal cord injury, sight loss and cystic fibrosis.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 521
