JETPACK JOYRIDE 2 $7.99/m, Apple Arcade The jumping, shooting and coin-collecting adventures of Barry Steakfries are back! Australian developer Halfbrick Studios has teamed with Apple Arcade for this sequel to the hugely successful Jetpack Joyride. This new take features high-definition graphics, mechanics, hidden treasures and a new character, Betty Beefpies, with a mysterious backstory about life in an alternative universe.
PLANT PARENT Free, Apple iOS/Google Android Whether you’re looking to boost your plant-raising skills, solve a problem, or avoid destroying a new investment, this app can assist. Plant Parent uses artificial intelligence (and your phone’s camera) to identify the plant you’re growing, the light it gets, strange marks it has on its leaves, and how often you need to water, fertilise and prune it. It can add these reminders to a calendar so you’re left in little doubt about how to keep it alive.
HEADS UP!
Free, iOS/Android A new version of the game made famous by Ellen DeGeneres, this app is a party game for people who stream a lot of TV. Netflix Heads Up! is designed to test a player’s pop-culture and acting skills as they either hold their phone above their head with the name of a character, actor or place and guess what their friend is trying to act out, or vice-versa. Shows featured in the game include Stranger Things, ever-saucy Bridgerton, and even Squid Game.
DANCE FIT $30/m, iOS/Android There’s something appealing about dancing away excess weight, and that’s the concept behind this fitness app. DanceFitme asks new users questions about their goals, height, weight and dancing acumen, and then prescribes a four-week course of daily dance exercises. Routines are shorter than you might imagine, with few lasting longer than 20 minutes.
LINKEDIN Free, iOS/Android The Australian job market is booming right now and it’s turning LinkedIn into a hiring frenzy. Those looking to join the Great Resignation a little late can quickly find work on this social network, that now has a section dedicated to jobs to suit your skills and others you’ve saved for later consideration. A $45.45/m Premium membership will also unlock a list of roles for which LinkedIn considers you the top candidate, and shows you who has been viewing your profile.
CREDIT: with Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 375
