But cyber security a key issue
AMERICAN and British ­defence chiefs say the West can only maintain a technological arms race advantage with initiatives such as the AUKUS pact, suggesting it could be expanded or repli­cated with other allies.
But they have warned major cybersecurity upgrades will be required to ensure Australia’s acquisition of nuclear submarines is not compromised by foreign spies.
Australian Defence Minister Richard Marles is in Hawaii this weekend for talks with US counterpart Lloyd Austin and to inspect the US’s Virginia-class submarines, as they work to finalise plans for Australia’s nuclear-powered fleet.
Japanese defence officials are also taking part in the talks, fuelling speculation about an expansion of the AUKUS pact.
While not viewed as an ­immediate possibility, a White House official said AUKUS could create a model for sharing defence technology.
“If we can make this work with our two closest allies ... I think it’s actually a sort of a preview for what may be possible in different and varying degrees into the future,” said Cara Abercrombie, US President Joe Biden’s defence policy co-ordinator.
Speaking at a defence forum in the US, British Vice Admiral Martin Connell said collaborations such as AUKUS were “more important now than they ever have been”.
“The kinds of systems and technologies we’re talking about here are too complex and too expensive for any one nation to be able to try to deal with by themselves, certainly if we’re going to keep the technological edge that the West has had in the past,” Admiral Connell said.
But he cautioned it would “massively increase our collective threat surface” ­because of the amount of “very, very sensitive information” which would need to be shared.
White House national ­security adviser Jake Sullivan said the AUKUS agreement was progressing well a year in.
“We’ve made substantial progress on this over the course of the last year. We feel very good on the trilateral co-operation on the submarine program,” Mr Sullivan said.
“Our three countries are very much on the same page about the path forward. “We also are pursuing a significant number of advanced capabilities through the AUKUS partnership, in cyber, artificial intelligence, and other areas, we’ve seen significant progress on those as well.”
CREDIT: TOM MINEAR
Word count: 374
