AI race is the modern atomic bomb
WINNING the race on artificial intelligence and quantum computing will deliver a strategic advantage similar to the atomic bomb, according to the opposition’s new cyber security spokesman, who says the AUKUS pact is Australia’s ticket to victory.
Senator James Paterson says the new Albanese government must work with the US and the UK to fast-track Australia’s access to their technological advancements for cyber warfare.
“If totalitarian states, authoritarian governments win the race on AI or quantum computing, that will be like winning the race to get the bomb in the 20th century,” he said.
In a wide-ranging interview about his new shadow ministry, which also includes countering foreign interference, Senator Paterson blasted the new government for dismantling the Home Affairs department by shifting key agencies out of the security super-department.
He also acknowledged changes were needed to the foreign influence transparency scheme implemented by the former government, and vowed to focus more on protecting diaspora communities from the tentacles of foreign powers.
The Victorian Liberal senator said it was crucial Labor took advantage “of the opportunities we’ve left them”, including activating critical infrastructure laws, using new sanctions to target cyber criminals, and tapping into the AUKUS agreement beyond acquiring nuclear submarines.
“These things are on the shelf and ready to go, and had we been re-elected we would have been making the most of it, so I want to make sure they make the most of it,” Senator Paterson said.
But he said it was a “crazy decision” for Labor to reverse the Coalition’s reforms, which moved the Australian Federal Police, the Australian Criminal Intelligence Commission and financial crimes watchdog AUSTRAC from the Attorney-Gen­eral’s portfolio to Home Affairs.
“It’s either driven by ideology or it’s a power grab … but we don’t know because they haven’t articulated their rationale,” Senator Paterson said.
He said the AFP needed to work with ASIO on foreign interference and counter-terrorism, and that the Home Affairs structure had improved oversight by ensuring the nation’s chief law officer was not responsible for enforcement and compliance with the law. Senator Paterson said too many organisations and people linked to overseas powers had “fallen through the cracks” of Australia’s foreign influence register, and that changes needed to be considered through the powerful parliamentary intelligence and security committee.
CREDIT: TOM MINEAR
Word count: 389
