RAIN PARROT $5.99, iOS If you want to know when it’s going to rain down to the minute, this app can assist. Rain Parrot uses a weather engine with advanced computer modelling to give users daily rain notifications. The app also features radar maps, with hyperlocal weather, current wind and rain probability. Users with an Apple Watch will also find the app handy when outdoors, with information screens, mini weather radar, and outside temperature.
PROCREATE POCKET $7.99, iOS Procreate Pocket is a complete digital art studio at your fingertips. The app allows users to create expressive sketches, paintings, illustrations and animations. Other features include hundreds of handmade brushes, a QuickShape feature for perfect shapes and responsive smudge sampling. Users can also import their photos from their gallery and edit them using powerful image adjustments including colour balance and curves.
SHUTEYE: SLEEP TRACKER Free, iOS, Android This app will analyse files recorded through your device’s microphone using artificial intelligence to produce detailed reports on your sleep cycles. It also features white noise including rain, campfire and ocean wave sounds to assist with falling asleep. There’s also detailed dream interpretations, healing music and sleep stories. A $97.99 a year subscription unlocks premium features including snoring and sleep talk recording, and meditation sounds.
PULL THE PIN Free, iOS, Android A super fun, yet challenging puzzle game, where users have to remove the pins to make all balls enter the basket. As you progress through each level, it becomes harder with the risk of pulling the wrong pins in certain orders and bombs that explode all the balls. Players can collect rewards during each challenge and exchange them for new balls, backgrounds, pin styles, even ball trails.
SOUND PROOF PUPPY TRAINING $5.99, iOS, Android This pawfect app is handy for all new puppy owners and allows users to train their dogs to be comfortable with a range of different sounds in the early stages of their development. The sounds include barking dogs, crying babies, lawnmower and drilling. It also lets dog owners record their own sounds and features other handy puppy training tips.
CREDIT: with SUZAN DELIBASIC
Word count: 353
