DEFENCE AUSTRALIA will drastically lift its military tempo in the Pacific, committing to its highest defence spend in more than two decades.
Overall defence spend will rise above 2 per cent of GDP – a level not seen since the late 1990s and early 2000s – to allow more fighters to take to the air and ships to sea, notably about the Pacific region.
The Albanese government has committed to a $270bn capability upgrade to 2030, as agreed to with the former Coalition government, after a 2020 strategic review warned of the need for self-reliance, security deterrence and engagement with the Pacific.
But it has flagged defence and national security spending would go 8 per cent higher in the coming year, after its own updated review is released publicly next March.
That review aims to make Australia “more potent” and a capable regional security partner. It will determine new acquisitions, including nuclear-powered submarines under the AUKUS security pact, as well as hypersonic missiles, advanced cyber and artificial intelligence capabilities, ground defence missile systems and drone air and sea warfare.
Meantime, the budget has allowed for a significant increase in available flying hours for all RAAF and RAN assets, including Australia’s leading F-35 strike fighter.
Their operations will almost double to 12,500 flying hours in the coming 12 months, while there will be more Anzac-class frigates and Hobart-class destroyers put to sea.
There is also an emphasis on greater aerial surveillance with the P-8A Poseidon fleet to work harder on intelligence gathering missions in the region.
The budget has spelled out the urgency in shaping Australia’s strategic direction to deter actions against national interests and respond “with credible force”.
To that end, the Albanese government has also flagged a huge emphasis on the greater Pacific region.
Gone is any significant ongoing funding to the Middle East with “geographical focus priority” squarely on the Pacific. That will include more than $147m to “advance” regional security and engagement, including establishing an Australia Pacific Defence School for multinational military and police training.
That initiative is in direct response to China’s push to increase its police and military presence in the region.
Overall, $1.4bn has been earmarked in additional development aid, including $900m for the Pacific.
“After nearly a decade of neglect and disrespect, we are restoring our role as a diligent and dependable partner and friend to our Pacific neighbours for a stable, peaceful and more prosperous region,” Treasurer Jim Chalmers said.
He added the Australian Defence Force would have the funding it needed to also ensure it could meet all challenges into the next decade.
Defence Minister Richard Marles said all the thinking was simply about keeping Australia safe.
“The 2022-23 budget will strengthen our regional partnerships and build our shared resilience to meet future challenges,” Mr Marles said.
In the wake of the damaging Optus and Medibank data hacks, the cyber security fight would also be lifted by $31m. Australia will commit $213m over five years toward Ukraine’s war with Russia, including $18.4m toward more humanitarian visas for Ukrainians fleeing the fighting.
CREDIT: CHARLES MIRANDA
Word count: 513
