BOOKS Fiction Blood Sugar Sascha Rothchild: Trapeze, $33 This engrossing thriller with multiple twists is a killer debut from Rothchild, an Emmy award-winning US TV writer and producer. And she’s on another winner with Ruby Simon, a respectable psychologist with a shocking collection of skeletons in her closet, dating to when she was just five. The problem is Ruby is being quizzed about four murders and it’s the one she didn’t commit that may see her life unravel. Mind games are Ruby’s professional specialty, giving her an edge in keeping her secrets safe – or so she thinks. Bizarrely, despite her penchant for killing, you can’t help but like Ruby and her cool and calculated attitude. And the title? Let’s just say there is insulin involved. This tale has TV streaming hit written all over it.
CARINA BRUCE * * * * 1/2 Fiction The Improbable Life of Ricky Bird Diane Connell: Simon & Schuster, $33 Ricky Bird is not a storyteller to let the truth get in the way of a good story and her vivid imagination is full of them – much to the delight of her little brother, Ollie, who demands to hear at least one daily. The impossible worlds, creatures and wonders she describes help the siblings cope with the sadness of their parents’ divorce, the uncertainty of moving to a bleak new neighbourhood, the unfriendly neighbours and Mum’s new boyfriend Dan, who seems to be an integral part of an already yucky package.
Gritty and raw, tender and heartbreaking, this is a beautifully written tale of an ordinary family and the fierce girl at its heart who will stay with you long after the last page is turned and the last tear has dried.
LEANNE EDMISTONE * * * 1/2 Fiction Trespass Louise Kennedy: Bloomsbury Publishing, $30 The more you get to know Cushla, a woman in her 20s in a town near Belfast in the 1970s who is juggling a lot, the more you love her. She slips behind the bar at the family pub by night, covering for her alcoholic mother, and teaches at a primary school by day; and she is quietly Catholic in an area that’s Protestant. Her love life is a mess; she is half-heartedly dating Gerry while barely keeping it together over an exhilaratingly sexy affair with an older, worldlier, married barrister who defends some of those caught up in The Troubles. This is a masterful work; a deeply personal and moving story that gives you a glimmer of what it was like when religious sectarianism and Catholic morality shadowed every move.
PENELOPE DEBELLE * * * * * Non-fiction Machines Behaving Badly: The Morality of AI Toby Walsh: La Trobe University Press, $33 Whether you are barking orders at Siri or weeping in frustration at the automated telephone answering service, you’re using Artificial Intelligence (AI). Professor Toby Walsh explains how AI will only become an even more regular presence in our lives, so we might as well know what it can do, what it can’t, and what limits humans should apply. AI can recommend people from a pile of job applications, but we still need to ask who did the programming. Driverless cars, war without soldiers and identifying faces in a crowd are amazing tricks – but they’re also a dictator’s dream. Walsh reminds us that machines can gather data really well but they can’t think, so we’re in charge.
ROBYN DOUGLASS * * * * 1/2
CREDIT: CARINA BRUCE; LEANNE EDMISTONE; PENELOPE DEBELLE; ROBYN DOUGLASS
Word count: 588
