From appliances to apps and security to switches, there are myriad ways to make your home a smart one – and to save yourself time and money in the process The most important questions to ask yourself when you’re thinking of turning your home into a smart home (whether you’re an owner or a renter) are: What do I want to achieve from investing in this type of technology? What are the practical, physical and philosophical outcomes I’m striving for in my home?
Is it simply that you don’t want to have to get up from the lounge to turn the lights on or off? Is it because security is important to you and you want to monitor the movements of people arriving at your front door, and those inside your home? Or is it more about being smart with money and making your home more energy efficient?
With so many questions and so many options available, it’s a good idea to have a fundamental plan and an end result in mind so that each piece of technology you invest in works towards obtaining that end goal. You’ll have a far better outcome this way than if you have sporadic and incoherent bits of technology scattered all over the place, doing different jobs and not working efficiently.
Like with all things, expert advice can be a good investment and the big internet suppliers and players – such as Google, Optus and Telstra – all have consultants on hand to advise you and guide you when creating your ultimate virtual smart world.
Keep in mind, this doesn’t mean you have to go out and buy a complete AI (artificial intelligence) system, but it is important to know whether a nano switch that you saw online (which lets you control, monitor, automate and schedule the electronics in your home), an inexpensive video doorbell off the shelf from your local hardware store, or a home-entertainment control system recommended by your geeky mate down at the pub is compatible with your plan and operating platform.
It’s no secret that I love innovative technology, but I’m also very cautious to maintain balance. One of the most important gadgets I have in my house right now is a carbon monoxide detector to monitor the health and overall comfort of the humans in my home.
These nifty detectors also allow me to store data and identify areas where more airflow is required due to stale or stagnant air. I’m always trying to reduce carbon dioxide levels in the house, too, with natural indoor plants.
We now have the ability to monitor and store data on all kinds of energy use in our homes, and making more informed investments in functional white goods or high-energy consumption items effectively puts money back in your pocket.
By analysing and strategising my home’s energy use I was able to forecast dollars saved by the choice of my 7-star energy efficient Hisense fridge. Now that’s something that’s both cool and smart. Barry Du Bois is a home-design and renovation specialist, and co-host of The Living Room on Network 10.
CREDIT: with BARRY DU BOIS
Word count: 522
