RISING costs of food, fuel and mortgage repayments have become a constant unwanted companion for Australians this year, and there’s more pain to come.
With five consecutive interest rate hikes this year already and more on the way, household budgets are being pushed to the limit.
Compounding the situation is predictions house prices could drop as much as 10 per cent – a devastating figure for homeowners who bought at the top of the market and until recently believed interest rates would remain low for at least another two years.
The end of the 20c cut to the fuel excise introduced by the former Coalition government has almost arrived, with motorists warned to expect a rise in prices once the temporary measure ends on September 28.
The government has repeatedly said the fuel excise cut won’t be extended, but this only further boosts the need to have some other cost-of-living relief in next month’s budget.
UKRAINE CALLING AS RUSSIA LOOMS Defence Minister Richard Marles – who is also currently Acting Prime Minister – has remained evasive about the timing of potential further military aid to Ukraine to help the war-torn nation consolidate recent gains made against Russian invaders as winter looms.
Ukraine has requested additional Bushmaster and Hawkei armoured vehicles among other military hardware.
But despite saying Australia is alive to the urgent nature of the situation, Mr Marles has been tight-lipped about when more aid may be committed.
Australia has so far been one of the largest non-NATO military supporters of Ukraine since Russia invaded the eastern European nation in March this year.
But Ukraine’s recent military successes in regaining territory is not the only compelling reason for Australia to maintain its support in the fight against Russia.
The recent announcement Russia and China will be conducting joint military exercises in the Pacific highlights how Australia’s security might be directly threatened by emboldened authoritarian leaders.
AUKUS? JUST ‘TRUST US’ SAYS GOVERNMENT A year on from the historic AUKUS pact was signed and Australia signalled its plans to acquire nuclear-powered submarines, the lack of detail about progress on the deal is concerning.
The Albanese government has been vague about expected timelines for delivering various stages and components of the AUKUS agreement, which extends far beyond submarines.
Co-operating on artificial intelligence, quantum computing and long-range missiles were also key components of the agreement, but so far Australians have nothing but vague assurances everything is on track.
A simple “trust us” response to questions of when and how various elements of the deal will be delivered make it extremely difficult to properly scrutinise progress.
It’s easy to meet a deadline if you never announce what the due date was until the assignment is complete.
Mr Marles has said the 18-month planning period for the submarines deal is “on track” and the government will be able to announce which vessel Australia will acquire in the “first part of next year”.
More clarity on the timelines for various stages and projects under AUKUS really can’t come soon enough.
ROYAL DUTIES Anthony Albanese is in London representing Australia at the funeral of Queen Elizabeth II where he has again tried to hose down debate about the future of the monarchy.
Despite the Prime Minister’s insistence the death of the Queen is a time for mourning and reflection, there’s been no avoiding the politics and he will have to face questions about the republic eventually.
UNITED COMMITMENTS Mr Albanese’s attendance at the Queen’s funeral means he is not able to attend the United Nations General Assembly meeting in New York, with Foreign Minister Penny Wong to take the lead for Australia instead.
Meanwhile, Energy and Climate Change Minister Chris Bowen will also be in the US representing Australia at “climate week” at the UN General Assembly, as well as several other events, including the Clean Energy Ministerial meeting in Pittsburgh. These outings will be a major opportunity for the Albanese government to spruik its 2030 climate target of 43 per cent reduction in emissions by 2030 on the world stage.
But when the handshakes, speeches and group photos subside, the Albanese government will be weeks away from its first budget and seemingly no closer to delivering promised energy bill savings to already cash-strapped households. CLARE ARMSTRONG IS NATIONAL POLITICS EDITOR
CREDIT: CLARE ARMSTRONG
Word count: 717
