Young people around the Spencer Gulf as well as at Kangaroo Island, Murray Bridge, Cleve, Streaky Bay, Naracoorte and Bordertown could soon be charging ahead with their careers.
They have the chance to get into the electricity industry, thanks to a huge increase in apprenticeships with SA Power Networks.
The company began advertising for an intake of 69 new powerline and electrical apprentices in early 2023.
This was announced as intakes of trainees, which already covers apprentices and graduates, to include a new category of cadetships.
The apprenticeship program develops the next generation of field crews, the graduate program brings new engineering and digital skills into the business and the cadetship program is aimed at developing the next generation of network program and works managers.
"We have been a major employer of apprentices and are stepping up our program even further in anticipation of significant extra work in coming years," said Paul Roberts, the company's corporate affairs head.
He said the network was growing and needed skilled people in what is an exciting time to enter the energy industry.
"This is probably the most exciting time in electricity since the expansion of the state's grid in the 1950s-70s, which led to the South Australia's rapid industrialisation," he said.
"We are leading the world in the shift to green energy and our electricity distribution network is a key part of the transition."
He said the network had about 340,000 homes with solar and 30,000 with batteries.
It was already the biggest source of energy generation in SA - a turnaround from the one-way network of just a few years ago.
"That, and the shift to electric cars, makes for exciting times in electricity distribution," he said.
Mr Roberts said the company offered a variety of work that allowed people to develop long and satisfying careers.
"People see our Stobie poles and wires. They are the backbone of the network, but they are only a part of the network's story," he said.
"We are exploring artificial intelligence, drones, and digitalisation. We have a sustainability and diversity focus, are deeply engaged with our community and have a strong presence in regional SA."
Applications for electrical and powerline apprenticeships will close on September 18 and applications for the cadetship intake of 10 people open soon.
Powerline apprenticeships are available in areas and depots including Bordertown, Cleve, Kingscote, . Murray Bridge, Naracoorte, Port Lincoln, Port Pirie, Streaky Bay and Whyalla.
CREDIT: Greg Mayfield
Word count: 408
