The Australian sports technology sector is on the cusp of a “golden era” but even just a small amount of government help would go a long way to helping the industry achieve its potential.
So says James Demetriou, who stepped down as chairman of Australian Sports Technologies Network on Friday, having helped oversee huge growth in the sector during the past decade.
ASTN estimates the market size of the local sports tech sector is about $3.1bn annually, or almost 10 per cent of the total Australian sports industry that has been valued at about $32bn.
The sector, including sports software, wearable technology, fan engagement, community sports and other data tracking apps, and stadium technology, employs close to 11,000 people in about 600 companies.
Many are emerging start-ups and firms that have graduated from accelerator programs designed to help them pitch for investment funds and other commercialisation programs.
By comparison, the number of jobs in the sector was estimated at about 2500 in 2012 from 200 companies. They are heady numbers and growth, and ASTN estimates the four years to early 2020 – just before Covid hit – saw the number of companies grow by about one-third alone.
The next decade, Demetriou says, provides even bigger opportunities for sports tech companies, as the 2032 Brisbane Olympics and other big events such as the Rugby World Cup in 2027 and the Women’s FIFA World Cup next year put Australia in the sights of the global sports sector.
“It is really critical to capitalise on it all,” Demetriou, a one-time lawyer and an ex-VFL player with Essendon in the mid-1970s who is the elder brother of former AFL chief executive Andrew, tells The Weekend Australian.
“The demand for our sports tech innovation is going to see unprecedented levels, I think.
“There is no probably one person in Australia over six years of age that is not using some form of Australian sports-tech in sport ­recreation fitness and wellness. From registration, smart apparel, wearable and GPS technology, fan engagement and use of stadiums technology at venues and esports. The future is very bright.” Demetriou has headed ASTN, which helps connect companies and researchers in the sports industry and foster innovation and commercialisation in the sector, for the best part of the last decade.
In that time, it has received about $9m funding from the Victorian Government and recently money from the Queensland Government. But little has been forthcoming federally, which instead supports more of the playing side of sport via Sport Australia.
Demetriou remembers being promised $10m by the then Gillard government in 2013, only for the Tony Abbott-led Coalition to win the subsequent election and the promise to vanish.
“That put us back four years,” Demetriou remembers. “We should have been in 2018 where we are today. In this golden age we need some support.
“If you take $10m now we think it could help create another $2bn in revenue and we get to 7000 employees (in the sector) and another 300 companies. That’s a good return … helping drive jobs and exports and creating new technologies.” Demetriou compares the level of support the sports tech sector gets federally to other industries, like the space sector that is getting $42m for a series of space, science and technology initiatives with India over the next three years.
“(Australian governments) do support the major events and stadiums. But we think sports tech is the third pillar of development in this country. Number one is infrastructure, number two is major events and three sports tech.
“Sports tech has a massive impact on the health, wellness and fitness and sport and recreation participation for all Australians. We think that needs supporting.” Even without significant support, a cluster of Australian sports tech companies have pulled off big deals or grown into global firms, like Catapult Sports that has $77m annual revenue from elite teams around the world using its athlete tracking software and technology.
There have been significant mergers and acquisitions in the sports and wellness sectors. Counting big deals like the $400m acquisition of the Sweat fitness app founded by Adelaide duo Kayla Itsines and Tobi Pearce by US firm iFit last year, there have been about $1bn worth of transactions involving Australian sports tech firms in the last two years.
Demetriou hopes there will be more investment in the sector by venture capital firms in the coming years, and more sport specific investment funds – though he says there is often more interest from overseas investors in Australian companies.
As he departs the ASTN chairman role to focus on helping the sector with commercialisation opportunities, Demetriou predicts several investment and market opportunities will emerge.
He says artificial intelligence will play a greater role in sport, both in predicting what happens on the field and fan engagement off it, as well as Web 3.0 and the Metaverse – where he points to the likes of Zed Run, the digital horse racing game built on blockchain technology, as Australian success stories.
“I think there needs to be more of a focus on female founders in sports tech as well, and sustainability and measuring ESG (environmental, social and governance) impacts and measures will also grow rapidly in importance,” Demetriou adds.
He says the sports tech sector needs to keep punching above its weight, just as Australian sport has done on the field. “There’s been massive amounts spent on infrastructure over 30 years. But look at what we do as an industry. It is a Melbourne Cup, AFL grand final and other major events combined in terms of revenue and impact,” he said.
CREDIT: John Stensholt
Word count: 936
