Fraser Coast businessman Greg McGarvie’s company Australian Clean Energy Electric Vehicles Group, will be used in a world-first advanced energy management trial in the embattled South Australian power network.
The trial, made possible through a Federal Government grant, is aimed at demonstrating how the batteries in electric vehicles can earn money, as well as save money, for those who drive them, by contributing to the power grid.
Mr McGarvie said had such a system been in place during the recent grid disruption, when the Callide Power Station explosion caused outages across the state, electric vehicles would have put power back into the grid, earning money for the vehicle owners.
The 12 month trial, called the Advanced Australian Vehicle to Grid, will look at bidirectional vehicle-to-grid charging to find energy cost savings and efficiencies for vehicle drivers as well as electrical grid operators.
Mr McGarvie started ACE Electric Vehicles about two years ago, determined to explore opportunities for a greener future and planet for the next generation.
In order to build affordable electric vehicles, Mr McGarvie kept costs down by designing a carbon fibre shell made of flatpack parts sourced from China and Taiwan.
The packs were shipped to their warehouse at Logan, south of Brisbane, and glued together to make the first Cargo Van.
“We are on the threshold of a new energy era in Australia” Mr McGarvie said.
“We are exploring how the EV battery can be used to offset everyday energy costs and how the utilisation of this new EV solution can create more reliable access to affordable clean energy.”
Senator Rex Patrick’s advocacy for Electric Vehicles and advanced manufacturing in South Australia, was instrumental in assisting ACE EV Group secure the $5 million grant for the technology trial, Mr McGarvie said.
“I am pleased that after months of lobbying the Federal Government to support establishing an Advanced Manufacturing Facility in Adelaide‘s northern suburbs, the government listened,” Senator Patrick said.
“The facility will see vehicle manufacturing brought back to South Australia for the first time in three years since the closure of the Holden factory in 2017.“
ACE EV Group will use a small part of the $5 million federal grant to help establish an EV manufacturing facility, underpinning the Government’s goals of technological solutions for reducing pollution, carbon loads and fighting climate change.
The ACE EV can also be used as a direct power source for work tools or power in emergency situations.
The 2021 trial will demonstrate how the Series 4 ACE EV, can be plugged into most power points without the need of a specialised outlet.
“We’ve selected strategic technology partners, to help accelerate Australia as a leader in electric vehicles manufacturing, in particular mobile energy management systems and as an exporter of smart packs,” Mr McGarvie said.
Leading Smart Cities solutions provider SenSen Networks Limited announced last year it had signed a Memorandum of Understanding with ACE Electric Vehicles Group to collaborate on developing autonomous driving capabilities for ACE electric vehicles to be manufactured in Australia by ACE.
ACE EV Group announced its partnership with SenSen last year and has been working with the leading artificial intelligence and machine learning enterprise to develop vehicle-specific technologies that support navigation and safe driving.
Word count: 520
