While many of Australia’s biggest influencers are based on the east coast, South Australia has no shortage of individuals who are carefully curating their gram feeds to build huge audiences and lucrative brands.
You’ve no doubt read about the phenomenal success of people like Kayla Itsines, the Adelaide fitness queen who has built a global empire off the back of her hugely successful bikini body workout program and amassed an Instagram following close to 13m people.
But who are South Australia’s lesser-known but still hugely popular stars of Instagram?
We’ve compiled our list below - and it may hold a few surprises.
Who did we miss? Let us know in the comments.
Check out our list for the top South Australian TikTok stars here!
Sarah Jane Stevens
Handle: @sarahjane.stevens
Followers: 134k followers
Adelaide local Sarah Jane Stevens’ slick photography and styling have seen her amass a huge following on Instagram. Founder of @the.anxietyclub – another account which aims to assist those suffering from anxiety in all its forms - Sarah has also been advocate for body positivity.
Elise Cook
Handle: @elisecook
Followers: 381k
Co-owner of Down The Rabbit Hole Wines (@downtherabbitholewines), Elise and her husband Domenic Palumbo (@domenic.palumbo) have been influential on the SA Instagram scene for quite some time.
The pair’s new McLaren Vale winery has been given a major boost off the back of their Instagram fame and the couple have also done their bit to promote many of the great tourism experiences SA has to offer through their travel photography.
Josh Lynott
Handle: @joshlynott
Followers: 51.1k
Josh Lynott is an author and photographer whose account largely focuses on ‘adventure running’.
His great eye for stunning natural scenery has seen an explosion in popularity on his page where his photos often are accompanied by an inspirational message.
Taryn Brumfitt
Handle: @bodyimagemovement
Followers: 110k
2019 Australian of the Year finalist Taryn Brumfitt is a film director and three time best-selling author who has worked extensively promoting healthy body image in young people.
Taryn is a well established keynote speaker and her film ‘Embrace’ for kids has been well received by parents and kids alike.
Teenage Joans
Handle: @teenagejoans
Followers: 10.7k
Teenage Joans are an Adelaide music duo who have amassed a huge following in a short amount of time.
The duo of Cahli Blakers and Tahlia Jayde who in September 2020 won Triple J Unearthed High 2020 and featured in the station’s annual Hottest 100 countdown – a list that has seen too few South Australian acts of late.
As well as their catchy songs, the pair’s humour, fun-loving personalities and support of others has seen them quickly become fan favourites and worthy ambassadors for SA music.
Taylor Walker
Handle: @texwalka13
Followers: 114k
Adelaide Crows player Taylor Walker has one of the largest followings in the state among footy fans who enjoy getting a glimpse into the player’s life off the field.
The father of two and ex-captain often shares photos of his kids, wife (@elswalker) and general adventures outside of kicking goals for the Crows.
Tammy Christina
Handle: @wbywhitewolfe
Followers: 44.5k followers
Tammy Christina studied law in Adelaide and now makes a career as social media influencer and writer. She recently moved to back to Australia from LA and now lives in Sydney having worked with E! and GQ Australia.
Duy Hunyh
Handle: @duydash
Followers: 20.7k
Duy Hunyh’s Instagram is a a smorgasbord of wonderfully shot pictures of food and travel destinations.
The talented photographer has worked with the likes of Time Magazine, the South Australian Tourism Commission and Singapore Airlines.
Ruairi Luke
Handle:@ruairi_luke
Followers: 31.8k
Ruairi Luke is a talented Adelaide-born model who now works across the country.
As well as achieving fame on social media, Ruairi has two certifications in companion animal services.
Jules Sebastian
Handle: @julessebastian
Followers: 258k
While no longer living in Adelaide, Jules’ reach is undeniable and her account covers everything from food, fashion and motherhood.
Husband Guy Sebastian (another proud Adelaide export) regularly features on her account documenting the couples’ home life.
As a YouTube, presenter, stylist and philanthropist Jules Sebastian has a loyal audience, which adores her insights.
Charlie Dixon
Handle: @charlie_dixon
Followers: 34.7k
Another football star, Charlie Dixon has gained a lot of popularity on Instagram over the past 12 months.
As well as sharing life experiences, the Port Adelaide has taken to sharing his love of cars on the platform, starting a separate page devoted to his projects (@drivinwithdixon).
Leah Itsines
Handle: @leahitsines
Followers: 582k
The sister of global fitness entreprenuer Kayla Itsines (12.8 million followers), Leah focuses on food on her Instagram.
The talented cook shares healthy recipes with her followers and is also a co-creator of the ‘bare’ food guide.
Christina Vithoulkas
Handle: @christina_vithoulkas
Followers: 34.9k
Christina Vithoulkas’s Instagram features a lot of motorsport content with the young influencer currently building her own drift car.
Christina, who was rendered paraplegic in 2018, also gives uses her Instagram to provide insights into living with a disability, as well as being a Wings For Life World Run and Red Bull ambassador.
Teddy Briggs
Handle: @teddybriggs_
Followers: 286k
Teddy Briggs featured on the reality TV show ‘Love Island’, a profile-boosting turn that has helped him build a huge following on social media.
The Glenelg local mostly posts scenic destinations and glamorous photo shoots as well as photos with friends.
Ebony Marinoff
Handle: @ebmarinoff
Followers: 15.8k
As a star player in the AFLW, Crows player Ebony Marinoff has enjoyed an explosion in attention following her two premiership wins with the club.
She was also named the inaugural AFLW’s rising star in 2017 and saw her team reach a grand final earlier this month.
Tom James
Handle: @boybotanical
Followers: 13.2k
Tom James, aka boy botanical, has been sharing his interesting and insightful experiences with plants for a few years.
The self-confessed green thumb offers advice and tips to his followers, particularly on looking after indoor plants.
Alfie the Alpaca
Handle: @alfie_the_alpaca_in_adelaide
Followers: 565k
Alfie the Alpaca joined Instagram in 2018, quickly becoming a certified social media star.
The furry influencer has no shortage of attitude and his escapades with his owners have attracted well over half a million followers.
Word count: 963
