MyBudget founder Tammy Barton says while the incident last May – in which customers were unable to access their money – had been “devastating”, it heightened her awareness of an issue she says all CEOs need to be more aware of.
“We thought we had the highest level of cyber security we could have,” she says. “So that was a tough time, but was a testament to the culture of our people. It impacted our system for five days, but we were able to run it manually and still do everything we needed to do for our clients.
“We’ve now got a dedicated full-time employee who looks after our private security. We’re also collaborating with multiple external agencies to check the work we’re doing to ensure as best we can that we are protected.”
Barton, who has recently been appointed to the State Government’s Entrepreneurship Advisory Board, says it’s imperative for all business leaders to be across the issue of cyber security.
“It has now really lifted itself from being something the IT department deals with to something that the executive of the board, the directors, CEOs, and founders all need to be putting focus on.”
Barton established MyBudget 20 years ago with the idea of simply helping “people get on track with their finances” and dealing with their debts. “Certainly that’s still a big focus of what we do but we’ve also evolved into focusing on improving people’s overall financial health.”
The business today has about 270 employees. Most are based in Adelaide – with others in satellite offices around Australia – while small teams in the Philippines and Sri Lanka carry out back-end processing and engineering work respectively.
Barton says the systems supporting the MyBudget program are fundamental to its ongoing success, sparking a current overhaul of its entire technology stack.
“The technology we’ve been using – while it’s been fantastic and got us through the first 20 years – it’s not going to take us through the next 20,” she says. “This will give us the ability to be more innovative. We can integrate a lot easier with other systems, whether that be different types of communication tools or banking platforms. It will be able to deliver the type of service clients are looking for today.”
Staff are also key to the firm’s evolution, with exciting opportunities set to stem from the upgraded system. Barton says once completed, it will create jobs and roles in the company it has “never had before”. “We’re going to need people who understand machine learning and artificial intelligence – we can automate a lot of the things we’re doing manually for our clients today and then use our people skills to add value to peoples’ lives.”
Barton says she is always “looking for great people” to get involved.
“I’ve created roles for people because I’ve just seen they’d be able to add value to the business,” she says, adding there are currently some positions available. “Because we are a growing business we generally always have customer service and client-facing roles available.
“In our technology space, we’re looking for business analysts, product managers, designers ... people can always go to our website and check out the positions available.
“But I would always say that if you’ve got a certain skill set, approach us – especially now, while we are growing and diversifying and creating more opportunities for the future.”
Word count: 554
