START-UPS in Adelaide’s Lot Fourteen innovation precinct have raised more than $90m in capital in the past three years and will employ more than 600 people by the end of the year.
Key stakeholders say this has exceeded expectations and proves entrepreneurship and innovation is not “vapourware”.
The state’s Chief Entrepreneur Andrew Nunn says the growing success across the state’s innovation sector means South Australia should look to actively market itself as “The Innovation State”.
Stone & Chalk established its start-up hub in the precinct at the site of the old Royal Adelaide Hospital in 2019, which hub general manager Chris Kirk said had created a “centre of gravity” for an entrepreneurial culture in Adelaide which, up until that stage, was largely hidden.
Now there would be more than 600 people employed by the end of the year across 55 companies, he said. More than $90m in capital has been raised during that time and more than 15,000 people have taken part in events.
Mr Kirk said a number of local companies had gone through start-up to scale-up phase, where their businesses expanded, and exited with capital returns for local investors. “It’s fantastic but also proves that entrepreneurship is a real thing. It creates money. These are real businesses, it’s not vapourware,” he says. He said those companies were now wanting to give back and mentor the next generation. “A few years ago you’d come here and say, who are the people I’m going to point to and say ‘That’s what success looks like?’,” he said.
“Now we’ve got companies that have gone through that maturity cycle and we have a pool of mentors from those companies who have gone through the journey and been successful and now want to give back. And that was really hard to do a couple of years ago in South Australia.” Lot Fourteen was established on the site of the old Royal Adelaide Hospital on North Tce by the former Marshall government in 2018.
The change of government hasn’t dampened the enthusiasm, with Premier Peter Malinauskas recently announcing defence company ASC was establishing a new science and technology hub at the site, Equatorial Launch was moving in and Amazon expanding its premises onsite.
At present, there are more than 1300 people working there across almost 130 businesses, with this expected to grow to 6000 by 2028. Early projections show that, by then, it will generate about $3.5bn.
Lot Fourteen project lead Di Dixon said it has come together more quickly than even she had anticipated, with global players including Google and Microsoft quickly establishing a presence on-site.
“It’s really a special thing for people to understand – this actually isn’t normal,” she says. “Because it probably appears this is how these things evolve and progress but usually it takes years to attract strategic partners, or then trying to incentivise or convince people to come into the process.” Chief Entrepreneur Andrew Nunn said this all amounted to something the state should look to actively promote. “I don’t think any state puts their hand up and says, ‘We’re the entrepreneurial state’, they have it off to the side and they do their other stuff,” he says. “We’ve put this (Lot Fourteen) in the middle of the city, we need to be the entrepreneurial state, we need to be the sandbox state. We need to be like Silicon Valley – Come and have a try here.” His call comes in the wake of the state government last month launching the “New State of Mind” campaign to attract more young people to SA from interstate.
SA WEEKEND: INSIDE THE START-UPS CHANGING A CITY PAGE 36: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: MATT DEIGHTON
Word count: 611
