The government has permitted the “vulnerable” travellers to fly from the Indian capital New Delhi to Adelaide.
It will be the first direct flight to SA from India after the controversial travel ban between the two countries ended last Friday.
The passengers, who will pay for their trips and must return a negative coronavirus test before boarding, will serve a mandatory minimum of 14 days in quarantine in the CBD’s Pullman Adelaide hotel, Hindmarsh Square.
More than 30 Australian cricketers, coaches and support staff, including former captain Steve Smith and bowler Pat Cummins, also returned to Australia on Monday after being caught up in the Indian travel ban.
SA deputy chief public health officer Dr Emily Kirkpatrick said the state would stick to its weekly cap of 530 returned overseas travellers, even if that meant limiting flights from other countries to make room for people arriving from India.
Dr Kirkpatrick said pressure on the state’s medi-hotel system had significantly reduced in recent weeks.
The system has room for up to 1100 guests, although a capacity limit of 80 per cent is in place.
Dr Kirkpatrick said SA Health was also negotiating with Malaysian Airlines on a planned commercial flight this Saturday for up to 85 passengers. She said talks were ongoing on whether that flight would leave from the Indian city of Chennai and connect through Kuala Lumpur, or start in Malaysia’s capital.
Travel agents have reported the service is booked out.
More than 9000 people want to return from India where virus cases have reached 24 million, including at least 340,000 on Monday.
India's COVID death crisis: In pictures
It comes as SA Health revealed special genomic tests had linked a highly contagious Indian coronavirus “variant of concern” to a Melbourne man, who tested positive last week after staying at Adelaide’s Playford medi-hotel. The testing linked the man, aged in his 30s, to another sick traveller staying in an adjacent room in the North Terrace facility.
The Melbourne man tested positive after flying home to Victoria. Investigations have yet to reveal how the virus escaped the Playford medi-hotel but hours of security vision have not revealed any clear breaches.
SA Health is exploring theories that either food delivery or guests having their room doors open too long may be behind the incident.
Another line of inquiry was if “aerosol transmission” may be to blame. A report will be published within days.
Chief public health officer Professor Nicola Spurrier said further genomic testing had shown both cases had the mutant Indian strain, which the World Health Organisation last week classified as a “variant of concern”.
“These results demonstrate just how virulent this strain of COVID-19 appears to be, and we continue to closely monitor the situation here and overseas,” Prof Spurrier said.
Opposition health spokesman Chris Picton said the state’s quarantine system appeared under pressure.
“We can’t afford another outbreak from hotel quarantine which would affect community safety and jobs and the economy,” he said.
Dr Kirkpatrick said new safety measures were in place at medi-hotels, including a day nine test for guests and “artificial intelligence” CCTV cameras.
SA Health is also investigating special masks for all medi-hotel staff, not just clinical workers.
The returning Australian cricketers and support staff will spend the next two weeks in quarantine after touching down in Sydney Monday morning.
The group of 38 players, commentators and support staff went to the Maldives a fortnight ago after the Indian Premier League was suspended.
Former cricketer-turned- commentator Michael Slater was the first to exit the airport followed by Cummins and Smith.
Others on board the Qantas flight included IPL stars Moises Henriques and Chris Lynn and former Test players Ricky Ponting, David Hussey and Brett Lee.
Some of the group waved to the media once seated on the bus that transported them to hotel quarantine.
Mike Hussey, who was diagnosed with COVID-19, also returned on a commercial flight from Doha on Monday.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison said the cricketers were not given any special treatment.
SA has 14 active cases, including three travellers with the Indian strain and eight people who have a UK variant. Since the start of the pandemic, a further 59 people in SA have tested positive to the UK strain and six had a South African variant.
SA has recorded 55 sick travellers from India in total and another 45 from Pakistan.
One Australian citizen that arrived in Darwin from India on Saturday has tested positive for COVID-19.
The state government’s COVID-19 transition committee will meet today amid mounting calls from business leaders for 75 per cent patron caps in licensed venues to be scrapped.
Medics hope for a surge in jab rates
Almost one in four vaccines available for South Australians remain unused as authorities tackle the sluggish COVID-19 jab rollout.
A federal government breakdown published on Monday shows SA Health used 79 per cent of its 116,260 available doses over the past week.
This was an increase on the two-thirds that were used of the 126,550 (vaccines) available deliveries the previous week.
Figures show that 14 days ago SA Health had used 59 per cent of 95,080 available doses and 57 per cent of 79,990 vials three weeks ago.
There are 36,243 doses in the stockpile, which is surprisingly down from 56,240 recorded over the previous week.
SA Health has administered just over a third of the state’s almost 23,000 vaccines. An SA Health spokeswoman could not explain the stock decrease after data showed fewer vaccines were administered.
Figures show that last week 9707 jabs were given, 88 fewer than the previous week’s 9795.
Opposition health spokesman Chris Picton welcomed the stockpile being cut but questioned where the doses had gone.
Health Minister Stephen Wade, pictured, said the state had the highest vaccination rate of mainland states. He said more than 30,000 doses would be moved from SA Health’s stocks to GP clinics.
People aged over 50 started receiving an AstraZeneca vaccine from GPs.
People with an underlying medical condition, aged between 18 and 49, can get a vaccine at various clinics. A second clinic opened in Mount Gambier on Monday with a weekly capacity of 1000 doses.
Word count: 985
