The state’s management of the health crisis has been lauded by business leaders, who expect it to enhance the state’s position as one of the cheapest places to do business in Australia.
The latest figures from international property group Colliers International reveal office rents in Adelaide are the lowest of the six biggest capital cities - less than half the rate paid by tenants in Sydney and around two thirds of the price paid in Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth.
Changes to payroll tax introduced by the State Government in 2018 have brought the state into line with the other states, while recent land tax cuts and the abolition of stamp duty on commercial property have made investing in property more attractive.
Property Council SA executive director Daniel Gannon said South Australia was the safest state in the safest country, and it was time to sell the other advantages of doing business in the state.
“Adelaide is fast becoming the nation’s comeback capital in the wake of COVID-19 and the success our state has experienced combatting this pandemic,” he said.
“South Australia is the beneficiary of many national competitive advantages like house price and commercial office rent.
“When this competitive advantage is combined with the state’s benchmark health response to the pandemic, South Australia’s competitiveness is nation-leading.
“We shouldn’t limit our tenant and business targets to one part of the economy or market. What we should do is spruik our economic, health and lifestyle advantages and encourage ASX-listed companies to send parts of their operations to office buildings in the Adelaide CBD.”
The latest ABS figures reveal labour costs are also lower in South Australia than in most other states, with average weekly earnings 10 to 20 per cent less than in NSW, Victoria and WA.
SA Centre for Economic Studies executive director Michael O’Neil expects the state’s competitive labour costs to drive an expansion of service industries.
“With companies like Accenture and Hewlett Packard coming to South Australia due to lower rental costs and the supply of skilled labour, more service industry investment will continue,” he said.
“The absolute key for further investment in services is our lower wages costs and lower cost of living, as services are labour intensive and this is the future for employment.”
William Buck Adelaide managing director Jamie McKeough said the business tax environment in South Australia was “either back in line with other states or better”, and it was time to sell the competitive advantage.
“We need to promote these advantages to the decision makers interstate or overseas,” he said.
“We have a good story to tell and real life case studies, now we just need to make sure as a state we tell it well and to the right people.
“Our advantages make SA ideally suited to businesses that require a smart, skilled and significant workforce. When you combine the overall lower costs of living, world-class universities producing skilled, work-ready graduates and an enviable way of life, it’s the perfect environment to source a sizeable workforce for any number of operations, from highly specialised tech roles to global call centres.”
PAY AND PRICES PER STATE
Shipbuilding puts state on radar for global companies
- Valerina Changarathil
South Australia is on the “verge of a manufacturing renaissance” that has attracted at least 15 hi-tech international organisations to the state in the past 12 months.
While State Government cash incentives have helped, it’s the billions of dollars being invested in defence shipbuilding that’s putting SA on the radar for global businesses, says John Spoehr, the director of the Australian Industrial Transformation Institute at Flinders University.
“The shipbuilding investment is a magnet for companies looking to grow their prospects around the world.
“It really is a step-change investment for South Australia – one that puts it on the verge of a manufacturing renaissance, especially advanced manufacturing,” he said. BAE Systems has won the $35b contract to build nine Hunter Class frigates, while Naval Group is spearheading the $50b plan for 12 new Attack Class submarines.
“Having two of the biggest defence companies in the world – BAE and Naval – both with deep connections in UK and France, will see their supply chain looking at the value proposition of setting up here.
“Further the common capabilities that intersect defence and space and cybercrime, the use of artificial intelligence and hi-tech systems will also boost further interest from technology investors,” Mr Spoehr said.
BAE Systems works with 1500 companies in Australia – across various programs.
“We spend more than $70m with companies here in South Australia,” said Chris Keane, BAE’s chief of future business.
US technology giant Accenture is setting up its hub in SA while Naval Group opened its new $25m office at Port Adelaide last month and launched its “Local Manufacturing Package”, worth almost $900m – inviting local defence industry companies to deliver submarine equipment.
Separately, Neoen, Mr X, Tesla, Airbus, Berkshire Hathaway, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology are also examples of global businesses that have set up shop in the state. French defence engineer LGM has established a presence here, alongside other international entities like French IT company Adexflow International, Bureau Veritas Offshore and Marine, SE4, Squad Australia Cyber Security, Saber Astronautics and consultants Cognitive Companions, Ghenova and SpaceSpecialists.
“South Australia is at the forefront of this exciting hi-tech and high-growth sector,” Premier Steven Marshall said.
Trade Minister Stephen Patterson said the Government has an “ambition to attract more global heavyweights” to SA.
New businesses in SA
Not just a good place to work, but a good place to live
- Tom Bowden
Adelaide’s affordability, lifestyle and relative safety throughout the coronavirus pandemic is increasingly attracting the eye of interstate and overseas investors.
Harcourts chief executive Gregg Toyama said his business owners were reporting the strongest market South Australia had seen in at least two decades, driven by a lack of stock and keen buyer interest through incentives such as government grants. “We’re also seeing a lot of expats and interstate and overseas buyers see that SA was largely unaffected by COVID shutdowns,” he said.
According to realestate.com.au data, the number of NSW-based searches for South Australian properties increased by more than 90,000 – or 27 per cent – between February and September.
The data also showed there were 64,097 more searches for SA properties out of Victoria since COVID hit, an increase of 11 per cent. Nationally, interstate searches for SA properties were up 17 per cent on their pre-COVID levels.
“They appreciate the value for money, the safety and the quality of life here,” Mr Toyama says.
The latest Valuer-General figures also showed our house prices had risen in the face of COVID adversity.
Adelaide’s metro house value over the past three months rose by 3.14 per cent and was up 4.12 per cent over the past year, to $492,500.
In comparison, Sydney’s median house price is $1m and Melbourne’s is $750,000.
Williams Real Estate director John Williams said the lifestyle available in SA was becoming increasingly irresistible to interstate and overseas buyers.
“In Melbourne, they’re pent up and pretty depressed and they’ve been through a really hard time,” he said.
“They’re looking to reset their lives and the concern about everything they’ve been through coming back is very real.” Sam and Andrew Shearing moved from Sandhurst in Melbourne to their new Aldgate home in June. They said they loved the lifestyle in SA.
“We are on nearly an acre-and-a-half and we definitely wouldn’t be getting that for this price in Melbourne,” Mrs Shearing said.
“I don’t think we ever thought we’d be so blessed to have the house and the property that we have and I don’t think we’ll ever want to give it up – we’re here for the long term, for sure.”
AA News Feed Playlist
Word count: 1250
