TECHNOLOGY VENTURE capital giant Square Peg Capital, headed by renowned technology leader Paul Bassat, has cut its valuation of Canva by 36 per cent, joining other investors in marking down the start-up darling headed by young billionaires Melanie Perkins and Cliff Obrecht.
Square Peg, which has about $2.5bn invested in 63 tech companies in Australia and abroad, recently undertook a similar process to fellow VC firm and Canva investor Blackbird in re-rating the value of its Canva holding.
The process, completed by a big four accounting firm and taking into account several valuation methods, including comparable listed companies, examining secondary market transactions and a discounted cash flow model, resulted in about $US14.4bn ($20.7bn) being wiped from Canva’s previous record-breaking $US40bn valuation.
Mr Bassat, who co-founded Australian tech sector pioneer Seek with brother Andrew and Matt Rockman, acknowledged the Canva rerating but insisted the online graphics business was “a remarkable company” with a bright future.
The fall in Canva’s valuation is almost certain to be the first of dozens of downward moves for Australia’s tech “unicorns”, which have recently achieved the much-heralded $1bn valuation mark.
Mr Bassat, a Square Peg co-founder, acknowledged it would be “disingenuous of me to say everything will go upwards” in the tech sector in the next couple of years, but insisted the local scene was relatively well placed to ride out the current storm.
“The Australian tech ecosystem has these deep roots, not that they didn’t exist previously,” he said.
“There are companies with hundreds of millions, sometimes billions, of revenue, thousands of employees, venture capitalists that have raised lots and more angel investors than ever. We have taken six or seven steps forward over the past five years. We’ve now taken a step back this year, no question. But I think we are well placed to cope with being buffeted by global market forces.” Many tech firms have cut staff in recent months and reined in costs, but Mr Bassat warned that founders had to find a way relatively quickly to continue their growth.
CREDIT: JOHN STENSHOLT
Word count: 342
