From models to reality stars and creators of fashion and lifestyle content, we take a look at the biggest names and how they grew their following.
Kirsten Stanley — 27.6k @kirstenstanley_
Beauty jobs in Paris, catwalks in Milan, swimsuit photoshoots in Bali and activewear campaigns in Sydney, in the world of modelling Kirsten Stanley has almost done it all.
The natural beauty - originally from country WA - is an accomplished model and mum of two, and is married to Geelong Cats ruckman Rhys Stanley.
She has worked for major national and international labels including Garnier, David Jones and Lorna Jane and previously been an ambassador for high profile events like the 2019 F1 Rolex Aus GP and more locally, the 2019 Geelong Cup.
Custom HTML
Tess Holmes — 27.8k @tessholmes_makeup
Geelong based make-up artist and hair stylist Tess Holmes has worked on some of the country’s biggest red carpet events.
Raised in Hamilton she made her way to the Geelong region after school and has made a name for herself not only locally, but in Melbourne and beyond thanks to her Instagram following.
Along with endless product recommendations and tricks of the trade, followers also love Tess’ account for bubbly daughter, Lara, who often has viewers laughing with her own makeup tutorials, dances and funny one-liners.
Custom HTML
Lydia Lassila— 28.1k @lydialassila
Lydia’s Instagram bio describes her as an Olympic champion, entrepeneur, mum and mover and shaker. This is clearly a woman who likes to stay busy.
The Lorne resident first came to national prominence as a freestyle skiier, winning gold at the 2010 Vancouver Games and bronze four years later at Socchi.
Away from the snow Lydia has become a succesful businesswoman, launching her wellness brand, Zone, last year.
She has also dipped her toe into reality television, featuring in two seasons of Australian Survivor.
Custom HTML
Daniel Hayes — 28.6k @daniel_hayes3
The well-known Geelong realestate agent and self-confessed ‘Million Dollar Bogan’ has been exposed to a national audience by appearing in the latest season of Big Brother Australia, which has no doubt given his Instagram following a boost. Hayes has never been afraid of the spotlight and doesn’t shy away from publicity and a bit of self-promotion, but he also has a softer side. In 2020 he rode from Geelong to Perth across the Nullarbor Plain on a monkey bike to raise money for male suicide prevention.
Custom HTML
Deni Todorovic — 34.8k @stylebydeni
Deni Tordovic is a non-binary LGBTQIA+ activist and digital creator.
The Geelong-raised former fashion editor at Cosmopolitan magazine returned home when the title folded and has been the contributing fashion editor of the Addy’s gt magazine.
A star on the rise, Deni’s Instagram account - Style By Deni - is complete with a broad array of fashion tips, beauty tutorials, impressive national brand collaborations and important educational discussions around topics such as diversity.
They’ve worked with some of the country’s biggest celebrities and count many of them - such as Elle Ferguson, Sam Frost, Samantha Jade and Dannii Minogue - as friends.
Custom HTML
Mardi Dangerfield — 36.8k @mardidangerfield
Mardi Dangerfield is a co-host of The Significant Other’s podcast, which aims to hand the mic to those spoken about but rarely spoken to.
The show, which highlights the multifaceted other halves of famous athletes, launched in 2020 inspired by the experiences of Mardi - married to Cats footballer Patrick - and co-host Hester Brown, married to Melbourne footballer Ben Brown.
Mardi is an occupational therapist, mum of two and celebrated local footballer in her own right - donning the boots at Geelong Amateurs.
Custom HTML
Amie Rohan — 45.3k @aimerohan_
Having grown up in Victoria and lived in Sydney while supporting ex-husband Gary Rohan in the early days of his football career before relocating to the Geelong region as a family in late 2018 - Amie’s followers come from all over Australia.
The real and relatable mum is open with followers about her journey as a grieving parent, having lost daughter Willow - twin of Bella - at birth in April 2018.
She has since gone on to welcome another daughter, Sadie, in March 2020 and regularly shares happy snaps of their life on the Bellarine Peninsula.
She is an ambassador for mental health charity One in Five and a 2021 ambassador for the Good Friday Appeal.
Custom HTML
Renee Enright — 47.2k @reneeenright
Renee Enright is a fashion stylist and former radio host.
The mum of three has recently been a guest on Studio 10 fashion segments, works closely with Geelong-born leather label Ena Pelly and is an ambassador for skincare brand Cetaphil Australia.
While partnering with big brands regularly, her Instagram feed most prominently reflects her time spent with the supercute kids she shares with Cats premiership player Corey Enright.
Custom HTML
Jordan Ablett — 55.4k @jordan_ablett
Jordan Ablett, wife of Cats superstar Gary Ablett junior, isn’t one for self promotion but can often be found using her platform to promote worthy causes close to her heart.
She is currently an ambassador for the Good Friday Appeal, a partnership inspired by son Levi who has a rare degenerative disease, and also My Room Children’s Cancer Charity.
Alongside her work for Guide Dogs Australia, her Instagram feed appears much like any other proud parent, documenting family moments milestones.
Custom HTML
Catriona Rowntree — 63.8k @catrionarowntree
The popular television personality has been on our screens for more than 25 years, most notabaly as a presenter on Channel 9 travel show Getaway. While she has travelled to some of the world’s most exotic destination, Catriona has settled into home life on a farming property near Little River at the foothills of the You Yangs with her husband James Pettit and their two sons. Her Instagram mix is an electic mix of travel, work and country living — which she regularly espouses.
Custom HTML
Brit Selwood — 72.1k @britselwood_
Being married to Geelong Cats captain Joel was always going to gain Brit Selwood some followers, but she’s really stepped up her influencer game of late.
The special needs teacher can increasingly be found promoting lifestyle and beauty products, along with picture perfect getaway destinations
The pair, who met after being introduced by a mutual friend, shared their first date at a coffee shop in South Melbourne and became engaged in mid-2018 before celebrating the wedding of the year in January 2020.
Custom HTML
Nadia Stamp – 71.6k @nadiastamp
She may be relatively new to the region, but she’s found love, made a home and grown her following even further in Geelong.
Nadia Stamp became a national name as part of Channel 9’s hit reality series Married At First Sight which aired in 2017 but before that she was a well-known name in her hometown of Adelaide.
A model in her youth, she competed in the Miss Universe pageant in 2005 — the year after Jennifer Hawkins.
She went on to appear in several TV commercials, host a radio show and do several presenting jobs at events and on camera.
She also worked as a qualified marketing and business consultant, who specialises in brand development.
In April 2020 she was able to apply her years of experience helping other start-ups to one of her own and founded DIPD Nails, an at home power nail kit, at the beginning of lockdown.
She now dates Glen Talarico, coach of the Bell Post Hill cricket club, who inspired her to relocate to Geelong and regularly gains new followers from overseas viewers who are seeing her series of MAFS for the first time.
Custom HTML
Sandi Zaljevic – 104k @sandi.bella.gigi
Style-savvy local mum Sandi Zaljevic and daughters Bella and Gigi are the faces behind online sensation, Kids Fashion Blogger.
First established in 2013, when Gigi was age one, the Instagram account has amassed 106k followers over the years and is best known for documenting the pair’s super cute clothing choices.
The platform has resulted in countless VIP invites to special events where they have rubbed shoulders with celebrities like Khloe Kardashian, Natalie Bassingthwaighte and Jessica Mauboy.
The trio has collaborated with Kardashian Kids, worked regularly with Westfield centres around Victoria, Cotton On Kids and Disney, and attended marquee events such as the Spring Racing Carnival and Australian Open as special guests.
The Instagram account recently rebranded from Kids Fashion Blogger to @sandi.bella.gigi to better reflect the girl’s stage of life – Bella is now grade six – and more broad lifestyle content being posted.
Custom HTML
Sophie Vine — 115k @sophie_vine
Dale Vine — 80.8k @vineyd
Sophie and Dale were just a couple of loved-up newlyweds when they first appeared on The Block in season 5. Their renovated South Melbourne house made them a tidy $355,000 at auction. Dale returned the following year for The Block All Stars to join Duncan Miller after his mate Mark Bowyer fell ill. The Bondi property made the trio just $25,000. Dale then returned for a third time with made Brad Cranfield for the Fans vs Favourites series and pocketed $507,250. The pair have a home in Belmont and have three children together. In 2015 Sophie launched a successful online store, Vines of the Wild, and runs it from home.
Custom HTML
Emma Hawkins – 124k @emmahawkins_
Geelong businesswoman Emma Hawkins has always had a knack for attracting and engaging with a large following.
Her digital media smarts date back to her post university days when she started lifestyle blog Who Loves That before blogging became the ‘it’ thing to do.
Calling on knowledge and contacts gained while working in sales and marketing for Bauer Media she established herself as an authority in the fashion and lifestyle space.
Her followers now tune into her personal and professional updates via Instagram.
As well as many and varied solo collaborations she has also had major brand partnerships alongside footballer husband Tom, star for the Geelong Cats, working with the likes of Woolmark, Dairy Australia, Nature One Dairy and Myer.
Emma is now the co-founder and creative director of children’s clothing label Homegrown Kids.
Custom HTML
Sarah Czarnuch – 124k @sarah_czarnuch
Geelong-raised model Sarah Czarnuch first came into the spotlight after being crowned Miss Tourism Australia in 2013.
Having previously lived and worked in Singapore, and been signed with an agency in London, her followers come from all corners of the globe.
Her resume includes modelling for international fashion houses Cartier and Tiffany & Co and she now has a monthly beauty column for the Addy’s own gt magazine.
Despite her growing audience, and relocating to Melbourne, Sarah never forgets her regional roots, regularly lending her support to local causes as ambassador of the Barwon Health Foundation.
Custom HTML
George Georgievski — 161k @schoollunchbox
The Belmont dad has amassed a huge following on Instagram with his simple lunchbox hacks for time-poor parents.
A married father of two school-aged children, George’s penchant for making creative snacks started when he offered to take on the daily task and posted his masterpieces online.
They quickly gained a following.
He created ravioli, dumplings, spring rolls, cupcakes and doughnuts out of bread and used simple ingredients for bento-style snack selections.
He’s since done the television morning show rounds, hosted live cooking segments, signed thousands of copies of his book and captured the attention of celebrity chef Jamie Oliver.
Custom HTML
Darren Grayson — 203k @darrengrayson
As a teenager Darren Grayson nominated four prospective career avenues for himself – hair, fashion, home design and food.
While he checked off the first of those options as a fresh faced 16-year-old with a David Cassidy style haircut, throughout his 35-years as a business owner his resume has blossomed to include all four creative pursuits.
Since founding his own salon, Darren Grayson Hairstylists, at 21, his identity has evolved to encompass artist, home designer, fashion stylist, event manager and adoring home cook who auditioned for MasterChef.
His standing in the hair dressing industry and Geelong is reflected by his massive Instagram following, which sits at 203,000 people.
Custom HTML
Word count: 1902
