The actor who played Mr Sulu in Star Trek has beamed into Adelaide to ensure that a new enterprise lives long and ­prospers.
Internationally acclaimed civil rights activist George Takei will participate in various events, including the dedication of UniSA’s new Enterprise Hub.
Thirty start-up businesses will be based inside a ­heritage-listed industrial building being refurbished by the university in Light Square, in the CBD.
During his week-long visit, Takei, 85, also will receive an honorary doctorate from UniSA in recognition of his “distinguished service to the community”.
Takei, who is globally renowned for his 1960s portrayal of the fictional starship USS Enterprise helmsman Lieu-tenant Hikaru Sulu, will ­received the award on Wednesday. A well-known figure on social media, the Japanese-American Takei spent his childhood in an internment camp during World War II.
He has been outspoken on issues including LGBTQIA+ rights, marriage equality, politics and pop culture.
UniSA vice-chancellor Professor David Lloyd said he was “thrilled to welcome such a creative icon and social justice leader to the university community”.
“Throughout his six-decade career, George has boldly gone where few have gone before,” he said. “He has a unique ability to portray and connect with people of different backgrounds, circumstances and generations.” Professor Lloyd said while Takei was known as a talented actor, he was “also a powerful human rights activist, representing the voices and concerns of under-represented groups all around the world”.
“Just as diversity and a quest for knowledge have always been at the heart of Star Trek, so too are they at the heart of UniSA,” he said.
“And these values connect us both.” Professor Lloyd said Takei had been determined “to make a difference to the lives of so many, particularly to those in the LGBTQIA+ community”.
“His understanding of the role that education plays is exemplary,” he said. Takei will attend several UniSA events including a session with Professor Lloyd, a graduation ceremony, meetings with students and screening of an autobiographical documentary. Asked how much it was costing to bring Takei to SA, a UniSA spokeswoman said as a guest of the university his flights and accommodation would be paid for.
CREDIT: COLIN JAMES EDUCATION EDITOR
Word count: 362
