TECHNOLOGY Video calls powered by artificial intelligence could be coming to your workplace soon, as tech companies seek to solve the problem of distracted and disengaged employees.
A global survey by software company Uniphore reveals almost half of Australians secretly multi-task while on video calls and more than a third cannot tell if other participants are engaged.
One in four also admit to faking a poor internet connection in order to end a call. Uniphore co-founder and president for Asia Pacific Ravi Saraogi predicts businesses will be using artificial intelligence (AI) to track body language within the next three to five years.
“Video AI will allow us to do real-time analytics on facial expressions (so) we can see how many people are engaged or not,” he says. “(It could) help with misinterpreting facial expressions, too. It can look at eyes, at nods. Are you smiling or neutral?” While this technology is not yet in the market, Microsoft recently launched intelligent cameras with the ability to track and identify who is speaking in a meeting with multiple people in the same room.
Microsoft 365 corporate vice president Jared Spataro says the idea came from a conversation with an Australian executive about his frustrations regarding hybrid meetings – those in which some people are in the office and some dial in remotely.
“(For a remote worker) the camera angle gives the sense you are on the outside looking in when joining a meeting,” he says. “And everyone looks like an ant – you can’t tell who is there.” Intelligent cameras with multiple video streams from a single camera unit can find the people in the room using AI and zoom in. They can identify individuals and show their name on the screen by using facial and voice recognition technology.
The goal is to help remote workers build better relationships. “We can have a picture of you and match that to the video screen (to identify you),” Spataro says.
“We can collect a voice sample so we can lock onto your voice.” AI is also being used for speaker coaching, a Microsoft Teams feature that listens to a presentation and sends the speaker private hints in real time if they are talking too quickly or not noticing colleagues are turning off mute. Spataro says AI that analyses body language is the direction the technology is taking.
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 397
