Automation, rapidly advancing due to artificial intelligence, is changing the nature of work causing many jobs to disappear and creating new work categories.
Most jobs are expected to increasingly require work with AI. It is already used to help doctors with diagnostics and is expected to impact many other jobs, including car mechanics and farming.The adoption of AI also increasingly affects how we find and use information and make decisions about different aspects of our personal lives, including health, housing, and finances. The age of AI requires that individuals be equipped with critical skills that enable them to be highly adaptive in a fast-changing world.
As widespread use is inevitable, we must ask whether we are ready? And what can we do to help people transition?
Research shows successful adopters have strong skills in independent learning. They also know how to collaborate with others. Unfortunately, not everyone has these skills and attributes.
The myth about digital natives - people intuitively able to use technology well due to being born into a rich technology age - was long ago debunked. It is true many people are comfortable using mobile phones and social media but they do not necessarily have strong digital skills in finding accurate and relevant information.
Research shows that even undergraduate students lack these basic skills. This is a particularly critical skill in the time of AI where fake news is easy to produce and spread. Some do not have the skills to collaborate or work in teams, especially not through digital technologies. How can we then expect them to work with different types of AI? We can empower people by providing these skills from the early days of school with a special focus on learners aged between 12 and 15.
Few of us can remember specific lessons in school about how to study effectively. The reason is most of us haven't been taught. Students are often expected to figure it out on their own. Even a brief lesson about effective learning techniques can significantly increase their use. Central to this learning are digital technologies.
Students should be taught how to define keywords to search information on the internet and they should be aware two different people using the same keyword search on Google or other search engines will not get the same information. This is because search engines aim to find results similar to other information we have previously used.
AI can even be used to accelerate the spread of correct and incorrect information making it both a problem and a solution. In both cases, an informed and empowered student can effectively navigate the situation.
Additionally, our classrooms should incorporate an array of AI applications in different forms. Students should experience how AI recognises human speech (as with Amazon or Siri) and the possible limitations. They should use AI for facial recognition and learn to assess potential threats to privacy. And students should also know how to work with autonomous AI systems such as robots which don't have to take a humanoid shape but can be phone apps or machines to help in mining and manufacturing.
AI can be behind drones that can be produced in very small sizes (such as nanobots) and can help pollinate fields. Yet, in all these cases, a close collaboration between humans and robots is necessary. Preparation for this future world must start in our classrooms today.
Empowering learners for the age of AI is a complex process that will require much public debate, research and broad community involvement. Internationally, several initiatives have been launched to explore ways for equipping learners with skills of the age of AI. Australia should look to these examples to ensure we're AI-equipped for jobs of the future.
Professor Dragan Gasevic is director of the Centre for Learning Analytics at Monash University. Professor George Siemens is the director of the Centre for Change and Complexity in Learning at University of South Australia.
CREDIT: Dragan Gasevic and George Siemens
Word count: 660
