Cash is up for grabs with a top talent tip, writes Lauren Ahwan AUSTRALIANS can earn thousands of dollars simply by recommending workers to companies who are desperate for talent.
Referral bonuses have long been used to incentivise existing staff to refer a new hire but now anyone is being offered cash to recommend talent to a company if the referred person is successfully hired.
Construction company EstimateOne started its external referral bonus scheme last month and, within the first week alone, had received 20 referrals.
For every successful hire, referees will immediately receive $3000 – unlike other companies that have introduced similar schemes but require a worker to be employed for a minimum period before payment is made.
“If they’re good enough to hire, they are good enough to pay (out the referral bonus immediately),’’ EstimateOne chief people and culture officer Marcus Waterreus says.
Cost-effective strategy Waterreus says while there were initial concerns the scheme may have been abused, those fears have not been realised and, in any case, would still be a significant cost saving on engaging a professional recruitment company.
“When you look at hiring an engineer, it can (cost) $20,000 to $30,000 (to go through a professional recruiter),’’ he says.
“For $3000 (per referral), we would need (to hire) 10 (unsuitable candidates) before we were concerned (the scheme was not cost effective).’’ Quality candidates Software company Metigy also rolled out an external referral bonus program recently, offering $1000 to those who refer a successful hire. The money will be paid after the referred candidate has worked for the Sydney start-up for one month.
Metigy chief of staff Myra Beal hopes the program will attract more experienced professionals than would otherwise apply for advertised positions. “I anticipate it will provide that middle level (of talent),’’ Beal says. “It won’t be as high (as candidates sourced through) employee referrals – (external referrals) aren’t (made by) our employees so they don’t have skin in the game.
“But because someone has vouched for them … (externally referred hires) do tend to be a higher-quality candidate (than those who apply to job ads).’’
Exercise caution Adecco Australia managing director Kevin Alexander warns against making referrals for money alone and says referees must have a strong conviction the candidate will be suited to the role. “Reputation is definitely an important consideration and it’s more about understanding that your referral reflects on your reputation within your peer group and how you support them,’’ he says.
“The (cash) reward shouldn’t be the main goal. “For the person doing the referring, it is important to not look at it as an opportunity to earn money or a referral reward but rather helping your contacts into new opportunities, with the referring reward just a bonus to that.’’
CREDIT: Lauren Ahwan
Word count: 464
