From start-ups to global giants, Lot Fourteen is the home of future industries – but there’s space for everyone to enjoy South Australia’s leading innovation precinct
BIG BUSINESS
From space to start-ups, artificial intelligence to Aboriginal investment, computer vision to cybersecurity, Lot Fourteen is a melting pot of technology, innovation and future industry that is transforming the South Australian landscape, its economy and job opportunities. With 40 tenants having already taken up residence and more to come, the state has never been in a stronger position to create a vibrant, thriving platform to drive new business, both locally and on a global scale.
One of the biggest global companies to have set up home at Lot Fourteen is tech giant Amazon, which will be running its cloud computing subsidiary Amazon Web Services (AWS) and Amazon Sciences, a team carrying out research in machine learning and artificial intelligence (AI), from the innovation precinct.
AI is big business – and not just in South Australia. PWC predicts that the accelerated development and take-up of AI will add 14 per cent to the global GDP by 2030 – that’s the equivalent of $21 trillion.
And Lot Fourteen’s focus on future industries, including AI, helped attract Amazon to Adelaide. “We see South Australia as fast becoming known for its hi-tech credentials and Lot Fourteen is such an amazing example of that,” says Sarah Bassett, AWS head of South and Western Australia.
“Our goal is to contribute to that community, support the start-ups and help some of those customers to go global.” Already with a base team on the ground, Amazon is looking to create 50 jobs in South Australia by 2024. “We want to make sure we’re contributing to future skills programs that will help build a workforce to come,” Bassett says. “It’s great to see the talent on the ground in Adelaide, and we can hopefully be a workforce multiplier in the skills space.” Innovation incubator Stone & Chalk is also supporting South Australian start-ups, with around 200 entrepreneurs across a number of emerging tech industries, including space, machine learning, artificial intelligence and defence, already under its roof. Launched in 2015, the not-for-profit enterprise has raised more than $550 million for its residents, helping create jobs and source talent in new and emerging industries.
“Before Lot Fourteen, there wasn’t an understanding of the sort of role a technology precinct could play above and beyond just purely supporting entrepreneurs to be successful,” says Chris Kirk, general manager at Stone & Chalk. “What we’ve seen over the past 18 months is a change in how Lot Fourteen is utilised as an asset, not just to support entrepreneurs but to ultimately support South Australia’s aspirations around transitioning into future industry.
“We’ve seen a real change in the investor communities, with South Australian businesses increasingly not having to go overseas and interstate to source capital, which is really positive, and we’re reducing the time it takes for an entrepreneur to connect with someone and work through the stages of scaling their businesses successfully.”
NEW FRONTIERS In just two months, Lot Fourteen will take a giant leap for the space sector with the opening of the Australian Space Discovery Centre in May. With a space exhibition area, industry area to connect business, start-ups and researchers, and a careers hub, the centre will be a place to inspire, educate and engage the future space workforce and the Australian community.
The Centre will also feature a Mission Control Centre for space businesses and researchers to control satellites and space missions, which visitors to the centre can watch through a theatrette. The centre will actively encourage public interaction, with hands-on, interactive exhibits, guest speakers, workshops, discussions and displays, and a Careers and Information Hub for those looking to discover career paths and jobs in the national space industry.
Meanwhile, Lunar Ascent is looking to develop Australia’s first mission to the moon.
The mission, spearheaded by Space Machines Company at Lot Fourteen, and supported by Deloitte and the South Australian and NSW governments, offers ridesharing capability to deliver six nanosatellites to useful lunar orbits, providing a more cost-effective and innovative way for companies to launch and deploy their tech into orbit around the moon. “Development of such capability in Australia for the mission will play a critical role in a globally competitive supply chain and skills growth for Australian Space Industry,” Space Machines Company chief executive Rajat Kulshrestha says.
ROOM TO GROW With completion of the entire Lot Fourteen precinct not due for completion until 2028, there is still plenty more to come. Due to open in July 2021, First Nations entrepreneur hub The Circle will provide a physical and virtual base to support South Australian First Nations businesses to build capacity, capability, confidence and to thrive.
The hub has been codesigned with representative South Australian First Nations businesses and provides tailored, fit-for-purpose support and solutions under five key elements: business development support, access to new markets, expert business advice, capability growth and access to the physical hub.
“The flow-on benefits of First Nations business ownership are significant, as they build family and community wealth, create employment, encourage the uptake of education, increase choice possibilities and open opportunities to engage with a globalised economy,” says Di Dixon, state project lead for Lot Fourteen. “A flourishing indigenous business sector is also an unrealised source of economic growth for the broader Australian economy.” An Aboriginal Art and Cultures Centre, which will showcase the past, present and future of Aboriginal cultures, is scheduled to open in 2025. Scheduled to open in 2023, the 16-storey Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre will feature an open foyer area with conference and event facilities and a retail and food hall, an office tower, two floors of innovation space, a rooftop terrace and room to park 300 bikes in the basement. “The Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre is seen as the flagship building,” Dixon says.
“It’ll be right at the centre and people can wander in. We really want that to be a hub of the whole precinct. It’s something that’s taking Lot Fourteen to the next level.”
PUBLIC PRECINCT But Lot Fourteen isn’t all about business: it will be a vibrant, welcoming precinct that everyone can enjoy.
Adjacent to the Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre will be Central Park, a public space with open lawns, large trees and play areas, semi-formal playing fields for touch football and soccer, and gardens and water features.
“About 70 per cent of the 7ha precinct will be returned to public accessible space and about 50 per cent of the site will be planted, landscaped and very open,” Dixon says.
LOT FOURTEEN ADL. FUTURE ADELAIDE SPECIAL REPORT
Word count: 1111
