KYIV: Europe’s largest nuclear plant, which is occupied by Moscow’s troops, has been disconnected from Ukraine’s national power supply.
It came as President Vladimir Putin ordered a massive troop surge of Russia’s military to swell its ranks to more than two million.
The Zaporizhzhia nuclear plant has been occupied by Russian troops in southern Ukraine since the opening weeks of the war, and it has remained on the front lines ever since.
Recently, Moscow and Kyiv have traded blame for shelling around the complex, a “highly volatile” development that the International Atomic Energy Agency says “underlines the very real risk of a nuclear disaster”.
Ukraine state operator Energoatom said the Zaporizhzhia plant was severed from the national network after a power line was twice disconnected by ash pit fires in an adjacent thermal power plant. The three other power lines “were earlier damaged during terrorist attacks” by Russian forces, the operator said.
“The actions of the invaders caused a complete disconnection of the (Zaporizhzhia Nuclear Power Plant) from the power grid – the first in the history of the plant,” Energoatom added on Telegram. It said “start-up operations were under way to reconnect one of the reactors to the network”.
Kyiv officials have said they believe Moscow has seized the nuclear power station in order to divert electricity to the Crimean peninsula, which was annexed by Russia in 2014.
Energoatom could not be immediately reached for comment on whether the supply had been diverted, the cause of the ash pit fires, or the number of those without electricity.
However, the mayor of the city of Melitopol, Ivan Fedorov, said “Russian occupiers cut off the electricity in almost all occupied settlements of ­Zaporizhzhia”.
Britain’s defence ministry said satellite imagery from the weekend indicated Russia maintained an enhanced military presence at the vast Zapor­izhzhia power plant.
The development came as Mr Putin signed a decree to increase the headcount of his country’s army to more than two million, including 1.15 million servicemen, from next January, according to the document published on a government portal.
Mr Putin last set the army headcount in 2017 at about 1.9 million people with 1.01 million soldiers.
Meanwhile, the death toll from an air strike on a train station in central Ukraine rose to 25, as the EU warned those “responsible for Russian rocket terror will be held accountable”. Russia issued a counterclaim saying it targeted soldiers and killed 200 Ukrainian servicemen in the attack, which came six months to the day after Russia began its invasion.
CREDIT: Merryn Johns; Nicole Madigan; Hayley Goddard
Word count: 427
