Can you imagine a Liberal government presiding over an electricity grid with more than 60 per cent renewable energy, where power prices are falling and with no blackouts whatsoever?
You don't need to imagine. It's the reality of South Australia. Five years ago it was the butt of every joke about renewable energy. It was roiled by power failures and ridiculed by the federal government in Canberra.
"We've got the states pursuing these ridiculously high and unrealistic state-based renewable energy targets," said Josh Frydenberg, then energy minister in the Turnbull government. "Only the Commonwealth, with 23.5 per cent [by 2020] is a realistic target."
At the time of the 2016 blackouts, solar and wind supplied 48 per cent of South Australia's electricity and it was aiming to hit 50. Now, it's a world-leading 62 per cent, more than double the national tally, measured over the last 12 months.
As for the well-worn trope that renewable energy is useless "when the sun don't shine and the wind don't blow", that's a bust, too. South Australia, more reliant on renewables than any state other than Tasmania, enjoys the most stable grid of any.
Now the power sources that fail more commonly are the country's ageing coal-fired generators.
Renewables were not South Australia's problem; the problem was the management of the grid's transition from carbon-based power to solar and wind. SA didn't lack carbon; it lacked competence under its previous Labor government. And the years of outrage at the high price of renewable energy - remember Barnaby's $100 leg of lamb? - that belongs in history's fan-forced oven of overheated hype.
While power prices did rise sharply in the tumultuous years of outages and chaos, in the past three years the average annual household power bill has fallen by $307, according to the South Australian government.
"With electricity, the more renewables that come in, the lower the prices go,"chair of the federal government's Energy Security Board Kerry Schott said this week.
Point for point, the South Australian experience demolishes every one of those three scare campaigns run by the federal Liberal-Nationals over the past decade. It has only one left: that a pledge to make further cuts in carbon emissions will destroy regional jobs.
How does that claim look to South Australia's Liberal Premier, Steven Marshall? "We've been the beneficiary of billions of dollars of investment in renewables," he tells me, "and beyond that a whole new group of investors because it's more environmentally aware and sustainable.
"Some of the largest companies in the world are coming to South Australia, Amazon for example. We just haven't attracted these sorts of companies before." Amazon has opened an office for research into machine learning and artificial intelligence in Adelaide's Lot 14 tech hub. Microsoft and Nokia opened a centre at Lot 14 to explore how space and 5G technologies can boost digital transformation. These businesses are not drawn by the renewables in themselves, says Marshall, but by what they have come to represent: "Sustainability is fundamental to all the large tech sectors around the world.
"These are companies that want to align themselves with the values they want to represent. In South Australia we are reorganising ourselves around renewable, climate and creativity - these are all points of difference."
Here's a critical point. Investment is not only flowing into new industries but also to old. "The grid is stable, prices are coming down, investment is rolling in and the future is looking bright for traditional industries," says Marshall.
"There's no doubt that we are going to go from the highest-cost, least-reliable energy in the world to very sustainable, low-cost, very reliable energy that will support jobs in the traditional sectors that had been struggling in Australia."
He gives the example of steel. "We were told steel manufacturing won't happen in Australia any more. COVID has shown we need to have sovereign capability in steel as well as so many other areas." Cheap, reliable, renewable energy is a huge advantage for steelmaking and other manufacturing, he points out.
Remember how the South Australian town of Whyalla was going to be "wiped off the map" according to Tony Abbott? Even two years after Abbott abolished the Gillard government's carbon tax, the BHP-owned Whyalla steelworks was on deathwatch and in 2016 went into administration. British investor Sanjeev Gupta's GFG Alliance bought it and announced a plan to make steel from entirely renewable energy, green hydrogen in particular.
Gupta's empire was thrown into disarray when its main financier, Greensill Capital, collapsed this year. Marshall says the steelworks "is already a very viable business, the green steel technology is almost there now and once GFG's finances are sorted I think we will see more steel and green steel" made at the plant.
All of this is exactly as outlined by eminent Australian economist Ross Garnaut. His 2019 book Superpower sketched a future where Australia takes advantage of having the world's lowest-cost renewable energy to transform itself into a manufacturing powerhouse and "an economic superpower of the future post-carbon world".
Marshall aims to make South Australia a green hydrogen energy superpower, able to "export electrons" to the rest of Australia through the promised $2 billion connector line to NSW. Ultimately, South Australia expects to be able to export five times more renewable energy than the state's own needs.
"With green hydrogen, the sky's the limit," says Marshall. Japan and South Korea have announced plans to become "green hydrogen" economies. "We are working on a range of projects to make it, convert it to ammonium and export. We will not only affect our own environmental credentials but improve the environmental credentials of these overseas economies. We are getting inquiries from investors right around the world."
Renewable energy export plans are booming across Australia. The Sun Cable project is investing $30 billion to send electricity from the world's biggest solar farm in the Northern Territory through an undersea cable to supply 15 per cent of Singapore's power needs from 2027, abating 8.6 million tonnes of carbon emissions each year. It's expected to create thousands of jobs and add $8 billion to the territory's economy.
Remember Scott Morrison's ridiculous 2019 scare campaign against electric vehicles? That they'd "end the weekend" because they were too feeble to tow boats or trailers? Ford Motor said this week it would spend $US11 billion to build three factories to make fully electric versions of its F-150 and Super Duty pick-up trucks. It would be Ford's biggest manufacturing investment in its 118-year history.
The Morrison government is out of scare lines. And this week we saw that it's out of excuses, too, when another Liberal government delivered its new carbon emissions targets. The NSW government said it was raising its sights - instead of cutting emissions by 35 per cent by 2030, it would cut by 50 per cent. This is the short-term target that economies will need to achieve to demonstrate that they're serious about delivering a net zero target by 2050.
This brings NSW into line with targets set by US President Joe Biden. And it leaves the federal government exposed - the 26-28 per cent cut by 2030 pledged by the Abbott government is revealed to be seriously inadequate.
The Abbott target was devised to match the US. But now the US has doubled its target, leaving Australia as a first-world laggard. Even Australia's own states of NSW, Victoria and South Australia are in line with the US target. How can Canberra not be? If Australia maintains its current targets, it will be inviting pariah status - international investors will avoid it, creditors will charge it a "carbon criminal" premium, and the EU will seek to impose carbon tariffs on its exports.
The global climate summit scheduled for Glasgow on November 1 is putting the government under irresistible pressure to upgrade its ambitions. Morrison is down to his last excuse - you can't just announce a target unless you have a plan.
What does Marshall say to that? "We have a plan, we're implementing it, and the results are extraordinarily positive for our state." If the federal government can't produce a plan, whose fault is that? Morrison needs to produce a plan, unify his party, and bring or bribe the Nationals along. He has a month to do it. Anything less will be an abject failure of leadership.
When Morrison held up a lump of coal in the Parliament in 2017, he taunted the Labor party: "This is coal - don't be afraid, don't be scared." Marshall's message to Morrison today: This is the future, don't be afraid, don't be scared.
Peter Hartcher is political editor.
  CREDIT: Peter Hartcher
Word count: 1443
