With Australia entering the Fourth Industrial Revolution, there is a huge sense of excitement and expectation in the air. But there’s also a bit of confusion, with experts such as the Institute for the Future stating that up to 85 per cent of the jobs today’s university and college students will have in the next decade haven’t yet been invented. So, with this in mind, how do we prepare today’s students for the jobs of the future?
It’s a question at the forefront of South Australia’s universities, which are continuously monitoring and refreshing their subjects lists to offer Industry 4.0-ready subjects, including cyber security, space and augmented intelligence (AI). “Technology and cyber security offers immense opportunities in the future,” says Professor Robert Saint, deputy vice-chancellor (research) at Flinders University. “We have fantastic research and facilities here where students can simulate a hacking attack and have a real-life experience in dealing with an issue like that.
“Given its location in Adelaide, the space industry is another important career pathway. We have commissioned Dr Space Junk who is working as an archaeologist with NASA and we’re working with her about the future of people in space, which is a pretty exciting direction we’re taking.” The impact of the coronavirus pandemic, meanwhile, has given rise to new study and career opportunities within the health sector. “This year we started to offer allied health as, with COVID, we’ve seen a real need for more expertise in this field on all fronts, the hands-on with nursing and caring for patients but also the science behind it,” says Professor Jennie Shaw, interim deputy vice chancellor and vice president (academics) at The University of Adelaide. “We have filled all our available spaces and I think these areas are going to boom.” And one that might come as a surprise to many given the national and international border closures of the past year is tourism. “You might think with what’s been happening with international travel, tourism might be taking a back seat but we’re finding the opposite,” Prof Saint says. “There’s been an incredible rise in domestic tourism, and the demand for skills is high. We have some novel courses around wine tourism, including a wine-tasting laboratory to skill students in the art of discerning the best wine, which is a huge drawcard for South Australia’s domestic tourism.” While sectors such as disability and aged care have long been recognised as strong career industries, a more recent sector is emerging that is proving more successful than some of the world’s most lucrative industries – gaming.
“Serious gamers who enter competitions can win fabulous amounts of money, and it’s a global phenomenon,” Prof Saint says. “The industry is worth about $175 billion annually, which is said to be more than Hollywood and the music industries combined. We have a degree in creative arts (digital media) which we run in conjunction with CDW Studio: our students have been rated among the top 10 globally for a number of years now, so we’re producing world-class designers and developers in that area.” But, while the focus is largely on what’s coming next, there are some traditional learnings that still hold value. “It is a really different world but I still think some of those basic skills remain the same,” Prof Shaw says. “You still want the same expertise in the subject as 30 years ago, the same problem-solving and creative-thinking skills, and that willingness to keep learning. It’s just how students these days go about acquiring and learning them that’s different.” These new learning styles include valuable industry connections. “There is huge value in industry placement or internship, which we embed in almost all our undergraduate programs now,” Prof Shaw says. “The placements are often mandated and accredited programs, but the internships are more elective.
“Even during COVID last year, we did 5000 internships and placements. Some ended up being online, and a lot of our placements are with small-to-medium-sized businesses who need students to come in with a fresh set of skills and eyes to bring a different perspective. So it’s a win-win.” The University of Adelaide has links with the neighbouring Lot Fourteen, South Australia’s newest innovation precinct and a hub for entrepreneurship, where many of the university’s students take up placements and internships. “We have a strong presence on Lot Fourteen, and our areas of artificial intelligence are growing at both the undergraduate and postgraduate levels,” Prof Shaw says. “I can’t see those areas dipping any time soon.” Flinders University’s relationship with the Tonsley Innovation Hub is also proving fruitful for its students where, in partnership with Cisco, it has set up the Innovation Central Adelaide (ICA), an industry and research collaboration centre designed to advance digital transformation and advanced manufacturing through an open innovation ecosystem. “Cisco and BAE Systems are establishing a Factory of the Future where we can provide training around Industry 4.0,” Prof Saint says. “One of the most important things is to explain to students that manufacturing isn’t all sitting on an assembly line; it’s giving them that experience of advanced manufacturing, including cobotics (humans working with robots) and the digital tools you use.” With industry experts predicting today’s students will change careers an average of five times during their working lives, The University of Adelaide is introducing alternatives to traditional three-or-more years of studying to allow students the flexibility of dipping their academic toes in a number of different waters. “We haven’t gone with a ‘take a five degree and that’s it’ model – we have a huge array of choice, which is really important,” Prof Shaw says. “You can take a traditional bachelor’s degree but we also have new higher education certificates, graduate certificates and diplomas, as well as short courses and micro credentials you can study with or without a degree.
“I think the value of the short course and micro credential structure is you can have a taste of something that’s not going to break the bank and only lasts for a few hours up to 20 hours, so it’s not the same commitment as enrolling in a full degree. These new forms of courses are really important, not just for school leavers but those who have already started out on a career path and are considering a change direction or are looking to get better skilled in a particular area.” Flexibility is also a key component in building job-ready skills for students at Flinders University. “It’s always a balance between skilling students in what employers need right now and being flexible in being able to respond to new challenges,” Prof Saint says. “That’s all about the way you approach the teaching, getting students to do things like work in teams, giving them challenges that require them to use their innovative thinking, their creativity. So there’s that balance between asking them to actively contribute to their own learning and providing them with all the opportunities to be skilled and employable at the end of their degree.” Given the upheaval of the past year, for today’s students it can be pretty daunting to get ready to embark on the first step of the next journey of their life, “We recognise that it’s a challenging time for senior high school students,” Prof Shaw says. “Some are lucky and know what they want to do, but for others it’s really tough.
“Trying to predict what the world is like given all the fear we all experienced last year is really hard, so my advice is to pick something you’re passionate about and look at where there’s a connection with industry or the workforce in that particular profession.
“It’s always so much easier to turn a passion into a career – we’ve seen some of the most amazing careers coming out of people with backgrounds we wouldn’t expect.”
COURSES FOR THE FUTURE
UNISA Bachelor of Information Technology (Networking and Cybersecurity) Cyber security and data protection are increasingly important to stop businesses and governments from being hacked and information stolen or destroyed. Hence, the demand for skills in this area is high. UniSA has partnered with Optus to establish a Cyber Security Research and Collaboration Hub at Lot Fourteen to educate Australia’s next generation of cyber security and data science specialists. Graduates can expect to secure jobs as information security analysts, penetration testers, network and system engineers and software developers.
Bachelor of Social Science (Ageing and Disability) At least 250,000 health care jobs are expected to be generated in the next five years, according to the National Skills Commission, predominantly in aged care and the disability sector. This degree equips students with a comprehensive knowledge of the National Disability and Insurance Scheme (NDIS) and aged care policies.
Bachelor of Engineering (Mechanical and Advanced Manufacturing) Manufacturing has transformed from alabour-intensive industry to one that is characterised by hi-tech, sensors and data analytics, advanced materials, smart robotics and automation, 3D printing and augmented and virtual reality. Students will learn the most sophisticated manufacturing technologies to improve products and processes integral to an Industry 4.0 future. An extra 450,000 jobs are expected to open up in this area in the next decade.
Bachelor of Creative Industries This is one of Australia’s most industry-connected degrees, and includes a major in animation and visual effects and video gaming. In 2020, UniSA offered the state’s first course in front-end games design and development, including computer-generated imagery. Students do industry placements with the likes of Rising Sun and Mighty Kingdom. Jobs include games designer, programmer and tester, software developer, audio engineer, animator and artist.
Bachelor of Biomedical Science The pandemic has illustrated the need for graduates equipped for growing industries in drug development, clinical trials research, and biomedical and life sciences generally. Students will learn broad skills in physiology, biochemistry, immunology, pharmacology, molecular biology, genomics and bioinformatics, as well as the key research skills to conduct clinical trials.
Venture Catalyst Space Venture Catalyst Space is a specialised incubator program that supports founders, entrepreneurs and start-ups to develop and grow innovative or disruptive ideas in the space sector. The one-of-a-kind program delivers tailored support and guidance working with a global pool of industry experts including former NASA astronaut Pam Melroy, the Australian Space Agency, Airbus, Nova Systems, Fleet, Myriota and the Smart Satellite CRC.
UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE Coding Boot Camp Web development is one of the fastest-growing careers in today’s economy. ICT roles such as software developer, engineer and architect roles are featured in the top 10 most in-demand occupations in Australia with 40,000 ICT jobs created in Australia in the last two years and tech-intensive jobs outside the ICT industry expected to grow at a rate of 2 per cent a year up to 2022. The 24-week program includes instruction in high-demand technologies and frameworks including HTML5, CSS3, JavaScript, MySQL, Command Line, Git and Java.
Applied Data Analytics The Sciences Faculty has new program offerings in this field. This includes an undergraduate certificate and Bachelor of Applied Data Analytics (with specialist areas including agriculture, bioinformatics, economics, environment, geosciences and public health). The undergraduate certificate provides a broad, introductory knowledge of the principles underpinning big-data analytics and decision science, while the bachelor provides the opportunity to use big-data analytics, develop skills in statistical inference including using machine learning and applying data analysis.
Defence With South Australia at the centre of Australia’s multibillion-dollar defencesector, and the University of Adelaide leading the way in defence partnerships, there has never been a better time or place to study a defence qualification. The University of Adelaide offers a wide range of defence-related qualifications including: Undergraduate Certificate in Technology (Defence Industries), Undergraduate Certificate in Cyber Security, Bachelor of Technology (Defence Industries).
Master of Marine Engineering Master of Cyber Security Agricultural Science Students learn how to respond to global food shortages and a changing climate with sustainable practices, environmental stewardship, modern agribusiness and new technology. They also practice the latest methods, from adapting genes and cells for new crops to the business of livestock, and explore emerging trends, like vertical farming. They learn about industry-transforming technology, like drones, GPS and crop sensors and develop skills in agribusiness that will facilitate working in the business of farming.
Drones The Unmanned Research Aircraft Facility offers a commercial drone course, via a short course structure leading to the award of a Remote Pilot Licence, which can be tailored to specific industries and also offers mapping with drones courses.
Construction Advancing technologies including innovative digital engineering, modelling and automation techniques are creating exciting opportunities for the construction industry. Demand is soaring for graduates in this field. Relevant courses include the Bachelor of Construction Management and Master of Construction Management.
FLINDERS UNIVERSITY Line Zero A unique manufacturing “sand pit” where students can learn – and test – their abilities in advanced manufacturing in a workplace-like setting. This is fast tracking the development of a highly skilled workforce equipped to use Industry 4.0 technologies to support activities that will be undertaken in environments such as modern digital shipyards.
Digital Diploma Australia’s first digital shipbuilding course – the Diploma of Digital Technology – is a partnership with BAE systems. This initiative is reskilling traditional workers for next generation jobs in the Industry 4.0 era. Flinders has won federal funding for 120 women to undertake the course over the next three years.
Green Chemistry This course is about finding ways of making goods – from fuels to medicines – with low or no toxic by-products. It’s also finding innovative ways of harnessing waste to address pollution issues, for example, using waste cooking oil and waste sulphur to develop polymers that can clean up oil spills or absorb toxic arsenic from gold mining operations. This is an area of high demand as the planet battles dwindling resources, rising pollution and climate change, and presents massive employment opportunities.
Word count: 2299
