–
Friday 6 August
–
Australia’ scientists must lead the recovery, says Liveris
Scientists, engineers and technology developers must parner with business to help Australia overcome its significant lag in industrialisation, former Dow Chemicals chief Andrew Liveris says.
“The world’s leading nations are sitting at around industry 4.0 … Australian industry is regarded by many around the world as hovering around industry 2.0 and some might argue maybe at industry 3.0,” InnovationAus reported him as telling an Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering webinar on Wednesday.
“Our opportunity is to hop, skip and jump over industry 5.0.”
Mr Liveris, who chairs listed US-based electric vehicle company Lucid Motors said “an economy that is not adding value to make things for export to global markets is one that is not using the skills of its people effectively”.
“ The [low] level of complexity means that there is now a mismatch between what Australians can do and what the nation needs them to be able to do.”
–
Thursday 5 August
–
Federation Uni’s new degree in disruptive innovation
Federation University has teamed up with IBM to launch Australia’s first degree in cognitive enterprise – a unique business degree which focuses on innovation from disruptive technologies like blockchain, artificial intelligence and 5G.
Through the link with IBM students will be able to do internships to get real-world experience and earn IBM digital badges in blockchain technology and AI.
As well as the standard bachelor of cognitive enterprise, students will also have the option of the bachelor of cognitive enterprise (professional practice) which gives students an additional year of paid work experience in the degree.
Both degrees will begin in 2022 and will be offered at the university’s Ballarat, Berwick, Brisbane and Gippsland campuses, as well as online.
–
Wednesday 4 August
–
Jennie Shaw is the University of Adelaide’s new DVC academic
The University of Adelaide has promoted its arts dean Jennie Shaw to be its new deputy vice-chancellor (academic).
Professor Shaw, who is by background a musician, has acted in the DVC role for over year, as well as continuing as executive dean of the arts faculty.
Vice-chancellor Peter Hoj paid tribute to her service to the university community.
“Taking on two senior full-time roles for more than a year – and doing so during the disruption of a global pandemic, at a critical and vulnerable time for our university – says much about Jennie’s commitment to the University of Adelaide, and her commitment to our students and staff,” Professor Hoj said.
–
Monash inks humanities agreement with top Indian uni
Monash University has signed a key agreement with a leading Indian university, the Tata Institute for Social Sciences, for humanities-focused collaboration in education, research, and industry partnerships.
The agreement formalises the growing co-operation between Monash and TISS which has already seen student exchanges between the two institutions in 2018 and 2019.
The agreement outlines future collaborative research areas between the two universities in the humanities and social sciences with topics to include the impact of COVID-19 on family violence, as well as criminology, gender, human rights and sustainability. There will also be a joint PhD program between the two institutions.
So far, at the Monash end, the collaboration has involved only the Faculty of Arts but it is hoped it will extend to other Monash faculties which have a presence in the humanities.
–
Tuesday 3 August
–
Craig Robertson to head Victorian Skills Authority
TAFE Directors Australia chief executive Craig Robertson has been appointed head of the new Victorian Skills Authority, a new body set up by the state government to gather data, lead planning and provide services for vocational education.
Mr Robertson, who has led the TAFE Directors Association since 2017, is a former deputy secretary of the Victorian Department of Education and Training. He starts his new role as CEO of the authority on August 23.
Victorian Training and Skills Minister Gayle Tierney said Mr Robertson brought “a wealth of knowledge in the training and skills field to the role”. Ms Tierney will soon appoint an advisory board to the new authority which is expected to represent industry, unions, TAFEs, training providers and other stakeholders.
The VSA replaces the Office of the Victorian Skills Commissioner, and will each year produce a skills plan for the state. It also handles the VET Development Centre, which promotes professional development for people who deliver VET training, and the Skills and Job Centres, which offer help to students and job hunters.
–
Monday 2 August
–
Making music at UWA
Igor Stravinsky’s ballet and orchestral work Petrushka is the subject of a University of Western Australia and West Australian Symphony Orchestra collaboration that will produce a new interpretation of the famous work.
After a week-long intensive workshop led by composer and animateur Paul Rissmann, the UWA Symphony Orchestra and WASO will perform the new work alongside the original ballet score on Tuesday 10 August at the university’s Winthrop Hall.
UWA Conservatorium of Music Alan Lourens said the advantage of the project was that it would put UWA musicians next to WASO members “to play in real-world situations”.
The partnership gives participants industry experience through training and musical development opportunities in a professional orchestral environment.
–
UTS offers a helping hand
Free after-hours learning support is on offer to senior high school students from more than 23 schools in the Greater Sydney region who are enrolled in the alternate, non-ATAR entry pathway to study at the University of Technology Sydney.
The UTS U@Uni Academy program’s students can receive study help and writing feedback delivered by online study support service Studiosity.
The university’s Centre for Social Justice and Inclusion executive director Verity Firth said 587 Year 11 and 12 students in the program now had access to Studiosity. The study support was in addition to weekly in-school mentoring and tutoring sessions for HSC students.
“We hope this helps our students feel confident in their abilities, and allows them to continue growing their academic skills,” Ms Firth said.
–
Events coming up
Melbourne EdTech Summit 2021 (17-20 August, online, free)
Australia’s premier education technology summit, presented by EduGrowth. Four days of bold ideas which connect to the wider education technology and innovation ecosystem, featuring keynote speakers, panel discussions and fireside chats.
Knowledge Commercialisation Australasia Annual Conference (9-10 September) online
Due to Covid the KCA conference is going virtual. The theme is Global Partnerships and Commercialisation themes. It also features the annual KCA awards that celebrate the achievements of members, and highlight “top tier work” in Australasian tech transfer.
Quantum Australia 2021 (8-10 September) Doltone House, Sydney and online
Sydney Quantum Academy’s conference and careers fair for the rapidly growing quantum technology industry. It’s for researchers, businesses, government decision makers, start-ups and big tech.
National Symposium on the Student Experience in Higher Education (17 September) Uni of Melbourne and online
The symposium, presented by the Melbourne Centre for the Study of Higher Education, will look to the future of Australian higher education and the key changes needed to improve the student experience.
Australian International Education Conference (5-8 October) Gold Coast Convention and Exhibition Centre and online
AIEC 2021 will explore new horizons for international education with five key subthemes: global challenges, digital innovation, life and learning, policy and politics, and strategic insights.
Collaborate Innovate 2021 (New date of 18-20 October, instead of 9-11 August). Hotel QT, Canberra
The Cooperative Research Centre Association conference will feature an early career researchers competition, the annual Ralph Slatyer address, and the 30th anniversary of the CRC Innovation Showcase at Parliament House.
5th Annual TEQSA Conference (New date of 25 November instead of 24-26 November) Virtual
The Tertiary Education Quality and Standards Agency conference, Hard Lessons, Valuable Learnings, Heightened Expectations will examine how the higher education sector is charting a new course, seeking to adapt and rethink higher education in a reshaped world. Organisers have taken the event entirely online in view of the resurgence of Covid-19 and lockdowns.
Word count: 1261
