An analysis of nearly 11,000 CSIRO Total Wellbeing Diet members revealed that those who weighed in regularly, followed the menu plan and tracked their food intake the most achieved a weight loss of 8.1 per cent of their starting body weight in 12 weeks, or an average of 7.5kg.
Those who adopted these habits the least achieved a 3.3 per cent drop in their weight (3.1kg) — a difference of nearly 4.5kg between the two groups.
The research comes as the CSIRO launches a new weight loss program called Hope as part of their CSIRO Total Wellbeing Diet, which uses psychological techniques to prompt and motivate members throughout their weight loss journey.
Hope works by predicting appropriate weight loss targets, tracking progress and providing timely feedback, using state-of-the-art machine learning, to help members thrive on the 12-week program.
“Whether you’ve overindulged during the holiday season, or you’re looking to kickstart your health goals this January, Hope equips you with the real-time insights, personalised support and encouragement to help you to put your best foot forward, and achieve your weight loss goals,” CSIRO Total Wellbeing dietitian Pennie McCoy said.
“In designing Hope, the CSIRO Total Wellbeing Diet continues to prove how the latest science can transform health outcomes, with an innovation that uses data from Australians, for Australians, to achieve enhanced weight loss success throughout the entire program,” Ms McCoy said.
“Many people feel they have to be really strict to see results. This pressure can lead to unrealistic expectations so it’s really exciting to see in the research findings that there is room for flexibility in a sustainable weight loss journey,” the dietitian said.
Mum-of-two Genevieve Plant wanted to feel healthier and lose some weight after the birth of her second child. She started at 91 kg and is down to 70 kg.
“What I love with this diet is that it is realistic and to have a grocery list and a menu plan is great for busy families,” she said.
Download the Courier Mail app
Word count: 327
