TASMANIAN Premier Jeremy Rockliff says the state’s funding is conditional on a stand-alone 19th licence and not a relocation as he prepares to meet AFL boss Gillon McLachlan in coming days.
Rockliff told the Herald Sun on Monday the state was prepared to walk from its bid for a team if the league tried to foist a relocated side onto the state.
The state and its Tasmanian taskforce have positioned this bid as the last possible chance for an AFL licence as the AFL’s presidents prepare for a potential August vote.
Rockliff confirmed the $150m figure being offered to the AFL in the form of a $50m start-up fund and $100m over 10 seasons.
But despite Sydney president Andrew Pridham’s weekend statement that the AFL must be open-minded to a relocation, Rockliff was adamant there was only one model that worked. “Our $150m bid is for a stand-alone Tasmanian AFL team only,” he said.
“We have been clear from the get-go that Tasmanians are not interested in a team that has half its heart in Melbourne. Granting Tasmania its own licence is the only way the AFL can be a truly national competition; Tasmanians will accept nothing less.
“I’ve been in regular conversation with AFL CEO Gillon McLachlan and we plan to meet in person in coming days.
“Plans are also underway to invite the club presidents to Tasmania to see for themselves what our island state has to offer and the passion and force behind the campaign.” McLachlan has been in constant contact with Rockliff but is yet to travel to Tasmania for an in-person meeting and has let key lieutenants Travis Auld and Sam Graham do much of the heavy lifting.
Tasmanian football sources said they were taken aback after the sudden resignation of former premier Peter Gutwein when the AFL’s mood instantly changed.
McLachlan sent one of his AFL underlings to a scheduled meeting with the Premier and immediately upped the yearly asking price for investment into the new team.
AFL presidents remain nervous about the league’s investment into a new state in the same year when the league is threatening to take as much as $2m a season from their annual distributions. It means the AFL’s ability to broker a significant TV rights deal is critical and closely linked to funding for a 19th team.
Pridham echoed the thoughts of many club presidents who have not yet been given the financials on the side when he said: “At this point, all options have to be on the table.” The Tasmanian government currently hands Hawthorn and North Melbourne about $8m a season for games in Hobart and Launceston.
CREDIT: EXCLUSIVE JON RALPH
Word count: 445
