In almost every developed economy across the globe, 10 to 30 per cent of government benefits and rebates go unclaimed each year.
That’s one of the reasons Commonwealth Bank developed the “Benefits Finder” within its app, which it launched in 2019, with a big spike in recent usage.
Customers have commenced more than 1.5 million claims, up from more than 1 million in February this year.
CBA’s chief data and analytics officer, Andrew McMullan, said the surge came after the bank started harnessing its data and analytics capabilities, along with artificial intelligence and machine learning, to contact customers potentially affected by various states of lockdown and offer support.
“We’ve recently sent more than 66 million localised and personalised in-app messages to relevant customers,” he said.
“We regularly contact customers within 24 hours, and sometimes the same day, following any government announcement advising of additional support available.”
Since the beginning of the year, customers in NSW have accounted for more than 50 per cent of all claims started around Australia, followed by Victoria with nearly 20 per cent and Queensland with more than 10 per cent.
Comparing June to July as the Delta variant of Covid-19 caused havoc, the number of claims started in both Victoria and South Australia more than doubled, while NSW had a spike of nearly 60 per cent, Dr McMullan said.
“We quickly saw the Covid-19 disaster payment become one the most popular benefits since it was recently added into Benefits Finder,” he said.
“That’s not a surprise to us, given that this particular benefit supports those workers adversely affected by a state public health order.”
The other two most common types of benefits that were started by customers using the tool during the first six months of this year were ASIC and state unclaimed money such as cash in bank accounts and life insurance policies not touched or claimed for a certain amount of time, and NSW Dine & Discover vouchers.
CBA says Benefits Finder saved customers more than $481m across utility bills and additional government payments between July 2019 and August 2020, with many customers standing to benefit from cost savings annually.
Word count: 346
