Prime Minister Scott Morrison and his US and UK counterparts — against the backdrop of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine — will on Wednesday announce a landmark new chapter of the tri-nation partnership to include hypersonic missiles and underwater war robots.
Mr Morrison, US President Joe Biden and UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson will use the announcement to double down on their condemnation of Russia.
“In light of Russia’s unprovoked, unjustified, and unlawful invasion of Ukraine, we reiterated our unwavering commitment to an international system that respects human rights, the rule of law, and the peaceful resolution of disputes free from coercion,” they said in a joint statement.
The AUKUS deal — with the core mission of providing Australia nuclear-powered submarines — will now include “deeper co-operation” on cyber warfare, artificial intelligence and quantum technologies.
There is also a new project on underwater war robots, with trials and experiments planned to start next year.
The announcement comes as the Prime Minister is on the cusp of firing the starter’s gun on an election campaign — one the Coalition hopes will have a strong focus on national security and bolstering Australia’s military.
It also comes a day after Defence Minister Peter Dutton revealed a $3.5bn commitment to fast-track the purchase of long-range strike missiles for Australia’s jets and warships — information released just as a new report found our navy was already outgunned by China.
Mr Dutton also named defence giants Raytheon and Lockheed Martin as lead contractors in the push to build hypersonic missiles in Australia.
The United States’ hypersonic missiles — including one that uses its sheer speed to destroy targets without the need for a warhead — have been developed by those companies.
It’s understood the new levels of co-operation within AUKUS will help Australia accelerate the development of those weapons through the sharing of usually top secret information.
AUKUS was first announced in September last year, sparking an intense fallout with France due to the federal government’s controversial exit from a multi-billion contract to build a conventional fleet of submarines.
It was revealed in recent days, through Senate estimates, that Australian taxpayers could end up paying up to $5bn for exiting the French-built submarine deal early.
Meanwhile, experts from the Australian Strategic Policy Institute in a report released on Tuesday called for a bipartisan investigation into what a regional war in our backyard would look like and what Australia’s defence capabilities are.
The report found Australia — and decades of “unchallenged” US military might — would probably be unable to defend itself against the ship-destroying cruise missiles China has built in the shadows.
The level of tech China has amassed includes, according to the report, sea-skimming missiles able to travel at hypersonic speeds to hit targets up to 537km away.
Word count: 448
