A new aerospace and defence-focused technology centre being developed in Adelaide by global management consulting and technology services firm Accenture is set to create 2000 jobs across five years - and recruiting is now under way
Global consulting giant Accenture is now actively recruiting for an Adelaide-based onshore technology delivery hub the company says will create 2000 jobs across five years. The new aerospace and defence-focused technology centre will be a base for investments in aerospace, defence and national security, including cyber security, with advanced technology centres of excellence for companies such as Oracle, Splunk and Salesforce that will develop capabilities in advanced analytics and artificial intelligence.
Hub director of Aerospace and Defence Security and Technology Mark Datta says the centre – which was launched last year – could generate up to $1 billion for South Australia’s bottom line while launching new job opportunities.
Currently boasting about 5000 employees in Australia – and 537,000 across 120 countries throughout the world – the business is well placed to offer exciting career pathways.
Datta says employment opportunities at Accenture are “essentially boundaryless” – a benefit of being a global company working across almost all industry sectors while at the forefront of technological revolution and digital transformation.
Aside from offering positions to graduates and experienced professionals looking for a new challenge, Accenture is also focusing on initiatives that encourage people from non-traditional pathways – such as those without university qualifications – to enter the tech industry.
“An example of this is the Cyber Security Traineeship program here in the Adelaide hub, where we have partnered with TAFE SA to provide full-time on-the-job training combined with part-time study for high-school graduates to pursue careers in cyber security,” Datta says.
“The two-year program brings students into traineeship roles at Accenture, where they get to work on client projects from day one. At the end of the program, they will gain a Certificate IV in Cyber Security ... and have an opportunity to join Accenture’s Cyber Security Defence Consulting team full-time.” Datta says there is no better time for interested people to start and cultivate a technology career, with demand for innovation and technology skills at “an all-time high”.
“In response to the pandemic, three years of digital transformation efforts have been consolidated into three months,” he says.
“As a nation, we have now realised the benefits and acknowledged the potential of technology to propel society forward and sustain an economy, and we expect this momentum to not only continue, but rapidly accelerate. Combined with growing concerns around social licence, data security and cost pressures, this is the right time to be expanding our onshore capabilities through our Adelaide hub, and nurturing and fostering local SA talent.” Datta says there are number of job opportunities available within both Accenture’s Adelaide Hub and throughout the organisation more broadly.
These apply to “all levels and aspects” of the company – from client relationship management to supply chain management, technology and business strategy across key operating groups including communications, media and technology, financial services, health and public services, products and resources. People are encouraged to visit Accenture’s careers page to apply for live roles or register their details to receive job alerts when a suitable position opens.
DEFENCE & HI-TECH SPECIAL REPORT FUTURE INDUSTRIES JOBS OF TODAY
Word count: 549
