US technology consulting firm MTX has launched a new local training program as part of its commitment to create 500 jobs at a new service hub in Adelaide.
The first of two courses has commenced, with the company planning to deliver up to 150 training places over the next year, focused on fundamental tech skills and certifications.
MTX announced in May that it would establish its first regional service hub in Adelaide as part of an expansion into the Asia-Pacific region.
Many of the 150 students who progress through the new training program are expected to join the firm as part of its plan to create 500 jobs over the next three to five years.
MTX Australia chief executive Ben Papps said the program would help develop new hi-tech employment opportunities. “We are extremely proud to make such a meaningful contribution to the South Australian community in the empowering form of skills training and an employment pathway in technology,” he said.
“Our Adelaide trainees have a unique opportunity to obtain new skills and rewarding career opportunities. At MTX, we are passionate about providing equal and growth opportunities to all, including embodying women in leadership, investing in training and providing a start for people from diverse backgrounds.” The first course offered as part of the new program is entry-level ICT, covering the basics of cloud computing and data security, collaborative work practices and simple programming. It will provide credits towards the Certificate III in Information Technology.
A proposed second course will be designed for more experienced students and graduates, with a focus on cloud-based software Salesforce, while future courses are expected to focus on other cloud platforms, machine learning and artificial intelligence.
Participants will also undertake industry-specific training and receive mentoring support during the first three months of their traineeship with MTX.
Skills Minister David Pisoni said the new training program offered a gateway to job opportunities in the state’s “flourishing hi-tech sector”.
“It’s great to see MTX launch an industry training program in South Australia that will provide a pipeline of skilled workers in an industry that is growing exponentially with the demand for ICT and cyber roles,” he said.
The Adelaide service hub is the first of its kind in Australia for Texas-based MTX, which provides expertise across a range of platforms and technologies, including Google Cloud, Salesforce, artificial intelligence, machine learning and data analytics.
MTX currently employs 18 people in Adelaide, and is on track for 50 staff by Christmas.
Roseli Jardim recently commenced the MTX training program after completing a Master of Business Information Systems at Torrens University. She said it was an exciting time to be starting a career in ICT. “The market here in Adelaide is very good at the moment, especially in technology because of the global companies like MTX that are coming here, and the investment the government is making in the area,” she said. “There’s lots of opportunities for graduates – Adelaide’s the right place to be for technology, innovation and digital.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 504
