AMERICAN technology firm Cognizant will set up a “global delivery centre” in Adelaide, creating 1600 jobs over the next five years.
The multinational’s chief executive for Australia and New Zealand, Jane Livesey, said the company would start recruiting immediately, targeting “talent in the early stages of their career – as well as experienced professionals with digital technology skills’’.
The global delivery centre, to be announced on Thursday, will be based in Adelaide’s CBD. It will help Cognizant’s clients in fields such as software, artificial intelligence, machine learning, cloud computing and data analytics.
Ms Livesey said in response to the pandemic, many of Cognizant’s customers were seeking onshore service delivery and were prioritising their digital investments.
“Our new delivery centre will expand Cognizant’s expertise in cloud, IoT (internet of things) and AI to help our clients to adapt to new market conditions, sharpen their competitiveness and meet their sustainability goals,” Ms Livesey said. “We are proud to partner with the government to recruit, train and invest in the next generation of Australia’s highly skilled digital workforce and contribute to the growth of the SA region.” Cognizant joins a number of major tech and consulting firms which have announced large commitments to Adelaide in the past 12 months.
Accenture recently revealed it had employed 300 of an expected 2000 workers over five years while Deloitte announced in September that it would recruit up to 500 staff for its new Centre for Innovation and Technology. In May, MTX Group announced 500 new jobs for a local service hub over the next three to five years.
“Cognizant will be in good company in Adelaide with the Australian Institute for Machine Learning, the MIT big data Living Lab, Amazon Web Services, Google Cloud, Microsoft Azure Space and Nokia 5G,” Premier Steven Marshall said.
“South Australia’s capability to provide a pipeline of skilled workers through our world-class universities and institutions, coupled with Adelaide’s status as the world’s third most liveable city, makes us an attractive place to do business.’’ Prime Minster Scott Morrison said the new centre would “serve as a magnet for top talent from Australia and abroad’’.
Cognizant said it was assisted by the Global Business and Talent Attraction Taskforce set up by the federal government in late 2020 to encourage high-growth companies to set up in Australia. The company said it did not receive any financial incentives from state or federal governments.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 403
