The company plans to roll out new LED screen technology, known as Fujivision, to customers across the state following a restructure of Fuji Xerox, of which Boileau is the exclusive distributor in South Australia.
Fuji Xerox Australia changed its name to Fujifilm Business Innovation Australia last week, bringing to an end a technology agreement between the Japanese and US technology giants.
It offers dealers like Boileau more flexibility to introduce Fujifilm products and services into their territories.
The restructure also signals a move from Fuji Xerox’s traditional printer and document solutions business into cloud, artificial intelligence and the internet of things – a trend Boileau itself has been following in recent years.
Boileau managing director Angelique Boileau said Fujivision’s digital signage and content management systems would deliver a new revenue stream for the company as its traditional printer services arm slowly recovers from COVID-19.
She said Boileau was looking to employ a product specialist to oversee the expansion of the digital signage division, with additional employment expected to follow. “It’s very exciting for myself and the team – this new technology is the future and some of the analytics we can access are truly innovative,” she said. “We will introduce the product to our existing customers – we have around 1000 customers – as well as to the wider business community, government and education groups.
“This isn’t just another product to sell – there’s the software, licences, and service and maintenance – it creates another additional annuity revenue for us, which will boost our revenue as the print revenue slowly is declining.”
Boileau is the exclusive reseller for the Fujivision product range in South Australia.
The LED screens, like the one installed at Boileau’s headquarters on Sir Donald Bradman Drive, enable users to tap into advanced analytics about the success of digital advertising campaigns.
The system provides data on the demographics of the screen’s viewers, using innovative technology that recognises age, gender, mood and other facial features.
The Boileau group of companies was established by Angelique and Husband Michael in 1989, and remains Fuji Xerox’s (now Fujifilm) longest-standing metropolitan dealership in Australia.
Ms Boileau said the new digital signage offering came at an opportune time given the challenges thrown up by COVID-19.
She said the pandemic had severely dented traditional printer services revenues given the number of people still working from home.
“Just before COVID, in February last year, we billed an average 8-to-10 million prints per month – then in March it immediately fell to 2.75 million,” she said.
“We’re back now to about 75 per cent of the pre-COVID level but we don’t think it will get much higher than that.
“We believe that there’s still a lot of people working from home – particularly big corporates, international organisations and a lot of government departments – that’s causing the decline in print volumes.
“Fortunately, our ICT managed services division is growing at a rapid rate and is compensating for the decline in other areas. And now with the addition of the digital signage and content management systems division it provides another revenue stream for us.”
Word count: 501
