Growing up in Adelaide, a young Simon Arkell rose to the top of his chosen sport – pole vaulting – through sheer grit and determination. Now, as a California-based tech entrepreneur, he’s using those same virtues to roll out cancer-fighting artificial intelligence with the potential to save countless lives. NATHAN DAVIES reports
SIMON Arkell still maintains he was never any good at sport. The dual Olympian and Commonwealth Games gold medallist says he was average to terrible at most athletic endeavours, but was least terrible at pole vaulting, so that was the one he put his energy into.
It’s the same energy the former Adelaidean later leveraged to become a successful entrepreneur in the cutthroat Californian tech boom of the late ’90s and early 2000s, and it’s the same energy he’s now pouring into what is undoubtedly the most important project of a storied career – using artificial intelligence to fight cancer.
Speaking from his house in the toney neighbourhood of Laguna Beach, in Orange County, California, the father of two says he can clearly remember the day he decided he wanted to go to the Olympics. He was just 11 years old.
“My stepdad took me to see a documentary about the 1976 Olympics in 1977 and I remember thinking, ‘Oh, my God, this is what I want to do with my life’, and then and there decided I was going to the Olympics,” he says.
“The only issue was I was sh..ty at every sport. I was literally no good at anything. When I found pole vault I was really no better, but decided that it was a path less trodden and something I could sink my teeth into.” Born to an Australian mother (Merilyn Pedrick, nee Marsh, whose father, Mort Marsh, was a DJ on 5AD for 30 years) and a British father, the young Arkell spent the first four years of his life in England.
When his parents divorced, Merilyn took her two children back to Adelaide, settling in St Peters.
“I turned four just after getting to Adelaide in 1970,” Arkell recalls. “I remember it took about three days in an old propeller plane, and I remember sleeping on the floor. It’s funny how you remember these big moments from when you’re young.” Completing primary school at St Andrews before being enrolled at St Peter’s College, Arkell says he tried “all the sports” before falling in love with running, thanks to the encouragement of his stepfather, a talented middle-distance runner.
He first picked up a pole at athletics training after good mate John Mattinson – who went on to win national championships for his age group – encouraged him to give it a go.
“I was terrible at it,” Arkell says. “But because my friend was so good, I became super persistent. I had tunnel vision. Even so, for the first six months I couldn’t even clear the bar.
“I was no-heighted (when a vaulter fails to clear even the lowest bar) at my first two junior nationals. That was demoralising. It’s the ultimate failure for a pole vaulter.” It perhaps speaks to Arkell’s high standards that he still dwells on “no-heighting” rather than focusing on the fact he was already at the junior nationals in a sport he’d only recently taken up.
Training with Alan Launder in the Field Events Talent Squad, which is still running today, Arkell says he became addicted to pole vaulting and the camaraderie that came with it.
Suddenly, that dream he had when he was just 11 was looking achievable. However, to be the best he could be Arkell knew he had to move to a location with a higher level of competition.
“I knew I didn’t want to move to Russia,” he laughs. “I knew that the best Americans were so much better than the best Australians at that time, and I knew that if I wanted to compete at that level the only option for me was to see if I could get a scholarship in the States.”
HE had a friend send him a list of all the colleges that competed in the highest level of athletics and set about writing to 37 schools. Two replied.
“One of those was New Mexico, so I gave it a shot,” he laughs. “I was jumping 5.10m when I got there, and by the time I graduated I jumped 5.62m – so I improved by half a metre in the four years I was here.” The other valuable lesson he learned while at college in the US was the art of hustle and hard work. Unbeknown to Arkell at the time, the scholarship was for books and tuition only, meaning he still had to find a way to put a roof over his head and food on the table.
It was at college that he founded his first business, selling ads on a school calendar that he flogged door to door, but he remembers things being fairly grim at times.
“I remember going to this super-cheap Chinese restaurant near campus with my buddies and everyone got the $2.50 chicken and rice plate, but I couldn’t afford that so I had to get the 50c rice plate,” Arkell says.
“But I was doing so well athletically and academically that I really was living the dream. I made the Australian Olympic team in 1992, a year after graduating college here, and I know I wouldn’t have made that team had I not taken the plunge and moved over here.” As big as making the Olympic team was, Arkell says there are a few moments that stand out as highlights of his athletic career.
“The first one was breaking the Australian record for the first time, and it was a 17-year-old record,” he says. “I broke that in Adelaide at a Grand Prix meet. That was a huge rush, breaking a record that had been around since I was four years old, and to do it in front of my Mum and stepdad and friends and coaches.
“Then making the Olympic team and walking into that stadium. That was a lifelong dream coming to fruition, and pay off for everything I’d sacrificed to get there.
“I’d left a girlfriend, left my mother who I was very close to, but would never live with again. And the other big thing was jumping 5.80m, which is still a world record for left-handed pole vaulters. Those are the three big things.” Arkell says the “tunnel vision and myopic focus” he learned on the athletic track served him well as he started pursuing his tech-based business interests.
The need to make money when he was still training and unable to work a standard 9-to-5 lit an entrepreneurial fire under him as he hustled to earn a living. Arkell has started 10 companies and says he’s never actually applied for a job.
“I’m so unemployable I’ve had to start my own companies,” he laughs.
AFTER earning his degree, Arkell enrolled at Cal Poly, in San Luis Obispo, to continue his pole vault training and study an MBA, but it also put him close to the modern equivalent of the Californian gold fields – Silicon Valley.
The region, south of central San Francisco, was just starting to hit its straps as the global home of tech start-ups and, for a driven young businessman, it was a dream come true.
“It was just as Netscape was starting,” he says. “Things were really kicking off in Silicon Valley. I started a company called Versifi and we’d be in Silicon Valley pitching to all these little companies that went on to become household names.
“We were pitching to Evite when it was just three people and a dog in an office.” Arkell went through the usual boom-and-bust cycles that tend to accompany start-ups, and says each time he got a little smarter and a little better, and his network grew a little larger. He’s grateful he was given the chance to succeed and fail in America, a nation where tall poppy syndrome is much less prominent than in Australia.
“When I first went to America, a lot of people in Australia said that I’d never make it,” Arkell says.
“In America, though, people were so supportive. They allow you to fail publicly and make a comeback. It’s an entirely different attitude, although I think that tall poppy syndrome is becoming less of a thing in Australia amongst the younger generations, which is a great thing.” Arkell’s latest project, Deep Lens, is his most important yet. Using artificial intelligence, Deep Lens helps to match cancer patients with clinical oncology trials, a process that was – until now – quite hit and miss. And it may already be saving lives.
“In the US alone, there are 13,000 clinical trials running in cancer right now,” Arkell says.
“It’s all very complex, and there could be 100 trials running in a healthcare system and the oncologists might not even know that they exist. The inclusion and exclusion criteria are, for obvious reasons, very complicated and precision medicine using immuno-oncology, for example, makes it even more complex.” Arkell says that just this week they matched a patient with a clinical trial; it was these success stories that energised him.
The big picture, however, could be far more wide reaching.
“What we’re really doing is helping these pharmaceutical companies get their clinical trials through the FDA (Food and Drug Administration) process so they can become commercially available,” he says.
“The biggest reason for a trial failing is not finding enough patients. We help them to do that, and we do that by giving our software for free to the hospitals, and charging the pharmaceutical companies for the service. We’re signing up a new cancer network every week at the moment.” Arkell says the usual “bury each other at all costs” mentality that often exists in tech companies is suspended among companies working in the cancer field.
“Everybody helps one another, and in a way it reminds me of the pole vault community,” he says.
“We were doing something so difficult and so dangerous that even people that were competing against each other helped each other out. People just want to help each other save lives.”
THE cancer fight is also, on one level, personal for Arkell. Not only did he lose his mother to the disease late last year, he was also deeply affected by the death of his friends’ daughter to leukaemia at the age of 10.
“I went to a fundraiser for Megan’s Wings (the charity his friends established after their daughter’s death) and I was so affected emotionally by the fact cancer could kill this beautiful little girl,” he says.
Arkell and his best friend from college, acknowledging that they lived in a wealthy area where “a lot of people have too much money and are looking to give some of it away”, decided to help out. They organised a dinner at a local ballroom and, for the next 10 years, brought 90 friends annually to raise money for Megan’s Wings.
“One year we raised enough money to buy a house and families can stay there free of charge while their children are getting cancer treatment,” he says.
“We’ve seen these working-class families get evicted from their homes and lose their cars because one of the parents has to quit work to look after their child with cancer. We try to help these families.” After decades of living Stateside, the boy from Adelaide says he still feels very much an Australian. “I 100 per cent feel Australian,” he says. “One of the great benefits of being asked to join the board of (Adelaide-based AI company LBT Innovations) has been that it’s given me the opportunity – pre-COVID – to get back to Adelaide more often. I feel very Australian, but obviously have a great affection for America. I have a foot in both camps.”
CREDIT: NATHAN DAVIES
Word count: 1994
