IN NORMAL times it’s unusual for a container ship to miss its “window” at Flinders Ports’ container terminal at Port Adelaide.
But these are not normal times, and during the past five months not a single ship has hit its window – something which chief executive Stewart Lammin has never seen before during his almost four decade-long career in the sector.
With sea freight rates going through the roof, some shipping lines are simply bypassing ports such as Adelaide, Mr Lammin says, chasing bigger dollars on transatlantic and Asian routes.
The number of container ships going through Port Adelaide is down about 30 per cent – although bulk commodities continue to perform well – which causes issues for importers and exporters alike.
Longer-term, however, Mr Lammin is optimistic.
The company, which is owned by major superannuation funds such as MTAA and Perpetual, has recently competed a 50-year plan and is about to go live with an artificial intelligence solution from Adelaide firm Complexica, which is set to transform the way containers move through its terminals.
But in the meantime there are some challenges to contend with, at least in the containerised part of the business.
“You’ve had a lot of ships delayed in ports,” Mr Lammin said. “If you look at some of the major hub ports like LA or Singapore, there’s probably 100 container ships sitting there.
“Looking at container lines they’re almost like a bus route. Theoretically a ship on a service will come on a Wednesday with a small window and every week that will happen.
“We haven’t had a ship in what we call ‘window’, which has come in in the time it’s supposed to have come in for over five months.
“Now, I’ve been in the industry for close to 40 years and it was rare that you’ve got ships coming out of window. That’s a massive change.’’ Mr Lammin said this cascaded into shipping lines trying to reorganise their schedules, “and that means you have to bypass some ports’’, with Adelaide currently being affected.
“We budget for maybe 28 container ships a month,” he said. “I think we’re getting anywhere between 17 and 20, so we’re losing maybe up to 30 per cent of container ships.’’ And of course if you’re not moving ships, containers get stuck – but demand has not abated.
“You’ve almost got that perfect storm at the moment where ships are out of schedule, ships are being held up, availability of containers, and I’ve never seen freight rates as high as they are at the moment, especially on those transatlantic, transpacific trades,’’ Mr Lammin said.
Shipping lines would put containers where they could make the best yield, he said, which meant that it might actually be better financially to send an empty container back up to Asia, rather than have it waiting in Australia to be refilled for the return journey.
“There’s been talk about whether it’s going to be six months or 12 months or two years for this to sort itself out,’’ Mr Lammin said.
“The industry has generally recovered from blips fairly quickly – quicker than people have anticipated.
“Whilst this is going to be more complicated I’d like to hope that sometime in ’22 this will start to sort itself out.’’ What the crisis has done, is underline the need for the business to think smarter about the way it handles containers, with Flinders’ project with Adelaide artificial intelligence firm and IPO aspirant Complexica about to go live.
That project involves decisions around where containers are placed and how they move around the yards being made by AI-driven software, rather than relying on intuition.
It’s a task uniquely suited to an AI solution, and Mr Lammin said the industry was overdue for a digital revolution, which was thrown into sharp relief by the pandemic and the associated supply chain issues.
“Undoubtedly what has happened is it has forced all of us to start looking at what we thought was something we’d look at in 12-24 months; it’s brought it to the forefront now,” he said.
“Covid and the supply chain issues have driven us, and really across all sectors, to look at how we can be more efficient.
“It’s not about taking jobs away from people, it’s about taking the mundane tasks away from people and allowing them to focus on the more compelling pieces of the business.’’ The company has recently finalised its 50-year plan – a big-picture vision which will inform major decision-making over the next few decades.
And it’s surprising the issues which arise. The impact of 3D-printing on container shipping volumes for example, was a scenario which was tested.
There has also been a large ESG piece, with ports, like every major industry, having rapidly adapted to a world in which investors want to know exactly what their social and environmental stewardship plans are.
“If you’d have asked me a couple of years ago, if I was doing a shareholder presentation it would have been 90 per cent financials, 10 per cent the rest of the business,’’ Mr Lammin said. “Now the majority of it is around sustainability, ESG and that type of thing.’’ Mr Lammin said the plan had been written in a way such that parts could be extracted and used to inform decision making around issues such as forward land and infrastructure planning or carbon emissions, without having to absorb the entire 1000-page document.
“The real key for it was to understand what would drive trade across the network,” he said.
“We’ve looked at potential disrupters to the business – for containerised trade what’s the potential impact of things like 3D and 4D printing?
“That may affect volumes on containers but what does that do for the inputs?’’ This could mean adapting to a liquid fuels trade away from containerised trade, to bring in the resins and liquids used in that industry. The scope to increase throughput for the container terminal over periods ranging out to three to four decades was also looked at, and while this could be done just by building new infrastructure, this could be “horrendously expensive ... with long time frames’’.
Instead, looking at ways ships could be turned around faster, whether more rail would help, and increasingly digitising the business to ensure any movements were as efficient as possible were preferred strategies.
“We’ve got a fairly aggressive four to five-year plan about how we transform the business from a tech point of view,’’ Mr Lammin said.
“I call us a very data-rich, information-poor business, so it’s ‘how do we use that information to make better decisions?’ ’’ Mr Lammin said that despite the turbulent nature of the current container trade, the financial result was unlikely to be materially affected this year, and the bulk commodities trade continued to perform well. For the 2021 financial year the company turned in a net profit after tax from continuing operations of $30.1m, just $334,000 down on the previous year, on revenues which were up 3.1 per cent to $240.8m.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 1176
