In normal times it’s unusual for a container ship to miss its “window” at Flinders Ports’ container terminal at Port Adelaide.
But these are not normal times, and during the past five months not a single ship has hit its window – something chief executive Stewart Lammin has never seen before in his almost four decade-long career in the sector.
With sea freight rates going through the roof, some shipping lines are simply bypassing ports such as Adelaide, Lammin says, chasing bigger dollars on transatlantic and Asian routes.
The number of container ships going through Port Adelaide is down about 30 per cent, although bulk commodities continue to perform well, which causes issues for importers and exporters alike.
Longer-term, however, Lammin is optimistic. The company, which is owned by major superannuation funds such as MTAA and Perpetual, recently completed a 50-year plan, and is about to go live with an artificial intelligence solution from Adelaide firm Complexica, which is set to transform the way containers move through its terminals.
But in the meantime, there are some challenges to contend with, at least in the containerised part of the business.
“You’ve had a lot of ships delayed in ports. If you look at some of the major hub ports like LA or Singapore there’s probably 100 container ships sitting there,’’ Lammin says.
“Looking at container lines they’re almost like a bus route. Theoretically a ship on a service will come on a Wednesday with a small window and every week that will happen.
“We haven’t had a ship in what we call a ‘window’ which has come in in the time it’s supposed to have come in for over five months.
“Now, I’ve been in the industry for close to 40 years and it was rare that you’ve got ships coming out of window. That’s a massive change.’’ Lammin says this cascaded into shipping lines trying to reorganise their schedules, “and that means you have to bypass some ports’’, with Adelaide currently being affected.
“We budget for maybe 28 container ships a month. I think we’re getting anywhere between 17 and 20, so we’re losing maybe up to 30 per cent of container ships.’’ And if you’re not moving ships, containers get stuck – but demand has not abated.
“You’ve almost got that perfect storm at the moment where ships are out of schedule, ships are being held up, and I’ve never seen freight rates as high as they are at the moment,’’ Lammin says.
Shipping lines will put containers where they can make the best yield, he says, which means that it might actually be better financially to send an empty container back up to Asia, rather than have it waiting in Australia to be refilled for the return journey. “There’s been talk about whether it’s going to be six months or 12 months or two years for this to sort itself out,’’ Lammin says.
“The industry has generally recovered from blips fairly quickly – quicker than people have anticipated.
“Whilst this is going to be more complicated, I’d like to hope that sometime in 2022 this will start to sort itself out.’’ The crisis has underlined the need to handle containers better, with Flinders’ project with Adelaide artificial intelligence firm and IPO aspirant Complexica about to go live.
Decisions about where containers are placed and how they move around the yards will be made by AI-driven software, rather than relying on intuition.
It’s a task uniquely suited to an AI solution, and Lammin says the industry was overdue for a digital revolution – a need intensified by the pandemic and associated supply chain problems.
“It has forced all of us to start looking at what we thought was something we’d look at in 12-24 months – it’s brought it to the forefront now.
“Covid and the supply chain issues have driven us, and really across all sectors, to look at how we can be more efficient.
“It’s not about taking jobs away from people, it’s about taking the mundane tasks away from people and allowing them to focus on the more compelling pieces of the business.’’ The company has recently finalised its 50 year plan – a big picture vision that will inform major decision-making over the next few decades.
And it’s surprising the issues that arise. The impact of 3D-printing on container shipping volumes, for example, was one factor tested.
ESG is also important, with ports, like every major industry, having rapidly adapted to a world in which investors want to know exactly what their social and environmental stewardship plans are.
“If you’d have asked me a couple of years ago if I was doing a shareholder presentation it would have been 90 per cent financials, 10 per cent the rest of the business,’’ Lammin says.
“Now the majority of it is around sustainability, ESG and that type of thing.’’ Lammin says the plan has been written in a way that parts can be extracted and used to inform decision-making on issues such as forward land and infrastructure planning or carbon emissions, without having to absorb the entire 1000-page document.
“The real key for it was to understand what would drive trade across the network,” he says.
“We’ve looked at potential disrupters to the business – for containerised trade what’s the potential impact of things like 3 and 4D printing?
“That may affect volumes on containers but what does that do for the inputs?’’ The scope to increase throughput for the container terminal over three to four decades was also looked at. While this could be done by building new infrastructure, this could be “horrendously expensive ... with long time frames’’. Instead, the preferred strategies were looking at how ships could be turned around faster, whether more rail would help, and digitising the business to ensure any movements were as efficient as possible.
“We’ve got a fairly aggressive four to five-year plan about how we transform the business from a tech point of view,’’ Lammin says.
“I call us a very data-rich, information-poor business … how do we use that information to make better decisions?’’ Lammin says despite the turbulent nature of the current container trade, the financial result was unlikely to be materially impacted this year, and the bulk commodities trade continued to perform well. For the 2021 financial year the company turned in a net profit after tax from continuing operations of $30.1m, just $334,000 down on the previous year.
CREDIT: Cameron England
Word count: 1078
