FINTECH start-up Tic:Toc has unveiled its new state-of-the-art office and artificial intelligence hub in the CBD.
The company has relocated close to 100 staff to its new headquarters in Charter Hall’s building at 121 King William Street.
With more than 100 desks for Tic:Toc’s engineers, marketing and product teams, it will also serve as the company’s AI development hub and accommodate more than 30 new jobs over the next 12 months.
Tic:Toc launched its online home-loan platform in 2017, digitising the application process and reducing the time needed to approve a loan “from 22 days to 22 minutes”.
It has also developed software that uses artificial intelligence and machine learning to automate the validation of customer data and provide insights for lenders and their customers.
The company’s lending technology is currently used by major financial institutions including Bendigo and Adelaide Bank and Aussie Home Loans.
Chief executive Anthony Baum said the company’s investment and expansion reflected its commitment to developing South Australia’s technology sector through STEM job creation.
“We’re excited to move into our new space in the Adelaide CBD,” he said. “Since day one, Tic:Toc has been on a mission to accelerate the financial services industry to make home loans faster, smarter and simpler for customers and partners.
“Our new space will give us the ability to not only deliver that, but also inspire our teams to innovate and collaborate while training the STEM talents of tomorrow, right here in SA.” Tic:Toc’s new office on the seventh level of the EY building features a mural “expressing the Tic:Toc history, culture and staff stories”, created by local artist Azzurro. Trade and Investment Minister Stephen Patterson, who officially opened the new office yesterday, said Tic:Toc was contributing to the state’s burgeoning AI ecosystem. “The growth of Tic:Toc in SA and the recognition Anthony and the team are receiving within the industry is a great endorsement of their AI capability, and just shows that you don’t have to be based in the eastern states to do deals in the Australian finance industry.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 344
