US-based MTX Group is among the latest tech companies to announce plans to set up shop in SA, first regional service hub
South Australia’s mix of research, skills and partnerships – combined with its burgeoning AI, space technology, renewable energy and health sectors – has proved too enticing for global tech consultancy firm MTX Group to look past. The US-based organisation is among the latest tech companies to set up shop in the state; unveiling details early last month of its plans to base its first regional service hub in Adelaide. A key to driving the company’s expansion into the Asia-Pacific sector, the move is expected to create about 500 jobs within the next three to five years.
The company – which is currently managing the Covid-19 vaccination rollout for New York City, Chicago and Houston – provides expertise across a range of platforms and technologies, including Google Cloud, Salesforce, artificial intelligence/machine learning and data analytics.
MTX Australia chief executive Ben Papps says the move will create opportunities across a broad spectrum of roles. “There’s a whole world of future employment opening up as governments and companies harness data and technology to make smarter decisions and deliver better services,” he says.
“A lot of these jobs are about understanding and managing data, analysing problems and helping design solutions. “ “We really want to engage with the local community to help open up career pathways, whether for women returning to the workforce or people whose work has been impacted by Covid-19 or for students graduating from uni and keen for advanced training and on-the-job experience.” The company is already seeking people to become part of its South Australian operation.
“We’re already advertising jobs for our Adelaide service hub and will add more as we build scale,” Papps says.
“We’re looking forward to making announcements about training programs and university graduate programs to help accelerate pathways for people to join in coming months.”
DEFENCE & HI-TECH SPECIAL REPORT FUTURE INDUSTRIES JOBS OF TODAY
Word count: 332
