TWO overseas health technology businesses are establishing a presence in South Australia, lured by grants totalling $160,000 from the state government.
Cancer-focused genetic analysis company Helixa Proprietary Limited, a commercial entity of South Korea’s Samsung Genome Institute, will get an $80,000 grant to set up its Australian business at Tonsley.
Using artificial intelligence, Helixa undertakes genetic analysis on cancer samples to predict the best treatment options for patients.
The company’s initial focus will be the introduction of its CancerSCAN and LiquidSCAN services for in-vitro cancer sample analysis.
Led by its Australian chief executive, Dr Clay Matthews, Helixa subsequently wants to establish laboratory services and training in SA.
Mr Matthews said SA’s health and medical facilities, along with its professional networks and associates, made it an attractive base.
It will result in the creation of up to 30 jobs in the next three to five years. “Helixa uses the most advanced methods known to deliver precision therapy,” Dr Matthews said.
“We use the genetic sequence of each cancer to predict the optimal validated drug that will improve the outcome of treatment.
“This avoids needless suffering for patients and increases doctors’ productivity.” Trade and Investment Minister Stephen Patterson said the company’s capability and technology would result in broader benefits.
“This is a new generation of personalised care, with cancer tissue taken from the patient and analysed to see the effect different therapies have on it,” he said.
“It will be the first of its kind for cancer therapy in Australia. “Helixa’s establishment in SA will play a critical role in providing medical technology innovation to South Australians.” Separately, US health tech company Kumanu also received $80,000 to set up its first Asia-Pacific presence in Adelaide. Kumanu uses its artificial intelligence software to help businesses and organisations to assess and improve emotional and social wellbeing among employees and members.
The company also provides integration and sustainability services to help combine “corporate, people, and well being strategies around a shared purpose”.
Covid-19 had created global demand for Kumanu’s offering, with Australia’s challenges and similar demographic make-up underpinning the business decision to move here.
Kumanu’s Australia director, Paul Richards, said he was excited to highlight the unique advanced artificial intelligence and machine- learning technology built into its services. The Landing Pad program supports business with cash and support towards an office space as well as networking and other services.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 398
