AUSTRALIA will work with the US and Britain to fast-track development of cutting-edge missiles, taking the pact between the three nations into the age of “hypersonic” warfare.
Scott Morrison, US President Joe Biden and UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson will on Wednesday detail collaboration on a range of defence systems, expanding the AUKUS agreement beyond the nuclear-powered submarines to be built in Adelaide.
Hypersonic missiles, which Russia has used in its invasion of Ukraine, fly at least five times the speed of sound and, unlike standard ballistic missiles, are highly manoeuverable and able to change course during flight.
The three nations will also collaborate on technology to defend against hypersonic weapon strikes.
In a joint statement, the three leaders condemned Russia’s “unprovoked, unjustified, and unlawful invasion of Ukraine” and reiterated “unwavering commitment” to international rule of law and peaceful disputes resolution”.
“We are pleased with the progress in our trilateral program for Australia to establish a conventionally armed, nuclear‑powered submarine capability,” they said.
“We also committed today to commence new trilateral co-operation on hypersonics and counter-hypersonics, and electronic warfare capabilities, as well as to expand information sharing and deepen co-operation on defence innovation.” Electronic warfare means use of the electromagnetic spectrum for purposes such as taking out enemy communications systems, while the innovation commitment is about finding “ways to more rapidly integrate commercial technologies to solve warfighting needs”. The three nations will next year start trials of underwater drones, described as a “significant force multiplier for our maritime forces”.
Co-operation on artificial intelligence is aimed at ­“improving the speed and precision of decision-­making” against “AI-enabled threats”, while cyber ­co-operation will protect “critical” communications and operations systems.
As part of the AUKUS commitment to deliver a nuclear submarine fleet, Australian defence personnel have started nuclear science and engineering training while – as revealed by The Advertiser – the federal government is working to secure more land to expand the Osborne shipyard.
“We are fully committed to establishing a robust approach to sharing naval propulsion technology with Australia that strengthens the global non-proliferation regime,” the leaders said.
By March next year, the three countries will decide on the design and construction of the nuclear-powered fleet, with the Prime Minister vowing the boats will begin to hit the water before 2040. UK and US experts visited Australia in February to assess infrastructure, workforce and industrial capabilities. Earlier this month, Mr Morrison announced a $10bn commitment to a new east coast submarine base.
A series of steering and working groups with officials from each country have met multiple times, with sessions in Canberra, London and Washington. SA senator and Finance Minister Simon Birmingham said: “There should be no doubt that South Australia is front and centre in this AUKUS partnership given it is where these nuclear-powered submarines will be built.” He said the leaders’ statement “should give South Australians further confidence that we are getting on with the task of progressing these subs”.
CREDIT: TOM MINEAR
Word count: 492
