DURING the COVID-19 lockdown last year, Premier Steven Marshall rang the chiefs of major companies around the country to pitch his story about expanding their operations in South Australia.
Mr Marshall, a former businessman, was determined to tell of his state’s new focus on industries such as hydrogen and renewable energy, defence, space, cybersecurity and machine learning, in addition to its traditional sectors of agriculture, mining, construction, manufacturing and tourism.
“When we came to government, we needed to develop a strategic plan for the state,” he told guests at The Australian’s Industries of Tomorrow lunch in Sydney recently, held in partnership with the SA Government. “Our intention was to change the trajectory we were on.” While the plan was interrupted because of the pandemic, Mr Marshall used the time to make phone calls to business leaders around the country to urge them to take a new look at investing in SA.
“We needed to come out of the virus stronger than before,” he said. “We couldn’t use the virus as an excuse to put our plans completely on hold.” With employers taking a more flexible view on where staff could work, Mr Marshall grasped the opportunity to make a new case for relocation to SA.
“We decided we needed to lean into the opportunity around COVID, of the permanent disruption around how the workforce is organised, to reposition SA.” One of the companies that responded was consulting firm Accenture, whose chairman, Bob Easton, committed to setting up a hub in Adelaide that would create 2000 new jobs across five years.
Accenture’s new aerospace and defence-focused technology hub will be a base for investments in aerospace, defence and national security, including cybersecurity.
It will include advanced technology centres of excellence for companies such as Oracle, SAP, Splunk and Salesforce that will develop capabilities in advanced analytics and artificial intelligence.
“It was a deal that was conceived during the pandemic and executed during the pandemic,” Mr Marshall said.
Announced in September, the deal has already generated 200 new jobs. Mr Marshall sees cybersecurity as a key industry SA can help develop.
“The world will get through this pandemic, but the next major global disruption, unequivocally, will be a cyber disruption,” he said.
“It’s not a matter of whether it will happen, it’s just a matter of when it happens.” Mr Marshall sees the Accenture project as part of a training program to develop skills in cybersecurity, which will be part of an ecosystem to attract major companies to SA.
“What we’ve done in SA, at Lot Fourteen, is to deliver the largest commercial cyber range in the nation, a massive training program,” he said.
“So now we’ve got something to go on sale to the large companies – the banks and the big energy providers.” Mr Marshall also sees hydrogen energy as a new area where the state can specialise when there is strong pressure on companies and governments to reduce carbon emissions.
“There is an opportunity as the world moves towards a hydrogen economy,” he said.
Japan’s Mitsubishi Heavy Industries announced last year it was investing in the H2U group, Australia’s largest developer of green hydrogen and green ammonia projects using power from renewable energy sources, which is involved in a project on Eyre Peninsula. Mr Marshall said another trial project, in the innovation precinct of Tonsley, involved the establishment of one of Australia’s largest electrolysers producing green hydrogen, which was being pumped into a gas distribution network.
CREDIT: GLENDA KORPORAAL
Word count: 581
