The project to get rid of cats from the Dudley Peninsula, and ultimately all of Kangaroo Island, received another funding boost this week.
South Australia's regional environment has been given a $4 million boost with projects including the removal of feral cats, weed control and kangaroo management receiving funding under the inaugural round of the Marshall Liberal Government's Landscape Priorities Fund.
Nine projects across the state have shared in the significant $4.2 million funding to address priority landscape management issues.
Among the nine was the removal feral cats from Dudley Peninsula , which will receive $350,000 from the fund.
In other cat eradication news, one of the most time-consuming tasks for the KI Landscape Board's Feral Cat Eradication team is checking cameras deployed out in the field for sightings of feral cats - especially in hard-to-access places.
Thankfully, advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) image recognition and 4G mobile connectivity have removed the need for these labour-intensive methods.
The team are beginning to use 4G-connected cameras, which send images to 'eVorta' image recognition software. This software then notifies the eradication team in real-time of any cats detected.
This removes the time needed for staff to look through SD card images, greatly speeding up the response time after a feral cat is detected.
The cat eradication team estimates deployment of 25 of these new cameras saves a huge 40 days of staff time annually.
The team is aiming to install 200 of these 4G-connected cameras across various sites on the Dudley Peninsula.
Residents and anyone wanting to help the mission is being asked to sponsoring one or more of these time-saving cameras.
Sponsors get to accesss unique images of Kangaroo Island wildlife in real-time, but also greatly assisting the efforts of the feral cat eradication team on the ground.
Some of the species that have been detected by existing cameras include: the KI Echidna, Heath Goanna, Southern Emu-wren, Bush-stone Curlew, Bassian Thrush, Southern Brown Bandicoot, Brushtailed Possum, Tamar Wallaby, and the Western Grey Kangaroo.
To sponsor a camera or make a tax-deductible donation, please visit team partner, Nature Foundation's page.
And for more information about the Feral Cat Eradication Program, visit the KILB website.
See: Labor says more resources needed to meet feral cat eradication target on Kangaroo Island
Landscape Priorities Fund The Landscape Priorities Fund is funded from Landscape levies collected in the Adelaide metropolitan area and redistributed to South Australia's regional landscape boards to enable them to work in partnership with other groups and individuals and invest in environmental projects.
Minister for Environment and Water David Speirs said the historic program was a key part of the state government's Landscape SA reform to deliver a more effective, decentralised, back to basics approach to natural resources management.
"Landscape SA is about building partnerships, rolling up your sleeves and working together to support our landscapes to thrive - leading to healthy and resilient communities, sustainable production, prosperous businesses and flourishing ecosystems," Mr Speirs said.
"Our historic Landscape SA reform is putting communities back at the heart of natural resources management and the Landscape Priorities Fund is key part of this.
"The Landscape Priorities Fund is significant change to how Landscape levies are collected and distributed and will deliver practical projects which wouldn't have been possible under the old system.
"Nine projects have shared in $4.2 million of funding in the inaugural round which will see a diverse range of environmental benefits across South Australia.
"While the projects will be delivered by South Australian regional landscape boards, importantly they will work closely with other organisations and individuals, like Aboriginal community groups, local councils, conservation groups, businesses and landowners."
The list of fully-funded projects (and recipient landscape board) includes:
The removal feral cats from Dudley Peninsula (Kangaroo Island - $350,000) Natural Resource Centres Building Capacity (Hills and Fleurieu - $318,964) Stopping the Spread of Feral Deer (Limestone Coast - $350,000) Returning Functionality to South Olary Plains (Murraylands and Riverland - $700,000) Optimising Kangaroo Management in SA (SA Arid Lands - $350,000) Camel and Buffel Grass Control (Alinytjara Wilurara - $742,512) Towards Eradication - 20 weeds by 2023 (Hills and Fleurieu - $600,000) Partially funded projects include:
Restoring Fleurieu coastal and marine habitats for wildlife conservation (Hills and Fleurieu - $250,000) A strategic approach to water security in a changing climate (Limestone Coast - $500,000) Projects will commence in June 2021. For more information contact the relevant regional Landscape Board through https://statewide.landscape.sa.gov.au/
The creation of the Landscape Priorities Fund is a significant outcome of the Marshall Liberal Government's landscape reform program.
The Fund is is supported from levies collected by Green Adelaide and is enshrined in the new Landscape South Australia Act 2019, enabling investment in large, landscape scale projects addressing regional and cross-regional priorities.
CREDIT: Stan Gorton
Word count: 793
