The US's DARPA continues to deliver revolutionary breakthroughs in a wide range of defence technologies.
When I worked at the Australian embassy in Washington in the early 1990s, I would sometimes accompany scientists from our Defence Science and Technology Organisation (now the Defence Science Technology Group) on visits to the US Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA). We were always impressed by the scope of DARPA's work, its free-wheeling approach to research, and the enthusiasm of its program managers.
DSTG's and DARPA's defence research roles are complementary, but they are very different organisations.
DARPA is unique because of the research latitude and generous funding that allows selected American innovators to work on a range of potential breakthrough technologies for enhancing national security. It will partner with universities, industry, small businesses, government, the public and the media. DARPA is independent of other US military research and development. It reports directly to Congress and senior Defense Department officials.
DSTG's stated mission is "to work closely with the Australian science, technology and innovation eco-system to deliver scientific advice and solutions that provide capability enhancement for Defence and the national security community".
Both organisations are currently headed by female scientists: DARPA's Dr Stefanie Tompkins, and DSTG's Professor Tanya Monro. Prior to becoming Australia's Chief Defence Scientist, Monro was the deputy vice chancellor research and innovation at the University of South Australia. She is the first woman to head the organisation.
DARPA comprises approximately 220 government employees, including nearly 100 program managers, who altogether oversee about 250 research and development programs. DARPA has a budget in the 2021 financial year of $5 billion. (Outside of DARPA's budget, the US Defense Department spends another $150 billion a year on research and development of weapons and equipment.)
By contrast, DSTG has 2300 employees and a budget of only $408 million - in other words, more than 10 times the staff and less than one tenth the budget of DARPA.
DSTG's More, together: Defence Science and Technology Strategy 2030 was launched in May 2020 to set the direction for Australian defence science and technology out to 2030. Its key objectives can be summarised as utilising science and technology to support Defence priorities.
DSTG comprises nine specialist Divisions: Aerospace; Cyber and Electronic Warfare; Intelligence, Surveillance and Space; Joint and Operations Analysis; Land; Maritime; Research Services; Science Engagement and Impact; and Weapons and Combat Systems.
DARPA has six technical offices. The offices and their national security objectives are as follows: Defense Sciences; Information Innovation; Microsystems Technology; Strategic Technology; Tactical Technology; and Biological Technologies.
The scope of DARPA's hundreds of research programs is too extensive to cover here but ranges alphabetically from artificial intelligence to world modelers analyses. Past successes include revolutionary military capabilities such as: precision-guided munitions, stealth technology, unmanned systems, advanced ISR (airborne Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance), and infrared night vision.
Enabling technologies behind these military capabilities - new materials, navigation and timing devices, specialised microelectronics, advanced networking, and artificial intelligence technologies, among others - have also benefited the private sector.
Other DARPA initiatives were the internet, automated voice recognition, automated language translation, and micro-GPS receivers for myriad consumer devices.
Unusually for a government agency, DARPA's research strategy accepts high-risk to achieve high-payoffs.
While some programs will fail, the total portfolio continues to deliver revolutionary breakthroughs in a wide range of defence technologies.
Rarely mentioned is the espionage threat targeting Five-Eyes defence-related research programs. They are inevitably a high priority target for foreign intelligence services. One of my tasks in Defence security was briefing senior DSTO managers on the nature of the espionage threat.
I'm not sure why, but our politicians and security establishment have always been reluctant to publicly name countries we know to be actively spying in Australia. Countries that target Five-Eyes defence research include China, Russia, and others I'm not at liberty to name here.
One historical defence research espionage case involved a British serviceman working on a joint Anglo-Australian guided missile project at Woomera in 1958. He was selling secret research information to an intermediary in Adelaide who was believed to be passing it on in turn to a Soviet KGB or GRU contact in Canberra.
Unfortunately, it was not possible to let the case run because of the circumstances under which the espionage was discovered - which were as follows.
Money was being stolen from a Woomera barrack block so military police planted some marked money. In due course the marked money was stolen. While searching the barrack block for the marked money, police found secret documents under the mattress of one of the occupants.
By agreement between prime ministers Menzies and Macmillan, the serviceman responsible was returned to the UK, where he was convicted of espionage and jailed for nine years. The main reasons for the decision to transfer the case to the UK were the difficulty of conducting a classified espionage trial in Australia and the likelihood the accused would get a harsher sentence in Britain. There were concerns in Canberra and London that if the spy was not given a sufficiently punitive deterrent sentence, the US would be reluctant to share secret technological information with Australia and the UK.
Clive Williams is a campus visitor at the ANU's Centre for Military and Security Law and a visiting fellow at the ANU's Strategic and Defence Studies Centre.
CREDIT: Clive Williams
Word count: 888
