ARTIFICIAL intelligence firm Complexica has raised $11m from investors including Microequities Asset Management and customer Flinders Ports which is tipping in $5m.
The Adelaide tech firm has flagged its ambitions to list on the Australian Securities Exchange likely late next year, with MAM investing an initial $5m in June via its Private to Beyond the IPO Fund.
The fund manager contributed an extra $3m in the current round, alongside Flinders Ports’ $5m and $3m from another unnamed investor. This brings the total raised since mid-2021 to $16m.
Flinders is about to go live with a solution designed by Complexica to use AI to improve container movements through the Flinders Adelaide Container terminal, with the project under development for the past two years.
“This investment and collaboration with Flinders Ports Holdings will enable Complexica to pursue development of next-generation software applications for ports globally, which will be AI and machine learning-enabled, cloud-based, and based on Internet of Things and Industry 4.0 concepts,’’ Complexica chief executive Matt Michalewicz said.
“A new ports and logistics division will also be established within Complexica, with a dedicated development and product team, as well as its own go-to-market strategy that will be readily available and executed globally.” Flinders chief financial officer Keith Halifax said the collaboration with Complexica was part of a broader project to digitise the ports business.
“In the last year alone, we have invested over $26m across the state’s ports,’’ he said.
“This investment builds on this commitment and enables us to ensure we have the digital as well as physical infrastructure in place to continue optimising our operations and drive value.
“This partnership will enable us to work closely with Complexica and allow us to apply AI and machine learning technology across our business and develop the next generation of services for our customers.” Complexica announced its initial public offer (IPO) ambitions early this year following the completion of a global, two-year project with wine company Pernod Ricard. Other customers of the company include Asahi, Metcash, Dulux, Pfizer, Arnott’s, PFD Food Services, and Costa Group. The company’s technology uses AI to optimise decision making across various business processes from logistics to sales.
CREDIT: TECHNOLOGY CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 365
