Australians will wake to the announcement of a major international security initiative following a flurry of late night top-secret meetings in Canberra.
The federal government did not respond to requests about the mysterious matter overnight, which multiple sources told The Daily Telegraph would involve the US and UK, and was related to defence.
According to Politico, the three allies will announce a new working group to share advanced technologies in a “thinly veiled bid to counter China”.
The US media outlet has reported initiative will make it easier to share information and know-how in areas like artificial intelligence, cyber, underwater systems and long-range strike capabilities.
It has also been confirmed that the US will help Australia identify the best way to acquire nuclear powered submarine capability.
In South Australia, they’re looking at a local angle:
An imminent national security announcement by the US President is tipped to directly affect Adelaide’s submarines industry.
It could be slightly bigger than that.
UPDATE. Something nukey:
Scott Morrison, US President Joe Biden and UK PM Boris Johnson have announced a historic new military alliance between their three countries, under Australia will acquire nuclear powered submarines to counter Chinese aggression in the Asia-Pacific.
The new partnership, dubbed AUKUS, was framed by the Prime Minister as a new arrangement where “our technology, our scientists, our industry and defence forces are all working together to deliver a safer and more secure region.”
Mr Morrison said the new fleet of nuclear submarines would be built in Adelaide and provided an assurance that Australia was not “not seeking to establish nuclear weapons or establish a civil nuclear capability.”
That’s not an assurance. Still, at least we’re nuking up against the ChiComs – and we’ve also binned Malcolm Turnbull’s ridiculous diesel submarine legacy.
UPDATE II. As expected, things didn’t run smoothly. But it’s no big deal in the overall scheme of things:
Not even Joe Biden forgetting the name of “that fellow Down Under” could mar the importance of what has just played out over the last twelve hours.
UPDATE III. This person is an idiot:
twitter
Many Australian cities are inland. Good luck piloting a submarine to Bendigo.
Among the responses to Bandt’s hysteria:
Mate, I'm a raging lefty but you used that "floating Chernobyls" line 4-5 times in your ABC Breakfast interview and it makes you sound ludicrously hyperbolic.
UPDATE IV:
Australian nuclear-powered submarines will be banned from entering New Zealand’s waters, New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern has confirmed.
Whatever. New Zealand doesn’t matter.
Word count: 395
