SOUTH Australia is on the “verge of a manufacturing renaissance” that has attracted at least 15 hi-tech international organisations to the state in the past 12 months.
While State Government cash incentives have helped, it’s the billions of dollars being invested in defence shipbuilding that’s putting SA on the radar for global businesses, says John Spoehr, the director of the Australian Industrial Transformation Institute at Flinders University.
“The shipbuilding investment is a magnet for companies looking to grow their prospects around the world.
“It really is a step-change investment for South Australia – one that puts it on the verge of a manufacturing renaissance, especially advanced manufacturing,” he said. BAE Systems has won the $35b contract to build nine Hunter Class frigates, while Naval Group is spearheading the $50b plan for 12 new Attack Class submarines.
“Having two of the biggest defence companies in the world – BAE and Naval – both with deep connections in UK and France, will see their supply chain looking at the value proposition of setting up here.
“Further the common capabilities that intersect defence and space and cybercrime, the use of artificial intelligence and hi-tech systems will also boost further interest from technology investors,” Mr Spoehr said.
BAE Systems works with 1500 companies in Australia – across various programs. “We spend more than $70m with companies here in South Australia,” said Chris Keane, BAE’s chief of future business.
US technology giant Accenture is setting up its hub in SA while Naval Group opened its new $25m office at Port Adelaide last month and launched its “Local Manufacturing Package”, worth almost $900m – inviting local defence industry companies to deliver submarine equipment.
Separately, Neoen, Mr X, Tesla, Airbus, Berkshire Hathaway, and Massachusetts Institute of Technology are also examples of global businesses that have set up shop in the state. French defence engineer LGM has established a presence here, alongside other international entities like French IT company Adexflow International, Bureau Veritas Offshore and Marine, SE4, Squad Australia Cyber Security, Saber Astronautics and consultants Cognitive Companions, Ghenova and SpaceSpecialists.
“South Australia is at the forefront of this exciting hi-tech and high-growth sector,” Premier Steven Marshall said. Trade Minister Stephen Patterson said the Government has an “ambition to attract more global heavyweights” to SA.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 380
