There’s a common misconception that camping or caravanning is cheap. Add up the costs of buying the van or trailer, perhaps a new vehicle to tow it, fuel, caravan and camping-site costs and potential emergency repairs and you’ve spent more than it would cost for a round-the-world cruise. That said, once the start-up costs have been covered, it can be an economical way to holiday. Here are our six top tips on how to have a great roadtrip without busting the bank.
Rethink your route The more you drive, the more it’s going to cost. But it doesn’t mean the month-long roadtrip is a thing of the past – just rethink the way you travel. Embrace slow travel and spend more time in fewer places. Pick a region and explore it in depth. If you’re somewhere where there are a few national parks, hit the walking trails, rather than the scenic drives.
Flash that card Auto club membership with the RAA, NRMA, RACQ or RACV can save you heaps if you break down or need to be towed to a mechanic in the middle of nowhere. And if you’re going to be far from home, take out premium membership, which covers your accommodation and alternative transport costs if your vehicle has a major problem. Beyond roadside service, membership also includes discounts on attraction tickets, tours, car hire, motel rooms and holiday parks. Member of a union or health fund? Your card may entitle you to a discount price, and there’s often a concession for a seniors card, too.
Pick your time to travel Everywhere is more expensive in the middle of peak season. If you’re not tied to travelling in school holidays, plan your roadtrip to avoid them. If you’re travelling with kids in holiday time, keep an eye out for holiday freebies in places such as national parks and local libraries.
Factor in holiday parks You can have a resort-style stay at holiday parks these days – think pools, water slides, adventure playgrounds, outdoor cinemas and all sorts of sports – as well as fully equipped kitchens, laundries, and even rewards programs for benefits and savings. More often than not they’re also on the best piece of waterfront real estate in town, too. Waking up to a million-dollar view for next to nix – what’s not to love?
Make fuel go further The most we paid for diesel on a recent fourweek, 5500km outback roadtrip was $2.76 a litre at Innamincka in SA, and nowhere did we find it at less than $2.10 per litre. We towed our camper trailer, and averaged about 15 litres per 100km. Our total fuel bill was almost $3000 – more than half of the entire trip cost. Ouch. So how can you make each litre go further? If you’re towing, the lighter your trailer and load, the better your fuel economy. A smaller trailer that tucks in behind your vehicle, such as a camper trailer or pop-up van, also creates much less aerodynamic drag. Underinflated tyres, lots of stuff on the roof racks and a poorly maintained engine also increase fuel consumption.
Cheap power Advances in 12-volt power technology and solar-panel efficiency now make it possible to go off-grid for about $1000 in set-up costs if you camp out of the back of your vehicle with a tent and an annex. This will buy a 100-amp/ hour deep-cycle storage battery, a 120-watt soft solar-panel blanket to keep it charged, and a battery box with 12-volt and USB outlets for appliances, plus a power input socket that connects to one of your vehicle’s 12-volt outlets to charge the battery as you drive.
CREDIT: Lee Atkinson; Bill McKinnon
Word count: 613
