Commissioner Julie Inman Grant’s has taken aim at dating apps, after an Adelaide man was arrested twice last week for allegedly stalking women he met online.
Sean Flintoff, 35, of Andrews Farm, faced court on Wednesday after a woman reported fearing for her safety.
He was arrested again on Friday and charged with more stalking offences and breach of bail, after another woman came forward.
A national scandal erupted last year over men sexually assaulting women they met on Tinder, using false details or deleting their chat history or accounts to avoid being found.
Ms Inman Grant said some apps had since “made some positive strides”.
“(But) there is still more work to do,” she said.
“As an online safety regulator, we don’t want companies to fail at protecting their users and it’s clear they must lift their standards and do better.”
Tinder has recently introduced a photo verification feature, which uses artificial intelligence to verify whether profile pictures match the account holder.
But Ms Inman Grant said despite some dating apps lifting their game, they remained a gateway to abuse, as some predators convinced potential victims to shift their interactions to other sites with poor security protections.
“Also of issue on these apps and platforms is repeat offending, where users who engage in predatory behaviour may be identified and their accounts deactivated, only to reappear on the platform under new accounts and aliases,” she said.
Jennifer Kingwell, from Embolden, the Alliance for Women’s Freedom, Equity and Respect, said men should think before they sent predatory messages.
“How would they feel if it was their mum or their employer or their friend reading these messages?” Ms Kingwell said.
“Remember that beyond the screen, you’re dealing with real people with real feelings, and also with real human and legal rights. Stalking, harassment and abuse are just as real online as in real life.
“If you find yourself getting off by sending abusive messages, or getting angry and lashing out after someone choses not to take things further with you, that’s a red flag about your own behaviour, and I would urge men like that to reach out to the men’s referral service.”
Tinder said keeping users safe was “paramount to everything we do”, citing a range of safety “guides, tools and resources” for members, and the launch of “more than 10 industry-leading safety features in the past two years” in the app.
“We’re always working to implement the newest technologies and teaming up with external partners and experts to find innovative solutions. Tinder has been closely collaborating with experts to rebuild its reporting process to be more transparent and trauma-informed so members feel confident and supported when reporting inappropriate behaviour on the app,” it said.
Tinder also cited its partnership with the state government on an anti-violence campaign.
Flintoff was remanded in custody on Friday and will appear in court again on Monday.
If you need help call 1800 RESPECT
Men’s Referral Service 1300 766 491
Guide to safe dating online
Word count: 480
