ARTIFICIAL intelligence is coming to the Women’s and Children’s Hospital with plans for robots to read X-rays.
Hot on the heels of introducing a virtual ED – where families can check in with clinicians by video link – the hospital is moving to embrace AI and machine learning.
AI refers to technologies that mimic aspects of human intelligence, while machine learning is a form of AI where a computer is taught to make decisions.
Phil Robinson, the Women’s and Children’s Health Network corporate services executive director, believes there are many possibilities for machine learning and AI to assist the hospital.
“There are a lot of ways that patients, families and hospital staff will benefit from this technology,” he said. “For example, machine learning can be trained to analyse X-rays to detect broken bones or images of skin to pick up cancers.” The project’s lead, Dr Gabriel Maicas, from the Australian Institute for Machine Learning, has a PhD in applying AI for medical image analysis and diagnostics and is working closely with WCH staff to identify areas where this technology can be applied. “I am really excited about this new role and to be working collaboratively across both AIML and WCH to create better health outcomes for South Australians,” he said.
“Right now my goal is to understand how the hospital works day to day, and what sort of problems staff are trying to solve. Then I can look at identifying specific aspects of hospital operations for which machine learning can be useful.
“AI might be applied for planning how best to distribute staff around the hospital to ensure optimal patient care, or it could even help with prioritising patients for urgent attention, or for predicting how long a patient will stay in hospital.” Women’s and Children’s Health Network chief executive Lindsey Gough said the collaboration between the hospital, the University of Adelaide and AIML was exciting for the future of health.
“This innovative approach to health is something we are thrilled to be a part of,” she said. “We are always looking at ways to use emerging technology to benefit our hospital community and this partnership is just another way we can do that.”
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 368
