FLYING cars will take to the skies of the South Australian Outback this weekend for a race designed to shake up global motorsport.
Adelaide start-up Airspeeder will host the testing event at a secret location and hopes to have three flying cars race on a digital “sky-track” at up to 150km/h.
The airborne vehicles are flown by remote control but it is hoped by next year Airspeeder will be ready to host a crewed aircraft race.
Bruno Senna, nephew of Formula One champion Ayrton Senna and Airspeeder’s development pilot and global ambassador, will travel to SA for this weekend’s event.
Airspeeder was founded by Matt Pearson, co-founder of nano-satellite company Fleet Space Technologies, and its staff include former employees of motorsport icons Ferrari, Brabham, Rolls-Royce and McLaren.
He said the weekend’s event was the second in a series of test races aimed at refining the flying cars’ design and the racing format.
“We’ve flown two in a race but we want to see what else we can learn about how many vehicles we can get in the air, how the competitive landscape changes, what our procedures need to do – it’s another development race,” he said.
“It’s exciting for the pilots to be getting runs on the board but as an organisation we’re proving out what is this racing product going to look like and how exciting can we make it.
“We’ll have three of our pilots competing on the day – it’s really exciting but we are still learning, still testing.” Airspeeder recently released footage from its first circuit race this year, when two remote-controlled flying cars raced head to head on a 1km digital sky-track above the pink salt flats of Lake Lochiel.
Airspeeder pilot Zephatali Walsh beat Fabio Tischler in a close race which Mr Pearson said offered a preview of the type of racing that could change the face of modern motorsport.
“We weren’t sure whether we were going to be able to overtake ... but in the first 60 seconds we had three overtakes,” he said. “In the first race they finished within a second of each other so it’s really compelling racing – we were blown away.
“We’ve been showing that to partners and investors around the world and now we’re ready to show it to the rest of the world and show what flying car racing looks like.
“It’s going to get faster, it’s going to get more aggressive, there’s going to be more vehicles in the sky.
“But this is the essence of what it’s going to be and I think that’s a really powerful thing to be able to show the world – that it’s real.” Airspeeder’s sister company Alauda Aeronautics is building its fifth Mk3 remote-controlled racing vehicle and is developing a Mk4 model designed for crewed racing.
Three more remote-controlled races are planned for next year ahead of the first crewed test race planned in late 2023 or early 2024.
And talks have already begun with manufacturers about participating in a grand prix-style series once the format of racing is designed, developed and tested.
“It’s a monumental undertaking building a championship,” Mr Pearson said. “Our ultimate goal is to build a vehicle that anyone can own, that anyone can fly, but there’s a road to get there and we’re following the same path laid down by the greats of the automotive industry 120 years ago.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 569
