It’s been a tough few years for Tracey Spicer. After being at the forefront of Australia’s #MeToo movement, the broadcaster and author suffered from burnout and was diagnosed with a major depressive disorder. Here, she talks to Stellar about taking a step back to prioritise her mental health, spending time with her family and tackling another big issue – getting more girls into STEM to address gender and racial inequality in the field of artificial intelligence These days when life gets stressful for author and broadcast journalist Tracey Spicer, she visualises a cup. If she sees it getting too full, she does something to reduce the pressure she’s feeling.
“It can be anything from catching public transport instead of driving, doing some gardening, watching a comedy, having a bath or just going outside and looking at the trees,” Spicer tells Stellar. “I’m really aware of doing things that mean my cup doesn’t overflow.” It’s a necessary protective technique for a woman who has spent much of the past 15 years campaigning, battling and advocating on behalf of women. From spearheading the Australian response to the #MeToo movement, publicly calling out workplace discrimination, writing a book which skewered the television industry and highlighting the lunacy of female grooming in a viral TEDx talk, Spicer used her profile to make sure women’s stories were heard.
Yet while her work saw her appointed a Member of the Order of Australia, it left her so burnt out that she was diagnosed with a major depressive disorder. The former Network 10 newsreader describes herself as a lifelong optimist, but the impact of listening to hundreds of stories from survivors of sexual assault led to her experiencing vicarious trauma. As she emerges from a period out of the limelight, she doesn’t want to focus on her suffering except to say she has strategies to manage it.
“It was a time when I learnt to properly focus on my mental health,” she says. “My dad experienced terrible depression and tried to commit suicide once, and I’d never experienced [depression].” She’s mindful that the pandemic has been tough on many, and while she’s come through thanks to therapy, meditation, exercise and yoga, she’s concerned for those still struggling. “Having been through depression myself, I really feel for people who are living with it each and every day. Prioritising your mental health is the number-one thing; everything else must come behind.” It’s why Spicer, 54, is taking a more deliberate and gentle pace with her next project – a book examining the bias within artificial intelligence, which is due to be released in 2023. With the working title Sexbots, the book forms part of her mission to get more girls and women into STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) careers so sexism and racism isn’t embedded into emerging technology.
“You speak to people globally and there are three big issues that will shape the world in the next 50 to 100 years: climate change, pandemics and artificial intelligence [AI],” she says. “We’re talking about the first two, but we’re not talking about the third here in Australia anywhere near enough. It’s a bit like how we used to view climate change – it’s too big so we don’t really want to confront it.” The broadcaster sees her work as a form of “future feminism”, designed to kickstart a conversation before existing stereotypes and discrimination are replicated in the robots and algorithms that will govern our lives for decades to come. She cites research into virtual assistants such as Siri, Alexa and Google Home being used by men to monitor, harass and control their partners at home, while the algorithms that determine who has access to a ventilator in US hospitals has been shown to favour wealthy white patients.
Spicer says she was concerned she was “catastrophising” about the issue until she began interviewing global experts who confirmed that artificial intelligence could potentially send us backwards in terms of sexism and equality. “I’m not an IT or AI expert, but what I can do as a journalist is take a complex concept and put it in simple terminology so that everyone has the tools as consumers to put pressure on the tech giants and government before it’s too late,” she says.
A version of the book will be modified for teachers, students and parents, and will highlight the gender imbalance in STEM careers. As Australia’s Chief Scientist Dr Cathy Foley revealed in a recent address, more than one-third of men in tertiary education are studying for STEM-related qualifications versus just 9 per cent of women. It’s a statistic that worries Spicer: “I’m looking to the future with fear and frustration, thinking that all these great gains that have been made in the path towards equality could be for naught.” With her two children, Taj, 16, and Grace, 15, galloping through adolescence, the presenter says she’s more determined than ever to confront social-justice issues even if it means ringfencing her time so she doesn’t become overwhelmed. “I think everyone deep down has a desire to make the world a better place. With the pandemic we’re seeing the best and worst in people, and the best is that it’s unlocking empathy in everyone.” While her Twitter callout to victims of sexual harassment left her traumatised and eventually led her to step away from NOW Australia (the support organisation she founded), Spicer is encouraged that plenty of young women are continuing the fight for equality. “It is wonderful for people of my generation to have such faith in that generation,” she tells Stellar. “They will absolutely fly the flag and create incredible leaps towards equality in the coming decades.” Having moved from centre stage to the sidelines of such issues, Spicer says she is happy raising her teenagers and spending more time with her husband of 20 years, cameraman Jason Thompson. Due to lockdown the couple had to scale down their planned anniversary celebrations to a walk in the rain, but she’s grateful for the man she calls her “absolute rock”. If the pandemic has made her realise how much her family means to her, it’s also tempered her pace. “I’m in my mid-50s now and I’m happy to slow down a little bit and just work three or four days a week,” she says.
“I’m fortunate to be in that position and hopefully I can continue to achieve that balance. As the great Martin Luther King Jr said, ‘The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends towards justice.’ It’s always been a quote I’ve loved.” Want to Zoom like a professional TV presenter? Tracey Spicer talks lights, camera, action for your next video call at Body+Soul TV.
CREDIT: Interview ANGELA MOLLARD
Word count: 1122
