TELEVISION From the Terminator to 2001 and Blade Runner to the Matrix, artificial intelligence has been a science fiction staple for decades.
Usually, these imaginary worlds focus on the threat to mankind of sentient machines but as technology advances and the prospect of real artificial intelligence draws ever closer, film and TV makers are having to ponder the subject more and more seriously.
Aaron Guzikowski, the creator of Foxtel’s hit sci-fi drama Raised By Wolves, says he appreciates all the possibilities that artificial intelligence could open up for humanity and is cautiously optimistic about the future, but also has concerns that we still know precious little about its potential consequences.
“Like many people I have my fears about where (AI) could lead us,” Guzikowski says. “But on the other hand, I also feel that a human being right now can’t even understand what an artificial intelligence is going to be like 20 years from now. Once a computer gains the ability to think for itself – what is it going to think about? I don’t think we really have the ability to know that answer and that unknown can be chilling.
“It can also be about extrapolating our own fears about human behaviour. Making the assumption that artificial intelligence is going to take the same sorts of pathways that human behaviour does is probably incorrect.
“So to me it’s a grand mystery – one with a little bit of fear but I am optimistic that through human beings we will find a way to use it the way that is most beneficial.” Raised By Wolves, produced and originally directed by sci-fi great Ridley Scott and now in its second season, leans hard into some of the questions posed by AI, as it focuses on a group of children on a far-flung planet who are being raised by two androids, named Mother and Father. As the years go by – and faced with danger to their charges when a group of religious zealots lands on the planet – the purpose-built androids begin to experience emotions.
The first season finished on an almighty cliffhanger as Mother gave birth to a terrifying, snakelike monster and the conflict with the zealots intensified.
The second season digs even deeper into the big questions of faith versus science, dogma versus rational thinking and a need for love and belonging in the face of intolerance and hatred.
In true science fiction style, Guzikowski says that Raised By Wolves examines the human condition by looking through the lens of the fantastical and otherworldly, in this case androids struggling to understand their human emotions. “When you’re talking about an android who is going through all of this, they don’t take these things for granted in the way that we do,” Guzikowski explains.
“Most of us don’t spend a lot of time thinking about what it means to be human. Why do I feel this way? Why do I even have emotions? These aren’t thoughts we are usually having because there is no point.
“We are stuck and we are the way we are. But with these androids, there is seemingly a bit more of a choice, so we are really trying to interrogate the human experience as an android is trying to understand it.” Raised By Wolves, Thursday, 7pm on Foxtel or On Demand
CREDIT: James Wigney
Word count: 559
