AUSTRALIA will accelerate development of super computers to protect the electricity grid, water, hospitals, banks and other critical infrastructure as China’s interest in the Pacific region grows.
Scott Morrison will announce a new “blueprint” for critical technologies, including a $100m investment in quantum technology, considered vital in protecting Australia’s assets from outside attacks.
Of this, about $70m will be used to establish a quantum commercialisation hub to partner with “like-minded” countries and help Australian businesses access new markets and investors.
Australia’s allies such as the US, Britain and Canada are already spending billions on quantum technology, while China is also highly advanced in its development. This new frontier is expected to have a significant impact on regional security.
A powerful quantum computer could theoretically break much of the encryption currently used to secure e-mails and international transactions, and help intelligence agencies reveal secret communications.
The technology would enable Australia to protect private information and thwart cyber attacks. Highly precise and sensitive quantum sensors could also be used for enhanced imaging, radar and threat detection for defence. Quantum technology also has uses in artificial intelligence, genetic engineering, novel antibiotics, antivirals and vaccines, low-emissions fuels, drones and robotics.
Mr Morrison will on Wednesday tell a national security conference Australia will seek to leverage its partnerships with the US, UK, Japan and India through AUKUS and the Quad to share security and defence-related science, technology and supply chains to bolster the nation’s defence system.
“Our trilateral efforts in AUKUS will enhance our joint capabilities and interoperability, with an initial focus on cyber capabilities, artificial intelligence, quantum technologies, and additional undersea capabilities,” the Prime Minister will tell the Australian Strategic Policy Institute.
He will say the government’s new blueprint will ensure Australia has access to critical new technologies, promote the country as a “trusted and secure” investment option and protect sovereign intellectual property. “(It will) support regional resilience and shape an international environment that enables open, diverse and competitive markets and secure and trusted technological innovation.”
CREDIT: CLARE ARMSTRONG
Word count: 336
