INVESTORS wiped $43bn off the Australian sharemarket yesterday as it plunged almost 2 per cent, snapping a three-day winning streak.
The benchmark ASX 200 index closed down 134 points or 1.9 per cent at 6931.7 points — its lowest daily closing level for the past six weeks.
It was the markets biggest one-day loss in almost three months and the third biggest this year.
The All Ordinaries Index slumped 1.83 per cent to 7165.7 points. CommSec analyst Steve Daghlian said the Australian market fall was significant. “There was perhaps no fresh catalyst for the declines but we did see the US market falling back about 1 per cent (on Tuesday),” he said.
“There’s still some concerns overseas about a faster than expected lift in inflation as well.” The market slide came as Westpac’s Australian consumer confidence index slipped from a 10-year high this month. The overall index fell 4.8 per cent to 113.1 in May.
But respondents were more positive about the jobs market and the budget resonated positively.
Westpac chief economist Bill Evans said the fall in consumer confidence needed to be put in perspective because it followed an 11 per cent rise in the previous three months, and was still the second highest level of confidence recorded since April 2010.
The worst-performing stock on the market was EML Payments. Its shares collapsed almost 46 per cent to $2.80 yesterday after the Brisbane-based fintech said regulators were probing its Irish subsidiary over anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism concerns.
The lightning-quick plunge came after EML resumed trade following a two-day halt put in place after its Irish arm, PFS Card Services, received correspondence from the Central Bank of Ireland citing “significant regulatory concerns”.
“EML is committed to co-operating with the Central Bank of Ireland and is taking steps to address concerns raised,” the company said. A top performer was artificial intelligence and machine learning outfit Appen, which unveiled a new organisational structure and financial reporting changes it promised would provide greater visibility of the drivers and performance of the business. Aspen shares spiked 17.5 per cent to $13.20.
CREDIT: MARKETS DAVID ROGERS CLIONA O’DOWD
Word count: 354
