DATING apps will use artificial intelligence to “red flag” potential sexual attackers and immediately refer any reports of assaults to police, under a world-first proposal to protect women.
The plan is being driven by the NSW Child Abuse and Sex Crimes Squad. It follows multiple cases of rapists using dating apps to find victims.
For several months, NSW Police and the US-based Match Group, which owns 27 apps including Tinder, Hinge and Plenty of Fish, have been negotiating on how to make the platforms safer and deter sexual predators.
Detective Superintendent Stacey Maloney, pictured, said Match Group would create a portal to feed to police information about sexual-assault reports and evidence needed in investigation.
“They have been very good at recognising that their brand can be somewhat damaged if they don’t support victims if there has been an incident that has stemmed from meeting on one of their apps,” she said yesterday. It is also looking at bringing in law-enforcement liaison officers, similar to a scheme that works well at Uber.
The prevalence of dating apps in sexual-assault cases was highlighted this week. Sydney man Anthony Glumac is charged with raping 19 different women, including four he met on Tinder, over seven years.
Dating apps such as Tinder do not refer reports of sexual assault or stalking/intimidation and predatory behaviour it receives from users directly to police. Instead, users receive a generic response, no response at all, or are assigned “case officers”, who are not trauma-trained and operate in call centres.
One of the biggest criticisms of Tinder, raised in a Four Corners investigation last year, was how the app’s unmatch function facilitated sexual violence.
Women described how men used the function after a sexual assault to block them and wipe their conversation history – and potential evidence.
Supt Maloney said she was talking to the app developers about using artificial intelligence to scan conversations between users and profiles for “red flags”.
“We are giving them an idea of what that looks like – it’s that very coercive and forceful behaviour that we see in law enforcement in offenders,” she said. In the future, Supt Maloney hoped Match Group would proactively tell police if, through its scanning, it came across a conversation between users about a sexual assault that had occurred. “It’s a long way to go, but that would be the ultimate goal,” she said.
CREDIT: AVA BENNY-MORRISON
Word count: 400
