HUMANKIND has become, for the first time in the limitless millennia of evolution, the servants of machines – of artificial intelligence.
The first spear, the plough, the gun and the machine were always tools controlled by their makers, the creative human. But in the past 20 years, humankind has become subservient to its own creation, the smartphone.
You may dismiss this as nonsense. But the harsh reality is, at least in the developed world, most of us can barely function without smartphones.
Most people dare not leave home without their telephone.
Our phones have become an extension of our bodies. You are your telephone. Your telephone is you. Artificial intelligence has corrupted us. It is draining our individuality, our personality and our capacity for clear thought.
Almost all of us have been forced to rely on our mobile phone for an increasing number of diverse activities.
We have surrendered to artificial intelligence for the sake of simplicity, convenience and necessity.
A couple of examples. The ice-making machine on the door of our refrigerator suddenly refused to produce ice. A truly selfish, middle-class, first-world problem. We identified the problem in the instruction book and keyed a code into the mobile telephone. Bingo, ice cubes began to drop again. What the phone had to do with our ice-making refrigerator is beyond my understanding. But the phone was essential.
I asked my doctor for an update on a couple of medical prescriptions. He played with his computer keyboard and then said: “There you go. All done.” The prescriptions are in my mobile phone.
I had my second Covid-19 vaccination. Proof that I’m Covid-safe is recorded in my mobile phone. My phone now contains my three credit cards, driver’s licence, BUPA and Medicare cards, a list of the medications I take, my Qantas Club and flybuys memberships, and my Dan Murphy’s discount liquor card.
Phones can open a garage door, turn on an oven or an airconditioner, activate an alarm or photograph possible intruders in our homes. My phone contains the contact numbers for hundreds of friends, relations and businesses including restaurants and taxis.
It takes photographs and records messages. I can use the phone to book a restaurant, do online banking, watch television, listen to music, check the weather and suggest my best parking options. My phone thinks for me, opens doors, makes appointments, sends reminders and pays bills. There are a million more examples but you get the idea.
People are addicted to them. Many feel uncomfortable, even inadequate, unless they have their phones in their hands. They compulsively check messages, information updates, and battery life.
Phones take precedent over general conversation and human interaction. How has it come to this? And where does it end?
The increased power and influence of phones has been insidious, driven by the most powerful individuals and corporations on the planet. Ethics, personal privacy and harm minimisation are expendable victims. Like it or not, we are captives of the smartphone. We are servants. We crave to remain in step with the latest technological refinements.
I weep for people who, through fear, financial restraints or blind hatred, do not use a mobile phone. People without them face isolation and deprivation. If phones have made such enormous advances in say, 15 years, what lies ahead? Imagine watching a movie which is beamed from your phone to the lens of your glasses. Imagine headphones inserted under your skin in your ears.
The blunt reality is that smartphones are an essential part of the modern world, for good or evil.
There is no escaping them. No going back. We are the servants of artificial intelligence.
552,544 SOUTH AUSTRALIANS JOIN THE CONVERSATION The Advertiser Sunday Mail advertiser.com.au
CREDIT: Rex Jory
Word count: 620
