AUSTRALIA’S largest bank has joined forces with the nation’s first cyber collaboration centre at Adelaide’s innovation precinct Lot Fourteen.
It comes as new figures show the number of business leaders and workers at the site has increased by about 25 per cent since January.
The interest in the site has the State Government confident another 1000 workers and students will be at the precinct next year.
About 835 workers and 35 students are at Lot Fourteen, where the population is expected to swell to 6000 over the next decade.
The Commonwealth Bank (CBA) will sponsor three programs, for an undisclosed sum, including the A3C Cyber Collaboration Centre aimed at protecting Australia’s businesses and residents from security risks.
CBA chief executive Matt Comyn, who toured the innovation precinct with Premier Steven Marshall on Wednesday, said the bank would support the cyber centre on a number of initiatives that “will ultimately secure Australia and support a prospering digital economy”. As part of the deal: CYBER teams will connect with teachers and students in universities and schools in a bid to secure the sector’s future workforce needs.
BUSINESSES will be provided intel to help them understand the cyber-security threats they face and how they can prepare for emerging trends.
GLOBAL partners will help to solve the challenges Australians face and find innovative security solutions.
Mr Marshall said the deal highlighted Lot Fourteen as a beacon of opportunity for those wanting to set up shop in SA.
“It is a place where businesses can collaborate, share research and grow,” he said.
“Despite the challenges we’ve faced due to COVID-19, Lot Fourteen has continued to attract national and international investment.
“This kind of growth is remarkable given how hard the pandemic has hit economies around the world.” Lot Fourteen state project lead Diane Dixon said the precinct’s strategic approach of focusing on high-growth sectors that could build on SA’s existing strengths had been reinforced this year.
“These include defence and space and hi-tech industries such as cyber security, artificial intelligence and machine learning,” she said. Ms Dixon said demand for space was outstripping supply but the completion next year of a refurbishment of the heritage Bice building and the construction of the 16-storey Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre by 2023 would provide work spaces for 1700 people.
CREDIT: MATT SMITH
Word count: 385
