AUSTRALIA will work with the US and Britain to fast-track development of cutting-edge missiles, taking the pact between the three nations into the age of “hypersonic” warfare.
Scott Morrison, US President Joe Biden and UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson will on Wednesday detail collaboration on a range of defence systems, expanding the AUKUS agreement beyond the nuclear-powered submarines to be built in Adelaide.
Hypersonic missiles, which Russia has used in its invasion of Ukraine, fly at least five times the speed of sound and, unlike standard ballistic missiles, are highly manoeuverable and able to change course during flight.
The three nations will also collaborate on technology to defend against hypersonic weapon strikes.
In a joint statement, the three leaders condemned Russia’s “unprovoked, unjustified, and unlawful invasion of Ukraine” and reiterated “unwavering commitment” to international rule of law and peaceful disputes resolution”.
“We are pleased with the progress in our trilateral program for Australia to establish a conventionally armed, nuclear‑powered submarine capability,” they said.
“We also committed today to commence new trilateral co-operation on hypersonics and counter-hypersonics, and electronic warfare capabilities, as well as to expand information sharing and deepen co-operation on defence innovation.” Electronic warfare means use of the electromagnetic spectrum for purposes such as taking out enemy communications systems, while the innovation commitment is about finding “ways to more rapidly integrate commercial technologies to solve warfighting needs”.
The three nations will next year start trials of underwater drones, described as a “significant force multiplier for our maritime forces”.
Co-operation on artificial intelligence is aimed at ­“improving the speed and precision of decision-­making” against “AI-enabled threats”, while cyber ­co-operation will protect “critical” communications and operations systems.
As part of the AUKUS commitment to deliver a nuclear submarine fleet, Australian defence personnel have started nuclear science and engineering training while – as revealed by The Advertiser – the federal government is working to secure more land to expand the Osborne shipyard.
“We are fully committed to establishing a robust approach to sharing naval propulsion technology with Australia that strengthens the global non-proliferation regime,” the leaders said.
By March next year, the three countries will decide on the design and construction of the nuclear-powered fleet, with the Prime Minister vowing the boats will begin to hit the water before 2040. UK and US experts visited Australia in February to assess infrastructure, workforce and industrial capabilities.
It comes as Spanish shipbuilding giant Navantia has launched a pitch to build the Australian Defence Force’s three more warfare Hobart-class destroyers within a decade at an overall cost of $6bn. “Navantia could build and deliver three additional Hobart-class destroyers for the Royal Australian Navy by the end of this ­decade,” Navantia Australia managing director Israel Lozano Barragan told The Australian. Ms Barragan said that the additional destroyers could be built in Australia, in Spain or in a hybrid model across both countries depending on the capacity of “Osborne shipyard to absorb the work”
CREDIT: TOM MINEAR
Word count: 490
