CAREERS TECH SMARTS PLUS INNOVATIVE THINKING WILL BE THE KILLER COMBINATION Data literacy, coding, collaboration and innovative thinking – these are the skills Australians will need if they want to land a job in 2030.
As the Covid-19 pandemic speeds up an already fast-evolving jobs market, experts suggest workers and school leavers be strategic about the skills they prioritise if they wish to remain competitive.
RMIT Online chief executive Helen Souness says the “killer combination of the future” will be a mix of both hard technical skills and soft transferable skills.
“Transferable skills will be humans’ competitive advantage over the machines,” she says.
DATA ANALYSIS Companies across all sectors are moving away from experienced-based decisions and toward data-based decisions, making analysis a necessary skill in marketing, sales and customer service through to project management, according to Souness.
Institute of Analytics Professionals of Australia managing director Annette Slunjski says data literacy will be an assumed skill for everyone in the future – “every single job from receptionist to CEO – and everything in between”.
“It used to be ‘reading, writing and arithmetic’, it’s going to be ‘reading, writing, arithmetic and data’,” she says.
Slunjski says there is also growing demand for dedicated data professionals. She says job titles vary but they essentially fall into three groups – data analysts who understand business problems and put data into context; data scientists who deal with advanced analytics, such as machine learning and predictive models; and data engineers who are concerned with data quality, access and ethics.
CODING Between 2020 and 2025, the National Skills Commission forecasts an extra 46,000 software and application programmers will be needed in Australia – a 30 per cent increase over the five years. But as more tasks are digitised, Souness says coding will be needed in most jobs.
“Although the level of knowledge the average worker will need to have and which coding languages will dominate are open to debate, coding skills will be essential to allow professionals to understand how the technology around them works,” she says. Robotic process automation company UiPath director of global services Luke Kelly says new “low code” and “no code” tech tools – such as phone apps and those with drag-and-drop interfaces – allowed non-programmers to do some of the work previously reserved for programmers, but this was increasing, not decreasing, the need for this skillset.
“There is absolutely still a need now and for the foreseeable future for highly skilled programmers to write complex code powering some of the most advanced technology on the planet,” Kelly says.
“There won’t necessarily be a raft of new roles, instead existing roles such as analysts, project managers, administrative or executive assistants, and many more, may increasingly be required to develop some level of competency for these low or no code based tools.” UiPath partnered with technology training company WithYouWithMe to upskill ex-military personnel in high level coding. “Allowing veterans to access our programs for free enhances the employability prospects post their service and provides tangible benefits to the economy through the provision of effective training and digital skills,” WithYouWithMe chief executive Tom Moore says.
COLLABORATION As artificial intelligence and machine learning become more common in workplaces, employees will need to collaborate with machines.
Recruitment firm Robert Half director Nicole Gorton says there are three types of jobs requiring this skill.
“Firstly, those that oversee the implementation and management of new technology, for example training machine-learning algorithms or chat bots,” she says.
“Secondly, specialist roles that leverage emerging technology to improve an existing process, for example retailers automating their warehouse processing.
“Finally, those that overlay ‘human’ insight to extract analysis and strategies from the technology, such as marketing automation specialists who interpret data to understand customer behaviour.”
Creativity and innovation The ability to come up with new ideas will give humans a competitive advantage over machines, according to Helen Souness.
“Although machines are already writing books and producing paintings, human imagination and general intelligence are extremely tough to reproduce,” she says.
Innovation will also set humans apart. “While creativity is about generating original ideas, innovation is about implementing ideas in a new way,” she says. “(It) is a collective endeavour … (so) innovation skills are best paired with a long list of transferable skills, including creativity, problem-solving, relationship building and communication skills.”
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 721
