RELATIONSHIPS Do-it-yourself separations are on the rise, with amicable couples using artificial intelligence to divvy up assets and agree on parenting plans, without massive legal bills.
Website tool amica.gov.au has attracted widespread use since it launched a year ago, with family court judges even referring suitable couples to it to make out-of-court agreements.
Created by National Legal Aid with $3m in federal funding, amica informs people about their legal rights and options, helps keep them communicating online and helps them reach a written agreement about their parenting arrangements and the division of their property.
Amica project chief and National Legal Aid director Gabrielle Canny helped develop the tool and says it empowers splitting couples.
Amica uses federal and family court law, which applies nationally and is enforceable in every state. Family law experiences and scenarios have been used to develop the artificial intelligence. It analyses: • the couple’s assets and their circumstances; • the agreements commonly reached by other couples in similar situations; and • how courts generally handle disputes of this nature.
USING AI Canny says the AI uses information provided to reach a fair and enforceable agreement.
“There is no magic in between that is doing a calculation … the AI is just combining your circumstances from the information you’ve provided, with the law, and then getting information,” she says.
“If information is input and deliberately skewed to reach an unfair agreement, amica will not print an agreement and will refer the parties to seek legal advice.” Amica also recognises when an imbalance of power exists within the relationship and will not document unfair agreements. It then refers the clients to community services such as financial counsellors and domestic violence support services.
More than 4500 couples have generated an agreement using amica in the first 12 months and a recent survey predicts growth in usage.
Recent amica research found that one in five couples blame the pandemic for ruining their relationship, while one in 12 have considered separating.
And a record 49,625 couples, filed for divorce during 2020-21, Federal Circuit Court statistics reveal – an 8 per cent rise in just 12 months.
SAVES TIME AND MONEY Canny says the tool saves time and money for both amicable couples and those who want to seek advice before approaching a lawyer. “Using amica, they will prepare all the information they need so their first visit with the lawyer is so much more efficient,” she says.
The maximum charge for amica is just $440 per couple and users only pay if they are happy with the agreement reached.
USER FRIENDLY Family lawyer Katherine Stavrou also helped develop amica and is thrilled to see the user-friendly interface helping separating couples who want a fair, quick and easy split without arguments.
“Amica reduces the costs and lessens the emotional stresses that come with separation,” she says. “It is quicker and stops you spending up to $30,000 for an acrimonious split through lawyers.” Stavrou says the AI is backed by a substantial human factor. “Amica’s webchat service is staffed by real people and a family lawyer double-checks the property split that is suggested by the AI.”
COURT APPROVAL Canny says the courts have been impressed with amica.
“The courts have been very interested from day one, right from the highest level with the Chief Justice and the deputy chief justice. What they recognise is that there is a whole cohort of people who do not need to be in courtrooms.” Canny says amica has to be the way of the future: “A society needs to benefit from technology and the law needs to keep up with it and empower people.” She hopes to see more than 20,000 couples using amica each year and for everyone to know the tool is at their fingertips.
The facts Since amica.gov.au launched just over a year ago: • More than 4500 people have used amica to help them reach agreements with their ex and move forward after a separation.
• The amica site has had more than 300,000 page views.
• More than 820 asset division suggestions have been provided by amica’s AI. • More than 300 property agreements have been finalised.
• More than 240 Parenting Plans and Parenting Agreements have been finalised. • 90 consent order court applications have been generated.
Source: amica.gov.au
AI enabled parents to divide assets fairly and plan for the kids JAMIE (not his real name) and his partner of 16 years used amica to help them work through issues regarding the care of their kids and the division of their assets.
He says they were both “in the dark” when it came to how they should work through the issues relating to separation but didn’t want to engage lawyers for fear of the cost on their modest incomes.
“We were still talking to each other and we thought that if we can keep it as simple as possible we would be able to get a better outcome for ourselves and also for our kids as well. We were driven mainly by cost, but the secondary consideration was just trying to find out what we had to do.” He says using amica was a godsend in many ways.
“It was a weight off our minds because we both thought we would have to get lawyers in, and we had been told that would cost us about $20,000. It’s been fantastic for the parenting plan that we have created. Amica really helped us move forward with the care of our kids.
“It’s unfortunate that people go through this but, at the same time, if there is a third party or a system like amica that helps you come to common ground, that makes the conversation that little bit easier.
“We also used amica as a guide for the division of our assets. It was brilliant because it helped us start the conversation about what we owed, what our assets were and who contributed what to the relationship.
“It helped us focus and it was good to have that focus rather than having an argument about who provided what.” He says amica helps couples realise what is fair. “It gives you that opportunity to have informed discussions and it leads discussions. It lets you both identify how accurate your idea is about what you should be getting … or what your rights or ownership of the assets should be.”
Word count: 1067
