RECYCLE MATE Free, iOS/Android It’s Earth Day on Friday and this app can help you work out what items you can recycle and how you can do it safely. Recycle Mate uses artificial intelligence (that it calls bintelligence) to identify items you photograph in the app, and uses your location to find an appropriate recycling facility. It will also tell you whether it’s safe to add the item to your council recycling or if it needs different treatment. You can also name the item yourself and check appropriate options.
YouTube Free, Apple iOS/Google Android Even if you missed watching Harry Styles perform live with Shania Twain in the first weekend of the Coachella music festival, there’s a second weekend of festivities to watch. YouTube will be livestreaming a curated setlist from the Californian festival’s second sitting, which is expected to see performances from Styles, Billie Eilish, Fatboy Slim, Swedish House Mafia and The Weeknd.
APPLE IMOVIE Free, Apple iOS Apple’s movie-making app just got a major update introducing two features: Magic Movie and Storyboards. The first lets users nominate which videos and photos they want to include in their home movie and lets artificial intelligence automatically piece them together. Storyboards are offered in different categories, such as cooking and product reviews, and suggests which shots should appear and in which order to make a compelling video.
NETFLIX $10.99/m, iOS/And Algorithms can be helpful when they’re recommending TV shows. But the new addition to Netflix can make them more helpful by letting users register what they love as opposed to what they merely like. The tech giant has added a double-thumbs up icon to this end so you can receive alerts based on shows you’re truly passionate about. Naturally, you can still use the thumbs down icon for genres you’d rather not see again.
TOHU $12.99, iOS/Android This adventure game is of such high quality and creativity, it seems more suited to the big screen than the very small one. Tohu follows The Girl as she explores mysterious fish planets on her ship, looking for new characters, solving puzzles, and trying to repair the Sacred Engine. She can turn into a robot, Cubus, to do the heavy lifting, and the whole experience looks like a dreamy cartoon.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 380
