Better testing lifts survival rate
AN innovative new screening program is helping men across Australia monitor their health by “predicting” their risk of developing prostate cancer.
Australian medical technology company Maxwell Plus is using artificial intelligence (AI) to determine the likelihood of a male developing prostate cancer in the hope it will help diagnose it earlier and decrease high case numbers.
The program works by assessing all the normal risk factors such as age, family history, blood and prostate specific antigen (PSA) levels and then comparing them to a dataset of more than 250,000 men.
This is analysed by the AI technology, which sifts through the data, using it to “predict” a person’s likely risk based on known outcomes.
And while it’s not intended to replace doctors and medical specialists, the idea is to fast-track the triage process and help refer men who might not believe they are at risk.
Professor Tony Costello, a urologist and specialist at the Royal Melbourne Hospital, said it was a test he would “liken to breast screening.” “We know early diagnosis affords a better chance of curability for the cancer,” said Prof Costello, pictured, who has been asked to join the company as an adviser, said.
“There’s also been a lot of confusion about the reliability of PSA testing but when it’s made available and put into algorithms I think it could be very effective (in predicting cancer).” The first half of the screening is online, via a quick survey and telehealth consultation, before further referrals such as blood and PSA tests are recommended. Prof Costello said the convenience and comfort of being able to access such a service from the couch meant more men, especially those in rural and remote areas, might be able to seek greater help.
“More men die from prostate cancer in Australia than women from breast cancer,” Prof Costello said.
“PSA testing works, it’s just a matter of getting the message across and getting treatment with advice … to improve our detection of men’s most prevalent and lethal cancer.” Prof Costello acknowledged that while Australia had come a long way, a more conscious effort was needed.
“When I first started, any man who came with a diagnosis of prostate cancer usually died within two years,” he said. “We’ve had a 25 per cent reduction in mortality since 1995 … anything that allows men to access a PSA without being told they don’t need it is good.”
CREDIT: ALANAH FROST
Word count: 411
