Australia’s penchant for booze is on the decline, a trend largely driven by young people and reflected in a raft of research. But today, sobriety is less about abstinence and more about moderation – a lifestyle supported by alcohol-free beverages, bars and social communities shaking off the sober stigma. So what has led to this monumental shift in our culture, and what does it say about us when the hottest trend in drinking is now not drinking alcohol at all?
As a mother-of-four running her own company and a busy household, Irene Falcone (pictured right) used to reach for the wine like it was balm for her soul. “I’d have a couple of glasses every night; I’d joke about it and call it ‘Mummy juice’,” she says. “Then in lockdown [in early 2020], I’d have a drink earlier because I didn’t need to do the school pick-up.” But with low energy levels, poor sleep quality and deteriorating gut health, the 47-year-old decided it was time to cut back on booze. “I went into a liquor store and asked if they stocked non-alcoholic wine – because I’ll be damned if I was going to give up my much-loved glass of wine, even though I was giving up alcohol.” When she was met with a mix of confusion, shock and a definitive “no”, Falcone – who had previously founded natural beauty and wellness company Nourished Life – was spurred to take matters into her own hands.
In early 2020 she created Sans Drinks, an online retailer selling zero-alcohol beverage alternatives, and in May of last year, she opened a bricks-and-mortar store on Sydney’s northern beaches – Australia’s first liquor-free bottle shop.
“I wanted to create a business that didn’t tell people that alcohol was bad or that they had to be sober. I wanted to empower them to drink less or drink less often,” explains the businesswoman, who’s stayed sober since founding Sans Drinks and says she feels better than ever.
While Falcone’s start-up idea was one of a kind, her sobriety story isn’t unique. Today, a wealth of research suggests Australians’ thirst for booze is on the decline – and it’s been trending downwards for a while now.
“Alcohol consumption has been decreasing here since about 2007, and we’ve seen a 10 per cent reduction in per capita consumption across the whole population,” says Dr Michael Livingston, associate professor at the National Drug Research Institute at Curtin University. “It’s being driven by big shifts amongst teenagers and young adults; they’re drinking significantly less than previous generations did at the same age.” Indeed, the number of 18-to-24-yearolds choosing to not drink booze has doubled in the past 20 years, although teens and twenty-somethings aren’t the only ones rethinking ingrained habits. According to a survey by International Wine and Spirit Research, 71 per cent of Australians – of all ages – went into 2022 planning to reduce alcohol consumption.
Faye Lawrence is a sobriety coach who holds a degree in psychology and says her clients are predominantly women aged 35 to 55. “I think when people reach their late 30s and beyond, hangovers get worse and they question whether they want this lifestyle for another 10 years,” she says. “They’re recognising the impact of alcohol on their health, finances and ability to achieve goals.” Falcone agrees: “Our core customers at Sans Drinks are women over 30 and 40 who are looking for the next step in their health routine. [But] surprisingly, the busiest day in our bottle shop was [in July 2021] when the NSW construction industry was shut down during lockdown. I’ve never seen so many men come in and buy non-alcoholic beer… They were going to go home and sit on the couch, but they [didn’t want to] drink alcohol for two weeks straight.” What’s notable about the modern sobriety movement is that there are no fixed rules, and the hard line between drinkers and non-drinkers is blurring. Teetotallers – traditionally a category reserved for recovering alcoholics, pregnant women and designated drivers – have been joined by the “sober curious”, a growing group of people who might relish a martini on a Saturday night, then sip on alcohol-free wine during the week.
“The black-and-white, abstinence-only approach is not for everybody who finds themselves questioning their relationship with alcohol,” explains Ruby Warrington, an author who coined the term “sober curious” in her 2018 book, Sober Curious. “Your life does not have to become unmanageable as a result of drinking for you to get sober curious. You don’t have to identify as an alcoholic… Being sober curious means choosing to stop drinking on autopilot. Most of us were not taught to question how we use alcohol; why it is so socially acceptable, what feelings we may be using it to mask, [and] how it really makes us feel.” Cue a crop of cool start-ups supporting the “sober sometimes” lifestyle movement. There’s Brunswick Aces – Australia’s first permanent no-alcohol bar, which opened in inner-city Melbourne last year – and local brands, including Ms Sans and Sobah, that serve up booze-free cocktails and craft beer respectively. With one of their chic bottles or colourful cans in hand, you can blend in at a party then wake up hangover-free.
Globally, the zero-alcohol category is also booming. In 2021, non-alcoholic “booze” sales surged 33 per cent to US$331 million (AU$476 million), and huge growth is forecast in coming years.
Even traditional liquor brands and bottle shops are getting in on the action. “We stock 329 zero-alcohol products,” says Tim Carroll, director of buying and merchandise at Endeavour Drinks Group, a leading national retail hospitality and drinks company. “Across our BWS and Dan Murphy’s stores, sales of zero-alcohol products have grown more than 150 per cent in the last 24 months.” It’s a time frame that coincides neatly with the ramifications of the pandemic, suggesting that lockdown may have been a motivating factor – for some drinkers, at least – to go completely dry.
“Measuring the impact of the pandemic on our drinking choices is challenging and research is still unfolding,” explains Livingston. “In Australia, it seems likely that drinking overall went down a bit, but that’s [largely due to the impact of] young people who weren’t going out to pubs and bars. There’s growing evidence that among other groups, such as parents, drinking went up.” Lower alcohol consumption among young people, he continues, is an evolving trend mirrored in high-income countries across the globe, reflecting some almost immeasurable shifts in society, parenting and attitudes to alcohol.
And it’s good news for the health of our nation. “Alcohol is one of the key risk factors for a range of chronic diseases and cancers, and also for road crashes, injuries and assaults,” says Livingston. “So if these big declines stick around through whole generations, we’ll expect to see substantial public-health benefits during the next 30 or 40 years.” But what does this mean for Australia’s deep-rooted culture of drinking – and is it possible that we can be sober without sacrificing our social lives?
“We’ve been indoctrinated to believe that we need alcohol to have fun – in the same way that we used to think we had to smoke cigarettes to be part of things socially,” says Lawrence, who founded Untoxicated, an alcohol-free “tribe” or social community of 9000 sober and “sober-curious” individuals. “I think the choice not to drink alcohol will become normalised in the same way the choice to not smoke or not eat meat has… And remember, when you were a child you still had fun and were social without alcohol, so what’s stopping you now?”
Feeling sober curious? Be sure to check in at bodyandsoul.com.au for more inspiring ways to change your drinking habits, as our site goes booze-free this week body+soul.com.au
SOBER CURIOUS THIS DRY JULY?
Experts share their top tips for drinking less while living a full life 1 Plan your social calendar “Change your social activities to daytime – catch up with friends for coffees, bushwalks, shopping, picnics and lunches,” advises sobriety coach Faye Lawrence. “Or if you’re going out in the evening, pick things where alcohol isn’t the central focus.” Alternatively, Lawrence recommends setting a two-hour limit if you find yourself at a bar or pub on a night out.
2 Keep your own routine “If you drink a glass of red with your meal every night, you can continue to pour yourself that red – just make it a non-alcoholic red,” suggests Sans Drinks founder Irene Falcone. “If you have a glass of bubbles in the bath on a Sunday night, swap that for something alcohol-free. You should keep the same rituals.” Adds Lawrence: “There are loads of amazing alcohol-free drinks that can help you feel part of things socially and nobody can tell you’re not drinking. Be aware, though, that they’re not for everyone. They can be triggering and could lead to a relapse for alcohol-dependent [people].”
3 Push through your FOMA Fear Of Missing Alcohol? “Feel the FOMA and do it anyway,” urges Sober Curious author Ruby Warrington. “Most people drink alcohol to feel more confident and relaxed in social situations, and it’s often where FOMA is most prevalent. If we’ve been teaching our brains since age 15 that we ‘need’ alcohol to socialise, the thought of having to ‘perform’ without our crutch can bring up a lot of fear. The fastest way to dismantle your fears is to prove them wrong, so [embrace] ‘sober firsts’ (being sober in situations where you’d normally drink). It may take a few goes, but you’ll realise you don’t ‘need’ alcohol at all.”
CREDIT: STORY KATHRYN MADDEN
Word count: 1606
