Of course, China is likely to make significant strides in coming decades in quieting its submarines. But in the meantime, it is vulnerable. Its latest nuclear ballistic missile submarine (SSBN) makes about as much noise as a 1980s Soviet-era Delta III SSBN, which were known as “boomers”.
This is important because China’s SSBNs are supposed to be its survivable second-strike nuclear war-fighting capability. And it helps to explain Beijing’s anger over the collusion of Australia, the US and UK in providing us with the world’s best nuclear submarines.
Australia’s strategic geography has always made huge demands on the technical limits of conventional diesel electric submarines, particularly range and endurance. From our main submarine base, in Cockburn Sound near Fremantle, to the South China Sea is about 4000km. That means we have only a few days on station before having to return to home base. A nuclear attack submarine would be able to travel twice to three times as fast and spend unlimited time on station, depending on food supplies and human endurance. With the unlimited range of nuclear attack submarines, it no longer matters that our Cockburn Sound base is so far away from potential main operating areas to our north.
The fact we are acquiring eight nuclear attack submarines will put us in the same rarefied class as the UK and France, which have six boats and seven boats respectively. The decision to acquire such a potent weapon is a good indicator of the rate of deterioration in our strategic circumstances. Only five years ago – in 2016 – the government’s defence white paper was declaring that we faced no risk of direct attack for the next 20 years. That is now a completely outdated basis on which to make defence decisions. China has shown no inclination to modify its increasingly aggressive posture towards us.
The decision by the Morrison government to embark upon a three-eyes technology alignment with the US and UK is a realistic reflection of our deteriorating strategic outlook. We have now committed to a regional strategic order underpinned by US power, and we will have access not only to submarine technology but also to a wider range of trilateral collaboration on joint capabilities in such technologies as cyber, artificial intelligence, quantum, and undersea remote capabilities.
In practical terms, Australia will make a choice between submarines derived from the UK’s Astute-class or the US Virginia-class. In their baseline form, they are of comparable size: the Astute’s submerged displacement is between 7400 and 7800 tonnes and the Virginia’s 7900 tonnes. Both are much larger than the Collins-class at 3400 tonnes.
The latest version of the Virginias (block V) is larger than the earlier boats (blocks I to IV) at 10,200 tonnes. This allows them to carry an additional 28 Tomahawks with a range of about 2000km. This could make them attractive to Australia, with our increased focus on long-range missiles for strike and deterrence.
The US is planning a production run of at least 34 of the Virginia-class and possibly up to about 50 or even more. Current costs of production are $US3.45bn per boat. In contrast, the UK expects to build only seven of the Astutes. The US is more relevant than the UK to Australia’s strategic future and its longer production run would bring greater prospects of through-life improvements and support. Australia was already planning to incorporate the Virginia’s combat control system in the French Attack Class subs.
While some design modifications are to be expected, any tendency toward extensive change needs to be resisted. This would most likely increase costs and lengthen the schedule, potentially significantly, and increase associated risks. We can ill-afford any further slippage.
There will be a need for a high level of focus on nuclear safety, and the clear communication of this to the Australian public. We will need a specialist and sustainable workforce in the RAN, Defence and industry. We should establish an Australian Centre for Nuclear Engineering, prospectively in Adelaide, to allow ease of communication with the submarine builder.
Such a highly trained workforce would help mitigate any loss of sovereignty that would come from an excess level of reliance on the US or UK for nuclear expertise. Australia’s negotiations with the US need to guard against the possibility of the return of US policies that reduce its commitment to allies. All the same, we must recognise that our shared concerns over China’s assertive behaviour will bind us closer.
An important benefit will be to encourage greater maturity in Australia’s understanding of nuclear issues. A country that takes so long even to decide where to store low-level nuclear waste is still an adolescent – egged on by political opportunism.
The government deserves congratulations on having recognised that the demands of our worsening strategic circumstances require the nuclear nettle to be grasped – despite the public’s ingrained aversion to the N-word. The government has been quiet so far on the questions of costs, but the nuclear attack submarine program will most likely cost more. This, too, deserves acknowledgment: the benchmark for future defence spending will be set by tomorrow’s more demanding strategic environment, not the easy decades of the previous 50 years.
Paul Dibb and Richard Brabin-Smith are both professors of strategic studies at the ANU. Previously, they were both deputy secretaries of Defence.
Word count: 872
