Matthew Pavlich, who played more than 350 games for Fremantle in a storied AFL career, and ex-St Kilda and Adelaide player James Begley have brokered a partnership that will see the NFL use their Vlast talent marketplace software to organise thousands of player commercial deals in the richest sports league in the world.
Vlast is a software as a service platform that uses artificial intelligence to organise, predict and choose which athletes and celebrities suit a particular brand, who can then employ the talent for commercial appearances.
Pavlich and Begley’s Pickstar Group built the software themselves during Covid, using their existing, mostly Australia-based activation platform that connects brands, businesses, schools and clubs to talent for various commercial appearances.
The NFL, which has 32 teams across the US, is the biggest deal for Vlast yet, building on contracts it has clinched with Australian leagues, soccer teams in England and a cricket league that has seen it treble its revenue in the past 15 months.
“We’ve built our own software to get someone to do something somewhere at a certain time,” Pavlich tells The Australian. “That sounds basic and simple, but the level of complexity and detail to provide that as a solution for teams or the talent is considerable.
“It was working out what the marketplace is. We’ve got technology there and let’s see if a problem exists, and we found it did. The NFL is the icing on the cake.”
Pavlich gives the NFL’s annual Super Bowl extravaganza as an example of how the software can work, with 600-800 athletes on Super Bowl Sunday itself engaged for guest speaking turns at corporate functions, making social media posts for sponsors, television broadcast slots and other scheduled appearances.
“The NFL had two people managing that via WhatsApp and a spreadsheet,” he says. “They saw our technology platform and how they could use it for managing all the bookings, making sure the talent turns up on time, that they are well briefed [about the appearance] and so on.
“So it will be managing all of the NFL’s talent appearances and activations. They’ve got 2000 current players and up to 15-20,000 retired athletes that they will use.”
Pavlich and Begley started Pickstar eight years ago, building on the experiences they had during their playing days, when the organising of player appearances at sponsor functions or school events could be haphazard. “We’d basically be handed an A4 sheet of paper at the end of training and told where we had to go and that was about it,” says Pavlich.
Pickstar developed as a talent booking business that would have a database of athletes and agencies or businesses, and fans would input certain information and criteria and then be matched with the talent for an appearance. It has since developed more sophisticated software with Vlast.
“What we know is that people on the marketplace sometimes will go for a specific target for a brief or budget, but generally around themes or events or client needs,” says Pavlich.
“They can shortlist however many they like but then our data and machine learning predict and match who is most likely to do that brief in that location.”
Pickstar is expanding its database from athletes to chefs, comedians, social media influencers, TV personalities and celebrities.
Word count: 533
