The incorporation of Artificial Intelligence (AI) into learning and the impact of digital learning on education will be discussed as part of a guest lecture at the University of South Australia Whyalla Campus on Wednesday.
Professor Shane Dawson, the Executive Dean of Education and Futures at UniSA, believes the the process of education is rapidly changing.with the demand to embrace the digital side of learning.
"With the pandemic, schools, TAFEs, colleges and universities all had to do this massive pivot to online, remote or emergency-based teaching," he said.
"Artificial Intelligence has been hyped to be transformative in all sectors ... we are seeing a lot of technologies shifting towards things like data science and predictive modelling."
Mr Dawson said understanding where recommendations from apps such as Spotify, Youtube, and even Netflix was important for the next generation.
"General critical thinking around what we're receieving through new modes of learning or social media is another example of digital learning," he said.
"There's a lot of psychology that goes into marketing and those targeting ads."
The focus on investing in digital learning within the education system, in particular in advanced technologies such as AI, is an area that Mr Dawson expects to continue to grow.
"Our ultimate goal is self regulating learning where a student knows that it's ok to fail and they're able to understand why and how to address it," he said.
"AI is definitely progessing towards that nudging behaviour, but we need a better understanding about that."
Mr Dawson said some schools are "pro" technologies while others were not as on board, with there being "no right answer".
"Understanding that it's currently here, in schools, is where we need to be more mindful," he said.
"The opportunity to come to the regions where UniSA has a strong footprint, particularly in Whyalla and Mount Gambier, was great to connect and re-connect."
Professor Shane Dawson will be delivering his lecture at the UniSA Whyalla Campus at 6:30pm for a 7pm start.
CREDIT: Louis Mayfield
Word count: 333
