WHEN it comes to implementing artificial intelligence (AI) technologies in Australia, we need to be on the ball.
But if we're smart and savvy and think strategically, it will ensure we optimise future benefits of the AI revolution; especially making Australian farmers and agribusiness more efficient and profitable, to strengthen our regional communities.
That's why I'm supporting a clever move designed to get ahead of the game and secure funding to launch and propel the Smarter Regions Cooperative Research Centre (CRC).
I've taken an exciting and important role on the Smarter Regions CRC's interim board, which is all about applying my professional experience and the acumen of others, to help guide its strategy and ensure sound governance.
In June, the Smarter Regions CRC Bid Development Committee is due to submit its case to secure $50 million to establish this new, national research agency, under the Federal Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources' CRC Program.
Several strong and committed partners are also backing the bid.
This includes more than 20 companies and 11 showcase regions, such as the NSW Riverina, comprising more than 50 regional organisations.
So why should Australian farmers and agribusiness be interested in supporting this initiative?
Because optimising the roll-out of AI technologies not only makes good sense, it also means we'll be on the smart money, to secure a better future.
A recent article ("Mini satellites, gene mods and AI: govt identifies ag tech of the future", theland.com.au March 17) on AI said researchers at the University of South Australia are already using artificial intelligence to monitor soil moisture.
Another article detailing the opportunities for EU farmers and their cooperatives said AI would give them, "a powerful tool to yield significant gains in terms of efficiency and productivity".
This not only tells us farmers and agribusinesses share great opportunities to boost profitability and performance, but our competitors are also looking at this space with just as much interest and an eye on the future.
As a wise person once said, "the tragedy of life is not found in failure but complacency. Not in you doing too much, but doing too little. Not in you living above your means, but below your capacity. It's not failure but aiming too low, that is life's greatest tragedy".
As our brochure points out, this is a limited opportunity, "as we have 5-10 years to transform our data into AI, or it will all be converted into AI products by our international competitors".
"Our bid needs to be funded in this current round before opportunity is lost and security risks are enabled."
Robbie Sefton is managing director of national marketing communications company, Seftons, and a farmer.
CREDIT: Robbie Sefton
Word count: 448
