It comes as it is revealed not one of the club presidents has officially accepted an invitation from Tasmanian Premier Jeremy Rockliff to head south to see the state.
Tuesday’s meeting will be the first opportunity between the AFL and club leaders since Mr McLachlan had his first face-to-face contact with Mr Rockliff in Hobart last Thursday.
In that meeting, not only did Mr McLachlan confirm a new licence must include a commitment to a new roofed stadium in Hobart, but that the AFL would also commit its resources and expertise in designing, building and sourcing funding for such a project.
A number of presidents have voiced some concerns about the financial sustainability and the impact of another club on the league recently, and Tuesday’s update is seen as a vital step in getting them back in the room for a 19th club.
The Tasmanian Government has an offer of $10m on the table for 10 years to help fund the club, plus a $50m start up grant for a high performance centre.
Hawthorn president Jeff Kennett — who has a vested interest given the Hawks are the biggest beneficiary of playing home games in the state — believes it needs to be a $20m commitment each season for at least 15 years for a Tasmanian club.
While a number of presidents, including Adelaide’s John Olsen and Port Adelaide’s David Koch, have indicated they will accept the invitation south, they are yet to officially do so ahead of Tuesday’s meeting Mr Rockliff said.
“The purpose of the letter sent to President’s was to outline Tasmania’s offer to the AFL, which is at the top range of the recommendations made in the independent (Colin) Carter report,” Mr Rockliff said.
“The letter also invited Presidents seeking any further detail to discuss the merits of the offer, because there is no doubt that the AFL and its clubs will benefit as a result of admitting Tasmania to the AFL and AFLW.
“While no one is yet to confirm travel to Tasmania, early responses to the letter have been positive.”
For Tasmania to enter the league, it must gain approval from the AFL commission before going to club presidents for a final vote in August.
brett.stubbs@news.com.au
Twitter follow Brett Stubbs
Word count: 364
