As well as subs, the AUKUS powers will work together on AI, cyber, quantum, hypersonic missiles and other 'undersea capabilities'. How will they change the game? Sherryn Groch and Felicity Lewis report.
Imagine a flying machine gun that can recognise faces - and pick its own targets. Or a new kind of computer chilled to the temperature of space and able to calculate in seconds what a supercomputer would take millennia to solve. Then suppose you could beam co-ordinates from a satellite to an army base using an unhackable encryption key; or send a swarm of undersea drones to lie in wait for a stealth submarine.
These technologies are no longer in the realm of science fiction; some are already cresting the horizon. Talk of artificial intelligence, quantum technology, hypersonic missiles, cyber weapons and other "undersea capabilities" may have been missed in the fanfare (and shock) of Australia's plan to build its first fleet of nuclear submarines, but they are all listed as part of the new technology-sharing AUKUS pact between Australia, the UK and the US. Experts say some of these technologies could disrupt the traditional battlefield before Australia's nuclear submarine fleet is even online.
What does 'cyber' have to do with warfare?The first act of a major conflict will now play out in cyberspace, says Professor Michael Webb, director of the Defence Institute at the University of Adelaide. If you can jam an enemy nation's satellites to mess with their GPS navigation, or blind their air radar systems, or even shut down their electricity grid, you can sow chaos before you've fired a single shot. An arms race is now under way as security agencies try to patch vulnerabilities faster than hackers and rival nation-states can exploit them. In many ways, it's not a new story, Webb says. "There's always a new edge [in warfare], so instead of using bronze, we've updated to iron. What's interesting now is just how fast it's all moving," he says.
The United States, China and Russia are thought to have the most advanced cyber capabilities in the world, but Israel, Britain, Iran and North Korea also have formidable armies of hackers. In Australia, most attacks considered sophisticated enough to be attributed to another state (from data grabs at our top universities to the infiltration of Parliament) are thought to have come from China. But some of the biggest and most brazen cyber attacks in history have come from Russia.
Through the intelligence-sharing Five Eyes alliance, Australia has had access to some of America's cyber capabilities, at times even running joint cyber-offensive operations, such as against Islamic State in Syria. "But [AUKUS] just takes it to another level," Webb says.
Australian Strategic Policy Institute (ASPI) defence analyst Andrew Davies agrees that the technology-sharing deal has let Australia "inside the tent".
Up until now, trade restrictions in the US have meant high-tech collaborations could only go so far. Webb says: "It happened quicker than I thought it might. But the geopolitics is just making everything a whole lot more urgent."
Just as cyber weapons are increasingly having real-world impact, so too is traditional equipment, from tanks to submarines, being brought into the digital fold, talking to one another as well as the soldiers running them. The emerging fields of artificial intelligence and, beyond that, quantum computing now hold the power to dramatically change the battlefield again, experts say.
And the frontier of the action, Webb says, is where many of these new technologies overlap. "So, using AI to fight back and detect cyber threats" faster than a human could, for example. While the US brings much of the technological heft to this enhanced defence partnership (such as designs for nuclear subs and long-range missiles), Webbs says that in AI and quantum technology, Australia is a research leader in its own right. "We're not coming with our hands empty."
Does 'AI' mean
killer robots? In 2020, an Iranian nuclear scientist was gunned down by an automatic machine gun, programmed, according to The New York Times, to recognise his face as he drove his car. His wife, sitting beside him, wasn't hit once. That same year, Turkish drones, packing explosives and facial recognition cameras, were sent out by Libya's army to eliminate rebels via "swarm attack" in Tripoli.
ASPI defence analyst Marcus Hellyer says a new generation of "smart" sea mines might work similarly, in this case reading the acoustic signature of passing ships to tell an enemy submarine from a commercial oil tanker. Unmanned craft are not a "like for like" replacement for manned vessels, he says. You might have sea drones designed for reconnaissance working with sea mines designed to take out enemy ships, both speaking to a "mother ship", say, a submarine with human crew.
These kinds of "disaggregated" autonomous systems now have huge disruptive potential in warfare, Hellyer says. An enemy wanting a relatively cheap and low-risk way to disable a nuclear-powered submarine, for example, could use robot drones - not unlike the new Boeing-designed US Orcas - to lay smart sea mines off the entrance to a submarine base. Smaller boat drones running on solar panels and towing nets of sonar are another cheap way to find subs, he says.
Of course, while machines are already recognising faces, performing surgery and winning games of chess, they're still a long way from rivalling a human brain. Even the most powerful can break when you throw something new at them.. The autonomous systems used in warfare almost always still have humans deciding whether to take out a target, Hellyer says. Next, we will probably move to "humans on the loop", meaning someone will monitor a machine but it will be able to carry out an entire attack solo. Or it may be that the AI becomes like the angel on your shoulder, helping refine targets or run reconnaissance, say, for special forces teams.
Webb says that as attacks, from missiles to hacks, are made using AI more and more, they will provoke a focus on the most efficient way to respond, which itself is likely to involve AI. "I think that'll drive us down that path," he says. "But I'm keen to never see a killer robot acting on its own."
Why is quantum computing
such a big deal?The future of war (and many industries) is closely entangled with advancing computer power. But there are limits to even the sprawling supercomputers housed in universities today. For example, a computer trying to find the shortest possible route someone could take if they were travelling through, say, 200 cities and back home, has to try each possibility one after another, a problem that might take it millennia to solve, says ANU quantum physicist Ben Buchler. "But a quantum computer will, essentially, try all these different paths simultaneously," he says.
So, how do they work? Says UNSW quantum professor Michelle Simmons: "It's not black magic." Instead of running a computer on traditional "bits" that can switch between on or off, a quantum computer uses "qubits". They can be on and off at the same time, like a coin spinning on its side yet to fall on either heads or tails.
This strange concept of "superposition" underpins quantum physics. If you break down the world to its smallest level, the things we take as a given, such as an object's fixed location in the world, become less certain. We cannot know for sure where they are until they are measured. But just the act of measuring nanoparticles that small changes their quantum state. So, things are said to occupy "superposition", or many potential states at once.
Even more spookily, particles (including our qubits) can be "entangled" - what happens to one will affect another that it is entangled with and vice versa, even if they are far apart.
Harnessing these quantum states in computing will allow us to simulate nature for the first time as it actually is, Simmons says, from a chemical reaction to a weather forecast, solving problems scientists have never been able to crack with regular computers.
But, for all their sensitivity, quantum computers are also incredibly fragile. Even the tiniest change can throw off these quantum states. Still, Simmons expects to see them solving real-world problems (with commercial applications) in the next five to 10 years.
At the moment, the largest quantum computers are less than 100 qubits. When they get to many thousands, Buchler says they will be able to crack encryption, which safeguards everything from our banking transactions to military networks.
"It's one of the reasons it's so scary," Webb says. "It will render a lot of our encryption obsolete." The way to fight back is with quantum encryption, Buchler says, using entanglement to "teleport information" in a new form of encryption "guaranteed by the laws of physics".
Quantum technology could also build game-changing sensors, say for finding a stealth submarine or tunnels, even seeing around corners. Some of those technologies are proven, Buchler and Webb say. The challenge now is scaling them up into a product that can be used in the field.
What are hypersonic weapons?One particularly impressive-sounding type of weapon, which Australia has plans to continue working on with the US, are hypersonics. Russian President Vladimir Putin said in an address in 2018: "The speed of sound is usually measured in Mach numbers, in honour of Austrian scientist Ernst Mach ... The speed of sound is Mach 1. Speeds between Mach 1 and Mach 5 are called supersonic, and hypersonic is above Mach 5."
Russia, he said, already had high-precision hypersonics, able to hit speeds as high as Mach 20 in some cases, and that could dodge defence systems.
Hypersonic weapons are designed to travel at faster speeds than "standard" ballistic missiles while also being more manoeuvrable. Says Webb: "That's the big threat, that you have no time to react. It would come down to seconds."
The US is spending billions of dollars on half a dozen known hypersonics programs, and countries such as Australia, France, India, Japan and Germany are investing too.
China's hypersonic projects include Starry Sky-2, a prototype aircraft that reached Mach 6 during tests in 2018. Work is also under way to stop hypersonics coming, Webb says, including harnessing AI to spot them faster on radars, targeting launch sites before the missile hits the air and even pulling out direct energy weapons (from lasers to microwave beams) to shoot or blind them.
But ASPI's Davies is sceptical of the hype. He points to a recent report by investigative physicists in the Scientific American who concluded "hypersonic weapons may have advantages in certain scenarios but by no means ... constitute a revolution". Still they warn, the nervousness around hypersonics could prompt rash responses to a missile warning, "increasing the chances of blundering into conflict".
For some commentators considering the new AUKUS alliance, the show of force against Chinese aggression that it represents is itself ratcheting up tensions unwisely. But, even though news of the pact has provoked anger from Beijing, Webb hopes the West working more closely together will "actually settle things down".
"It just raises the bar and, hopefully, it raises it too high for China to step over."
CREDIT: Sherryn Groch and Felicity Lewis
Word count: 1871
