CBA figures show cash holdings increased over the year from $82m to $124m, which in part shows the revenue strength but also that management is still conservative and not throwing money at new investments.
Not surprisingly, investors welcomed increased dividends from the big miners such as BHP and Rio Tinto and are expecting the banks to follow through after standout commentary during the season.
As vaccines land in the country, the concerns ease by the day, with Sydney Airport’s Geoff Culbert ­reporting increased numbers over the weekend.
The profit figures presented over the past three weeks to the ASX differ from those reported on Monday by the ABS, which cover a wider range of companies and are negative in the expected sectors such as accommodation, arts, recreation and transport, which are all down due to COVID-19 and tend not to be listed companies.
CBA, Bendigo, BoQ and Suncorp all reported and Westpac and ANZ in particular posted strong quarterly numbers that have the market looking forward to better returns from the banks.
Figures supplied by AMP’s Shane Oliver showed 48 per cent of companies increase their dividends and only 33 per cent cut them.
The string of CEO departures — including Medibank’s Craig Drummond, Andrew Bassat from Seek and Orica’s Alberto Calderon — made it seem like being stuck at home during COVID-19 raised their awareness to other ways to fill their days.
In all, there were 11 bosses ­either presenting their first or last result, but the combined index weighting of the group is just 8.1 per cent of the index so it’s not quite a revolution.
It is, however, a significant turnover attributed to in part COVID-induced retrospection.
Some, like Calderon, have made no secret of their desire to follow their careers in private ­equity.
Since mid-2015, Orica has underperformed the market by some 90 per cent, so it seems timing the announcement of his departure with a profit downgrade was no accident.
The highly engaging Calderon was outstanding at hiring talent to the company and, while China coal issues went against him, internal things such as rolling out the new SAP system were very much internal issues.
His chair, Malcolm Broomhead, has confided that there were times when he and Calderon disagreed — which is not unexpected and in all private equity looks less stressful and hopefully more ­lucrative.
ESG came into its own this reporting season, moving up from a position in the appendix in company presentations to the first few slides, which reflects increased shareholder focus.
In some eyes, ESG is another way of saying risk management, but either way it’s something companies know they have to talk about because their owners want them to.
Some fund managers think ESG is all about climate change while others argue its primarily about governance, which widens to issues like remuneration, modern slavery, diversity, data privacy and security.
All of the above are being raised, albeit briefly, by company management in profit presentations when they are normally the preserve of the director-led meetings closer to annual meetings.
The better-than-expected numbers have significantly changed expectations, with discretionary retail now tipped to produce 14.6 per cent increases in earnings per share, up from the expected fall in earnings at the start of the year.
While three of the big four banks don’t report until later, they were in some eyes the stars of the reporting season.
Last year, banks reported a 36.9 per cent fall in earnings and this year they are expected to report a 45.6 per cent increase.
MST’s Hasan Tevfik noted that the financial sector had sparked the bulk of the 4 per cent in upgrades across the market.
Companies have also done well to cut costs, offsetting the big rise in some expenses such as freight and commodities.
Banks are selling at a relatively low price-earnings multiple of 15.4 times, below the 18.1 times multiple for the market and 28.2 times for industrial companies.
Capgemini’s pick-up
French-based technology consultant Capgemini has appointed long-time Deloitte consultant Kaylene O’Brien as its New Australian boss.
Her predecessor and now Asia-Pacific boss Olaf Pietschner said: “Kaylene is a recognised leader in the industry and brings a wealth of experience that drives customer innovation, growth and talent inclusivity in an agile environment.”
During an interview, he said O’Brien was “an amazing leader able to build teams”.
This is important in a field where 65 per cent of the firm’s revenue comes from cloud and digital services with five key partners including Microsoft, AWS, SAP, Salesforce and ServiceNow.
Pietschner said the global firm ran on a “noshore model”, which meant consultants were bought in from all around the world to help.
O’Brien said Australian companies “were early adopters and were now at a point of maturity on the cloud which meant the firm’s services were directed to help find the best solution”.
The biggest challenge, she said, “was keeping pace with the technological change in the industry”.
O’Brien left Deloitte in October last year as head of consulting, after being with the firm for 24 years, 12 of which as a partner.
Pietschner said that “through innovative digital transformation strategies, technology delivery, and customer/citizen-led innovation, we can be a business partner to our clients to help them define their future through technology and make it a reality”.
“Areas such as cloud, engineering and research and development, artificial intelligence (AI), 5G, edge computing and cyber­security are some of the trends we see,” he added. “We recognise that technology is now the critical enabler to almost every transformation of business and society.”
Capgemini’s clients are based on financial services, public sector and consumer goods fields.
Infrabuild float
Any doubts about Sanjeev Gupta’s planned Infrabuild float can be put to one side, market willing, in the wake of European concerns about his relationship with Greensill Capital. These come as Thyssenkrup pulled a planned sale to Gupta after failing to reach an agreed price.
Wall Street Journal reports suggest German regulators want Greensill, who owns a German bank, to spread his risk away from a perceived overreliance on Gupta. Greensill backer Credit Suisse is also looking to reduce ties to Greensill, which Gupta is reportedly in talks with Brookfield about backing his steel empire.
Infrabuild had all Gupta’s Australian steel assets except the Whyalla mill because that is where the debt is attached.
Credit Suisse ironically was seen as being the likely backer of the float and, as reported previously, Cleanaway’s Vik Bansal will be the chief executive, with Daksesh Patel to run Whyalla.
The float is aimed in the September-October timeslot and, amid all Gupta’s finance talks, will be a welcome diversion with Brookfield set to be a cornerstone investor along with Gupta.
Greensill’s Australian office declined comment on the US ­reports.
Word count: 1086
