However, she has since been forced to leave because her employer — the European Banking Authority — decided to relocate to Paris in 2019 due to Brexit.
The EBA’s departure was an early illustration of the impact that the 2016 referendum result would have on the Square Mile, now braced to feel the full force of the UK’s EU departure.
The City and Canary Wharf — and the broader financial services sector — endured the equivalent of a no-deal when the clock struck 11pm on New Year’s Eve. The treaty signed by Boris Johnson failed to secure access to the EU for British banks, insurers and other financial firms. Their fate lies in the hands of the EU, which will decree in the coming months whether Britain’s rules are robust enough to justify granting that access.
How data is shared across borders also needs clarifying, as Johnson’s treaty provides only a six-month moratorium before the seamless transfer of data could be subject to new rules.
Brexit meant financial firms in Britain lost their “passporting rights” to operate seamlessly in the rest of the EU. Domestic banks, US players and other international outfits have moved 7500 staff to the Continent, along with trillions of pounds of assets.
When the markets open today, regulators will discover whether contingency plans will be enough to avoid serious disruption as trades previously booked in London may now have to be booked in the EU.
Yet it could take much longer to discover whether the decades-long party for the City is over. Much will depend on whether Brussels grants “equivalence” — a means for financial firms in Britain to maintain access — and, perhaps more importantly, how chancellor Rishi Sunak decides to “take back control” of financial regulations.
Sunak faces questions about whether he will adopt a “Singapore-on-Thames” approach of low tax and low regulation, or risk what Clifford Chance partner Simon Gleeson calls “Byzantium-on-Thames” — a system clogged by regulation.
The stakes are high. Lobby group TheCityUK estimates that, along with professional services, the financial services industry contributes more than 10 per cent of the UK’s economic output and employs more than 2.3 million, two-thirds of them outside London.
Britain’s trade surplus in financial services was £60.3bn ($107bn) in 2019, making it the world’s biggest net exporter of such services. About 2.5 times as many dollars are traded in Britain as in America.
Three-quarters of all trade involving euros happens in the City, which makes it remarkable that financial services barely featured in the EU trade talks.
The trade deal clinched on Christmas Eve mentions “financial services” six times, said Sarah Hall, professor of economic geography at Nottingham University. “Fish” — an industry that makes up 0.1 per cent of the economy — gets 16 mentions.
While service industries are rarely part of trade deals, the government may have been mindful of the PR dangers of what might have been dubbed a “bankers’ Brexit” after the 2008-9 crisis. Pat McFadden, shadow City minister, said it was “immature and indeed reckless” to leave financial services out in the cold.
McFadden, who sat on the committee that helped to devise some of the post-crisis banking rules, said as long as the industry was properly regulated, and people and companies were paying taxes, the City was “a huge strength for the UK economy”.
The task of rebuilding the economy after the deepest economic shock in 300 years has accentuated the need to establish the City’s role. Lord (Paul) Myners — parachuted in as City Minister by Labour during the banking crisis — recalled that the City he joined 40 years ago was run by domestic partnerships. Now it is a playground for global giants. The explosion of the eurobond market and Margaret Thatcher’s Big Bang in 1986 paved the way for the big players to snap up old City firms. Britain’s membership of the EU allowed overseas banks to gain access to 500 million consumers.
“That’s important because that’s what London has built the City on,” said Hall.
She explained that the more Britain diverges from EU rules, the less likely it is that Brussels will grant equivalence. “There’s a domestic policy choice to be made,” she said.
Sunak has started to set out his vision of an “open, attractive and well-regulated market”. He wants Britain to be a world leader in “pioneering new technologies”, particularly green finance, and set the regulatory framework for “stablecoins” — a fast-growing area of cryptocurrencies.
The United Kingdom left the European Union's orbit on Thursday (December 31), turning its back on a tempestuous 48-year liaison with the European project for an uncertain post-Brexit future. Flora Bradley-Watson reports.
Several reviews are under way. Ron Kalifa, the former boss of Worldpay, is due to report on the fintech payments ecosystem.
An investigation by former EU financial services commissioner Lord (Jonathan) Hill into stock exchange listing rules has prompted expectations that Britain is preparing to water down requirements for global companies listing in London, to rival New York.
“A lot of high-growth companies may choose New York at the moment, and we would like them to come here,” said John Glen, Sunak’s City minister.
He insisted Hill was not looking to come up with something “quick and dirty” but was devising ideas that would “respect the UK’s high standards of corporate governance”.
London’s existing regime did not stop the successful float of Matt Moulding’s beauty empire, The Hut Group, but kept the £7.6bn online retailer off the premium market, where index-tracking pension funds would have been forced to buy in. One prize would be to convince Deliveroo to list in London.
Loosening the rules would be controversial. A row erupted three years ago when regulators created a new premium listing category in the hope of attracting oil giant Aramco, while the disastrous FTSE listing of Kazakh miner Eurasian Natural Resources is still a painful memory.
Glen is focused on the next 12 weeks, when a “memorandum of understanding” is due to set the regulatory relationship with the EU. Glen said Britain would seek to do things differently, less codifying of legislation in law and more focused on an outcomes-based approach.
“That does not mean we are seeking to wilfully diverge in every area for the sake of some short-term presentational gain,” he said. “Our reputation as the world leader in financial services is based on having high standards.”
Equivalence more usually involves line-by-line analysis by regulators, but in November, Sunak stepped in to offer equivalence to EU firms in a number of areas. Then, just hours before the transition period ended, City regulator the Financial Conduct Authority altered its rules for three months to avoid turbulence in the swaps market.
What Britain might gain is nimbleness. Andrew Pilgrim of accountancy firm EY said the UK would no longer need to co-ordinate closely with 27 EU countries — an advantage in innovative sectors such as climate change finance and fintech.
Sir Howard Davies, chairman of NatWest, senses little appetite for deregulation.
“When you get down to the detail, it’s hard to see what you can do (after Brexit) that you couldn’t do already,” he said. “I can’t quite see what the deregulation in banking or investment banking would be.”
There could be scope for changes to unpopular rules that force insurers to hold high levels of capital against long-term savings in annuities. However, the bonus cap will not be up for discussion, according to Glen. One lever for keeping businesses happy — tax cuts — looks politically unpalatable.
The City should prepare for greater competition from Europe and focus on “a more skilled workforce, more investment in technology and more in artificial intelligence”.
The pandemic has focused attention on technology: James Bardrick, UK head of US bank Citi, said that this would be seen to have had “a more profound impact on the way financial services are delivered” than Brexit.
Competition will come from New York and Asia, too. Ministers hope the City’s ecosystem of lawyers, accountants and professionals, along with the convenient time zone, will make it resilient.
However, those who have left have found that life does not grind to a halt.
The EBA’s Congiu said: “I’m living in Paris, the other big city in the EU. It’s another great experience in another international place — another big city.”
The Sunday Times
Word count: 1352
