ADELAIDE is at the heart of a quite remarkable opportunity unlocked by a historic defence partnership with the US and Britain, our two closest and longest-standing major allies.
Forged to transfer technology and expertise to counter China’s growing strategic threat in the Indo-Pacific, the AUKUS partnership has resulted in the US agreeing to share nuclear submarine secrets for only the second time.
Even in 1958, when the US partnered with Britain, the latter was a nascent nuclear power.
At least eight nuclear-powered submarines will be built at Osborne Naval Shipyard as AUKUS’s first major collaboration.
It is expected the boats will be in the water by the end of the next decade. Australia effectively will be enmeshed into the US and UK’s military industrial complex, enabling co-operation on cyber capabilities, artificial intelligence, defence science and industrial bases.
The mutual interest is to grow Australia’s sovereign manufacturing and sustainment capability, particularly for nuclear-powered submarines, to extend the allied presence in the volatile region and lessen the impact of any fractured supply lines.
The decision ends confusion over the future of the project to build 12 conventionally powered submarines at Osborne, which was spearheaded by French firm Naval Group.
Importantly, it gives certainty to the Adelaide-built Collins-class submarine fleet until at least 2038, given the life-of-type extension program confirmed yesterday.
In a major victory for this newspaper’s campaign on behalf of Adelaide workers, Prime Minister Scott Morrison also confirmed the 900 jobs involved with the Collins’ full-cycle docking would remain in Adelaide. Between them, these two programs support 1300 jobs and are worth up to $6.4bn.
It was a very significant day for South Australia. This gives hope of a longstanding and prosperous industry, backed by the combined might of two global powers, and helps cement SA’s claim as the Defence State.
The switch to nuclear-powered submarines is spurred by darker changes in global security. Quite recently, Australia’s ambitions were firmly rooted in Asia. We could walk and chew gum at the same time – having China as our major trading partner and the US as our major security ally.
In recent times, though, China has boycotted a series of Australian products and pushed so-called wolf warrior diplomacy – adopting an aggressive and antagonistic diplomatic posture. There are serious concerns about China’s intentions towards Taiwan and the risk of this triggering a wider conflict.
Regardless of the sensible rationale for AUKUS and nuclear-powered submarines, the partnership’s execution has left a series of open questions.
More than 300 Naval Group workers face uncertain futures, despite Mr Morrison’s effective guarantee of ongoing employment for shipbuilding workers.
Firms that had been gearing up to be part of the Naval supply chain need to know how they might be embraced, if at all, in the nuclear submarine program.
Will there be sufficient work to stem a so-called valley of death? Other critical details remain vague or unknown. How much will the project cost? What precise role will Collins-class builder ASC have in the program?
AUKUS is Australia’s most significant strategic shift in generations. There is considerable opportunity for the state and nation. But considerable work is ahead to fulfil the promise of this historic partnership. Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Matt Deighton, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 548
