CHEAP renewable energy has been driving down power prices in South Australia in the past few years.
But further savings will rely on consumers taking advantage of innovation, most notably virtual power plants and flexible solar exports.
Adelaide company IO Energy offers a radical price structure – selling energy at midday at a quarter of the price of the evening peak.
Former Adelaide United star and now Committee for Adelaide chief Bruce Djite has signed up.
He already has solar but sees an opportunity to make further savings. “They’ve got a fantastic model where they take advantage of low wholesale prices,” he said.
The family had adjusted their behaviour to use appliances in the day. “Why not use energy when it’s cheap,” he said.
Individual circumstances result in a variation of power bills. But two official monitors of average bills both show price falls. The Essential Services Commission of SA found in 2012 average SA households were paying $1598 a year for electricity.
Prices rose to a peak of $2244 a year in 2018 but have since fallen to $1941. National body the Australian Energy Market Commission (AEMC) breaks down average prices by component and has found wholesale components in SA are falling while network and environmental costs are rising.
Wholesale prices in SA this financial year are a quarter of what they were from 2016 to 2019, and less than half the prices in coal-dominant NSW and Queensland.
Grattan Institute policy director Tony Wood said wholesale prices did affect retail prices paid by households.
Some retailers were also generators but other retailers bought all the energy they supplied.
Generators had a mix of power purchase contracts and spot market sales. “I think we’ve seen the biggest benefits we’re likely to see from renewable energy,” Mr Wood said.
Renewables would continue to put downward pressure on prices but many projects weren’t making big profits.
There were price rise risks from the forthcoming exit of coal and market structure changes.
The AEMC said consumers were becoming more active and new technologies were “disrupting the way we use, create, deliver, sell and store energy”.
The biggest savings for households are from using rooftop solar. Cost-saving innovations such as demand management and artificial intelligence will allow control of consumption without consumers needing to press buttons themselves.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 387
