SCHOOLS across South Australia are crowing about the SACE results their students have achieved, in a year when the pandemic made Year 12 that much harder.
As authorities do not supply data on SACE achievement for individual schools, The Advertiser scoured dozens of school websites and Facebook pages to find those trumpeting their success after students received their results on Tuesday.
Almost all posted messages praising the resilience and determination of the Class of 2020 in the face of challenges posed by COVID-19.
Many were claiming 100 per cent of students eligible to complete their SACE had done so.
Schools choose to report to their communities on different measures. Common ones are SACE subject Merits, median ATARs, and numbers or proportions of students who achieve in various bands of the Australian Tertiary Admissions Rank system.
Investigator College at Victor Harbor boasted 75 per cent of all grades were As or Bs and a quarter of its university aspirants achieved ATARs above 90.
Investigator’s head of senior school Belinda Delyster said the results were “truly excellent”. “In fact, our college’s results continue to rival those of the elite independent schools in capital cities,” she said. “Even more exciting is the fact that 80 per cent of those students wishing to attend university have already received early offers from the University of Adelaide and Flinders University.” St Dominic’s Priory College said 93 per cent of all grades were As or Bs. At St Peter’s Girls School, 73 per cent of all grades were As. That was up from 66 per cent last year in a fourth consecutive year of improvement.
Some schools said they had median ATARs in the high 80s. University Senior College had 13 students with ATARs above 99. Adelaide High School had 73 students with ATARS of 90-plus.
At Parafield Gardens High School, the dux was Sebastian Facchin-Young with an ATAR of 99.95, followed by Fares Elmore on 99.8.
Sebastian’s subject mix was strong in the sciences and he hopes to study medicine.
Year 12 was tough because he was at risk of coronavirus due to health conditions, forcing him to learn remotely for nearly three months as well as give up his job at Foodland.
“There was a lot of adjustment. I had to recognise that hey, I’m home but that doesn’t give me the excuse not to do anything,” he said.
It was now a “bittersweet” feeling, he said – parting on a high of success from the school that felt like a second home.
Fares wants to study computer science and artificial intelligence. A migrant from Egypt, he and his family hope to gain permanent residence.
“My dream is aviation and becoming a commercial pilot,” he said.
A RECORD OF ACHIEVEMENT ■ Norwood Morialta High had 100 per cent SACE completion with 290 students graduating – 22 of them scored ATARs above 95 ■ Henley High students bagged 23 Merits, while 37 students scored an ATAR above 90 ■ 21 per cent of Prince Alfred College students scored ATARs of 95-plus ■ Pulteney Grammar students had a median ATAR of 87.8 ■ 25 per cent of Scotch College students scored ATARs above 95 ■ At St Peter’s College, 34 students were awarded 57 Merits and the median ATAR was 90.2 ■ St Peter’s Girls School had an even higher median ATAR of 92.85 ■ At Westminster School, 38.6 per cent of students scored an ATAR of 90-plus ■St Patrick’s Technical College had 100 per cent SACE completion, while a record 100 students were signed up to apprenticeships ■ At St Michael’s College, 29 students achieved A grades in at least five subjects ■ St Ignatius’ College students were awarded 47 Merits, while 47 per cent of students scored an ATAR of 90 or above ■ At St Dominic’s Priory College, 93 per cent of all grades were As or Bs ■ 16 per cent of students at Mercedes College gained an ATAR of 95 or higher ■ 95 per cent of grades recorded by Loreto College students were As and Bs ■ University Senior College students scored 12 High Distinctions in Adelaide Uni Headstart program courses SEE RESULTS FROM DOZENS OF SCHOOLS: bit.ly/saceschools
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS; CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 703
