MOUTHING OFF (1) Oxymoron: Found missing. (2) Just asking: Why is it that no plastic bag will open from the end you first try? (3) Laughter is the best medicine: What do you call a bunch of rabbits in a row all hopping backwards? A receding hare line. (4) Back in the day: The Advertiser Rest Lounge at the Royal Adelaide Show. (5) Caught in the fact: During her tell-all interview with Oprah Winfrey, Meghan Markle said she used to work in a frozen yoghurt shop called Humphrey Yogart.
INSIGHT “Grandma knows everything. If she doesn’t know, she makes stuff up really fast.” - T-shirt message.
QUOTE, UNQUOTE “I have a car that I call Flattery because it gets me nowhere.” - English-born US comedian Henny Youngman.
KEEPING COUNT 8881 - the total number of new Toyota Corolla (3830) and Ford Ranger (5051) vehicles sold in Australia in June 2017.
JUST A THOUGHT Watching TV can insult your intelligence. But nothing rubs it in like a computer.
REMEMBER WHEN Today is March 23, World Meteorological Day and the 82nd day of the year. There are 283 days remaining until the end of the year. On this day: 1944: Composer-pianist Michael Nyman was born in London.
1950: Watched by a cheering crowd, three Adelaide City Council workers chased a rabbit around Victoria Square for 15 minutes.
1962: Members of Channel 9 personality Ian Fairweather’s fan club held a record evening at the Rechabite Hall in Victoria Square.
1970: FIFA president Gianni Infantino was born in Brig, Switzerland. 1977: In a cover story, The Australian Women’s Weekly called Prince Philip the “perfect husband for a working wife”.
1981: Time magazine reported a woman in West Germany was seeking a divorce because when her husband came to bed he was too exhausted from playing with his Rubik’s cube to even give her a cuddle.
1988: US jazz singer Sarah Vaughan performed at the Festival Theatre in Adelaide.
1994: Birth of AFL player Tom Clurey (Port Adelaide No. 17). 2001: The Russian space station Mir broke up in the atmosphere before splashing down in the Pacific Ocean near Fiji.
2002: Blockbuster listed A. I. Artificial Intelligence, directed by Steven Spielberg and starring Haley Joel Osment, Jude Law and Frances O’Connor, as Adelaide’s No. 1 rental movie.
2015: The Australian Recording Industry Association listed Bills, by US rapper Lunch-Money Lewis, as Australia’s No. 1 hit single.
2017: US comedian and television writer Jason Marcus tweeted: “Love should never come between anything except ‘Jennifer’ and ‘Hewitt’.” 2020: From the front page of The Advertiser: “Pubs and licensed premises across Australia will be closed from noon today as the Federal Government cracks down on people refusing to follow official advice to slow the spread of coronavirus. Cinemas, churches, gyms, casinos and nightclubs will also be closed and cafes and restaurants will only be allowed to sell takeaway food.” 2020: Tweeting about COVID-19, US President Donald Trump wrote: “The hardship will end. It will end soon. Normal life will return.”
CREDIT: WITH MARTY SMITH
Word count: 507
