Twenty years ago, aspirational careers included being a doctor, lawyer or engineer … but the rise of the digital age has meant the jobs of the future now look very different.
July 11, 2008, marked a turning point in Australia – the first iPhone hit the market, and since then the rise of the digital age has been meteoric. With it, the job market has changed so much that, for those graduating Year 12, there are careers that didn’t even exist when they first started kindergarten wearing oversized uniforms and nervous smiles While 20 years ago the blue-chip jobs included being a doctor, lawyer or engineer, today’s school leavers can become cloud engineers, artificial intelligence developers or social media leads. How are South Australian schools preparing students for life after graduation when the average Australian will have up to seven different careers during their lifetime?
Career aware For those students who stayed in school beyond Year 10, their final years of school were often when the idea of a career was first introduced – often with a questionnaire filled out with a careers counsellor. But today’s students are starting to think about the future at a much younger age.
“Students currently enrolled in school will have a range of careers and many jobs during their lifetime, so preparing students to be confident in knowing how to investigate career choices, how to use labour market data to inform their future career decisions and to navigate changes in employment is essential for workers of the future,” says Dr Neil McGoran, director of Catholic Education South Australia.
Starting early Children as young as five are already starting to learn the basics of complex concepts like 3D printing, coding and design. The Makers Empire is a free download used in schools to teach kids creative problem solving – and give them the tools to enact real-world change.
Eight years ago, an Adelaide-born father and software developer realised there was nothing for his four-year-old daughter to create when she used the iPad – and so he made something for her. Along with other co-founders, the Makers Empire was born and is now used by more than two million school students around the world.
Director of learning at Makers Empire Mandi Dimitriadis says there are two important aspects to the software – technology and creative problem solving.
“We know that advanced manufacturing techniques are going to continue to disrupt the way things are made in the future,” she says. “We want kids to understand what technology can do and also understand limitations as they will be the ones developing the technology into the future.” Makers Empire also helps children develop a skill set that can be applied to any problem. “We encourage kids to find a problem in the local community and work through a design process to solve it,” Dimitriadis says.
As a result, primary school children have helped farmers find solutions to trough water loss in drought-affected areas, improved access for those with mobility, addressed environmental concerns like ocean pollution and even helped their classmates.
At the small Littlehampton Primary School, one student with cystic fibrosis relies on a piece of equipment reused several times a day – a nebuliser – which needs to be cleaned and thoroughly dried. He was becoming frustrated as it wasn’t drying efficiently, so he put the problem to his fellow students.
“The kids then worked through a design-thinking process,” Dimitriadis says. “And the first part of that is around developing empathy. If you’re designing something for someone you care about, you’re invested in a positive outcome.” The children came up with different ideas and were able to print 3D prototypes using the Makers Empire tool. The little boy tested the different draining techniques and found there was a rack – designed in Makers Empire and 3D printed in biodegradable plastic – that worked.
While children will end up working in jobs that don’t exist today, they’ll rely on the problem-solving skills they learnt in primary school. “They’re also going to be solving problems that have never existed before so they’ll need that creative and innovative way of thinking,” she says.
“They’ll know that they need to work with others to bring skills and ideas together, know that it’s OK to fail, and come to the problem with a sense of empathy so they really understand where the person is coming from and can ask questions.” The Makers Empire is specifically aimed at five to 13-year-olds because they believe that is the period when children are forming their values and sense of identification and self-belief.
And there is opportunity on the horizon for those South Australian primary school students who are already solving real-world problems. Global consulting giant Accenture officially opened its new aerospace, defence and cyber security-focused technology hub in Adelaide last year, a move that is expected to create 2000 jobs during the next five years.
A head start For those South Australian high school students who thrive in non-traditional pathways, they can begin making inroads into their careers before they’ve even graduated.
While technology has seen huge changes in the jobs available, some traditional jobs – like teaching and health care – are here to stay.
Traditional vocations also include the trades – from plumbers to electricians – and students can start learning before they finish Year 12.
“Students in Catholic schools can study VET courses from Year 10,” Dr McGoran says.
“All students are encouraged to develop their employability skills whilst they are at school and an excellent way of doing that is to study micro- credentials, Certificate II and III VET courses, in career areas that align with their interests.” He says other options include a Certificate II in Engineering and Cybersecurity. So whether it’s a job in the digital or tech world, or learning a trade, today’s school children are not only thinking about their careers at a younger age – they’re already working on the skills they’ll need to future-proof their resumes.
Word count: 1001
