Holiday subsidies DID I get that right? The taxpayers are subsidising the holidays of the well-heeled?
The workers who have had reduced working hours, or no work at all, are hardly considering the luxury of holidays when the priority is paying rent, school fees or the bank loan.
Surely there are better ways to help small business in the regions. Or anywhere for that matter.
Please get your thinking caps on and come up with something smarter than handing billions of taxpayers’ money to Qantas and Virgin.
C. CATT Kensington Park
Hitch up caravans I SAW the headline “Road trips go back in style as trailer sales surge” (Sunday Mail, March 7).
For heaven’s sake this is Australia not the US. Trailers are used for carrying stuff. The things we tow with living quarters are caravans.
MIKE WITCHER Ingle Farm
Rusting pipeline I WAS recently returning from a trip to the South-East.
Wanting to return to the Tea Tree Gully area, I went through Murray Bridge and connected up with the Mannum to Adelaide road.
Having not travelled on this road for quite a while, I was surprised to see the condition of the pipeline that supplies water to Adelaide and Whyalla. It was in such a state of disrepair.
The amount of rust that covers the outside of the pipeline is evident. I wonder how much longer it will be before they start leaking.
Or are they already?
In days gone by, I believe the Electricity and Water Service would have been in charge of maintenance. But they are long gone and it looks like no one is in charge now.
KEVIN DATSON Waikerie
Royals break free GOOD luck to Harry and Meghan for wanting to be free of rituals and being tied to “The Firm”.
Royalty may claim fame and fortune, but at what cost? Suppression of your whole way of life.
Look no further to how Princess Diana was treated. And then you can fully understand why Harry and his wife took the path they have.
Unfortunately, the sad part of this story is the friction caused to the family and the sides taken.
Just let Harry and Meghan live the life they have chosen and get on with it. E. LITTLE Seaford Rise
Writing on the wall MEGHAN says she would not survive inside royal life.
I could have told everyone this before Meghan and Harry married. I saw the writing on the wall that she was trouble.
The Queen has done a magnificent job in nearly 70 years of reigning over the Commonwealth. Kate and William seem to be doing a great job, as well, and seem to be happy.
Meghan needs to get her own way. She obviously got her own way on her TV series and when that finished, she wanted to rule everybody in her path.
ROBERT COOMBE Collinswood
Policing smoking HERE we go again regarding South Australia becoming a police state. “Bid to stub out balcony smokos” is typical of this State Government, which seems to have nothing to do but put the general public off-side (Sunday Mail, March 7). While I hate second-hand smoke, Attorney-General Vickie Chapman’s proposed changes to the smoking laws are going way over the top.
Surely people are allowed to smoke on their own balcony if they own or are renting that property.
The Liberal government returning to power at the next election is currently sitting on a knife’s edge, especially with the ongoing unnecessary COVID-19 restrictions that are wearing thin and the loss of revenue and the public’s enjoyment by cancelling the V8 Supercars race.
I suggest they should focus on what the general public cares about – jobs, education, etc – rather than wasting time trying to impose another ridiculous sanction on people’s right to smoke on their own premises.
PETER JEFFERY Kingswood
Portfolio shift JUSTICE must be seen to be done (“Circle of friends rally for justice”, Sunday Mail, March 7).
The friends of the woman at the centre of the rape allegations against Attorney-General Christian Porter strongly and compassionately appear to see that statement one way whereas Prime Minister Scott Morrison and many others see another perspective and are opposing an inquiry based on legal principle.
Yet there is another quite separate view.
Mr Porter happens to be the chief law officer of this nation and that does not allow for any suspicion to affect the credibility of that position.
Given that, and the fact that the matter is of serious concern, he should move to another position until some way is found to resolve the allegation.
An immediate portfolio move would be wise. And an inquiry would not only satisfy many critics but may also have a political upside.
MICHAEL SCHILLING Millswood
Give the youth a go SAYS Peter Goers: “Old white guys have stuffed it up – it’s time for young to have a go” (Sunday Mail, March 7). Yes, Peter, there are many things in today’s privileged Australian society that require vast improvement and serious remedies.
And suggestions and complaints are not in short supply, while the funding to fix priority areas certainly is.
In any case, I am not so sure all the answers will ever be found on Mars or on good old Google, from artificial intelligence, or for that matter, in moody music and poignant poetry.
“Let’s do something. We have no choice,” he pleads.
Well, I’m sorry, Peter, but I think we (being old white guys) do have a choice. And that is to step back and give the next generation, Indigenous and others, the opportunity to address the mess we and our forefathers may well have made.
And to go forth with abundant hindsight and make their own inevitable mistakes for future generations to criticise and deal with. “Poor bastards” indeed, Peter.
NEIL LONGBOTTOM Minlaton
Word count: 972
