A NEW hi-tech “guardian angel” keeping watch in Adelaide hospitals is helping to give an early warning to medical staff about which patients will need intensive-care treatment.
The Ainsoff system – which one South Australian health leader has hailed as among the most important developments in her 35-year career – has predicted 19 out of 23 patients who needed to move to intensive care units as part of a two-week trial in Adelaide hospitals.
The technology monitors patients’ vital signs and sends a text message to clinical staff alerting them to trends showing a person’s risk of deterioration, giving a valuable head start for intervention in critical situations.
The Royal Adelaide Hospital and Queen Elizabeth Hospital are the first public hospitals in the world to use the system, which was developed by Australian doctors.
It is now in use in four surgical wards at the two hospitals, alerting clinicians to patients at risk so they can receive intensive care before their condition worsens. It monitors blood pressure, heart and respiratory rates, oxygen saturation, temperature, inflammatory markers, haemoglobin and renal function, with software using artificial intelligence to detect deterioration “well in advance of extremis”, according to company officials.
Central Adelaide Local Health Network (CALHN) surgical lead Professor Jane Andrews called it one of the most important developments she had been involved with in 35 years practising medicine.
“This technology is empowering for staff because once they receive an alert, they can assess the patient immediately and when they need to escalate to a doctor, they already have the vital data on hand to underpin the alert,” Professor Andrews said.
“Ainsoff hasn’t replaced any of usual checks and balances in place for a patient’s care, but detects trends over time to provide earlier insights into a patient’s likelihood of deterioration to allow nursing and medical staff to act before it worsens. It’s a stitch-in-time-saves-nine concept.” An example would be when a patient has a slow bleed, it picks up the trend of a slowly rising pulse rate and slowly dropping blood pressure that might not be obvious with current alert systems.
CALHN chief executive Professor Lesley Dwyer said: “The RAH and QEH are the first public hospitals in the world to implement this Ainsoff system, which has been … proven to make vast improvements in patient care and safety.” The two-week trial at the RAH and QEH monitored more than 2000 patients.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 403
