Ensuring peace and stability JUST over a week ago in the nation’s capital, Australia and the US marked the 70th anniversary of our most important alliance.
It wasn’t front-page news, but the continued importance of the ANZUS treaty cannot be overstated — a bond that has helped maintain peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific for more than half of Australia’s nationhood.
While Covid put back the commemoration, the recognition of the signing of ANZUS on September 1, 1951 was important not just in symbolic terms but in a time of real and growing national security concerns now and in coming years.
ANZUS was born as the Cold War followed two horrendous global conflagrations, a treaty reached through the foresight of Australia’s minister for external affairs, Percy Spender, under the auspices of prime minister Robert Menzies working with then US president Harry Truman, secretary of state Dean Acheson and John Foster Dulles of the US State Department.
Then, as now, regional security in the Pacific was at risk, the bloody years of World War 2 still raw. The Communist revolution in China had begun and in 1949 the former Chinese republic leadership fled to Taiwan while North Korea, armed by the Soviets and supported by China, invaded South Korea in 1950.
The parallels then and today are stark as Russia, under President Vladimir Putin, destabilises Europe with his invasion of Ukraine while China, under Xi Jinping, has militarised the South China Sea, weaponised trade and threatens the forced reunification of Taiwan.
While ANZUS continues as a bedrock for protecting democracy and the international rules based order within our region, it is now reinforced by other partnerships and a new-trilateral alliance.
The Quad partnership, between Australia, the US, Japan and India seeks to ensure a free, open and resilient Indo-Pacific and respond to challenges of cyber security, climate change, infrastructure and maritime security to counter disinformation and provide humanitarian assistance.
Then there is the new AUKUS trilateral pact, signed last September by Australia, the US and Britain. As a result, Australia will be able to buy nuclear-powered, conventionally-armed submarines before 2040 – hopefully supported with leases of existing boats of the class in the interim as the next-generation is built and delivered.
Yet such is the unpredictability now as global instabilities rise — with Moscow, Beijing, Pyongyang and Tehran among the most pressing challenges – AUKUS is expanding to share access to weaponry and other technology for defence. As revealed yesterday, Australia, the US and Britain will co-operate on further development of hypersonic missiles, unmanned submarines, artificial intelligence and quantum technology. Assessments have identified significant advances by China and Russia in hypersonic weapons, defined as capable of travelling five times the speed of sound, and democratic nations must counter the threat.
“We are now facing two global powers: China and Russia, each with significant military capabilities both who intend to fundamentally change the rules based current global order,” the US Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, General Mark Milley said yesterday.
Shoring up defences with our major allies should not be dismissed as hawkish bravado or provocation – the world has entered a dangerous, unpredictable phase thanks to the actions, aggression and expansionism of one-party autocracies that recklessly jettison international law.
ANZUS helped keep relative peace and stability in our region for 70 years, AUKUS will now help continue that security through the 21st century.
AFLW kicking goals THE AFLW is moving from strength to strength as another season reaches its grand decider.
On Tuesday, Brisbane Lions star Emily Bates was crowned the league’s best and fairest at the W Awards in a nailbiting finish on 21 votes, one ahead of Adelaide’s Anne Hatchard with Adelaide’s Ebony Marinoff earning 18 votes.
Three-time All-Australian midfielder Bates, 26, Brisbane’s first ever draft pick in the inaugural season in 2016, adds the B & F honour to being crowned AFLCA champion player of the year.
Young Blues player Mimi Hill won the AFLW Rising Star award, Fremantle’s Ebony Antonio won Goal of the Year and Kangaroos high-flyer Tahlia Randall took out Mark of the Year.
On Saturday, a season’s toil is put to the test as the Adelaide Crows take on Melbourne for the 2022 Grand Final silverware. Separate to the on-field contest, R&B-pop singer Jessica Mauboy features in the halftime entertainment line-up at the Adelaide Oval.
Now in its sixth season, the AFLW is not just kicking goals at the elite level — it has driven a boom in girls’ participation in the sport across the suburbs and regions. The growing stature of the AFLW has already built a legacy at that grassroots level where a new generation of future stars is now taking the field.
Word count: 783
