LET’S DO LUNCH: THE art of the business lunch takes years to perfect. You can’t just launch into your pitch from the get-go; you need to ease into it, letting your guests take the edge off their hunger and perhaps allow the wine to do its work. And the importance of choosing the right venue can’t be underestimated.
You need a spot where you’ll be greeted by name, establishing that you are, indeed, someone worth lunching with. A place where the menu is just right and the staff know the perfect balance between being attentive to your every need and knowing when to give you space to clinch the deal.
Adelaide’s top-shelf restaurateurs have established themselves as having the venues to be seen doing business, or to serendipitously bump into those who are.
As business leaders return to offices – and dining tables – around the nation, we’ve selected what we believe to be Adelaide’s top business restaurants for your dining and dealing pleasure.
GEORGES ON WAYMOUTH Address: 20 Waymouth St Cuisine: Modern Mediterranean Signature dish: Lamb press WHEN the restaurant’s “house red” is a Torbreck GSM labelled specifically for the venue, you know you’re dining somewhere special.
While the turbulent pandemic year has meant that Georges hasn’t had its bespoke red this year, or its house white from The Lane, the quality of hospitality served up by long-time proprietor George Kasimatis certainly has not changed.
The restaurant, opened 19 years ago, is perfectly positioned for coffee catch-ups directly opposite the offices of Deloitte, ANZ and News Corp Australia, and a stone’s throw from BHP’s still new-ish Franklin St digs.
Finlaysons partner Will Taylor is a regular in the mornings and former ABC board member and supreme networker Donny Walford is also often in attendance, occasionally running her Behind Closed Doors events at the restaurant.
While it’s definitely among the top two or three venues in town to “accidentally” bump into the city’s executive class, if you’ve got something delicate to discuss, keep an eye out for journos from The Advertiser, who are often floating about. Members of the former government’s Economic Development Board once got up and moved seats when they found themselves a bit too close for comfort with one business scribe.
The stunning photography on the walls is by artist Luiza Michalewicz. Her husband, Matt Michalewicz, managing director of software firm Complexica, is often running potential customers through the magic of artificial intelligence at a table.
Kasimatis says the key for him and his staff is knowing when to be attentive, and when to back away and give customers a bit of room to talk, or wheel and deal.
PRANZO Address: 46 Exchange Place Cuisine: Contemporary Italian Signature dish: Taglierini blue swimmer crab with chilli, brandy cream, napolitana DOES former Crows chairman and BankSA boss Rob Chapman even need an office? Given it’s a good bet to find him perched just inside the door at Pranzo with long-time collaborator Jim Hazel – if he’s not at Georges – it’s probably arguable.
Executive recruiter Phil Morton is pretty much part of the furniture as well, with co-owner Anna Camerlengo well past the point where she needs to ask his order.
The place is packed with executives every morning, with Santos and Beach Energy types milling about, the occasional lobbyist and the Property Council’s Daniel Gannon often in attendance.
Pranzo has everything you need for the perfect business catch-up – large, street-facing windows so everyone can see who you’re meeting with, superb staff whose familiarity grants you extra kudos and, for the regulars, the ability to run a tab. There are also two entrances, so if you need to make a quick getaway, you’re sweet.
CHIANTI Address: 160 Hutt St Cuisine: Italian Signature dish: The best carpaccio in Adelaide IF YOU want to be greeted like a long-lost relative, venture no further than Chianti, a thoroughly family affair that has been at the top of the tree for long lunches since it started as Chianti Classico in Light Square in the 1980s.
Frank and Maria Favaro’s unremitting hospitality and the superb seasonal menu has the place packed with lawyers, accountants and the state’s political elites from breakfast to the late hours.
The associated Bar Torino, launched by their children a few years ago, means the venues are a double threat these days.
While the upstairs dining room is a favourite for private business soirees, it’s also possible to hazard a guess as to why it’s so well sought out for political intrigue.
Perhaps being away from Parliament House while still being able to dine with style in the city is the attraction, although it hasn’t worked in terms of keeping a low profile.
Former Labor premier Jay Weatherill and current Opposition Leader and former union boss Peter Malinauskas, left, famously met here to build a relationship that would see the former later ascend to the top job.
And a 2015 catch-up between then-prime minister Tony Abbott, his chief of staff Peta Credlin and then-education minister Christopher Pyne took place here just six weeks before the PM was rolled by Malcolm Turnbull.
Big Liberal Party donor and mining company boss Sally Zou has also been known to frequent Chianti, most notably when former foreign minister Julie Bishop, of whom she’s a big fan, was dining.
EROS KAFE Address: 275 Rundle St Cuisine: Greek Signature dish: Char-grilled octopus WITH its street-facing windows, Eros is the perfect place to sit and catch every passer-by wandering down Rundle Street in the city’s East End.
It’s a favourite for property magnate Theo Maras who regularly holds court, treating guests to ample helpings of octopus, calamari and chicken while greeting his many associates, customers and tenants passing by. Owners Joyce and Jim Dimitropoulos have been in business 26 years, with his heritage going back to the East End’s time as a fruit and veg market.
Given the demographic of the East End, there’s more than your usual share of advertising and marketing types, with KWP chief executive David O’Loughlin spotted there recently catching up with another Business SA board member. Property Council members and construction industry bosses are also regulars.
WHITE PICKET COFFEE HOUSE Address: 10 Stuart Rd, Dulwich Signature dish: Coconut chicken salad, or the hash brown burger BEING walking distance from the homes of many of the state’s political, property and legal powerbrokers means you’ll be bumping elbows with a top-tier crowd at White Picket on a Saturday morning.
Nestled in the centre of two of Adelaide’s high-end suburbs, Dulwich and Toorak Gardens, it’s a delightfully quaint setting, as the name suggests. That said, with many a business meeting taking place outside the CBD these days, it’s not unusual to see the head of a CRC or a property investment scion holding court.  Indeed, the associated local businesses, Gigi’s cafe and Dulwich Bakery, tend to be packed on weekdays and it’s not all moneyed retirees. Be careful parking: if you have a fender bender you’re most likely looking at repair costs on a Range Rover or Porsche!
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 1178
