Mind control of medical devices is the next frontier
HEALTH technology is moving from “wearables” to “thinkables” and virtual emergency departments are a coming trend, experts predict.
In the process, South Australia stands to gain high-skilled jobs, improve quality of life, prevent minor problems developing into hospital cases and save lives.
The latest Fearless Conversations forum – a 13-week collaboration ­between the Sunday Mail, The Advertiser and Flinders University covering topics vital to SA’s future – revealed opportunities as well as pitfalls with health technology and medical devices.
Digital Health CRC chief executive Terry Sweeney, Flinders University Professor of Digital Health Systems Trish Williams, CareApp founder Allison Nikula and orthopaedic surgeon Matthew Liptak joined the forum.
Dr Sweeney, pictured, said health data was doubling every 73 days and major healthcare agencies only used about 15 per cent of it – but artificial intelligence would help harness it to drive better decisions.
Noting adverse patient incidents cost the nation about $4bn a year, and the global cost of chronic disease was $47 trillion a year, he said there were huge savings to be made through technology, including a trial now under way in Adelaide hospitals to predict and prevent adverse events in patients.
Dr Sweeney raised fascinating developments on the horizon.
“We’ve done some work quite recently with capturing brainwaves – to move an artificial limb for example, so we now have the ability to clench your fist, open a fist, turn our artificial limb by using brainwaves in the same way that we can,” he said.
“There’s a long way to go but there’s a lot of exciting developments happening in that field of using our mind to control a physical device.” Dr Sweeney also raised “thinkables”. While “wearable” devices checked heart rate, steps walked and so on, thinkables based on the brain’s neural networks would monitor health signs and give warning of looming problems. “So if you are an elderly person and there’s a risk of you having a fall, being told in advance that this may happen so you can get to a safe place is going to be a fantastic breakthrough,” he said.
The forum heard the pandemic had accelerated moves to treat patients remotely via online platforms such as telehealth.
The Women’s and Children’s Hospital has just opened a “virtual emergency department” and Dr Sweeney worked with a Sydney hospital on a similar project.
“In six months they interacted with over 8000 patients, many would have presented to the hospital if it wasn’t for that virtual consultation,” he said.
“Virtual care and virtual hospitals is a trend that’s going to accelerate rapidly.”
The Advertiser #FEARLESSCONVERSATIONS Flinders University VIDEO: Watch the Fearless Conversation on medical innovations bit.ly/fearlesshealth
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH HEALTH REPORTER
Word count: 456
