A major project to chart the entire Great Barrier Reef needs people to join the crew – and kids can be part of it, too
Ever wanted to do something important for the environment?
A world first project is putting together the first complete map of the Great Barrier Reef, and SpongeBob SquarePants is calling on young citizen scientists to help.
Over the past three months a convoy of boats, from research ships, tourism, dive boats and super yachts, have been collecting get as many pictures of the reef as possible. The Great Barrier Reef is huge – as big as Germany. It’s nearly 3000km long and much of it has never been charted. So the armada of boats has returned with almost 14,000 pictures.
Andy Ridley is the head of Citizens of the Great Barrier Reef and he told CHILL the census needs people to help analyse the photographs.
People who sign up are shown what to look for, and with their computer cursor, they “colour in” different sections of photographs like sand, coral and rubble. This way, they can “teach” artificial intelligence about the reef for future research. It’s so easy, children can do it.
“It would not surprise me if kids were better at analysing images than adults,” Andy says.
“I’ve got a seven-year-old and an 11-year old and I know how sharp they are on Minecraft and Roblox.
“If you like spending time on a tablet or an iPad, you are who we need”. Andy says at the start, it takes about five minutes to check a picture, but experienced people can do one in a couple of minutes – and it’s fun.
Ideally, each photograph will be done two or three times (by different people) so the more people who sign up, the better the data will be.
Andy is a conservationist, and he says it’s not just scientists who will be needed in the future – young and old, all sorts of skills and talents will be needed to help the environment and combat climate change. “You should never feel like you are powerless because you are not,” Andy says.
“Twenty-first century conservation is going to involve kids sitting in their bedroom in South Australia helping us with the analysis and someone very similar sitting on the other side of the world in lockdown in Manchester doing the same thing.
“It really is a co-operative effort and that’s essentially what we are in desperate need of.” Andy says kids already understand about reducing use of plastics, not wasting energy and making sure rubbish is not going in the water. He says one of the most important things kids can do is “ensure their parents are doing them as well as they are. That might be annoying – my kids annoy me with that – but kids can be an incredibly powerful reminder of what we need to do”.
The Great Reef Census analysis is open now, and goes until the end of April. Head to greatreefcensus.org/analysis Not yet a Junior Citizen? Sign up today at Nick.com.au/reefsquad and pledge your support to protect our oceans, one reef at a time!
HAT CAN YOU DO TO HELP THE ENVIRONMENT?
• Switch off lights • Save water and have a three-minute shower • Walk or ride your bike to school • Banish the bag and reduce plastic • BYO water bottle • Recycle right Get a SpongeBob Reef Squad pack at nick.com/reefsquad
Word count: 576
