As the number of older Australians continues to increase, so do the number of ways industry can benefit from an ageing cohort, writes LYNN CAMERON When the Federal Government released its Intergenerational Report in June, it painted a sobering picture of an economy hit by the impact of Covid-19 and compounded by increasing life expectancies and falling fertility rates. “As the population ages, there will be fewer people of working age relative to the number of older Australians,” the report stated. “This presents long-term economic and fiscal challenges, similar to those faced in most comparable countries.” While Australia’s annual population growth has averaged 1.4 per cent over the past 40 years, restrictions on migration as a result of the global pandemic are expected to reduce that growth over the next 12 months to just 0.1 per cent – the slowest growth rate in more than a century. Given that, over the next 40 years, the number of people aged 65 and older is expected to double to 8.9 million (23 per cent of the Australian population), while the over-85s will triple to 1.9 million (5 per cent), there is clearly cause for concern. Or is there? Yes, there will be an increasing number of older Australians but, experts say, this growth should be seen as an opportunity rather than a burden. “In modern ageing, Australians will seek out products and solutions that meet their needs,” says Julianne Parkinson, CEO of the Global Centre for Modern Ageing (GCMA). “This will forge a societal and political pressure to create jobs, increase products and services offerings and re-engineer our health systems to service this demographic.” Parkinson cites today’s Baby Boomers as a prime example. “They’re one of the most active and healthy, adventurous, tech-savvy and crucially affluent generations in history and they will reward businesses with those solutions that best meet their needs,” she says. “We need to co-design new forms of participation that meet people’s individual purpose, so they wake each day to opportunities and contribution that make a difference to them and others.” Smart homes are just one rich source of growth potential waiting to be tapped by forward-thinking, proactive businesses. “With eight out of 10 older people wanting to stay in their current home for as long as possible and be offered a greater breadth and depth of choices, this presents an enormous opportunity for the building industry, for example, to modify houses with solutions that allow people to age in their homes for as long as possible,” Parkinson says. “Smart home technologies and the internet have the potential to enable older people to stay in their homes for longer with autonomy and independence, and give aged care policymakers more efficient and scalable alternatives to institutional care.” As well as benefits to industry and the economy, smart home technologies support our older population to age in place in the community with improved safety, independence and social connections. “We have unobtrusive and passive monitoring of health and safety markers, such as the regularity of movement and patterns of appliance use,” Parkinson says. “We have proactivity and can predictively detect the likelihood of emergencies through artificial intelligence, targeting early intervention if required. We have operational efficiencies freeing existing resources to focus on face-to-face care; lower stress burdens on informal carers; automation of daily tasks and home maintenance. “We will be aiding older people in supported independence and safety despite their cognitive decline, and enabling proper communication and connection with broader social and caregiving networks.” Over the past 12 months, the GCMA has seen increasing appreciation from industry and business that the ageing demographic is not a homogenous group, and that personalisation is essential. “The changing needs of consumers mean their needs will require others who aren’t part of that traditional aged care response; and even if they were, the needs, desires and expectations of people in aged care have changed quite dramatically, so it’s a really great cross-organisational opportunity that presents itself now for South Australia,” Parkinson says. “I think that’s really powerful. “It’s a great growth market that’s there to be harnessed, invested in, understood and responded to.”
CREDIT: LYNN CAMERON
Word count: 691
