THE BIG PICTURE JOBS, tax cuts and 70,000 new apprenticeships are at the heart of an $87bn budget cash splash to boost Australia’s economy after COVID-19.
Treasurer Josh Frydenberg is banking on the spending spree to create 250,000 jobs in two years, drive unemployment below 5 per cent and fast-track the nation’s great escape from its biggest financial shock since the Great Depression.
The 2021 budget includes a $17.7bn package to overhaul aged care, $13.2bn extra for the NDIS, and a $2.3bn package to tackle mental health and suicide prevention.
South Australia’s slice of the GST will be $900m bigger than expected in the last federal budget, coming in at $6.5bn for this financial year and growing to $6.7bn next year.
Young Australians wanting to retrain or upskill will get access to an extra 163,000 free and low-cost training courses through a $500m boost to the JobTrainer scheme, while $2.7bn will go towards creating 70,000 new apprenticeships.
Tax cuts of up to $1080 for 10 million Australians earning a low or middle income will also be extended another year at a cost of $7.8bn.
But the bold COVID-recovery strategy comes with a $1 trillion gross debt Australians will be paying off for a generation. “This pandemic is far from over … but Australia is now well on the road to recovery,” Mr Frydenberg said in his budget speech last night.
“We are better placed than nearly any other country to meet the economic challenges that lie ahead.” The nation’s “economic engine” was “roaring back to life” with more people in work than before the pandemic and consumer sentiment at an 11-year high – but it has “come at a significant cost,” he said.
But rather than major budget cuts or austerity measures, the government will try to pay down debt by growing the economy through getting more people into jobs and sparking wage rises and inflation.
For the first time since before the Global Financial Crisis, unemployment is forecast to stay below 5 per cent for three years, falling to 4.75 per cent by 2023 and remaining at 4.5 per cent until at least 2025.
It’s promising news for SA, which has the nation’s highest unemployment rate at 6.3 per cent. Wage growth will remain sluggish this year, but will start to pick up over the following two years. Childcare costs will be slashed for 250,000 families with multiple children under age five, in a $1.2bn budget package, while women’s retirement savings will be boosted by axing the $450 threshold for superannuation to be paid on income.
A further $1.1bn will go towards tackling domestic violence as part of a focus on securing women’s safety, including money for more legal advice, counselling, emergency accommodation and financial support for those fleeing abusive relationships.
Up to 10,000 single parents will get help to buy a home with a deposit as low as 2 per cent under a new Family Home Guarantee.
New star ratings will be established for aged care providers as part of a sweeping overhaul of the sector in the wake of the royal commission – although the budget stops short of some of its recommendations. An extra 80,000 home care packages will be funded to significantly reduce the waiting list, and 33,800 free or low cost training courses will go towards helping new and existing aged care workers boost their qualifications.
A supplement towards nursing home residents’ care will also be lifted by $10 a day, among other changes.
An extra $84.5bn more tax revenue in Australia’s coffers will help pay for the new measures – including an extra $15bn for infrastructure projects designed to create jobs, such as the Truro Bypass and Augusta Highway duplication in SA.
Tax relief for businesses will be extended another year and new measures will help drive post-COVID innovation in the medical and biotech sectors, including slashing tax paid on new patents developed in Australia to 17 per cent.
A $1.2bn digital economy boost, which includes $53.8m to create a national artificial intelligence centre and four AI and digital capability centres, are among the measures that could help SA’s economy.
Finance Minister Simon Birmingham told The Advertiser it leaned into advances being made around Lot Fourteen to attract new companies and start-ups. He also said the GST “windfall” would enable states to invest in areas to create jobs and support critical services like mental health.
The federal budget is $161bn in the red this year, but that’s $52.7bn lower than the $213.7bn deficit expected just over six months ago. That’s due to more people being back at work, higher tax revenue, soaring iron ore prices and less people than expected requiring JobSeeker payments.
The deficit is forecast to drop to $106.6bn next year and to $57bn by 2025. Net debt is also $85.7bn lower than expected at $617.5bn this year, and smaller than forecast next year at $729bn. Australia’s gross debt will still soar past $1.058 trillion by 2023, but that’s a year later than expected in last year’s budget. Economic growth will rocket forward by 4.25 per cent next financial year, then return to 2.5 per cent for 2022-23. Budget papers say Australia’s international border reopening, and the “gradual arrival” of overseas students will “ rely on the effective containment of COVID-19 outbreaks both here and abroad and will be a key factor in the timing of the reopening of international borders, which could weigh on the outlook for the tourism and education sectors”.
CREDIT: CLAIRE BICKERS FEDERAL POLITICAL EDITOR
Word count: 919
