Backing AUKUS CHRISTOPHER Pyne is ­correct in stating that the AUKUS treaty is vitally important to Australia’s security and future (“Seismic deal in high-stakes game”, The Advertiser, Monday).
France probably does feel a little peeved about our decision. But that is no reason to keep throwing money at a poor deal made years ago.
We must look after ourselves and think of the future of our children and grandchildren.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison has had a good couple of weeks on the international scene.
Australia needs strong leadership globally and at home. It is time that we started to think nationally regarding matters such as border closures.
Australia is a great country – greater still if we act as one. PETER SHERGOLD, Springfield Cutting-edge subs THERE is an old adage: Those who “beat their swords into ploughshares” will plough for those who keep their swords.
We need new subs to keep our swords sharp, although a 30-year sharpening program sounds a bit slow.
The new US subs will also ensure that our subs will fit into the US defence plans.
Our leaders assure us that our subs will not carry nuclear weapons. But surely ensuring mutually assured destruction (MAD) is what nuclear-powered and nuclear-armed subs are for.
Our defence system will be about as independent as the paint on a US cruise missile.
DAVID HARRIS, Novar Gardens US strategy READ with concern the Pyne on Monday article “Seismic deal in high-stakes game”. It is naive to think the US developed the AUKUS pact only for international foreign-and-defence policies.
I consider it did it to establish a military base in the Indo- Pacific that can confront any immediate attack against the US from China.
Should it eventuate, Australia will be China’s initial strike target. Is the AUKUS pact worth our survival?
DES KEMP, St Agnes Protect lives I NOTICE the US continues to have many Covid-19 infections, with Texas being at the forefront.
I looked up the Texas ­Tribune to see what was going on there. One paragraph stood out.
Of the nearly 19,000 Texas deaths attributed to Covid since early February, 119 were fully vaccinated, according to their state health department.
A bit over 99 per cent were not.
What more is there to say?
PHIL LLEWELYN, Belair Vaccines for all IF South Australians want a normal Christmas it is up to all of us to get double vaccinated.
Friends and family interstate or overseas who want to return for Christmas must also be double vaccinated.
Every industry in Australia should be urging this. 70 per cent to 80 per cent really is ­inadequate.
T. JAUNUTIS, Morphett Vale Dividing people AS eastern states plan to lift some Covid-19 restrictions, it is reported some venues will allow vaccinated people entry. But the non-vaccinated will be denied the opportunity.
Expert opinion agrees that both non-vaccinated and vaccinated people may transmit the virus. Therefore, if any virus is present, vaccinated people are likely to either avoid contracting it or, at worst, get it mildly.
What then is the reason for not allowing all people to ­congregate? This is the dreaded vaccine passport in action.
SA must avoid such a ridiculous policy of discrimination when we lift restrictions.
KEN GRUNDY, Naracoorte Park confusion MY head is spinning from trying to make sense of what is going on in regards to ­commercial development in Adelaide’s heritage-listed parklands (“Parklands tensions rise up”, The Advertiser, Monday).
On the one hand, the state-government-supported organisation Green Adelaide is bidding for Adelaide to become the world’s second-only National Park City.
On the other hand, there is a bid for highrise apartments, shops, offices, hotels and other tourist accommodation on both sides of the River Torrens.
In other words, a bid to take more of the park out of the parklands. Who is behind this opposing bid?
If you’ve never made a submission during public consultation before, now is the time to start.
Go to yoursay.sa.gov.au and search for “riverbank precinct”. C. FAULKNER, Cheltenham Human helpers I CANCELLED a subscription where a direct debit was withdrawn monthly from my bank account.
I actioned this by phone. Predictably, the response was automated. Press this number for such and such or that number for whatever.
To safeguard my request, and having online banking, I went into the system to sanction the cancellation.
I sought the help page and was welcomed with: “Hi, I am a bot and am here to help.
“If the business continues taking payments the humans can help.” The next automated response was: “Talk to a human.” I am old enough to remember the days when communication, and a pleasant smile, meant everything towards a sale. Or greater customer ­relations.
Now the smiles are masked and communication is by an artificial intelligence algorithm. Albeit, one positive to date is no AIs have been hospitalised with Covid-19. IAN KENT, Renmark
Word count: 810
