The project to get rid of cats from the Dudley Peninsula, and ultimately all of Kangaroo Island, received another funding boost this week.
South Australia's regional environment has been given a $4 million boost with projects including the removal of feral cats, weed control and kangaroo management receiving funding under the inaugural round of the state government's Landscape Priorities Fund.
Nine projects across the state have shared in the significant $4.2 million funding to address priority landscape management issues.
Among the nine projects was the removal feral cats from Dudley Peninsula, which will receive $350,000 from the fund.
In other cat eradication news, one of the most time-consuming tasks for the KI Landscape Board's Feral Cat Eradication team is checking cameras deployed out in the field for sightings of feral cats - especially in hard-to-access places.
Thankfully, advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) image recognition and 4G mobile connectivity have removed the need for these labour-intensive methods.
The team are beginning to use 4G-connected cameras, which send images to 'eVorta' image recognition software.
This software then notifies the eradication team in real-time of any cats detected.
This removes the time needed for staff to look through SD card images, greatly speeding up the response time after a feral cat is detected.
The cat eradication team estimates deployment of 25 of these new cameras saves a huge 40 days of staff time annually.
The team is aiming to install 200 of these 4G-connected cameras across various sites on the Dudley Peninsula.
Residents and anyone wanting to help the mission is being asked to sponsoring one or more of these time-saving cameras.
Sponsors get to accesss unique images of Kangaroo Island wildlife in real-time, but also greatly assisting the efforts of the feral cat eradication team on the ground.
Some of the species that have been detected by existing cameras include: the KI Echidna, Heath Goanna, Southern Emu-wren, Bush-stone Curlew, Bassian Thrush, Southern Brown Bandicoot, Brushtailed Possum, Tamar Wallaby, and the Western Grey Kangaroo.
To sponsor a camera or make a tax-deductible donation, please visit the website of team partner, The Nature Foundation. And for more information about the Feral Cat Eradication Program, visit the KI Landscape Board website.
The Landscape Priorities Fund is funded from Landscape levies collected in the Adelaide metropolitan area and redistributed to SA's regional landscape boards to enable them to work in partnership with other groups and individuals and invest in environmental projects.
Minister for Environment and Water David Speirs said the historic program was a key part of the state government's Landscape SA reform to deliver a more effective, decentralised, back to basics approach to natural resources management.
"Landscape SA is about building partnerships, rolling up your sleeves and working together to support our landscapes to thrive - leading to healthy and resilient communities, sustainable production, prosperous businesses and flourishing ecosystems," Mr Speirs said. "Our historic Landscape SA reform is putting communities back at the heart of natural resources management and the Landscape Priorities Fund is key part of this."
CREDIT: Stan Gorton
Word count: 506
