We've all heard it before.
You're on the phone to a farmer driving through regional SA and they alert you the call may drop out as they enter a mobile blackspot.
In some way, it almost seems like an accepted practice in regional Australia. But in today's day and age it shouldn't be.
I recently read about work being done on technology for 6G mobile phone coverage and telecommunication companies plan to switch off the 3G network.
In an era where COVID-19 has people seeking greater telehealth services, while educating kids and working at home, it is difficult to believe mobile phone and internet coverage remains in the dark ages for much of SA.
Increasingly graingrowers are relying on mobile phone coverage to implement technology on-farm and to collect critical data to inform their customers and markets.
And yet, some growers still have no mobile phone coverage, or at the very least, patchy and limited reception. It's not only a daily frustration but can be dangerous.
Too often the focus has been on upgrading mobile phone infrastructure in areas of high population. Grants have been directed towards priority lists to boost mobile phone and internet coverage in or on the outskirts of metropolitan based areas.
Regional SA, home to graingrowers and agriculture commodities that are the backbone of the state's economy, have too often been the city's poor cousin on mobile phone reception and internet connectivity. While conversation continues about switching off 3G coverage, we need to do better to bridge the digital divide.
Without a solid connectivity infrastructure, it is not possible to reliably use artificial intelligence, analytics, connected sensors and other emerging technologies to further increase yields, improve water and input efficiency and build sustainability and resilience across cultivation.
As an Eyre Peninsula graingrower recently said to me: "If they turn 3G off, we'll be worse off because quite often when we are on the fringes, it's all we've got".
We need our farmers to have the best connectivity at their disposal.
- Brad Perry is the chief executive officer of GPSA.
CREDIT:
Word count: 345
