Tasmania could be prepared to lengthen its commitment to a new AFL team past 10 years of guaranteed money as detailed talks on a new waterfront stadium continue despite Saturday’s threat from the premier to withdraw the bid.
The AFL and the Tasmanian taskforce believe the bid for a Tasmanian team is on track even after the strong statement from premier Jeremy Rockliff, which has been put down to posturing as the Tasmanian opposition wavers on its support for the financing of the team.
Premier Rockliff lashed the AFL and threatened to withdraw the current $150 million bid on Saturday despite constructive talks with AFL executive Travis Auld on Friday.
New contracts for Hawthorn and North Melbourne worth a total of $8 million per season have been put on hold and would likely be scrapped if a bid failed.
The government has made clear it would instead invest that sum in the NBL and A-League, which would have a significant impact on grassroots development in the state.
Auld and a delegation of AFL officials toured several prospective sites for a new football stadium and a training headquarters in what were seen to be strong and encouraging talks.
Rockliff’s strongly-worded statement saw him adamant “the government will withdraw its offer if the AFL doesn’t respect the magnitude of this offer”.
It led to speculation the AFL had made clear it was going cold on the 19th licence or had put unreasonable demands onto the state at the last minute ahead of a decision next month.
But the AFL and Tasmanian taskforce believe the bid is on track despite his statement.
A new Tasmanian stadium on the Hobart waterfront would be a partnership with funds contributed from the AFL, federal government, state government, and private partnerships.
The Tasmanian government wants to know how much money the AFL would contribute to the stadium and elite training facility as well as the governance levels of the new club.
It has made clear it will not lift the yearly commitment of $10 million a season plus $50 million as a start-up fund.
But it is understood it could be prepared to lengthen the commitment to 12 or 15 years to underwrite the bid.
That could guarantee $20-$50 million of extra money to ensure a team. But the league believes its movement towards a 19th licence is on track despite the growing pessimism from clubs.
The significant commercial opportunities from a waterfront stadium on the edge of the Hobart CBD would be of significant appeal for partners who would also lure concerts and entertainment to the city.
The league has been able to deliver massive infrastructure projects including Metricon Stadium, Perth Stadium and Adelaide Oval and is confident it can orchestrate a similar result in Hobart.
The AFL said on Sunday its productive discussions were continuing with the Tasmanian government.
“The AFL continues to work through the 11 agreed workstreams with the Tasmanian government.” Meanwhile, reigning AFL premier Melbourne expects its star bookends and premiership onballer James Jordon to play against Fremantle as it aims to rediscover its defensive “hallmark” in a season-defining trip west on Friday night.
All-Australian Jake Lever is certain to be available for the big clash against the Dockers at Optus Stadium after just failing to hit strength indicators on his injured shoulder.
He will train and play after the Demons gave up 100 points for the first time since 2019 without his intercepting strength.
Coach Simon Goodwin was less certain about spearhead Ben Brown, who has carried a knee injury for multiple years and needed cartilage surgery early last year. Dangerfield ‘robbed’ P23
CREDIT: JON RALPH; AUSTRALIAN FOOTBALL; Additional reporting; Marc McGowan
Word count: 611
