An online "war" will be unleashed on farmers and food companies over the next 10 years, as detractors and competitors seek to damage their reputation with fake news.
That is one of the key findings from a report that looks at the seismic shifts facing agriculture in the coming decade.
The Future Forces report was sponsored by AgriFutures Australia and written by the Institute for the Future and Agthentic Advisory.
The report warns the increasing influence of social media on people across the world would be accompanied by a rise in the spread of intentionally misleading information, which could trigger a decline in trust in people, brands and industries.
"The coming decade will see an acceptance of an environment of constant disinformation as a new norm and a continual back-and-forth between those who sow mistrust and disinformation via media technology and those who seek to mitigate it," the report said.
"While propaganda is certainly nothing new, we're seeing the emergence of technologies that allow bad actors to do their work much more rapidly and effectively, but also with less control over the effects.
"Many food issues are highly politicised, making them prime targets for disinformation campaigns."
The report said food safety and reliability would be easy targets for viral disinformation as they were universal and sensitive topics.
"This type of disinformation will also be used by industry groups, lobbyists or even companies for commercial gain," it said.
The report also discussed other major forecasts for Australian agriculture across the next 10 years.
Among them is the rapidly growing challenge posed by synthetic biology as researchers and industry alike build tools for molecular manipulation.
The report said some forms of synthetic biology were already familiar, such as engineering individual soil microbes or designing plants and animals to have desirable traits.
"We will see a change in the way agricultural work is done as production happens increasingly in labs or bio-factories with the aid of robotics and artificial intelligence," the report said.
Driven by new energy systems and automation technologies, there will be a fundamental redesign of individual production systems and regions as everything from genetics to irrigation to layout of farm operations will be optimised for automation, the report said.
The report said farmers of the future would have an expanded mix of income streams.
Not only would they be converting grass to meat or fibre, but also converting sunlight to solar power and soil to carbon sequestration services.
Genetic therapies and gene editing tools, such as CRISPR, would become democratised through commercially-available products, the report said.
CREDIT: Vernon Graham
Word count: 429
