Help is at hand for South Australian farmers grappling with unpredictable weather patterns, crop disease, irrigation issues and pest control.
Traditional methods of evaluating and managing these challenges have been complex, time consuming and labor-intensive.
But the development of drone and robotics technology has made it easier to monitor and treat properties, crops and irrigation equipment in a non-invasive way by capturing crisp images or broadcasting products in real-time or on an hourly, daily or weekly basis.
This means the farmer is taking critical action when required.
XAG has been a trailblazer in development of specialist agricultural robotics, drones and other artificial intelligence technologies.
These provide a detailed view of land and crops that cannot be seen by the naked eye and can be used to apply agri-chemicals and fertiliser.
The company's P30 Agricultural Drone has been highly popular and it recently released its latest V40 and P40 models right across the globe.
These will deliver digital agriculture into more rural areas.
The XAG V40 and P40 are fully-autonomous drones that can conduct mapping, spraying and broadcast on-farm.
They are designed to help support the transition of farmers to "climate-smart" practices - driving higher productivity with lower carbon footprints and less, more targeted application of agri-chemicals.
The V40, as the flagship model of XAG's V Series Agricultural Drone, is the first tilting twin-rotor unmanned flying platform of its kind in agriculture to find the right balance between precision, performance and efficiency.
As an upgraded model of the classic P Series agricultural drone, XAG P40 is more compact, flexible, and easy to transport with its four arms.
The V40 Agricultural Drone is an award-winning design that embodies XAG's understanding of agriculture, farmers and society.
In October, it received Japan's G Mark Good Design Award, which is one of the world's top four renowned design awards.
Owing to its twin-rotor structure, the V40 has more concentrated wind field that contributes to an effective spray width up to 10 metres.
It has multiple aerodynamic optimisations, so that its spray penetration is more than twice that of traditional multi-rotor drones.
This means chemical drops penetrate more precisely into dense crop canopies, providing better protection against weeds, diseases and insect pests to help close the yield gap.
The XAG R150 is designed to be configurable for many different tasks and applications around the farm.
The vehicle can carry up to 150 kilograms and is available in three base models of the delivery version, spray version and an open payload version.
XAG has developed a complete spraying solution capable of autonomous spraying in orchards and on paddocks.
The XAG R150 control system leverages XAG's experience in developing autonomous drone-based aviation solutions.
The heart of the XAG navigation system is the SUPERX3 Pro RTK Control System.
The XAG R150 is accurate and capable of centimetre precision, which provides plenty of accuracy for agriculture applications.
The XAG navigates using optical positioning, and includes real-time transmission over high-speed 4G or a wireless network. It has several modes.
More information: sales@xagaustralia.com.au
CREDIT:
Word count: 502
