It was late last year when I sat in on a discussion about the future of agriculture in SA that planted a seed of doubt in my mind.
How realistic is it to expect most farmers to adopt new and unfamiliar technology that will change the way they have traditionally operated?
There were some constructive points made by the panelists about workforce shortages, disruption of the supply chain, market access and attracting young people into agriculture.
And then one of the panelists, a farmer, said something that has since stuck with me.
He said "technology will take our jobs".
For those who have always farmed the same way, they may look at technology as a threat.
And I understand the scepticism about agricultural technology, particularly when it can be overwhelming to see so many different types of technology solving the same problem.
But as someone in the innovation sector once said: "standing still is the fastest way of moving backwards".
If SA farmers don't proactively adopt new technology as part of their daily routine, as a state we will fall further behind the rest of the world.
With artificial intelligence and the Internet of Things (for example) being ingrained in the day-to-day operations of farm businesses, the required skills of the future for farming are changing.
They aren't replacing the farmers already on the land, they are value-adding to the business and ensuring farmers have the relevant data to make the most informed decisions they've ever made.
If you look back across generations, the adoption of technology on-farm has been occurring for decades.
But the technology is getting smarter and the pace of adoption is increasing, particularly among the younger generation.
Last month was the announcement of the first entirely autonomous tractor for large-scale use, ready to be sold to farmers in the United States.
No doubt it will take some years for this autonomous tractor to be made available for sale in Australia, but many farmers will be watching closely to assess the impact this machinery has in the US and whether this truly is a signal of a new era of advanced smart farming.
It looks like a normal tractor, but operates within less than 2.5 centimetres of accuracy and has six pairs of stereo cameras enabling 360-degree obstacle detection and calculation of distance.
And the sticking point is the farmer doesn't have to be directly next to the machinery - they can operate the tractor remotely.
At this stage there are still many unanswered questions about the autonomous tractor.
But time will tell as to whether it is successful in changing some of the traditional ways we farm.
In fact, many researchers argue several smaller machines on one farm could do the job more efficiently than a single machine.
Given the challenges Australia has faced, and continues to face, with workforce shortages due to COVID-19 restrictions, autonomous farming seems like a potential solution.
Agriculture as we know it is changing, it's not standing still and our farmers will be in the virtual driver's seat.
Brad Perry is the new chief executive officer at Grain Producers SA.
CREDIT: BRAD PERRY
Word count: 522
