The agricultural sector faces political, environmental, logistical and economical challenges today, and will continue to do so into the future.
According to the United Nations, more than 600 million people across the globe are under-fed.
Our world faces a rapidly growing population and it is forecast the demand for food will double in the coming 20 years.
Making agriculture more productive and sustainable is vital to meet this need - and the many other challenges facing the sector.
These are the issues Agrifac is firmly focused on, and coming up with solutions to.
Agrifac has an 80-year history of developing innovative and sustainable technology for agriculture and other industries.
The factory the company built in the Netherlands in 2018 is the most sustainable in Europe.
Using artificial intelligence and deep learning, Agrifac develops machines that reduce the agricultural footprint and enable increased output on-the-ground at the same time.
Some of the company's latest technological advances include its StabiloPlus undercarriage, which is specifically designed to make crop spraying equipment extremely stable.
This, in turn, generates industry-leading boom stability - even across the widest booms of up to 54 metres.
Adding a fully suspended cab to a specially-designed suspension system increases driving comfort on the road and in the field.
Agrifac's FastFoldPlus systems allows the spray boom to fold and unfold easier and faster than ever before.
For example, a 48m boom can unfold in just 22 seconds.
The company has used several technologies to make folding and unfolding the boom not only faster, but also safer.
This increases the system's life.
it also reduces the number of actions needed by the user to fold and unfold the boom.
Incorporating the Agrifac HighTechAirPlus to sprayers has ensured a constant and easily set droplet size when in operation.
This system uses a combination of traditional spraying, air assistance and mixing in the nozzles.
Both liquid and air are delivered to the same nozzle.
This helps to create a constant droplet size that can be easily be adjusted from the cab to meet changing conditions.
HighTechAirPlus enables the operator to set and keep the droplet size, irrespective of the driving speed.
Whether accelerating or decelerating, the relationship between air pressure and water pressure ensures the droplet size remains constant.
With StrictSprayPlus, there are the benefits of individual nozzle control, turn compensation and rate control.
This can reduce chemical use and ensure that every drop hits the right spot.
When the operator is in the Agrifac Condor's comfortable cabin, they use the acclaimed EcoTronicPlus operating system to control the sprayer.
It is easy to understand, user-friendly and provides all necessary information while spraying.
At a glance, the operator can see the status of the sprayer's systems and indicators. Most functions can be set to run automatically if desired.
Agrifac guarantees its sprayers deliver capacity, precision and stability due to strong, wide booms.
These J-Booms are available in widths from 24m to 54m.
The booms have a robust profile, stability and rigid construction that will deliver a long life - even at high working speeds.
Safety is guaranteed by gas-spring controlled breakaway and full nozzle protection.
The modular construction makes the spray boom easy to modify or expand.
Agrifac's latest Endurance II machine delivers capacity and endurance.
Similar to all Agrifac Condor self-propelled crop sprayers, the Endurance II offers highly stable and balanced spraying.
Endurance II is a reliable, superior quality crop sprayer with a strong undercarriage, an 8000-litre tank and a boom that extends up to 55m.
Track widths for the new Condor Endurance II vary from 190 to 460 centimetres and have a standard track width adjustment of 100cm.
Due to a wide range of tyre options, the ground pressure created by the Condor Endurance II is significantly lower than that of other comparable machines.
The newly-released Condor V self-propelled sprayer is fully equipped with innovations and high-end technology to help improve accuracy and increase efficiencies even further.
Condor V guarantees capacity, precision and durability and has specifications to suit all applications.
With versions that give a wider track width - WideTrackPlus - and higher ground clearance -ClearancePlus - the tried and tested Condor concept can also be used in a range of conditions and crops.
Hilly terrain or higher ground clearance are not a problem with the Condor.
CREDIT:
Word count: 716
