Scientists aim to grow Australia's agriculture and food production value by $20 billion in the next decade, and the pork industry stands to be a major beneficiary.
The CSIRO has a key role in achieving this goal and recently announced a $150 million spend for three main "mission" programs.
These aim to tackle drought, boost food exports and progress the controversial issue of alternative protein - or "fake meat" - industries.
CSIRO chief executive Larry Marshall said the three programs could capture a $20b opportunity for Australian agriculture, including the pork, red meat and horticulture sectors, and extend its position as a world leader.
At the same time, the National Farmers Federation (NFF) has set a goal to grow Australian agriculture into a $100b industry by 2030.
Dr Marshall said CSIRO had been working with growers and governments across the nation for more than 100 years to improve farming systems.
"We are now bringing all of our newest science and technology - from artificial intelligence to genetics and smart materials - to overcome the national challenge of drought," he said. "We also aim to protect the authenticity of Australian products and invent new markets."
Dr Marshall said the three "mission" programs would support Australia's future - using science to amplify the nation's global advantages and strengths.
He said, overall, the CSIRO was seeking to reduce the impacts of drought by 30 per cent, boost the value of Australian agrifood exports by $10b and produce an extra $10b worth of high-quality protein products by 2030.
"We are proud to have many collaborators on board to help Australian agriculture become more resilient and more profitable," he said.
"We need to produce food that is more plentiful and healthier for Australians and our global customers."
Meat & Livestock Australia (MLA) managing director Jason Strong said each of the three CSIRO "missions" were targeting critical challenges and opportunities to ensure Australia's meat and livestock sectors continued to be the trusted source of the highest quality protein.
"MLA is also focused on building a new frontier for the Australian red meat sector," he said.
"This will contribute to the sector doubling its value by 2030, developing innovative clean food technologies and building new markets at home and across the globe."
Through the CSIRO's drought initiative, researchers will investigate new farming systems that use water more efficiently, assess technologies to secure regional water supplies and drive development of new tools based on localised climate data that will make farming into the future easier.
They believe Australia can increase the value of its agrifood exports, such as pork, beef, sheepmeat and horticulture products, by $10b by 2030.
This will come from methods to improve access to high-value markets through new isotopic fingerprinting tools that can support "proof-of-origin" for food and verify its clean and green credentials.
The CSIRO plans to continue to its push into alternative proteins.
It has has already spent millions of dollars - through its investment arm the former Innovation Fund, which is now known as Main Sequence - to back new "fake meat" startup companies such as V2food and Eden Brew.
Dr Marshall said there was a $10b opportunity for Australia's growers and producers to create the future protein to help feed growing populations around the world.
He said this would protect and grow existing livestock and aquaculture industries, develop new plant-based products and use new technologies - such as bio-manufacturing - to create new proteins.
"Partnerships are the life blood of our missions, and we will not create impact without them," he said.
The CSIRO's Drought Resilience "mission" is a collaboration with the Department of Agriculture, Water and the Environment and Bureau of Meteorology. The Trusted Agrifood Exports "mission" has live projects with the Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment, Hort Innovation and MLA.
The Future Protein "mission" involves the CSIRO, Department of Industry, Science, Energy and Resources, Victorian government, MLA and Grains Research and Development Corporation.
The CSIRO partners with industry groups and companies, including V2food, GrainCorp, Ridley, Clara Foods, Wide Open Agriculture and start-ups. It will also work with Food Innovation Australia Ltd, Austrade, state governments, state departments and universities.
CREDIT:
Word count: 691
