China is well on its way to achieving its goal of complete military modernisation by 2027 and already has more warships than the US. China's shipyards launch a new sub every year or so.
Australia is well on its way to world champion status in faffing about with submarine acquisition. As of yesterday, Australia has no agreement with anyone to build any new submarines whatsoever.
China has 66 submarines. It's expected to have 10 more by 2030, six of those nuclear powered, the US Office of Naval Intelligence says. By then, Australia will have exactly as many subs as it has today, the same number it had a quarter-century earlier, according to government's statements yesterday.
That is, Australia will have the same six Collins class diesel-powered subs commissioned by the Hawke government, assuming they're still functional. Their retirement has been postponed repeatedly as successive governments - Labor and Liberal - have fumbled their replacements.
So what was all the fanfare from Scott Morrison, Joe Biden and Boris Johnson? Australia, the US and Britain have announced an "enhanced trilateral security partnership", the inelegantly named AUKUS. It is not a treaty and doesn't pretend to be.
But it does represent an increased level of trust and an intensified commitment to share technology and advanced weaponry. This includes co-operation on some of the same technologies Beijing has declared as its highest tech priorities - quantum computing, quantum communication, artificial intelligence and cyber.
This could prove the most important element of the agreement in equipping Australia for its own defence in the longer run, if it's executed intelligently, a major caveat.
As Joe Biden put it, AUKUS is a "historic step to deepen and formalise co-operation among all three of our nations, because we all recognise the imperative of ensuring peace and stability in the Indo-Pacific over the long-term."
But the three wartime allies have chosen to announce as their first initiative a plan to help Australia acquire nuclear propulsion technology for submarines.
Australia has spent the postwar era fantasising about nuclear power for its submarines. Till now, that's all they were, fantasies.
Morrison gets credit for persuading Washington and London to share their closely held nuclear expertise. But what's Australia going to do with it? What is the practical outcome?
First, the Morrison government has cancelled the contracts to buy 12 French-designed submarines. This was the deal the Turnbull government struck five years ago. The subs, to be built in Adelaide based on French designs, were to cost an estimated lifetime total of $90 billion. The first was to enter the water in about a decade from now.
That agreement, then feted as the basis of a new era in strategic relations with France, is now dead. All that remains is an argument about how much Australia will have to pay to cancel. And a deep sense of French dismay and betrayal. Much as Australia's abortive deal for Japanese subs ended years earlier.
In its place? The Morrison government has announced an interdepartmental committee to spend 18 months talking to the US and UK "identifying the optimal pathway to deliver at least eight nuclear-powered submarines for Australia". They're to be built in Adelaide, the government says, so that will require a reconfiguration of the shipyards and workforce. But there is no known design and certainly no contracts. In other words, it's a plan to have a plan.
But we know from the Morrison government the proposed new nuclear subs will be delivered years later than the French-designed subs, and cost more. And because it's planning "at least eight", Australia could end up with fewer than the 12 in the previous deal.
The nuclear reactors that drive them would be inserted as sealed units by the US or UK. Canberra says that no civil or military nuclear capability will be developed in Australia.
"We'd be buying a nuclear reactor in a box," says the Australian Strategic Policy Institute's sub specialist, Marcus Hellyer. "It does make us even more dependent on the US. At any point they can turn off the technology."
Australia can now contemplate another decade or two with no new subs. And even if this proposal goes to plan, Australia will not have a full sovereign capability but an increased defence dependency on the US.
So when Beijing's spokesmen fulminate against this announcement, don't be surprised if they have to pause to laugh into their sleeves.
CREDIT: Peter Hartcher
Word count: 737
