ABC READING EGGS $13.99/m, iOS/Android Whether the young kids in your home are “boooored” on holidays, or you’re wondering how to fill extra weeks before a late return to school, this app could assist. It delivers access to reading, maths, and phonics games for children aged between two and 13 years, and they’re presented in a fun way that doesn’t feel like a chore. The games range from read-aloud books for the youngest users to measurements and number patterns for older players.
TOTAL WELLBEING $199/12 wks, Apple iOS/Google Android For those who want to boost their health and improve their diet in 2022, Australia’s top scientific research lab is offering Hope. That’s not a feeling but the name of the firm’s new artificial intelligence tool within its Total Wellbeing app that is designed to provide feedback, encourage users, and provide insight into their progress on its own diet plan. Users need to subscribe to access the tool, and that will cost $199 for 12 weeks.
DEAR MY CAT Free, Google Android/Apple iOS Sometimes, amid the gloomy news, it’s nice to have a digital escape. That’s what this dreamy app provides. It’s set on an island where an adorable kitten wakes to find herself alone and in need of activities and attention. Players must unlock new parts of the island, create new features, such as a rainbow-fuelled train station, invite new cats to visit, and get to know the cats. It’s a strange but calming game set to an ethereal soundtrack.
YUKA Free, Android/iOS This app can provide a shortcut for working out whether your snacks are really good for you. The Yuka app scans the barcodes on food labels and gives them a score out of 100 and a rating (bad, poor, good, and so on) as well as breaking down their positives and negatives. Cheesy rice crackers, for example, have too much sodium but some protein and fibre. The app’s Australian range is limited but this could help you make sense of food’s fine print.
POP TILES $4.09, Google Android This game is a little like Candy Crush, a little like Tetris, and a great way to tune out while making tiles match, explode and fall from the screen. Pop The Tiles is a simple app that will have you popping tiles filled with different shapes before they reach the dreaded top line. There are no extra purchases or permissions required, just a bit of your time and attention.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 414
