WOMEN’S safety advocate Amani Haydar, Arab-Australian author Michael Mohammed Ahmad and photographer Dorcas Tang will be among the diverse array of speakers at the OzAsia Festival’s new writing and ideas program, In Other Words.
Former Adelaide Writers’ Week director Laura Kroetsch put together the program at the Dunstan Playhouse from November 5-7 with guest curators, writer/broadcaster Benjamin Law and award-winning Indian-Australian author Roanna Gonsalves.
“It’s going to be an exciting snapshot of Australia in the Asia-Pacific and we’ll be exploring some of the key issues here at home and across the region,” Kroetsch says.
She promises important discussions about “the remarkable times we find ourselves in, and what might be waiting for us just over the horizon”.
In Other Words will open with You Are Here (And So Is China), a panel discussion about the implications of an increasingly powerful China featuring Age of Uncertainty author Professor Evelyn Goh, Lowy Institute director Natasha Kassam and former ambassador Geoff Raby.
TV personality Marc Fennell, comedian Jennifer Wong and playwright Anchuli Felicia King will weigh in on the closing debate on whether Australia is an Asian country.
Celebrity chefs Adam Liaw and Hetty McKinnon will present Making Food, Making Culture, explaining the memories that inspired their respective new cookbooks, Tonight’s Dinner and To Asia, With Love.
American-Canadian author, filmmaker and Zen Buddhist priest Ruth Ozeki will share insights from her novel The Book of Form and Emptiness, while science fiction writer Chen Qiufan will talk about his latest work AI 2041: Ten Visions for Our Future, about how artificial intelligence will change our world over the next 20 years.
OzAsia artistic director Annette Shun Wah said the discussion sessions would also be livestreamed free, with recordings available to view on the festival’s website.
“We are grateful to our In Other Words speakers for being so flexible as we deliver a hybrid program, especially those who will be joining us via video link,” she said. Full program and registrations at ozasiafestival.com.au
CREDIT: PATRICK McDONALD
Word count: 332
