GINGER WRITER Free, Apple iOS/Google Android When you absolutely have to nail your spelling and grammar, Ginger Writer can provide a second set of eyes. Using artificial intelligence (through Microsoft Translator software), this app will scan the text you type and identify words that are spelled or used incorrectly. As an important bonus, it also offers a “rephrase” option that will analyse your sentence and let you choose other versions of it.
RAIN CITY $2.98/$3.29, Apple iOS/Google Android This carefully illustrated app game looks like a storybook that’s come to life. The moody creation follows the adventures of a cat looking for his missing sister in Rain City, and it involves solving a series of puzzles, mini-games and observational challenges to bust mysteries. Its settings range from beautiful to bizarre, including a secret passage, a mushroom field, and an eerie laboratory, and players must interrogate other animals along the way.
JIBJAB Free, iOS/Android It’s not too late to send someone an Easter card, as long as you do it digitally. This curious app lets users create their own greeting cards or invitations that move and dance about, and feature their own face (or the face of a loved one) superimposed in the action. Creations can be saved as videos or gifs, and there’s a bunny-themed greeting available for this weekend (though users must subscribe, for $2.99 a month) to access it.
RABBIT RUN Free, iOS/Android Easter seems like an apt time to revisit the adventures of Peter Rabbit and his family, Flopsy, Mopsy and Cotton-Tail, on adventures through fields and down paths filled with free, floating vegetables. Players must hop, slide or float down the paths to collect tomatoes and power-ups in this game, and collect jigsaw puzzle pieces to unlock new bunny characters.
SHARETHEMEAL Free, iOS/Android If you’ve watched harrowing coverage from the war in Ukraine and wondered how you can help, this app provides a path. ShareTheMeal is a creation from the United Nations World Food Program and lets you donate meals to people around the world in crisis. Emergency aid in Ukraine has now been added to its list of recipients, with more than two million of its goal of 6.5 million meals donated so far. Just $36 will fund 30 meals to Ukrainians fleeing conflict.
CREDIT: with Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 383
