WHEN the Australian Def­ence Force takes to the future battlefield, its officers will be inspired not by stuffy training manuals but by a book that’s a “real page turner”.
In a significant departure from the usual military service “expectations” manual, the ADF has commissioned some of the world’s best civilian minds to help write a 72-page “foundational” doctrine to ­redefine its culture and leadership in the 21st century.
Revered Australian author Thomas Keneally, pioneer of business and culture change management John Paul Kotter, famed American psychologist Abraham Maslow and even Plato are among those cited as contributing to the new military manifesto.
“It is a real page turner,” ADF chief General Angus Campbell, pictured, said of the doctrine released this week.
“Australia’s future strategic environment will be challenging. To overcome these challenges, we need well-trained, thoughtful, forward-looking leaders at all levels of our organisation.” The doctrine is a part-­philosophy, part-instructional man­ual that flags its “intellectual debt” to various sources from a variety of civil and military figures in history, all aimed at guiding ADF leadership training today.
“Leadership is about inspiration, how you connect with people,” General Campbell said. “It’s not about just having people obey your legal direction – that’s command auth­ority. Leadership is about inspiring people to do so much more, to believe in the purpose, to achieve great things.” Afghanistan War hero Corporal Daniel Keighran is one of only two personnel singled out in the doctrine with a ­detailed description of his leadership and courage under fire that earned him the Victoria Cross in 2010.
The other is Chief Petty ­Officer Jonathan “Buck” Rogers and a harrowing account of his leadership and death during the HMAS Melbourne-HMAS Voyager tragedy in 1964.
General Campbell told the popular Dead Prussian podcast series that the doctrine was fundamental in highlighting where ADF leadership needed to be and to ­inspire the best leaders to confront future challenges.
“We will see the capacity for very high-tempo and very high-intensity warfare,” he said. “We will see levels of technology that will confound, we will also see the openings of artificial intelligence challenges.” When asked to describe war, he said: “War is a failure of politics and policy by other means.”
CREDIT: CHARLES MIRANDA
Word count: 371
