SMART fun
ALL OF YOU $7.99/m, Apple iOS This adorable but puzzling adventure asks players to help a clumsy mother hen to rescue all of her chicks. Obstacles and dangers range from dragons and dogs to explosions and ramps that don’t fit together, with players often forced to pause gameplay to rearrange pieces of the scene, or pay close attention to where she roams next. It’s designed for players aged nine and over, and comes in Apple’s Arcade package.
FITCUS Free trial, Apple iOS This fitness app works differently to its peers. A product of the 2020 Monash Generator Accelerator Program, it not only guides users through fitness routines but uses the camera in their smartphone to scan their body and artificial intelligence to determine if they’re using correct technique. Users receive feedback in real time (before a bad squat hurts their lower back) and the app offers a seven-day trial before yearly billing kicks in.
PAUSE Free, iOS/Android Smartphones aren’t known for their relaxing qualities, nor are they big on helping users to focus. This app promises to help turn around their reputation by offering a calming, visual time-out to help users regain focus. The app asks users to follow an on-screen dot with their finger, moving slowly, and spend three minutes chilling out. Users can advance to Master level.
BEST RIDE $6/m, iOS/Android If you’re a regular rideshare user, this app could save you some cash. The Best Ride app can be used to compare the current prices of a journey across all the available platforms — Ola, DiDi and Uber — and let you know which is the cheapest. There’s even a shortcut in the app so you can go straight to the most inexpensive provider to order a car. Users can pay $1.49 for four searches or have an ongoing monthly subscription.
FLIGHT DECK Free, iOS/Android Sydney electronic duo Flight Facilities have released so much music in this app, your home office will be sorted for weeks. It includes their highly regarded Decade Mixes — part-music clippings, part history lessons — and a new offering covering everything from 1962 to 1972. Other music in the app includes extended DJ sets, digital mixtapes, bootlegs and edits of songs featuring artists such as Lou Reed, Kanye West and Fleetwood Mac. No idea why this app is free.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 394
