SAGE Group will be handing small businesses digital tools their larger competitors have had the benefit of for years through its software arm TilliT, which incorporates local small business Ailytic that Sage bought last week for an undisclosed price.
Ailytic’s digital smarts in helping businesses use artificial intelligence to analyse data and improve scheduling operations complements TilliT’s paperless quality control capabilities.
The new business arm, for which Sage has a target of about $2m in recurring revenues, will put the capability that large manufacturers have enjoyed for some years into the hands of SMEs.
“TilliT is bringing together our two existing software products of TilliT Digital Operations and AI Scheduler, and enables us to continue to focus on the ongoing development of smart software solutions,” chief executive Adrian Fahey said.
“The solution is broader than just predictability and encompasses the digitising of a wide range of tasks that make up manufacturing operations.” The launch of the TilliT software business forms part of a strategic expansion for Sage to deliver software as a service (SaaS) solutions for customers across sectors.
“TilliT’s Digital Operations (DO) SaaS solution is a powerful and simple to implement digital factory platform,” Mr Fahey said.
“It provides an integrated way to plan, execute and analyse manufacturing processes.
“An all-inclusive solution, it provides visibility of asset and manufacturing line performance, the execution of events and activity necessary to manufacture finished goods, (conduct) quality checks and management in real-time and production scheduling and digital workflow.” Ailytic founder James Balzary will head up the TilliT business in the role of chief executive. “This is an exciting step which will allow us to enter new markets, build new channel relationships (and) ultimately service current and future clients with an expanding portfolio of innovative software technologies,” Mr Bal­zary said.
“While the teams are coming together to incorporate this expanded offering, it is business as usual without disruption for Ailytic and TilliT customers.” Ailytic has supplied sensors and software to manufacturing, food, packaging and wine businesses, namely Treasury Wine Estates, Accolade Wines, and OzPak, among others.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 347
