INDIGEMOJI Free, Apple iOS It’s NAIDOC Week and this app could help iPhone users celebrate it. The Indigemoji app features 90 virtual stickers created to represent items of importance to Aboriginal people in Arrernte Country in Central Australia. Each emoji features an Arrernte name, including an audio translation, and the emoji items range from traditional paintings and items with the Aboriginal flag, to swags, four-wheel drives, footballs, boomerangs and dancers.
TOUR DE FRANCE 2021 Free, Apple iOS/Google Android If you’re getting hooked on the world’s most famous cycling race, this app will keep you up to speed (so to speak) with all the latest developments until its July 18 finish. The free app not only features rankings of cyclists and teams but profiles them, will show you what to expect from each stage, provides a briefing on its location, and will let users stream video from the race to ensure you’re not missing a climb or a crash.
TRANSCRIBE $8/hr, Apple iOS Whether you need notes from a lecture or minutes from a meeting, this app can provide it by tapping into artificial intelligence. The Transcribe: Speech to Text app uses this technology in the cloud, letting users upload voice or video recordings to their servers to be turned into blocks of text with surprising accuracy. Users get 15 minutes of transcription free before it’s charged at $8 per hour.
ZOOM PWA Free, Android It’s one of the apps that defined the work-from-home outbreak of 2020 and now Chromebook owners are being offered their own version of Zoom to catch up to their Mac and PC counterparts. Available in Google’s Play Store, the Zoom for Chrome Progressive Web App adds features including background masking (to hide messes), live transcriptions, support for breakout rooms, and new customisable gallery views.
LIKE A DINO Free, iOS/Android It’s hard to imagine a game more adorable than this one. The free app features a happy, long-necked dinosaur that players must move back and forth across the screen to catch musical notes on their head. The soundtrack is just as cute as the animation and, while incredibly simple, players can unlock new songs, speed up the tempo, and challenge themselves to earn more coins.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 373
