SMARTfun
APPLE PODCASTS From 49c, Apple iOS PODCASTS are stepping up a gear, with Apple launching premium subscriptions in its app. The new content gives users access to top quality content such as Luminary’s original The Midnight Miracle with Talib Kweli, Yasiin Bey and Dave Chappelle, To Live and Die in LA that follows the disappearance of Elaine Park by Neil Strauss, and a host of podcasts in different formats, such as news, comedy, scripted fiction, and mindfulness. Subscriptions start from 49c per month.
ANY.DO Free, Apple iOS/Google Android THIS to-do app brings something new: it lets you command it to do things. Any.do works with voice assistants to let its users set reminders, record appointments, and add tasks with their voice alone and at the time and date they specify. Users can also set locations for reminders, tag other people, record sub-tasks, and add notes. Additional features, like recurring tasks and colour-coding, can be unlocked for $15.49 per month.
80 DAYS $7.99/$8.99, Apple iOS/Google Android WHETHER you’ve read Jules Verne’s tale or not, 80 Days is a fun global adventure app. Based on his famous book, players stand in the shoes of Phileas Fogg’s assistant Passepartout and must traverse the world in 80 days or fewer, choosing unusual and old-school modes of transport such as steam ships, gyrocopters, airships and camels. Along the way, there are characters to meet, useful tools to amass and trades to make to meet the finish line.
SHAZAM Free, iOS/Android IT’S one of the most common uses of artificial intelligence — giving names to the mystery songs on the radio and in your head — and Shazam has just reached a milestone. The app recently identified its 50 billionth song, names one billion songs each month, and counts Tones and I’s Dance Monkey as its most requested track. Those who haven’t sparked up the song app recently will find it now shows off a list of trending tunes to get started.
SCRIBD $13.99/m, Apple iOS FANS of listening to books have several suppliers from which to choose but Scribd has just added one more reason to select its service. The Scribd app is now available on Apple Watches (Series 3 and above) so listeners can tune into their current titles on the run and control playback, even down to the narrator’s reading speed, from the smallest screen in the Apple family.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 402
