MASTERCLASS $276/yr, iOS/Android The app that brings in some of the world’s best known actors, filmmakers, chefs and entertainers at the top of their field is having a sale again. Until December 28, MasterClass will let you gift someone a yearly subscription to the more than 100 classes in its app and get one for yourself, too. Those memberships aren’t cheap but they do include classes from the likes of Gordon Ramsay, Annie Leibovitz, Ringo Starr, RuPaul and Margaret Atwood.
PROCREATE $14.99, Apple iOS This unique app, created in Tasmania, took the title of top paid iPad app for 2021. Procreate is built to help people illustrate on a virtual canvas, with hundreds of brushes, tools and layers, 64-bit colour, 3D compatibility, and the ability to create an ultra high-definition artwork. You can also create a time-lapse of your work to show people how you did it, and export it directly to Photoshop for further polishing.
PHOTOROOM Free, Google Android/Apple iOS Named on Google’s list of 2021 best apps, this smart photo-editing app uses artificial intelligence to identify the subject of your image, separate it from the background, and cut it out entirely. This can provide a great way to show items in an online store or let users blur the background or change it to something more striking. The app is free to use though users can go ‘pro’ with a $14.49 monthly subscription that removes the logo from your results.
ZOOKEEPER $7.99/m, Arcade There’s plenty to do in this game: follow the story, create cute animals, and complete puzzles to unlock new characters. Zookeeper World, a new addition to Apple’s Arcade, asks you to solve three puzzle games to win more animals and plants for your zoo, often in a Candy Crush style, and to defeat a Mecha Boss to upgrade those animals with new costumes. It’s a fun mechanic and the game itself is updated regularly.
BEYOND Free, iOS/Android Visiting real-world stores for your Christmas shopping is advised in December and to do that you may need help from this app. Beyond Park will let you know where there are places to leave a car near your destination, and can also be used to reserve a space and pay in a contactless way at some locations. The Aussie app also offers warnings for large vehicles.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 393
