STACK: PDF SCANNER Free, Google Android Tax time is approaching and this new app from Google’s in-house incubator could make recording and categorising receipts a lot easier. The app from Google’s Area 120 lab not only scans paper bills and receipts but it uses artificial intelligence to record their date and amount, gives the documents a name and files them into categories. Scanned items can also be saved to Google Drive, where they can later be found with a search rather than a hunt through drawers.
DAYGRAM $3.99, Apple iOS/Google Android If starting a journal seems almost as onerous as maintaining one, this app can provide motivation. DayGram is a minimalist app that encourages users to record just one line about their day, whether it’s something they did, something they felt, or something they just want on the record. The app will remind users to write something regularly, and it features options for adding a passcode lock and saving all entries to the cloud or in a PDF.
OPENTABLE Free, Apple iOS/Google Android With restaurants, cafes and bars open for business again – and Mother’s Day perilously close – this app can help you secure a celebratory feast. OpenTable will show you food joints near your location, or another you specify, at the time and for the number of people required. You can send friends and family invitations from within the app, as well as checking out special promotions or menus on offer.
THE OREGON TRAIL $7.99/m, Apple Arcade Originally created as an educational game in 1971, The Oregon Trail’s latest reboot is designed for touchscreens. While its retro graphics are still there for all to see, they’re mixed with some from the new era. Players must guide their wagon from Independence to Oregon City in this app, patching it up when required, avoiding thieves, and recovering from pesky health issues like cholera. A charming revival.
BONZA WORD PUZZLE Free, Apple iOS/Google Android This brain-bending word game is a bit like a crossword, a bit like a Scrabble game, and a touch like a general knowledge quiz. Players are given one hint, like the start of a phrase, and must then rearrange pieces of words to complete the sentences. It can be trickier than it looks and, if you’re stumped, you can spend the coins you earned on other puzzles to get past any hurdles.
CREDIT: with Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 400
