VOCATIONAL education and training plays a vital role in retraining and upskilling employees to meet the challenges of the emerging digital age. That is the view of SA Power Networks, which won the Large Employer of the Year at the 2020 Australian Training Awards.
The power energy infrastructure company is embracing the emerging digital age through automation, digital-control technologies and artificial intelligence to deliver improved energy solutions to customers, and help workers get the skills to do so.
SA Power Networks learning and development manager Angela Coker said vocational education and training (VET) has always been important for the organisation.
“We have a long history of developing apprentices in our powerline and electrical trades,” Ms Coker said.
“We value VET for what it offers employees in other areas of our business. “Not only are we able to develop skills in more traditional areas such as leadership and management, and project management, we have also embarked on a re-skilling strategy to ensure that we are prepared for future challenges.
“These new qualifications focus on things like cyber security; and in an Australian first we are partnering with Skills Lab to offer a digital engineering apprenticeship, where apprentices undertake a diploma of applied technologies.’’ In the past 20 years, SA Power Networks has trained 575 electrical apprentices and has a 93 per cent retention rate. It is currently training more than 100 apprentices.
Ms Coker said that from a morale perspective, winning Large Employer of the Year at the Australian Training Awards provided employees with a reason to celebrate.
The South Australian Training Awards program, in its 25th year this year, is presented by the state’s Training and Skills Commission and supported by collaboration partners MEGT and Mas.
Applications for the program, which celebrates and acknowledges the achievements of the state’s best and brightest students, trainers, training providers, schools and employers, are open until May 17.
South Australian Skills Commissioner and Training and Skills Commission chair Renee Hindmarsh said the 2021 program included a range of activities and initiatives designed to highlight the increasing opportunities available to trainees and apprentices in SA.
“There really hasn’t been a better time than now to invest in your business and grow the capability of your staff through vocational education and training,” Ms Hindmarsh said.
Twelve award categories will be presented this year – six for individuals and six for organisations.
There is also the Voters’ Choice Award which is presented to the public’s favourite individual finalist. To apply, visit satrainingawards.sa.gov.au
CREDIT: AWARDS CARA JENKIN
Word count: 420
