Engaging, innovative and contextualised learning experiences are central to learning at St Aloysius College, particularly when it comes to the thriving Digital Technologies curriculum and the integration of Science, Technology, Engineering and Maths from Reception to Year 12.
The school for girls, established by the Sisters of Mercy in 1880 and located in the heart of Adelaide’s CBD on Wakefield Street, says that it hopes to foster student innovation and entrepreneurship, while nurturing both critical and creative thinking.
Principal Paddy McEvoy is proud of the high level of participation in Maths and Science in the senior years, which she sees as a result of the high-quality teaching and learning that takes place right across the school.
“The large number of students currently pursuing STEM careers challenges some of the gendered thinking that exists about career pathways for women,” McEvoy says.
From robotics and programming, which begins in reception, to experimenting with new concepts, students at St Aloysius College have access to resources and experiences enabling them to grow as confident, mindful creators.
In the primary years, students’ imaginations are ignited as they ideate and experiment using every day materials in cardboard arcade game challenges and an annual Lego expo where students design, build and program Lego models around a theme.
In the secondary years, students benefit from participating in many local and global programs and competitions including the international Microsoft Imagine Cup Junior competition where students learn about artificial intelligence (AI), ethics behind technology and innovative AI concepts.
Participation in the competition encourages students to develop higher order thinking skills as they explore the transforming impact of technology on our world and the way it can be harnessed to solve real world problems.
All Year 9 semester one Digital Technologies students were given the opportunity to enter this competition and this year two St Aloysius College teams placed in the Top 10 in Australia, and one Year 9 student placed in the Top 10 in the world for the development of an innovative companion obedient response robot for people with Autism.
Secondary students also participate in the Young Scientist of the Year Video Competition addressing environmental issues. Year 10 student Charlotte says “we use video editing software across our curriculum, so it’s a great opportunity to present a topic we are passionate about through a medium we understand and enjoy”.
Digital Technologies Co-ordinator Joanne Villis says the college strives to create a culture that encourages students to “be open to new ideas, be brave and voice their thoughts”.
Villis shares that a “personal connection with a STEM issue is the key to igniting passion and bringing about change”.
For more than 140 years, St Aloysius College students who have gone on to blaze a trail by pursuing careers in STEM fields regularly return to the college to share their experiences, ensuring these pathways are clearly visible to current students.
St Aloysius College Phone: 8217 3200 Website: www.sac.sa.edu.au
Word count: 488
