TELSTRA chief Andy Penn says the telco giant will bring a fresh set of eyes and a trusted brand already in people’s homes to the energy market as it explores launching an electricity offer.
Telstra, one of the nation’s biggest electricity users, is assessing plans to sell renewable electricity to customers.
It has underwritten projects that generate enough renewable energy to power about 100,000 homes. That will increase as it works to ensure all of its electricity consumption is sourced from renewable sources by 2025.
The Melbourne-based company has deployed artificial intelligence and smart devices to manage its own energy usage in recent years, as well as secure renewable energy at the best prices.
Mr Penn said it would leverage these new skills and resources as it explores launch-ing a retail electricity brand, adding that being an outsider to the sector was a key advantage.
“We often face challenges in being the largest player in telecommunications – there are organisations who can come in at times and compete with us on the margin, and because of our incumbency, it can make it much harder for us,” he said.
“Looking at some of the big energy players, they have that same sort of dynamic, whereas we are coming in new and fresh. We don’t have any constraints or incumbency. We can offer really simple solutions, we can leverage a lot of our existing infrastructure and services around marketing and we’ve got a very trusted brand already in the home.
“One of the opportunities we have is really leveraging our existing in home presence.” The push into energy is part of Telstra’s connected-home strategy where more devices are connected and managed via the internet.
Telstra’s services have been in hot demand this year as the coronavirus pandemic has led to a surge in remote working.
Mr Penn said COVID-19 had transformed ideas about how and where people worked. “We’ve had more digital ad-option in the past six months than the previous five years – what that says is that technology was not the constraint,” he said. “There is a real opportunity to accelerate the digital economy and for that to be a vehicle for a faster and stronger economic recovery. There needs to be a lot of focus on how we support the digital economy from here on.” The energy shift was outlined at an investor day, when Telstra said it would undertake a major restructure, splitting itself into three divisions in a shake-up that better positioned it to be able to buy the National Broadband Network.
CREDIT: JOHN DAGGE
Word count: 429
