FATHER Sefa Kuzu has never seen the faces of his twins.
The 50-year-old lost his sight to a degenerative eye disease before his son and daughter were born in 2005.
But with help from a bionic eye developed in Australia, he is seeing more of them for the first time.
“I can tell how tall they are and how wide they are,” he said. The bionic eye, implanted in 2018, is also helping him navigate everyday life, finding the tools he needs for his woodwork and “not bump(ing) into cars parked on the driveways”.
Mr Kuzu is one of four people currently trialling the bionic eye created in Melbourne that is now poised to enter global trials to gain marketing approval.
It’s thought the revolutionary device could be a lifeline to the 8000 Australians robbed of their sight by the degenerative genetic condition retinitis pigmentosa, which affects 1.5m people worldwide and is the most common cause of inherited blindness.
The four people trialling the device said they were able to recognise objects on table tops, navigate obstacle courses, find doorways and make out the outlines of people nearby.
Colleen Knowles, who has four children, 15 grandchildren, and two great-grandchildren, has been able to take up people-watching after her implant.
“It’s not going to replace a guide dog or a cane but it enhances the experience. I can tell if there are trees in the nature strip,” Ms Knowles said.
Mark Boyd was declared legally blind in 1993. He said the bionic eye had allowed him to scan tables in cafes and locate objects.
And 42-year-old science fiction fan Scott Nixon, declared totally blind at the age of 21, is enjoying the jokes about his new sight upgrade. “My sister and I are sci-fi nuts and when I first found out I was definitely getting the device I said ‘I’m going to be a cyborg’,” Mr Nixon said.
“There’s been a lot of Terminator and Robocop jokes.” Users have to be trained to recognise the flashes of light the device transmits to electrodes surgically implanted behind their eye.
“We had one test where there was a hallway with a number of obstacles and it was like Indiana Jones or Ninja Warrior. We had to dodge the obstacles,” Mr Nixon said.
But the bionic eye is not powerful enough yet to allow them to read or to recognise facial features. An enhanced model to be used in stage three trials next year will use artificial intelligence to allow facial recognition and specific object detection.
The device would be able to detect the faces of relatives and friends and electronically inform the user who they were looking at.
The new model, to be trialled in 40 people in the US, China and Australia, will also allow depth perception and let users see white clothing against a white background. BionicVision Technologies, is developing the product along with researchers from Melbourne and Australian National universities.
CREDIT: SUE DUNLEVY EXCLUSIVE
Word count: 495
