RESEARCHERS have been on the hunt to find the worst feral pest in the state and, surprisingly, it’s not rabbits or foxes.
A Flinders University study has revealed that weeds have been the biggest offender and the most expensive in the long term.
The study found that in the past 60 years, the combined cost of fighting pests in SA was a staggering $3.29bn.
In the first study of its kind, Professor Corey Bradshaw led analysis using a database he described as “the most comprehensive and standardised compilation of invasion costs globally”, combined with other Australian information on invasive herbivores, plants, and disease-causing agents.
He said $3.29bn was just the tip of the iceberg.
“The message is, invasive species cost us a lot of money,” Professor Bradshaw said.
“Even the estimates we do have are a gross underestimate.” Co-author Dr Andy Sheppard, who heads the Managing Invasive Species and Diseases program at CSIRO, said he was not surprised to find weeds were public enemy No.1 in SA.
Heliotrope, also known as potato weed or caterpillar weed, tops the spending list at $200m, followed closely by rye-grass at $190m and then brome grass at $67m.
Rabbits – the only animal to make the list – were at No.4 on $59m. The top invertebrate pest was Queensland fruit fly, which has been a major challenge over the past year or so.
The state government and landowners have spent a lot of money to get the problem pests under control.
Dr Sheppard said weeds had “huge impacts” on agriculture, reducing yields by competing with crops, reducing the quality of pasture or causing toxicity in livestock.
These combined effects were far greater than insect pests or diseases. On top of that, they had enormous environmental impacts that were harder to quantify.
In November, CSIRO released the report fighting plagues and predators to push the issue higher up the national agenda.
“The first thing we need to do is to shut the door to new arrivals, so a lot of work goes into making sure no more come in to Australia,” Dr Sheppard said of the findings.
“Most of our future weeds are already here so a lot of what we need to do is about education, what to plant and not plant.
“And then for the ones that are harmful, the best tool is classic biological control.” The pretty, yet toxic to horses, purple weed Salvation Jane, also known as Paterson’s curse, has been subject to biological control with two weevils and two flea beetles. Dr Sheppard said one of each had been very effective in reducing the dense infestations of the weed, so much so that farmers no longer have to spray for it.
But for many species control is a combination of herbicide use and vigilance, which is where the community can get involved as landholders or as volunteers through groups like Landcare.
The National Herbarium is working with CSIRO and Microsoft on an app to support on-ground weed-control.
People will soon be able to take a photograph of a suspected weed using a smartphone and then, through artificial intelligence, the app will determine from its thousands of records what it thinks you’ve found.
“The idea is to help people understand what they’re looking at, so people have the power to do identification in the field,” Dr Sheppard said. The Flinders research was published in the open-access journal NeoBiota.
CREDIT: CLARE PEDDIE
Word count: 571
