A former snowboarder turned author explores just how far competitors will go to come out on top Elite snowboarders are a very supportive, friendly and social bunch, though you wouldn’t know it from reading former top competitor Allie Reynolds’ debut novel.
Shiver sees five former friends and competitors reunited in a remote French Alpine mountain resort, 10 years after a beautiful rival disappeared on the eve of a championship. It quickly becomes clear this is no friendly jaunt down memory lane, but a sinister search for the truth by an anonymous menace.
“Readers might think snowboarding is a very cutthroat world but actually it’s not at all. The more dangerous the sport, the more supportive the crowd is because you’re looking out for each other and cheering each other on,’’ laughs Reynolds, 45, a one-time British top 10 freestyle snowboarder, who swapped the snowy mountains of Europe and Canada for a surfboard and Gold Coast beaches in 2004.
“I was interested in the mind games a lot of top athletes are famous for, which really fascinated me, and how they might play out in a very dangerous environment, like an icy glacier, in an extreme sport, and I could easily imagine how it could turn deadly,’’ she says.
The “really gruesome idea” of the bodies of long-lost hikers, climbers and skiers being given up by the shrinking glaciers of Mont Blanc, one of the areas she used to snowboard in the French Alps, turned up in her research at just the right time.
“My first season was in Chamonix, which is a beautiful and amazing area, but extremely dangerous. There were 160 people missing in the glaciers there, who had disappeared over the years from falling down crevasses and from avalanches. These bodies would slowly emerge when climbers and hikers would discover body parts protruding from the ice,’’ says the Agatha Christie fan.
“I put these ideas together and imagined if someone went missing in this environment, was their death an accident or was it something more sinister? Then who might want to do something sinister — an athlete taking out one of their rivals maybe?’’ Reynolds spent five winters competing, after graduating with a degree in artificial intelligence, but always wanted to be a novelist. She wrote Shiver in about six months, after finally putting aside a novel she’d struggled with for more nearly 20 years while competing, then training and working as an English teacher.
Shiver ended up in a 10-publisher auction, resulted in a two-book deal, will be published in 18 territories and is being made into a UK TV series.
“It is just a total dream. I started writing full-time in 2018, and started writing Shiver. The idea just came very smoothly. I guess all that scribbling for 20 years actually did get me somewhere in the end, though it didn’t feel like it at the time.’’ Reynolds is working on her next book, another psychological thriller this time set on a remote Australian beach, writing longhand with pen and paper at her kitchen table, in between juggling the demands of her two sons, aged eight and six, and her noisy tabby cat Muffin.
“We’ve gone from the snow and ice, to the heat and ocean,’’ says Reynolds, a keen surfer who tries to hit the waves several times a week. “Surfing has almost the same high (as snowboarding) but without the broken bones.’’ Shiver by Allie Reynolds (Hachette Australia, RRP $32.99), will be released on January 27.
CREDIT: WORDS LEANNE EDMISTONE
Word count: 587
