Hey Google, who’s that knocking at my door? We put smart home security gadgets to the test
RADAR DETECTION Ring Floodlight Cam Wired Pro The connected camera that started the home security trend is in the spotlight again $379, ring.com PROS Powerful, motion-activated lights 110 decibel siren Bird’s Eye View feature CONS Some features require subscription Lights can’t be replaced Requires pro installation
Ring pioneered connected home security gadgets and this floodlight shows how far the market has come. The newest model not only flashes a light and pings your phone when it senses motion, but uses a radar to detect movement, comes with a more reliable Wi-Fi connection, improved audio, offers colour night vision footage, and will sound a louder siren than the previous model. It also comes with a feature called Bird’s Eye View that maps where visitors walked around your property, though recordings and personalised alerts are only for Ring Protect subscribers.
* * * *
APP CONTROL Samsung SDS A30 Smart Lock This smart lock can provide keyless home entry for you and guests $569, bunnings.com.au PROS PIN, fingerprint and app unlocking One-time PINs for visitors Automatic locking after 10 seconds CONS Won’t work with Apple’s Siri Uses AA batteries Pro installation recommended
Streaming video from your front door is becoming common but this gadget takes smart security further. The SDS A30 Smart Lock is a connected deadbolt that can be controlled by an app so you can let people in remotely or issue a temporary PIN for a one-time visitor. Those numbers also move around to prevent any guessing games.
* * * *
Swann SwannBuddy Video Doorbell A thoroughly modern way to keep your online shopping safe $200, swann.com/au PROS Save videos without a subscription Heat and motion detection Six chimes from a separate speaker
This Australian-made smart doorbell promises to “outsmart porch pirates”. It has a wide-angle lens that records vertically so you can monitor parcels in front of your door, sensors to monitor heat and motion, and a microphone and a speaker so you can talk to unexpected visitors.
* * * 1/2
Arlo Essential Indoor Camera A connected camera to keep an eye inside the home $159, arlo.com PROS Clear video, even at night Automatic privacy shield Works with Amazon and Google commands CONS No local storage Noticeable cable No support for Apple HomeKit
The straightforward security camera can be plugged into a wall, connected to Wi-Fi and will send alerts when it detects motion and stream video to your phone, even at night. In a useful privacy feature, the Arlo gadget can also be shut down in the app, which lowers a small curtain over its camera and shuts down its mic.
* * * 1/2
USES AI Google Nest Cam This camera can tell if there’s a cat or a parcel outside your door From $329, store.google.com PROS Can identify parcels or people Indoor or outdoor use Rechargeable battery CONS Some features require subscription Some accessories cost extra Quite heavy
It’s no surprise Google’s take on smart home security involves artificial intelligence. Its Nest Cam security cameras can be used outside or inside, can be fixed to a wall with a magnetic plate or stood on an optional stand, and will work out what’s in front of them, from a package, to a person or vehicle. Users can also set up an activity zone to monitor and make announcements through the cameras. Each camera will let you see what happened in the last three hours. * * * * 1/2
CREDIT: Story JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 596
