SMARThacks CAREERS COVID HAS CHANGED THE WAY EMPLOYERS CHOOSE WORKERS. HERE’S WHAT YOU NEED TO KNOW
Record numbers of jobs are being advertised as businesses recover from Covid-19 but applying for them is different now than it was pre-pandemic in many ways.
SEEK customer insights and strategy head Elyssia Clark says hirers and talent acquisition professionals are using new technologies and techniques to source the right person for the right role.
“If you’re looking for a job, it’s helpful to be aware of these innovations when preparing for the interview process,” she says.
SafetyCulture talent vice-president Robert Lamb says being savvy with technology is important but many former principles still apply.
Here are five ways landing a job has changed since Covid-19.
THE FIRST STEPS OFTEN ARE FACELESS “The hiring processes can now include digital elements where jobseekers may not meet their prospective employer until well into the hiring process,” Clark says.
Lamb says artificial intelligence was already a big trend in the initial screening process but it is not just being used to vet resumes.
“When you’re answering online application questions, really make sure you’ve read and understand the question, and answer as concisely and clearly as possible,” he says.
“We’ve heard that many applicants seem to assume that because they’re initially speaking with a bot they can answer their questions in draft mode, but you absolutely still need to be thoughtful in your responses to progress in the process.”
YOU’RE TALKING TO A COMPUTER Video interviews have become the new normal, as many companies practise social distancing or lockdowns prevent in-person meetings.
“While becoming more prevalent, our data shows that one in four feel more nervous about attending an interview online than they do in person,” Clark says. “While it can be awkward at first, it’s important to practise and feel comfortable speaking to a screen – even when there is no one on the other end of the conversation.” Lamb says jobseekers should become familiar with not just speaking one-on-one with the hirer.
“Group assessment and selection centres have been moving online into either breakout rooms or specialised assessment tools,” he says.
“You could be participating with other jobseekers and your interaction with others is critical.
“It can be harder with ‘strangers’ online, but the interviewer needs to see you can build rapport, even in a digital setting, because this will likely form part of your job.”
EMPLOYMENT GAPSARE OKAY The pandemic has led to many roles being made redundant and therefore many people are out of work, so gaps between jobs listed on resumes are not seen as such a bad thing as they have in the past. “These redundancies are not a reflection on a jobseeker’s work ethic or skills and shouldn’t be a cause for concern,” Clark says.
“Be transparent with interviewers about any gaps in your resume, and focus the conversation back towards why you’re the best person for the role.”
CHANGE IS NOW CONSTANT “From working from home to switching operations entirely, jobseekers need to be able to demonstrate to talent acquisition professionals that they are able to adapt to new situations,” Clark says.
Transferable skills also are more important than ever.
“Critical thinking, communication and collaboration are the skills employers value most,” she says.
“Our research has shown that 58 per cent of employers would hire someone without the right experience if they have the right skills.”
ASSESSED FIRST, INTERVIEWED LATER Lamb says there are fewer interview rounds occurring, but more assessments are being conducted upfront.
“The take-home assessment has really risen in popularity because it gives us a chance to see how the candidate will perform on the job with a task or problem they’d experience day-to-day, how they think and where their skill level is at,” he says. “A lot of these assessments are timed, but some of them are open book. “This technique isn’t used to try and catch candidates out; we’re trying to give them a chance to shine through with their actual work skills, which is great for very competent candidates who might not interview well in traditional processes.”
CREDIT: Cara Jenkin
Word count: 687
