THERE ARE A FEW UNEXPECTED REASONS TO CONSIDER TRADING YOUR IPHONE FOR SAMSUNG’S NEW FLAGSHIP SMARTPHONE TECHNOLOGY The Samsung Galaxy Note is officially dead but, surprisingly, there’s little need to mourn it.
Like a last-minute movie recast, the tech giant has replaced its iconic smartphone with another model; one that promises to deliver speed and a stylus for scribbling like the Note, while also boosting its camera credentials.
But is the Samsung Galaxy S22 Ultra a worthy competitor to the iPhone 13 Pro Max or Google Pixel 6 Pro? We tested the top model, due for launch in Australia on March 4, to find out.
LOVE NOTE TO THE NOTE Samsung owes a lot to the Note and, for the most dedicated fans, this phone will be a bittersweet release.
The Galaxy Note was the first phone to make big screens big, as well as the first to reinvent the stylus since Palm. The S22 Ultra steals both of these skills.
Its 6.8-inch screen is just .01 of an inch smaller than the last Note release and the S Pen’s inclusion is more than telling.
Plus, this Pen steps up its game. It uses artificial intelligence to cut down writing delays to 2.8 milliseconds, predicting where you’ll draw on the screen next.
While that delay is hard to quantify, it certainly worked swiftly in our tests. And while Samsung doesn’t reinvent what the S Pen can do on this phone, Galaxy S buyers who might not have used it as a selfie shutter release or to scribble notes while on the phone will find plenty of new tools at their disposal.
RAW PHOTO POWER Paper comparisons do not do the S22 Ultra cameras justice.
Yes, this smartphone still has four rear cameras and, yes, they feature the same megapixels and zoom power as last year.
What they do benefit from is powerful software upgrades that make a genuine difference to your images, and a better integration of RAW photo capture for enthusiasts.
One of its best additions is a feature called Adaptive Pixel that uses two of the phone’s sensors to create a better image than just one could achieve.
In dim light, for example, this technology uses the phone’s whopping, 108-megapixel sensor to capture fine detail and its 12-megapixel sensor to capture a brighter image. By combining the two, it can produce a sharp, well-exposed photo that you might not expect a phone to capture.
A new artificially intelligent stereo depth map boosts its abilities to separate a person (or pet) from the background in Portrait mode, delivering more realistic results.
Photographers are also likely to appreciate the new RAW format integration in this phone. Its Expert RAW app provides easy access to tweaks like metering, white balance, shutter speed, and ISO, as well as a live histogram and access to all four camera lenses. The results can show incredible detail and can be moved to Adobe Lightroom with a tap.
Samsung is not the first to play up its RAW photo skills – both Google and Apple phones have added support for the image format in recent years – but its delivery is slick.
WHAT’S MISSING?
Surprisingly, this phone will not support the next generation of 5G broadcasts in Australia, called mmWave. This is a particularly unexpected omission from Samsung, given its history of beating competitors in network speeds.
The entry-level version of this phone also features less RAM than the others, and there’s no space for a MicroSD storage upgrade.
THE VERDICT So much hype surrounded the release of this smartphone and, for the most part, those who followed it will be pleased with the result.
Samsung’s new flagship smartphone is clearly the most accomplished photographer in the range and grabs the Note’s stylus like a baton in a relay race.
While it’s disappointing the company didn’t add next-gen 5G or upgrade the camera hardware of this smartphone, its software enhancements give images a serious boost and plenty of new tools.
The Galaxy S22 Ultra is the new standard by which 2022 smartphones will be measured.
In review Samsung Galaxy S22 Ultra $1849-$2499, samsung.com/au PROS • More advanced photographic options • Noticeably improved Portrait mode • Fast and useful S Pen • Speedy operation • Long battery life
CONS • Missing mmWave 5G • Entry level model has less RAM • Gets warm when snapping 108-megapixel images • Photo rendering can take time • No removable storage VERDICT ****1/2
CREDIT: Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 746
