Twenty20 freelancer Chris Lynn has no legally binding roadblock to fulfilling a big-money contract in the new UAE league, regardless of whether Cricket Australia deny him official permission.
While David Warner and a host of other Australian contracted players were approached by the UAE league with offers worth up to $700,000 to play next January, their status as CA, state or Big Bash League contract holders effectively barred them from accepting.
Warner is in the final stages of reaching terms to take part in the BBL this season for the Sydney Thunder, under the sort of hybrid deal once used for the likes of Kevin Pietersen, Mike Hussey, Shane Watson and the late Shane Warne in the tournament's start-up phase.
But Lynn's deal with the Brisbane Heat was not extended this year, meaning that unless he signs with another BBL club - he has been in talks with the Adelaide Strikers - CA will struggle to restrict him from playing overseas this summer.
Senior cricket sources told The Age that Lynn still wishes to play BBL this summer, but signing any such contract would automatically rule him out of any chance of going to the UAE. Without a contract, his situation is entirely different.
An ICC clause exists that requires a player to request a no objection certificate (NOC) from their home board for two years after the conclusion of their most recent contract. But the global players body, FICA, is adamant the regulation is not enforceable.
"Professional cricket is built on contracts, which along with any collective agreements, should govern employment relationships," FICA's chief executive Tom Moffat told The Age. "NOC's should be an administrative tool around that, not a tool used to restrict un-contracted players, and FICA will offer its support to any players, especially un-contracted players, that are unfairly restricted.
"Players taking opportunities in domestic leagues are working in the context of a short term, precarious career path. Like workers in any other industry, they are entitled to choose who their employer is if they aren't contracted. Players are also taking the opportunities that are provided to them by the boards and ICC who run the game and determine its structure and schedule at global level.
"We don't believe answers lie in blanket restricting players at global level or domestically. Equally, if any countries have the aim of attracting the best international talent into their own league, and therefore away from another country's system, it would be slightly hypocritical to want to stop players from taking the same opportunities that might lie elsewhere for players."
A precedent of sorts was set by Kieron Pollard in 2016, when the West Indies board initially blocked him from playing in the South African T20 league as it was attempting to gain fees from other boards in exchange for NOCs. Within days, WICB was forced to back down as Pollard was not centrally contracted at the time.
CA stated yesterday that Lynn had not yet applied for the certificate he requires to be allowed to play, and reiterated that the Australian season was a priority for players. "Our guiding principle remains the prioritisation and protection of Australia's domestic summer of cricket and the interests of the game overall. As such, [certificates] are generally only issued for the period after the Australian season has finished."
Under the regulations set by the UAE league, each privately owned team is able to recruit as many as 12 overseas players from full member countries, including Australia, with nine overseas players and only two local players required in the playing XI. That ratio has led to calls from Cricket Australia's chief executive Nick Hockley and others for a cap on the number of overseas players allowed in any league.
While sanctioned by the UAE cricket board, the Twenty20 league is privately owned by two of its directors. Mubashshir Usmani, the UAE board's secretary, argued the new tournament would still be geared at developing cricket in the region, despite its lopsided squads.
Moffat said Twenty20 league pay had outstripped international pay in smaller countries for a long time, and the fact the issue was only now starting to catch up to the likes of Australia and England should be cause for a global summit on scheduling, contracts and the co-existence of domestic leagues and international cricket.
CREDIT: Daniel Brettig
Word count: 722
