There’s one appliance you buy, then it’s literally set and forget – the washing machine. If you can remember the old curved washer with a wringer, or heaven forbid, still have one, perhaps its time for an upgrade.
According to CanstarBlue, the average life cycle of a washing machine is eight to 10 years, depending on whether you have front or top loader. However, in the past decade, artificial intelligence technology has taken over these appliances, so you may want to know the options before you head down this minefield of choice and make a purchase.
WASHING ONLY Once upon time the agitator in top-loading machines worked its magic with brute force, then spin cycles improved and became more gentle, and depended on what clothes you just threw in.
Now it’s all about pre-treatments, sanitising and hygiene steams. Steam features can reduce up to 99.99 per cent of some bacteria and are a good choice for allergy sufferers.
Or, why not choose a machine with a “bubble” soak, which will pre-mix detergent with water and soak clothes in bubbles for a thorough clean.
If you are contemplating a new top loader, be aware front loaders have come to the fore with technology and are becoming the machine of choice as they allow more laundry benchspace.
Canstar Blue’s Tahnee-Jae Lopez-Vito says a recent survey of 1130 households with new washing machines based purchases on performance, reliability, quietness while operating, additional functionality, design, value for money and operating satisfaction.
“Washing machines aren’t the easiest appliance to replace, so it really does pay to do your research, and finding out what other consumers just like yourself think,” she says.
TECH OPTIONS Leading washing machine brands are all about simplifying the weekly wash, and are making machines smarter and intuitive with some even linking to Wi-Fi and apps that can plan your weekly laundry, control wash settings and check your machine’s energy consumption from your smartphone.
Pop the washing on before you leave work, so it’s ready to hang when you get home.
Washers are also becoming easier to use, faster too, some washing in less than 39 minutes, they can learn washing habits and remember them for the next laundry load, too.
Samsung Australia’s director of home appliances, Andrew Wand, says most people only use 3.7 of 14 wash cycle options and are after the quickest, simplest options.
“Our Smart AI range are designed to make doing the laundry simple. They don’t just connect to Wi-Fi, but learn how you wash and give you real time recommendations to make it less of a chore,” he says.
Next, built-in sensors will determine the level of soiling, weigh the load, even assess the fabrics to select wash modes, optimise the amount of water and detergent used, and set the rinse cycle, all with sustainability in mind. Machines with turbo cleans will also reduce wash times, as well as electricity and water usage.
And, according to Samsung research, 60 per cent of Australians wish they had a nicer laundry and that’s led to more colour choices, such as black and platinum as well as traditional white.
“The new colour options provide choice and with the ability to match the washing machine and dryer design,” says Andrew.
“It creates a flow-on with the overall aesthetic of their home.” THE COMBO The next option is washing machines and dryers that have combined as one. Yes, it means you can’t do both at once, but it does cut down time unloading and reloading.
These are also ideal for those who turn on the machine, then promptly forget about it. Cost-effective, convenient and space saving, some brands, such as LG, are taking the combo a step further, introducing a Wash Tower, aimed at minimising floor space.
The separate washer and heat pump dryer are stacked on top of each other with a single control unit to operate both. And it’s being applauded, with the Wash Tower winning the company a 2021 Red Dot Design Award.
Wash options put through the wringer STEAM THROUGH: One of the biggest advancements in washing machines, steam is gentle on clothes and even smooths wrinkles, and removes stubborn stains. A 20-minute cycle can deodorise fabrics and is ideal for clothes that aren’t quite dirty enough to require a full wash and only need a quick refresh.
ENERGY EFFICIENT: Washers with a 4.5 star rating or higher are recommended, and bigger wash load capabilities, up to 10kg, can reduce the number of separate washes each week, although they can still chew energy. Machines with inverter motors will minimise noise while boosting efficiency, making them ideal for apartments or where the laundry is next to a lounge or bedroom.
EASE OF USE: Look for large loading doors, ergonomic handles, larger capacities, LED text and button displays and streamlined automatic programs.You can expect to pay between $900 and $6000 for a new machine, but remember it will probably last for the next decade, if not longer. ONE SIZE DOES NOT FIT ALL:From compact washers to large capacity, always measure your machine to check it will fit your space and has a 2.5cm gap on each side for ventilation.
CREDIT: Words; Trudy Oram
Word count: 865
