CAREERS GOOD JOBS ARE HARD TO FIND, AND IF YOU ARE YOUNG, IT CAN BE EVEN HARDER Finding meaningful work can be difficult at the best of times, but the odds are stacked against you if you are under 25. The youth unemployment rate in June (10.2 per cent) was roughly twice that of the general workforce (4.9 per cent), according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
It was, however, significantly better than a year earlier at the peak of the Covid pandemic (16.3 per cent).
Exclusive research commissioned by youth charity Humanity Matters reveals two in five Australians (40 per cent) believe the most significant barrier for young jobseekers today is a lack of entry-level jobs, resulting from automation and technical advancement.
Other major perceived barriers include a lack of soft skills (35 per cent of respondents believe this) and a lack of technical skills, such as those of a specific trade (33 per cent) or in emerging industries, including artificial intelligence and robotics (21 per cent).
Other respondents say ongoing Covid lockdowns (31 per cent), mental health issues (21 per cent) and a lack of community and social support (11 per cent) pose a challenge for young people wanting to join the workforce.
Humanity Matters Youth Street Service manager Selim Ucar says unemployment among young Australians cannot be reduced to a single issue and the Covid-19 pandemic is only compounding the problem.
“Now more than ever, we must invest more into building up the confidence of young people so they can earn a living,” he says.
“Governments, communities and those who hold key relationships with young people must reach out to support our young people in their journeys to become valuable members of our workforce amid these challenging times.” Career Success Australia program director Naren Chellappah says he is not surprised by the Humanity Matters survey findings but he would also add the barrier of increased competition, as uncapping university places has led to the creation of too many graduates.
He shares his best advice for young people entering the workforce: START EARLY “Go and see your school careers adviser to match your interests, skills and passions with a vocation or career,” Chellappah says. “(For example, think about) engineering/technology, business/finance, creativity/marketing/design, health/nursing, law or a trade.” ATTEND CAREERS FAIRS These events are all virtual now, making it easier than ever, he says. FIND A MENTOR Chellappah recommends doing this as soon as possible, even in Year 11 or 12. “Set up a LinkedIn profile and connect with professionals in the industry or job you are keen to get into,” he says.
“Arrange a 10-minute phone chat to learn more.” GET INVOLVED ON CAMPUS For the university students, Chellappah advises joining associations or clubs and being active in them. “(For example,) become an events officer or president,” he says.
BUILD YOUR CONFIDENCE AND SOFT SKILLS “Consider doing a summer internship or industry placement as part of your course to build confidence and networks and get a ‘feel’ for the real world,” he says.
CHOOSE AN AUTOMATION-PROOF CAREER Chellappah advises some good examples of “bullet proof” careers are traditional trades, user experience and user interface (UX/UI) design, software development, data science, engineering, law, business consulting and healthcare.
THINK BEFORE YOU LEAP “Choose your study option wisely,” he says. “Don’t just do a degree or certificate or diploma for the sake of it. You will waste two to four years.
“You’re better off taking a break, working with a careers adviser on your career path and then studying.” Chellappah says university and TAFE are not the only options, either with “many institutions offering half-year, industry-focused courses.”
Punting on youth ANDREW Tralongo was 21 when Melbourne-based digital marketing agency Xugar gave him a go.
He had a Bachelor of Design and started as a design intern – but quickly became a production manager.
Tralongo says the biggest barrier for young jobseekers is the number of entry-level jobs that require at least two years of experience.
“There are avenues of volunteering which can give you that experience, but if you are not financially independent then volunteering may not be an option,” he says. Xugar chief executive Sagar Sethi says he offered Tralongo a job as he showed initiative, a willingness to grow and commitment to the firm.
“On the very first week of his internship, he approached me and wanted five minutes of my time,” Sethi says.
“(We ended up talking) for 20 minutes – he had ideas, plans, and a keen sense to own the design arm of the company. “I decided in the very first week that he needs this job and, moreover, Xugar needs Andrew.”
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 779
