Duran Duran’s Simon Le Bon shares with Stellar why his daughter accused him of not even liking music, the times he’s thrown his “toys out of the pram” during spats with his band of four decades, and the wild rumour about him that was started in Australia So, it took you six years, but you finally made good on your promise of a new Duran Duran record with Future Past. Yeah, it’s good, isn’t it? That sounds quite arrogant and obnoxious to say that, but you just know when you’ve done something that’s got depth and meaning, musical and lyrical, and in style as well.
The album bridges the Duran Duran of the 1980s with the sound of now. I understand your daughter Tallulah (Le Bon’s youngest daughter with his wife of 35 years, former model Yasmin Le Bon) had an accidental influence on that. I think the year of lockdown made us all re-evaluate the job, really. I remember coming downstairs one morning and my daughter had [alternative music station] BBC Radio 6 on and I’m like, “Oh, I can’t have breakfast with this sort of thing on.” And she said, “Dad, call yourself a musician... You don’t even like music.” I do like music, but I know what she means. It starts with you coming out of a studio after an eight-hour session, getting into the taxi at 2am and the driver goes, “What do you want to listen to?” And you say, “You know what, you might just leave it off, I’ve been listening to music all day.” Pretty soon you find that you’re only listening to the music you’re working on and the music that got you into a band in the first place: Patti Smith, Lou Reed, Iggy Pop, the Sex Pistols, The Doors, a few things from the ’90s and a few things that I picked up along the way. I realised I need to open my ears up; I need some new music. It’s very easy to go “modern music isn’t what it used to be” – you know, that Jeremy Clarkson attitude. Tallulah gave me a few starting points and I loved falling down those rabbit holes on Spotify.
Future Past is a progressive record but songs like ‘Anniversary’ are classic Duran Duran. Yeah, it’s ‘Hungry Like The Wolf’ and ‘The Wild Boys’ – it’s the new one of those. And that will always be there in our music because that’s where we come from. We’re not revisionists and we don’t deny our past. We’re proud of our past. We love it. And we know why that music works.
Duran Duran was one of the pioneering bands to usher in the MTV era. Now you’re one of the first to use artificial intelligence to create a music video for your single ‘Invisible’. We don’t stand around and wait for things to happen. We go looking for the new. We’re not a new band but if there are new technologies out there or different points of view, different ways of getting an idea across, we’ll take a punt.
After being together for 41 years, what’s the dynamic between you and your fellow bandmates, keyboardist Nick Rhodes, bassist John Taylor and drummer Roger Taylor, during the musical conversations – is it easier now? Yes, because we know what would upset each other and we don’t go there. We’re more able to communicate ideas and say, “Can I try something different on that, please?” Without being the 20-year-old saying, “I think it’s awful. We just have to scrap it. I’ve got a much better idea.” We’re not as terrified of each other as we used to be. We like each other a lot now and we’re better friends. There’s one thing that’s king over everything, and that’s the music and the record. As long as you keep that as your number-one focus, these conversations are a lot easier. It’s still a very personal thing and occasionally Nick will say something that will make me throw my toys out of the pram. I always call him up later and go, “I think you’re right. I’ve had an idea and I’ve written another verse or I’ve changed that lyric.” I absolutely love being in Duran Duran. I love these people and I love the music we make and I love the career we’ve had. I feel so lucky.
And Australia’s love affair with the band will continue. Absolutely. Ever since you all thought I was Bryan Ferry’s illegitimate son. Remember that? Only in Australia!
Biopic or jukebox musical: which one is Duran Duran going to do? Neither. We’ll do a surreal semi-fictional biopic with lots of jukebox music in it. Future Past is out October 22.
CREDIT: Interview by KATHY McCABE
Word count: 795
