THOUSANDS OF NEW ROLES ARE BEING CREATED IN THE RETAIL SECTOR AS PEOPLE CHANGE THE WAY THEY SHOP CAREERS Retail jobs are a hot choice for employment opportunities, with the sector growing by more than 34,000 people last year – one of the few sectors to increase, according to figures from the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
And we can expect new types of roles to be created in response to emerging technologies and online shopping trends.
So where will the jobs be? Australian Retailers Association chief executive Paul Zahra and Coles chief people officer Kris Webb share their insights: THE JOBS ON OFFER Store managers and sales assistants are top of the list but there will also be new science-driven roles to support the shift towards online sales and artificial intelligence, Zahra says.
He predicts the retail industry will have a greater need for engineers, mathematicians and logistics professionals.
Webb says Coles’ strategic investment in technology and automation is driving the need for new roles that have not yet been created – such as in fulfilment and online delivery – but traditional retail roles will also be needed.
She says the most common roles likely to be available with the supermarket giant this year are: customer service agents to help deliver online orders, qualified bakers, corporate roles in the technology and digital space, and in-store team members in customer service and grocery night fill.
“We are always investing in our store network and in (the 2021 financial year), we plan to refurbish around 65 supermarkets and to open 10 to 15 new stores over the course of the year, which will provide an influx of job opportunities in local communities across the country,” she says. “As we continue to expand and develop our store network, there’s often a wide range of roles available including store managers, department managers, trade-qualified roles like butchers and bakers, and customer service agents to help deliver Coles online orders.” In the past 12 months, Coles employed more than 30,000 new team members. This included more than 6500 people in a single month at the height of COVID-19 panic buying – the company’s largest ever recruitment drive.
“On average, we recruit approximately 28,000 new team members annually and we expect similar numbers in 2021,” Webb says.
“As the job market regains momentum, we expect there will be more turnover this year than in 2020.” THE SKILLS YOU NEED Being a team player, focusing on good customer service and having a reliable reputation are the key attributes jobseekers need for customer-facing roles, according to the Federal Government’s JobOutlook portal.
People with skills in active listening (listening to others, not interrupting, and asking good questions), critical thinking (considering the pros and cons of different ways to solve a problem), serving others, reading comprehension, speaking, and social perceptiveness (understanding why people react the way they do) are also sought by retailers.
Meanwhile, employers look for retail managers who provide good customer service, have strong people skills, and are organised, well presented and trustworthy.
In-demand skills include monitoring (keeping track of how work is progressing and making changes or improvements), critical thinking, social perceptiveness, speaking, and persuasion (talking people into changing their minds or their behaviour).
TIPS FOR APPLICANTS Webb says jobseekers can prepare for an interview with Coles by visiting its careers website, thinking about their own experiences as a customer, and practising answering questions about themselves with a friend or family member.
“When choosing what to wear, go for something neat, clean and professional,” she says. “No need to dress too formally, just something that makes you feel comfortable and well presented.” She also recommends jobseekers think about their body language. “Consider your posture, expressions and tone of voice, as well as what you’re saying,” she says.
Online team member and checkout operator Kaylan Semic, 19, started with Eastgardens Coles after losing his job at a trampoline centre following the COVID-19 outbreak and subsequent business shutdowns.
He says he plans to stay in the industry for a long time as he enjoys “everything” about his role.
“It’s the hours, the people, it’s all really manageable,” he says. “The staff is really helpful, the customers are really nice.” Semic’s advice for others applying for a retail position is to have questions in mind to ask the interviewer. “I also dressed well and it made me feel more confident going in,” he says. “Just go online, be honest, and go for it.”
Winners and losers RETAIL JOBS THAT GREW LAST YEAR ■ 9400 more workers in food retail ■ 50,600 more workers in other store-based retail, including department stores, clothing and footwear, recreational goods, furniture, hardware and garden supplies, electrical and electronics, and pharmaceuticals RETAIL JOBS THAT SHRUNK LAST YEAR ■ 16,200 fewer workers in motor vehicle and parts retail ■ 3600 fewer workers in fuel retail ■ 3200 fewer workers in non-store and commission-based retail, including direct mail retailing and commission-based health food sales. SOURCE: ABS Labour Force – December 2020 versus December 2019
CREDIT: MELANIE BURGESS
Word count: 839
