THE MIDNIGHT SKY (M) A fading star can still burn brightly, US, 121 min. At Palace Nova Eastend and Prospect. On Netflix from December 23.
George Clooney has not appeared before the cameras in a movie for well over five years. So fans of the immensely popular leading man are going to be in for a shock when they first catch sight of him in his new project. Heavily bearded, highly stressed and hardly speaking, this is not the George Clooney so many know and love. But it is a George Clooney all will pay attention to. Such is the sheer gravity and intense focus he applies to the role of Augustine, a solitary Arctic scientist who could well be the last man left alive on Earth. Working from his base station near the North Pole, Augustine may also hold the only lifeline to survival for the last humans left in space. But only if he can prevent them from entering our planet’s orbit. While we get to know the crew of five on the spaceship Aether (led by the fine pairing of Felicity Jones and David Oyelowo), Augustine must find a way to open communications with the vessel before it is too late for all aboard to turn back. Also directed by Clooney, this is quiet, thoughtful and considered, as much a clever exercise in science fiction as it is a stirring tribute to the human survival instinct. * * * 1/2
I’M YOUR WOMAN (MA15+) A good woman stands by a bad man, US, 125 min.
Streaming on Amazon.
This slow-burning revenge thriller requires both constant patience and curiosity sent its way, but does ultimately reward the viewer for the effort. It is some unspecified time in the 1970s. Jean (a mesmerising Rachel Brosnahan) has been married to Eddie (Bill Heck) for quite a while. The couple never got around to having a kid. The reason might have something to do with Eddie’s career as a thief. Then Eddie brings home a baby one day. Doesn’t say where it’s from. But the understanding is Jean will raise the little cherub. Then Eddie disappears, leaving Jean in danger of retaliation from his former associates. To protect herself and her newly acquired child, Jean must hit the road and hide away. Firstly in the company of Cal (Arinze Kene), a stern former partner of Eddie. Then in the care of Cal’s seen-it-all-before wife Teri (Marsha Blake). While this unorthodox movie will be an acquired taste for some, there can be no denying there is something subtly powerful at work here. Keep your eyes on Brosnahan’s shrewd performance to work out what that something might be. * * *
THE PROM (PG) Show people unable to show the way, US, 132 min.
Streaming on Netflix.
Once upon a time, The Prom was a simple, straightforward Broadway musical. There was a lovely story about a teenage girl rising above intolerance. Ten songs to further illuminate her plight. And a nice generous intermission in the middle. Now The Prom is a Netflix musical. Which means a lot more story and a few more songs. As for an intermission, you can program as many as you want by hitting the pause button. However, the feeling never quite goes away in this razzle-dazzle-get-out-your-jazz-hands movie that it must have been much more fun when it happened on a stage. Meryl Streep, James Corden and (a weirdly under-utilised) Nicole Kidman spearhead a tragic tribe of New York theatre professionals looking to put their latest flop behind them by drumming up some easy publicity in a faraway small town. Does teenage Emma (Jo Ellen Pellman) need or want this motley lot’s help to go to her high school prom with her girlfriend as her official date? Not really. Will there be much hammy hoofing, huffing and highly dubious singing? Yes, there will. Directed by Ryan Murphy, he of the much-loved (and missed) TV series Glee. * * 1/2
SUPERINTELLIGENCE (PG) One last chance to get with the program, US, 106 min.
In cinemas. Whenever Melissa McCarthy collaborates with her writer-director husband Ben Falcone, it is usually time to hit the exits and head for the hills. Movies like Tammy, The Boss and Life of the Party are comedy calamities of the highest order, which can only lower any expectations that might be out there for the couple’s latest work, Superintelligence. Well, surprise surprise, this new one does not give off even the faintest whiff of debacle as it goes about its low-key comic business. McCarthy plays Carol, a Silicon Valley tech exec who notices her appliances are beginning to talk to her in ways that are clearly not programmed. Turns out Carol has been selected by a rapidly evolving form of artificial intelligence to act as a guinea pig for the future of the human race. If the AI likes what it sees, the planet can go on spinning. If it doesn’t, we are toast. There is both an unexpected sweetness and relaxed energy in play here that realises the movie’s limited ambitions with ease. McCarthy is also far more generous with her co-stars than is usually the case (as evidenced by some wonderful scenes here with Bobby Cannavale as Carol’s ex-boyfriend). * * *
CREDIT: LEIGH PAATSCH
Word count: 881
