TECHNOLOGY They’re among the most popular and useful smartphone downloads: weather apps can tell you if it’s safe to venture outside, what you need to take with you and whether you need to rescue your car from incoming hail or falling trees.
But not all weather apps are created equally. They don’t offer the same accuracy, the same alerts and many don’t use the same source of data to make their predictions.
So is the weather app that came with your smartphone the one you should stick with? Or is there something better out there? And is there something to warn about local flooding?
Weather apps became a popular smartphone staple just as soon as Apple launched them with the iPhone in 2007 – and for Australians in 2008.
And the iPhone’s default weather app has recently undergone a makeover, now offering more detail about humidity, air quality, wind, rain and visibility.
Apple gets weather information from a long list of data sources, including The Weather Channel, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and meteorological agencies in India, Canada, Germany and beyond.
And it’s not alone in pulling data from a wealth of sources. While many Australian-based apps use data from the Bureau of Meteorology, others use additional sources like the UK-based OpenWeatherMap and develop their own forecasts.
It’s the reason why one app may predict a 40 per cent chance of rain and another warns of clouds only.
A recent report from ForecastWatch investigating the accuracy of weather apps between 2017 and 2020 found The Weather Channel delivered the most accurate predictions worldwide and in the Asia Pacific region in particular.
It’s worth noting, however, that its “one day out” forecasts were accurate 32 per cent of the time in 2020, and its closest rival, Dark Sky, was correct 17 per cent of the time, leaving plenty of room for change.
And then there are weather apps that do more with that information – something delivered by artificial intelligence and cunning app developers.
Some apps will alert you minutes before a downpour, like Rain Parrot, while others will show you a rain radar and let you decide where it’s headed, like the BOM app.
Unfortunately, Australia has few apps that warn about floods, like those seen in Queensland and northern NSW recently.
The BOM app shows general flood warnings but the NSW Public Works Department offers one of few flood-specific apps, called Floods Near Me, that provides details about water levels and road closures. The SES has apps in other states in which users can request assistance.
Smart weather apps are useful to people like Ashleigh Ernst, whose business has unexpectedly turned her into an amateur meteorologist.
The entrepreneur launched The Picnic Co in Brisbane six years ago and regularly creates elaborate spreads for couples, small groups and even weddings.
But those events are usually held outdoors, where the weather can play a major role in their success.
“I would have the most perfect job if I could control the weather,” she says. “I’m so organised but the weather is the one thing I can’t control and it drives me crazy. It adds another element of stress because you look at the weather forecast and sometimes they say up to 120mm (of rain) in the day but it’s been sunshine. It’s really hard to get a gauge on it.” After plenty of experience with unpredictable storms and surprise rain, Ernst says she’s tried plenty of forecasting apps but, frustrated by their differing opinions, she often goes straight to the BOM weather radar.
“Normally, I’ll start looking at forecasts a week prior and start to monitor it,” she says. “If I’m in my office, I’ll have the radar up on my screen all day.” She also recommends people don’t make picnic plans based on long-range weather forecasts and regularly encourages her clients to make a backup plan, whether that’s hiring a gazebo or considering where they could hold a picnic in their own home if storms approach.
“It can be blue skies and clients will think it’s a beautiful sunny day but, from my experience, I know that storms can form within seconds,” she says. “I’ve learnt a lot about the weather in this job.”
Five of the best come rain or shine BOM Weather (Free, Apple iOS/Google Android): The official app from Australia’s weather experts shows any weather warnings prominently, delivers forecasts for rain, temperature, and even wind by the hour, and offers quick access to an animation of the latest radar images so you can track incoming storms.
My Lightning Tracker Pro ($4.49/$3.19, Apple iOS/Google Android): This app is often first to alert its users to incoming storms as it tracks the location of lightning and will send an alert when it hits near your area. You can customise these alerts in its menus, as well as tracking the locations lightning has struck, checking out the rain radar, and looking at storm activity around Australia.
Rain Parrot ($5.99, Apple iOS): This app delivers warnings so specific they’re almost spooky. Its Rain Alerts will not only tell you how much of a downpour to expect but indicate how many minutes will pass before it starts falling, and when the storm will pass. The app also shows a weekly forecast, radar images and a detailed breakdown of the day’s events.
SunSmart (free, Apple iOS/Google Android): This app from the Cancer Council tracks the sunny side of weather and can help you work out when you’ll need to deploy a hat and sunscreen. SunSmart will not only show the current UV rating for your location but send you an alert when it gets high, show the worst time for sunburn and can remind you to reapply sun cream to avoid incidents.
Carrot Weather (free, Apple iOS/Google Android): This is undoubtedly the only weather app with a 17 years-plus advisory. Carrot Weather earned that by insulting its users in hilarious, adult ways, calling them “meatbags”, and offering forecasts with snarky comments often based on the news of the day. Despite its focus on humour, there is also genuinely useful weather data inside.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 1023
