FRENCH tech start-up Bilberry is upfront about its intentions with the announcement that the company’s “green-on-green’’ weed identifying technology will soon be forward-mounted on an Australian self-propelled sprayer for the first time.
A limited number of the Bilberry systems will be available with Miller sprayers for 2022 as local factory-fitted options.
The front-mounted Miller machines already feature options including nozzle application systems, Raven XRT auto height control and four-wheel steer, as well as the company’s Spray-Air platform and other third-party air-assisted systems, while WeedSeeker 2 Reflected Light spot-spray technology also can be used.
The Bilberry Intelligent Spot-Spraying System uses an embedded camera network, artificial intelligence and deep-learning software to identify weeds in-crop or in green-on-green applications.
Paris-based Bilberry opened its first Australian office in Perth in 2019 after two years of testing here.
Australian sales manager Josh Johnson said plans were in place to expand across Australia, with a presence in Adelaide to open soon.
“The initial work has focused on firming up the technology, building up our algorithm data sets and running remote trials,” Mr Johnson said.
“Miller represents our third partnership in the Australian market, with Bilberry already in use with Agrifac and Goldacres machinery, though this is the first time the technology will be fitted to a front-mounted boom.
“Currently, our most widely applicable algorithm is the one for broadleaf weeds in cereals, but we will be progressively releasing the blue lupin algorithm for WA growers next year while broadleaf and grass weeds in chickpeas, canola and lentils could be added in 2023.” Miller machinery is managed exclusively in Australia by Perth-based McIntosh Distribution, whose national sales manager, Peter Vella, said green-on-green trials with the Bilberry system had shown an average hit-and-kill rate of 80 per cent and chemical savings of up to 90 per cent.
Mr Vella said the technology also created the opportunity for more concentrated herbicide applications and use of particular selective herbicides to better control difficult weeds, while also offering the ability to map weed populations.
“Growers could potentially gain an understanding of crop growth stage and disease status and receive GPS-logged data that could assist nitrogen and fungicide applications, as well as their overall farm management strategy,” Mr Vella said. High-speed, high-definition cameras are installed at 3m intervals along the booms to scan paddocks, able to be used at speeds of up to 20km/h.
CREDIT: By COLIN TAYLOR
Word count: 397
