Australia will develop long-range missiles that can travel at least five times the speed of sound under a new agreement with the United States and Britain to build up its defences in the face of a rising China and belligerent Russia.
The "hypersonic" missiles - which will be fired from the land, sea and air and have a range of more than 2000km - will be developed under the AUKUS defence pact between the three countries, which will also build a fleet of nuclear-powered submarines for Australia.
The land-based missiles would be stationed in Australia, while the other two types of missiles could be deployed on the country's jet fighters and war ships. Prime Minister Scott Morrison joined his American and British counterparts Joe Biden and Boris Johnson early this morning to announce the new deal to build hypersonic missiles. The three leaders also lashed Russia's "unprovoked, unjustified and unlawful invasion of Ukraine" and re-affirmed their commitment to build the nuclear boats for Australia.
The AUKUS countries will work together to develop hypersonic missiles, and missile defence systems and radars that can take out an enemy's hypersonic missiles.
There is a technology race going on between China, Russia and the US and its allies to develop hypersonic missiles, which can glide on the atmosphere while changing direction at high speed, making them virtually impossible to track and destroy with existing radars.
The three leaders also confirmed they were progressing with plans to develop undersea drones, with initial trials planned for next year, as well as new quantum and artificial intelligence technologies.
They said they were "fully committed" to developing a fleet of nuclear-powered submarines for Australia. While the plan to build nuclear submarines has been widely welcomed by defence experts, there has been ongoing concern that there could be a capability gap because the current fleet of Collins-class submarines are due to begin going out of service in 2038 and the nuclear-powered boats may not arrive until the 2040s.
Defence Minister Peter Dutton last December said he was extremely confident that Australia would have its first nuclear-powered submarine before 2038.
Since AUKUS was announced in September last year, the three countries have held high-level meetings to advance the plans. Initial steps are also under way to ensure Australia has a workforce with the necessary skills, training, and qualifications to build, operate, and sustain the nuclear submarines, according to sources from all three countries.
Mr Morrison last month outlined the options for the base for the submarines, saying Defence had reviewed 19 potential sites and estimated a $10 billion cost for the base at one of the preferred east coast sites to add to an existing base near Perth. The federal government is also taking initial steps to secure land to build a construction yard for the nuclear submarines, including land adjacent to the existing Osborne North Shipyard in Adelaide.
Mr Morrison and Mr Dutton yesterday announced defence giants Raytheon and Lockheed Martin will lead the nation's $1 billion plan to build guided missiles, and will equip the nation's Super Hornet fighters with Joint Air-to-Surface Standoff Missiles (JASSM-ER) by 2024, three years ahead of schedule.
  CREDIT: Anthony Galloway | National security correspondent
Word count: 531
