The Group of Eight universities are eyeing a new threat to their six Confucius Institutes after the US congress passed legislation ­earlier this year which bans ­defence funding for any American university hosting one of the Beijing-funded institutes.
In the past four years, $90m in US defence funding has come to Australian universities, with over $70m of that going to the research-intensive Go8.
While the ban – inserted into the annual National Defence ­Authorisation Act that funds the US military – was aimed at US universities, foreign universities can, by regulation, be included in the scope of the ban which comes into force in 2023.
“We are concerned enough to keep a watching brief on the legislation and seek advice on the ­implications, if any, on ongoing defence-related funding to those Go8 universities which host Confucius Institutes,” said Go8 chief executive Vicki Thomson.
The Group of Eight universities hosting Confucius Institutes are the University of Sydney, UNSW, the University of Queensland, the University of Melbourne, the University of ­Adelaide and the University of Western Australia.
Research projects in Australia which have benefited from US defence money include the University of Queensland’s work on scramjets and hypersonic flight, artificial intelligence research at UNSW, and development of quantum technology at the University of Sydney.
Even if Australian universities are not directly targeted for removal of defence-related funding at a result of the new legislation, if could affect US universities’ willingness to do joint research with their Australian counterparts.
And, due to the high level of suspicion toward Confucius Institutes in the US, the Defence Department and other US funding agencies could choose, in future, to steer clear of Australian universities which host Confucius Institutes.
Already, US universities are withdrawing en masse from Confucius Institutes. Since 2018, 81 universities have either closed, or announced the closure of their institutes, with many saying that the reason is either the legislation passed earlier this year or other official measures which have restricted the Beijing-funded institutes.
For example, Colorado State University closed its institute on June 30, saying that the “strong research partnership it has with the Department of Defence and other government funding organisations” was a factor in the decision.
According to the National ­Association of Scholars there were 41 Confucius Institutes still operating in US universities in early July, with nine of those either paused or scheduled to close.
The squeeze on Confucius Institutes in the US is likely to tighten. In March the US Senate unanimously passed the Confucius Act which would cut federal funding to universities and colleges with Confucius Institutes unless the agreements which govern them protect academic freedom, prohibit application of foreign laws at the university and ensure managerial control of the institute resides with the univer­sity. The bill has not yet been passed by the House of Representatives.
Meanwhile Australian universities are waiting to see if Foreign Minister Marise Payne will close local Confucius Institutes under the Foreign Relations Act passed last year, which gives her power to cancel overseas agreements made by universities.
Higher Education P21
CREDIT: TIM DODD; HIGHER EDUCATION EDITOR; EXCLUSIVE
Word count: 516
