The United Kingdom, Australia, and the United States have announced a major new defence pact, that will have nuclear submarine technology shared with Australia in a bid to counter China's rising power.
The defence pact, dubbed AUKUS, was announced by the leaders of the three countries in a joint press conference held over a video-link, at 9am yesterday morning.
Though China was not mentioned, the creation of the new pact is an explicit salvo in the growing geo-political struggle over the Indo-Pacific.
Australia would be the immediate beneficiary of the AUKUS pact, receiving a nuclear submarine fleet in the coming years. Prime Minister Scott Morrison said Australia would not acquire nuclear weaponry or civil nuclear infrastructure, and the submarines would only have conventional weapons on board.
Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern, speaking to reporters yesterday afternoon, said New Zealand had not been approached to join the new partnership.
"Prime Minister Morrison and indeed all partners are very well versed and understand our position on nuclear-powered vessels and also nuclear weapons. That of course means that they well understood our likely position on the establishment of nuclear-powered submarines and their use in the region."
The Government's policy that nuclear-powered vessels could not enter New Zealand waters, a long- held position, would not change, Ardern said.
She said there would be "absolutely no change" to New Zealand's relationship with the US, the UK, or Australia, or the Five Eyes intelligence sharing partnership.
The deal means that Australia is only the second country the US has shared it nuclear submarine secrets with, after the UK received access in 1958. Six countries have nuclear-powered submarines, including Russia, France, China and India.
The AUKUS pact will also encompass defence and foreign policy meetings, and co-operation in cybersecurity, artificial intelligence, and other emerging technologies.
"Our world is becoming more complex, especially here in our region, the Indo-Pacific. This effects us all. The future of the Indo-Pacific will impact all our futures," Morrison said, at the press conference. "To meet these challenges, to help deliver the security and stability our region needs, we must now take our partnership to a new level."
US President Joe Biden said, "We need to be able to address both the current strategic environment in the region, and how it may evolve."
The Indo-Pacific is a term used widely by US-aligned countries, and recently embraced by the New Zealand Government, to include India in the strategic picture of the Asia-Pacific region as a greater counter-weight against China's growing influence.
New Zealand was formerly a member of the ANZUS treaty alliance with the US, however its involvement mostly ended in the 1980s when it declined to accept US nuclear-powered vessels in New Zealand waters. Biden said the US would continue to work with the "five treaty allies" - a reference to the Five Eyes arrangement and its offshoots - and "other close partners in the Pacific".
United Kingdom Prime Minister Boris Johnson said providing nuclear submarines to Australia would be one of the most "complex" technology programmes in the world that would take decades.
"It is a momentous decision for any nation to acquire this formidable capability," he said.
The new submarines would be built in Adelaide, Australia, after an 18 months period for planning.
CREDIT: Thomas Manch
Word count: 544
