Bold subs deal to counter China AUSTRALIA will build a high-powered fleet of nuclear submarines in a historic defence pact with the US and the UK to counter the threat posed by China in the Indo-Pacific.
After months of top-secret talks, Scott Morrison, Joe Biden and Boris Johnson ­unveiled the AUKUS partnership on Thursday, which gives ­Australia access to America’s world-leading nuclear technology.
The eight submarines — to be built in Adelaide and expected to start hitting the water by 2040 — will never need refuelling, meaning Australia will not ­create a domestic nuclear industry.
The move prompted an angry response from China as well as France, after the federal government also ripped up its $90bn deal for 12 diesel-powered submarines from the French-owned Naval Group.
The Prime Minister said AUKUS was a “a forever partnership that will enable Australia to protect our national security interests, to keep Australians safe, and to work with our partners across the region to achieve the stability and ­security of our region”.
“This forever partnership that we have announced today is the single greatest initiative to achieve these goals since the ANZUS alliance itself,” Mr Morrison said.
The partnership also means: ●The ADF will bolster its long-range strike capability with new Tomahawk cruise missiles fired from fighter jets that can hit targets up to 900km away, and guided missiles for land forces capable of striking from 400km; ● American forces will enhance their presence in the region over the next two decades as our subs are built; and ●Australia, the US and the UK will work together on other cutting-edge defence technologies, including artificial intelligence, cyber warfare tools and unmanned underwater vessels.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman Zhao Lijian hit back on Thursday night, saying the partnership “greatly undermines regional peace and stability, aggravates the arms race and hurts the international non-proliferation ­efforts”.
He also questioned Australia’s commitment to foregoing nuclear weapons, saying the US and the UK were “using nuclear exports as geopolitical gaming tool and applying double standards.” The nuclear reactors needed for Australia's submarines will be built overseas, and the federal government slammed the door on any suggestion the moratorium on ­nuclear power would be lifted. Mr Morrison also made it clear nuclear weapons would not be acquired.
“Australia has no interest in that. No plans for it, no policy for it, no contemplation of it. It is not on our agenda,” he said.
Those commitments are set to satisfy the Labor Party, as Anthony Albanese welcomed the new trilateral agreement.
But with the election fast approaching, and concerns about the “mismanagement” of the future submarine program, the opposition asked to be involved in the 18-month consultation period to design new boats.
Naval Group said the decision to abandon its submarines was a “major disappointment” after it had made “unrivalled commitments in terms of technology transfer, jobs and local content”. Australia will now pay hundreds of millions of dollars in compensation. After Mr Morrison informed French President Emmanuel Macron on Wednesday night, his ministers in Paris said scrapping the deal was “contrary to the spirit and the letter” of co-operation between Canberra and Paris.
CREDIT: Tom Minear; Jade Gailberger
Word count: 528
