Australia will develop long-range missiles that can travel at least five times the speed of sound under a new agreement with the United States and Britain to build up its defences in the face of a rising China and belligerent Russia.
The "hypersonic" missiles - which can be fired from land, sea and air and have a range of more than 2000km - will be developed under the AUKUS defence pact between the three countries, which will also build a fleet of nuclear-powered submarines for Australia.
The land-based missiles would be stationed in Australia, while the other two types of missiles could be deployed on the country's jet fighters and war ships.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison joined his US and British counterparts Joe Biden and Boris Johnson in the early hours of Wednesday morning to announce the new deal to build the missiles.
Under the deal, the AUKUS countries will work together to develop hypersonic missiles, and missile defence systems and radars that can take out an enemy's hypersonic missiles.
There is currently a technology race going on between China, Russia and the US and its allies to develop hypersonic missiles, which can glide on the atmosphere while changing direction at high speed, making them almost impossible to track and destroy with existing radars.
The three leaders also confirmed they were progressing with plans to develop undersea drones, with initial trials planned for next year, as well as new quantum and artificial intelligence technologies. They also said they were "fully committed" to developing a fleet of nuclear-powered submarines for Australia.
While the plan to build nuclear submarines has been widely welcomed by defence experts, there has been ongoing concern that there could be a major capability gap because the current fleet of Collins-class submarines are due to begin going out of service in 2038 and the nuclear-powered boats may not arrive until the 2040s.
Defence Minister Peter Dutton last December said he was confident Australia would have its first nuclear-powered submarine before 2038, saying recent discussions with US and British officials had given him renewed optimism.
Since AUKUS was announced in September last year, the three countries have held multiple high-level meetings to advance the plans. For several weeks in February, teams from Australia, the US and Britain visited multiple sites across the country to investigate what was needed to build and sustain nuclear boats.
Initial steps are also underway to ensure Australia has a workforce with the necessary skills, training and qualifications to build, operate and sustain the nuclear submarines, according to sources from all three countries.
Mr Morrison last month outlined the options for the base for the submarines, saying Defence had reviewed 19 potential sites and estimated a $10 billion cost for the base at one of the preferred east coast sites to add to an existing base near Perth.
The government is also taking initial steps to secure additional land to build a construction yard for the nuclear submarines, including land adjacent to the existing Osborne North Shipyard in Adelaide.
Mr Morrison and Mr Dutton yesterday said defence giants Raytheon and Lockheed Martin will lead the $1 billion plan to build guided missiles and will equip the nation's Super Hornet fighters with joint air-to-surface standoff missiles by 2024, three years ahead of schedule.
CREDIT: Anthony Galloway | National security correspondent
Word count: 554
