A strong flow of capital into dedicated pre-IPO funds will keep the initial public offers flowing this year, while private capital is also increasingly on the hunt for exposure to the transition to a low carbon economy, says John Kain, the managing director of mid-tier M&A firm Kain Lawyers.
Mr Kain, whose firm last year advised on deals including Archer Capital’s sale of V8 Supercars and Silk Laser’s $52m acquisition of Australian Skin Clinics, said the special purpose funds, which invested in private companies looking to list on the ASX in the short to medium term, had been growing in popularity.
While there have been players such as Regal Funds Management, Ellerston Capital and Bombora active in the sector for some time, other investors were now increasingly looking to the strategy for strong returns.
Alium Capital Management is an example that has been active in recent years, with its Alpha Fund focused on pre-IPO investments in ASX technology aspirants, as well as recapitalisations and placements.
Perennial also got involved in the sector three years ago, Mr Kain said, and in August closed its third private-to-public fund, which raised $200m in funds to deploy.
Microequities Asset Management in August launched its Private to Beyond the IPO Fund, which is targeting 15-25 per cent returns. That fund invested $5m in Adelaide artificial intelligence company Complexica in the middle of last year, following up with another $3m in December.
Mr Kain said he would be surprised if there was not at least an extra half a billion dollars dedicated to pre-IPO funds by the end of the year. Typically the investment horizon for such vehicles was about two years from investment to listing, he said.
Last year was already a record for total equity capital market raisings, with more than 1000 ­issues over the year, according to Refinitiv.
In the year to December 22 there was $US8.3bn ($11.5bn) raised through IPOs, up 148.9 per cent on last year, making it the highest total since 2014.
Overall, $US41bn was raised, up 14.4 per cent on last year, including the largest ever follow-on equity raising linked to CSL’s $US11.7bn purchase of Vifor ­Pharma.
Mr Kain said there was also a weight of capital from the number of companies such as Sydney Airport that would soon be or had been taken private over the past year, which would keep IPO flow high.
“All that capital has come out of the market, a lot of capital return, dividends resuming where they perhaps weren’t there a year ago, that builds a demand for more companies to come into the market,’’ he said.
“There is a universe of companies taking this (pre-IPO) capital. The owners of the capital are saying, ‘I’m giving this to you on the clear understanding that you’re going to list within two years’.
“At the other end you’ve got a pile of capital that’s just come out of the market looking to invest back into the market. Those dynamics are there from a supply and demand side that will see quite a healthy pipeline of IPOs.’’ Most of the companies funded by the dedicated funds would be in the sub-$200m market capitalisation range, Mr Kain said, with the investments through the funds usually in the $5m-$10m range. “They’re not massive companies, but they’re usually fast-growing, there’s often a tech focus,’’ he said.
Mr Kain said there was also a lot of money looking for a home in companies that were involved in the transition to a low carbon economy and also digitisation.
Aggregation in the tech sector would also be a theme. “There are businesses which are good businesses but they are sub-scale,’’ Mr Kain said. “They haven’t got the capital or the time to grow them but they’re too small for most funds to look at.”
CREDIT: Cameron England
Word count: 636
