AUSTRALIA will fast-track the development of cutting edge hypersonic missiles in conjunction with the US and the UK, expanding the AUKUS defence pact beyond nuclear submarines.
Unmanned underwater vehicles will also be trialled from next year as art of a plan to massively boost the nation’s maritime forces.
Almost seven months since the AUKUS partnership was unveiled, Prime Minister Scott Morrison, US President Joe Biden and UK Prime Minister Boris Johnson will on Thursday detail their work together on defence systems – including electronic warfare, quantum technologies and artificial ­intelligence.
As part of the commitment to deliver a nuclear submarine fleet, Australian defence personnel have started nuclear science and engineering training, while the government is seeking more land for a construction yard in South Australia.
“We are pleased with the progress in our trilateral program for Australia to establish a conventionally armed, nuclear-powered submarine capability,” the leaders said in a statement. “We are fully committed to establishing a robust approach to sharing naval propulsion technology with Australia that strengthens the global non-proliferation regime.” Mr Morrison, Mr Biden and Mr Johnson revealed a deal for “new trilateral co-operation on hypersonics and counter-hypersonics, and electronic warfare capability, as well as to expand information sharing and to deepen co-operation on defence innovation”.
The accord comes after Minister Peter Dutton unveiled a $3.5bn weapons package on Monday, including air-to-surface missiles with a 900km range for the air force and missiles to double the current strike range of the navy’s frigates and destroyers.
By March next year, the three countries will decide on the design and construction of Australia’s nuclear-powered fleet, with Mr Morrison vowing the boats will begin to hit the water before 2040.
UK and US experts visited Australia in February to assess the nation’s infrastructure, workforce and industrial capabilities. Earlier this month, Mr Morrison announced a $10bn commitment to a new east coast submarine base.
A series of steering and working groups with officials from each country have since met multiple times. Mr Morrison said on Monday that AUKUS was Australia’s “most significant defence agreement” in 70 years.
CREDIT: Tom Minear
Word count: 349
