FRANCE has recalled its ­ambassadors from Australia and the US as it continues to react with fury to Canberra axing its $90 billion submarine contract in favour of a US ­nuclear submarine deal.
French Foreign Minister Jean-Yves Le Drian ann­ounced yesterday the ambassadors were being withdrawn for consultations.
Mr Le Drian said in a statement that the decision was made to immediately recall the two French ambassadors due to “the exceptional seriousness of the announcements made on September 15 by Australia and the United States”.
US President Joe Biden ­announced the new Australia-US-Britain defence alliance on Wednesday, extending US ­nuclear submarine technology to Australia as well as cyber ­defence, applied artificial ­intelligence and undersea capabilities.
The move infuriated France, which had seen its ­initial $45 billion deal with Australia double in price, with the giant carrot of another $145 billion in maintenance costs over the coming decades.
But the French ambassador recalls from the US and Australia, key allies of France, are unprecedented.
France accused Australia of back-stabbing and Washington of Donald Trump-era ­behaviour over the deal. “It’s really a stab in the back,” Le Drian said on Thursday.
“We had established a relationship of trust with Australia, this trust has been betrayed”.
France has also called off a gala at its ambassador’s house in Washington. The event was supposed to celebrate the anniversary of a decisive naval battle in the American Revolution, in which France played a key role.
Foreign Minister Marise Payne, in Washington, said she understood the “disappointment” in Paris and hoped to work with France to ensure it understands “the value we place on the bilateral relationship and the work that we want to continue to do together”.
The White House has ­expressed “regret” over the ­recall of France’s ambassador, but said the US would work to resolve the diplomatic row.
“We regret that they have taken this step, we will continue to be engaged in the coming days to resolve our differences, as we have done at other points over the course of our long alliance,” a White House official said.
Not a rivet had yet been struck but Australia’s $90 billion contract with France to build a “next generation” fleet of submarines for our defence has been a five-year disaster in the making.
Essentially, they were too expensive, too noisy and would have effectively been obsolete even before they entered Australian waters which was to be sometime well into the 2030s.
Australia had so far spent “just” $2.4 billion setting up the infrastructure for them to be built in South Australia. The federal Government has given itself 18 months to work out how the deal under the AUKUS pact will work.
CREDIT: Charles Miranda defence reporter
Word count: 453
