THEY’VE collaborated with Hollywood actors, released vinyl and founded their own record label, and published a writer’s anthology – now, nature start-up Unyoked is bringing its architecturally designed cabins to Tasmania.
The Sunday Tasmanian can reveal Unyoked, founded by Sydney twins Cameron and Chris Grant, will this month debut two new cabins, “Olive” and “Tilda”, located at Winnaleah, in the state’s northeast.
Unyoked has simultaneously debuted in New Zealand to add to its burgeoning portfolio, which includes more than 50 nature retreats in all states and territories bar Western Australia, South Australia and Northern Territory, plus dozens in the UK.
Cameron Grant said the brand’s first scouting trip to Tasmania was about three years ago.
“Tassie’s always had a place in our hearts ,” he said.
“Every location we unlock has gone through a long and rigorous scouting process to ensure that the site leaves our community with the feeling of being unyoked – that is, feeling the lasting benefits of nature during and directly after their stay, having immersive and/or vast levels of nature surrounding them, and importantly, being secluded from the hustle and bustle of day-to-day activity.
“Tasmania is a special place where you can feel those psychological and physiological benefits of nature as soon as you step foot on the soil .
“The location we selected was hand-picked because of how vast it is, how quickly you can shed away the worries of life and feel nature do its thing, and for our incredible hosts who not only share in our mission here at Unyoked, but make it stronger in many ways.” The cabins include bedding, picnic table, gas stove, plates, fan, composting toilet, towels, solar power, bar fridge, fire pit and hot showers, but are bereft of other 21st-century comforts like Wi-Fi or television.
Since its founding in 2016, Unyoked has become a darling of the nature-based travel scene, aided by its collaboration with A-list Hollywood actor Matthew McConaughey and hip record label Future Classic, aimed at clinching the Gen Y and Millennial market. alex.treacy@news.com.au
CREDIT: ALEX TREACY
Word count: 342
