The Australian revealed earlier this month that the Border Gavaskar will expand to five Test matches in the Future Tours Program 2023-27, putting it on the same mantle as the Ashes.
The deal, it was predicted, adds value to the next broadcast rights deal and Cricket Australia confirmed that in announcing a seven-year contract with Star Disney for the Indian market.
All Australian hosted international matches and the BBL competitions will be broadcast in cricket’s biggest market under the arrangement which is a substantial increase on the last rights deal.
The Australians will now play five Test series against India and England with the three powerhouses guaranteeing each other reciprocal opportunities to harvest money in the next cycle.
Watch South Africa’s Tour of England. Every ODI & T20 Live & On-Demand on Kayo. New to Kayo? Start your free trial now >
Pakistan is understood to have secured an agreement to play two three-Test series in the next FTP period following the successful tour earlier in 2022.
Cricket Australia chief executive Nick Hockley is in Birmingham at an ICC meeting to rubber stamp the new FTP and will then attend the women’s T20 cricket events at the Commonwealth Games in that city.
“It really puts the Border Gavaskar trophy on a par with the Ashes and certainly the viewership from the last time India toured to Australia, those numbers domestically and overseas were huge and that trajectory is reflected in this partnership,” Hockley told The Australian.
Cricket’s rich may be getting richer but some countries and formats are on starvation rations. According to reports England will not play a single Test match in the Caribbean, deigning to only play eight ODIs before 2027.
Indian legend Ravi Shastri ruffled feathers during a discussion of cricket’s crisis on Sky over the weekend.
“If you want Test cricket to survive you cannot have 12 teams playing,” he said. “Keep the top six, keep the quality of the cricket going, respect quality over quantity.”
The debate around the future of ODI cricket was elevated in recent weeks with South Africa opting to play its own inaugural domestic cricket league rather than touring Australia and hopefully securing a guaranteed entry to the 2023 World Cup.
This startling development was followed a week later by Ben Stokes, hero of the 2019 World Cup, retiring from the format because he said it was unsustainable for him to engage in ODIs, T20s and Test cricket.
Australia claim disappointment at the cancellation but are happy to have top line Australian players notionally available for the BBL.
Hockley indicated the next FTP program would not include any international fixtures in January.
“We are obviously very disappointed that South Africa withdrew from the ODIs but what it means that the shape of the summer is more akin to what we will see going forward under the next Future Tours Program,” he told The Australian.
There is, however, widespread cynicism about the state of the BBL despite attempts to attract international players for at least a part of the tournament.
BBL: Australian wicket keeper Alex Carey is keen to get Rashid Khan back at the Adelaide Strikers in the inaugural BBL draft.
Ricky Ponting has just taken a job on the Hurricanes coaching staff but was not optimistic about the current state of the competition.
“There might be more pressure on Cricket Australia now than ever before,” Ponting said.
“I‘ve got no idea what Cricket Australia are thinking as far as the current model they’ve got, but it just seems that, if you look at the draft already this year, and you look at the player availability, it looks like the majority of the players are pretty happy to commit to the BBL for the first part, the first six or eight games.
“Then the South African tournament is going to start up in mid-January and you can guarantee the players are probably going to look to play the first half here and go play the second half over there, which for a tournament like the Big Bash is not ideal. So if there are ways around that and ways that that can be changed, then I think Cricket Australia most definitely have to look at that.”
Usman Khawaja, Test opener and star recruit for the Heat in the BBL, also believes things must change.
Cricket: England looked to be in trouble against South Africa, however a sensational innings with the ball earned them a tasty victory.
“I‘ve spoken about this before, I think there’s a fork in the road for the Big Bash in my personal opinion,” Khawaja said. “I don’t speak for ACA (players’ association) or CA, my personal opinion is the BBL needs to look to privatising because the money needs to come from somewhere. Players won’t come to the Big Bash unless you are paying them the right money.
“There are other tournaments starting up that are privatised. If you don‘t keep up with that, and there’s a small window for the Big Bash to privatise in the next few years, and I’m afraid if we don’t do that we’ll fall behind. Already you’ll see players not list for the draft. I’ve talked to a couple and they’ve not listed for the draft because they want to spend Christmas at home and then will go and play in the UAE. That’s a red flag for me already.
“The money has to come from somewhere and you don‘t necessarily want it to come from CA’s stock, then that affects another part of the organisation. So why not bring money from outside. I think the IPL is a very good model. If we aren’t trying to follow that type of progression, I feel like the BBL can be left behind.”
Word count: 934
