We'd love to help but. . .
Apparently, there is a healthcare workforce emergency in Victoria. My wife and I are both ex-healthcare professionals. We have been trying to join the COVID-19 vaccination response workforce. You would hope it would be simple.
But no. If you can find the right webpage (not obvious), you find that recruitment has been outsourced to a private provider. You start to fill in a form, then notice that you are expected to have police and working with children checks before applying.
Fair enough. What is not said is that these are complicated online procedures with substantial fees, difficult identification procedures and visits to post office. Too hard. No wonder there is an emergency.
David Ben-Tovim, Carlton
Health risk for teachers
According to a group of "notable Australians", including health experts, who have called for schools to reopen, "Teachers are at no higher risk (of the virus) than the general adult population" (Opinion, 12/1). Do the general adult population spend 30-plus hours each week, maskless, working at close quarters with 25 young people? I would like to see these notable Australians prove this statement.
Miriam Pohlenz, Highton
Two years of learning
As a mother of teachers and a grandmother of school-aged children, I have witnessed the education system in action over the past two years. The notable Australians are correct that schools today are exciting places of learning and their greatest value is the social and emotional learning that they help to develop.
But please, in singing all the praises of opening up schools, do not denigrate the excellent innovating education that took place over the past two years.
Teachers worked long hours to prepare suitable material for online learning. As an ex-teacher, I was constantly amazed at the patience they displayed while dealing with technological problems and situations that they would circumvent if in a classroom. Learning did take place during these two years.
Marilyn Hoban, Mornington
Pay teachers a lot more
Julie Carrick (Letters, 11/1) is right that, during lockdowns, Victorian children barely missed a day of schooling due to the efforts of care givers and hardworking, at-risk teachers. By the way, how is that pay rise claim (7 per cent) going, Daniel Andrews?
Lee Guion, Portarlington
The list is endless
So researchers in Israel have trained goldfish to drive (Odd Spot, 12/1). Maybe we could train them to drive our submarines, and tortoises to drive our new tanks. Think of the savings. Teaching chickens to drive their own deliveries to supermarkets would fix our supply chain issues. GI (goldfish intelligence) for self-driving cars. If only we could find smarter geese to provide effective government.
Simon Westfold, Bittern
Our dangerous roads
The safety rails on our major roads were designed to minimise serious injury for motorists. With more cyclists, the roads are less safe for both motorists and riders.
Leaf litter, which used to be blown off the road by the speed of passing vehicles, accumulates against the safety barriers. The road verge that was able to be used by cyclists is often impassable, forcing riders to use the driving lane. With the litter and barrier, there is no escape for cyclists, and motorists face moving into the oncoming lane. Is there a cleaning regime to remove the litter?
Cherie Forrester, Gembrook
Dutton's double standard
It seems Peter Dutton's hypocrisy knows no bounds. Here he is demanding that celebrities and athletes call out China on its treatment of women, including tennis player Shuai Peng (The Age, 10/1). Yet a few short years ago he warned captains of industry to "stick to their knitting" when they spoke out about same-sex marriage. Let us hope that these celebrities and athletes call out not only China but our own government for its draconian treatment of asylum seekers.
Jan van de Graaff, Brunswick East
Embarrassment all round
The Novak Djokovic visa saga is a fiasco to the point of laughable. Who will end up with more egg on their face? Djokovic or the immigration officials?
Christine Hammett, Richmond
No option but to lie
The Djokovic saga continues with claims that he may have lied on his entrance travel form (The Age, 12/1). Well, so did I on returning recently from Germany. And I had no choice. The electronic form is so incompetently constructed that it is impossible to put in the correct information because it prevents you from doing so.
In my case, I could not enter the date I arrived in Germany, some four months before my return, because it only allowed a date up to 14 days prior. And I could not enter that I was returning from Germany because of a three-hour transit in Dubai and the change of flight numbers. My attempts to find who to contact to fix the problem were futile. Yet another example where replacing people with artificial intelligence results in actual stupidity.
Tim Davis, Heidelberg
Cringeworthy moments
So Nick Kyrgios says he is embarrassed to be an Australian athlete due to the handling of Novak Djokovic's entry visa. Well, Nick, now you know how we feel every time you represent Australia and exhibit unprofessional, juvenile behaviour on court - very embarrassed.
Julie Perry, Highton
Selling it to the voters
Immigration Minister Alex Hawke is taking his time in deciding whether to exercise his discretion and cancel Novak Djokovic's visa. I'll bet Cabinet is workshopping a range of possible options with focus groups to find out which one best suits the loudest voices.
Les Cooper, Anglesea
Stay firm, Prime Minister
Just remember, folks, Novak Djokovic is merely an ego-driven tennis player, including not being candid with the truth. He does not give a rat's backside about our country and should be turfed out pronto. The government should support the true Aussie battlers who carry the load, play by the rules and are doing it hard.
Yes, Scott Morrison, stick to your guns and make it clear to Djokovic and Tennis Australia they are not that important, and their standard of behaviour is less than acceptable.
Paul Reynolds, North Wangaratta
Staying the best option
Apparently Australia grants visas easily, allows ineligible visitors to arrive here, then "cuts them off at the pass" and sends them home. Presumably this saves federal money - provided it does not backfire. Being unvaccinated for no good reason, Novak Djokovic should just not have received a visa in the first place. But the Morrison government has made such a deplorable hash of things that it now seems only fair to let him stay.Anthea Hyslop,
Eltham
The horse has bolted
According to the federal Department of Health's website, yesterday Fortress Australia had an estimated 612,619 active COVID-19 cases. And our politicians claim they are keeping Australians safe by maybe not allowing one unvaccinated, negative-tested tennis player into our fort? Seriously?
Noela Read, Brighton
A lack of leadership
Immigration Minister Alex Hawke seems to have a problem with putting pen to paper when a decision is required regarding visa applications and exemptions. Indeed he seems unable to act within a timeframe that is relevant to the nature of the application and he clearly ignores the emotional and physical well-being of the people involved.
The refugees and asylum seekers have been confined to their rooms in the Park Hotel for up to nine years waiting for their cases to be reviewed and resolved. No decision on Hawke's watch, it seems. Now the Djokovic farce.
We expect our politicians to demonstrate leadership and make responsible, timely and fair decisions, even when they are difficult or unpopular. Not this government. Delay and indecision are its catchwords.
Jenny Williams, Parkdale
A convenient excuse
If Novak Djokovic is allowed to stay, just be ready for it: "How could you expect me to win the Australian Open after the way in which you interfered with my preparation?"
Winston Anderson, Mornington
Cavallo, a true rule model
How about we give some positive attention to sportspeople who deserve it, like Adelaide United defender Josh Cavallo who called out homophobic abuse - "'Enough's enough': Police probe threats" (Sport, 11/1)? He is truly someone to admire and look up to. If only those in the crowd who gave him a hard time could have done the same.Simon Presljak,
Reservoir
Voters' mixed views
Your correspondent (Letters, 12/1) seems to be suggesting that many people vote on the basis of a single issue. Government ministers often use the same tactic but, for them, it can be any issue that suits their message on any given occasion.
Perhaps this is why so many issues are mentioned during election campaigns with most then ignored until afterwards when a minister, in all seriousness, describes such issues as the ones "we put to the Australian people and they voted in favour".
It is not uncommon for voters to support a range of positions put by different parties. In fact, it is arguable that to support every policy of one party and no other is a sign of someone unworthy of the responsibilities and privileges involved in participating in a democracy.Terry Bourke, Newtown
Stick to simple English
Could we please bring back discussions for conversations, plans instead of contingencies, affect instead of impact and swimming instead of swim (swim schools/teachers). This list is incomplete.Polly Mish, Hawthorn
CREDIT:
Word count: 1542
