9.04pm: Lenovo planning listing in Shanghai
Lenovo Group Ltd. is capitalizing on two booming markets, Chinese stocks and the global PC industry, to list in Shanghai.
The company is the world’s largest maker of personal computers and is well-known for acquiring IBM’s ThinkPad unit and the Motorola Mobility smartphone business. The news that Lenovo would join the STAR Market, China’s answer to the Nasdaq, boosted its Hong Kong-traded shares, which on Wednesday hit their highest level since 2015.
A series of Chinese technology companies have recently listed in mainland China or in Hong Kong, amid heightened tensions with the U.S. Beijing has also encouraged companies to join the fledgling STAR Market, also known as the Science and Technology Innovation Board, by introducing more relaxed listing rules and other requirements compared with other Chinese markets.
Lenovo and Megvii Technology Ltd., an artificial-intelligence startup specializing in facial recognition, will be among the first companies to make use of a structure known as a Chinese depositary receipt to raise funds.
In a filing late Tuesday, Lenovo said it planned to sell stock equivalent to up 10% of its enlarged ordinary share count. Its shares jumped 9.7 per cent on Wednesday, giving the company a market value of nearly $US14bn.
Chairman Yuanqing Yang said that with the offering, Lenovo was “leveraging the booming China capital market” and making it easier for Chinese investors to buy into the company.
Lenovo plans to use the funds for research and development, strategic investments and to replenish working capital. It didn’t give a time frame and said the offering remains subject to market conditions and needs approval from shareholders, exchanges and regulators.
Lenovo, which bought ThinkPad in 2005, now accounts for one in four of the world’s PC shipments, and its PC revenues hit a record high in the three months through September.
Dow Jones Newswires
Lachlan Moffet Gray 7.04pm: Retail shares surge with positive forecasts
Retailers surged following a better than expected sales update from the owner of Just Jeans, Smiggle and Peter Alexander, in a sign that the economy is on a fast track to recovery despite the Christmas Covid flare up.
Shares in Premier Investments hit new highs from the get-go on Wednesday, surging more than 18 per cent to an intraday high of $26.70 after announcing that earnings before interest and tax for the first half of the financial year will lift by up to 85 per cent to $221m-$233m.
The company closed at $25.35 a share, up 12.7 per cent, valuing chairman Solomon Lew’s 42 per cent stake in the company at around $1.69bn. With a fortune estimated at around $2.51bn, Mr Lew currently ranks at 33 on The List – Australia’s Richest 250.
Analysts at Goldman Sachs said the result was “significantly stronger” than expected. A Blue Ocean Equities analyst called them “very impressive” and Morgan Stanley researchers lauded the result as “exceptionally strong”.
The results sparked a sense of confidence in consumer spending and the Australian economy and investors jumped on other retail stocks, most of which are yet to issue guidance.
Shares in JB-Hi Fi jumped by 2.3 per cent to close at $51.86 after hitting a record high of $53.05, while infant retailer Baby Bunting lifted 3.8 per cent per cent to close at $5.15 after hitting a record high of $5.37.
Read more
David Swan 5.54pm: Google search buries Australian news sites
Google has confirmed it is burying links from traditional media outlets in some of its search results, as an ongoing spat between publishers and the tech giant continues to escalate.
The company told The Australian in a statement that the move was part of a “short term experiment”. It means that for some users, news stories from commercial media outlets, are hidden by the company’s algorithms.
“Every year we conduct tens of thousands of experiments in Google Search. We’re currently running a few experiments that will each reach about 1 per cent of Google Search users in Australia to measure the impacts of news businesses and Google Search on each other,” a Google spokesman said.
“In 2018, the value we provided to publishers through referral traffic alone was estimated at $218 million.
“These experiments will conclude by early February.
“As we said last week, we remain committed to getting to a workable code and look forward to working with the Senate Committee, policymakers, and publishers to achieve an outcome that’s fair for everyone, in the interests of all Australians.”
Read more
Elise Shaw 5.34pm: $A tipped to go above US80c ‘first time since 2018’: CBA
Commonwealth Bank’s Global Markets Research team notes AUD/USD recovered but faced resistance again at US78c.
“The lift in oil and iron ore prices are very supportive for AUD/USD. AUD can climb above US80c for the first time since May 2018.”
AUD-USD exchange rate chart
Jade Gailberger 5.29pm: Cherries in China’s firing line
Australia’s much-loved cherries have been lashed as “inferior” in taste and quality by Chinese state-owned media.
The Global Times this week highlighted that Australia’s share of cherries in the Chinese market had fallen, as buyers favour the Chilean fruit.
The comments have given rise to concerns that the high-end product could be the next to suffer from trade tensions between Australia and China – which last year caused woes for seafood, red wine and beef industries.
The criticism comes as China’s foreign affairs spokesman Zhao Lijian accused Australia of politicising trade.
“The share of Australian cherries in Chinese market … has dropped due to the inferior quality of the product given the reserved seasonality,” fruit traders are reported to have told the Global Times.
“The taste and quality of Australian cherries is not as good as it once was.
NCA Newswire
Read more
David Swan 5.15pm: Self-driving cars ‘a decade away’
Full self-driving vehicles are at least a decade away according to the chief executive of Here Technologies, the mapping and self-driving company owned by German automotive companies including Volkswagen and BMW, who says an expectation reset is needed on the futuristic technology.
Speaking to The Australian ahead of the CES tech summit, held virtually this year because of the pandemic, Edzard Overbeek said that despite an abundance of hype, self-driving cars are not realistically going to be hitting our roads any time soon.
Apple is reportedly planning a self-driving car in partnership with Hyundai due by 2024, while Tesla is moving towards full self-driving capabilities.
“There’s now a more realistic view on what autonomous driving is, and when it will be ready,” Mr Overbeek told said in an interview.
“We all agree that level two and a half, which is basically advanced driver assistance systems, are kicking in. And technology-wise, level four and five, which are full autonomous driving, are possible. But government and regulatory-wise, it’s difficult. If an accident happens, who’s to blame? And if your car is not ‘your’ car, and it’s driving itself … There are just so many variables.”
According to Mr Overbeek, solving the regulatory issues, to the point where self-driving vehicles are common on our roads, is something that’s about a decade away. Trials of automated vehicles have taken place in Australia, and state and territory transport ministers have already agreed on several key policy decisions, though federal guidelines have not yet been finalised.
Read more
4.32pm: ASX rebounds from 4-day low
Australia’s sharemarket rebounded from a 4-day low as US futures edged up after supportive comments from Fed officials and a strong Treasury auction calmed the bond market.
The S&P/ASX 200 finished up 0.1pc at 6686.6 after falling from an early high of 6691.6 to a 4-day low of 6657.1.
ASX S&P200 index chart (XJO)
Sectors were split with outperformance from the Energy, Communications, Materials, Discretionary and Financials sectors and underperformance from Staples, Tec, Utilities, Health care, Real Estate and Industrials.
Major banks and insurers buoyed the Financials sector with Westpac and ANZ up 0.5pc and QBE up 1.6pc.
The US 10-year bond yield fell to 1.1052pc after hitting a 10-month high of 1.1855pc overnight. But expensive defensive, growth and bond proxy stocks continued to feel the effects of the recent spike in bond yields.
Coles fell 2.4pc, CSL fell 0.7pc and Lendlease fell 2.9pc.
But Woodside jumped 5.4pc after WT crude oil rose 1.8pc overnight and 1.1pc in APAC trading.
Best and worst performers - end of trade
Telstra jumped 2.7pc, Newcrest and South32 rose more than 3pc. Goldman Sachs raised its price targets for a number of miners.
A strong trading update from Premier Investments boosted its shares by 13pc and lit a fire under the retail sector.
Robyn Ironside 3.45pm: Queensland Reds get own jet service
Forget the team bus. The Queensland Reds have become Australia’s first sporting team with their own jet at their disposal after signing a lucrative sponsorship with Alliance Aviation.
The cash and support deal will include charter flights for the Reds to rugby games and festivals within Australia and New Zealand, giving them a huge advantage over their rivals relying on commercial flights.
The deal comes as most airlines tear up sponsorships, due to the financial strain of the COVID crisis, with Qantas last year ending its 20-year tie-up with the Wallabies.
Alliance managing director Scott McMillan said the partnership with the Reds was a “meeting of minds” that should serve the team well.
“A lot of big US sporting teams own their own aircraft because it’s much easier for them to fly in, play the game, pack up and fly back home,” Mr McMillan said.
“You can bring all the support staff, the physios and doctors and you have a totally tailored schedule. There’s no hanging around airport terminals.”
As well as flights throughout regional Queensland and within Australia, Alliance expected to carry the Reds to Dunedin and Wellington in New Zealand later in the year.
Read more
Patrick Commins 3.01pm: Employers trying to fill 250,000 jobs
Australian employers embarked on a hiring spree over the three months to November, with job advertisements surging to a record 254,000 as businesses in sectors hardest hit in the Covid recession scrambled to replace worskers they let go through the pandemic.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics reported that the number of vacancies jumped by 48,000 in the November quarter, an increase of 23 per versus the previous three-month period, when vacancies rose by an even sharper 77,000 as the nation emerged from its Covid-19 lockdown.
Job vacancies surpassed pre-pandemic levels in February, the seasonally adjusted figures showed, and were 12 per cent higher than a year earlier. There were close to double the number of vacancies than in the May quarter, during the depth of the Covid-19 downturn.
Read more
Elise Shaw 2.18pm: Engineering construction the new boom: CommSec
Engineering construction work done fell by 1.7 per cent in real (inflation-adjusted) terms in the September quarter. But work done is still up 1.9 per cent on a year ago.
The value of work done for the private sector fell by 4.2 per cent but was still 1.4 per cent higher than a year ago.
The value of work done for the public sector rose by 2.1 per cent in the September quarter to be up by 2.6 per cent from a year ago.
Engineering construction work rose in four of the states and territories in the September quarter:
NSW (down by 3.0 per cent); Victoria (down by 3.8 per cent); Queensland (down by 1.8 per cent); South Australia (up by 0.1 per cent); Western Australia (down by 1.2 per cent); Tasmania (up by 11.6 per cent); Northern Territory (up by 6.7 per cent); ACT (up by 2.1 per cent).
In the year to September, engineering construction work rose in three of the states and territories: NSW (down by 3.6 per cent); Victoria (up by 1.8 per cent); Queensland (down by 0.1 per cent); South Australia (down by 2.2 per cent); Western Australia (up by 17.3 per cent); Tasmania (down by 14.4 per cent); Northern Territory (up by 2.4 per cent); ACT (down by 7.8 per cent).
The value of engineering work yet to be done fell further from the 5-year highs of $76.7 billion in the March quarter, down from $69.6 billion in the June quarter to $67.4 billion in the September quarter. Commencements fell from $78.8 billion to a 2-1⁄2-year low of $77.2 billion in the September quarter.
The value of outstanding non-resource projects rose from $45.5 billion in the June quarter to $46.3 billion in the September quarter but was still below the record high of $50.7 billion in the March quarter.
Work yet to be done on bridges stands at an 11-1⁄2-year high ($0.9 billion); water supply & storage at 8-year highs (3.4bn); sewerage & drainage at 6-1⁄2-year highs ($1.6bn); and recreation at 5-1⁄2-year highs of $0.9bn.
“Work outstanding on non-resource engineering projects remains at lofty levels but arguably more work can be taken on. All states and territories increased spending on infrastructure in recent budgets. But the projects are yet to show up in the data. The outlook for construction-dependent firms and sectors remains favourable,” says CommSec.
2.00pm: ASX hovers around flatline
Australia’s share market briefly returned to flat in mid-afternoon trading.
The S&P/ASX 200 rose to 6684 after falling 0.3pc to a 4-day low of 6657.1 this morning.
The brief upturn came as S&P 500 futures rose as much as 0.2pc.
It was led by a bounce in the Financials sector, with Westpac and ANZ rising 0.5pc after early falls.
The Energy, Materials and Consumer Discretionary sectors remain positive.
But Consumer Staples, Tech, Real estate, Utilities, Industrials and Health Care are fairly deeply in the red.
The S&P/ASX 200 was last flat at 6679.
Nick Evans 1.24pm: Iluka’s billion dollar rare earths move
Iluka Resources low-key entry into the rare earths space could yield a billion dollar business, according to Goldman Sachs analysts, as the company prepares to ramp up the export of rare earth concentrates from a mothballed mineral sands mine in Western Australia.
In a bullish note on Iluka released this week, Goldman mining analyst Paul Young said Iluka’s move into rare earths could yield a substantial revenue stream, and increase the value of its business by about $1.2bn as the company weighs construction of a cracking and leaching plant and refinery.
Iluka’s move to begin shipping a rare earths concentrate from its mothballed Eneabba mine in WA was first revealed by The Australian in mid-2019, and it began shipping concentrate in the September quarter.
Mr Young told Goldman clients that Iluka could be receiving as much as $US2500 a tonne for its concentrate, known as monazite, and seven times that if the company moves further downstream to produce oxide products.
“Based on our price forecasts we think that if ILU produced a rare earth oxide in Australia it would receive a basket price of around $US18,000/t or $US18/kg (real 2020 dollars),” he said.
Iluka has not disclosed the pricing on its monazite sales contracts, but Iluka boss Tom O’Leary told analysts last year he expected the Eneabba monazite concentration plant, which cost $10m to build, would be paid back within six months of construction, implying before-tax earnings of about $20m a year for the lower grade concentrate.
Iluka has since ticked off on a $35m expansion at Eneabba to produce a higher-grade product, and Mr O’Leary confirmed to The Australian last year that Iluka was running the numbers on a downstream operation, including a possible deal with Lynas’ under-construction cracking and leaching plant at Kalgoorlie.
Goldman put the cost of building a cracking and leaching plant at Eneabba at $350m, and $450m to build a full-blown refinery.
“We value the rare earth refinery at $1.15bn based on our capital and rare earth price assumptions with the project generating a circa 25 per cent internal rate of return and payback of about 4 years,” Mr Young said.
Iluka shares were trading up 25.5c to $6.855 at 1pm (AEDT).
12.07am: ASX lower despite bond yield fade
Australia’s share market was weaker at midday despite some cooling of the surge in bond yields that upset Wall Street this week.
The S&P/ASX 200 was down 0.3pc at a 4-day low of 6657.1, even as Australia’s 10-year bond yield fell 3bps to 1.12pc after the US equivalent yield fell 8bps from a 10-month high of 1.186pc following a strong Treasury bond auction overnight.
The Consumer Staples, Technology, Real Estate, Health Care, Industrials and Utilities sectors were weakest, amid profit taking in highly valued defensive, growth and bond proxy stocks with US President-elect Joe Biden due to outline his plan for “trillions” of dollars of US fiscal stimulus on Thursday.
In those sectors, Woolworths and Coles fell more than 2pc, Altium dived 5.2pc, CSL fell 1pc, Transurban lost 1.7pc and APA Group fell 1.7pc.
The Financials sector performed in line with the overall market with NAB down 0.5pc and Macquarie down 1.1pc on profit-taking, after a pause in the bond yield curve steepening that helped banks in recent days.
But the Energy, Materials and Consumer Discretionary sectors rose, with Woodside up 5pc on rising crude prices, BHP and Rio Tinto up 0.6pc on price target upgrades from Goldman Sachs, and Premier Investments up 14pc on a strong trading update.
Lilly Vitorovich 11.55am: Foxtel names new customer, marketing boss
Foxtel has hired television and entertainment industry executive Hilary Perchard as its new chief customer, marketing and revenue boss, reporting to chief executive Patrick Delany.
Mr Delany says Mr Perchard’s experience and track record will help build on the progress made in maintaining Foxtel as Australia’s premium subscription television service.
“Hilary’s appointment provides an opportunity to build on the momentum we have created with a fresh, international perspective that continues to deliver our loyal, premium customers the best of TV and on-demand, all in one place,” he said.
“Foxtel remains our core business within what is now a much larger, more diversified media company. This includes our rapidly growing Kayo and Binge streaming services and our successful advertising business, Foxtel Media.”
Foxtel said Mr Perchard will be responsible for all customer interactions, including Foxtel residential and commercial sales, customer service, loyalty, creative services, marketing and publicity.
Mr Perchard most recently was chief revenue officer at interactive entertainment company Activision Blizzard. He has also worked at Fox Networks and Sky UK.
Mr Perchard is expected to join Foxtel in March after completing travel and other arrangements. He replaces Kieren Cooney, who is joining TPG Telecom as group executive consumer.
Foxtel is 65 per cent owned by News Corp Australia, publisher of The Australian, with the remainder held by Telstra.
11.41am: 2021 could be Boral’s year: UBS
The year 2021 could be Boral’s year, according to UBS.
“Boral share price has rallied 180pc off its Mar-20 low, it’s still only 10pc above its pre-Covid levels and is the sector laggard,” notes UBS analyst James Brennan-Chong.
He thinks “the set up for 2021 looks strong” since his FY21 earnings estimate of $460m is 12pc above consensus and Boral should quantify a cost out target (UBS sees $75m). He expects Knauf to sell its wholly owned plasterboard assets, which would allow the market to price in Boral’s divestiture of the USG Boral joint venture, and the late 2020 sale of Midland Bricks for $250m or 8 times enterprise value to earnings signalled “the start of the US building materials exit”.
“We think the market is not pricing in any of these four events,” Mr Brennan-Chong says.
He prefers James Hardie for its ability to deliver 10pc sales growth with 30pc margins and Boral for its company specific catalysts, but notes that “recent $A strength is a drag.”
CSR remains Buy rated and should trade with housing sentiment, while Adbri remains Neutral rated, albeit with its price target up 30pc to A$3.15 as surging housing mitigates uncertainty over lime demand.
Lachlan Moffet Gray 11.24am: Universal earnings to rise
Retail group Universal Stores has issued guidance for the first half of the financial year and expects underlying EBIT to be between $30 and $31m, representing growth of 60 per cent to 67 per cent on the first half of 2020.
The ASX newcomer said the result was driven by like-for-like sales growth of 26.5 per cent and an expanding gross margin, with sales growing 24 per cent to $118m across its online store and 65 physical locations.
The news sent shares in the company up by more than 12 per cent to a new record high of $5.80.
It means the company has seen its share price grow 52 per cent since its $3.80 a share listing last November.
11.04am: ASX turns down after brighter start
Australia’s share market slipped to a four-day low in morning trade, after a positive start.
The S&P/ASX 200 share index fell 0.3pc to 6660.6, after rising 0.2pc in early trading.
Despite a slight retreat in bond yields, the real estate sector remained under pressure along with some high PE stocks in the technology and health care sectors, with Xero down 2.8pc and CSL down 1pc.
While having no immediate impact on the share market the COVID pandemic in Brisbane was potentially set to worsen.
Queensland authorities were scrambling to test and quarantine 605 in Brisbane after authorities found the highly infectious COVID-19 variant has spread to six people who stayed at the Grand Chancellor hotel.
ASX S&P200 index chart (XJO)
10.39am: Worst year ever for office sector: Macquarie
Macquarie Equities expects office demand in the listed property sector to remain soft in the near term.
Vacancy rates in Sydney and Melbourne rose to 12 per cent and 13 per cent respectively in the worst year on record due to COVID.
“The rise in vacancy and decline in net effective rents place pressure on free cash flow,” the broker says. “Valuations, however, are supported by low discount rates, which are positive for Charter Hall Group.
Mirvac is its preferred office landlord over GPT and Dexus, driven by a more limited near-term lease-expiry profile.
10.45am: Worst year ever for office sector: Macquarie
Macquarie expects office demand in the listed property sector to remain soft near term.
Vacancy rates in Sydney and Melbourne rose to 12 per cent and 13 per cent respectively in the worst year on record due to COVID.
“The rise in vacancy and decline in net effective rents place pressure on free cash flow,” the broker says. “Valuations, however, are supported by low discount rates, which are positive for Charter Hall Group.
Mirvac is preferred over GPT and Dexus due to a better near-term lease-expiry profile.
10.22am: ASX edges up in early trade, Premier jumps
Australia’s share market rose 0.2pc to 6689.4 in early trading after a steady night on Wall Street.
However, Premier Investments surged 15pc to a record high of $25.84 on a strong trading update.
That rubbed off on other retailers, with JB Hi-Fi up 2.6pc and Harvey Norman up 1.6pc.
Resources were also quite strong after commodity price gains and target price upgrades from Goldman Sachs.
Among standouts, Beach Energy rose 5.7pc, Iluka gained 5.3pc and Santos rose 3pc.
Major miners also rebounded with BHP up 1.3pc, Rio Tinto up 1.7pc and Fortescue up 1pc.
Financials slipped as US bond yields retreated after a strong US Treasury auction.
CBA fell 0.3pc and Macquarie slipped 1.1pc.
ASX S&P200 index chart (XJO)
10.05am: Goldman lifts forecasts for miners
Goldman Sachs has boosted its price targets for Australian miners as the US investment bank stays bullish on commodities in 2021 on recovering global demand, low inventories and supply constraints, reflation and a weakening US dollar, and ongoing capital discipline from the mining sector.
Among major miners, its price targets for BHP and Rio Tinto have risen 8pc to $48.70 and $117 respectively. Other price target increases include South32 up 7pc to $3.00, Alumina up 5pc to $2.10, Iluka up 22pc to $7.20, New Hope up 6pc to $1.70 and Deterra up 11pc to $4.00.
“Our preferred commodities in 2021 are metallurgical coal, iron ore, copper, aluminium and zircon, based on favourable supply/demand dynamics,” says GS analyst Paul Young.
“Five years of mining sector deleveraging and capital discipline from 2015-2020 and a lack of high-quality greenfield projects across most commodities sets this next cycle up as more of a supply-side driven rally as global demand recovers from the COVID-19 pandemic.
“We note though that demand for base metals in 2021 will only climb back to 2019 levels and the demand recovery will be volatile.”
He notes that most of Goldman’s commodity price forecasts are near the top end of market estimates and its earnings forecasts are mostly above consensus.
While the sector may appear “fairly valued based”, he notes that the 2003-2007 and 2009-2011 commodity bull markets saw most diversified miners and pure plays traded up to around 1.2 times their net asset value, “indicating the sector can move higher.”
On an enterprise value to earnings multiple basis, major miners “appear slightly undervalued relative to historical multiples, although 2021 will be close to historical peak earnings.”
“We also think multiples can expand in this cycle due to stronger balance sheets and free-cash-flow,” he adds.
“Lastly, we see consensus EPS upgrades for the sector over the 1H21 and expectations for strong capital returns in February to continue to support share prices in the near term, particularly for the iron ore and copper companies.”
Lachlan Moffet Gray 9.42am: Lew’s Premier upgrades forecasts
Premier Investments has upgraded guidance for the first half of the financial year and is now forecasting earnings before interest and tax to be in the $221m-$233m range.
The guidance represents a potential 75 to 85 per cent increase on last year’s result of $126.1m and is attributed to strong, higher-margin, online sales which “have continued to accelerate.”
The Solomon Lew-owned outfit says that in the first 24 weeks of the financial year online sales were $146.2m, up 60 per cent on the $54.8m booked during the same period in the last financial year.
Online sales contributed 20.4 per cent of group sales which were five per cent higher than last year at $716.9m.
Like-for-like sales for the first 24 weeks of the financial year were up 18 per cent across the group and 26.2 per cent in Australia.
The group said strong cost discipline also contributed to the expected result, including by reaching key agreements with landlords.
However, the benefits of the Jobkeeper wage subsidy earned in the first few months of the financial year were “more than offset” by the loss of gross profit in Victoria during the second wave.
Premier Investments will report first half results in late March.
9.41am: ASX retreat may continue
Australia’s share market may retreat for a third day running amid lingering caution about market positioning and overall upward pressure on bond yields from US fiscal stimulus plans.
Wall Street recovered from intraday falls as US bond yields eased from a fresh 10-month high after a strongly-supported Treasury bond auction overnight.
The S&P 500 was flat at 3801.2 after 0.6pc to 3776.5, as the 10-year yield fell 1.7bps to 1.129pc after initially rising to 1.186pc.
Australia’s S&P/ASX 200 index fell 0.3pc to a 3-day low of 6679.1 on Tuesday - slipping below a minor chart point at 6685 after a “false break” of range resistance at 6756.7 last week.
With charts now favouring a test of range support at 6587 and strategists calling for a short-term correction on Wall Street, the S&P/ASX 200 may stay soft.
Still, commodities rebounded with WTI crude up 1.7pc, gold up 0.6pc, copper up 1.5pc, nickel up 3.4pc and steaming coal up 2.4pc and Dalian iron ore futures up 1.3pc.
Focus turns to US CPI data and presidential impeachment proceedings overnight, following by Joe Biden’s fiscal stimulus outline due on Thursday.
8.58am: Bull market: room to move?
How much room is left in the current equity bull market?
JP Morgan finds that global non-bank investors’ allocation to equities is currently about 43.8 per cent – significantly below the high of 47.6 per cent seen in January 2018.
The US investment bank’s head of global quantitative & derivatives strategy, Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou, argues that “this means there is still room in the current bull market”.
Still, he cautions that retail investors played a significant role in supporting equity market gains in December and January to-date, and overweight institutional positioning since November has created “some near-term vulnerability to a correction if retail investors’ equity buying slows from here.”
The post-Lehman average equity allocation of 42.3 per cent or “neutral level” was first breached in the middle of November, and the “melt up” in equity markets since then combined with the selloff in government bonds has shifted JPM’s implied equity allocation further above neutral.
But the equity appreciation needed to shift the implied equity allocation of non-bank investors globally from its current level to the post-Lehman period high is 22.5 per cent for the MSCI All Country World index and 26.1 per cent for the S&P 500, according to Mr Panigirtzoglou.
And his equity upside calculation exhibits little sensitivity to a potential rise in bond yields.
It’s more sensitive to his projection of money supply expansion, and on that subject, the US investment bank’s base case is that the stock of cash or M2 money supply ex-China will rise by $US4.8 trillion (6.2 trillion) this year, or half of last year’s increase.
“Any big deviation from that projection of money supply expansion would have significant impact on the implied equity upside,” Mr Panigirtzoglou says.
But he does note that institutional investors appear to have entered 2021 with “elevated equity exposures and a very low short base”.
In particular, the equity beta or market sensitivity of equity long/short hedge funds in particular last month rose to its highest point in almost three years.
“This in our mind creates some near-term vulnerability to a correction if retail investors’ equity buying slows from here.”
Lachlan Moffet Gray 8.34am: Newcrest’s Havieron Project approval
Newcrest Mining has received regulatory approval for key early works at its Havieron Project in Western Australia, a joint venture with Greatland Gold.
In a statement on Wednesday Newcrest said approval for works such as the construction of a box cut, exploration decline and supporting surface infrastructure had been approved while a water management plan for these works was being finalised.
The Newcrest board has approved funding of $146m for these early works and has entered into a $50m loan agreement with Greatland Gold so it can fund its share of the early work activity.
Newcrest holds a 60 per cent interest in the project, with an option to increase it to 70 per cent by spending $US65m and completing a series of development milestones within a six-year period that commenced in May 2019.
8.20am: ASX poised for weaker open
Australian stocks are tipped to edge lower as Wall Street wavered between small gains and losses.
Shortly after 8am (AEDT) the SPI futures index was down seven points, or 0.1 per cent.
Yesterday, the ASX closed down slightly as US futures wavered.
The Australian dollar is higher at US77.72c.
Oil extended its recent rally, with Brent crude up 1.7 per cent to $US56.58 a barrel.
Spot iron ore is up 0.1 per cent to $US171.35 a tonne. Gold futures are down 0.4 per cent to
$US1844.2 an ounce.
8.14am: What’s impressing analysts today?
Accent Group cut to Equal-Weight: MS
A2 Milk cut to Neutral: GS
Boral raised to Neutral: JPM
Fletcher Building raised to Overweight: JPMorgan
Lycopodium raised to Buy: Bell Potter
Novonix cut to Hold: Morgans Financial
Reece cut to Underweight: JPM
SCA Property raised to Hold: Morningstar
Adbri price target lifted 30pc to $3.15: UBS
AMP price target raised 13pc to $10.31: UBS
BHP price target raised 8pc to $48.70: GS
Charter Hall price target raised 12pc to $7.94: GS
Rio Tinto price target raised 8pc to $117: GS
South32 price target raised 7pc to $3.00: GS
Alumina price target raised 5pc to $2.10: GS
Iluka price target raised 22pc to $7.20: GS
New Hope price target raised 6pc to $1.70: GS
Deterra price target raised 11pc to $4.00: GS
8.02am: US stocks wobble, end ahead
US stocks wavered, finishing up slightly, after a day of moving between small gains and losses.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average was up 0.2 per cent as of the close of trading in New York, after wavering earlier in the day. The S&P 500 was about flat, while the technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite ticked up 0.3 per cent.
All three indexes closed at record highs on Friday but retreated at the start of this week.
Investors broadly expect stocks to rally this year as the rollout of vaccines and fresh government spending help the economy recover from the disruption caused by the pandemic. Still, some are bracing for volatility in the coming months amid risks stemming from high valuations in parts of the stock market, still-elevated coronavirus case rates and political uncertainty following last week’s attack on the Capitol.
In the coming days, money managers will parse quarterly results as earnings season gets under way among US companies.
“There is an expectation for an earnings recovery compared with last year, which is quite important,” said Maria Municchi, multiasset portfolio manager at M&G Investments. “The stimulus we have seen is certainly supportive to some of this earnings growth.”
In Washington, Congress careened toward a fresh showdown with President Trump. House Democrats said they plan to vote on impeaching him Wednesday over accusations he incited supporters to storm the Capitol.
The clash could lead to some swings in stock prices in the short term but ultimately has limited implications for investors, according to Ms. Municchi. “Compared to the pandemic situation and the need for resolution, this is almost a side show,” she said.
Some big technology and communications stocks continued to decline after sharp drops on Monday. Facebook shares fell 1.9pc, while Twitter slid 2.3pc. The social-media giants have taken increasingly tougher actions to block Mr. Trump’s accounts and stem misinformation and incitements to violence ahead of President-elect Joe Biden’s inauguration.
Meanwhile Google shares declined 1.3pc, while Apple was down 0.4pc. Both tech giants recently removed Parler, a social-media service popular among conservatives, from their app marketplaces amid concerns that it was being used to promote violence.
Such actions have raised jitters that Big Tech could face new regulation, particularly with Democrats set to take a narrow majority in the Senate, said Olivier Sarfati, head of equities at GenTrust. “They are a lot more at risk after the Capitol Hill riot than prior,” he said.
Oil extended its recent rally, which has been driven by a global recovery in fuel demand and continuing production cuts by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. Futures on Brent crude, the benchmark in international energy markets, rose 1.7pc to settle at $US55.66 a barrel.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 index rose less than 0.1pc.
Dow Jones
7.34am: Coon Cheese to be rebranded as Cheer
Dairy company Saputo is retiring the Coon name after 85 years amid concerns over its racist connotations.
It will relaunch the product in July as Cheer, after six months of deliberations over a new name, the Herald Sun reports.
“The name Cheer has the significance of pleasure and joy,’’ Saputo’s chief executive Lino Saputo said. “It’s nice when you take a picture you say cheese and when you give a toast you say cheers.”
6.55am: Oil at nearly 11-month high
Oil futures rose, with the U.S. benchmark closing at its highest since February 21 as the US dollar came under renewed pressure.
West Texas Intermediate crude for February delivery rose 96 cents, or 1.8 per cent, to close at $US53.21 a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
The move came as the ICE U.S. Dollar Index, a measure of the currency against a basket of six major rivals, fell 0.4pc to trade near a more-than-2-1/2-year low. A weaker dollar is seen as a boost for commodities, like oil, that are traded in the currency, as it makes them cheaper to overseas buyers. Crude has also been underpinned by Saudi Arabia’s decision last week to unilaterally cut production by 1 million barrels a day in February and March.
Dow Jones
6.40am: Boeing reports steep drop in 2020 deliveries
Boeing reported a plunge in annual plane deliveries and a diminished order backlog as it contended with dual crises caused by the 737 MAX grounding and the travel industry downturn brought about by Covid-19.
The figures offer the final tally of a bruising year that forced Boeing in March to seek a bailout from Washington as it faced existential questions during the apex of both crises. Boeing was successful in obtaining the aid, but turned to private support instead.
Boeing, which has cut tens of thousands of jobs amid its struggles, delivered just 157 planes last year, down 59 per cent from 2019.
The company’s backlog at the end of 2020 stood at 4,223, down from nearly 5,900 planes at the end of 2018, when the airline industry was still in growth mode prior to Covid-19 and the MAX was still flying.
Airlines in 2020 cancelled 641 orders for the MAX, which was cleared later that year to resume flights in the United States and some other markets following a 20-month grounding after two fatal crashes.
AFP
6.09am: US stocks waver
US stocks moved between small gains and losses as investors weighed the potential of more regulation for big technology companies and prepared for coming earnings reports.
The Dow Jones Industrial Average rose 0.2 per cent in afternoon trading, after wavering between small gains and losses earlier in the session. The S&P 500 rose 0.1 per cent, while the technology-heavy Nasdaq Composite was up 0.3 per cent.
All three indexes closed at record highs on Friday but had retreated since the start of this week.
Investors broadly expect stocks to rally this year as the rollout of vaccines and fresh government spending help the economy recover from the disruption caused by the pandemic. Still, some are bracing for volatility in the coming months amid risks stemming from high valuations in parts of the stock market, still-elevated coronavirus case rates and political uncertainty following last week’s attack on the Capitol.
In the coming days, money managers will parse quarterly results as earnings season gets under way among US companies.
“There is an expectation for an earnings recovery compared with last year, which is quite important,” said Maria Municchi, multiasset portfolio manager at M&G Investments. “The stimulus we have seen is certainly supportive to some of this earnings growth.”
In Washington, Congress careened toward a fresh showdown with President Trump. House Democrats said they plan to vote on impeaching him Wednesday over accusations he incited supporters to storm the Capitol.
The clash could lead to some swings in stock prices in the short term but ultimately has limited implications for investors, according to Ms. Municchi. “Compared to the pandemic situation and the need for resolution, this is almost a side show,” she said.
Some big technology and communications stocks continued to decline after sharp drops yesterday. Facebook shares fell 2.2 per cent, while Twitter slid 2.5 per cent. The social-media giants have taken increasingly tougher actions to block Mr. Trump’s accounts and stem misinformation and incitements to violence ahead of President-elect Joe Biden’s inauguration.
Meanwhile Google shares declined 2.2 per cent, while Apple was down 1.2 per cent. Both tech giants recently removed Parler, a social-media service popular among conservatives, from their app marketplaces amid concerns that it was being used to promote violence.
In other corporate news, Tesla shares jumped 5.5 per cent after local media reports said the electric-car maker is in talks to join with Tata Motors to build out its business in India.
Oil extended its recent rally, which has been driven by a global recovery in fuel demand and continuing production cuts by the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. Futures on Brent crude, the benchmark in international energy markets, rose 1.5 per cent to $US56.50 a barrel.
Overseas, the Stoxx Europe 600 index ticked up less than 0.1 per cent. Most major Asian equity benchmarks ended the day higher. The Shanghai Composite gained 2.2 per cent, while Hong Kong’s Hang Seng advanced 1.3 per cent.
Dow Jones
6.00am: Deutsche Bank to sever ties with Trump: report
Deutsche Bank will cease its longstanding relationship with outgoing US president Donald Trump, The New York Times reported.
Deutsche Bank was Trump’s primary lender for two decades, and he owes the institution more than $US300 million, according to the newspaper, which cited an unnamed source as saying the German lender “has decided not to do business with Mr. Trump or his company in the future.” Deutsche Bank declined to comment to AFP.
The move comes on the heels of last week’s violent attack on the US Capitol by Trump supporters at the president’s incitement, and follows steps taken by other companies to cut ties with Trump and his businesses.
Christiana Riley, head of Deutsche Bank’s US division, called the violent siege on the Capital “a dark day for America and our democracy” in a post on LinkedIn last week.
Trump’s relationship with Deutsche Bank has sparked numerous probes in the United States, including in New York, where the Manhattan District Attorney is investigating whether Trump committed financial crimes as he sought loans.
AFP
5.55am: European stocks, US dollar decline
European stock indices declined as hopes for coronavirus vaccinations and US monetary stimulus competed with fears over surging infections, tougher lockdowns and political turmoil across the Atlantic, traders said.
London closed down 0.7 per cent, Frankfurt shed 0.1 per cent and Paris ended down 0.2 per cent.
The US dollar was mostly lower against other major currencies, while oil prices rose.
Gains by the pound against the dollar weighed on the London stock market which includes many multinationals that earn substantial amounts of their profits in the US currency.
Bitcoin was steadier after swings of 20 per cent in recent days, trading for around $US34,500.
“The fact that vaccines are being rolled out will be comforting for investors but the first quarter is shaping up to be far more painful than anticipated,” said Craig Erlam, analyst at Oanda trading group.
“This may dampen sentiment in the coming weeks, especially if corporate America raises concerns during fourth-quarter earnings season, which kicks off later this week.” Another focus of attention for traders was Washington, where Democrats are seeking a historic second impeachment of Donald Trump, whom they accuse of inciting an attack on the Capitol Building that left five people dead.
There is concern however that the move could distract from the Democrats’ plans for a bigger stimulus bill to soften the virus’s impact, and some warn the row could overshadow President-elect Joe Biden’s first months in office.
He has called for a huge package including $US2000 cash handouts, though analysts said that while markets would welcome a spending splurge, there were concerns about the fiscal implications.
Bets on another rescue deal have ramped up inflation expectations, with 10-year Treasury yields above one per cent for the first time since March and talk swirling that the US Federal Reserve could begin to consider winding down its vast bond-buying scheme.
AFP
5.50am: Boeing commercial plane deliveries plunge
Boeing reported a 59 per cent plunge in commercial plane deliveries in 2020 as it contended with the grounding of the 737 MAX and a travel industry downturn amid COVID-19.
The aerospace giant delivered just 157 planes last year, down from 380 in 2019. Boeing also suffered a net drop of 471 commercial plane orders in 2020 following hundreds of cancellations of the 737 MAX, which was cleared in late 2020 to resume flights in the US and some other markets following a 20-month grounding.
AFP
5.45am: Telegram chief reports 25m new users in three days
The encrypted messaging app Telegram has registered 25 million new users in the past 72 hours, its Russia-born founder Pavel Durov said, on the heels of WhatsApp announcing a change to its privacy terms.
Durov, 36, said on his Telegram channel that the app had over 500 million monthly active users in the first weeks of January and “25 million new users joined Telegram in the last 72 hours alone”.
The surge in downloads comes after WhatsApp, which boasts over two billion users, introduced controversial changes to its privacy conditions that will allow it to share more data with its parent company Facebook.
AFP
5.40am: Renault 2020 sales slump on pandemic
French auto giant Renault reported that sales by volume slumped 21.3 per cent last year to 2.9 million vehicles in a market down 14.2 per cent due to the coronavirus pandemic.
The fall was “principally due to the company’s large exposure to countries which imposed strict lockdowns... in the second quarter, plus a another slowdown in the fourth quarter, especially in France,” Renault said in a statement.
For Europe as a whole, sales fell 25.8 per cent to 1.4 million units. Hybrid and electric vehicles held up better than traditional cars in the second quarter and in the last three months of the year, orders in this segment were up 14 per cent from a year earlier in Europe, Renault said.
AFP
Word count: 7230
