Time is ticking for a new generation of social media infl uencers, who have risen from cyberspace obscurity to fi nd stardom – and more than a bit of moolah – on the video-sharing app TikTok.
IN MANY respects, JasmineTXO is an ordinary 22-year-old. She loves horror films and bubble tea and starting her morning at the gym. Public speaking is one of her biggest fears. Once a week, she teaches a hip-hop class to teenage dancers and, every Sunday, she works as a sales assistant in a pharmacy, a job she’s had since she was 18. In January, Jasmine bought a red hoverboard – a two-wheeled scooter that looks like a Segway without handles – and has since mastered the art of gliding around the house on it.
Like many young Australians, she lives with her parents and younger sister, Leila, in Melbourne’s northern suburbs. Unlike other 22-year-olds, though, one of her bedroom walls is papered with letters and illustrations she has received from some of the four million followers she has amassed as a content creator on the video-sharing app TikTok.
I meet Jasmine, who prefers not to go by her full name publicly, on a brisk autumn day at a café in Northcote, in Melbourne’s inner north. She is wearing sharp winged eyeliner, small hoop earrings, pale-pink nails and a black denim jacket over a tie-dye jumper.
She has a huge grin and a wide-eyed warmth about her, exhibiting the same exuberance in person that she does in her online videos.
For six years, Jasmine has been posting a mixture of dance videos, comedic skits and vlogs – video journals of her day – to TikTok.
Since graduating from a communications degree at RMIT in 2019, being a TikToker has been a full-time job. Her videos on the platform have amassed more than 105 million likes and even more views. What started as a fun hobby with her sister Leila and best friend Olivia – the girls originally posted from a shared account – has turned into a living made through advertising deals and merchandise, including her own branded bubble tea kit. Her online shop sells hoodies, phone cases and tote bags emblazoned with her slogan, “Spreading Smiles”.
Jasmine spends up to seven hours a day on her phone, a figure she both laments and seems resigned to. There’s time spent filming her own content, as well as videos for brands who pay her to advertise their products: “collabs”, as the influencer lingo goes. The lightning pace at which the popular becomes passé on TikTok makes it tricky to film videos more than one or two days’ ahead of time. Then there are the unglamorous hours spent editing videos, and more spent replying to comments and interacting with her followers on live streams.
Before filming, Jasmine peruses the app for both content inspiration and to keep abreast of the trends du jour, be it a dance, a comedic sketch or a song. “I’ll usually spend at least an hour or so scrolling before making a skit video,” she says, searching for the music or short sound clips to include in her sketch. “Every day there’ll be new trending sounds that we had no idea about the day before. It’s crazy because that often blows up [boosts the popularity of] different musicians’ songs.”
Jasmine has built a platform on fun, upbeat videos: there are skits set in a drive-through, filmed in her car, and at the window of her grandmother’s shed; she dances with swagger to hits both old and new; holding a laptop in front of her, she recites lines in perfect synchrony with scenes from TV shows and films.
When I ask about her audience, Jasmine opens the app to show me the geographical breakdown of her followers. Around 83 per cent of her audience is female, 42 per cent American. Some 320,000 people – only 8 per cent of her following – live in Australia. Though the platform doesn’t provide an age breakdown of followers, judging by the commenters on her videos and the people who approach her in public, Jasmine assumes most of them are children or in their early teens. Like many TikTokers, Jasmine’s audience ballooned during the pandemic. In March 2020, she was at 500,000 followers; by the end of the year, she had an audience of 3.3 million.
Jasmine is one of a growing number of Australians earning a livelihood from the platform. As baking banana bread and jigsaw sales spiked during the lockdowns of 2020, so, too, did TikTok’s user base: it became the most downloaded app in the world last year. Though the platform doesn’t disclose its user figures, an external estimate by Roy Morgan, as of last October, suggests at least 2.5 million Australians regularly use TikTok, a figure that rose by 52 per cent in the first half of 2020. Seventy per cent of users belong to Gen Z or younger.
The app’s surge in popularity has created a new breed of celebrity, who – to young audiences for whom free-to-air TV is outdated – are as recognisable as older stars of the small and silver screens. The platform has decentralised fame or, at least, changed the parameters of who can court attention. Overnight, in some cases, normal people living normal lives are plucked by TikTok’s discovery engine from relative obscurity and projected onto the screens of millions around the world. For young TikTokers who can sustain and monetise this attention, the opportunities seem limitless.
TikTok consists of videos typically between 15 seconds and a minute long (for some users, it has recently rolled out the ability to upload three-minute videos).
First released in 2014, the app was originally known as Musical.ly and was rebranded in 2018 when the Chinese firm ByteDance acquired it. ByteDance has invested in artificial intelligence research for several years – and central to TikTok is the “For You” page, an endless scroll of videos powered by an algorithm that serves a curated mix of viral content and videos based on the user’s personal interests.
TikTok Australia general manager Lee Hunter says the recommendation algorithm is unique to each user, taking into account factors such as the types of videos a person likes, shares and comments on: “a whole range of things that give us a sense of who you are”.
The algorithm then delivers videos it believes to be uniquely interesting in broad verticals such as comedy, sport and DIY, he explains.
Over time, TikTok users have grouped together videos that share a theme. FoodTok, for example, comprises cooking videos rhythmically edited down for bite-size consumption; WitchTok features self-identifying witches purportedly casting spells and making content about the occult, which has undergone a renaissance in recent years; Queer TikTok is a trove of educational and supportive videos for LGBTQI+ users; CleanTok is home to oddly satisfying videos of domestic-cleaning hacks. The app’s duet function allows anyone to film themselves alongside an existing TikTok video or to add themselves to a chain of videos, as was the case for the sea shanty Soon May the Wellerman Come, which became a viral sensation in January.
LIKE MANY, I downloaded TikTok in 2020 while in lockdown in the UK. After several hours of scrolling, TikTok’s algorithm had carved out and finely honed an addictive niche for me: videos that captured or elicited extremes of emotion. I couldn’t get enough, the app had decided, of videos that made me laugh or cry, but which were otherwise unrelated by content.
I was breathless at a silly skit of a playground safety inspector aggressively throwing dolls around; at a man trying and failing to stop a moving ceiling fan with his hand; at a girl drowsily attempting to remove gauze from her mouth after having her wisdom teeth removed. I was moved by a mother reuniting with her daughter after a year separated by COVID-19, and by a class of university students who surprised their professor with heartfelt messages via Zoom.
The videos weren’t always originals: often they’re repurposed from YouTube and given a new life on the app, as in the case of a haka performed at a New Zealand teenager’s funeral, the boy’s brother breaking down halfway through. I often found myself opening up TikTok to swipe through just a few videos and then looking up much later in a daze to find that an hour had passed.
In acknowledgement of its own addictiveness, TikTok runs advisory videos encouraging users to take screen breaks. People are also able to set screen-time limits within the app, 40 minutes being the minimum. Though TikTok declines to provide official statistics, the average user reportedly spends 45 minutes per day on the app. Hoping to replicate TikTok’s success, Instagram and YouTube have both rolled out similar features, named Reels and Shorts respectively.
TikTok is awash with users who have aspirations to be famous. Many list a numeric follower goal in their account bios and there’s an entire subgenre of “How to get TikTok famous” instructional videos on the platform. To earn TikTok clout, some share traumatic stories or fake their videos entirely; others pull outrageous stunts. In December, a Melbourne teenager was banned from Qantas, Virgin and Jetstar flights after joking on TikTok about committing a terrorist attack as she boarded a flight.
“This is a space where fame and virality [the tendency of content to be shared rapidly and widely on the internet] are channelled post first rather than persona first,” says associate professor Crystal Abidin, an internet-culture researcher at Perth’s Curtin University.
“Things that go viral depend on the flavour of the day or maybe even the flavour of the hour.” She has noticed many TikTokers – even those with a coherent “brand identity” – experiment with different content styles, memes and trends, “in order to continually be seen on the platform and by the audiences that follow them”.
“Creativity is what’s rewarded, not necessarily a follower count,” says TikTok’s Lee Hunter. “You don’t need to have huge followings in order to see success on the platform.”
WRIT LARGE, TikTok’s discovery algorithm can have a homogenising effect, as Vox reporter Rebecca Jennings has described – particularly in the US, where the app has the largest number of users outside China. (In China, the app is called Douyin, and the content between Douyin and TikTok is kept separate. India had more users than the US, but the app was banned there in June 2020.) “What we’re seeing,” Jennings writes, “is the lowest common denominator of what human beings want to look at, appealing to our most base impulses and exploiting existing biases toward thinness, whiteness and wealth.”
This is true of the two most-followed TikTokers in the world, 17-year-old Charli D’Amelio (118 million followers) and 20-year-old Addison Rae Easterling (81 million followers), both dancers whose anodyne but astonishingly popular videos are perhaps explained by their youth and conventional beauty. The app has also been criticised for unequal treatment of creators of colour. At the height of the Black Lives Matter protests last year, TikTok apologised to black creators and vowed to make the platform more inclusive.
In Australia, at least, the app seems noticeably – and refreshingly – polyphonic. The algorithm gives prominence to LGBTQI+, First Nations, disabled and other minority creators in a way that I haven’t encountered on other platforms. “There is an explosion of diversity on the app, because it’s still working out what its vernacular visual genres are,” says Abidin, “unlike Instagram, where the go-to things are fashion, beauty and skinny white girls who look beautiful and are always a size six.”
Jasmine, whose ancestry is half-Sudanese, half-Greek, says TikTok feels like a more inclusive space for body positivity. A few years ago, when Instagram still reigned supreme, she felt the attitude to someone like her was, “ ‘Oh, you’re probably never going to make it: you don’t fit the image,’ ” she says.
“Now, it’s changed completely.”
I catch up with Jasmine again on an overcast Saturday at a park in Melbourne’s Northcote. She has picked the location to film a dance to a song currently blowing up on TikTok: a 2017 reggae version of Iko Iko, which was first released in 1953. Jasmine and her friend Olivia have learnt the dance the night before, and show up in matching oversized retro shirts, straight-leg jeans and Nike Air Jordans. Jasmine’s sister Leila has come along to film them, and they are joined by Jasmine’s mum, Stella.
“I hate filming in public,” says Jasmine. “But in front of millions of people is fine,” says Stella, and they laugh at the irony. The girls film the dance a few times on some boulders, then shift to the middle of a footpath.
Stella and I chat while they film. Jasmine is often recognised in public, but otherwise life has hardly changed, she says. Stella and her husband were struck, however, when Jasmine organised a meet-up for fans at a park in January 2020, with several other TikTok creators. A few hundred children and young teenagers showed up to the event. “Seeing the reaction of these little kids just reminded me when I was a kid, fangirling over pop stars,” says Stella. “It was like, ‘Oh my god, she’s really something to them.’ To see your kid – your little kid – and all these other little kids want to be near her … it’s crazy.”
Despite Jasmine’s four million followers, Stella says her daughter’s renown is “still relatively small” in the grand scheme of TikTok fame: a manageable level that doesn’t compromise the normality of their lives. “I like her to keep her privacy as much as possible,” she says.
“You don’t want super fame.”
UNTIL RECENTLY, the most popular Australian on TikTok was 19-year-old Sarah Magusara, a FilipinaAustralian who lives in Brisbane (at time of going to press, she has just been pipped by 20-year-old Perth dancer Hannah Balanay who hails from the Philippines).
Magusara has amassed a following of more than 16 million, mainly through videos of herself dancing, and TikToks made with her one-year-old daughter, Zamira, often in matching outfits for fashion brands. Her audience on TikTok grew significantly, she tells me over the phone, when she announced her pregnancy on the app in 2019, when she was still a high-school student.
TikTok fame has forced Magusara to adjust to being a public figure. She says she’s always recognised whenever she goes out and now runs her errands when she’s less likely to get stopped; during school hours on weekdays, usually. If she does a grocery run after 3pm, she’s sometimes mobbed by groups of schoolgirls. “I usually make sure to be out for only a little bit because a lot of people just want to take photos of me and talk to me, which is amazing, but sometimes I need to get stuff and it’s really hard.” Once, she says, her parents were on an outing alone with their granddaughter. They were approached by a group of girls, who asked whether the toddler was “Zamira from TikTok”.
While being an influencer seems glamorous, TikTok fame can be both overwhelming and lonely at times, says 19-year-old Rory Eliza. Rory, who goes publicly by her first and middle name, has more than four million followers on the app. She started making videos as a 15-year-old when the platform was still Musical.ly.
When a management company, Born Bred Talent, approached her, convincing her she could parlay her audience into a full-time job, she decided to drop out of school at 17 to pursue it as a career. Aside from a brief stint at McDonald’s, she has never had any other job.
Like the others I speak to, Rory is often greeted by fans in public. “I’m so awkward to meet,” she says. “I’m not an awkward person, but when someone’s crying because I’m standing in front of them, it’s just crazy that you can have that sort of impact on somebody’s life.”
Outside of TikTok, Rory describes her life as quiet.
She lives at home with her parents near Newcastle in NSW. She makes a point of starting her day by making her bed. She plays guitar, sings and roller-skates: hobbies which have recently begun to make their way into her videos. “I got bullied at school for doing TikTok,” she says. As her audience grew, she found her friendship circle shrinking. “I’ve only got, like, one friend left,” she says.
The first time Rory and I speak, via Zoom, she’s sitting outside in the sun. With straight blonde hair, high cheekbones and full lips, she looks like the paragon of an Instagram influencer. (Her TikTok fame has translated into a following of 165,000 on that platform.) But based on Rory’s TikTok feed, she’s clearly unconcerned about looking perfect and readily pokes fun at herself for comedic value. In various videos, she appears without make-up, in pyjamas, with wet hair or forces a double chin. “I find Instagram very dry … a little bit self-absorbed sometimes,” she says. “A lot of the photos are really edited and it’s like a fake life. TikTok is legit just people having fun.”
She acknowledges that there’s artifice on TikTok, too, but says content on the platform requires “a bit more personality, rather than just a mirror selfie”.
What aspiration is to Instagram, relatability is to TikTok. Users of the video-sharing app engage in what Abidin calls “calibrated amateurism”. “As much as people know that they have to put an effort into creating their content, they try to also portray a more casual tone to things: allowing bloopers to be in there, showing a face without make-up, inviting people into [their] bedrooms,” she says.
When I visit Brooke Styles, a 25-year-old TikToker at her family home in the Sunshine Coast hinterland, I’m struck by a strange sense of familiarity. When I arrive, Brooke is sitting at her computer in her studio, a room I recognise from her videos: the curtains, a painted wall arch, desk, chair and sofa are all shades of pastel pink. The space, previously a garage, features a wall-mounted roll of pink (of course!) studio backdrop paper and is topped off by exposed wooden ceiling beams.
Brooke and her fiancé, Jake, renovated the studio themselves. They’ve redone many of the rooms in the house, which they share with Brooke’s mum and sister, as well as her two young cousins, who moved in with them when her aunt passed away. Brooke has documented the renovations on TikTok as well as DIY projects, including building a backyard barbecue area and kitting out a yellow van for road trips. The goal for her content, she says, is to be “a groovy version of Better Homes and Gardens”. Lifestyle videos are her mainstay, her account peppered with food and drink recipes, travel vlogs and styling videos. After we chat, Brooke shows me a stack of furniture she has been buying from op shops for a series of “flips” – transforming or upcycling them – for TikTok.
Brooke was an Instagrammer before she joined TikTok in 2019. “I fell out of love with Instagram,” she says. She had gained some weight and was struggling with her body image and mental health. “It came to a point where it wasn’t a creative thing any more for me; it was like a competition.”
Initially, she felt like a baffled millennial on TikTok.
“These kids were doing crazy things,” she says. “I was like, ‘This is really entertaining to watch, I really want to be a part of this.’ ” After posting a few TikToks, one video of her dogs was viewed 20,000 times, and she was hooked. It had taken Brooke six years to build a following of 100,000 on Instagram. On TikTok, she gained the same audience in a month. “It only took me a year to hit one million. It was just so quick and intense,” she says.
AT FACE value, being a famous TikToker might seem like a cushy career choice. But, says Clare Southerton, a technology and social media researcher at the University of NSW, it requires a significant input of creative labour. “The reality is that people who work in social media, in content creation, are workers; they’re creating things that people enjoy,” she says. “It’s like a lot of artistic careers – not everybody can be successful.”
The downside of social media is that, much like the news cycle, it never switches off. “I don’t ever stop thinking about it,” says Brooke, who works seven days a week. “Even if I want to casually scroll social media, it turns into me thinking about work.” Rory also feels pressure to post continually, although she tries to take weekends off to spend time with her family. “There isn’t really annual leave or holidays for me,” she says.
TikTok’s ability to captivate and galvanise young audiences hasn’t been overlooked as a powerful marketing tool. All the TikTokers I speak to are paid by a variety of brands to make advertising videos promoting products that span the gamut of fashion, beauty, fast food, music and more. Their fees are negotiated by their managers and, depending on the budget, they might be required to post one or a series of TikToks, as well as posts on Instagram or Instagram Stories, which disappear after 24 hours.
No one is keen to comment on the record about their salaries or individual brand deals, but Rory tells me that for TikTok “influencers, who are in the millions of followers, their income is in the medium-tohigh range of incomes in Australia”. When I ask Rory about brand deals, she rattles off a pre-prepared list that includes Fanta, Sportsgirl, the NSW Department of Education, Nissan, Baby G and Milo.
On a good day, she says, she might get five new briefs. “I’ve never had so much work before,” Brooke tells me; she now earns more than her mum, who works in childcare management. And Jasmine, who works at the pharmacy and as a dance teacher, has kept those jobs primarily because she enjoys their social aspects.
TikTok has had a particularly marked effect on the music industry. Jasmine, for instance, has worked with both Warner Music and Sony Music to promote certain songs in her videos. Increasingly, the platform has become a launch pad for new music, which is heavily pushed by record labels through paid campaigns and dance trends that seem all but engineered for virality.
For a while last year, choreographed dances to The Weeknd’s Blinding Lights and Drake’s Toosie Slide were inescapable, while some musicians, like John Mayer and former One Direction member Niall Horan, post musical instrumentals to the platform, encouraging their fans to duet their videos.
The app has even become something of a hitmaker, starting with Lil Nas X’s Old Town Road in 2019. There’s now a significant overlap between the music that’s trending on TikTok and the songs that are topping mainstream pop charts. Olivia Rodrigo, the 18-year-old American actor and singer, is arguably the biggest pop star in the world right now because of the platform. Her debut single, Drivers License, broke Spotify’s record for the most streams in a single week when it was released in January. She broke her own record in May with another single, Good 4 U. Back home in Australia, the TikTok popularity of 24-year-old, Adelaide-born Shaylee Curnow, who performs under the moniker Peach PRC, eventually led to a record deal.
TIKTOK SKEWS female: around 60 per cent of its user base, according to both Australian and American estimates. The app’s biggest male stars in Australia tend to be older and have already established audiences on other platforms: these include YouTubers such as Mullen Slay (10.2 million followers) and 30-year-old JoshDub (8.4 million followers), who have gained an audience for their virtual reality gaming videos.
Thirty-one-year-old JoelBergs (6.6 million followers), who largely posts comedic reactions to viral videos, is another: he was previously a popular creator on Vine, a now-defunct short-video platform which had similarities to TikTok.
Male TikTokers who have grown large audiences primarily on the app include the baby-faced Bijay Baniya (9.7 million), 25, a choreographer and dancer, and Melburnian Caleb Finn (10.8 million), a former pre school teacher who, with his braces and drawn-on freckles, looks much younger than his 26 years.
TikTok’s vast audiences have also created celebrities out of certain professionals, such as health workers and teachers, who use their TikTok videos to entertain, educate or drum up business. In Australia, these include Dr Daniel Aronov, a Melbourne-based cosmetic surgeon; Sally Prosser, a voice coach in Brisbane; and Sticky, a rock candy shop owned by David King, a former lawyer.
As TikTok has grown in popularity, the platform’s cultural dominance has begun to extend beyond the sphere of teenagers. The platform is “ageing up”, Hunter tells me, without sharing specific demographic details.
“We’re seeing a lot of older users get on board,” he says.
As well as the airing of a broader range of content. In May, Scattered, a “series” of 38 one-minute episodes cocreated locally by Logan Mucha and Kate Derrigan, launched on the platform. A scripted and professionally shot madcap narrative detailing the exploits of three friends who steal their mate’s ashes then accidentally lose them, the project has brought a highly polished cinematic offering to TikTok and is the first project of its kind to receive funding from Screen Australia. “It’s like The Hangover for Gen Z,” Screen Australia’s Lee Naimo told The Sydney Morning Herald. “There’s a booming and growing audience [on the platform] looking for new things they can’t get elsewhere.”
A widening user base suggests the app might be around for the long haul, says Southerton, although TikTok’s longevity is far from guaranteed. To date, it has already survived the existential threat of a potential ban in the US – last year, Donald Trump signed an executive order effectively banning the platform, although the order was later rescinded.
Plus, as Abidin puts it, “For all generations, socialmedia platforms have an expiration date for when it’s cool to be on them … you’re probably not going to find many 18-year-olds who are voluntarily on Facebook, because it’s an old people’s platform [now].”
Then there are concerns – and an ongoing lawsuit in Europe – about how it collects data from users, particularly given that so many are so young. The data TikTok collects is fairly comparable to other socialmedia platforms, and less far-reaching than Facebook’s policies, says Southerton. But, she says, there are valid privacy concerns about young people using the platform. “Any time a child or young people are filming themselves, that’s always a risk: that they might film something that reveals where they live, or reveal something about them that is private,” she says. “Just as you would educate a child not to put their address on Twitter, you would teach them not to film something that would reveal their location.”
“If TikTok drops off the face of the earth, I will be quite lost,” admits Rory, the next time I speak to her. Her blonde hair is now streaked with pink. “I don’t know anything else other than this and Macca’s. I don’t really have any experience in the world.” For more social interaction in her daily life, she’s considering getting a part-time job. She has decided to revamp both her look and her TikTok content, spurred by a recent, disheartening drop in her viewing statistics. While she used to easily rack up nearly half a million likes on a sketch video, lately she’s finding that she’s “lucky to get 20,000 likes”. “When you don’t see the traction, it makes you nervous,” she told fans in a live stream the week before our chat. “This is my job. What happens if it all dies? Then what?” It’s a pertinent question: what happens when these young TikTokers have had their time in the sun? In the entertainment industries, the timespan separating the popular and the passé was never long to begin with, and it is rapidly shrinking in sync with online attention spans. From YouTubers to Instagrammers, burnout among online influencers is a common phenomenon, perhaps unsurprising given that always staying switched on is a requirement of the job – and that the job, to some extent, requires commodifying oneself.
“I’m not that worried if TikTok doesn’t last forever,” says Brooke. She feels she has mastered what types of content gain her traction online, and believes she could transfer such content to other platforms if need be.
If social media didn’t exist, Jasmine tells me, she would see herself working in the film and TV industry.
“I do have plans to continue, hopefully, doing this kind of work for as long as I can,” she says. “But yeah, I guess you can never know.”
Later, Rory is more sanguine. “This is my passion,” she says. “I’m just so blessed to have the platform that I have.” Feeling pressure to succeed and uncertainty about future career paths are, she recognises, common experiences. “I don’t think it’s just influencers,” she says. “That comes with any job.” 
CREDIT: Donna Lu
Word count: 4865
