Four Corners
3 May 2021
Are you being played?
LAURA GILBERT, GAMER: The thing I love about gaming is immersing myself in a different world & just having some downtime outside of the scary realities of you know life.
IVY, GAMER: I love how you can connect with people, & how you can build, you can create, you can build whatever you want, & you can just connect, have fun.
LUCY CARTER, REPORTER: Millions of Australians play video games every day.
DR. KIM LE, CHILD AND ADOLESCENT PSYCHIATRIST: The video games industry is in the business of manufacturing fun, & video games are fun for many people but for a small percentage of people it can be misery.
LUCY CARTER: Gaming has become a global business, worth around 175-billion US dollars, more than Hollywood & the music industry combined.
ANTHONY McDONALD, GAMER: Modern game designers, they want your time, & they want your money.
More money & more time.
SEN. JORDON STEELE-JOHN, AUSTRALIAN GREENS: Some of these larger game development entities, some of the big players in the mobile video game space have just gone, "Oh my God, this is a licence to print money."
LUCY CARTER: For some players, switching off can be a struggle – & it's not just kids.
NAE JACKSON, GAMER: You've become so immersed in the game world & what's going on that, that is your world & that's your priority.
KAT MCDONALD, GAMER: I know it was manipulated by the game.
I could see it was manipulating me, but I was still participating.
LUCY CARTER: Tonight, on Four Corners we investigate the business of video gaming.
We'll examine how some games are being deliberately designed to extract maximum time & money from players.
And we'll reveal the psychological tricks being used to keep gamers hooked.
TITLE: ARE YOU BEING PLAYED?
LUCY CARTER: The kids' homework is done, & dinner is over.
For the Jackson family on the outskirts of Melbourne that means it's time to start gaming.
IVY: Are you breaking all the…?
KEITH JACKSON, GAMER: Yes.
IVY: I think it's one thing that means a lot to me because I have so many great memories of it & it's one of those things that's, it's like a hobby, it's really important to you, & you think now if you ever stopped your life would end because you just, you don't want to stop.
LUCY CARTER: Ivy is 10 years old.
Her favourite game is Minecraft, one of the biggest selling games of all time.
Since its release a decade ago it's made an estimated 3-billion US dollars
IVY: You can create, you can build whatever you want, & you can just connect have fun.
With enough coding skills, you can create mini games, you can make things walk forward.
Screen time can affect you; you can get addictions & that can become a serious problem.
But at the same time, I kind of wish, why do addictions exist?
Why can't we just play?
Why is looking at a screen for too long bad for you?
Like I know why, but like why does it have to be?
LILLIAN, GAMER: It's kind of weird to not see someone on a computer or playing a game.
In the same way that some families go camping, we play video games.
LUCY CARTER: Ivy's sister Lillian is 15 years old.
She also plays Minecraft & is trying to build up an online following of people who watch her as she games.
LILLIAN: So, I stream on the platform Twitch, it's a live stream of your computer screen, to whoever clicks on it.
Like I watch a bunch of YouTubers who also do it, like it looks like they're having fun, why not?
JAY, GAMER: I like being able to connect with my friends & other different people & the gaming community is just a nice place to do that after school & on weekends.
LUCY CARTER: Their brother Jay is 13 & loves a game called Roblox.
It's free to download but encourages players like Jay to spend real money on a virtual currency called Robux.
Roblox Corporation was recently valued at 38-billion dollars.
JAY: This is the avatar shop where you can buy stuff for your avatar.
The next thing I really want to buy is the Violet Valkyrie but it's 50,000 Robux & I don't have that kind of money yet.
LUCY CARTER: And do you know how much 50,000 Robux is in like Australian dollars?
JAY: Not really but I know it's more than like $100.
LUCY CARTER: And what is it about the Violet Valkyrie hat that you want?
JAY: I've seen it on YouTubers that I watch, & it makes your avatar look really cool, people always really want this one & I would like to have it on my avatar too.
NAE JACKSON: They're trying to get kids pocket money off them.
So, they come, & they ask for money, & it's all of these little transactions.
Oh, it's just eight bucks, it's just two bucks.
It's just, & it's, it's very, very different to you pay, you'd pay for the game, & then you'd pay for your subscription to get the extra stuff, to all of these little microtransactions of just two dollars, just two dollars that add up before you have any idea how much you've spent.
LUCY CARTER: The children's mother Nae Jackson has been gaming since she was a child.
For years she dedicated her life to a multiplayer fantasy game called Rift, where players join together in so-called 'guilds'.
They're teams of players from around the world.
NAE JACKSON: I think the ultimate kill that I made with my original guild was a giant octopus & we spent months killing the giant squid, but it was amazing & the feeling of achievement, the sense of achievement when we finally killed it, we killed it on our own, we didn't recruit any semi-pro players to help us kill it, we did it ourselves.
It was amazing, & just the cheer that went up when we finally got that kill & the little scroll across the bottom 'achievement unlocked' there's nothing like it still, there's no team building like killing a giant squid.
LUCY CARTER: How many hours a day were you spending on Rift killing a giant squid?
NAE JACKSON: So, during an entire day you could easily do eight hours on a raid day, & there would be two to three raid days per week.
LUCY CARTER: Nae would regularly play through the night.
NAE JACKSON: Getting the kids to school on time the next morning was definitely a problem, I was really tired, I was often tired, & I would fall asleep accidentally & once I missed a school pick-up because I was asleep, because I fell asleep, being tired, the school would call, where are you?
It's only a couple minutes down the road so I just nipped up & got them.
LILLIAN: I remember putting my sister & brother to bed, & tucking them in & everything, & then mum would come in when she got a break, & that was, that was just kind of how I guess I grew up from about seven, I just remember it almost always being there.
LUCY CARTER: Gaming for 8-hours at a stretch took a toll on Nae's health.
She ended up with stress injuries to her hands.
NAE JACKSON: I lost a lot of muscle tone, when I started gaming a lot.
My shoulders would ache, my neck aches, & for quite a while I had problems with my wrists, they would actually seize up and, I actually had to step out of the raiding team of the guild for a while there because my wrists were so bad, I actually couldn't game, it would cramp, I would take painkillers to get through it, what am I doing to myself, for the sake of a giant rock monster or a giant squid?
LUCY CARTER: On one occasion Nae organised her whole family life around a 24-hour binge.
NAE JACKSON: All I had to do was prep the food, organise the play dates & I had to write all the lists down so that I was organised & I could give it 24 hours straight.
I bought energy drinks, dinners were made & prepped, I knew exactly when I was going to feed them.
I had people coming to pick up the kids for play dates & drop off & that kind of thing & when one of them, one of the play dates fell through, the kid went to play at the neighbour's.
So, I had everything down to a fine art so that, for that 24 hours, I did nothing but explore the new world.
LUCY CARTER: Were you addicted to this game?
NAE JACKSON: If you're prepping meals, & organising schedules around a game map dropping, pretty safe to say that either you are overly, fiercely competitive which I'm not, or you're addicted & you've become so immersed in the game world & what's going on that, that is your world & that's your priority.
LUCY CARTER: Ron Curry represents the booming Australian game development & publishing industry.
In 2019 Australians spent close to 3.2 billion dollars on gaming.
RON CURRY, INTERACTIVE GAMES & ENTERTAINMENT ASSOCIATION: About three quarters of Australians play games & that certainly goes up much higher when we start to talk about younger people, people in their teens & their twenties, that number gets up around to 90%.
But interestingly, the fastest growing group in that is retired women & we certainly see them as the accelerated group of gamers because they have time, they're getting used to engaging online.
LUCY CARTER: Players around the world can connect & compete online.
It means that a game is now always underway somewhere for anyone who wants to play.
RON CURRY: No matter where you are, you have an access to a game.
You can have that quick little game when you're at the bus stop.
You can go home for that really deep engaging game by yourself.
Or more importantly now, every time we pick up a device, we're not playing alone & we know this.
We know that gamers don't play alone anymore.
They prefer to play with a friend or a whole series of friends.
DR. KIM LE, CHILD AND ADOLESCENT PSYCHIATRIST: The video games industry are in the business of manufacturing fun, & video games are fun for many people but for a small percentage of people it can be misery.
LUCY CARTER: Dr Kim Le is a psychiatrist who treats children & teenagers struggling with their gaming habits.
DR. KIM LE: As therapists, as people working with young people, we're playing catch up & we've been playing catch up ever since games came out.
LUCY CARTER: Today he's training counsellors in Adelaide to deal with the growing number of patients they're seeing with problem gaming.
DR. KIM LE: They might be saying to themselves my online game teammates need me, I won't be able to cope unless I'm playing an online game, there's nothing else I'd rather be doing or nothing else I can do than online game & I'll feel better about myself if I play a game.
LUCY CARTER: He wants the counsellors to understand the appeal of videogames so they know exactly what they're up against.
DR. KIM LE: The main reason why I brought in the Nintendo Switch & played Mario Kart with them is to show them how polished video games are now today & to explore with them what they found fun about the game & how they felt while they were playing the game, because different people play for different reasons & the best way that I could show that as an example was to get them to actually do it & hear the sights & sound.
And as you can see from today it sounded very much like a poker machine all these rings & bells & lots of flashing lights & it's very exciting, people got really invested into it.
LUCY CARTER: In 2019 The World Health Organisation classified video game disorder as a behavioural addiction.
DR. KIM LE: It's characterised by a loss of control over your gaming time, priority over other activities for video games, & then you get negative consequences because of the amount of time that you are spending playing video games.
LUCY CARTER: Psychologist, Dr Daniel King led a recent review of 53 global studies which found 2-percent of all players had gaming disorder.
That's potentially tens of millions of people worldwide.
DR. DANIEL KING, CLINICAL PSYCHOLOGIST, FLINDERS UNIV: The gaming industry often expresses opposition to this notion of problem gaming & gaming disorder on the basis that many people, millions of people enjoy games, they do it to socialise, they get some other personal satisfaction.
But that does not invalidate the phenomenon of gaming disorder.
The fact that it's an activity enjoyed by millions, we could say that about many other recreational activities, we could say it about gambling.
But we know that many people do have a problem with gambling, & we know that many people have a problem with their gaming.
RON CURRY: Just to say, there's a gaming disorder, may just be a little bit too lazy.
It's too easy to say, they play too much, too many games, therefore they have a problem.
What we're saying is, we'd like to understand, is there an underlying reason why people are playing too long?
Sometimes, it's just, they play too long.
Other times, there's social issues, there's depression issues, there's other medical issues, there's other familial issues that just make them drive them to play the game as an escape from something else.
DR. KIM LE: Internet gaming disorder was highly associated with panic disorder separation disorder & depression.
I'm seeing families being torn apart.
As a psychiatrist I see a lot of children who are presenting in distress, self-harming, having thoughts that life isn't worth living.
I have had pediatricians refer children to me who have been soiling themselves & the pediatricians will do all the tests, physical examination, all the imaging, do all the investigations & they can't find any physical cause for a young child soiling themselves & they'll refer them to me & the child will come to my office, I'll ask them what are you doing when you are soiling yourselves they'll tell me they are playing a video game & they can't stop.
LUCY CARTER: Dr Le understands what it's like to be drawn into the world of a game.
For the last five years he's been hooked on Pokémon GO, a mobile game that's made an estimated 4-billion dollars.
DR. KIM LE: It's a good way for me to just mind numbingly escape whatever stresses I have in the day.
You love getting the reward when you've reached there but you look back & you regret the amount of time that you have spent to get to that spot, & you wonder how else I could have spent my time in a more worthwhile way.
LUCY CARTER: Dr Le knows how hard it can be to quit a game.
DR. KIM LE: I've gone through at least two different 90 day detoxes, so my first ever self-imposed detox with the help of people using forums online, journaling my entries I tried to quit Pokémon GO & within the first week I failed.
I relapsed because the game offered me a opportunity, a reward I couldn't simply refuse, I've been waiting for this particular reward for a long time & so I relapsed.
The other reasons why I relapsed was my teammates they kept messaging me, telling me to come back & play, the problem is once the flow of rewards has started how do you stop?
ROB LEMING, GAMER: Your personal life starts to exist in the game.
So, you're meeting friends in-game, you're making friends in-game.
Yeah, it's all about running around in the games, doing adventures & killing creatures & whatever you want to do.
LUCY CARTER: Psychology student Rob Leming has been gaming his entire adult life.
He became hooked, losing himself for weeks in blockbuster games like World of Warcraft & Assassin's Creed.
ROB LEMING: I would wake up; I would do essentially the basics.
Border line get dressed if I had to, put a bit of food in my belly, definitely make a coffee, usually a strong one & sit down & start playing.
And at that point on, everything in the day revolved around the game, or what I was doing.
When I was deep into playing World of Warcraft, my partner threw a term around at the time which I found hilarious, but it was pretty horrifying.
She said she was almost one of the Widows of Warcraft, describing herself as one of the partners of a couple who was out in the cold while the other half was engrossed in this game.
DR. DANIEL KING: The idea of these games is to get people far more hooked into the game, more immersed into the game, getting them to spend less time away from the game & feel much more invested in the game as they make progress through it.
LUCY CARTER: Rob sank into what gamers call 'grinding' — the repetitive play required to progress through some games.
ROB LEMING: I remember one game playing; I think it might have been Assassin's Creed, one of the Assassin's Creed series, there's a lot of them.
I spent days jumping around rooftops in some ancient land collecting feathers, & I'm sitting here now & I'm going, "Huh? What for?"
Maybe they gave my character a new sword or something, but the game didn't depend on it.
It's not Assassin's Creed fight for feathers.
GAME: Round one your turn.
LUCY CARTER: In many games, players can avoid some of the grinding by paying real money to progress more quickly.
It's known as 'pay to win.'
ROB LEMING: The pay to win model is pretty much as it sounds, that two people can play, & they can follow the same set of rules of progression to get better.
So, we could both start at level one, & we could keep playing the certain amount of hours, & depending on our skill level, perhaps slightly faster than one another.
Or you or me could just spend some money then & there & get all the advantages that come with having progressed.
DR CELIA HODENT, GAME USER DESIGN CONSULTANT So games that are pay to win are games that, are asking players to, use, you know, spend some money to buy things that are not just cosmetics, in the game, just to make you look cool, just like shoes, the skin that you want to have in the game, but you pay to have specific abilities or to have a specific weapon that is going to give you an advantage in the game play.
So typically, gamers hate that because they want it to be fair & pay-to-win is not very well regarded.
Dr Celia Hodent has helped design some of the biggest games in the world, including Fortnite.
She uses cognitive science to understand the gamer's brain.
DR. CELIA HODENT: You don't want to just think about revenues & think about profiting at the expense of players & their fun and, & their best interests.
So, to me it's really an ethical consideration & the line has been blurry.
LUCY CARTER: Persuading players to pay money for advantages & extra features is now a key part of the gaming business model.
These payments are known as in-game purchases, or microtransactions.
SEN. JORDON STEELE-JOHN, AUSTRALIAN GREENS: At their core, they are a moment within a game where a player is asked to purchase something within that game, either with money directly or via the purchase of in-game currency, that then enables you to purchase the item.
LUCY CARTER: Greens senator Jordon Steele-John is a keen gamer who has investigated in game purchases.
SEN. JORDON STEELE-JOHN: Now, the item may make your character look different, it may help you advance easier within the game, it might make you stronger or invisible or those kinds of things, but at the heart of it, it's a moment where a player is asked to spend an amount of money to gain some kind of advantage or difference within the game.
LUCY CARTER: Microtransactions started appearing in games in the mid 2000's & now make up three-quarters of all gaming revenue.
Last year, gamers around the world spent about 117-billion U.S dollars on microtransactions.
Of the highest selling 20 console & computer games in Australia last year, 18 included some type of microtransaction.
RON CURRY: Microtransactions make up a significant part of the market in Australia & that's because consumers have learnt that if they like a game, they can buy into it, & quite literally buy into the game.
Whether that's buying a new skin or whether that's creating, like I said before, a new house, the vehicle you're driving, you want to change the tyres on it.
Now that's that interactivity that people are enjoying in games, that it's not this linear two-dimensional entertainment medium.
It's three dimensional, & they can control a whole lot of it.
So yes, they're spending their money on it.
DR. DANIEL KING, VIDEO GAME RESEACHER: We refer to this concept of predatory monetisation, which is about the schemes within games that disguise or mislead the player about how much money they actually need to spend in the long term until they're already committed into the game.
So, some of the systems the games that use predatory monetisation include constant solicitations to spend money, & developers want you to spend money as soon as you get into the game.
They want people to spend money in some way.
LAURA GILBERT, GAMER: I've always been a gamer, but I also delved into some cosplay, which stands for costume role-play, & you dress up as fictional characters & so that was another way that I expressed my love for gaming & pop culture in general.
LUCY CARTER: Laura Gilbert is a passionate gamer & streamer, playing character driven epics like Batman.
She's one of many gamers becoming disillusioned with how focused gaming has become on microtransactions & profits.
LAURA GILBERT: There's a game that I love playing, & it's actually directed at quite a young market, like primary school kids, & the amount of small money grabs that they try to make, "Get this other colour, you can be, characterise this".
And "I want the cool outfit, but oh, I've got to ask mum for the credit card", & then how many small transactions do you need to make?
LUCY CARTER: The most controversial type of microtransaction is the lootbox.
Some mimic the look & sound of poker machines, others a spinning prize wheel.
They're like a virtual treasure chest that a player buys with no guarantee of what they win.
LAURA GILBERT: I think it has that element of gambling because you don't know what you're going to get in that loot box.
Whereas an expansion pack, I mean it is a better form of an additional cost because you know exactly what you're getting yourself into & you know what you're purchasing.
Whereas a loot box is a form of gambling & that's where I draw the line personally, with my personal morals & values.
DR. CELIA HODENT: It's used to engage people with the monetisation of the game.
So that's what a loot box is, & it just started to appear probably around 2010, something like that & because it was successful & game developers saw that, players liked that, & it was making revenues, a lot of people started to use it, just because it works for this game, so why not use it?
LUCY CARTER: Lootboxes earned games companies an estimated 15-billion dollars last year.
This slice of the global gaming market is projected to grow to 20 billion by 2025.
DR. JAMES SAUER, PSYCHOLOGICAL SCIENTIST, UNIV. OF TASMANIA: We do know that the psychological mechanisms that many loot box systems operate on, are very similar to other forms of gambling.
And we do know that a disproportionate amount of the revenue that loot boxes draw come from or comes from players that score highly in terms of problem gambling symptomology.
LUCY CARTER: Psychological scientist Dr James Sauer analyses how video game design affects behaviour & has conducted several studies into lootboxes.
DR. JAMES SAUER: We are talking here about potent psychological mechanisms & not everybody has a background in human motivation or human psychology, so they won't necessarily be aware of these things.
Yes, it's possible that these mechanisms can influence players' behaviour without players being explicitly or consciously aware of those pulls.
I think we need to help gamers understand what's going on under the hood.
SEN. JORDON STEELE-JOHNS: The concern is that we are enabling particularly young people or people in vulnerable situations to come into contact with the basic mechanisms of gambling, particularly pokies, at very early ages & in context where they might not be aware that that's what, in fact, they are coming into contact with.
LUCY CARTER: The games industry defends lootboxes, saying they're no different to a Kinder Surprise.
RON CURRY: As young kids we love to get a lucky dip, Pokémon cards or Kinder surprises & that mechanism is a similar mechanism to what's in loot boxes.
I don't think they're similar to gambling.
With the loot box, you are investing money to get something back.
You'll always get something back.
Whatever you get, you can use in your game.
Now, whether it's something, you really wanted to play in your game or it's something that's less than what you wanted, it's still something you can play in your game.
DR. JAMES SAUER: I think loot boxes are different to a Kinder Surprise.
I think when somebody buys a Kinder Surprise, by & large, they know what they're getting.
They're getting some chocolate & they're getting a little plastic toy.
In loot boxes, you buy a game & there's a reward mechanism in the game.
You don't buy the game for the reward mechanism, but the reward mechanism is there.
You purchase access to this reward mechanism, & you get a random outcome, that might be very valuable or not at all valuable.
LUCY CARTER: In 2018, Jordon Steele-John led a parliamentary inquiry into the potential harm of lootboxes.
SEN. JORDON STEELE-JOHN: We gathered really great evidence during the course of that Senate inquiry from community, from academic experts, from people particularly within the independent development space within the video game industry here in Australia.
And I t was pretty compelling & quite clear that these loot boxes, particularly when they meet the psychological definition of gambling, pose a real risk to kids & to vulnerable people & that there were some really clear steps that could be taken to support the community, to know exactly what they were playing & buying into.
LUCY CARTER: The inquiry acknowledged widespread concern that lootboxes could normalise gambling & cause harm.
But after lobbying from big players in the games industry, the only recommendation was for the Federal government to conduct another review into lootboxes.
SEN. JORDON STEELE-JOHN: I believe that the major parties rejected stronger recommendations, I mean, ultimately what we heard from the community & from academic experts, people that work in the video game industry, is that at the heart of the loot box exists the same mechanisms that exist at the heart of the poker machine & that those mechanisms are predatory, that they exist to trigger addiction & compulsive continual use.
LUCY CARTER: Senator Jordan Steele-John told us that loot boxes were, & I'm quoting him, akin to putting a child in front of a poker machine, do you agree with his assessment?
RON CURRY: No, I don't & I've had this conversation directly with him & I actually had this conversation with him at the Senate inquiry that he called into loot boxes, which we had a very big part in.
That inquiry came out & said that, first off, there are different styles of loot boxes.
They're not all the same & secondly, that the government would continue to monitor it, but at the time of the inquiry, didn't believe that there was a big enough issue or that there actually was a link between gambling & loot boxes.
DR. JAMES SAUER: Countries like Belgium have banned loot boxes, outright.
China has required odds disclosures, so gaming companies have to be open with players about, well, these are the odds of getting this valuable type of reward.
Other countries are focusing on consumer awareness campaigns & consumer information.
But as yet, I've not heard of Australia's intent to regulate.
TORULF JERNSTRÖM, TRIBEFLAME CEO (2016): Hello, I'm here to talk about monetisation.
LUCY CARTER: The psychological techniques some games companies can use to suck cash from players are rarely acknowledged by the industry.
Mobile gaming executive Torulf Jernstrom shocked many by openly discussing these techniques at a conference in Helsinki.
TORULF JERNSTRÖM (2016): The first spend is it breaks the ice, then they think of themselves as spenders in the game, it's okay for me to spend in the game.
Lots of people otherwise have this wall up, "I will never pay for a mobile game", so, you need to break the wall first.
A summary of a huge bunch of behavioral psychology so, the, the tricks on, on how to monetise a game well.
Some of you will probably be slightly shocked by what, all the tricks I have listed here, but I'll leave the morality of it out of the talk, we can discuss it if we have time later.
GAMER: He doesn't give a fuck that's basically what he's trying to say.
LUCY CARTER: Gamers responded angrily when they saw the talk posted online.
GAMER: Alright let's get on with the show
TORULF JERNSTRÖM (2016): So, let's go down into some more of these tricks.
GAMER: Watching on in utter disbelief as the game industry proudly boasts & gloats about the ways in which it psychologically hooks people into unethical unnecessary aggressive video game monetisation.
TORULF JERNSTRÖM: The five per cent that actually do pay, they will spend a lot.
GAMER: I love this medium too much to let shit like this be normalized.
TORULF JERNSTRÖM, FORMER MOBILE GAMING EXECUTIVE: Someone in the gaming industry discussing monetisation, it's a very sensitive subject.
If you work in a big company, I don't think they'll let you do it.
So, the only reason I I could do it is it was because I, I, with, with a friend of mine, we had our own company & there was no one telling us what we can & cannot do.
LUCY CARTER: Torulf Jernstrom says players need to know the reality of the industry's business model.
TORULF JERNSTRÖM: If you're going all in for, for making as much money as possible on them that I do do think is, is dishonest & unhealthy & I hope that that the players would realize that & move away from such games & also, that, that the platform operators, the, the app stores are basically cracking down on such behaviour.
LUCY CARTER: With the rise of artificial intelligence & data collection, games developers are getting even better at exploiting players.
DR. DANIEL KING: Many of these games are using machine learning, they're tracking what players are doing using people's information, & the information contained within their social network to make very strong predictions about how people will behave within the context of the game.
So, I think we're already at a point where the games have become extremely sophisticated, & in some ways, players are not always aware of how much the game is actually playing them.
LUCY CARTER: COVID-19 has delivered a windfall to the games industry, with people around the world trapped at home.
KAT MCDONALD, GAMER: So, March 2020, we were entering into lockdown, & so I was actually just looking for something to occupy myself from home, big days at home with the kids.
And so, once the kids went to sleep, I wanted to find something to play around with, or something that would engage me.
Kat McDonald was sucked in by the Chinese-made mobile phone strategy game, Legend of the Phoenix.
LUCY CARTER: In March, the game made a reported 2-million dollars just through microtransactions.
KAT MCDONALD: When I was playing the game in the earlier days & I was paying money to be part of the, I'd find myself in one of the top ranks or winning a round.
I think I won one round & so, it just felt really good to be at the top of something, because that time of my life, I probably wasn't feeling like I was succeeding.
I was getting a lot of negative kind of vibes & things like that & COVID was a really sad time for a lot of people so, I went for, it felt nice to actually be succeeding in something.
LUCY CARTER: Kat was recruited into an online team, or guild, through the in-game messaging system.
Guilds can increase the pressure on gamers to keep playing & spending.
KAT McDonald: I was definitely identified by the guild, because of my regular gameplay & the fact that I had increased so much power & that was by spending money.
ANTHONY McDONALD, KAT'S HUSBAND: So, there was a bit of a community sense & an obligation almost that she had to maintain & help & support her guild pushing forward.
And it was around that time that she spent a lot more time, & I'm assuming a bit more money, doing that.
LUCY CARTER: Kat bought the in-game currency to spend on outfits & to boost her character's power.
The more she spent in Legend of the Phoenix, the further she advanced.
DR. DANIEL KING: The intent behind an in-game currency is to change the psychological value of money that's been spent on the game & game developers will sometimes use multiple currencies to make it difficult for players to keep track of how much they're spending.
LUCY CARTER: Kat was so immersed in the game she lost track of exactly how much she'd spent.
KAT MCDONALD: I had thought that it was around the $2,500 mark, & it just took a little bit of digging, because I wasn't sure how to work out an itemised account, because on your bank account, it just says Apple, so, it could be Stan or your Netflix subscriptions or whatever.
So, once I finally found out how to do the itemised Apple account, I sat down with a notepad & pen & wrote out every single transaction & added it up to $4,000, & that was just every time I kept adding it more, I'm like, "It can't be that much. It can't be that much," but it was, & it was really mind-blowing.
LUCY CARTER: How did you feel when you came to that final figure?
KAT MCDONALD: I felt a little bit sick, I felt a bit scared to tell my husband, because we share funds in our house, so, I felt like that was money that the family could have spent & I hadn't even noticed that I'd spent anywhere near that much.
ANTHONY MCDONALD: And I went, "wow," because she'd been paying it for a long time & the fact that she'd only just realised how much she'd spent on the game.
I wasn't angry, but it kind of hit me & I went, "wow", if she hadn't been checking that, could you imagine how much more she could have spent?
KAT McDONALD: I know it was manipulated by the game.
I could see it was manipulating me, but I was still participating, because it was still giving me that dopamine rush when you're like, "Oh, I got all this free stuff," or you find yourself in the top 10 of the ranking & you're like, "Well, that was money well spent", it's not really.
ANTHONY MCDONALD: Modern game designers, they want your time, & they want your money.
More money & more time.
So, the more time they get from you, the more money they're going to get from you, & the bigger their backend is going to be.
RON CURRY: There are adults who spend too much on video games, as there are adults who spend too much on a whole lot of other activities.
LUCY CARTER: So, what is being done to protect those people?
RON CURRY: There are warnings throughout the game which will actually trigger a warning that's saying, "You have spent too much money or you're spending too much, are you sure you want to spend this?"
Outside of that, there's not a lot of protection.
LUCY CARTER: We've spoken with a woman who spent over $4,000 on a game & was horrified to realise she'd spent that much.
She says there were no triggers there were no warnings.
RON CURRY: Yeah, & again, it's hard to say, if we take one instance of someone spending $4,000, which is a lot of money, although there are people who would spend $4,000 happily over a year on a video game which they budget for, & that's part of their entertainment budget.
But with the array of games & publishers & different actors within this market, there'll always be those who aren't probably as upfront as they should be.
DR. DANIEL KING: The game developer knows much more about the player than the player knows about the game, & we call that an information asymmetry.
In the early days, players would go through them & learn more about the game & the system & become more practiced, they could apply skill & strategy to effectively get better & master the game.
These sorts of games, mobile games, games that use predatory monetisation, have kind of flipped the equation.
LUCY CARTER: Video gaming has grown into one of the most lucrative entertainment businesses in the world.
It's succeeded through a combination of immense popular appeal & a business model deliberately designed to get people hooked.
Gamers are now starting to realise how they've been played.
DR. KIM LE: Nowadays gamers themselves are actually saying hang on a sec these games are getting more & more advanced.
The online interactivity, the way it's programmed, it is something wrong with the way it's programmed & they are not stupid, they are not silly, they realise that the gaming companies are trying to sell them a product & use their psychology against them.
LAURA GILBERT: I have fears for not myself but for other people, I also have fears about greed because that's where it all stems from, is the greed to make money because they're really sacrificing someone else's life essentially.
Like with any gambling, people gamble away their lives & gaming, they'll game away their lives.
ANTHONY McDONALD: Gaming is escapism & gaming is an experience that is supposed to be fun & engaging, or scary if you're into horror & that sort of thing.
It isn't something to make 1000's of dollars, millions of dollars, billions of dollars off people who aren't really able to stop.
Word count: 6621
