PYNE ON MONDAY
DO you know when the last 130m-plus building was completed in Adelaide’s Central Business District? 1988. It is now Westpac House but for a time it was the headquarters of the State Bank and carried the State Bank’s livery.
That’s 31 years! Can you imagine being able to say the same thing about Melbourne, Sydney, Perth or Brisbane?
Thank God that’s all changing.
I was driving over the Morphett St bridge with an Uber driver a couple of weeks ago, from North Adelaide towards the city, when she commented on how much the Adelaide skyline had changed in such a short time.
It occurred to me that until South Australians can touch and see the new infrastructure, construction and development, like doubting Saint Thomas, they won’t believe.
But there is no doubting it now.
The city skyline is being transformed. Just this last month two new CBD buildings near North Tce, both taller than 130m, “topped out”, meaning construction reached its highest point.
There are plans for more. Adelaide City Council has just endorsed a development above and around our wonderful Central Market that will be in excess of 130m.
SkyCity Casino’s new hotel is rising alongside Lang Walker’s redevelopment of the Festival Plaza and creation of new retail, office and accommodation The General Post Office redevelopment is coming along well.
Along with BHP’s new South Australian headquarters, it will host a new five-star Westin Hotel.
Nearby in Currie St, a Sofitel hotel is well underway.
Eventually, it will be 32 storeys.
Along with the new Crowne Plaza on Frome Rd, it will give Adelaide three luxury hotels; two of them five-star rated.
The Uniting Communities new building that replaced Maughan Church has been completed. Her Majesty’s Theatre redevelopment is taking shape. Calvary Wakefield Hospital’s new building on Angas St is complete.
For all its faults, the Royal Adelaide Hospital has transformed the cityscape of the western end of North Tce, as have SAHMRI I and the new Adelaide University and University of South Australia medical and health science buildings.
Premier Steven Marshall is investing real effort into the creation of Lot Fourteen as one of the best centres in the world for innovation, science and modern industries such as machine learning, artificial intelligence, space and defence.
Start-ups and accelerators like Stone and Chalk, Myriota, Chamonix and creative industry businesses are already working out of Lot Fourteen.
It will also be a cultural centre housing the Aboriginal Art and Cultures Gallery along with the world class International Centre for Food, Hospitality and Tourism.
I was shocked to read that Diana Ramsay didn’t just make a “generous donation” to the Art Gallery of South Australia, she left the gallery a staggering $38 million! The largest cultural bequest in Australia’s history.
Our gallery will be the envy of the arts world in the rest of Australia. Much of this dramatic change has happened imperceptibly to most South Australians.
But as these new buildings are finished and fill with workers and residents, it will be obvious that Adelaide has changed.
As the minister for defence and defence industry, I laid the foundation for the gigantic ship and submarine building projects at Osborne on the Le Fevre Peninsula in Adelaide’s northwest. They are valued at $85 billion and will employ more than 5000 people.
They will chiefly be South Australians but I hope it will include others who will move themselves and their families from interstate and overseas to add to our community, culture and capability.
The good news isn’t exclusive to Adelaide.
Sanjeev Gupta, who owns and runs the GFG Alliance company, is investing heavily in Whyalla and through it, the Eyre Peninsula.
In 2020, it should see Australia’s largest solar farm at Cultana underway as well as a $600 million upgrade to the Whyalla Steelworks.
A new jetty is under construction. The main oval in Whyalla is being upgraded to a standard for hosting AFL games and the city’s airport is being redeveloped.
All this, only a few years after the future for Whyalla looked bleak. Monarto Safari Park is undergoing a makeover that will create one of the great safari experiences of the world.
In a way, we are so used to believing that our economy is sluggish, our wages are behind most of the other capital cities, our standard of living is lower and our employment growth is anaemic, that when that starts changing, most people probably believe it is unlikely to last.
Maybe they don’t want to get their hopes up to avoid disappointment? Just recently, The Advertiser reported that last year saw the most South Australians returning to live and work in the state for many years.
It is a positive sign that they can see a future here for themselves and their families.
I’m sure that is the case.
The spirit of the state is on the improve.
Confidence is returning and with it investment, development and a preparedness to take a risk.
After a decade of stops and starts in South Australia, the 2020s are looking bright.TWITTER @CPYNE
CREDIT: CHRISTOPHER PYNE
Word count: 849
