SUBJECTS in major technological shifts such as artificial intelligence and “big data” could become compulsory for Adelaide University undergraduates, Vice-Chancellor Peter Rathjen says.
Ahead of today’s release of the university’s strategic plan for the next decade, Prof Rathjen, pictured, also told The Advertiser he plans to tear down the fences around the North Tce campus as a sign of the institution’s desire to become a hub of community activity.
The plan proposes the creation of three “colleges of expertise”. The technology one would focus on the transformational impact of artificial intelligence and big data. The society college would explore policy development needed to accompany technological change, and the third would look at sustainability.
Researchers from across the university would have access to college expertise to inform their own work. And all students would at least have access to courses run by the colleges.
Prof Rathjen said all students should be exposed to the major “vectors of change” sweeping society.
He forecast a “dramatic” expansion of overall student numbers, subject to the uncertainties of Federal Government policy, with the proportion international students likely to grow from 30 per cent to 40-45 per cent.
After the Royal Croquet Club’s success at bringing large crowds to the university, the plan signals an intent to host a year-round calendar of arts and other events to welcome the public and keep students on campus more. But at the same time, rapid growth in online students is also expected.
There will be two new history walks through the city campus – one on the main north-south path devoted to Kaurna heritage, while an east-west route will tell the history of the university. Prof Rathjen said the uni’s large art collection, largely hidden away at present, would be displayed around campus.
He said the uni aimed to broaden its student cohort through more scholarships and different entry methods less reliant on the ATAR.The strategic plan will inform the uni’s next building masterplan expected later this year.
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS
Word count: 333
