THE final days of the 2020 Fringe and Festival season give opportunity for ref-lection about the significance of this world-class celebration of creativity and its broader implications.
There’s no doubting our place as the Festival State. For the past 60 years, the arts industry in SA has grown and flourished. This incredible month-long display of creativity and culture, which had its initial home at the University of Adelaide, is of great social and economic benefit to the state. But how might we as South Australians embrace creativity in its fullest sense, to help drive further benefit that extends beyond the arts?
To emerge stronger from its challenges and to turn them into opportunities, South Australia will need creativity at every level – including in the wider workforce, in business and industry.
Our state and our universities rightly have a focus on STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics).
With large defence contracts, the reinvigoration of the space industry, and the preparation of the future workforce at hand, STEM must take centre stage in our skills base. But widespread social-economic benefit from these initiatives will require broader uptake of related innovation and education to industries such as agriculture, energy and health, and to the working lives of young South Australians’ Employers are already telling our universities that South Australia will need more creative, flexible, adaptable thinkers. Highly-trained problem-solvers who are not only ready to take on the world of work as it exists today but who will lead us into the world of work for tomorrow.
What that looks like hasn’t been invented yet because disruptive change will become the norm.The first Industrial Revolution resulted in disruptive change to almost every aspect of daily life and reshaped entire economies. The next revolution is already occurring – with disruptive technologies led by artificial intelligence, big data, and machine learning heralding changes we can only begin to imagine.
In a world that is experiencing such rapid advances, how will we adapt? Where will the jobs of the next 10, 20, 30 years come from, and who will be ready for them? Who will be the ones driving that change?
Typically, they will be highly educated, creative thinkers.
We don’t just need job-ready graduates – we need future-ready graduates. Our university’s strategic plan, Future Making, has a focus on creativity and culture.
Such thinking impacts on our curriculum and on the broader student experience. As a leading research university, our students’ education is informed by the creation of new knowledge, and the creative application of that knowledge.
In order to become more creative thinkers, students must also be challenged in many ways; to step out of their comfort zones. Our state prides itself on being a leader in the arts and creativity but we have an opportunity to take that beyond festival season.
PROFESSOR PETER RATHJEN IS VICE-CHANCELLOR OF THEUNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
CREDIT: PETER RATHJEN
Word count: 481
