SILICON Valley investors including multistage venture capital firm SOSV will be visiting Adelaide this week as part of an inbound visit hosted and organised by the Office of the Chief Entrepreneur.
Chief entrepreneur Jim Whalley said connections were made with investors and businesses on the recent trip to the US which involved himself, Premier Steven Marshall and other attendees.
Mr Whalley said that during the visit to the US in January he visited companies including Elon Musk’s SpaceX, and a number of other firms, and invitations were extended to bring these companies back to Adelaide.
One of the events to be held this week will be a reverse pitch, where firms such as SOSV explain what they do, and what they are looking for from companies looking for investment.
Princeton, New Jersey-based SOSV, formerly SOS Ventures, has funded more than 700 start-ups and says it funds about 150 new companies a year.
It invests at various stages of the venture cycle and runs accelerator programs in the US and abroad.
It has invested in companies such as Storyful and Jump as well as gaming company Harmonix, which developed the Guitar Hero franchise.
“We’ve got the founder, Sean O’Sullivan and one of his partners coming out,’’ Mr Whalley said. “We want to facilitate direct connections between Silicon Valley and start-ups in South Australia, but we also want to give our start ups access to the international market.
“To prepare them and coach them, to give them an insight into what these guys are looking for.
“But also for the inbound companies we want to give them access to the future industries and emerging start ups in South Australia.’’ “The inbound companies come from all sorts of areas, defence, space, cyber security.
“We’re going to show them that here in South Australia we’re on the cusp of something pretty strong.’’ This included the set up of the Australian Space Agency in Adelaide, the multi-decade, multi-billion dollar defence shipbuilding program, and the establishment of the Lot Fourteen innovation precinct.
As well as the reverse pitch event, there will be three days of activities including a tour of Lot Fourteen and a presentation on the future vision for the site, a cyber security lunch presentation. Adelaide start ups will also have the opportunity to pitch to the inbound investors.
“And we’ll be hosting an event with targeted business connections around the defence and space industry, looking at what are the opportunities that exist and how do we strengthen relationship,’’ Mr Whalley said.
Mr Whalley said part of the SA sales pitch was that we have world class skills at a fraction of the Silicon Valley price, we are a Five Eyes country which is important in the cyber security field, and there’s a ready pool of resources here for companies looking to set up or invest.SA companies which will be involved include nano-satellite company Inovor and Life Whisperer, which has developed an artificial intelligence technology which helps sort the most viable embryos for in-vitro fertilisation. The head of global business development from pharmaceutical company Merck will also be coming to Adelaide.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 521
