GOING down a social media rabbit hole can be a wonderful, wacky adventure. Or, it can be a one-way trip to becoming a terrorist. We should probably do something about that.
On the weird side of the ledger, you might set out to learn about aromatherapy and before you know it you’re looking at ads for Gwyneth Paltrow’s latest product, which happens to be her This Smells Like My Vagina candle.
Then you swoosh around a corner and before you know it Facebook is suggesting you try a douche. Or calling you a douche. Or something.
Going “down the rabbit hole” comes from Lewis Carroll’s Alice’s Adventures in Wonderland, where Alice follows the White Rabbit into his burrow and ends up talking to a hookah-smoking caterpillar. Delightful!
But online, going through the wrong door can be just the start of a series of decisions that ends with you shouting “off with their heads!”.
Australia’s spy agency, ASIO, has warned that we are facing a dramatic rise in right-wing extremism, thanks to social media.
In 2016, right-wing violent extremism took up between 10 and 15 per cent of their workload. Now, it’s between 30 and 40 per cent. ASIO deputy director-general Heather Cook said extremist plotters are using similar strategies to Islamic State.
“(Its) ability to manipulate social media to recruit the young and the vulnerable – I think we are seeing a similar phenomenon being used by some in that extreme right-wing milieu to good effect,” she said.
If you can’t see how online radicalisation leads to real-world violence, just look at the Christchurch massacre, and a swag of right-wing murders in the US.
And if you think it takes a dedicated agent to radicalise a young person, you’d be wrong. With right-wing extremism, it might not even be a specific group. Spy agencies here and overseas warn of “lone wolves” self-radicalising online.
There’s a growing base of research showing how algorithms on social media drag unsuspecting minds down darker and darker paths, and the role of the internet in fertilising a new crop of extremists.
And a New York Times podcast, unsurprisingly called Rabbit Hole, tracks the real-life stories of radicalisation.
And if you think you, or your loved ones, would never get sucked in, go and watch The Social Dilemma on Netflix. Do it for yourself, for your kids. Do it for democracy.
Because this relentless meshing of our lives with the online world is not just a distraction, it’s a dangerous manipulation of our minds and the way we work. This documentary features employees from Facebook, Google, YouTube, Twitter, Pinterest, from all over the online world.
They detail how social media, its artificial intelligence and algorithms, is outwitting our flaccid human brains; how it floods the web with misinformation and propaganda. It’s creating echo chambers, sowing division, inciting lynch mobs, promoting fake news, germinating hate, threatening electoral democracy.
It’s driving kids to anxiety, self-harm and suicide. It is inexorably, with its cold, machine brain created by warm, flawed people, driving society apart.
I feel fairly in control of my internet use. It’s relatively mundane. By 8.30am yesterday I’d cleared my Gmail and Outlook, checked my LinkedIn, Facebook, Twitter, Slack, and looked at my Gmail calendar for Zoom, Webex or Teams meetings. I looked again at WhatsApp and Signal which keep showing new messages I can’t find. I don’t TikTok and I maybe look at Insta once a day.
I know the dangers of social media – or I thought I did, until I watched The Social Dilemma. Now I want to wipe the lot, sit down with a good book and rock slowly back and forth.
Watch it, but watch right to the end. There is hope. Some are optimistic about creating a better world. Others have practical tips: Turn off your notifications. Don’t accept recommendations. Remember you are voting with each click. Uninstall apps. Listen to people in the industry who won’t let their kids use social media. And always fact check before you share. No one wants to be the person who believes six impossible things before breakfast.
CREDIT: Tory Shepherd
Word count: 687
