With construction work fast-tracked and new tenants moving in, Lot Fourteen remains at the epicentre of South Australia’s post-coronavirus recovery With work not just continuing but also being fast-tracked during the fallout from the coronavirus pandemic, Lot Fourteen remans a beacon of light for South Australians at a time of uncertainty. The redevelopment of the old Royal Adelaide Hospital is currently home to more than 750 knowledge workers: 35 per cent focused on artificial intelligence and machine learning, 31 per cent on defence and space, and 20 per cent in digital technologies. Already the site is sitting at 80 per cent of its current capacity – and there is more to come. “Once the refurbishment of the final heritage building, Bice Building, is completed in March, there will be about 1000 people at the precinct,” says Di Dixon, state project lead for Lot Fourteen. “And once the precinct is fully completed, we’ll have a target of about 6000 people, so it’s pretty rapid progress already.” While COVID-19 has put a halt on many businesses and developments over recent months, at Lot Fourteen it has opened doors to new ways of thinking that are facilitating new ways of working and speedier results. “COVID gave us the opportunity to look at the ways we were planning on delivering some of the projects and what opportunities there are to maybe bring some of these forward as part of the recovery phase of the State Government,” Dixon says. “The next wave of developments, as part of the Adelaide City Deal include the Entrepreneur & Innovation Centre, (EIC), International Centre for Food, Hospitality & Tourism Studies and the Aboriginal Art & Cultures centre. The EIC will be an exciting new centrepiece. We’re talking about quite a significant build. That was due to start construction in 2022 but we’re aiming now for early in 2021. That’s been done by looking at how we can talk to the tenants we have already interested and sounding out developers and investors in terms of delivering projects. So we’re doing a lot of things in parallel that might have been done sequentially before, and the Government is providing a lot of support in terms of helping us to drive that forward a lot quicker.” While renovation work remains ongoing, new tenants are flowing in to Lot Fourteen: recent additions include the Australian Space Agency, CSIRO Satellite Design Facility, SITAEL Australia and the Australian Cyber Collaboration Centre (A3C). The latter, a mission-driven not-for-profit with State Government funding of $8.9 million over four years, has pushed up representation of cyber security at Lot Fourteen to almost 7 per cent, helping to build the neighbourhood’s reputation as a centre for cybersecurity innovation and skills development when it opens its doors for business on July 1. A3C has four missions: to offer full-spectrum cyber courses to increase the supply of skilled workers to the industry; assist enterprises in launching new cyber products and services to global markets; build cyber awareness and resilience in Australian corporates, small-to-medium enterprises (SMEs) and government; and solve real-world cyber challenges through collaboration. “Cyber security is quite a confusing area for a lot of people, particularly SMEs who know the threat is out there but aren’t sure what to do to protect themselves,” says Kim Scott, chair of the A3C. “Fifty per cent of cyber attacks happen to SMEs, and about 40 per cent of those organisations will go out of business within six months.” The timing of the A3C couldn’t be more relevant, with the news earlier this month that Australia had been the victim of a widespread cybersecurity attack by a foreign entity. “I often refer to cyber as the Achilles heel of the internet – it’s such as amazing thing that has opened up global connectivity for us all in so many different ways, but the problem is the criminals are going great,” says Geoff Rohrsheim, A3C board member. “You can’t ignore it, but the problem is businesses have been ignoring it.” The issue, Scott says, is the common view that cyber security is an IT issue when, indeed, it should be everybody’s concern. To change that perception, the company will be running C-suite training to bring the reality of a cyber attack into the boardroom. “CEOs, CFOs and CTOs often look at cyber as something the IT department has to deal with: they don’t look at it as a true business risk and they need to,” Scott says. “We’ll bring them into the cyber range, simulate an attack, show them what it looks like when data is infiltrated and taken out of their organisation, and see how they respond to that: what do they do from an emergency response perspective, how do they deal with communicating to the public? We’ll have camera crews in there putting some pressure on them to explain what they’re going to tell their members about all the data they’ve lost. So it brings to reality the importance of cyber security within their own organisation.” And it’s not just the CEOs who need to pay attention: new ways of working following the coronavirus lockdown are threatening the cyber security of every South Australian. “Because we’ve all been working from home, that’s opened another weakness in the network,” Rohrsheim says. “When we’re at work, we have computers secured by the IT department but at home we’re on wi-fi, we could be on the kid’s laptop: that’s opened a whole new opening for cyber attackers to get into our organisations.” As the number of attacks continues to grow, so does the need for more and more cyber security specialists to help keep our businesses – and our homes – safe. “Right now there is a shortage of 2000 cyber professionals in Australia and the anticipated shortage is 17,600 by 2026,” Scott says. “That’s a lot of lost opportunity if we can’t fill those positions and training is a key part of that.” That training will be offered through A3C’s cyber academy, a one-stop training portal to provide people new to cyber with the skillsets they need to launch a career as well as upskilling those already working in industry. “People are confused by what training they need – universities offer training but they are degree courses,” Scott says. “A lot of people need to continue to have microcredentialing and updating their experiences because the cyber threat is always changing. They need to continue to have small, short courses, and we’ll be delivering those through our partners and be able to bring the capability of our cyber professionals to the next level.” Partnerships have already been established with South Australia’s universities as well as TAFE SA and international organisations including Mitre Corporation, University College of London and Carnegie Mellon University. “We’ll have a number of members delivering services and we’ll be the broker/facilitator of those capabilities to other members in industry or academia in both South Australia and Australia, and eventually we would look to provide those services in South-East Asia,” Scott says. Being based at Lot Fourteen innovation neighbourhood Lot Fourteen is key to launching A3C on that national and international stage. “We see A3C being a large part of the ecosystem in South Australia and, when you see people moving into Lot Fourteen and the vision that has been delivered, we felt it was important for us to be part of that ecosystem,” Scott says. Lot Fourteen’s ecosystem, says Dixon, will deliver “a real economic engine for South Australia” that will complement the state’s other innovation hubs at Tonsley and Technology Park, building connections with university and educational institutions to ensure a steady flow of new talent. “We need to stay very specific to SA’s strengths in space, defence, artificial intelligence and machine learning, making sure we are linking those up with those core research skills across the universities and with the education element, so it’s a real pipeline opportunity,” she says. “The idea is for students to be able to get internships and work with these companies; but it’s also an environment in which staff are already succeeding. Hopefully the next wave of development will bring global corporate companies in as well, so it really enables Adelaide to establish that engine of economic activity, right from skills development through to start-ups.
CREDIT: Words Lynn Cameron
Word count: 1384
