DETECTING suspicious activity on the internet has become almost impossible for mere mortals, but an Adelaide company has found a way to get computers to do the hard work for police, defence, security and border-protection authorities.
The world-first software platform Fivecast Insight uses artificial intelligence and machine learning to analyse text, images and video on the internet from a wide range of publicly available sources, in-cluding extremist blogs and forums, as well as the “dark web” where suspected criminals tend to gather.
Fivecast Insight chief executive Dr Brenton Cooper said the system had “absolutely” provided critical operational insights relevant to counter-terrorism, serious and organised crime and border protection, but he couldn’t give specific examples because “we don't talk about those”.
“In general terms, we help our customers in the law enforcement and national security area understand risks, in particular some of the challenges they are facing in the amount of data they have to analyse to understand those risks,” he said.
“In today’s world, there’s increasing amounts and volumes of data, so what we’re helping them with is essentially trying to find the needle in that data haystack.
“To do that we apply artificial intelligence and machine learning to help interpret and understand that data … help intelligence analysts do their job.” Fivecast Insight won an award for Excellence in Innovation at theCo-operative Research Centre Association conference, held in Adelaide at the Hilton Hotel.
That’s because the company wasformed by the Data to Decisions CRC, a collaboration between Australia's national security agencies and various research organisations, which is winding up at the end of June after five years of funding.
Research participants included the Department of Home Affairs, the Australian Federal Police, the Attorney-General’s Department, the Australian New Zealand Counter Terrorism Committee, all Australian state police forces, the Department of Defence, and the Office of National Assessments.
Fivecast Insight was successfully deployed to support law enforcement agencies protecting the 2018 Gold Coast Commonwealth Games and by federal intelligence services in the aftermath of the Christchurch attacks in New Zealand.
Dr Cooper said what used to take an analyst days, could now be automated and reviewed in hours.
“It’s almost outrageous the tasks that people were being given and attempting to do with the very limited tools that they had,” he said.
“We’re just helping to make a difference … building a set of tools and capabilities for use in protecting society.” He is excited about building a hi-tech company in South Australia, “taking on a workforce of about 20 people and growing from there”.Recruitment is also under way in the US, to find the first account and business development manager over there in addition to their current team of two advisers.
CREDIT: CLARE PEDDIE SCIENCE REPORTER
Word count: 457
