Wine? That's the domain of the southern states ... or is it? By Rob McFarland.
Ask someone to name Queensland's biggest drawcards and it's unlikely they'll mention wine. Yet in the late 1800s, Brisbane had about 140 hectares of vineyards that produced more than 100,000 litres of vino a year. Predictably, the focus of production moved to the cooler southern states but there are still a surprising number of Queensland wineries managing to make it work.
In 2020, the state launched the Vine and Shine Trail, a series of self-guided wine journeys that explore Queensland's six main wine regions. I decided to follow the Brisbane and Sunshine Coast trail, a 150-kilometre road trip that begins in Brisbane and meanders through the Sunshine Coast hinterland.
When it opened in 2019, City Winery became Brisbane's first inner-city winery in more than 150 years. Winemaker Dave Cush sources grapes mainly from South Australia, ships the fermented juice to Brisbane and then transforms it into wine in a converted warehouse in Fortitude Valley.
He produces a wide range of varietals, from a crisp, citrusy fiano to a big, bold blend of montepulciano and mataro. My favourite is a rich, full-bodied GSM (grenache, shiraz and mataro), which pairs perfectly with a hearty lunch of tender pork belly and a cloud-like ash-baked potato.
In the hinterland, it's hard to believe Ocean View Estates made its first wine in 2002. In two decades, it's blossomed from a fledgling family start-up to a polished, multi-faceted operator with a cellar door, gift shop, restaurant, function space and accommodation. Located an hour north-west of Brisbane at 450 metres above sea level, the 40-hectare winery is a bucolic montage of gently sloping vineyards and manicured lawns surrounded by rolling countryside.
Visitors can pop in for a tasting, enjoy lunch in the award-winning restaurant, or sign up for a guided tour of the winery that includes a delicious platter of local cheeses. For a true rockstar entrance, you can even arrive by helicopter (two land during my visit).
For co-owner and chief winemaker Thomas Honnef, it's all about "accumulating flavours in the vineyard, then preserving those flavours in the winery". Viognier, chardonnay, shiraz and ruby cabernet are all grown onsite, while verdelho and merlot are sourced from vineyards in South Burnett.
From Ocean View, it's a scenic 40-minute drive with spectacular views of the Glass House Mountains to Woongooroo Estate Winery in the Somerset Valley. Owners Phil and Gail Close were teachers and musicians before taking the plunge and planting their first grapes in 1997. They have less than one hectare under vines so also use fruit sourced from the Granite Belt to produce an intriguing variety of wines, from an apple-scented semillon/sav blanc blend and a semi-sweet muscat to a smooth, fruity merlot and an 18-month barrel-aged port.
The best bit? The wines are a bargain, starting at $12 for a bottle of the eminently quaffable Classic White sauvignon blanc.
Montville is one of the Sunshine Coast hinterland's gems, an attractive village full of boutiques, art galleries and excellent restaurants that enjoys stellar views from its elevated position in the Blackall Range. What most visitors don't realise is that five minutes away is an estate making Mediterranean-style wines that can hold their own against the best of the big-name brands from the southern states.
Flame Hill Vineyard is the brainchild of Tony Thompson, a straight-talking country Queenslander who's passionate about developing a sustainable, regional-focused tourism offering. All Flame Hill's wines are made using hand-harvested fruit from the estate's vineyards in Montville and the Granite Belt. All the beef served in the winery's restaurant comes from Flame Hill's working cattle farm and most of the poultry, herbs and veggies are sourced from an onsite kitchen garden.w
CREDIT: Ben Groundwater
Word count: 627
