ONE of the world’s leading IT services companies has partnered with the State Government to deliver up to 40 traineeships in South Australia’s thriving information technology sector.
The $214,000 Skilling South Australia project sees DXC Technology, which provides independent, end-to-end IT services to more than 3000 clients in the Australia-New Zealand region, teaming up with TAFE SA to establish a two-stage Associate Professional IT career pathway. The first part is a Certificate IV in Information Technology at TAFE SA, combining in-class learning with practical work experience at DXC’s Digital Transformation Centre (DTC) in Adelaide. Those who successfully complete their Certificate IV will have the opportunity to embark on a further two-year diploma traineeship.
“Australia’s demand for technology workers will grow by 100,000 between 2018 and 2024, and in South Australia alone we expect (more than) 4000 tech-savvy jobs will be created,” Minister for Innovation and Skills David Pisoni said. “By bolstering the skills of our local workforce, we can match this increase in demand and help more South Australians into meaningful careers.” Eleven participants have successfully completed the first part of the program, with a further 11 due to commence this month, the first step on the pathway to a world of exciting employment opportunities for graduates.
“It’s such an exciting time in South Australia with all the great things we have happening here at Lot Fourteen and beyond,” said Michelle Cox, director of DXC Technology and state lead for DXC South Australia. “We have the Australian Space Agency through to coding, augmented reality, artificial intelligence, machine learning … the scope is just so big and that’s what’s so exciting about it.” As one of South Australia’s fastest-growing industries, the need for skilled IT staff is an ongoing factor for businesses such as DXC, which employs about 1000 staff in Adelaide, 150 at its DTC which it expects to expand to 300 in the next two years. Ms Cox is confident the new training project will help not just grow the number of skilled staff in South Australia but help retain local talent.
“We’d like to see a lot more females entering the industry and we’d like to attract a full range of diversity into the program,” she said. “We really want people with energy and enthusiasm for our state and our industry, for being part of the change in transforming organisations into a digital world.“I don’t think many South Australians understand the opportunities that exist in this state through this sector. We’re looking to create strong careers for South Australians and keep them here.”
CREDIT: LYNN CAMERON
Word count: 429
