RESEARCH SUCCESS
RESEARCHERS in South Australia are defying the pandemic economic downturn, winning new grants and mobilising rapidly to take on the challenges posed by COVID-19.
Research is lifeblood for universities, creating reputation which drives rankings and then revenue.
Flinders University committed in 2019 to allocating an extra $100 million to research over five years and vice-chancellor Colin Stirling is optimistic that will be honoured despite the financial squeeze.
“I’m hopeful we’ll be able to maintain those investments because it’s important for us to increase our research activity and impact,” he said.
“One of the things we’ve seen during this pandemic is the importance of having a pool of great researchers.
“We’ve been able to turn on a sixpence and our researchers have focused on really important issues around the consequences of the pandemic.
“We have a trial under way on a COVID-19 vaccine, we have researchers who have enabled the manufacture of personal protective equipment in this state.
“Our researchers have been able to get straight in and deliver – that’s a huge resource for the community.” Researchers and clinicians from Flinders and the South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute last week were awarded $1.4 million to improve early detection and treatment for indigenous Australians at risk of blindness through diabetes.
Professor Jamie Craig said the three-year project, supported by the Medical Research Future Fund, would involve cultural leaders, medical researchers and artificial intelligence teams.
At UniSA, research has not slowed.
“We have had a lot of people who really stepped up and engaged in pandemic-facing research, we have people working on vaccines, there’s a lot on mental health and resilience,” vice-chancellor David Lloyd said.
“Then there’s the pandemic drone which can scan crowds.” The drones can monitor temperature, heart and respiratory rates and detect people sneezing and coughing, in a project led by Professor Javaan Chahl with Canadian-based company Draganfly.
UniSA molecular biologist Gokhan Cildir is working with US company Atomwise to use artificial intelligence to seek compounds to block the “spike” protein which COVID-19 uses to invade human cells.
Health and biotech are priorities at Adelaide University.
“We have already seen an accelerated and co-operative approach to research globally into various aspects of COVID-19, with University of Adelaide researchers involved in that work,” acting vice-chancellor Mike Brooks said. “We can expect to see a broader range of research projects investigating pandemics and infectious diseases, and their wider implications, such as economic impacts and recovery.”
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 414
