SOUTH Australia has experienced a spike in skilled migrants, with more than 2600 people granted regional visas in just four months from July to November.
It’s a 200 per cent increase on the same period last year when 869 overseas workers were granted visas to SA, new immigration figures show.
And many more skilled workers are expected to settle in the state under two new regional visas being launched today. They require migrants to work in a regional area for three years before they can apply for permanent residency, as part of a federal push to encourage people to live outside the congested cities of Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane.
Dutch couple Johan Verjans and Yvette van Eenennaam swapped Amsterdam for Adelaide two years ago for cutting-edge jobs in the health industry. Yvette leads the new Adelaide BioMed City research hub, while Johan works as an imaging cardiologist at Royal Adelaide Hospital and the SA Health and Medical Research Institute.
He also conducts artificial intelligence research at the Australian Institute for Machine Learning. The couple was told they were “crazy” to pick Adelaide over Sydney. “But for us, it was easy to choose. With a family, it was really a no-brainer to choose Adelaide,” Mr Verjans said.
Applications open today for the two new visas, which will be granted to up to 25,000 people each year. One allows employers to sponsor workers, while the other allows state governments or eligible family members to sponsor them.
“We know Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane are suffering significant population pressures, while many parts of the country, like SA and Tasmania, are crying out for more skilled workers,” federal Immigration Minister David Coleman said yesterday. He said the three-year regional requirement encouraged people to “put down roots and settle in these areas long-term”.
Business SA spokesman Anthony Penney said the state would be competing for workers with Perth and the Gold Coast, which were also designated “regional’’.
He said businesses were also “screaming for a simpler and more affordable migration program”, not extra restrictions.
“The two new visas impose minimum wage floors significantly above market and award rates of pay for many occupations, and mandatory skills assessments that are making employers and migrants fitter through all the hoops they have to jump through,” he said.
He said the spike in visas being granted was likely due to a rush in outstanding applications being processed before the old visa system ceased in September.
Migration Institute of Australia SA president Constantine Paxinos called for the requirement for skilled migrants to have three years of prior work experience to be scrapped, saying there had been fewer applications since it was introduced.Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni said targeted skilled migration policies were showing “signs of success”.
CREDIT: CLAIRE BICKERS
Word count: 461
