We need to talk about space, defence, fuel, rare earths and China … just don’t mention the resettlement deal. Tory Shepherd reports on the upcoming meeting between ScoMo and Trump
MELANIA Trump has reportedly been overseeing some home improvements to the White House, including new wallpaper for the Red Room, which had faded to a decided pink.
She’s been sprucing the place up in preparation for Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s arrival.
Mr Morrison, his wife Jenny and an entourage will be treated to a rare State Dinner, although apparently it was hard to get celebrities to turn up – most of them had trounced President Donald Trump at one point or another.
“The visit will celebrate our two countries’ close friendship and shared history, and reaffirm our common vision for global peace, security and prosperity,” the White House said in a statement.
It will probably be friendlier than when Mr Morrison’s predecessor, Malcolm Turnbull, buttonholed Mr Trump over a refugee swap deal.
Mr Trump is probably not up with the Cronulla Sharks’ performance, but there are plenty of other topics for the two to cover.
SPACE Mr Morrison has made it clear he wants to talk about space – outer space, that is, and any role Australia’s new Space Agency might have with NASA. He will go to NASA HQ on this trip and says he “welcomes greater US-Australia co-operation on space and other cutting-edge science and technology initiatives”. The Federal Government, however, has not committed to be part of Mr Trump’s Space Force.
The Australian Strategic Policy Institute has stepped through what a US-Australia space partnership could entail. Chief executive Peter Jennings reckons Mr Morrison should focus on our big spending on space. That could butter up Mr Trump, who is a notorious grump when it comes to how much money allies are putting in to shared missions compared to the US.
But for a bit of razzle-dazzle, Mr Jennings says Mr Morrison should pitch for a spot on the 2028 moon landing and the journey to Mars after that.
It would only cost a few hundred million, he says, the equivalent of a couple of Joint Strike Fighters.
He goes on to talk about expanding co-operation on other defence capabilities and technologies, including artificial intelligence, machine learning and quantum computing. About $2 billion all up to “bullet proof” the alliance.
FUEL Iran is the likely suspect in a drone strike against Saudi Arabia’s oil refineries.
Mr Morrison said it was “premature” to talk about any further support for military action in the Middle East, although Mr Trump has been chest beating on Twitter.
“I’m sure it will be one of many issues that get discussed about the geostrategic situation at the moment,” Mr Morrison said.
But after a couple of bottles of syrah, he should think about bringing up the US fuel reserves and how Australia might be able to raid those cellars if necessary.
RARE EARTHS They may sound esoteric, but rare earths are a critical component of flat-screen tellies and other necessary items. You’ll be hearing more about them as China is the main source and has been closing the doors on exports.
Not too long ago, South Australia was set to play its own role in exports – Whyalla was picked to host a $1 billion rare earth processing plant.
Arafura Resources got major project status for the plan in 2010, only to scrap it in 2013. They’ve decided to process the metal elements closer to their Nolans Bore project site in NT.
CHINA China’s fractious relationship with the US and its not-quite-so fractious relationship with Australia will be one of the more awkward dinner table conversations.
CLIMATE CHANGE Lots of people will be talking about climate change in the US over the next week, but not Scott Morrison. There is a meeting of world leaders in New York on September 23. Mr Morrison is in the country but he’s not going to the meeting because he doesn’t have any new information to present.
Foreign Minister Marise Payne will go to defend Australia’s record.
PRESENT Oh, you think it’s hard knowing what to get a sibling for Christmas? Try being a world leader.
Earlier this year a conga line of world leaders thought hard about the perfect present to bring to Mr Trump. They decided to give him pictures of himself.
We’ll see if Mr Morrison follows suit. A framed double-thumbed, double-action selfie, perhaps? Mr Morrison has hinted it will be something military. Something that speaks of mateship and the battlefield.The Advertiser is betting on something to do with the Battle of Hamel, where US and Australian troops fought alongside each other in WWI. (But we’re not putting money on it).
CREDIT: Tory Shepherd
Word count: 790
