A WORLDWIDE competition designed to unlock the mineral riches beneath South Australia starts in the next few days, with hopes our next massive mine could result from the hunt.
The competition, ExploreSA: The Gawler Challenge, is part of a new approach to encourage mineral exploration in SA, which also includes the Accelerated Discovery Initiative. The ADI is offering $10 million over three years to co-fund exploration programs. However, it goes beyond supporting drilling programs.
The ExploreSA competition is offering a prize of $250,000 for anyone who wants to look at the open-file datasets covering the Gawler Craton, and propose new exploration ideas for minerals such as copper, gold, uranium, zinc and iron ore.
Run through open-innovation platform Unearthed Solutions, the competition mirrors one run by Adelaide-based OZ Minerals last year, which the company says has delivered new and innovative approaches to exploration at its Mt Woods prospect.
The theory is simple yet relatively untried in the past, with everyone from data scientists and programmers to traditional geologists encouraged to come up with ideas.
With many more minds working on the problem – some with new “big data” approaches – the hope is that previously undiscovered patterns or signals in the geological data can be teased out.
Rohan Cobcroft, the director of the Geological Survey of South Australia, said the state had world-class data, including a recently completed aerial survey over the Gawler Craton.
Speaking to The Advertiser at the State Government’s core library at Tonsley, where drill core from every exploration program across the state is held, Mr Cobcroft said the ExploreSA project would be launched at the world’s premier exploration conference, the Prospectors & Developers Association of Canada conference, starting tomorrow.
He said the competition, the ADI and the work of the geological survey was “fundamentally about trying to stimulate exploration and the next mineral discovery’’.
“The Gawler Craton airborne survey ... we’ve completed the data acquisition phase and we’re about to release the final tranche of data,’’ Mr Cobcroft said.
“The ADI is the next iteration of co-funded exploration activities. The interesting thing, which I think makes it a bit unique, is it’s not just cofunded drilling.
“It’s looking at geophysics, geochemistry, groundwater, proof of concept, artificial intelligence, machine learning - it’s got a much broader scope.’’ Mr Cobcroft said the Department for Mining and Energy was also involved in The MinEx Cooperative Research Centre, which is aimed at developing better, cheaper, more efficient exploration methods.
He said the department believed it was unique globally in running a competition such as ExploreSA, and was excited to see what results came through.The ExploreSA: The Gawler Challenge opens on March 2 and entries close on July 31. Details are at www.unearthedsolutions
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND BUSINESS EDITOR
Word count: 457
