PUBLIC sector leaders are being put on notice to deal with widespread bullying as a new “action plan” looks at first-aid training for mental health and artificial intelligence to address the issue.
Commissioner for Public Sector Employment Erma Ranieri, pictured, has released a blueprint aimed at addressing concerns from a damning staff survey that found more than one in three SA public servants had witnessed bullying or harassment in their workplace.
At the centre of the plan is a bid to ensure public-sector leaders better deal with their staff.
About 3000 public servants have also been trained in mental health first aid, and pilot programs are being developed to deliver a “toolkit” that will guide them on how to treat vulnerable staff and manage bullying at the earliest-possible stages.
Ms Ranieri said the new action plan had a strong focus on “lean methodology”, or working smarter, to ensure leaders had the time to maintain a healthy workforce.
She said greater use of online “bots” that could answer staff questions would free up leaders to focus on their workers.
“Part of the plan is about process improvements where we might want to use artificial intelligence to help do things more efficiently,” she said.
“If someone gets help themselves on more simple matters, we can then help them on more complex matters.” One of the proposals still under consideration is a contact officer in each agency.
“The key is to get people who lead other people to get all the necessary skills to manage people effectively,” Ms Ranieri said. “If you can talk to people early on in the piece, you can solve issues, or understand why they are not performing very well, and get them back on track. There is a lot of preventive stuff (in the plan) that helps productivity in the long run.” South Australia’s first Your Voice Survey – conducted last October – received feedback from 22 per cent of the state’s public sector workers, including doctors, nurses, police and administration workers.Verbal abuse, derogatory remarks, shouting, screaming, withholding information, undermining and sabotage were listed as the main issues in the survey of 24,341 public servants.
CREDIT: MATT SMITH
Word count: 361
