ONE year ago, the Future Industries eXchange for Entrepreneurship (FIXE) action plan was launched by Premier Steven Marshall to create a supportive and growing ecosystem for start-up companies in South Australia.
Its goal, to make SA the nation’s start-up capital. It’s vision, to create the right culture, improve the capabilty and mobilise the capital required to make South Australia a leader in entrepreneurship.
This vision has seen the state have the highest rate of business start-ups per capita in the space of 10 years.
Developed in concert with the entrepreneurial community, and under the auspices of the SA Office of the Chief Entrepreneur, FIXE is putting in place access to the supports nascent companies need to thrive and grow, contributing to the state’s economy.
Now based at innovation hub Lot Fourteen, FIXE and its companion program, Stone & Chalk, are guiding hundreds of entrepreneurs as they build exciting and sustainable new ventures.
At Lot Fourteen, the start-ups are able to forge connections to future tech and research capabilities, including machine learning and artificial intelligence.
Entrepreneurs can also build their capabilities by rubbing shoulders with each other and experienced operators, including chief entrepreneur Jim Whalley.
Programs feed in access to high-quality education, skills and training programs, mentors, top talent pools, investor contacts and infrastructure on the journey every entrepreneur must take from idea to outcome. To date, FIXE has supported 280 companies in this process. Seventeen SA start-ups have also received specific funding totalling $7.82 million through the Research Commercialisation and Startup Fund (Stream 2). These companies have collectively matched their grant funding with $10 million in private funding.
The SA Venture Capital Fund is also helping innovative early-stage companies accelerate growth to a national and global scale. A mentoring program has had more than 122 applicants, and matched more than 70 companies with an SA business mentor, and the Australian Cyber Collaboration Centre (A3C) is soon to open at Lot Fourteen.
In South Australia, now established as one of the healthiest and safest places in the world to live and do business, the way ahead for people with energy and bright ideas is clear, as is the vibrant ecosystem needed to keep them growing. Visit fixe.org.au
CREDIT: JENNIFER HULLICK; LYNN CAMERON BRET FISHER
Word count: 374
