THE popularity of ambulance reality TV shows has helped drive a surge in applications across the country for enrolment in paramedicine degrees.
But ambulance associations have warned there are now more paramedics being trained than there are jobs for.
News Corp asked universities what their most popular degrees were in 2019 (based on the number of applications) and what new courses had been introduced in response to demand and anticipation of future workforce needs.
There are new degrees being offered in data science, environment, renewable energy, cyber security, artificial intelligence, game design and digital technologies.
Teaching, law, business, commerce and arts continue to rate among the most popular course selections at many Australian universities.
But it was degrees in health which topped first preferences at most universities.
Paramedicine courses are among a range of health degrees which have grown dramatically in popularity in recent years.
In South Australia Flinders University offers a Bachelor of Paramedic Science while at the University of Adelaide, medical and health-related degrees including nursing are among the most popular.
However, the Australian Paramedics Association (APA) told News Corp increasing numbers of Australian graduates were looking overseas to find work.
The glut of paramedic graduates follows the rise in popularity of reality emergency TV series such as Ambulance Australia and Paramedics, and their international equivalents.
Ambulance Victoria chief executive Tony Walker said the shows shone a positive light on the work of ambulance officers and it was not surprising many young people were keen to pursue a career in the field.
“However, we are seeing more people qualifying than we have jobs available and having a degree does not always guarantee you a job as a paramedic,” he said.
At Australian Catholic University (ACU) – which has campuses in Adelaide, Melbourne, Ballarat, North Sydney, Strathfield, Brisbane, and Canberra – paramedicine has gone from being its eighth most popular course five years ago to its second most popular course, behind nursing, this year.
Acting Provost Professor Michelle Campbell said the demand for university courses at ACU reflected workforce needs, with the Federal Government’s Employment Outlook to May 2023 predicting the health care sector would continue to make the biggest contribution to employment growth across Australia over the next five years.
THE TOP TEN University of Adelaide 2019 most popular courses 1. Medicine & Surgery 2. Nursing 3. Law 4. Dental Surgery 5. Veterinary Bioscience 6. Arts 7. Health and Medical Sciences 8. Psychological Science 9. Criminology10. Commerce
CREDIT: MANDY SQUIRES
Word count: 413
