SIX SA-based research institutes, including two supporting agriculture, will share $19.6 million in state government funding.
Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni joined with SA's university leaders and research community at the Australian Wine Research Institute at Urrbrae, and said the overall investment from the National Collaborative Research Infrastructure Strategy across six years would enable infrastructure upgrades and the purchasing of new equipment, as well as support the creation of 25.3 full time equivalent jobs.
"This co-investment boosts the amount of NCRIS funding to $82.1m - including $47.1m from the Commonwealth government and $15.4m from the research institutions," he said.
"The funding means there will be strong, long-term industry and research partnerships, both nationally and internationally, providing a conduit for knowledge to support industry in delivering future jobs, economic growth and economic diversity.
"This will significantly build our state's competitiveness in attracting additional funding from the Commonwealth Government's major research funding programs, and it will help us to continue to attract, develop, grow and export a highly skilled workforce, including the next generation of researchers."
Some of the funds will go to the Australian Plant Phenomics Facility - the Plant Accelerator - a high technology glass house facility measuring plant growth and attributes for developing new and innovative crops and healthier food, as well as to Bioplatforms Australia, provides state-of-the-art biomolecular platform capabilities necessary for health, agriculture and the wine industry.
The Plant Accelerator's scientific director Bettina Berger, University of Adelaide, said the investment in the Adelaide node of the Australian Plant Phenomics Facility would lift the agricultural sector, generating new value and insights from the complex data generated by the facility's world-leading technology.
"We have collaborated with international partners on the development of two new cutting-edge pieces of infrastructure, which will enable us to lead the way in developing data analytics and machine learning, in partnership with the University's Australian Institute of Machine Learning," Dr Berger said.
"This will ensure the vast amounts of data collected by the new equipment can be turned into outcomes for the SA grains industry."
Funding will also go to the Australian National Fabrication Facility, Microscopy Australia, National Imaging Facility andTerrestrial Ecosystem Research Network.
The Integrated Marine Observing System, which undertakes systematic and sustained observing of Australia's vast and valuable marine estate, will receive in-kind commitment to support current staff employed.
Word count: 387
