LONDON IT’S an idea out of this world – literally.
Australia and Britain are in talks to build a giant commercial power station in orbit that beams down solar power to Earth giving both countries sovereign energy capability that will help slash utility bills for householders.
The British government has gauged the interest of NSW, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland and Western Australia at a meeting with an international consultancy firm, Frazer-Nash, to build a two gigawatt solar power station in space.
The vision is for its rotating satellites to collect sunlight, convert it to power and send it down to Earth to be fed into the power grid.
If given the go ahead early next year, the space-based solar power initiative will help the UK and Australia work towards reaching net zero emissions.
“This will help continuing relations between England and Australia which have always held a special relationship and give both countries sovereign capability on energy and (not) worry about fluctuations in energy prices,” London-based Australian engineer, James Bunn, who brokered the meeting several weeks ago, said.
“A briefing was held to assess the feasibility of bringing electricity from space to the UK and Australia.
“It would mean both countries will no longer be held ransom by unfriendly powers who provide these services.
“By becoming self-sufficient the UK and Australia can use the electricity supply chains to dictate their own energy prices to the consumer.
“This also eliminates the problem of relying on ground based solar panels because in space there is no night time and by generating electricity all night long we can maintain base load energy 24 hours a day,” he said.
The compelling race for net zero will see Australian and British officials attend a top-level meeting next month of European science ministers in Paris that will decide priorities for the European Space Agency, of which the UK is a member.
On the list for discussion is a proposal for testing the feasibility of a commercial power station in orbit.
Solar panels gather up to 40 per cent more energy than our modern conventional panels on earth.
The space based energy concept uses giant reflectors in orbit to take in the sun’s rays and points to potentially unlimited electricity, no carbon footprint and more energy captured in a year than the total ever provided by fossil fuels and nuclear power.
The space industry has always led solar power development. A year after Russia launched the battery-powered Sputnik 1 in 1957, the Americans unveiled the Vanguard 1 satellite in orbit generating power through solar energy.
The solar power scheme is also expected to contribute to a world in which electric car driving using sustainable renewable space solar power is the norm. Dutch start-up Lightyear has launched its Lightyear 0 electrical car that has solar panels covering the roof, bonnet and boot so that it can be charged while driving.
CREDIT: EXCLUSIVE DANIELLE GUSMAROLI
Word count: 486
