Artificial intelligence is already having a game-changing effect on our lives, but it's happening in ways we don't see
Artificial intelligence is fast changing the global economy. Smart algorithms run large tracts of enterprise, executing trades, controlling new additive manufacturing, billing clients, automating customer services, navigating aviation flightpaths and guiding surgical care.
But while there is a public fascination with chatbots and self-driving cars, very few people understand how AI actually functions and is changing the world in front of their very eyes.
Or maybe this is the issue: AI, like electricity, is invisible. It's a general-purpose technology that works its magic behind the scenes. The contours and consequences of AI remain elusive to us - we can't see it in action, but we somehow experience its impact.
Like other general-purpose technologies such as the internal combustion engine, telephony and the silicon chip, AI is becoming ubiquitous. It is everywhere and nowhere at once, both omnipresent and unnoticed.
The impact of AI on our economy, welfare and social interactions - on the human condition - is something on which techno-pessimists and techno-optimists fundamentally disagree.
On the one hand, the pessimists argue that technology will create far more problems for humanity than it solves. It will take our jobs, intrude on our privacy and possibly escape our control.
It could imperil our way of life. As the late Stephen Hawking commented: "AI could spell the end of the human race."
The pessimists argue that technology will become a self-perpetuating machine, with AI rendering humans increasingly obsolete. Reducing our reliance on AI is the only way to resolve what could become an existential crisis. Futuristic novels and movies perpetuate this view with their dystopian narratives.
Techno-optimists, on the other hand, believe technology will improve the world in unimaginable ways and at a scale incomprehensible to us today. It will do this by learning from itself in an exponential trajectory of mutual benefit to individuals and the economy. AI is poised to radically extend economic prosperity.
We are in a conundrum with AI and its larger impacts. While its influence and penetration are growing, there has been no noticeable evidence of improvements in productivity across the developed world.
To help explain this, we have the Solow Paradox. In 1987, Nobel prize-winning economist Robert Solow noted that the computer age's impact was seen everywhere - except in national productivity statistics. His observation remained true for a number of years before some sectors in the economy surged following technology enhancements.
A recent paper for McKinsey & Company argues that the lag between adoption and productivity boom is being experienced again in high-tech advanced nations. "Digitisation (including cloud computing, e-commerce, mobile internet, AI, machine learning and the Internet of Things) contains the promise of significant, productivity-boosting opportunities - but the benefits have not yet materialised at scale," the paper says.
But other McKinsey research has "identified potential productivity growth of at least 2 per cent a year over the next decade, with roughly 60 per cent coming through digitisation".
The paper goes on: "That's below the 2.5 per cent annual rate achieved in the late 1990s and early 2000s, but well ahead of the 0.5 per cent annual average in recent years."
We should be clear about what is at stake here. If productivity rates do quadruple as predicted, it will be because business innovation has finally "caught up with the opportunities created by digitisation".
There is a direct connection with AI. Governments and organisations are becoming acutely aware of this. In 2017, the United Arab Emirates became the first country to appoint a minister for AI. The UK government recently committed to opening up data to help drive the adoption of AI. Speaking at an industry forum, the Minister for Culture, Communications and Creative Industries, Margot James, said that by working with industry, the government would be able to realise the "full benefits to society and the economy that can come from AI", but only if it was widely used. She said AI was predicted to add £232 billion to GDP by 2030.
AI cuts to the very core of our lives, deeply influencing and restructuring social relations and personal identity. In his new book The Culture of AI, Anthony argues: "The complex ways in which people interact with new technologies fundamentally reshapes the further development of those very technologies.
One of the central distinguishing features of advanced AI ... is that the boundaries between humans and machines have - to a considerable extent - dissolved, which in turn promotes evergrowing opportunities for human-AI interaction in diverse robotic ecosystems."
My point is that the interfaces between humans and machines have deep implications for the way we work, live, socialise and interact on the most fundamental levels. The mouse and keyboard are on their way to becoming obsolete technologies, replaced by intelligent natural language systems that are seamlessly integrated into our daily lives.
For a mind-spinning array of examples, look to Deloitte's 2018 Artificial Intelligence Innovation Report. The report notes that deep learning over traditional machine learning is well underway, with each succeeding layer in a network learning from the previous layer. "It is now possible to create deep learning neural networks which operate fast enough and accurately enough to have practical real-world uses," the report says.
"Because of this, we are experiencing a paradigm shift in computing, an AI boom in which companies are spending billions to develop deep learning AI technology."
The report highlights some interesting examples. Among these are Doxol, an AI system of drones and robots that monitors every stage of a construction process and can alert managers to any potential problems.
Also of note is an Israeli start-up called 3DSignals, which uses sensors to track the sounds made by machinery with an algorithm able to alert managers to potential breakdowns or malfunctions before they happen.
In health AI, Corti is an early recognition system for cardiac arrest that could provide first responders and medical staff with vital information to help save lives.
MIT researchers have developed microscopic robotic devices the size of a single cell, called syncells. The cells could search out disease in a human's bloodstream and be used to monitor conditions in oil and gas pipelines. The potential is mind-blowing.
But this is where the techno-pessimists also get grist for their mill. Darwin Geo-Pricing is a plug-in that e-commerce companies can use to "personalise prices and promotions based on a customer's location". Another, Watson Ads, enables marketers "to interact with customers in natural language as they gather data about consumer behaviour". We are still reeling from the Cambridge Analytica debacle and the seemingly wanton attitude of Facebook towards its customers' privacy.
Fundamentally, AI is already changing our lives, even if we can't see its impact. It is driving global innovation in a virtuous cycle that could bring enormous economic benefit, but which may not be realised for some time.
In the meantime, governments and business will have to work hard to keep ethics central to policymaking in this new and quickly evolving field.
Anthony Elliott is dean of external engagement and executive director of the Hawke EU Jean Monnet Centre of Excellence at the University of South Australia. Julie Hare is honorary fellow of the Graduate School of Education at the University of Melbourne. Professor Elliott's new book, The Culture of AI: Everyday Life and the Digital Revolution, is published by Routledge.
CREDIT: Anthony Elliott; Julie Hare; Comment
Word count: 1240
