GLOBAL technology and services giant Accenture will set up an Adelaide hub, with a plan to create 2000 local jobs.
In one of the biggest announcements yet for the hyped growth of future technologies industries in SA, the US-listed firm will launch a recruitment campaign for workers from today. It expects to ramp up to the 2000 jobs over five years.
It comes amid expansion of the Lot Fourteen development.
CONTINUED PAGE 4 Tech giant sets up city hub Up to 2000 technology jobs to be created in City FROM PAGE 1 Premier Steven Marshall, pictured, said the company’s commitment was “a massive coup for the state”, and strengthened SA’s position as a global leader in hi-tech industries. Accenture describes itself as a leading global professional services company. It works across strategy and consulting, interactive, technology and operations and has digital capabilities for those products.
It operates in more than 40 industries, with 506,000 staff in 120-plus countries and drove $US44bn in revenue during the last financial year.
Mr Marshall said the scale of Accenture’s investment in SA “cannot be underestimated”, and was expected to inject $1bn into the economy, along with “thousands of jobs”.
“This is a jobs bonanza for SA at a time when we need it most,” Mr Marshall said.
“Accenture’s Adelaide hub will serve as a magnet for talented young people who will help drive our state’s economic growth and bolster our defence, space and cyber sectors.
“The decision by Accenture to invest here is proof that SA is a major drawcard to international companies across hi-tech and high-growth sectors.” The Adelaide hub includes development of national security and cyber defence capabilities as well as new “advanced technology centres of excellence” in areas such as IT. It also boasts artificial intelligence and analytics.
The Lot Fourteen site is already home to the Australian Space Agency, the SmartSat Cooperative Research Centre, MIT Living Lab, the Australian Institute of Machine Learning and the Australian Cyber Collaboration Centre.
Accenture Australia and New Zealand chairman Bob Easton said Adelaide had “a high-quality labour force, committed business community and a government that embraces new opportunities”.
“This makes South Australia an ideal location for Accenture’s latest hub and a new collaborative approach to business and technology,” he said.
Mr Easton said Accenture was “committed to serve as a key member of the local community, investing and working together with other businesses and educational institutions”.
The Accenture Adelaide Hub will collaborate with the company’s other similar ventures in Sydney, Melbourne, Perth and Canberra. They are connected to more than 100 Accenture innovation hubs and centres around the globe. PAGE 18: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: DANIEL WILLS
Word count: 442
