AC COMPANION IN THE GENERAL DIVISION Professor Anthony William Thomas, North Adelaide For eminent service to scientific education and research, particularly in the field of nuclear and particle physics, through academic leadership roles.
AO OFFICER IN THE GENERAL DIVISION Ms Jacqui Elizabeth McGill, Underdale For distinguished service to the minerals and mining sector, and to gender equity and workplace diversity.
The Honourable Amanda Eloise Vanstone, North Adelaide For distinguished service to the Parliament of Australia, to the people of South Australia, andthe community.
AM MEMBER IN THE GENERAL DIVISION Professor Mohamad Abdalla, Magill For significant service to education in the field of Islamic studies. Mrs Melanie Grace Champion de Crespigny, Gilberton For significant service to youth through charitable organisations. Mrs Glenise Maxine Coulthard, Port Augusta For significant service to Aboriginal health in SA, and to emergency response organisations.
Ms Jane Selby Covernton, Adelaide For significant service to the literary arts as a publisher of children’s books. Ms Judith Margaret Cross, Lockleys For significant service to community health through social welfare organisations.
Ms Lynette Gwenyth English, Findon For significant service to mental health and consumer support organisations. Mr Terence Charles Evans For significant service to higher education, to health organisations, and to the law.
Dr Sanghamitra Guha, Norwood For significant service to medicine, and to medical education. Mrs Jennifer Ruth Hurley, Fullarton For significant service to the community through charitable organisations. Ms Helen Louise Leake For significant service to film, and to professional organisations. Dr Helen Diana McLean, Kingswood For significant service to dentistry, and to professional associations. Ms Jennifer Mary Richter, Glenunga For significant service to medical administration, and to community health. Dr Walter John Russell For significant service to medicine in the field of anaesthesia, and to medical health standards.
Mr Vincent Tremaine, Henley Beach For significant service to shipping infrastructure and freight transport. Emeritus Professor Roderick Tucker Wells, Flagstaff Hill For significant service to education and biological sciences. Ms Tracey Whiting For significant service to the museums and galleries sector. OAM MEDAL IN THE GENERAL DIVISION Ms Joanna Geraldine Agius For service to people who are deaf or hard of hearing, and to the indigenous community.
Ms Eve Barratt, Mt Gambier (deceased) For service to the community through social welfare organisations. Mr Albert Bensimon, Malvern For service to business, and to the community.
Mr William Hugh Biscoe, Angaston For service to the community of the Barossa.
Mr Mark P S Bourchier, Adelaide For service to the SA community.
Mrs Judy Charlotte Burke, Daw Park For service to community health.
Mr Donald Percival Cant, Somerton Park For service to the community through a range of organisations. Mr Peter James Carter, Lockleys For service to canoeing.
Mr Peter Combe, Glenside For service to performing arts, particularly music for children. Mrs Ruth Adelaide Daws, Burnside For service to netball and to the community.
Mr John Dring, Ashford For service to the rail transport industry.
Ms Christine Joyce Egan (deceased) For service to the indigenous community of SA.
Mr Stephen (Mark) Gilbert, North Adelaide For service to engineering, and to the community.
Mrs Annette Massie Gillen, North Adelaide For service to the SA community.
Mrs Promilla Gupta For service to the Indian community, and to multiculturalism. Mr Brian Douglas Hern, Walkerville For service to the Uniting Church in Australia.
Mr Graham William Hobbs, West Beach For service to youth, and to lacrosse.
Mr Giuseppe (Joe) Ienco, Mt Compass For service to the community through charitable and multicultural organisations. Ms Diana Betty Laube, Tiatukia For service to conservation and the environment.
Dr Anthony John Lian-Lloyd, Quorn For service to medicine, and to the community.
Dr SadanandLimaye, Walkerville For service to medicine, and to the multicultural community. Mr John Mitchell Little For service to the community of the Barossa Valley.
Mr John Francis Lynch, Grange For service to the community through emergency response organisations. Dr David John Marshall, Crafers For service to orthopaedic medicine.
Mr Roger Wilfrid McCauley, Moonta For service to the Uniting Church in Australia and to the community. Ms Anne McEwen, Eden Hills For service to the Parliament of Australia, and to the community of SA. Mr Andrew John (Hank) Middleton, Aberfoyle Park (deceased) For service to Australian rules football in SA.
Mrs Heather Motteram, Fullarton For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mrs Barbara Janine Mullan, Norwood For service to the creative arts.
Mr Neil Mullard, Uraidla For service to the community of Uraidla.
Associate Professor Maria Parappilly For service to science education, and to women.
Mr Andrew Guy Peake, Dulwich For service to community history.
Mr Ken Murray Potts, West Lakes (deceased) For service to Australian rules football, and to the community. Ms Karen Jeanne Redman, Mt Barker For service to music through concert bands.
Dr Andrew Kenneth Rollond, Glenelg For service to medicine, and to local government.
Mrs Barbara Elaine Sax, Findon For service to the community.
Mr Gary Schulz, Tea Tree Gully For service to education, and to the community.
Ms Jan Sutherland, Semaphore Park For service to sport in SA.
Dr Robin Katherine Uppill, Hawthorndene For service to orienteering.
Mr Peter James Wallace, Henley Beach For service to education, and to the community.
Ms Emma Webb, Port Adelaide For service to the performing arts, particularly in Port Adelaide. Mr Garry Keith Wellington, Tarlee For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Bruce Anthony Wilson, Seacliff Park For service to conservation and the environment.
Ms Helen Patricia Oxenham, Cumberland Park (Honorary) For service to the community through social welfare initiatives and advocacy. Ms Brenda Jean Rayner, Kingswood (Honorary) For service to music.
DISTINGUISHED SERVICE MEDAL Australian Army Bombardier Michael Richard Cobb For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as the Australian Counter Unmanned Aerial Systems Detachment Commander within Headquarters Joint Task Force 633, while deployed to the Middle East Region from October 2017 to June 2018.
CONSPICUOUS SERVICE CROSS Royal Australian Navy Captain Daniel John LeRaye For outstanding devotion to duty as the inaugural Class Lifecycle Engineering Officer in Collins Class submarines.
Royal Australian Air Force Squadron Leader Craig Geoffrey Keane For outstanding devotion to duty in AP-3C aircraft electronic warfare capability development for the Australian Defence Force.
CONSPICUOUS SERVICE MEDAL Royal Australian Navy Warrant Officer Class One Craig Cutts For meritorious devotion to duty in administrative and logistic support to Australian Defence Force operations and training assistance in the Republic of the Philippines.
PUBLIC SERVICE MEDAL Dr Dale Austin Lambert For outstanding public service in the use of artificial intelligence in surveillance and reconnaissance, command and control, intelligence and autonomous platforms.
Mrs Jan Marie Cornish, Flinders Park For outstanding public service to asset management in local government in SA. Professor Edward (Ted) Tuckseng Mah, Medindie For outstanding public service to public health in SA.
Ms Deborah Ann Pearce, Woodcroft For outstanding public service to people with a disability, and to SA Police.
AUSTRALIAN POLICE MEDAL Detective Sergeant Bernard Joseph Farrington Senior Sergeant First Class Tracy McLeod Gentgall Detective Sergeant David Paul Hunt AUSTRALIAN FIRE SERVICE MEDAL Mr Kenneth Campbell, Mannanarie Mr Shane Mark Heffernan, Mawson Lakes Mr Samuel John Sanderson, Bridgewater Mr Dennis Robert Taylor, Mawson Lakes
AMBULANCE SERVICE MEDAL Mr David Mark Jaensch, Whyalla
EMERGENCY SERVICES MEDAL Mr Maxwell John Coulson, Port Lincoln
AUSTRALIAN CORRECTIONS MEDAL Ms Susan Jane DightonMr Bernard John Gelston
Word count: 1211
