ADELAIDE’S inner-city and fringe suburbs have outperformed the rest of Adelaide’s residential market over the past six months, according to new property value data released by local analytics firm PointData.
Backed by artificial intelligence and machine learning technologies, PointData’s automated valuation model considers a multitude of factors including recent sales, neighbourhood profiles and distances to schools, main roads, shops and beaches.
Unlike traditional valuation models, which measure trends across entire suburbs, PointData’s new quarterly indices provide six-monthly rolling median valuations at a “granular” level – representing neighbourhood precincts of around 400 people.
PointData chief executive George Giannakodakis said the firm’s data showed Adelaide’s property market had been flat over the past 12 months, but signs of a modest recovery were beginning to appear.
“Adelaide is the first city in Australia to be tested using our new technology,” he said.
“The difference is that our ‘dynamic neighbourhood scaling’ methodology, which is AI-driven, can focus in on a small area to get knowledge about what’s happening at a granular level.
“While Adelaide’s property market has been quite flat over the past year – and one of the lowest capital cities with growth under 1 per cent over the past quarter – there is a strong sign of recovery across well over half of metropolitan Adelaide.
“Our index shows many neighbourhoods growing between 2.5 per cent to well over 5 per cent in a six-month period. These include parts of North Adelaide, Prospect and the Nailsworth area, neighbourhoods across Mitcham Council, and parts of inner-western and northwestern suburbs, including Semaphore, Glenelg North and Seaton.” PointData's algorithm values every property across Adelaide on a weekly basis, drawing on around 2000 like-for-like property sales, as well as new planning and other data.
According to the figures, there was a significant dip in property values across 56 per cent of Adelaide between July and October 2019, coinciding with the debate over the State Government’s land tax changes.
“A lot of Adelaide was falling in value in the six months to October and then have increased after that,” Mr Giannakodakis said.
Pockets of Adelaide that have seen values fall consistently over the past year, by more than 5 per cent in each six-month period, include the blue ribbon suburbs of Glenelg, Unley Park, Malvern, Goodwood, Rose Park, Toorak Gardens, Walkerville and St Peters.
“This may reflect a price correction in $1 million-plus properties or a recent drop in investment,” Mr Giannakodakis said.
PointData recently struck a deal with the state’s lands titles office to distribute its valuation products.A new monthly publication, Lay of the Land, will be released by the company later this month, including a series of property maps and analysis of Adelaide’s real estate landscape.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 456
