MORE than 100,000 Adelaide properties are subdividable under current planning rules, according to a new report.
Property technology firm PointData’s report reveals the scale of development opportunity across metropolitan Adelaide, led by the Onkaparinga Council area, with 25,000 subdividable sites.
It’s followed by Tea Tree Gully, Charles Sturt and Campbelltown as the most developable parts of Adelaide.
Subdivision opportunities are most limited in Unley, Walkerville and Prospect council areas.
PointData’s software assesses each property’s development potential based on its location, distance to amenities and services and quality of street and suburb.
It uses artificial intelligence to assess development options for a block of land, calculating the most profitable development style based on local planning rules.
PointData policy planning manager Ben Russ said while more than 105,000 properties across metropolitan Adelaide could be subdivided under current planning rules, only about half would return a profit to developers.
“This is because of the costs of subdivision and initial high property purchase price relative to the subdivision uplift,” he said.
“Subdivision into two parcels in high-value locations often leads to a profitable result in land, depending on the purchase price of the property and other constraints.
“Further profits can often be achieved in building margins in these locations. “This includes high land value councils such as Burnside, Holdfast Bay, Norwood Payneham & St Peters, Prospect, Unley, Walkerville and beachside suburbs.” But only about 10 per cent of subdividable properties are found in high-value locations, Mr Russ said.
“While there are many subdividable parcels in low land value council areas that turn a profit – like Onkaparinga, Playford and Tea Tree Gully – the quantum of that profit is small because of the low starting value of the land,” he said.
Mr Russ said nearly 95 per cent of subdividable properties across Adelaide would lead to low-density development, or subdivision into two or three parcels of land.
“This is counter to most people’s perception that group dwellings, flats and apartments account for a majority of infill development,” he said.
Established in 2014 by Adelaide planning expert George Giannakodakis, PointData has spent the past five years refining its algorithms and artificial intelligence systems.
While infill locations account for up to 80 per cent of all residential development, Mr Giannakodakis said only about 3000 subdividable and profitable sites were listed for sale each year.
“Adelaide’s point of difference against other capital cities is its affordable housing located close to the city and services,” he said.
“It is important to ensure that Adelaide maintains a steady supply of development sites if we are going to attract young professionals and families to settle in Adelaide.” Mr Giannakodakis said the new planning and design code, due to be implemented next year, would affect the development potential across Adelaide.
Last year, PointData struck a deal with Land Services SA to distribute its AI-backed products through the state’s lands titles platform.
In March, the company released a property vale data report. The Property Develop-ment Potential report is available through Land Services SA’s online SAILIS system. PAGE 53: BUSINESS DAILY
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 512
