These five young South Australians are driving business and creating headlines both nationally and internationally, proving this is a state brimming with talent
DEANNA LUSH CO-DIRECTOR, AGCOMMUNICATORS AGE: 37 Growing up on a farm in rural South Australia, Deanna Lush fell in love with the land. Three decades later, the land repaid her devotion by leading her to find a new love – the farmer across the road who, 18 months later, became her husband.
During those three decades, the land remained a constant feature of Lush’s life. Her high school years were spent oscillating between being a lawyer, an osteopath, a chef or a gift wrapper at John Martin’s department store, before opting for a degree in journalism at the University of South Australia. In her second year, she began a cadetship at the Murray Valley Standard in Murray Bridge; from there, she moved to the Stock Journal in Adelaide before receiving a job offer to become media advisor for then Minister for Water Karlene Maywald. This was May 2006: the following month, record low inflows into the Murray Darling Basin were causing national concern for government, farmers and local residents.
“I have no doubt that if I had not been in that role, I wouldn’t be doing what I’m doing now,” Lush says. “It gave me a whole lot of experience in advocacy and metropolitan media.” Taking that experience, in 2013 Lush and her friend Belinda Cay created AgCommunicators, providing communication, marketing and events services for rural and regional Australia. “Ag is the industry I love, I’ve grown up in and know I will be in for the rest of my life,” Lush says.
And the industry loves Lush, too: in 2017 she was awarded a Churchill Fellowship and in March this year won the 2019 SA AgriFutures Rural Women’s Award for her “value-based” project aimed at driving the agriculture industry forward. “It’s rewarding but very humbling,” she acknowledges of the awards. “We all just go about doing what we do and if we can see an issue and we have the skills to tackle it, we have a go. So when you are recognised for contributing to your industry, that is a great honour.” Also of value to Lush is the lifestyle South Australia accords. “I love that I live in the country and have an office in the city, just 80km from Adelaide,” she says. “I can be in the office in just over an hour – that is an amazing lifestyle opportunity.”
SHARNI HONOR FOUNDER, THE PORCH SESSIONS AGE: 26 Sharni Honor’s lightbulb moment came from an afternoon spent playing music on her home porch with a friend. Neighbours sitting on their own porch perked up their ears, picked up their seats and crossed the road to sit, wine in hand, and listen to the music.
In that moment, the idea for The Porch Sessions was born. Inspired, Honor dropped out of university to study for her Certificate IV in Music Business with Music SA; one of her assignments was to prove he could put together a gig.
“It was in my parents’ back yard and we just gave it a go – and it sold out,” she recalls. “We had 150 people, food vans, a bar and two amazing bands.” Word quickly spread and it wasn’t long before Honor found herself inundated with offers from people volunteering their own porches to host more gigs, attracted by the intimate nature of the event.
“There are a lot of people who love music but don’t want to spend time travelling into the CBD and lining up late at a dark venue,” Honor says. “A lot of people, especially young families, love the idea of having beautiful, quality music brought to them in a safe environment. And it centralises music for the local community as well, bringing neighbours together.” Surprisingly, Honor didn’t grow up in a musical environment: “my family aren’t really into music,” she says. This absence of parental influence allowed her to develop her own tastes as she grew, initially leaning towards folk, blues and soul. Today, her tastes extend to world music, jazz, hip hop and everything in between: “it’s amazing what you can learn from branching out of your little genre box,” she says.
Also branching out are The Porch Sessions, which are gaining popularity interstate where they tour for one month each year: “It’s a wicked showcase of the SA climate in terms of what’s happening with arts and music festivals,” Honor says.
Then there’s Porchland, the annual music festival that draws a sell-out crowd of 2000 music lovers. More recently, Honor has been involved in the launch of Summertown Studios in Somerton Park, a creative neighbourhood offering local wares, co-working spaces and creative studios. “The cool thing is there are still challenges all the time,” she says. “We keep changing the goal posts, creating new brands.”
PAUL VASILEFF FOUNDER AND HEAD DESIGNER PAOLO SEBASTIAN AGE: 29 Like the cherished stories that inspire his creations, South Australian couturist Paul Vasileff’s story reads like something of a fairytale: from the three-year-old boy with the passion for Disney films who learned how to sew by his grandmother’s side to the founder of internationally acclaimed label Paolo Sebastian, whose designs have graced Paris catwalks and boast a celebrity fan base that includes Jennifer Hawkins, Katy Perry, Kim Kardashian and Hilary Swank.
But take all this away and Vasileff remains an Adelaide boy at heart. Paolo Sebastian’s headquarters remain firmly entrenched in the state; outside of work, he unwinds by spending time with friends and family and enjoying South Australia’s many beautiful beaches.
Vasileff’s ethos is all about giving back to his home state. After spending a year in Milan studying design as a 19-year-old, he couldn’t wait to bring his skills back to South Australia. Ten years later, he employs 18 staff who help create his exquisite wedding dresses and gowns.
“Our team is incredibly proud because we get to go to work each day and create magic, and it’s all from Adelaide,” he says. “We’ve been able to maintain all our manufacturing here in SA and keep a skillset alive that I’m really proud of.
“I think we’ve been able to show that your geographical location doesn’t limit what you’re capable of. We’re grateful we have the opportunity to travel and create a bit of exposure not just for Adelaide but for Australia, because when we go to Paris, the first thing new people say to us is, ‘I didn’t realise this type of work is being done in Australia’. So that’s a wonderful feeling.” For Vasileff, success is not about the money or the fame: it’s about family, friends and home.
“It’s not so much the actual reaching the goal but it’s the journey you take in getting there and the people who help you get there, and then being happy and proud of the result and who you are at the end: to me, that is success,” he says.
ANTON ANDREACCHIO FOUNDER: CONVERGEN, JUMPGATE VR ARTISAN POST GROUP, DOUBLE BISHOP, GMTI CONSULTING AGE: 32 As a teenager, Anton Andreacchio had a passion for mathematics, music and footy. As one of South Australia’s most successful entrepreneurs, Andreacchio has transformed those passions into business.
His first company, Convergen, specialises in infrastructure visualisation through animation, and has been involved with prestigious projects in Adelaide such as the Riverbank Footbridge, the Airport upgrade and the O-Bahn; as well as interstate on the Chandler Highway upgrade, Gold Coast Light Rail and more. Convergen’s sister company, Jumpgate VR, has produced a wide range of virtual reality projects including training AFL players and creating contemporary artworks such as Living Rocks, a 30m installation brought to life surrounded by music from the Australian String Quartet.
Post-production company Artisan Post Group and film production company Double Bishop also reflect Andreacchio’s artistic interests, while data science consultancy GMTI Consulting allows him to indulge in his favourite subject – maths.
“My personal interests manifest with different clients – we work with sport, contemporary arts, construction, engineering,” he says. “I’m really honoured to be a part of that.” Originally studying for a degree in engineering, Andreacchio’s career path changed during a year spent in the US studying at UCLA in Los Angeles. “I felt if I graduated I would start just competing for the sake of it in that field,” he says. “So the idea of stopping and figuring out why I’m competing and running a different race was as important as anything.
“I usually blame studying in the US for this, where college isn’t just an extension of high school; it’s very much this transformative period where everyone’s leaving home and it’s a melting pot – who knows what you’re going to be?
“I had some strong influencers who very much encouraged the idea of being self-determined in terms of pathways, so when I came back some of that American entrepreneurial sensibility got the better of me and now I don’t know how to do anything else.” In addition to running five companies, Andreacchio is also a member of the Entrepreneurship Advisory Board created to help grow entrepreneurship in South Australia, while his “down time” is spent studying for his Masters degree in mathematics at the University of Adelaide.
“Maths is a hobby more than anything, just playing with numbers and statistics,” he says. “I find it meaningful, because when you learn you grow, you can feel progress and I find that immensely satisfying.
“As an entrepreneur, you have to be confident to everyone – clients, the people you’re leading, the press – but to be able to put yourself in the position to not have all the answers is absolutely necessary. It’s an extraordinary privilege to be able to keep learning.”
DR JONATHAN HALL FOUNDER, LIFE WHISPERER AGE: 33 Jonathan Hall didn’t grow up thinking about a career in fertility. As a high school student at St Peter’s College, his main interest was in music: a keen piano, drums and cello player, his passion for concertos outweighed that for academia.
Today, as co-founder of Life Whisperer, a South Australian company that has developed an app that uses artificial intelligence to identify healthy embryos and improve outcomes for couples going through IVF, fertility is close to his heart. “I have friends who have suffered a great deal because of (infertility),” he says. “There are things people don’t want to say about the IVF process – how stressful and traumatic it is, the low success rate, the hormonal drugs can be distressing. And it’s so excruciatingly expensive.
“I come from a Christian household: I have a lot of deep values about wanting to help people. Fertility is hard but if modern technologies can solve some of these problems, we can continue to make things better and better.” Dr Hall’s journey from music to medicine has seen him complete two PhDs, in physics and nanotechnology, travel the world as an academic researcher and become scientific lead at Presagen, Life Whisperer’s sister company that uses similar technology over a wider medical field. Life Whisperer’s app is currently in the process of moving from R&D to sales and is attracting interest from clinics all over the world, including in California where the company has recently set up its first station. “It’s an exciting time,” Dr Hall says.
With international interest in his product, Dr Hall has hopes of taking Life Whisperer global – but Adelaide will always remain its home ground. “We want to become a great company that was invented and headquartered here in South Australia, the place where we live, the place that has so many great things about it,” he says. “We have all the makings of a great innovation hub at Lot Fourteen, we have a strong university sector, and we have some real talent in innovation other states in Australia don’t have.“I care about this state and where it’s going. I’m really excited about what’s happening here.”
CREDIT: words lynn cameron
Word count: 2000
