SPECIALIST data analytics con­sultancy Exposé has laun­ched a digital twin system that allows users to simulate the operation of their physical assets on a virtual platform.
A digital twin is a digital replica of a physical asset, process, environment or system, which integrates Internet of Things (IoT), artificial intelligence (AI), machine learning and software analytics to simulate and track performance.
Users can use data provided by a digital twin to head off problems before they occur, prevent down-time, improve operational and environmental performance and plan for the future using simulations. Etienne Oosthuysen, Exposé national manager of technology, solutions and quality, said the company was in discussions with utilities companies, universities, councils and aged-care providers, which saw an opportunity to proactively manage their assets and environments using a digital twin system.
“The concept of twinning is not new but, of course, with things like the pervasiveness of IoT and sensors, contextual real-time information like weather, the cloud and the ability to ingest all of this mass amount of data, the concept of a physical twin quickly translated into a digital twin,” he said.
“So, if you can have a digital replica of something, you can perform that same analysis and simulation without leaving your desk. If I just look at current discussions, there are two with utilities – one in the electrical space, one in the gas space.
“The one in the gas space is around pressure on the network; in the electrical space, it’s movement of people and making sure the right people are at the right place. A digital twin is crucial to both of those.” Mr Oosthuysen said unlike other digital twins developed for a specific industry, Exposé had created a framework that could be tailored to clients across all industries.
“Rather than retrofit a solution to a completely different industry, as is the case with many digital-twin offerings, our offering can quickly be provisioned from the ground up to suit any industry,” he said.
“In the creation of the product, we collaborated with aged care as well as councils to get the framework in place, that we can build on and repeat many times to suit an array of use cases across many industries.” With sister company Chamonix, Exposé was one the first tenants to move into the Lot Fourteen start-up hub. The company employs about 20 consultants and other staff in Adelaide, and an additional five consultants in Melbourne.
Exposé general manager Kelly Drewett said the company was seeking more data scientists, technical consultants and other staff in Adelaide.
“Within the next six months, we’ll probably bring on another four to five if we can find them - that’s the hard part, it’s an incredibly huge issue that we have,” she said.
“What we offer our grads now, which is keeping them here, is the chance to work on projects like this – the digital twin – where they’re working on projects with leading-edge technology.“And we’re finding more and more people are coming over to South Australia to live from the eastern states, given that we’ve got Lot Fourteen here – it’s a big selling point.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 524
