ADELAIDE start-up ipData has secured close to $2 million in funding and appointed a high-powered board to help commercialise its AI-backed property software.
BankSA chief executive Nick Reade, former KPMG SA chairman Con Tragakis and former Lend Lease project director Alex Pyrlis have been appointed to the company’s board, joining chief executive George Giannakodakis and chief operating officer Amanda Dunbar. Property developer Steve Maras has been brought on as a strategic adviser.
The company has raised $1.6 million through a Series A funding round, while being awarded a $387,000 grant from the Federal Government’s Accelerating Commercialisation program.
The funding will go towards developing the company’s two flagship platforms, PropertyAI and Valeri, which help developers, builders and consumers value property and optimise development of parcels of land.
Mr Giannakodakis said the capital raising followed four years of research and development and $1.5 million of personal investment, and had attracted a range of investors, including construction companies, development groups and tech investors.
“The funding sees us through to the commercialisation of both platforms, and hopefully we have traction by 2020, with the funding seeing us through to 2020,” he said.
“The fact that this is a national initiative that we’re looking to scale beyond Australia – we are proud of the fact that most of the R&D has been done here. We have 10 staff, we’ll have another six in the next few months and by the end of the year we’ll have around 25 – the new roles will be mostly in product development and sales.” The PropertyAI platform uses artificial intelligence to assess development options for a block of land, calculating the most profitable development style based on local planning rules. “It does everything from giving you a market realistic purchase price, it assesses all the development styles that can fit on that block of land within the planning rules, it works out the optimum building size and the quality of the building,” Mr Giannakodakis said.
“It also works out the recommended house and land price to sell it for, and then it gives you the return on investment, so it cycles through all of the development options on that site and lands on the highest profit result.” The platform is backed by the Valeri machine learning tool, which uses a wide range of characteristics to calculate accurate property valuations.
“Valeri has been learning how to value properties based on not just sales data but also things like how far they are from the beach, schools – learning its own patterns and setting values for qualitative factors that are very hard to value,” Mr Giannakodakis said.
“We realised that its accuracy is so good that it could become a commercial platform in its own right and that’s why we’re going to offer it commercially as well.” Both platforms will be offered via a monthly subscription, or through one-off reports generated for specific properties.
The data will soon be made available to building companies, developers and other businesses, before the launch of a consumer platform by the middle of this year.
Mr Giannakodakis said properties across metropolitan Adelaide would be searchable first, followed by Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Perth.
“We’d like to be participating in the increase of urban infill and progressing that planning vision for Adelaide to grow Adelaide up and not out,” he said.“There are roughly about 70 or 80,000 developable parcels across Adelaide ... but then obviously we’re looking at all 2.6 million development parcels across Australia.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 583
