THE arts in South Australia is at a turning or pivot point in its development, according to former Australia Council chief executive Tony Grybowski.
Mr Grybowski yesterday delivered a progress report on his arts review for the State Government.
He was the key speaker at a meeting of the Committee for the Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) in Adelaide.
“The review is a roadmap of what people could do, not telling people what they should do,” he said.
Mr Grybowski is due to deliver the review to the State Government at the end of this month.
He said it came at a critical time in SA’s development, which above all pointed to changes in the interactions between artists and audiences.
“We are in a global transition from the industrial to the information age,” he said.
“Since the early 2000s, SA has faced economic challenges. With the closure of industries comes the opportunity to make new industries in technology, defence, renewables, artificial intelligence and space sector.
“There is the growth of digital technology and I can’t think of city where that has happened so quickly. It’s the first city to roll out a high-speed data network and become a so-called 10-gig city.” Mr Grybowski, pictured, said there had been a change in the expectations of audiences and the way people consumed their culture, including two-way exchange where consumers themselves become con-tent creators. Finally there was a change in the demographics of the city.
Mr Grybowski said he had been given the commission to review the arts in SA without any budget attached to it.
“But its role is to influence the Government to invest into it,” he said. He would provide two documents, one a review addressing the objectives areas provided by the Government with observations and recommendations. The second would be a strategy on how to achieve its goals.The CEDA forum also heard from Adelaide Lord Mayor Sandy Verschoor, Adelaide Festival Centre chief Douglas Gautier, and Dan Thorsland, a director of games developer Mighty Kingdom
CREDIT: TIM LLOYD ARTS WRITER
Word count: 341
