How the global pandemic grounded the jetsetting, post-politics career of Julie Bishop, and her emotional response upon discovering a lineage of sailors and criminals she never knew existed The pandemic demolished the travel plans of thousands of Australians but few more than the former foreign minister, Julie Bishop, whose professional life ground to a shuddering halt.
Since leaving politics in April last year, she has spread her wings in the private sector as a well-paid speaker and member of a number of international boards, both of which have kept her frequent flyer points topped up.
Suddenly, it all stopped.
“I had just arrived back from overseas,” says Bishop, who is about to feature in an episode of the SBS documentary Who Do You  Think  You  Are?.  “I  flew  home Heathrow-Dubai-Perth so I got back when the restrictions were imposed.” Bishop talks about her life after politics – where she was popular for the diligence she  brought  to  the  demanding  foreign affairs post as much as for the fashionable style  with  which  she  did  it  –  as  her third career: first law, then politics and now this. Her trip to London was as a member of an advisory board for Afiniti, a leading artificial intelligence company that uses algorithms to improve the success rate of call centres, with Afiniti taking its cut.
Chairing the board is David Cameron, a former British prime minister, and Bishop is in company with Rupert Murdoch’s daughter Elisabeth, and Lord John Browne, the former chief executive officer of BP.
“I had a full diary, I had speaking engagements at many conferences which were cancelled immediately and I had overseas travel for board meetings,” Bishop says.
“So suddenly I had an empty diary for the first time in living memory.” As  with  everyone  coping with the pandemic, it took a while for her to adapt. Bishop has always been a keen runner and says  she  set  herself  ridiculous  fitness goals while she worked out how to get back on track.
The SBS program by its nature has a long lead time and was already complete. A huge depth of research lies behind each episode and Bishop had first to be convinced it was going to be worth exploring her ancestry in a way that would produce television that people wanted to watch. Although her political career was based in Western Australia, where she was the member for Curtin for 21 years, she was born at Lobethal and grew up in Basket Range on her parent’s cherry orchard, studying law at the University of Adelaide after completing her secondary education at St Peter’s Girls’ School.
Her connections to South Australia were well documented. Her mother, Isabel Wilson, had married her father, Douglas Bishop, who was a returned soldier and orchardist, and her family had lived and worked on the farm for five generations. They had close ties to the South Australian community, her mother had been active in local government and her grandfather, William Bishop, served as the mayor of East Torrens.
“I couldn’t envisage what would be different or unique or newsworthy about my ancestors,” Bishop says. “They were, as I understood it, agricultural workers from the UK who came to South Australia in the 1830s, 1840s. SBS said, ‘Leave it with us, we will go off and do some research and come back to you’.” This was 2019 and the researchers returned a few months later with some intriguing stories on the father’s side of Bishop’s grandmother’s family – people she knew nothing about. They also mentioned people from her mother’s maternal side, again who she knew nothing of. Bishop began to think it might be worthwhile after all.
“I was aware that the level of research that SBS did was of the highest quality, and it piqued my curiosity,” she says.
At this point she knew so little about what SBS had unearthed she did not even know the names of the people they had traced. Part of the dynamic of the show is to take the subject to places relevant to their history and confront them there with details of people to whom they are related.
The story began, as it had to, at Basket Range, where the program talked to a cousin who is the family historian and knew more than Bishop did about her paternal grandmother’s side. She then connected with the SBS team when she was in London for a board meeting and was introduced to a fascinating character called J.B. Fry, a great-great-great-grandfather who had become a sailor in the British Navy and was involved in dangerous battles to suppress the slave trade in West Africa.
“We went all over England, down to Dartmouth to the maritime colleges there, and to the southeast coast of England where he had lived,” Bishop says. “We followed his life as a sailor and that was fascinating; I had no idea.” Bishop discovered that Fry, who was involved in the Crimean War, eventually joined the Merchant Navy, working for a time for the East India Company before jumping ship in South Australia, the origin of one branch of the family’s SA connections. “He was a real adventurer but he had travelled globally before he settled in South Australia and he became a school teacher,” she says.
SBS also traced back through her mother’s maternal line a great-great-great-great-grandmother, Dinah Dalimor, who Bishop was touched to learn had led a very hard and impoverished life, with four children born out of wedlock and a spell in prison. Dinah’s granddaughter, Jemima, and her husband, Thomas Sims, came to SA as free emigrants to escape generations of poverty and work as labourers. They were eventually able to buy land – something they could never have done in the UK.
Bishop says the emotional response to learning about family members from generations ago was very real.
As a bonus, she has since been introduced to descendants on her father’s side who live in SA and whose existence she had never even suspected.
The idea, pre-COVID, was for Bishop to fly  to  Adelaide  to be  with  her  sisters, MaryLou and Patricia, and their families, and to watch the program together when it airs on Tuesday, June 30. Now, as with most things in her current life, Bishop will join her Adelaide family virtually and watch it together online via Zoom.
The initial halt to her work did not last long as companies everywhere quickly adapted to the forced isolation by moving their business online. Meetings resumed, slowly at first but now with more regularity, and her diary is almost as full with online meetings as it once was.
The Bishop clan has also adapted by scheduling a Saturday family catch-up where they all dial in, nieces and nephews included.
Bishop is philosophical about the impact of the pandemic on her work. It affected her profoundly in some ways but it was nothing compared with other families, particularly those touched by sickness and even death.
To stay physically and mentally active, she joins friends in Perth for a yoga class, runs in Kings Park or walks along Cottesloe Beach and will continue to do so while the travel restrictions apply.
As well as her work on international boards she runs a boutique consultancy, Julie Bishop & Partners, with her former chief of staff, Murray Hansen, who lives in Queensland, and they provide strategic advice – including some lobbying – for companies seeking to do business in Australia. Her background in law, politics and foreign affairs made it seem an obvious thing for her to do, she says.
Bishop’s most prestigious appointment post-politics was to become chancellor of the Australian National University, a gilt-edged position that became a much harder challenge when the closed borders shut down lecture rooms and kept foreign students away.
“That has been quite a transformation for me because we are doing all of our meetings online and the university itself had to go online,” she says. “There have been some extraordinary challenges and experiences from which we can learn a great deal.” Apart  from  a  spate  of  Marie  Kondo-inspired culling of her wardrobe and possessions, Bishop has had the space to reflect and reassess her life. There have been minor adjustments and a reordering of priorities but no major shifts in direction. She has had the time to read A Bigger Picture, the best-selling memoir of Malcolm Turnbull, who is a close political ally and a friend before and after politics, and she gives a nod of approval to the way her contribution was portrayed.
“I think Malcolm reflects the way I feel about my role as foreign minister, that I acted with integrity and dignity appropriate to the office throughout my time in the role,” she says.
Apart from that, the sometimes incendiary observations were Turnbull’s view, Bishop says, and she will not be buying into it. “It’s Malcolm’s perspective on his life,” she says. “I think political memoirs are the perspective of the author, and participants in those events can have their own perspectives.” Bishop’s feelings about her career – particularly the deals done at the end that saw her tilt at the leadership fall at the first post as the party rallied for different reasons behind Scott Morrison – have the makings of another bestseller.
It won’t be happening any time soon.
“I am still busy in my third career so I have no plans for a memoir at this stage,” she says. “I have certainly been asked by a number of publishing houses but I am very busy leading my life.” Who Do You Think You Are?, with Julie Bishop, airs on SBS, June 30, at 7.30pm
CREDIT: WORDS PENELOPE DEBELLE PHOTOGRAPH WARNER BROS
Word count: 1622
