ARTIFICIAL intelligence is being predicted as a way to boost farming, as well as tackle global challenges, such as illegal fishing and plastic waste, as part of a new partnership between CSIRO and Microsoft.
The wide-ranging agreement was signed by CSIRO chief executive Larry Marshall and Microsoft Australia managing mirector Steven Worrall, and is designed to accelerate critical research that will use AI and machine learning to:
Equip farmers with custom, digital insights from a diverse range of data sources, including sensors and satellites, but importantly deep domain knowledge integrated with analytics and modelling to provide insights on tactical and strategic decision making including soil condition, crop growth and farm management. This work will begin at CSIRO's new agricultural research facility at Boorowa, NSW. Tackle illegal fishing by analysing information gathered from high resolution cameras and underwater microphones to assist with fishing management in Australian marine reserves like the Great Barrier Reef, and detection of fishing with explosives in Indonesia.
Target marine debris by analysing videos of rivers and stormwater drains to identify and track garbage flows into waterways and inform intervention efforts, like placement of river rubbish traps and reverse vending machines where the public can recycle bottles and cans in return for a fee. The partnership will also contribute towards CSIRO's managed data ecosystem and digital academy, projects that are transforming CSIRO's digital landscape with new technologies, data capabilities and skill sets, and bring Microsoft's latest digital technology to CSIRO's wide portfolio of research.
Dr Marshall said the partnership brought together decades of scientific expertise in solving real-world challenges and the latest breakthroughs in AI.
"This partnership is turning science and technology into real-world solutions for real people, from the Great Barrier Reef, to suburban waterways, to farms and environments around the country," he said.
"Everything CSIRO does is through partnerships across Australia and around the world, so it's great to share such a broad vision for making the world a better place with a visionary partner like Microsoft."
RELATED: Climate change is reducing hazard-burning window
Mr Worrall said Microsoft's research and investments in data-driven tools such as cloud and artificial intelligence are designed to tackle global challenges.
"We're pleased to be forging a deep strategic partnership with CSIRO as part of Microsoft's mission to empower every person and every organisation on the planet to achieve more," he said.
"This partnership also aligns with Microsoft's sustainability commitments and pledge to be carbon neutral by 2030, carbon negative by 2050.
"By partnering with a world-leading scientific organisation like CSIRO we believe we will be able to bring deep and lasting impact to Australian organisations, communities and the environment by accelerating progress in critically important areas such as managing plastic waste, and equipping farmers with digital tools of the future."
The partnership follows previous initiatives like the Healthy Country Partnership, announced in November, which combines responsible AI and modern science with Indigenous knowledge to solve complex environmental management problems, and care for animal species and habitats within Kakadu National Park.
This project has been so successful that plans are now underway to take this to more communities across Australia.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Click here to sign up to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
Word count: 541
