ADELAIDE property technology start-up PointData expects to more than double its workforce in the next six months after signing a deal with the state’s lands titles office to distribute its suite of AI-backed products.
Established in 2014 by Adelaide planning expert George Giannakodakis, the company has spent the past five years refining its algorithms and AI systems, culminating in the company’s official launch tonight. Through a deal recently struck with Land Services SA, the products will initially be accessible to consumers through real estate agents and conveyancers via the office’s South Australian Integrated Land Information System (SAILIS).
Backed by an innovative machine learning tool, detailed valuation reports consider a multitude of quantitative and qualitative factors when valuing a property, including recent sales, land economics and neighbourhood profiles.
Meanwhile, a property development potential report will provide customers with tailored development options and returns on investment under different development scenarios.
Mr Giannakodakis, who is PointData chief executive, said the products would deliver valuable information to banks, real estate agents, conveyancers, homeowners, property investors and developers.
“Our custom reports are able to provide instant property feasibility studies with a very high degree of accuracy in property and land values, thanks to our evolving and sophisticated algorithms and artificial intelligence systems,” he said.
“This is about creating value for a range of customers, from big banks to mum-and-dad investors, by unlocking a wealth of data that was previously largely inaccessible to most people.” PointData has 11 employees, with that number expected to increase to 25 in the next six months, and to 60 within three years as part of a national expansion plan. It has set up offices in Sydney and Melbourne to support its early growth, and plans for its products to offer national coverage by the second half of next year. PointData’s launch marks the first time in Australia that a land registry office has partnered with a private company to distribute products.
The company’s services will later be available directly to homeowners, developers, investors and property buyers for a fee. Banks will be offered PointData’s automated valuation services, providing real-time information and analysis.Earlier this year, PointData secured close to $2 million in funding and appointed a high-powered board including BankSA chief executive Nick Reade and former KPMG SA chairman Con Tragakis. It will officially unveil its services at a launch event at Land Services SA’s offices tonight.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 400
