THOUSANDS of accounting graduates are entering the workforce each year without a key soft skill, according to a University of South Australia researcher.
A report, prepared by adjunct researcher Dr Alan Reddrop, analyses 26 accountancy courses offered by universities and other education institutions across Australia.
After finding just one reference to “listening” in curricula across the accountancy schools, Dr Reddrop believes a key skill, valued by clients, is being ignored.
He blames professional bodies CPA Australia and Chartered Accountants Australia and New Zealand, suggesting they had dropped references to listening skills in their program accreditation guidelines in recent years. The most recent guidelines, however, list “listen and read effectively, including a sensitivity to cultural and language differences” as a required skill.
Dr Reddrop, a former business adviser with the State Government, said educators needed to recognise the importance of developing soft skills, given the increasing role of artificial intelligence and other technologies in the more technical aspects of an accountant’s role. “It is also concerning that in a recent study, accountancy graduates regarded listening and reading as the least important communication skills related to employability,” he said.
“Unfortunately, as an earlier study found, accounting educators by and large are an ageing, change-resisting faculty, which limits the power and will to change the status quo.” CAANZ group executive education & learning Simon Hann said the professional body recognised the influence of automation, with soft skills such as communication and leadership, becoming far more important for the profession.
“The CA Program already has a focus on soft skills and emotional intelligence, and we are currently refreshing the way we assess learning outcomes of a candidate’s personal and professional skills,” he said. “This will allow the CA Program to support the capabilities that are in demand by employers in the increasingly disrupted world of work.” William Buck Adelaide people and culture director Tom Laundy said soft skills were a key focus of internal training and development at his firm.
“Listening is an essential skill for any trusted advisor,” he said.“It’s an ability we look for in our recruitment and reinforce in ongoing staff professional development.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 358
