Lookinglass, a South Australian developed app, uses artificial intelligence to analyse video of a patient. Tested by 16 occupational therapists, and in use at nursing homes and in five health care clinics, subscribers upload a video recording of a patient for analysis by a computer vision system to allow health care professionals to instantly analyse and diagnose those in their care. The system’s AI tracks the patient’s movement and compares it with well-known symptoms of Parkinson’s.
The technology, which was developed as a start-up based at the University of South Australia’s Innovation & Collaboration Centre, is garnering serious praise both here and overseas.
“It's as accurate as if there were a doctor in the room physically assessing someone – it makes visual assessments in the same way a human does,” Lookinglass CEO Kelly Carpenter says.
As exciting as this is, the best is yet to come as the company is currently testing the product’s application into smart mirrors, allowing patients to effortlessly record themselves for monitoring, hopefully from mid to late 2020 and at a competitive price.
“This demographic that we’re aiming to help – a lot of them don’t feel the most comfortable with technology, and people with Parkinson’s or arthritis have trouble using computer keyboards, touchscreens, menus and the sort of things that normal devices would necessitate,” Carpenter says.
“Making a dedicated device that integrates into that existing routine – a mirror is something most people interact with every day – we're really trying to take that difficulty of interaction out of it. It’s something that’s meant to work in partnership with healthcare professionals, so we definitely expect this to be a ubiquitous device that everybody has in their home over the next five to 10 years.
“We’re looking at channelling them through occupational therapists, so that when they are recommending clients install assistive products like handrails and things like that in their bathrooms, a smart mirror is the sort of thing they would also recommend.
“We definitely envision this as being something everyone can installin their home."
Word count: 341
