A BETTER blood test and a quicker follow-up check means up to 70 per cent of chest pain patients could be discharged from emergency departments faster, an SA study has found.
The findings have the potential to significantly reduce waiting times, crowding, and rates of hospital admissions without compromising safety.
The world-first trial for patients with suspected acute coronary syndrome, which includes heart attacks, focused on a more sensitive cardiac blood test for a protein called Troponin T.
Under national protocols, patients are tested when they arrive at an ED, then retested three hours later to compare protein levels.
The trial involved follow-up tests after one hour with some patients, and after three hours with others.
Patients in the one-hour follow-up group on average spent one hour less in the emergency room and were significantly less likely to be admitted to hospital — 33.2 per cent compared to 45.5 per cent.
Flinders University Professor Derek Chew, pictured, who led the study, said it showed the one-hour protocol was safe for patients.
“Currently there are around 30,000 emergency department presentations for chest pain each year in South Australia, so that represents a large number of people … taking up a hospital bed,” he said.
“We continued to monitor both groups of patients and, over the next 30 days, there was no difference in the ongoing health between the two groups. The benefits for the system as a whole are reducing crowding in EDs and reducing unnecessary hospital admissions.” Prof Chew said waiting times and admissions could be reduced even further by developing an artificial intelligence program to support the decisions doctors make.
Investigations for suspected acute coronary syndrome account for about 10 per cent of the 7 million presentations at emergency departments across Australia every year.
However, a significant number of these patients present with “undifferentiated” symptoms such as chest pain or shortness of breath that may or may not reflect a heart problem.
Health Minister Stephen Wade said the research “could be a game changer” for suspected heart attack patients, with potential to cut ED waiting times dramatically.Prof Chew is also network director of cardiology at Flinders Medical Centre and co-leader of the lifelong health theme at SAHMRI.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH HEALTH REPORTER
Word count: 374
