There are enormous opportunities for South Australia in the economy of the future.
Our state’s growth industries over the next decade and beyond – areas such as defence, health, professional services and creative industries – will be highly reliant on technology, and emerging areas such as cyber security and artificial intelligence (AI).
However, to fully reap the economic benefits, the state must better prepare our current and future workforce.
People, not technology, are central to driving value in these industries, making it important that we address potential skills shortages that will result from their growth.
BankSA’s latest Trends economic report identifies that, by 2030, South Australian employees will be missing two-to-three of the key skills required across our state’s key growth industries.
This doesn’t mean that we’re short of people for the job; it means that we’re short of people with the right skills for the job.
It’s estimated that at least 75 per cent of new jobs in the future will demand some ability in science, technology, engineering and maths (STEM).
Additionally, skills that are classified as uniquely human – customer service, leadership, conflict resolution, organisation, time management, digital literacy – will continue to be in high demand due to the difficulty of these being automated.
The South Australian government has outlined a plan for 3 per cent economic growth over the next five to 10 years.
There are exciting opportunities ahead of us, particularly in areas like defence, and burgeoning new industries like space, where South Australia can lead the nation.
But it’s critical that we’re prepared to meet these opportunities – and we need to be preparing now.
South Australian businesses need to increase the level of technology-based skills training they are providing to employees. We need to keep growing our talent pool for our young people to stay and work locally, and also increase skilled migration. And we need to get the skills focus right at all levels of our education system.
Technology and innovation precincts like Lot Fourteen will also play a key role. The recent announcement of a Living Lab with MIT University – the number one ranked university in the world and a global leader in data science – will see big data used to gain insights and inform decision making on key economic issues and opportunities.The Living Lab, sponsored by BankSA, will be the first of its kind in Australia. We’re looking at ways to collaborate and take action to back South Australia’s future economic growth and prosperity. And it will be important that all levels of government and business work together to ensure we’re prepared for these opportunities.
CREDIT: NICK READE BankSA CEO
Word count: 443
