PRIMARY school students should be learning now about the future work opportunities on warships and submarines, says Defence Minister Linda Reynolds.
Senator Reynolds, on her first visit to the Osborne Naval Shipyard since the election, said South Australia would need a pipeline of workers skilled in science, mathematics, engineering and science.
She said while the $89 billion naval project will provide thousands of jobs, the ships and boats are just the platforms for the launch of all sorts of other technology, including artificial intelligence technologies.
Senator Reynolds said the warfare of the future will be “hybrid” “Here in SA traditionally … it’s all about the blue collar work and you have a very skilled workforce here,” she said.
“But the long-term work is the systems work, the engineering, AI, drones, surveillance technology, cyber warfare, all of those capabilities you have here. They are a growth industry.
“When you look at hybrid warfare, SA and Adelaide in particular is very well placed.” She said the workforce would be needed for decades to come.
“We do need, right back from primary school, to highlight that jobs in the shipbuilding industry, working in the defence industry, as important as it is, it’s not just about the physical build,” she said.
“It’s about the smarts and the technology.” Girls and women are under-represented in STEM subjects and careers, as research shows that gender diversity is critical for success in all industries, including Defence.
Senator Reynolds said 75 per cent of all jobs in the future will need STEM and primary school was the place to start.
BAE Systems Australia has won the contract to build Australia’s future frigate fleet.
Chief executive officer Gabby Costigan. who is also an Ambassador for Pay Equity, said the most successful companies are those with the most diverse workforces.
“My challenge for women and girls considering future careers is to rethink what you are capable of, to relook at the opportunities and careers available to you, and to remove the limits or barriers to your thinking,” she said.
More women are needed at all levels of Defence and international policy, a report released yesterday argued. The Australian Strategic Policy Institute’s Women, Peace and Security is a series of essays on the importance of gender in areas of policy.
Stacey Porter, a Royal Australian Navy captain, said the stories of Australia’s sailors, soldiers and aircrews should be told.
A former gender adviser in Afghanistan, she says the best way is to show people “pragmatic examples of how the integration of gender can boost military effectiveness and lead to better operational outcomes”.The Australian Defence Force has 10 full-time gender advisers and 135 qualified gender advisers.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD
Word count: 448
