EMPLOYERS are taking longer than ever to make up their mind on new hires, potentially costing them in lost productivity and allowing top talent to slip away.
Research from ELMO Software and the Australian Human Resources Institute revealed it took on average 40 days to fill a vacant role in South Australia – longer than in Victoria (38 days), Western Australia (37), the Northern Territory (30) and Tasmania (26).
Queensland roles took the longest to fill, averaging 43 days. Exclusive research from Gartner backed up the trend, revealing a national average of 37 days between the first interview and a job offer being made.
It is four days longer than the global average and about twice as long as a decade ago.
Gartner research and advisory vice president Aaron McEwan said it was expensive for businesses to spend so much time on a decision – especially as the quality of hires did not seem to be improving.
“It’s taking twice as long to get the same result in a world that is demanding everything to be done by yesterday,” he said. “Typically when you are hiring someone it means you have got an empty seat where work is not being done and that can be costly.
“Of equal importance, there are people in the business carrying that load and we are already in an environment where people feel overworked and stretched and burnt out (so it’s) impacting the wellbeing of people in that business.” Companies that took too long to act could also lose the best talent to their competitors, particularly in high-demand fields such as artificial intelligence and data science.
Mr McEwan said hiring times had blown out because processes involved too many steps and too many stakeholders, and had become too complex.
A driving factor was the Global Financial Crisis, which forced companies to operate with reduced headcounts. There was a lot of pressure for anyone hired since then to be the right person for the job, with no wiggle room to bring on workers who did not perform.
Mr McEwan said this led to more people wanting to have their say on new hires, slowing down the process.
“We want more people involved in decision making so we can cover all our bases to make sure everyone is happy with the decision but it’s not adding predictive power, it’s just making it frustrating,” he said.
His advice going forward was to reduce the number of steps and people involved in hiring. “A couple of very well-designed behavioural interviews, a standard psychometric test and some sort of job preview test – that is probably the gold standard and anything above that is simply adding more time and complexity to the process,” he said.
“Companies like Google are abandoning cognitive assessments like, ‘How many buckets of cement do you need to fill a swimming pool?’.
“Diversifying the people involved in the decision making process (is a good thing but) we have to make sure the people included add value to the assessment, they are not just dragging it on.” On the other hand, Australian HR Institute SA president Chris Wood said 30-plus days was the norm for executive and senior-level recruitment in SA and he did not believe this was an unreasonable amount of time. “Processes are no longer as hurried, they are more thought out,” he said.
“People would rather take the time to recruit the right candidate and go through a more diligent process than hire the wrong candidate and have to start again.” Mr Wood said many candidates came from interstate and overseas and this was prolonging the process.“The markets are completely decentralised and people are willing to travel,” he said. “Australians returning from overseas and Adelaide people returning from interstate, that’s adding a bit of time.”
CREDIT: MELANIE BURGESS CAREERS DEPUTY EDITOR
Word count: 638
