I SPENT 20 minutes and $59 supermarket shopping last week. From the moment I walked in until I picked up my bags and left I didn’t speak to a single person. Not a soul. Supermarkets are lonely, impersonal places.
The shop was busy, metal trolleys were jostling in the aisles, queues were snaking back from the check-outs. I found everything I needed and the shop was meticulously clean, the produce fresh and the shelves well stocked and well lit.
But nobody talked to anyone. It was as if we were strangers in a strange land. Of course, some people are busy or in a hurry. They just want to fill their trolleys and get out. No time for socialising or idle chat.
But there is another, more sinister possibility. People are so conscious of the need to be politically correct and avoid the chance of inadvertently offending someone, they shy away from eye contact, let alone harmless conversation.
Naturally outgoing and sociable people have been forced into a cocoon of silence for fear that they may affront, insult or embarrass someone. In turn, if you do dare to ask a stranger for advice about the relative merits of diced or crushed tomatoes, you are invariably regarded with suspicion.
If you are a man and children could be directly or indirectly involved in a conversation, be very careful. The fear of stranger danger, the proper and sensible warning about talking to strangers, is alive and thriving in supermarkets.
So there we were, dozens of us, walking po-faced and silent, guiding our trolleys around the chutneys, soups, spreads, mueslis and sweet biscuits, not daring to speak to each other. The sadness is that life in the supermarkets reflects broader, general life.
The art of conversation, even idle chitchat, with strangers is dying. We are no longer game to strike up casual conversations in case we offend or frighten people. Mobile telephones with their range of keyboard communications like texting and emailing, are replacing conversation. Particularly among the young.
I vaguely remember the corner-store grocer, often wearing a white apron, who would fetch your requested items from shelves, jars, tins or a mysterious room out the back.
Banter would be almost continuous. It was the epitome of personal service. Then, in the 1950s, a grocer at Henley Beach, Martin Darsow, established South Australia’s first supermarket. It was a revolutionary move and people were initially suspicious – instead of being served you served yourself. It would, the cynics said, never catch on.
Darsow merely picked up on overseas trends. In August, 1930, Michael J. Cullen opened the world’s first supermarket in Queens in New York. His store, known as King Cullen, operated under the catchy slogan: “Pile it high, Sell it low.” There was industry and buyer resistance to Cullen’s radical marketing operation but as the economy sank into the Great Depression, consumers became price-sensitive. Self service reduced staff numbers and operating costs, which were reflected in lower prices.
Personal service and self service were locked in a deadly arm-wrestle but by the 1950s supermarkets had opened in Britain and ultimately Australia.
The trend moved from food retailing to a wide range of merchandise. It doesn’t matter whether it is pharmacy products, petrol, hardware lines, clothing or sporting goods, we can all make our selections from the racks and shelves without seeking assistance.
Pay as you leave. And speak to no one.
There’s no turning back. A few shops in most shopping strips still offer one-on-one service but the push to self service is irresistible. It will increase as artificial intelligence becomes more sophisticated and machines can make considered decisions for us. It is, of course, already happening. Who speaks to anyone in a bank anymore? It is becoming increasingly difficult to speak to anyone on telephones. Computers are taking over.
I have no argument with supermarkets or the broader trend to self service. It is efficient, hygienic, safe, quick and relatively cheap.But one of its unintended consequences is the slow death of conversation.
CREDIT: Rex Jory
Word count: 674
