WE’RE swimming in plastic, literally and metaphorically.
A study published this week found microscopic particles of plastic are falling out of the sky with snow in the Arctic.
A Senate inquiry into marine plastic pollution in 2016 heard a dead shearwater bird on Lord Howe Island had 274 pieces of plastic in its stomach, 14 per cent of its body weight.
Its report sets out an alarming problem: five trillion plastic pieces lying on the surface of the oceans and eight million tonnes of plastics leaking into the ocean each year – the equivalent of a full garbage truck every minute.
Programs such as the ABC’s War on Waste show disturbing examples – 7.5 tonnes of plastic waste were collected in an effort to clean up Melbourne’s Yarra River, while an estimated 3.5 billion plastic straws and one billion coffee cups are thrown out in Australia each year.
In case that’s not scary enough, the World Economic Forum says plastic production will quadruple by 2050.
It’s a problem that clearly needs leadership; from businesses, the Federal Government and jurisdictions willing to lead the way.
To that end, the State Government and Environment Minister David Speirs need to be applauded for taking the first step and announcing a plan to phase out single-use plastics, though it’s important to note that decision was reached once overwhelming public support for doing so had been secured.
Under a plan that is set to be tabled in State Parliament sometime next year, plastic straws, cutlery and stirrers are first in the firing line, with polystyrene cups and containers to follow soon after.
Some of the biggest plastic offenders – coffee cups, plastic bags and takeaway containers – won’t go until further work has been done about how they can be phased out and replaced by plastic-free alternatives.
It continues South Australia’s track record of taking the lead on environmental issues.
We were the first state to implement a container deposit scheme, in 1977. It now gives South Australians a 10c refund when they recycle certain drinks containers. The state was again the first to take action against lightweight, supermarket checkout-style plastic bags, saying goodbye to them in 2009.
We should be rightly proud that we’ll again lead the nation, and the establishment of four plastic-free precincts – all Surf Life Saving SA clubs, Adelaide Central Market, The Parade at Norwood and Brighton’s Jetty Rd strip – is a big leap forward as we wait for more details about how the single-use ban will work.
But there’s plenty more to do.
Australia, and most of the world, has a huge recycling crisis on its hands. A Chinese Government decision to ban the import of plastic products sparked a chain reaction, forcing businesses and countries to make difficult decisions about how to process waste for the first time.
It’s been a long time coming, but the last few weeks have shown the Federal Government is taking the issue seriously. Prime Minister Scott Morrison has announced he’ll ban the export of plastics overseas.
He told a Pacific Islands Forum in the Pacific Island nation of Tuvalu focused on climate change that the issue of plastic pollution in the Pacific “is a very serious one” and said it would become an “even more significant part” of Australia’s global advocacy.
“That starts with making sure we take care of our own waste,” he said at the forum yesterday.
“Our waste, our responsibility and ensuring that we’re recycling our waste in Australia, not shipping it off to other countries so it can find itself, particularly in terms of plastics, floating off the Great Barrier Reef or other parts of the Pacific.” That national decision presents serious opportunities for South Australia to lead the way, to become a global leader in dealing with waste.
So far, the major government action to address the issue has been a punitive measure, a huge increase in the Solid Waste Levy. The cost of taking a tonne of waste to landfill increased from $100 to $110 as of July, and will then skyrocket to $140 in January.
The levy will raise an additional $89 million over four years, and while the majority of revenue will be reinvested in environmental programs, $48.9 million of it will go towards coastline remediation. That doesn’t sound like funding for innovative ways to stop rubbish reaching landfill in the first place. All together, new measures designed to tackle the waste problem make up just $22 million over four years – less than a quarter of the windfall.
Those programs are $10 million of grants handed out to councils and businesses through the Green Industry Fund, and a $12 million program to increase compliance.
There are plenty of opportunities for SA to become a recycling and waste powerhouse, to ensure we’re at the forefront of the national response.
With the state’s seasonally adjusted unemployment rate spiking to 6.9 per cent in Australian Bureau of Statistics figures released this week, perhaps it’s time the waste and recycling industry joins space, artificial intelligence, cybertechnology and defence as key areas to tap into.
Phasing out single-use plastics is a start, one that’s overwhelmingly supported in principle by the community. It’s almost a free hit for a government trying to establish its environmental credentials.But getting the wider issue of plastics and recycling right could be the key to the Government achieving its pre-election promise of more jobs, lower costs and better services. It just has to be willing to get its hands dirty.
CREDIT: THE STATE ADAM LANGENBERG
Word count: 923
