Don’t order your online groceries under the influence. It’s hard enough sober. All those pesky details, all those prices, all those different items.
Watch out and you’ll end up with three kilos of tomatoes, half a chicken leg and one olive. One nice old lady in the UK ended up with 73 litres of milk after pressing the wrong button.
Substitutions can also be an issue. One guy received sanitary towels instead of protein powder. I don’t care what the system says, but “Maxi nutrition promax chocolate” is not the same as “Always infinity night 10”.
Others tell of getting the wrong size batteries, having Easter eggs replaced by daffodils and even ending up with fresh, naked wild rocket instead of extra peppery Italian rocket. I’ve got more sympathy for the person trying to bulk up for the gym by snacking on adult nappies.
It’s no wonder online grocery shopping isn’t catching on in this country, and accounts for only 2 per cent of all supermarket purchases made. Many say they don’t trust the process, don’t think it’s convenient and don’t think the food will be fresh enough.
Enter Codey from West Ryde. Codey, a personal packer, is featured in Woolies ads in a bid to convince shoppers their online haul is lovingly selected by people just like them. At Woolworths “only the pickiest pick your shopping”.
But online shopping is set for the biggest shake-up in years with the arrival of Ocado on the scene. Coles has just signed a deal with the automation multinational to set up two warehouses in Melbourne and Sydney. Just as we’re struggling to come to terms with machines scanning our groceries and randomly telling us that “an item was not detected in the bagging area”, machines are taking over the online duties as well.
Ocado will build two “fulfilment centres”, which are, in fact, vast factories full of battery-operated robots zipping around directed by air traffic controllers. A “hive” of robots sort thousands of grocery items into carts. They are so co-ordinated they help each other, huddle and then split up to pack an order in minutes. They’re much more efficient than humans at a checkout and don’t want to chat about how the cold weather’s affecting their bunions.
Similarly, Woolworths is working on a range of AI and ML (artificial intelligence and machine learning) projects that will be used to create “future shopping” experiences.
Sorry, Codey, no longer will we need you to spend five minutes fondling our avocadoes with a satisfied look on your face.
Of course, some shoppers will never make the switch to online because – according to one survey – they “enjoy going to the supermarket” and would “miss the social contact”.
No way, not me. In fact, I’d prefer to crawl through compost than pop into my local supermarket for a social outing.
The other day I was forced the indignity of getting a price check for Lynx Excite male body spray. This caused a stampede of teenage girls to the aisle hoping to find a cute teen boy, only to see a middle-aged woman with bed hair spraying Lynx Dark Temptation up her jumper.
After 15 years of parenthood, I am sick of the weekly trawl around the aisles looking for specials to keep the family fed. We pop in for milk and emerge an hour later with two trolleys full of things the kids remembered they HAVE TO HAVE like lollies for swimming carnival and air-popped popcorn (but not the cheddar cheese one because it tastes like vomit).
And all that choice … do we need Quilton toilet paper three-ply eight pack or is it eight-ply three pack? I often give up and run out with microwave meals just as they’re turning the lights off.
That’s why I love the idea of easier, cheaper, fast online shopping. But there’s one thing the robots are having problems with. They don’t know how to handle bags of oranges.
They just can’t deal with them. The bag moves in too many weird ways, there are no obvious bits to grab hold of, and they often squeeze them too hard.
It’s nice to think the robots aren’t smarter than us just yet. Codey, perhaps you won’t be out of a job as a personal picker for awhile. BLOG WITH SUSIE susieobrien.com.au, follow her on Twitter @susieob and Facebook.com/NewswithSuse
CREDIT: Susie O’Brien
Word count: 733
