MORE than a million Australians are living with cancer but the death rate from the disease has plunged in the past decade, thanks to major medical breakthroughs.
Better screening programs, a big drop in smoking rates and the introduction of the cervical cancer vaccine are either preventing cancer or catching it earlier when it can be successfully treated.
The death rate from cancer has tumbled by more than 24 per cent since the 1980s when half those with a diagnosis died within five years.
Today, almost seven in 10 Australians will survive for at least five years, with some having a survival rate as high as 90 per cent. Some doctors now speak of the disease becoming a chronic illness rather than a death sentence.
By the age of 85, one in two Australians can expect a cancer diagnosis, with the rate of cancer diagnoses falling.
Cancer diagnoses peaked at 508 cases per 100,000 people in 2008. It has dropped to 483 cases per 100,000 people in 2019, the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare says.
The medical breakthroughs of the past decade that have helped save and extend the lives of cancer patients include:
CANCER VACCINE Cancer Council CEO Professor Sanchia Aranda lists the 2017 cervical cancer screening program and the cervical cancer vaccine among the biggest advances of the decade.
Last year, researchers revealed Australia was on track to be the first country in the world to eliminate cervical cancer as a result of a nationwide free vaccination program for teenagers.
Combined with a more sensitive cervical cancer test, “this has put Australia on track to eliminate cervical cancer as a public health issue by 2035”, Prof Aranda said.
IMMUNOTHERAPIES Professor David Thomas, director of The Kinghorn Cancer Centre and head of the Cancer Theme of the Garvan Institute in NSW, rates immunotherapies as the major breakthrough of the decade.
Immunotherapies such as Yervoy, Keytruda and Opdivo harnesses the body’s natural immune system to fight cancer, and “the immune system in some people continues to fight the cancer even when the drug is withdrawn”, he said.
Previously, only 5 per cent of people with advanced incurable cancer lived longer than five years. With immunotherapy, that has risen to 20 to 30 per cent of patients.
CAR-T CELL THERAPIES Another amazing breakthrough has been CAR-T cell therapy, which combines immunotherapy with genetic engineering.
Scientists harvest T cells (a type of white blood cell) from people, genetically alter them, then infuse the resulting cells into patients so they recognise and attack their tumours.
In Australia, the CAR-T cell therapy Kymriah is approved for the treatment of relapsed or refractory patients with paediatric B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and adult diffuse large B-cell lymphoma.
PRECISION MEDICINE Prof Thomas has been working on another breakthrough – precision medicine which involves testing the genome of tumours and finding targeted therapies to beat the cancer.
In half the patients with cancer of unknown origin, the Garvan Institute has found molecular targets for medication – but finding a drug trial that patients can use is more difficult.
Those who can’t find a suitable trial are offered immunotherapy, and Prof Thomas said a promising subset of these patients had survived longer than expected.
BLOOD TESTS The holy grail of cancer detection and treatment is a blood test that can pick it up before it becomes life-threatening – and major advances have been made towards this goal.
In November, researchers at the University of Nottingham, in the UK, reported they had developed a blood test that could detect breast cancer up to five years before there are any clinical signs – but it’s only 37 per cent accurate.
Another test probes DNA for tiny chemical tags (methylation), which cancer cells shed into the bloodstream when they die. It is 99.4 per cent accurate on 20 types of cancer.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE In the past decade, computers have been trained to diagnose skin cancers from pixel-level information in pictures.
A US study by Northwestern University found artificial intelligence can outperform radiologists at cancer screening, especially in lung cancer patients, cutting false positive rates by 11 per cent.
VIRUSES TO KILL CANCER Scientists are exploring whether viruses could be used to kill cancer by prompting the immune system to recognise and fight the cancer.
A new virus based on cowpox has killed almost every known type of cancer cell in a petrie dish.
US scientists have turned the virus that causes the common cold into a treatment to kill brain cancer – in some patients the cancer disappeared for years before returning, in others it shrank the tumours considerably.
Associate Professor Tom John, from the Olivia Newton-John Cancer Research Institute, recently tested another virus treatment in combination with immunotherapy (Key­truda) on 11 lung cancer patients and three patients saw their tumours shrink.
USING LIGHT Dr Andrew Stephens, from the Hudson Institute of Medical Research in Melbourne, is trialling a treatment that uses light and a modified form of chlorophyll from plants to kill cancer. The chemical has been turned into a gel, which is being tested on patients with basal cell carcinoma skin cancers. It is also being turned into an intravenous formulation to see if it can treat ovarian, lung and prostate cancers.
When the patient is exposed to light beams of a certain wavelength, the photo-sensitiser becomes toxic to cancer cells. Unlike previous such treatments, this one does not require patients to be in a darkened room for weeks – or months – after treatment.
TUMOURS ON MICE A new way to find personalised treatments for hard-to-treat cancers has researchers taking samples of human tumours and growing them on mice so they can test possible therapies.
A team from the Children’s Cancer Institute in Sydney used the method to test the drug CBL0137 on a ferocious form of the blood cancer that kills half the infants who contract it.
THE NEXT DECADEProf Thomas said the next decade of cancer breakthroughs would include finding ways of picking up cancer earlier through better screening and using immunotherapies on people at high risk of cancer before they develop it in the hope of preventing it.
CREDIT: SUE DUNLEVY
Word count: 1027
