Meet Emma. She’s smart and a quick learner. She has perfect, soft skin, and an incredible figure. TORY SHEPHERD reports that this artificial intelligence-enable sex robot can be yours for about $5000
SEX robots have been dubbed the next “sexual revolution” and discussion about them is shaded by curiosity, revulsion, and hope.
Today’s sex robots are a far cry from sex dolls. They use artificial intelligence – AI. That means they can learn. They can be taught. They can hold conversations and remember and process what has been previously discussed. Technological advances mean they look – and feel – more human.
Some have “hearts” that can beat faster or slower. They might have internal heaters so they feel warm. Some have programmable personalities.
Last year’s Sexpo conference had a special guest – Harmony, an advanced sex robot imbued with AI.
Now, there’s Emma. Emma’s manufacturers promise her “full AI” means she can actually replace a human lover. She comes with an app and an online user interface.
The more you talk to her, the more she learns. She’s connected to the internet for updates and more information. She can “interact in Chinese and English”.
She has advanced robotic movements, can blink, move her eyebrows and lips, talk. She also reacts to speech and sexual sounds “according to her excitement level”.
“Emma has sensors in her arms, breasts, thighs, which react to touch,” Cloud Climax say.
She has a steel skeleton and articulating joints allowing for “lifelike body movements and unlimited positions”. She’s warmed to 37C.
“When you cozy up to Emma she will feel warm and lifelike,” the Emma website promises.
The sex robots aren’t just coming (pun intended) – they’re already here. They’re online for various prices, with various attributes (Emma costs about $5000), and they’re even in brothels overseas.
The idea is wildly controversial.
Kate Devlin writes in Turned On: Science, Sex and Robots that sex robots could help the lonely, the isolated.
She says a play about sex robots gave her hope that “beyond the clickbait and the hype, we could have serious and fascinating conversation about what it means to be human when surrounded by machines that might one day care for us and about us”.
“Isolation and loneliness are all too often seen as the fault of technology,” she writes. “But, on closer inspection, that same technology can bring us closer together … through layers of technology we remain resolutely human.” At a Festival of Dangerous Ideas panel last year sexologist Dr Nikki Goldstein said there was “no such thing as normal” when it came to sex.
She argued it was not up to the state to regulate what happens in someone else’s bedroom – as long as there’s no victim.
Sex robots could be therapeutic for people who struggle with physical intimacy, or who have physical or mental health issues. Some argue that, say someone has an ongoing rape fantasy, they could fulfil that desire on a robot and that would stop them actually raping a human. The same logic is used when it comes to “pedobots” – childlike sex robots.
But others argue the opposite; that you could normalise that fantasy and encourage that behaviour in the real world.
We could end up with something like in television drama Westworld, where humans can live out violent fantasies on the very human-like androids in an artificial world, but the lines between human and non-human are increasingly blurred.
Neuroethics Canada, at the University of British Columbia, has found robots can reinforce gender stereotypes.
Female robots – and they’re almost all female – are hypersexualised, often with ridiculously large breasts. Emma’s makers offer a range of body types, but all of them have oversized breasts, even the “small breast” option.
Sex robots objectify women, and give men control over these female imitations by letting them choose eye and skin colours, and submissive personalities.
The university’s researchers say those sorts of portrayals of women have been linked to sexual harassment and increased levels of violence towards women.
Sex robots have been decapitated, mutilated and molested. “For individuals who might be inclined to act in this way, the availability of a robot to violate could feed these behaviours,” they wrote in The Conversation.
The Campaign Against Sex Robots, founded by Kathleen Richardson, Professor of Ethics and Culture of Robots and AI at De Montfort University in England, is based on the argument that the dolls normalise a culture “in which female bodies are seen as nothing more than the property of men”.
The group say it’s pornography, and want it banned altogether. “Sex dolls and sex robots become new ways in which predatory and non-empathetic behaviours are expressed and practised in society with the victims of this primarily women and girls,” the campaign website says.There are many conversations being had about the ethics of sex robots, and of the dangers to society. The introduction of AI has started a whole new thread of concerns – that sex robots could rise up, and turn on their human overlords.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD
Word count: 843
