ADELAIDE company Consilium Technology’s annual revenues have soared 30 per cent in one year even as it targets an “ocean of opportunities” for its software products across domestic and global industry sectors.
Chief executive and founder Seth Thuraisingham said the business was currently in talks with major US defence primes for the use of a multi-spectral simulation software – Infinite Studio – developed in partnership with the Australian Defence Department.
Infinite allows users to create real-time simulations of the world in the visible, infra-red and ultraviolet parts of the electromagnetic spectrum using affordable desktop computing hardware and modern gaming engines.
The negotiations follow a recent $250,000 contract with the UK Defence’s research team to support their programs using Consilium’s intellectual property in machine learning.
Earlier this month, the Federal Government awarded the company $1 million to accelerate the commercialisation of its revolutionary AgTech product, GAIA, which uses high resolution satellite images and advanced machine learning to provide the wine industry real-time mapping and vineyard insights.
From one employee and big ideas in 2015, the business today employs 40 staff and has 19 defence and 14 agriculture contracts and a number of mining contracts.
“We are definitely aiming to be a global company with exports our key focus. “While using artificial intelligence and the specific area of machine learning (where computers are taught to master tasks) for predictions is not new, the quality of what we can predict is going up,” he said.
“That’s where Consilium is adding value and speed to making decisions using high-quality predictive tools,” he said. “For instance, we are looking to be able to create simulations of different defence scenarios to build tools for support them in tactical systems and real situations,” he said.
From Consilium’s perspective, he said SA had a good talent pool and low-cost operating environment. The company which specialises in modelling and simulation, data analytics, mixed reality, human sciences and machine learning, employs computer programmers, scientists, engineers and analysts. Australia’s burgeoning space sector also held scope for more growth.“The technology we have is adaptable across sectors and space has those opportunities for us. “It will all come down to our ability to grab those and it would be excellent to do it here in SA.”
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 377
