COMPLEXICA has signed a global deal with Pernod Ricard Winemakers which will see the Adelaide-based artificial intelligence company develop a worldwide platform to help it make better decisions right across its business.
Complexica launched five years ago, and has had success with companies such as Metcash, Pfizer and Dulux, originally helping them optimise sales decisions through its AI application, Larry, the Digital Analyst.
Chief executive Matthew Michalewicz said the company, which employs about 50 people, had evolved to offer a broader suite of solutions, exemplified by the Pernod Ricard deal.
“When we started Complexica it was really in the sales area, trying to automate the complex analysis that a good salesperson would do to be effective,’’ Mr Michalewicz said.
“We built a number of applications which would answer complex questions for salespeople, like, ‘In an entire market where should I spend my time this week, how should I price a deal’.’’ The product quickly grew to straddle sales and marketing.
“And we understood that what we were doing was optimising the decisions that companies make,’’ Mr Michalewicz said. “Whether it’s the decision of an individual rep, a marketing department, or even financial decisions around pricing and trading off market share against margin and so forth.’’ Mr Michalewicz said “good decisions create value for companies” across a broad range of areas, including production, sales, safety and costs.
“When we moved from sales and marketing , the next silos that come in are really predicting demand, and then your supply chain, and that has a similar amount of complexity and sometimes more,” he said.
“So, for Pernod Ricard, the winemaking divisions, we are using our AI software to develop a global platform for them which will optimise the decisions and help them make optimal decisions in all wine production across all sites starting in Australia and New Zealand.
“And that then turns our business from, five years ago a sales-optimisation business and a few years ago a sales and marketing-optimisation business using AI, cloud and large data sets, to a decision-optimisation business where we’re straddling multiple business functions.
“It takes us overseas and is a big step for our business in terms of our global aspiration to have multiple sites overseas and to list on the ASX in the years to come.’’ The platform would be used initially on tactical elements such as grape supply and operational production matters, and later expand into strategic areas such as decisions around what products to make more or less of.
Pernod Ricard is among the largest wine producers in Australia, owning brands such as Jacob’s Creek, St Hugo and New Zealand’s Stoneleigh.Pernod Ricard IT director, Simon Bennett, said the partnership would “create a project team with the perfect blend of internal and external expertise which we will use to accelerate the use of artificial intelligence and machine learning to drive operational efficiency”.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND BUSINESS EDITOR
Word count: 483
