AS artificial intelligence hits the business mainstream, executives increasingly are expected to be across AI ethics.
Almost a quarter (23 per cent) of business decision-makers believed the C-suite of the company deploying AI should be accountable for its outcomes, new research by software company LivePerson revealed.
Executives were more likely to be held responsible than the lead programmer or developer (18 per cent), the Australian Government (16 per cent) or the government of the country in which the AI was developed (14 per cent).
LivePerson chief executive and founder Rob LoCascio said progressive companies were already changing people’s lives by making technology more efficient, easier to use, reliable and capable. However, ethical issues could not be ignored.
“Business leaders should approach AI with their eyes wide open, looking at practical and proactive measures to ensure ongoing ethical implem­ent­ation that results in the best outcomes for customers,” he said.
“An ethical AI mindset starts with developing a well-defined ethical AI strategy, as without this, AI will become the next digital technology that divides us.” Currently, just two in five Australian businesses have AI standards in place, the LivePerson research finds.
It is despite concerns that AI usage could lead to unauthorised access to data (41 per cent of decision makers believe this), loss of privacy (39 per cent), loss of employment (32 per cent) and a lack of transparency in decision making (30 per cent).
Executive recruiter Andrew Sullivan said it was increasingly important for executives to understand how AI was relevant to their business.
“It’s also important to be able to apply artificial intelligence policies and implement artificial intelligence tools in an ethical way,” he said.
“Executives who are across this now are in the position to really stand out, but my view is that it will increasingly be an expected standard.” The Sullivan Consulting managing director said AI had been spoken about at conferences and in industry publications for a while but had really “come to the fore” in the past year.
“Businesses are constantly striving to innovate and develop an edge over competitors, and the potential of AI to enhance this and change the way we do business is driving the current trend toward adopting AI,” Mr Sullivan said.
“It has applications in many industries, including manufacturing, marketing, customer service, communications and even recruitment.”Business leaders should approach AI with their eyes wide open
CREDIT: MELANIE BURGESS
Word count: 399
