APPEN LIMITED (APX) SELL Appen is a global leader in the development of human annotated datasets for machine learning and artificial intelligence. APX’s share price is higher than it was before COVID-19 hit. It has maintained performance guidance, and has seen very little impact due to the economic shutdown. We like Appen long term, and if anything, social distancing may accelerate certain sectors of the tech space that will support its growth story over the long term. However, at its current share price it is fully to overvalued, and with so many attractive buying opportunities elsewhere, we recommend sell on valuations grounds.
12mth price target: $30.57 Forecast Cash Yield FY20: 0.4% Est. P/E Ratio FY20: 45.5
AGL ENERGY (AGL) BUY AGL is a leading integrated energy company, owner-operator and developer of renewable energy generation. It sells and distributes gas and electricity and fuel products. Energy demand has been surprisingly resilient amid the COVID-19 lockdown, only down around 5 per cent in March and April. AGL maintained its performance guidance, but on the lower end of the spectrum. AGL can be a good quality defensive stock, made attractive due to its sustainable dividends during these trying times. At the current share price it has attractive upside while having defensive cashflows. Attractive to investors seeking sustainable yield.
12mth price target: $18.90 Forecast Cash Yield FY20: 5.8% Est. P/E Ratio FY20: 12.9
ANZ GROUP (ANZ) BUY Big four bank ANZ has general banking, mortgage, and instalment lending, leasing, hire purchase and general finance services. It also operates in international and investment banking and advisory services.Banks have a bumpy ride ahead of them. Heightened unemployment is likely to remain for some time and we have the end of the JobKeeper program on the horizon. Both will act as a headwind for existing and new loans in the medium term. We don’t expect banks to rally any time soon, but for a long term buy and hold strategy there are some very attractive buy-in prices for investors who are willing to wait before dividends return. 12mth price target: $17.04 Forecast Cash Yield FY20: 3.6% Est. P/E Ratio FY20: 11.7
CREDIT: Catapult Wealth Portfolio Manager TIMOTHY HASELUM
Word count: 362
