AUSTRALIAN scientists are developing an internet tool to guard against online misinformation about vaccinations.
Epidemiologist Associate Professor Adam Dunn, from Macquarie University Australian Institute of Health Innovation, has developed the online “pre-bunking” app that will alert people when they are directed to anti-vaccination material, fake news or sites that are not based on credible science. Scientists point to the resurgence of measles in many Western countries where it was once eliminated and a decline in vaccination rates in some pockets around the world and Australia as partly caused by misinformation found online.
Prof Dunn said his pre-bunking tool would show a pop-up that cautioned when someone was about to link to information that was not credible. “If you are accessing a website or social media, it will just pop up and alert people about when they are about to link to misinformation and explain why the information at the end of the link might not be credible,” he said.
“When we have someone who is vaccine-hesitant and asking questions, they can go online and find good and bad information.
“The idea is like how vaccines inoculate us against diseases, we are developing software tools that will inoculate people against misinformation.” According to Google data, search interest in measles is this year the highest on record in Australia and has doubled in the past 12 months.
Search interest for vaccines and MMR – specifically the measles, mumps and rubella vaccination – are also at an all-time high this year and double that of last year. Despite research categorically disproving any link between vaccines and autism, according to Google Trends data, search interest for “vaccine” and “autism” has also increased this year in Australia. A form of artificial intelligence called machine learning will be used to identify which sites are inaccurate.
“We use machine learning to teach computers how to critically appraise web pages and social-media posts, in the way an expert would but we get a machine to do it and that way we can spot misinformation before it emerges and becomes entrenched in certain communities and we do it at scale,” Prof Dunn said.A previous study on which Prof Dunn collaborated analysed Twitter posts on the Gardasil vaccine for HPV – a precursor to cervical cancer – and showed a link between the types of information spread and the levels of vaccine coverage.
CREDIT: JANE HANSEN
Word count: 397
