BINGO INDUSTRIALS (BIN) BUY Bingo Industries is a recycling and resource management company. It operates across the entire waste-management supply chain, and has exposure to residential, non-residential, commercial and industrial waste. The share price has been bouncing around, and there are time when Bingo looks like really good value again. We like the long-term recycling thematic and, at some point in the future, we expect the Federal Government to open its coffers and implement some of the long-awaited infrastructure spending, which makes Bingo an exciting long-term hold. It reports in November, and has the potential to surprise on the upside.
12-month price target: $2.60. Forecast Cash Yield FY20: 1.6%. Estimated P/E Ratio FY20: 21.4.
WOOLWORTHS (WOW) SELL Woolworths has a diverse range of operations, including supermarkets, department stores, liquor, hotels, pubs, gaming and petrol retailing. It faces headwinds in the form of online shopping and overseas competitors such as Aldi, Costco, Amazon Fresh, and the Schwarz Group brands such as Kaufland. It is responding to some of these issues with the closure of Big W stores and the spin-off of Endeavour Drinks and ALH group into a separate entity. This demerger should allow Woolworths to focus on core operations. At the current share price we feel the benefits from the demerger, and the tax cuts flowing through consumer spending is making it ripe for some profit-taking.
12-month price target: $34.24. Forecast Cash Yield FY20: 2.8%. Estimated P/E Ratio FY20: 26.1
APPEN LIMITED (APX) BUY Appen is a global leader in the development of human annotated datasets for machine learning and artificial intelligence. It has two main operations: language resources and content relevance, which are used in various applications including e-commerce, web and social engagement, speech recognisers and machine translations. Appen posted some impressive growth numbers when it reported in August, but the market was pricing in much higher expectations and investors dumped their holdings bringing the share price back down to the low twenties. Since then the share price seems to be stabilising and now maybe a good time to grab some exposure to this tech company.12-month price target: $24.92. Forecast Cash Yield FY20: 0.4%. Estimated P/E Ratio FY20: 48.1.
CREDIT: TIM HASELUM Catapult Wealth
Word count: 366
