As Sloan rightly points out, this country has enormous reserves of this commodity and is among the world’s biggest exporters thereof. What Sloan fails to mention (and the anti-fossil fuel brigade never acknowledges) is that the greenhouse gas emissions from natural gas are about half those from coal. Furthermore, the start-up times for gas turbines are very much shorter than those for coal-fired plants, making them ideal back-up for intermittent renewables, an asset tacitly acknowledged and incorporated by many renewable energy projects in the US.
We have for some years now been informed of plans for projected landing and storage facilities for natural gas in NSW, Victoria and South Australia. It would be of interest to learn whether any of these projects are progressing or if they, too, have fallen victim to the current unpopularity of investment in projects involving fossil fuels.
As Sloan writes, the Northwest Shelf of Western Australia is producing abundant supplies of natural gas and the obvious solution to the looming east coast energy crisis would be to facilitate its transport to destinations in those eastern states.
Bill Pannell, Dalkeith, WA
As dire turmoil and consequences proceed to envelop Australia’s energy security and our standard of living, notwithstanding the protestations of many, it is verging on the treasonable that Australia does not have modern and thriving domestic industries using coal, gas and uranium. The ignorance of the amount of energy needed to run a modern economy is palpable and, regardless of the hype, there is no way renewables technology currently comes anywhere near such energy requirements, and won’t for very many years. Said hype includes the moralistic catchcry of “doing our bit”. I remind Australians of Judith Sloan’s accurate observation in The Australian on December 21, 2019, shortly after COP25: “What COP25 really demonstrates is that the vast majority of countries will not put moral purpose before their economic interest.” Excepting, of course, Australia. And with global emissions inexorably continuing to rise, where is our moral purpose leading us?
Peter M. Wargent, Mosman, NSW
Don Higson (Letters, 7/6), I like your thinking: we have wasted years failing to develop national energy security. But your choice of technology (nuclear), not so much. Like Higson, the Coalition is now pushing a highly unpopular, expensive and risky “solution”, while renewables are still relegated to Cinderella status, patiently waiting in the background for her turn to shine.
It is sometimes mystifying why some are so wilfully blind to the fact that Australia already has the renewable resources it needs to power the nation. If the billions of dollars poured into subsidies for fossil fuels had been diverted to clean energy we would be well on the way to electrifying everything (to paraphrase Saul Griffith). Our natural resources (sun and wind) are safe, low-cost and emission-free. For years the stepsisters have been telling lies, but we may just have found the right-sized shoe.
Fiona Colin, Malvern East, Vic
On the mission-critical issue of climate and energy, the Coalition’s broadchurch would be well advised to sing from Matthew’s hymn sheet. Matt Canavan’s, that is, not Matt Kean’s. It is Canavan who gets it best. His objection to net-zero from the get-go as a dangerous green pursuit was principled then and is prescient now – particularly as US and European administrations are belatedly prioritising energy security, affordability, reliability and sovereignty over emissions obsession.
Senator Canavan’s consistent advocacy for coal as the 24/7/365 baseload reality is the undeniable truth and should provide inspiration for the feds to pull rank and make NSW the commonsense energy superpower state. Coz Kean’s “green hydrogen” never will.
Mandy Macmillan, Singleton, NSW
Word count: 592
