SMART fun READLY $7.99/m, Apple iOS If you’re a big magazine fan, this app could save you a lot of money and a lot of space. As its name suggests, Readly offers plenty of reading material — it gives users access to more than 5000 magazines for a monthly subscription price, and that includes plenty of Australian titles, such as Marie Claire, Who, and The Australian Women’s Weekly. Users can nominate their interests to get recommendations, and quickly access their downloaded faves.
EDISON MAIL Free, Apple iOS/ Google Android Messages are like that Smash Mouth lyric — emails “start coming and they don’t stop coming” — and the Edison Mail app is designed to help you regain control of them. It will let you compile multiple accounts in one place, show you what it deems to be high-priority messages, let you unsubscribe from lists in a tap, and automatically sorts out your bills, packages, and subscriptions.
REFACE Free, Apple iOS/ Google Android If you’ve seen your friends’ faces appear in unexpected places lately, there’s a big chance this app has made it happen. Reface uses advanced machine learning and artificial intelligence to achieve the most superficial of technical feats: make it look like you starred in Iron Man or a UFC fight. New videos are uploaded daily into which you can insert your own selfie, and subscriptions are available if you tire of the ads.
THE CHASE $2.99, iOS/Android Whether you’re a fan of The Shark’s SMARTdaily quizzes or you just miss your pre-pandemic pub trivia, this app will get your brain ticking over again. The Chase Australia app works just like the TV show on which it’s based, except it cuts out the ad breaks and banter. Players face a quick round of questions before facing off against a randomly selected expert, from Supernerd to Goliath, and must beat them in a playoff to claim virtual winnings.
WORLD’S END CLUB $7.99/m, Apple iOS This game feels like Scooby Doo meets The Goonies on a field trip to the apocalypse. The new Apple Arcade adventure follows a group of 12-year-old Japanese kids who encounter an accident during a class trip and wake up to a puzzling battle for survival in which their choices decide their fate. This 2D side-scrolling game is much more charming than you might expect of an app.
CREDIT: with Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 396
