Computers could become the next generation of teachers. Lauren Ahwan reports
MORE than a third of Australians would embrace workplace training that was led by robots.
While futurists warn robot-led training would create myriad problems, the survey results show an increasing willingness among employees to adopt technology in the workplace.
Australia has one of the most positive attitudes towards using technology, with 39 per cent of workers willing to be trained by artificial intelligence or a robot, a survey by technology leader Genesys reveals.
Sixty-two per cent are willing to use augmented reality or virtual reality for job training, with greater efficiency cited as one of the main reasons for worker acceptance of technology.
Genesys Australia New Zealand employee engagement strategic director Andy Hardy says artificial intelligence allows for a more targeted approach to workplace learning.
However, Hardy stresses robots “won’t be taking over the world of training’’. He believes AI can be used to analyse the performance of workers, identify their weaknesses and provide training in those specific skillsets rather than rehash learning in areas in which they already have strong knowledge.
Hardy says more targeted training will lead to greater staff engagement and boost overall company performance.
Technology futurist Shara Evans agrees AI has a significant role in workplace training but doubts it will ever fully replace human educators.
Evans says AI is still too easily affected by human bias, citing the example of Tay, the bot released by Microsoft in 2016 that turned racist within hours as it interacted with people on Twitter and imitated their posts.
“Robots can be used to complement training but could you imagine having a robot, standing there with a hands-on-hips stride, calling you stupid or some sort of equivalent because it’s picked up somewhere in its data that that’s OK? I don’t think so,’’ Evans says.
“Or would AI mark a student down because they’ve got a different view to what has been programmed?
“But if you’re talking about AI being used to reinforce learning or to identify where people are picking up what’s being taught really fast and what parts they’re not – then that’s a fantastic use of AI.’’ Chris Giffard, project and innovation specialist with personal finance company MyBudget, says he would be open to being trained by a robot for process-driven roles.
However, for soft skills, such as empathy, interaction with a human trainer is key, he says.
“The fact that machines deliver their output without emotion could make them more effective at delivering simple training to large numbers of people, as they allow for better control over the level of consistency in the method,’’ Giffard says.“But there will always be elements of training that only a human could and should deliver.’’
CREDIT: Lauren Ahwan
Word count: 459
