BEDFORD PARK
A NEW, more effective flu vaccine developed at Flinders University is believed to be the world’s first drug completely designed by artificial intelligence.
Researchers hope the vaccine, which is set for clinical trials in the US, will provide 80-90 per cent immunity, compared to 50 per cent for current jabs.
Professor Nikolai Petrovsky, who is also research director of local company Vaxine Pty Ltd, said computers have been used to help design other drugs.
But never has a computer program developed an entire drug.
Researchers created an AI program called SAM (Search Algorithm for Ligands – a type of molecule) and taught it about flu vaccines that had proved successful or unsuccessful, so it learned the difference between good and bad drugs.
Prof Petrovsky said SAM then developed a list of “trillions of weird and wonderful drugs” that it was able to narrow down itself to a small number that were most likely to be effective.
These were then put through laboratory trials using human cells at Flinders, to find the best one.
“The idea of AI is you make the computer the inventor,” Prof Petrovsky said. “It’s AI, so you don’t initially trust it. But in essence, it did work. In a very small space of time, we went from a computer making a drug to it going into a human being.” The vaccine uses substances called adjuvants, which act as “turbochargers” boosting resistance against infection. The AI process shaved down the traditional drug development time – 20 years of work – to around three years.
The clinical trial in the US requires 240 healthy volunteers and will take a year.
“This represents the start of a new era where artificial intelligence is going to play an increasingly dominant role in drug discovery and design,” Prof Petrovsky said.
His team had demonstrated much could be done to improve the effectiveness of vaccines: “It’s been a very successful model of how you can work together to hopefully change a human disease.” However, he said it was unfortunate the new drug could not be taken further in Adelaide.
“We would have loved to be able to develop it here in SA, but we don’t have the support here,” Prof Petrovsky said.Australian research funding models were too short-term, he said.
CREDIT: Dixie Sulda
Word count: 384
