CARLTON VICTORY GATECRASHES COACH’S LAST GAME IT was meant to be a day of celebration for Leon Cameron’s GWS tenure but a stirring Carlton performance on the road has ensured the Giants coach’s nine-year stint at the club ended on a sour note as the Blues ran out 30-point winners on Sunday.
In their first win at Giants Stadium, which lifts them back into the top four, Carlton was able to capitalise on a sensational start to the game to set up a win only marred by a seemingly serious achilles injury to Zac Williams.
The Blues quelled any emotion the Giants – who are now 2-7 – were keen to play with in honour of Cameron, and perhaps summed up their current state as the Blues jumped out to a four-goal lead early in the first term.
“Credit to Carlton, we haven’t been beaten like that in our contested ball for a while,” Cameron said. “I said to the players it’s a really disappointing way to finish but I said to the players don’t be despondent but we’ve been in some tough times before so they’ll come out of it, they’ll be fine.” At one stage Carlton had 15 inside 50s before the Giants had managed one of their own.
“It was probably a shock to our players on Thursday, so whether emotion goes over the top and you try too hard and make silly decisions, I think there was a bit of that today,” Cameron said regarding the slow start.
Sam Walsh kicked two of those majors in the first quarter as he produced a best-on-ground display with 31 touches. He was well supported when it came to winning the inside ball by George Hewett, who collected 29 touches and eight clearances, and his brilliant skipper, Patrick Cripps, who had 26 possessions and seven clearances.
The Giants were able to work their way back into game, led by Braydon Preuss in the ruck, co-captain Josh Kelly with 36 touches and a goal, and the precocious talent of Sam Taylor down back, who again showcased his defensive quality.
Taylor would keep Charlie Curnow goalless until three quarter time but fresh off his six-goal effort last week, Curnow would strike twice in the early stages of the last quarter.
“He’s a beauty. He’s the ultimate defender,” Cameron said of Taylor. “He hates getting beat, he’d be furious with Curnow kicking a couple goals in the last quarter and that’s why our club will be fine.”
A TIME TO REFLECT But despite the underwhelming end of Cameron’s GWS tenure, there was time to reflect on his legacy at the club, which has included taking an expansion club, despite their bevy of top end draft picks, to a grand final and two preliminary finals inside 10 years.
“It probably fluctuates in between some disappointing moments and equally proud moments,” he said.
“Start-up clubs are hard, we’re in a tough industry and we’re trying to knock the doors down and bring new supporters in. You bring in new players from West Australia, South Australia, Victoria and you want to keep that talent.” Cameron admits coaching is still a part of his future plans but for now he’ll enjoy the luxury of being able to attend his children’s weekend sport and watching the Giants progress from afar. “I’m really confident under Mark’s (McVeigh) tutelage there’ll be plenty of chances for kids and players to stamp their authority as Giants players and looking from afar that will be exciting.”
CREDIT: Daniel Garb
Word count: 587
