When John MacLean, a medical practitioner who is chief executive of artificial intelligence start-up DocLink, decided he needed the business skills offered by an MBA degree, he scanned the options and found them limited.
“When you’re running a start-up you’re quite busy. I couldn’t do a traditional MBA with classes during the day,” he said.
Dr MacLean — who shares his time between Adelaide and Sydney — decided to look for online options and came down in favour of Macquarie University’s new global MBA, which launched last month on US-based online education provider Coursera.
His choice was partly based on cost. The online global MBA is $33,000 compared with around $80,000 or more for traditional MBAs offered by prestigious business schools.
And he was reassured by the fact the university’s conventional MBA from the Macquarie Graduate School of Management, which is offered separately to the global MBA, has a high reputation.
The global MBA is fully online, and the live interaction with instructors and other students is by video chat. Dr MacLean said he was “a little bit worried going in” but discovered the format worked well. He happily completed a large project with three other students, one in Myanmar, one in Hong Kong and one in Melbourne.
His first unit was on competitive advantage and Dr MacLean said he was immediately able to apply some learning into his start-up, which aims to improve lung cancer diagnoses from CT scans using artificial intelligence. Likewise Hana Vo, who taps into the MBA from Vietnam, said that she was able to apply what she learned about supply chains to businesses in her country.
“We are all encouraged to use our local examples (in our assignments) whenever we can,” she said.
The global MBA launched last month with 69 students and Lan Snell, its academic program director, said she was aiming for more than 70 in the next intake in September. Now, students come from 14 countries — mostly in Oceania, Asia and North America — and they have an average age of 38.
Associate Professor Snell said the digital delivery of the degree was actually an advantage to students because it broke down learning barriers and helped make the MBA accessible.
“It’s for people who want to future-proof themselves, who want in invest in their professional development, who value lifelong learning,” she said.
Lecturers deliver material in short videos, which Ms Vo said was ideal because ideas could be quickly grasped. It also means that students can watch a complete video on their commute or during a break in their day. The video content is backed up by substantial academic reading.
Students who don’t meet the entry requirements — a bachelor degree, proficiency in English and three years’ professional experience — can enter by completing parts of the degree at a discounted price.
Austrade chief executive Stephanie Fahey said at the global MBA’s launch last month that it was crucial that Australia’s coming generation of business leaders were fully equipped to work internationally.
Dr Fahey, a former academic, said she had been surprised to learn that MBAs from some Australian universities had no content on international trade or investment. “That’s not the case here,” she said of the global MBA.
Macquarie Business School dean Stephen Brammer said the new degree would enhance perceptions of the school, recently created by a merger of the Macquarie Graduate School of Management, the Applied Finance Centre and the former faculty of business and economics.“I think it’s going to be a huge brand builder and reputation builder for us as we reach communities of a scale that are vastly greater than our direct face-to-face operation,” he said.
CREDIT: Tim Dodd
Word count: 614
