It is rare to witness a junior biotech soar 200 per cent on the local market but that was the bumper boost enjoyed by LBT Innovations when it revealed the US regulator had approved its product for sale.
Chief executive Brent Barnes said while the 200 per cent share price jump last Tuesday was positive to see, he did not like talking about the share price, given it could also go down.
“The price is what the market determines it to be and my focus is about execution right now and the market can take care of itself,” the former Cochlear executive said.
The market did take care of itself last week, when the stock closed almost 200 per cent higher on news LBT had been given the green light to sell its device, APAS Independence, in the biggest market in the world, the US.
The share price, which was 5.9c in March, closed at 16.5c on Tuesday. The stock gave up some of the gains enjoyed earlier in the week, closing 12.5 per cent lower on Friday at 14c.
LBT, which develops medical technology automation using artificial intelligence, describes APAS as a fully automated instrument which can process more than 200 culture plates per hour, which is at least three times faster than manual culture plate reading. The instrument can differentiate between culture plates showing bacterial growth from those that are not, without the need for highly skilled microbiologist assistance.
Mr Barnes said the Adelaide-based company first started developing the machine learning ability to interrupt bacteria on a petri dish in 2010.
It then did a 10,000 patient clinical trial in 2015 to demonstrate that its software worked.
The LBT boss said the US approval was a game-changer due to the market size, which was 50 times larger than Australia’s.
There are more than 5000 clinical laboratories in the US and LBT estimated that more than 1500 of those exceed the daily culture plate volume that would make the commercial return on investment on an APAS Independence attractive.
“There is no direct competitor for our technology … that is why getting a commercial instrument for sale is important,” he said.
The device sells for $US300,000, then there is an ongoing annual fee of $US30,000 for the software. Mr Barnes said the software drove the value of the instrument and there was future upside to developing further revenue streams around different modules attached to the software.
The device is available in Australia, with St Vincent’s in Melbourne the first commercial sale locally last year.
LBT is hoping to secure EU approval in the third quarter, with Germany and Britain the targets.
Mr Barnes said there could be a takeover play for the small biotech at some point in the future, but he added his focus for now was on early commercialisation activities and extending that to distribution partners.
“We are a small company and there are big companies in this space that we are talking to from a partnering perspective,” he said.
“We are in early commercialisation now. We have generated one sale and have just opened up the single largest market, the US.“These big players don’t want to take on any risk; they want a mature product and are happy to pay a bit more for it.”
CREDIT: Sarah-Jane Tasker
Word count: 552
