When it comes to large investment in transformative technology, general counsel are a long way outside their comfort zone.
With the way the legal and commercial world is heading, they all know they have to do it but they are at a loss to know exactly how to approach these super-expensive investment decisions.
They often don’t have any framework at all for making the necessary judgment calls. Yet the opportunity is there for GCs to take advantage of technology and put themselves on the front foot.
They have the chance to lead discussions on transformation of the legal department and into the business’s whole ecosystem. An example of this could be improving processes in the purchasing and supply department. This element can boost the bottom line and make the GC part of strategic conversations in the business.
In truth, disruption of the legal industry in terms of new processes and technology is a relatively recent phenomenon. Unlike other commercial industries, legal departments have been very slow to change their method of delivery of service. These departments have been constrained by business models that reward inefficiency, that lack transparency and, crucially, cost too much.
GCs in Australia are now under pressure, and on the backfoot, to “do more with less” and in some cases substantially reduce their overall spend. In the past, there were limited options available to help GCs achieve substantial cost reductions.
Seeking volume discounts from external law firms was one method often adopted but this method isn’t transformative, and will not generate substantial true savings in the long term.
We are finding more legal departments are working with enterprise legal service providers to take a holistic rather than piecemeal approach to analysing the entire department. They are drawing on a combination of consulting, introduction of technology and changes to process.
One of the biggest challenges facing in-house legal teams is knowing exactly what type of legal work is being performed by the team, and how much time is taken to perform each task.
Workflow tools can be introduced to generate accurate data around the type of requests coming to the legal team. The smarter legal departments will increasingly pursue transformation by “analysing the flow” of legal issues around the business and look to separate the different “strata” of legal services and reassess how each layer is best resourced and delivered based on the nature, risk and complexity of that work.
GCs will also be making tough decisions about whether certain strata still need to be housed within the internal legal department or if they are better situated outside through some form of outsourcing arrangement.
At UnitedLex we have recently opened our Australian office in Adelaide as a platform to offer a scalable outsourced pool of Australian lawyers who are not necessarily based in the highest cost cities. This analysis of flow is where questions around technology come in — and this is where we have seen exciting headlines in Australia and elsewhere about the rise of artificial intelligence in the legal service industry.
The less complex and more frequently occurring requests for legal support can often draw on a technological solution that does not require a human in the driving seat. The legal departments of corporations typically comprise relatively experienced lawyers based in Sydney, Melbourne and other major cities — teams that may require high costs in maintenance, training and energising.
Turning to technology to resource some of the more straightforward tasks can balance some of this cost. Artificial intelligence is now a reality in the legal service industry. Some legal departments are already using “chatbots” to provide legal services. This is a simple yet effective example of artificial intelligence. Chatbots enable the business to ask frequently recurring questions and receive an answer without having to speak to a lawyer at all. Chatbots can enable a businessperson to create a standard form contract and can even be used to triage legal work to the most appropriate resource in the legal team.
At the other end of the technology spectrum, artificial intelligence tools are now used to analyse third-party contracts to determine if they comply with a company’s contracting policies.
There is significant untapped strategic and operational value that legal departments can provide, and it could all start with tech transformation.
Nick Boymal is vice-president of digital contracting solutions for Asia-Pacific at UnitedLex
CREDIT: NICK BOYMAL; COMMENT
Word count: 729
