The Hon. Geoff Brock, Minister for Regional Roads (SA), Media Release, 21 September 2022
Outback road condition information will be even easier to access for travellers on our unsealed tracks thanks to new QR code signage being installed at key locations across northern South Australia.
The large QR codes are being installed on existing road condition signs, within mobile phone range, across the state’s unsealed road network to provide direct access to the Outback Roads Warnings webpage.
The Outback Roads Warnings webpage hosts latest available information on the status and conditions of roads.
Warning signs that advise travellers of changing road conditions during rain events are also being installed on many unsealed roads that do not have road closure signs.
These will also provide the QR code as well as the 1300 361 033 hotline number to take callers to a recorded warnings report.
Weather conditions in the outback can change quickly, and road users should always check local weather conditions and the latest road closures and warnings, prior to travel.
Road users planning to travel the state’s outback are reminded to have a clear plan, travel with adequate supplies including drinking water and first-aid supplies and ensure the vehicle is in appropriate condition for unsealed roads.
For the latest information about road conditions, including the latest closures, visit https://dit.sa.gov.au/OutbackRoads.

Quotes attributable to Geoff Brock

Weather conditions in the outback can change quickly, and it is critical that travellers on our unsealed road network have the latest available road condition information.
Heavy or prolonged rainfall events can make our unsealed roads very dangerous and closing them quickly during weather emergencies can save lives. There is always an important safety reason why a track is closed.
These new QR codes on signage not only make it easy for travellers to access the latest road conditions, but they are also a visible reminder for travellers that they should take a moment to stop and check.
We want all travellers on our unsealed road network to safely reach their destination. Taking a couple of minutes to stop and check road conditions could save you a world of trouble or could even save your life.
Word count: 359
