WORLD-first Adelaide research shows your circle of online friends says more about you than you might expect.
A person’s tastes and behaviour can be predicted with 95 per cent accuracy by analysing social media data of just eight friends, a study of 30 million Twitter users has found.
CONTINUED PAGE 10 No place to hide online because of your mates FROM PAGE 1 Adelaide University senior lecturer in applied mathematics Lewis Mitchell, pictured, said the extent of information encoded in interactions with friends was surprising.
“We wanted to see how predictable people are – how predictable the next word to come out of someone’s mouth is – based on who their online friends are,” he said.
“And we discovered you can get 95 per cent of what we call potential predictive accuracy about an individual by looking at as few as eight to nine of their friends … in the data embedded in social ties and text published online.” The joint study with the University of Vermont in the US was partly motivated by a desire to discover the potential for artificial intelligence to predict a person’s likes and dislikes, as well as exploring privacy issues.
“We hear a lot about privacy, about protecting your identity, but we generally view privacy around individual data,” Dr Mitchell said.
“Effectively (this research) shows there is no place to hide on social network platforms and telling people to delete an account in order to protect privacy is not enough, as your conversations remain, and profiling information such as someone’s political affiliations or leisure interests can be determined from their friends’ posts.
“It’s like listening in on one end of a phone call. Even though you can’t hear the person on the other end of the line, you can still find out a lot of information about them from the one-sided information you can hear.” Dr Mitchell said social media platforms targeted information to users that they would find interesting, based on data gathered about them.
“But of course there is a dark side as well, such as the potential for the creation of ‘filter bubbles’. For instance in a political debate, people may be only exposed to one type of information and may not receive any opposing views.” Study co-author James Bagrow from the University of Vermont said the research showed people were inadvertently revealing key information about friends when they posted on social media.
“Many people know they are giving out access to their information when choosing to use an online platform, but they think it’s only information about themselves,” he said.
“They’re also giving away information about their friends.”The study is published today in the journal Nature Human Behaviour.
CREDIT: REBECCA BAKER
Word count: 452
