THE state’s education institutions are transforming to prepare students for jobs of the future, capitalising on the $90 billion investment in the naval shipbuilding industry and the booming space sector.
More than 750 South Australians have signed up to the Naval Shipbuilding College’s workforce register, accessing advice on the training they need to pursue their desired careers and being connected with potential employers.
Flinders University is the first uni in Australia to have its engineering degrees approved by the college, which rather than training people itself, is charged with working with unis and TAFEs to ensure their courses match industry needs.
Flinders pro vice-chancellor Deborah West said the endorsement meant graduates could be sure they would be “skilled and capable of meeting the changing needs of the workforce and future industries”.
SA is set to gain the lion’s share of the 15,000 jobs to be created by the national shipbuilding enterprise, from engineers and trades to a wide range of support roles such as logistics and procurement.
Of the 1192 applicants to the shipbuilding college’s national workforce register so far, 765 are from South Australians.
UniSA has inked a deal with University College London to deliver a naval architecture and maritime engineering speciality within its mechanical engineering degree.
UniSA defence director Matt Opie said it was a coup as UCL produced “a large proportion of Europe’s maritime engineers” and was a world leader in the area.
UniSA is building an “industry 4.0 test lab” capable of running “digital production lines” to determine the best advanced manufacturing methods for defence and space products. It is also reviving a Masters in defence systems integration to help “mid-career” workers transfer from other industries such as mining.
Adelaide University will make a radical attempt to revive interest in that industry by teaching about mining on other planets.
Vice-chancellor Peter Rathjen said the government defence investment in SA provided the chance “to create a new kind of economy based on advanced technology”.
That meant “fundamentally changing the ways we think about teaching”, so all students were exposed to learning about artificial intelligence, big data and sustainability, he said.
The State Government is yet to reveal details of the new technical school for the western suburbs that was its signature election policy on training schoolchildren for defence jobs. But it has launched reviews of vocational education and careers advice in schools.
TAFE SA said there was growing interest from school groups in its new Advanced Welder Training Centre.
“We have implemented new defence industry familiarisation sessions for school students and teachers in engineering, technology and fabrication,” chief executive David Coltman said.
The SACE Board has flagged new industry-driven Year 12 subjects in cybersecurity, the space business and advanced technologies, along with an overhaul of the Research Project, and has put a business case to the State Government for funding to implement the changes.
The Heights School has a defence specialty with a range of industry partners. Assistant principal Sharon Robertson said that of 50 students in the Year 10 classes the school calls “cutting-edge science”, about 90 per cent want to be engineers. The SA initiatives come as tech companies warn of huge skills shortages in cloud computing.PAGE 18: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS
Word count: 538
