ADELAIDE fintech company Tic:Toc has added 10 staff to its growing local workforce in the past month and will add a further 10 in the coming weeks, according to chief executive Anthony Baum.
The company’s rapid growth is expected to boost local staff numbers to 70 in the coming weeks, with the company considering taking up more space at its North Tce headquarters, or potentially relocating to Lot Fourteen or another CBD building.
Tic:Toc launched its online home loan platform in 2017, digitising the application process and reducing the time needed to approve a loan “from 22 days to 22 minutes”.
Mr Baum said the financial services sector was being “challenged by digital disruption”, with demand for Tic:Toc’s artificial intelligence-backed technology on the rise.
“We now have a mortgage portfolio of half a billion dollars, with 8 to 10 per cent growth a month,” he said.
“We’ve started selling our technology to the industry to allow industry to improve the customer experience, to reduce costs, increase credit quality and improve regulatory compliance. So with growth in the direct lending space, that’s seeing us grow from a revenue point of view and an employment point of view. We’ve outgrown our space here (233 North Tce) so we’ve got the option of taking more space here or moving somewhere else in the CBD – Lot Fourteen or another building.” Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, which owns a 27 per cent stake in Tic:Toc, provides the funding for loans processed through the Tic:Toc platform. Earlier this year, the country’s fifth-largest retail bank entered a white label agreement with the Adelaide company, becoming the first lender to offer the Tic:Toc technology under its own branding with the introduction of Bendigo Bank Express.
Mr Baum said his company would unveil a new website next month and was preparing to launch its first software as a service (SaaS) product before the end of the year.
“With the world of open banking and APIs (application programming interface) it’s about breaking down our platform into a series of modules and making them accessible to the industry to improve the customer experience,” he said.
Open banking is a government-led policy aimed at boosting competition in the banking sector. The regime will allow customers to order their bank to provide their data to an accredited third party to use to identify products and services that are more suitable, better or cheaper.
As an initial step, the big four banks must by February next year provide access to a range of consumer, account and transaction data for mortgages, credit and debit cards, deposit accounts and transaction accounts.
“Open banking is an enabler – it’s a unique opportunity for Australia given we’re second to the UK in terms of the framework being rolled out,” Mr Baum said.“We’re open banking ready and that provides us with an opportunity to provide a service that will become a legislated service through open banking. The framework we are adopting will be one that provides opportunities for companies like Tic:Toc to develop their technologies, which could ultimately be adopted by the rest of the world.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 521
