THE State Government has moved to rezone Lot Fourteen to potentially allow a boutique hotel and retail outlets on the 7ha site.
Under the latest development, the Government has applied to change the North Tce site’s zoning to mixed use, which would allow for the “transformation” of the area.
Lot Fourteen is currently zoned Institutional (University/Hospital). A government report said the rezoning would pave the way for the site to be turned into an innovation precinct, with a focus on the “public realm including tourism, hospitality and cultural land use”.
It said a landmark building with a “slender design” to create an “iconic identity and marker for this important site” would be built in its centre.
The maximum height for all buildings would be 53m, with the exception of the landmark building, which could be taller.
A Renewal SA spokeswoman said the primary focus of the development was the creation of employment and business opportunities in the technology sectors of space and defence, cyber security, artificial intelligence and the creative industries.
She said Renewal SA was not currently in any commercial discussions about construction of a hotel.
But she indicated a small-scale operation was being considered. “There are some supporting services envisaged … including small-scale tourist accommodation, which could be provided as the development and neighbourhood population expands, if there is market demand,” the spokeswoman said. “There will be some small-scale food and beverage opportunities to support the neighbourhood and provide amenity for visitors.” The Advertiser reported in February that Lot Fourteen would have its own “retail street” to support economic activity on the former Royal Adelaide Hospital site.
The Australian Space Agency and an Aboriginal Art and Culture Gallery and International Centre for Tourism Hospitality and Food Studies will be housed at the site.The total investment in the Lot Fourteen development is expected to be more than $1 billion and 6000 jobs will be created on site when it is finished.
CREDIT: CELESTE VILLANI CITY EDITOR
Word count: 328
