SACE
If you visit Glenelg on a sunny day, there is a good chance you will see Charlotte Folland on her paddleboard.
Folland, who is studying Year 12 at Immanuel College, and lives minutes from the beach, has been paddleboarding since childhood.
Now, the pastime she pursues for pleasure and relaxation has morphed into something else.
The 17-year-old is working on a school project that will make it easier to get the board from her home to the beach.
“The beach isn’t far but it’s a bit of a struggle because the board is 11 foot (3.3m) and weighs about 15kg,” Charlotte said.
Drawing on her school studies in design and technology, Charlotte set herself a challenge – to design and make a low-cost paddleboard trolley.
“That was an important criteria,” she said.
“There are a lot of products on the market but they’re quite expensive.” Costing under $100, Charlotte’s two-wheeled, CAD-designed invention will be born via Immanuel’s 3D printer and form part of her SACE assessment.
She hopes to study design or architecture at university.
Head of Immanuel’s Senior School Alice George said Charlotte’s story was the tip of the iceberg in terms of the opportunities available to students.
Education has evolved – and will continue to do so – in sync with society. Shaping the curriculum right now are developments in communications and technology, and, in South Australa, the transition from industries such as traditional car making to new enterprises earmarked for Lot Fourteen at the former Royal Adelaide Hospital site.
Think defence, artificial intelligence and space.
“The message we need to get out to parents is that the world is very different to 15, 10, even five years ago,” Mrs George said.
“ATAR (Australian tertiary admission rank) is important but, today, the way students learn is as important as what they learn. No one can really predict where things are heading.
“As educators, we want to give kids skills they can apply in any situation, like critical thinking, problem solving and resilience.” Premier Steven Marshall said the next generation would have to be job ready to “to take advantage of the incredible opportunities being presented by the space, defence and cyber industries in our state”.
People studying STEM (science, technology, engineering and maths) were in a good place but there would be myriad entry points.
The State Government wanted to change perceptions around apprenticeships and traineeships, and promote “apprenticeship and traineeship pathways in these emerging industries”, he said.
Mrs George said SACE’s flexibility was a strength, and while students were on board parents sometimes need convincing.
“A lot of parents have preconceived ideas which is understandable because we’ve all been to school,” she said.
“But there are many different pathways available now, and there’s a lot of flexibility in terms of things like VET (vocational education and training) and school-based apprenticeships.
“You really can tailor a program to an individual student to allow them to follow their passions and dreams.” Immanuel’s Director of Teaching and Learning, Martyn Anderson, agrees. “ATAR is important but I would say it’s only half the story,” he said. Thinking critically, working collaboratively, bringing creativity to the table and understanding how to apply knowledge in different situations are among his main lessons for life after school.
“It’s important for students and parents to focus on academic outcomes – literacy and numeracy are good skills to have – but it’s also important to develop in other areas, through things like arts, sport and part-time work. About 40 per cent of students do some kind of VET course; last year our students studied a combination of 54 different subjects.” Saxon Cameron, front end development manager for professional services organisation Deloitte, helps with staff recruiting in Australia.
“Our field evolves year by year so, generally, we’re looking for more of a cultural fit,” he said.
“Someone who can show they have a track record in self-learning, who’s technically-minded, who can demonstrate they’ve armed themselves with programming fundamentals.
“If they tick those boxes, and we can have a good conversation, they could potentially be a good consultant. We can teach them the rest.” His own journey started at Immanuel where his interest in IT and gaming had room to grow. It led to a scholarship to Bond University, Queensland, and a degree in gaming.“A lot of my colleagues at Deloitte went to university but a lot went to TAFE – they come from very diverse backgrounds,” he said.
Word count: 742
