HI-TECH Australian and international start-ups can now apply to join a new hub to be established at Lot Fourteen, in the CBD, before Christmas.
Stone & Chalk, which has fintech hubs in Melbourne and Sydney, will set up a hub on North Tce to help develop and nurture start-ups focused on space technology, defence, cybersecurity, artificial intelligence and smart cities.
An information session for interested businesses will be held on-site on July 18.
The group will partner with the State Government and the Office of the Chief Entrepreneur, led by Jim Whalley.
The establishment of the start-up hub, before Christmas, on the 7ha former Royal Adelaide Hospital site adds to the vision for the former Royal Adelaide Hospital site, which includes the Australian Space Agency and a national Aboriginal art gallery.
South Australian businesses with global potential, including Myriota, Chamonix, Presagen and Convergen, have already moved in.
Lot Fourteen has also attracted recent funding commitments from state and federal governments to re-imagine the site as an entrepreneurial launch pad.
Stone & Chalk has been selected by the Government as a key anchor tenant and operator of the start-up hub.
The company’s two interstate hubs are home to more than 600 residents in 142 start-ups supported by 27 corporate partners. The same model is set to be replicated in Adelaide with a focus on new-tech companies.
Stone & Chalk chief executive Alex Scandurra said start-ups within the two existing hubs had secured more than $330 million in funding from investors.
“Stone & Chalk might be most readily known for its leadership in nurturing and scaling high-growth fintech companies that are transforming the way we consume financial services,” Mr Scan­durra said.
“How­ever, under­lying this is a broader cap­ability in building thriving innovation ecosystems where communities of mutual benefit form and produce the type of high-growth companies that are creating the industries and jobs of our future.
“Achieving this requires far more than the simple provision of space.” Minister for Innovation and Skills David Pisoni said the hub would attract entrepreneurs and start-ups looking to commercialise products and scale quickly into national and global markets.
“In the very near future, the start-up hub will feature up to 650 workspaces as well as conference rooms, event facilities and meeting spaces designed to promote collaboration,” he said.ENTREPRENEURS CAN APPLY AT WWW.STONEANDCHALK.COM.AU/ADELAIDE
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 390
