ADELAIDE University plans to open small campuses in eastern states cities to capitalise on their greater population growth and appeal.
Course cuts, a move to trimesters, reviewing the use of exams, and turning students into a volunteer “army” are also proposed in draft staff consultation documents obtained by The Advertiser.
“Recognising the imbalance in population growth favouring the eastern states, and east coast metropolitan centres’ appeal to both domestic and international students, we will offer an Adelaide education in new micro-campuses,” one document says.
Each of the five documents builds on the uni’s strategic plan released in March. “To manage load and student demand, we will substitute lower-performing pro-grams for those which will serve the aspirations and needs of more students,” one says.
“We will teach less in order to teach better, rationalising programs and courses to maintain choice and flexibility, while reducing complexity and timetable clashes.” The documents say moving from semesters to trimesters would make it easier to include internships and overseas study opportunities in all degrees.
A new program would “create a student volunteer “army” working in the broader community, with participants given special recognition on their academic transcript.
E-textbooks would be provided to all first-year undergrads, and “we will review the balance of ... assessment tasks, and the use of examinations”.
Nick Warner, president of the National Tertiary Education Union’s Adelaide University branch, was broadly supportive because the plans focused on growth that should mean more jobs, but said much more detail was needed.
He warned trimesters could greatly increase staff workloads, but said the uni had committed to more consultation on that proposal. Management had not revealed which courses could be cut when pressed in staff forums, or how the plans would be funded, he said.
The uni would not provide more details on what it called “high-level guiding principle documents”, saying “the detailed planning (is) still to be formulated”.Final versions will be endorsed by the university council in late August. In March, vice-chancellor Peter Rathjen, pictured, said the proportion of international students would rise from 30 to 40-45 per cent, as part of a “dramatic” expansion of overall student numbers. The strategic plan could result in artificial intelligence and “big data” subjects being compulsory for all students.
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 379
