A FREE event aimed at encouraging women to embrace and be empowered by technology and hear from some leading national and local female entrepreneurs comes to Adelaide for the first time on May 29.
Vogue Codes, which was established in 2016 to address gender imbalance in the technology industry and is aimed at inspiring more females to study and take up careers in IT, is being held at the University of Adelaide.
Among the line up of speakers is Dr Michelle Perugini, founder of Presagen, which earlier this month raised $4.5 million from private investors and the State Government.
The money will help Presagen fast track its artificial intelligence-driven Life Whisperer technology, which helps couples using IVF to overcome fertility difficulties.
Dr Perugini said her tenacious desire to learn and solve problems from a young age have led her down the path of entrepreneurship and to be a co-founder of two companies, Presagen and Intelligent Software Development, which was bought by Ernst & Young in 2015.
“The idea of building deep technology from scratch and using it to solve problems was exciting after 10 happy years of being a research scientist,” Dr Perugini said.
“But technology is now more prevalent in our lives and more of an essential skill. It is going to impact and cut across all areas of our life.
“Even if you don’t want to be a technologist, you need to understand it,” she said.
As a speaker at Vogue Codes’ first Adelaide event, she was hoping to inspire young people, especially women to think about innovation and non-traditional careers.
“It’s important to have platforms like Vogue Codes, which is part of the movement and narrative to drive confidence about new thinking,” she said.
“I would love to see more women innovators and more women doing their best to understand technology.” Vogue Australia editorial director Edwina McCann said she hoped the event would help challenge societal norms “Vogue Codes is our campaign to see women empowered by technology. “While the statistics of female participation in tech related roles and industries are improving, they are still not good enough.
“Vogue has long celebrated women achieving great personal and professional successes and we hope that by providing a platform for some of the world’s most impressive female entrepreneurs and business leaders we will help to challenge the societal norms.” Vogue Australia said it was delighted to be working with BankSA to bring the Vogue Codes initiative to Adelaide for the first time this year.
BankSA chief executive Nick Reade said ensuring SA had a highly skilled STEM workforce would be critical to growing the state’s economy in the coming decade and beyond.
“The key growth industries for our state will be in areas such as medical research, defence, space, cyber security and health industries, so it’s important that we’re actively working across the education sector, private enterprise and government to ensure our young people are prepared for the opportunities that will offer viable career options right here in SA,’’ he said.
“Currently the technology industry is made up of less than 30 per cent women – and only 16 per cent of these are qualified STEM professionals – and we know that businesses with a gender balanced approach to innovation perform far better than those without, so encouraging more girls and women to pursue STEM is not only important for ensuring our workforce is sustainable, but it is vital for our economy to grow and prosper.
“BankSA is focused on being a catalyst for economic growth in our state and our support of Vogue Codes is just one of the ways that we’re doing that for the benefit of all South Australians.” More information on Vogue Codes, including registration is available at ww.vogue.com.au/vogue-codes
SPEAKERS AT ADELAIDE UNIVERSITY ALEX MOSS, chief executive and head designer, Canaria Technologies. DR MICHELLE PERUGINI, co-founder and chief executive, Presagen. ALYCE TRAN, founder, The Daily Edited.
ALLISON NIKULA, founder CareApp.
MELANIE FLINTOFT, founder and head of product, Australian Fashion Labels.LOUISE NOBES, founder and chief executive, Kik Innovation.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 676
