GEELONG has hosted the Royal Australian Navy’s launch into a more collaborative approach to solving its major workforce challenges.
The navy needs new ways to train and more job-ready recruits as it sets about delivering an ambitious shipbuilding program and arming its fleet with the technical skills needed to adapt to rapidly changing systems and threats.
The inaugural Navy, Industry and Academia Training Conference heard the navy was embracing advances in technology as it prepared to start building a new fleet of highly advanced frigates, offshore patrol vessels and submarines.
Rear Admiral Peter Quinn said autonomous systems, artificial intelligence and human machine teaming would increasingly be central to fighting in maritime environments.
“The pace of technological change for those autonomous systems is very short,” Rear Admiral Quinn said.
“We need to have a workforce that is used to rapid technological change; that is used to working closely with machines.” The Federal Government’s continuous naval shipbuilding program is seeing more than $1 billion invested in creating the world’s most advanced shipyards in Herbert, in South Australia, and Henderson, in Western Australia.
About 15,000 jobs are expected to be created in direct shipbuilding, sustainment work and in the supply chain as about $90 billion in naval ships and submarines are built over the next 40 years.
The conference at Deakin University heard that meeting the navy’s challenges and the imminent ramp up of the workforce would require collaboration with education institutions and industry.
Participants engaged in big idea pitching and presentations for innovative approaches to training and practical activities focused on learning theory, training delivery and the use of training technology.
Deakin, which has an established relationship with the navy through the Institute of Intelligent Systems Research and Innovation, showcased its hi-tech training simulators at the conference.
Commodore Justin Jones, the navy’s head of training, said the conference offered the opportunity to share ideas on how new technology might be able to be applied or adapted for different uses.
“We need to change the way we train, and adapt and become more far more agile and dynamic in how we train,” Commodore Jones said.
He said the shipbuilding program was a national endeavour with opportunities for everyone, including people and organisations from the Geelong region.
“We are going to take skills, ideas and innovation from wherever they come,” Commodore Jones said.
The navy is aiming to grow its workforce of about 14,400 to about 20,000 by 2035, while also developing the shipbuilding program workforce.
The Naval Shipbuilding College training solutions manager Nick Howie said the conference would help start aligning educational programs with the needs of industry and the Navy.
“The main challenge is the steep ramp-up coming into the early 2020s, especially in trade and operation type areas,” Mr Howie said.More than 300 delegates, about half from the navy and the other half from industry and academia, attended the two-day conference at Deakin University’s Waterfront campus.
CREDIT: Dave Cairns
Word count: 489
