Tress stress test Peter Dutton made a hair-raising confession in question time on Wednesday. “I can tell you as a parent of a teenager who just came back from schoolies, I had some hair before schoolies started. No hair by the end of it. But she got back safely. I’m misleading the house a little bit there. Sorry. Nonetheless, a lot of stress for parents.” As Anthony Albanese started to heckle, the Home Affairs Minister took aim at the Opposition Leader’s thinning top: “That comb-over works for you, Albo, that’s what I will say. The comb-over works for you. I’ve accepted my fate.” This reminded Strewth of a story we once heard whispered by someone close to Dutton in the ministerial wing. When he was contemplating whether to shave his remaining tufts, staff printed off a few snaps of Jason Statham — star of action movies such as The Transporter and The Fast and The Furious franchise — to show him the, um, sexy possibilities of a glabrous dome.
Activist out of action Former Baywatch babe Pamela Anderson tragically cancelled her trip to Parliament House on Monday after a scheduling conflict (politicians made do with three Miss World Australias who turned up on Thursday to promote — and this isn’t a joke — world peace). Invited by South Australian Centre Alliance MP Rebekha Sharkie, the Canadian-American activist actress had planned to give a speech to persuade Scott Morrison to help her friend Julian Assange. Strewth has seen a copy of Anderson’s speech, which bafflingly warns against a Terminator-style rise of the machines: “We need to understand the things that only a few brilliant people who have done the laborious research understand — or humanity might end in humans’ hands. Artificial intelligence is a massive threat. Maybe more so than climate change. Why wouldn’t you want Julian, who is savvy and aware, on your side?” She was also scheduled to watch question time (where one of the crossbench would conveniently ask about the WikiLeaker), hold a private briefing with members of the Free Assange Parliament Friendship Group (including George Christensen, Barnaby Joyce, Zali Steggall, Andrew Wilkie and Adam Bandt) and a Q&A with any interested MPs and senators. Imagine! Forget Malcolm Turnbull, we’d much prefer to hear Anderson’s analysis on Angus Taylor and the phone call to the top cop about the doctored doc.
Mixed message As the penultimate sitting week was winding down, Parliament House exploded into schoolyard giggles when the screen in the House of Representatives (which tells politicians what they’re voting on) displayed this message: “That the member no longer be hard”. It should have said “heard”.
Outed on the patio After Strewth revealed that GANGgajang lead singer Mark “Cal” Callaghan would be the secret celebrity guest attending Labor’s Parliamentary Christmas Party next Thursday, Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack got on the blower to point out that the band’s best-known tune, Sounds of Then (This Is Australia), is actually the soundtrack to the National Party. The 1985 hit was written on a veranda in Limpus Crescent, Bundaberg — home of Paul Neville, the Nationals member for Hinkler from 1993 to 2013. MicMac tells us that before Neville’s death he was lucky enough to live out the famous lyrics (“Out on the patio we’d sit / And the humidity we’d breathe / We’d watch the lightning crack over canefields / Laugh and think, this is Australia”) — all with views of cane fields in the distance.
Broadside of Barnaby Barnaby Joyce issued an SOS on Facebook: “The National Party in South Australia will lose its registration at the end of this week if its membership base does not grow … That’s less opportunity to stand up against the injustices of Vegan activists, fewer people to fight for live exports, reduced focus on drought, and a reduction in commonsense policy for our regions.” The junior Coalition partner has until close of business on Friday to sign free supporter members or face the wrath of the Electoral Commission.
Sticker in craw Does unparliamentary language extend to stickers? WA Greens senator Jordon Steele-John had to apologise after accidentally bringing a laptop into the chamber with a “Let’s UnF*#ck Our Future” sticker on it in letters large enough to be read on TV. The 25-year-old said his office printer was not working, forcing him to use a staff member’s computer to deliver a speech.
Paper tiger “Let me tell you, when I’ve got heartburn and I’m feeling sick and I want to get back to sleep … I read The Australian ’cause it usually takes about half a page,” Labor senator Glenn Sterle said in a debate on the government’s anti-union bill. Seconds later he singled out the fine work of this paper’s Ewin Hannan. Make up your mind, Glenn!strewth@theaustralian.com.au
CREDIT: ALICE WORKMAN
Word count: 801
