The Mackenzie era at BHP is ending. Perversely, given the introspective and conservative nature of BHP's strategy over the past half dozen years, it will probably be regarded with hindsight as one of the pivotal and positive periods in the group's 134-year history.
Andrew Mackenzie was the right man for the moment at BHP and he will hand the chief executive baton to an internal successor with a blend of experiences and a history of successes that made him an obvious choice.
Mike Henry, 53, with 16 years at BHP and 30 in the global mining and petroleum industry, has been running BHP's entire Australian portfolio - the core of the group's assets and profitability - since 2016. Before that he ran the coal business.
With a lengthy prior history in the suite of commodities BHP produces, the blend of commercial and operational experience within and outside the world's largest and most diversified resources company, has provided him with a near-perfect CV for the role.
He and Mackenzie share one of the great highlights in BHP's modern history, the toppling - against the odds given the far larger scale and nature of their resources and infrastructure - of Rio Tinto and Vale as the world's lowest-cost iron ore producer.
Another big related tick for his candidature was a 60 per cent reduction in the frequency of high-potential injuries in the Australian business - he can cut costs and improve productivity and safety at the same time. Safety metrics are good indicators of the quality of management in a resource business.
Chairman Ken MacKenzie and his board followed corporate best practice and considered both external and internal candidates for the job including reportedly, Anglo American's Mark Cutifani.
Given Henry's track record it would have been very hard to go past him, particularly once the other most logical internal contender, chief financial officer Peter Beaven, withdrew his name for family reasons.
Mackenzie became CEO of BHP six-and-a-half years ago in the aftermath of the puncturing of the bubble in commodity prices that destabilised a sector bloated and leveraged by the China-inspired boom.
Where his predecessor, Marius Kloppers, had presided over rapid and ambitious expansion, Mackenzie's brief was to bring discipline to the group's operations and portfolio and he has done that.
The demerger of South32 dramatically simplified the group. It instantly transformed BHP from a group with more than 40 assets across the globe to one with 12 very large and high-quality basin-focused assets. While it took some time - and some massive write-downs - Mackenzie also extricated BHP from the biggest of its boom-time mistakes, its foray into the US onshore shale sector.
He de-leveraged the balance sheet, released enormous productivity gains and, with MacKenzie and Beaven, introduced a new capital management framework that has imposed financial discipline and which ultimately released a tide of cash and capital for BHP shareholders while creating a highly conservative balance sheet.
There's been significant investment in the petroleum business, footholds in copper exploration in South America, exploration success in South Australia and (in another tick for Henry) the restoration of a Nickel West business that was once earmarked for distressed sale but now looks highly strategic in the dawning era of electric vehicles.
The low-point in Mackenzie's tenure was the tailing dam disaster at Samarco in Brazil.
Mackenzie has left Henry with some growth options and challenges, the biggest of which is ensuring the portfolio he inherits can evolve in line with a shift in the nature of those commodities in demand as the world's raw material needs themselves evolve.
A decision on whether to proceed with the Jansen potash project in Canada will need to be made early in his tenure.
The sub-economic performance of the potentially very valuable Olympic Dam project in South Australia has to be fixed, the future of thermal coal within the portfolio will have to be determined and new greenfields growth options will need to be identified.
Henry will also have to deal with the volatility and deep cyclical nature of the resources sector.
Mackenzie has been, at times, controversially progressive in his views, putting the group at the forefront of resource industry action on climate change, affirmative action and seeking to improve conditions for indigenous communities.
Henry isn't expected to walk away from that progressive positioning. His own history is one of championing diversity. BHP says he has nearly doubled the number of women in its Australian workforce while also increasing indigenous employment.
He might also be expected to lead BHP further into automation and artificial intelligence, and continue Mackenzie's work on an ambitious agenda that is as much about BHP's culture and a devolution of responsibility and accountability as it is about digging more stuff up and shipping more stuff out.
  CREDIT: Stephen Bartholomeusz
Word count: 798
