France is a European nation of 65 million that could easily fit into the land area of NSW (population 8 million). Its interests abut Australia’s territorial waters at New Caledonia (Noumea) and in the Antarctic, where Adelie Land sits like a slice of pizza between Australia’s claimed territories.
And then there’s France’s Naval Group (formerly DCNS), which recently won an Australian Defence Force contract (worth $50 billion) to build 12 next-generation (but not nuclear) sub­marines in South Australia.
Last year a joint US-Australian naval base was announced for the revitalisation of a WWII facility at Lombrum on Manus Island, and now there is talk of France upping its naval presence “somewhere” in the Pacific.
And not forgetting that, according to the last census, Australia contains 31,000 residents born in France. Sadly, the French census doesn’t separately identify Australian residents, but I am sure there’s an Aussie community equal to say, Goondiwindi, scattered across France.
France’s GDP ($US3.06 trillion, or $4.35 trillion) is double that of Australia ($US1.582 trillion) despite having more than twice our population (25 million). We are richer than France (and many others) on a per-capita basis, not because of our brilliance but because of our mineral wealth.
France is also a nuclear state that caused us angst in the mid-1990s by conducting tests in the South Pacific.
Our two nations were galvanised when thousands of Diggers died on the Western Front in ­places such as Fromelles, Pozieres and Bullecourt.
So, apart from these connections, what are the wider lessons that can be learnt from a comparison of the demographics of France and Australia?
About 11 per cent of France’s population is foreign-born; this compares with 32 per cent for Australia. This might sound like a big difference — and it is — but the rest of the developed world is much closer to France than to Australia on this measure (it’s 14 per cent in the US).
We specifically target larger numbers of working-age migrants; the difference with France is evident in a comparison of the age profile.
In Sydney, 39 per cent of the population was born outside Australia. In Paris, the equivalent figure is 22 per cent. In Berlin, it is 15 per cent. In Tokyo, it is 2 per cent. In Shanghai it is 1 per cent.
Australia’s rate of growth hasn’t changed substantially over the past decade: each year we add about 140,000 through natural increase and about 200,000 from net overseas migration. If nothing else, we Australians are consistent in the way we grow.
France, on the other hand, is undergoing a profound shift, which is evident in recent demographic figures. The nation is ageing: the number of deaths is rising by 8000 a year while the number of births is contracting by 9000 a year, causing the rate of natural increase to drop from 300,000 in 2006 to 140,000 in 2018.
France’s Institute of Statistical & Economic Studies has placed the country’s net annual migration at about 60,000 for much of this decade. Today, France adds roughly 200,000 people a year, down from more than 340,000 a decade ago.
The UN’s recently released population projections has France holding at 65 million by 2100. This is different to the outlook for Germany, Japan and Russia, which are expected to have fewer people.
French property and infrastructure companies might like to consider opening an office on Australia, where the local population is projected to rise from 25 million to 43 million by 2100.
Like most European countries, France’s immediate future is shaped by labour-market contraction. Baby-boomer workers, born in the late 40s and 50s, will exit the workforce in the 2020s, leaving a depleted 60s-born and 70s-born workforce to plug the skills gap. France’s prime 15-64 cohort went into decline from 2011 as 65-year-olds (born 1946) exited the workforce faster than 15-year-olds (born 1996) could enter the workforce. This is an important shift.
The number of people in France’s 65+ cohort, which increased by about 100,000 every year in the late 20th century, is now projected to rise by more than 200,000 a year during the 2020s and 2030s.
France and other European nations are at the forefront of a demographic and social shift that has been six decades in the making. The 1950s baby boom pumped more taxpaying workers into the workforce from the 1970s onwards. The women’s movement then pumped more working taxpayers into the labour force.
The advent of contraception (in the 1960s) and the ageing of the baby-boom generation was always going to have an impact on the labour market from the 2010s onwards. More workers exiting than entering the workforce slows the rate of growth in the tax base, which limits spending and comes as a bit of a shock to a community conditioned (over decades) to expect a rising pool of funds to support programs and infrastructure.
Australia had much the same problem as France — too many imminently retiring baby-boomers — so, late last decade the immigration rate was directed towards young skilled workers and overall numbers were doubled in the process. Melbourne now adds 120,000 net new residents every year whereas a generation ago, in 1993, this city added barely 15,000.
The fundamental problem for first-world nations like France and Australia is that during the 2020s the demographic underpinnings that delivered tax growth are now shifting in the opposite direction. Ageing workers are moving into retirement at an unprecedented rate; adjustments to spending priorities need to be made for a community that has developed a way of life based on a superseded demographic model.
The Australian solution to this ageing problem was to double the rate of immigration, which has caused concern about social cohesion and the adequacy of city infrastructure. But then Australia (theoretically) has the space to accommodate more migrants. What is required by all nations facing the ageing issue — and there are many in Europe — is the ability to live sustainably within the constraints of the changed taxpaying capacity of the community.
These adjustments to how life might be lived in a world of many more retirees will play out over years if not decades. And there is never a single solution. Retirees in France and in Australia may have to pay more tax and accept fewer entitlements. Workers may have to pay a higher rate of tax. And immigration might have to be more skills-oriented and numbers increased to offset retiring workers.
And then there is the great hope for the future: automation, artificial intelligence and even greater levels of globalisation might somehow increase the productive output per worker. This greater productivity might then be taxed to sustain our first-world way of life in a world.
However, perhaps the very first step in this process is to have an honest discussion with the community about the way in which our demography is shifting, and some of the choices we may need to make in the future.
Bernard Salt is managing director of The Demographics Group.bernard@tdgp.com.au
CREDIT: Bernard Salt
Word count: 1170
