ORDER OF AUSTRALIA COMPANION (AC) GENERAL DIVISION Her Excellency the Hon. Margaret Joan Beazley AO QC, Sydney NSW. Service to the people of NSW, particularly through leadership roles in the judiciary and as a mentor of young women lawyers.
Prof. Margaret Elaine Gardner AO, Parkville VIC. Service to tertiary education through leadership and innovation in teaching, research and financial sustainability.
The Hon. Chief Justice Catherine Ena Holmes, QLD. Service to the judiciary, notably to criminal, administrative, and mental health law, and to the community.
Prof. Bruce Gregory Robinson AM, Kirribilli NSW. Service to medical research, and to national healthcare, through policy development, and to tertiary education.
Prof. Anthony William Thomas, North Adelaide SA. Service to scientific education and research, particularly in the field of nuclear and particle physics.
OFFICER (AO) GENERAL DIVISION Ms Ilana Rachel Atlas, NSW. Service to financial and manufacturing sectors, to education, and to the arts.
The Hon. Edward Norman Baillieu, Hawthorn VIC. Service to the people and Parliament of Victoria, particularly as Premier, and to international engagement.
Prof. Larissa Behrendt, Sydney NSW. Service to Indigenous education and research, to the law, and the visual and performing arts.
Distinguished Prof. Genevieve Bell, ACT. Service to education, particularly to the social sciences and cultural anthropology.
Dr John Michael Bennett AM, NSW. Service to the law through prolific authorship of biographies of eminent members of the legal profession.
Emeritus Prof. John Bloomfield AM, Crawley WA. Service to higher education in the field of sports science, and to professional sporting organisations.
Ms Sarah Bradley, Bardon QLD. Service to the law, and to the judiciary, to women in the legal profession, and to the community.
Prof. Shaun Patrick Brennecke, Parkville VIC. Service to medical education and research in the fields of obstetrics and gynaecology, and to professional societies.
Prof. Rachelle Buchbinder, Malvern VIC. Service to medical education in the fields of epidemiology and rheumatology, and to professional associations.
Prof. Robert Graham Cumming, Centennial Park NSW. Service to medical education and research, particularly to ageing and age-related diseases.
Mr Charles Roderick Curwen CVO OBE, Tylden VIC. Service to the Crown, and to public administration in Victoria, to medical research, and to Australia-China business relations.
Prof. John Kinley Dewar, Whittlesea VIC. Service to education through leadership roles in the universities sector, and to professional organisations.
Mr Ian Ross Donges, Cowra NSW. Service to primary industry, and to the community of rural NSW.
Mr Ronald Patrick Dullard, Swan View WA. Service to education in Western Australia, to local government, and to the community.
Mr Peter Adalbert Fritz AM, Chippendale NSW. Service to business, particularly to information technology and communications, and to public policy.
Mr Graham Burton Goldsmith, Hawthorn VIC. Service to community through philanthropic foundations, to education, and to the banking and employment sectors.
Mr Robert Malcolm Goot AM SC, Double Bay NSW. Service to the Jewish community through executive roles with educational, cultural and social welfare bodies.
Mr James Gorman, Service to the finance and banking sectors through executive roles at the national and international level.
Dr Donald Morrison Grant AM RFD, Bathurst NSW. Service to surveying, particularly through the establishment of a combined public sector mapping agency.
Ms Gillian Margaret Groom, Sandy Bay TAS. Service to the community through healthcare, medical research, and social welfare organisations, and to the law.
Emeritus Prof. Jules Mitchell Guss, Darling Point NSW. Service to education and scientific research in the field of molecular bioscience, and to professional organisations.
Ms Jane Caroline Hansen, Toorak VIC. Service to the community, to education and cultural institutions, and through philanthropic support for charitable foundations.
Mr Ian Andrew Healy, South Brisbane QLD. Service to cricket at the national and international level as a player, to the broadcast media, and to the community.
Prof. Hal Christopher Hill, Aranda ACT. Service to education in the field of economic policy development, and to Australia-Indonesia relations.
Commissioner Darren Leigh Hine APM, TAS. Service to law enforcement as Commissioner of Police in Tasmania, and to the community.
Mr Peter John Hood, WA. Service to business and commerce at the state, national and international level, and to the resources sector.
Ms Julie Kantor, South Yarra VIC. Service to the community through philanthropy, to Indigenous governance initiatives, and to the visual and performing arts.
Mr Samuel Lipski AM, Southbank VIC. Service to the community through the promotion of strategic philanthropy, to education, and to Australia-Israel relations.
Dr Linley Margaret Martin, Northcote VIC. Service to education, particularly to student equity, educational standards and academic administration.
Mr Kevin McCann AM, Mosman NSW. For distinguished service to business, to corporate governance, and as an advocate for gender equity.
Prof. Peter Joseph McCluskey, Homebush NSW. Service to ophthalmology, and to medical education, to eye health organisations, and to the community.
Ms Jacqui Elizabeth McGill, Underdale SA. Service to the minerals and mining sector, and to gender equity and workplace diversity.
Prof. Peter McIntyre, Atarmon NSW. Service to medicine, and to medical education, to child and adolescent health, and to professional bodies.
Maj-Gen. David John McLachlan AO (Mil) (Retd), Beaumaris VIC. Service to veterans and their families through roles with social welfare and commemoration organisations.
Ms Fiona Margaret McLeod SC, Fitzroy VIC. Service to the law, and to the legal profession, at the national and international level, and to women lawyers.
Mr Campbell Kevin Newman, QLD. Service to the people and Parliament of Queensland, particularly as Premier, and to local government.
The Hon. Barry Robert O'Farrell, Turramurra NSW. Service to the people and Parliament of NSW, particularly as Premier, and to the community.
Prof. John (Michael) Holroyd Permezel, Deepdene VIC. Service to medicine, and to medical education, in the fields of obstetrics and gynaecology, and to professional colleges.
Prof. John Reginald Piggott, Bellevue Hill NSW. Service to education, to population ageing research, and to public finance policy development.
Mr Michael John Rice, Oatley NSW. Service to business and economics, particularly to the actuarial profession, and through advisory roles.
Prof. Alison Joan Ritter, Vaucluse NSW. Service to education, to drug and alcohol research and social policy, and to professional medical societies.
Prof. Roy Michael Robins-Browne, Templestowe VIC. Service to medical education and research in the field of microbiology and immunology, and to professional groups.
Prof. Matthew Roy Sanders, St Lucia QLD. Service to education and research in clinical psychology, and to child, parent and family wellbeing.
Prof. Robert (John) Simes, East Lindfield NSW. Service to education, and to medicine, in the field of cancer research and clinical trials.
Emeritus Prof. Raymond Louis Specht, St Lucia QLD. Service to science, and to education, in the fields of botany, plant ecology and conservation.
Laureate Prof. Geoffrey Wayne Stevens, Parkville VIC. Service to education, to chemical engineering and environmental remediation, and as a mentor.
Mr Ian Duncan Stewart APM, QLD. Service to law enforcement as Commissioner of Police in Queensland, and to the community.
The late Dr Enrico Taglietti, Manuka ACT. Service to architecture, particularly in the Australian Capital Territory, to education, and to professional organisations.
Ms Anne Lorraine Trimmer, Elizabeth Bay NSW. Service to the law, and to the legal profession, to healthcare standards and policy, and to education.
Mr Keith Lionel Urban, US. Service to the performing arts as a singer and songwriter, and to charitable organisations.
The Hon. Amanda Eloise Vanstone, North Adelaide SA. Service to the Parliament of Australia, to the people of South Australia, and to the community.
Dr Brian Harrison Walker, Aranda ACT. Service to science, particularly to ecosystem ecology and research, and to professional scientific bodies.
Prof. Rachel Lindsey Webster, Clifton Hill VIC. Service to education in the field of astrophysics, to astronomical research, and to young women scientists.
Mrs Gwen Wetzig, Wishart QLD. Service to the international community of the Democratic Republic of Congo through medical support, teaching and training programs.
Dr Neil Robert Wetzig, Wishart QLD. Service to the international community of the Democratic Republic of Congo through medical support, teaching and training programs.
Mr George Bernard Wright, Richmond VIC. Service to parliament and politics as National Secretary of the Australian Labor Party, and to business.
Prof. Jeffrey David Zajac, Heidelberg VIC. Service to medical research and education, particularly in the field of endocrinology, and to professional societies.
MEMBER (AM) GENERAL DIVISION Mr John Arthur Abbott, Gladstone QLD. Service to education, and to resources. Prof. Mohamad Abdalla, Magill SA. Service to education in the field of Islamic studies.
Mr Anthony Abrahams, Bellevue Hill NSW. Service to Australia-France relations, and to the law.
Ms Rosemary Therese Langford Addis, Balaclava VIC. Service to social innovation and impact investment, and to the law.
Mr Robert Harold Annells PSM, TAS. Service to the tourism and hospitality sector, and to public administration.
Ms Bettina Mary Arndt, Woollahra NSW. Service to the community as a social commentator, and to gender equity through advocacy for men.
Dr Anne Marie Astin PSM, Endeavour Hills VIC. Service to the dairy industry, and to food safety regulations.
Mr John Charles Batten, Launceston TAS. Service to orthopaedic medicine, and to professional bodies.
Mr Kenneth Peter Baxter, Sydney NSW. Service to public administration, and to agricultural reform.
Prof. Emerita Joan Errington Beaumont, Brunswick West VIC. Service to education, particularly to the study of war history.
Emeritus Prof. Warren Arthur Bebbington, The Basin VIC. Service to education, particularly to the study of music.
Ms Faye Lorraine Berryman, Fitzroy North VIC. Service to education, to literacy, and to the community.
Mr John David Bevins, McMahons Point NSW. Service to community health and social welfare organisations.
Dr Geoffrey Neville Boughton, Kingsley WA. Service to engineering, professional bodies.
Emeritus Prof. Thomas (John) Boulton, Carrington NSW. Service to medical education, and to paediatric medicine.
Dr Stephen James Bourke, Croydon NSW. Service to the international community of Jordan through archaeological projects.
Dr Frank Patrick Brennan, Kogarah NSW. Service to palliative medicine, and to medical education.
Dr David Stewart Briggs, Tamworth NSW. Service to community health management, and to education.
Emeritus Prof. Richard Laurence Broome, Malvern East VIC. Service to education in the field of history, and to historical groups.
Mr Bruce Richard Brown, Broome WA. For significant service to the pearling industry, and to marine research.
Mr Lyndon Mayfield Brown, Mosman Park WA. Service to the pearling industry, and to marine research.
The Hon. Dr Meredith Anne Burgmann, Glebe NSW. Service to the people and Parliament of NSW.
Ms Elaine Cafferty Carbines, Grovedale VIC. Service to conservation and the environment.
Mr Garry Raymond Casey, Woodroffe NT. Service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Prof. Anthony E Cassimatis, St Lucia QLD. For significant service to education, to the law, and to the community.
Mrs Melanie Grace Champion de Crespigny, Gilberton SA. Service to youth through charitable organisations.
Ms Annabelle Chaplain, QLD. Service to business through a range of executive roles.
Prof. Pierre Henri Chapuis, Waverton NSW. Service to medical education, and to colorectal surgery.
Ms Lisa Chung, Double Bay NSW. Service to the community through charitable and cultural organisations.
Dr Christopher John Clements, Mount Eliza VIC. Service to international public health through immunisation programs.
The late Dr Stephen Vincent Coles, Mt Martha VIC. Service to veterinary science, and to professional bodies.
Dr John Paxton Collins, Toorak VIC. Service to medicine, particularly to breast cancer treatment.
Dr Joseph James Collins, Oatley NSW. Service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Shane Owen Colquhoun, Perth WA. Service to performing and cultural arts administration.
Ms Deborah Anne Conway, VIC. Service to the performing arts as a singer, songwriter and producer.
Mrs Glenise Maxine Coulthard, Port Augusta SA. Service to Aboriginal health in South Australia, and to emergency response organisations.
Ms Jane Selby Covernton, Adelaide SA. Service to the literary arts as a publisher of children's books.
Ms Marita Louise Cowie, Bardon QLD. Service to community health in rural and remote areas.
Ms Catherine (Emily) Cox, Red Hill QLD. Service to the performing arts through choral music.
Dr The Hon. Mary Catherine Crawford, Brisbane QLD. Service to women, and to the people and Parliament of Australia.
Ms Judith Margaret Cross, Lockleys SA. Service to community health through social welfare organisations.
Emeritus Prof. Brendan Crotty, VIC. Service to health education, and to the community.
Ms Dyan Elizabeth Currie, Camp Hill QLD. Service to town planning and strategic urban development.
Dr Geoffrey Michael Currie, Wagga Wagga NSW. Service to nuclear medicine and medical radiation science.
Mr David Edmund Curtain QC, Toorak VIC. Service to the law, and to professional legal organisations.
Mr Henry Gibson Dan, Mooroobool QLD. Service to music, and to the Indigenous community.
Mrs Sara Megan David, Bull Creek WA. Service to international humanitarian health programs.
Ms Sarah Kate Davies, Brighton VIC. Service to the community through executive roles.
Prof. Karen Patricia Day, VIC. Service to science education, and to global public health.
Prof. Richard de Dear, Annandale NSW. Service to education, particularly the design of the built environment.
Mr Damian John De Marco, Wallaroo NSW. Service to the community as a child safety advocate.
Dr Leoni Marilyn Degenhardt, Gerroa NSW. Service to education through the independent schools sector.
Ms Maria Dimopoulos, Altona VIC. Service to women, to cultural diversity, and to the prevention of domestic violence.
Mr Carl John Dowd, Toorak VIC. Service to the community through philanthropic endeavours.
Mr Justin Joseph Dowd, Glenhaven NSW. Service to family law, and to professional associations.
Mrs Wendy Dowd, Toorak VIC. Service to the community through philanthropic endeavours.
The Rev. Ann Bryson Drummond, Docklands VIC. Service to the Uniting Church in Australia, and to women.
Dr Gillian Mary Duchesne, Hawthorn VIC. Service to radiation oncology medicine, and to professional medical organisations.
The late Ms Juli Dugdale, Elwood VIC. Service to young women through leadership development organisations.
Dr Robert John Edgar, East Melbourne VIC. Service to the banking and finance sectors, and to medical research organisations.
Prof. Harriet Edquist, Melbourne VIC. Service to architectural history and design, and to higher education.
Dr Paul Elias Eliadis, South Brisbane QLD. Service to medicine as a clinical haematologist, and to charitable initiatives.
Mr Allan English, St Lucia QLD. Service to the community through philanthropy. Ms Lynette Gwenyth English, Findon SA. Service to mental health and consumer support organisations.
Mr Wesley James Enoch, Dunwich QLD. Service to the performing arts as an Indigenous director and playwright.
Mr Terence Charles Evans, SA. Service to higher education, to health organisations, and to the law.
Dr Graham John Faichney, Mosman NSW. Service to science in the fields of animal nutrition and physiology.
Dr Ian James Fairnie, Bull Creek WA. For significant service to the community, and to veterinary and agricultural organisations.
Mr Andrew Charles Farriss, Barraba NSW. Service to the performing arts as a musician, composer and producer.
Ms Mary Featherston, Ivanhoe VIC. Service to the arts, particularly to interior and industrial design.
Mr Paul James Field, NSW. Service to the arts, particularly to children's entertainment, and as a supporter of charitable endeavours.
Emeritus Prof. John Joseph Fitzgerald, Carlton North VIC. Service to higher education, particularly in the field of Chinese studies.
Mrs Diane Mildred Fleming, Prahran VIC. Service to Australia-Africa relations, and to education.
Mr Peter Charles Flinn, Dunkeld VIC. Service to agricultural research through the promotion of near-infrared spectroscopy.
The late Mr John Clement Fordham OAM, Woollahra NSW. Service to the community through philanthropic support for a range of foundations.
Mr George Cameron Fox, QLD. Service to the law, to professional legal organisations, and to the community.
Prof. Raelene Frances, Aranda ACT. Service to history studies as a teacher and author.
Ms Christine Franks, Greenwich NSW. Service to the community through social welfare initiatives.
Dr Erica Frydenberg, VIC. Service to psychology as a researcher, educator and adviser.
Mr Kim Gillis, Moruya NSW. Service to public administration, and to defence projects.
Emeritus Prof. Jeffrey Denys Goldsworthy, VIC. Service to education, particularly to legal history and philosophy.
Ms Rachel Ann Griffiths, NSW. Service to the performing arts as an actor. Ms Johanna Leigh Griggs, Collaroy NSW. Service to community health, to television, and to sport.
Mr Matthew Thomas Grounds, NSW. Service to the financial investment sector, and to the community.
Dr Sanghamitra Guha, Norwood SA. Service to medicine, and to medical education. Emeritus Prof. Anthony John Guttmann, VIC. Service to the mathematical sciences, and to education.
Mr Allan Thomas Haggarty, Griffith NSW. Service to the community. The Hon. Hartley Roland Hansen QC, Toorak VIC. Service to the law, and to professional associations.
Mrs Dallas Elspeth Hayden, QLD. Service to the Australian community. Dr Janice Leona Hills, NT. Service to veterinary science, and to the community. Dr Vedella May Hinckley, Cedar Creek QLD. Service to medicine as a plastic and reconstructive surgeon.
Ms Bella Hirshorn, Toorak VIC. Service to the Jewish community, and to women. Mrs Trina Coral Hockley, Worongary QLD. Service to the community, and to business.
Mr Grant Donald Hunt, Isle of Capri QLD. Service to the tourism and hospitality sectors.
Mrs Jennifer Ruth Hurley, Fullarton SA. Service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mr Geoffrey Ian Huston, Red Hill ACT. Service to science, and through pioneering roles with the internet.
Dr Alison Scott Inglis, Parkville VIC. Service to education, and to the museum and galleries sector.
Ms Catherine Mary Inglis, NSW. Service to the building and construction industry.
Dr Robyn Rae Iredale, Scotland Island NSW. Service to people with an intellectual disability, and to education.
Mr David Harley Jacobs, Newport NSW. Service to Australia-Japan relations, and to business.
Dr Miles Gareth Jakeman, Deakin ACT. Service to business, to national security, and to the community.
Dr Gael Jennings, Northcote VIC. Service to science, and to the broadcast media. Ms Alana Therese Johnson, Benalla VIC. Service to women through leadership and advisory roles.
Prof. Margaret Anne Jolly, Hackett ACT. Service to education, particularly to gender and Pacific studies.
Rabbi Zalman Kastel, St Ives NSW. Service to interfaith and intercultural understanding and acceptance.
Mr Barry Leonard Kelly, Coorparoo QLD. Service to the mining and minerals sectors, and to business.
The Hon. Charles (Rod)erick Kemp, VIC. Service to the Parliament of Australia, and to the people of Victoria.
Mrs Rae Merlyn Kingsbury, Castlemaine VIC. Service to the international community of Timor Leste.
Mrs Christine Elizabeth Kirby, Abbotsford NSW. Service to the community, and to women.
Prof. Martin Evald Krygier, University of NSW. Service to legal education, and to professional associations.
Mr Murray Wayne Lampard APM, Gwelup WA. Service to the community of WA. Mr Douglas Lawrence OAM, West Brunswick VIC. Service to the performing arts, particularly to chamber choirs.
Ms Helen Louise Leake, SA. Service to film, and to professional organisations. Dr David Ronald Leece PSM RFD ED, Beecroft NSW. Service to the environment, and to defence and security studies.
Dr Michael Kwok Leung, Malvern VIC. Service to medicine, and to the international community.
Mrs Rose Lew, Toorak VIC. Service to the community, and to philanthropy. Mrs Dorothy Hazel Lipmann, Richmond VIC. Service to the elderly, and to the visual arts.
Mrs Susan Mary Logie-Smith, Armadale VIC. Service to the decorative and fine arts.
The late Mr Eric William Lumsden PSM, Wannanup WA. Service to public administration, and to planning.
Mr Kenneth Duncan MacDonald, Indooroopilly QLD. Service to the law, and to the legal profession.
Ms Jenni Mack, NSW. Service to business through consumer advocacy roles. Dr Robert David MacPherson, Brisbane QLD. Service to the visual arts. Ms Robin (Bobbi) Mahlab, Birchgrove NSW. Service to women, to publishing, and to philanthropy.
Ms Keelen Marie Mailman, Augathella QLD. Service to the Indigenous community. Mr Michael Kevin Malouf, Wandana Heights VIC. Service to local government, and to the community of Victoria.
Prof. Lenore Hilda Manderson, Prahran VIC. Service to education, particularly medical anthropology, and to public health.
Mr Duncan Antony Marshall, Chapman ACT. Service to heritage conservation. Ms Julie Marie Mason, Point Cook VIC. Service to the community, and to education.
Ms Janet Patricia Matton, Melbourne VIC. Service to the information technology and health sectors.
Ms Rachael Zoa Maza, Sunshine VIC. Service to the performing arts as an artistic director.
Ms Kathryn Anne McClymont, Paddington NSW. Service to the print media, and to investigative journalism.
Ms Vicki Gayle McDonald, QLD. Service to librarianship, and professional associations.
Ms Catherine (Ludo) McFerran, Bermagui NSW. Service to women and children, and to social justice.
Mr Graham Robert McKenzie-Smith, Mount Pleasant WA. Service to military history preservation, and to forestry.
Dr Helen Diana McLean, Kingswood SA. Service to dentistry, and to professional associations.
Dr Suzanne Bridget McNicol QC, Melbourne VIC. Service to the law, and to the legal profession.
Mr Paul Joseph Mercurio, Tyabb VIC. Service to the performing arts, particularly to dance.
Mrs Janine Louise Middleton, Mosman NSW. Service to the LGBTIQ community, and to marriage equality.
Mr Timothy David Minchin, Coogee NSW. Service to the performing arts, and to the community.
Ms Heather Lee Mitchell, Surry Hills NSW. Service to the performing arts, and to the community.
Prof. Marjory Lucy Moodie, Eaglemont VIC. Service to education, particularly to health economics.
Ms Cathi Moore, Narrabundah ACT. Service to young women, and to the community. The Rev. Canon Dr John Laurence Morgan, Moe VIC. Service to education, and to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Mr John Patrick Mullen, NSW. Service to business, and to the community. Ms Patricia Anne Murray, Mount Claremont WA. Service to the community through family social welfare associations.
Dr Anthony Leigh Mylius, Northam WA. Service to community health, and to cardiology.
Prof. Marea Nicholson, Glenhaven NSW. Service to education, and to professional standards.
Ms Melissa Noonan, Doncaster East VIC. Service to people with a disability. Prof. Pauline Margaret Nugent, East Melbourne VIC. Service to education, and to nursing.
Emeritus Prof. John Frederick O'Callaghan, Yarralumla ACT. Service to information technology, and to education.
Ms Caroline O'Connor, Noosaville QLD. Service to the performing arts, particularly to musical theatre.
The late Ms Patricia Maria O'Donnell, Fitzroy VIC. Service to the community through a range of roles.
Dr John William Orchard, Coogee NSW. Service to sports medicine, particularly to cricket.
Mr William Patrick O'Shea, Melbourne VIC. Service to the legal profession, and to the community.
Mr Peter John Overton, Willoughby NSW. Service to the broadcast media, and to the community.
Mr David Philip Paratz, Paddington QLD. Service to the Jewish community of Queensland, and to the law.
Ms Colleen Georgette Pearce, North Fitzroy VIC. Service to the community through public advocacy roles.
Dr Peter Andreas Pedersen, Campbell ACT. Service to military history as an author and researcher.
Mr Robert Maxwell Penfold, Los Angeles California USA . Service to the broadcast media, and to journalism.
The late Lieutenant Colonel Barry Petersen MC (Retd), QLD. Service to the international community of Thailand.
Ms Sabine Cornelia Phillips, Port Melbourne VIC. Service to aged welfare, and to the legal profession.
Mr Peter James Plummer, QLD. Service to higher education, to health research, and to public administration.
Prof. Laura Poole-Warren, Coogee NSW. Service to education, and to biomedical engineering.
Emeritus Prof. Sharman Ellen Pretty, Wahroonga NSW. Service to music education, and the performing arts.
The late Prof. Steven Russell Raine, Middle Ridge QLD. Service to soil science and agriculture, and to education.
The late Mr Daniel Leo Reardon, TAS. Service to the community of Tasmania through social welfare and charitable organisations.
Ms Jennifer Mary Richter, Glenunga SA. Service to medical administration, and to community health.
Emeritus Prof. Staniforth Ricketson, Carlton North VIC. Service to legal education, and to intellectual property law.
Dr Peter William Riddles, QLD. Service to science, to biotechnology, and to innovation.
The Hon. Fredrick Riebeling, Dudley Park WA. Service to the people and Parliament of Western Australia.
Mr Gary Phillip Roberts, Dalkeith WA. Service to the broadcast media, particularly to radio.
Mr David Michael Ross, East Side NT. Service to the Indigenous community of Central Australia.
Ms Violet Roumeliotis, Carlton NSW. Service to the community, particularly to refugee support.
Dr Walter John Russell, SA. Service to medicine in the field of anaesthesia, and to medical health standards.
Dr Sabar Rustomjee, Malvern East VIC. Service to psychotherapy, and to community health.
Dr John Dominic Santamaria, Heidelberg VIC. Service to intensive care medicine. Ms Janine Sargeant, Balmain NSW. Service to medical administration through a range of roles.
Ms Marion Albertje Saville, Carlton North VIC. Service to women's health through cervical screening initiatives.
Mr George Savvides, Mount Martha VIC. Service to the community, to charitable groups, and to business.
Mr Michael James Scott, West Pymble NSW. Service to urban development, and to the community.
Ms Robyn Margaret Sexton, Northbridge NSW. Service to the law, and to the judiciary.
Dr Errol Vernon Seymour, Gooseberry Hill WA. Service to the oil and gas industry, and to engineering.
Emeritus Prof. Cindy Shannon, QLD. Service to Indigenous health, and to medical education.
Prof. Robert Keith Shepherd, Ascot Vale VIC. Service to biomedical research, and to education.
Mr Vianney Shiel, Templestowe VIC. Service to electronic engineering, and to education.
Mr John A Simpson, Euroa VIC. Service to people who are blind or have low vision.
Ms Christine Lois Simpson Stokes, WA. Service to the community through cultural organisations.
Mr Keith Nichol Slater, Greenmount WA. Service to cricket, Australian rules football, and baseball, in Western Australia.
Dr Judith Beryl Smart, Richmond VIC. Service to education, to social research, and to women.
Mr Damien John Smith, Deepdene VIC. Service to business through a range of roles.
Mrs Georgina Jane Somerset, Durong QLD. Service to primary industry, to women, and to the community.
Ms Carol (Carlotta) Spencer, Surfers Paradise QLD. Service to the performing arts, and to the LGBTIQ community.
Ms Claire Elena Spencer, St Kilda West VIC. Service to arts administration, and to the community.
The late Mr Jeremy Mark Spinak, NSW. Service to the Jewish community, to multicultural relations, and to interfaith dialogue.
Ms Julie Anne Steiner, NSW. Service to business through a range of roles. Emeritus Prof. Vivian Bruce Sunderland, Claremont WA. Service to education, particularly to pharmacy.
Dr Robert Jeffrey Sward, Malvern VIC. Service to primary industry, to gene technology, and to the Jewish community.
Prof. Acram Momolook Taji, Saint Lucia QLD. Service to education, particularly to horticultural science and plant biotechnology.
Dr Peter George Thorne, Albert Park VIC. Service to computer science education, and to history.
Mr Robert Murray Torrance, Rossmoyne WA. Service to the building and construction industry.
Mr Vincent Tremaine, Henley Beach SA. Service to shipping infrastructure and freight transport.
Dr Mathew Ansel Trinca Talalin, ACT. Service to the museums and galleries sector.
Prof. Kenneth Thomas Trotman, Oatley NSW. Service to education, particularly accounting.
Mr Daniel Philip Tucker, WA. Service to mining, and to the Indigenous community. Mr Michael Robert Tyack, Rozelle NSW. Service to the performing arts. Mr Richard Ashton Warner, TAS. Service to agricultural research and development. Prof. Lea Elizabeth Waters-Scholes, Parkville VIC. Service to education, and to psychology.
Emeritus Prof. Roderick Tucker Wells, Flagstaff Hill SA. Service to education, and to the biological sciences.
Dr Ann Felicity Westmore, Kew VIC. Service to medical history, and to science communication.
Emeritus Prof. Edward Thomas White, Indooroopilly QLD. Service to higher education, particularly to chemical engineering.
Ms Tracey Whiting, SA. Service to the museums and galleries sector. Mrs Georgina Dulcie Williams, Preston VIC. Service to the Indigenous community through advocacy roles.
Mr John Denis Witheriff, Varsity Lakes QLD. Service to business, and to the community of the Gold Coast.
Dr Dedee Daryl Woodside, Umina Beach NSW. Service to animal conservation, and to zoological organisations.
Dr Graeme Leonard Worboys, Gilmore ACT. Service to conservation and the environment, and to the community.
Mr Heathcote McMichael Wright QC, Flinders VIC. Service to the law, and to the performing arts.
Dr Desiree Swei-Lien Yap, East Melbourne VIC. Service to women's health, and to medicine.
Prof. Justin John Yerbury, Wollongong NSW. Service to education and research in the field of biological sciences.
Mr John Zerunge Young, Kew VIC. Service to the visual arts, and as a role model. MEDAL (OAM) GENERAL DIVISION Mr Robert John Abbot, Sunshine Coast QLD. For service to local government, and to the communities of Noosa and Sunshine Coast.
Mrs Sandra Gai Ackers, NSW. For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Kenneth Bruce Adams, Bowral NSW. For service to the community of the Southern Highlands, and to the plumbing industry.
Mr Lindsay Mark Adams, Bunya QLD. For service to the professional speaking industry.
Ms Joanna Geraldine Agius, SA. For service to people who are deaf or hard of hearing, and to the Indigenous community.
Dr Qazi Ashfaq Ahmad, Bonnyrigg NSW. For service to the Muslim community, and to interfaith relations.
Ms Julie Christine Ainsworth, Maryville NSW. For service to the community of Newcastle.
Mr Daryl James Akers, Melton South VIC. For service to conservation and the environment.
Mrs Margaret Alice Aldous, Benalla VIC. For service to nursing. Mrs Alison Moorna Alexander, Karana Downs QLD. For service to the tourism and hospitality industry.
Mrs Diana Joy Alexander, Lockhart NSW. For service to education, and to the community.
Mr Geoffrey Robert Alexander, Shepparton VIC. For service to the community of Shepparton.
Mr Brian Leslie Allen, Rosebud VIC. For service to education in developing countries, and to the community.
Mrs Ronda May Alterator, Warriewood NSW. For service to netball. Mrs Julie Michelle Anderson, Berwick VIC. For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Robyn McDonald Anderson, VIC. For service to children through hospital charitable organisations.
Mrs Rebecca Andrews, South Maroota NSW. For service to the community of West Papua, and to equestrian organisations.
Mr Phillip Nicholas Antippa, Albert Park VIC. For service to thoracic surgery, and to music.
Mrs Lorna Apelt, Dalby QLD. For service to aged welfare.
Mr Joseph (Yossi) Aron, Caulfield VIC. For service to the Jewish community of Victoria.
Mr Charles Albert Aronson, Bellevue Hill NSW. For service to the Jewish community of NSW.
Mr Antonio Arrigo, Bunyip VIC. For service to the community of Bunyip. Mrs Julie Ann Arthur, Maryborough QLD. For service to local government, and to the community of the Fraser Coast.
Mr Robert Barry Auston, NSW. For service to veterans through a range of organisations.
Ms Patricia Joyce Bailey, Cairns QLD. For service to the community of Cairns, and to rugby league.
Mrs Rosanna Baini, Mernda VIC. For service to the Lebanese community of Victoria.
Mr Glenn McGregor Baker, Alfred Cove WA. For service to children through charitable organisations.
Mr Jason Paul Baker, Curl Curl NSW. For service to rowing.
Mrs Dianne Ball, Raymond Terrace NSW. For service to the Indigenous community of the Hunter.
Mr Laurie Ernest Barber, Port Macquarie NSW. For service to the community of Port Macquarie.
Mr Leonard Robert Barlow, VIC. For service to veterans and their families. The late Ms Eve Barratt, Mount Gambier SA. For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Richard Joseph Barry, Narrabri NSW. For service to veterans and their families, and to the community of Narrabri.
Mr Patrick Joseph Bartolo, Toongabbie NSW. For service to the Maltese community of NSW.
Mrs Nancy Dawn Bates, Maryborough QLD. For service to the community of Maryborough.
Mr Joel Becker, Fairfield VIC. For service to literary organisations. Ms Lisa Ann Beehag, Sylvania NSW. For service to netball.
Mr Lindsay Gregory Beer, Caulfield VIC. For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Neville Dickson Bell, Ascot QLD. For service to horse racing, and to the community of Caboolture.
Mr Richard Palmer Bennett, Alonnah TAS. For service to photography. Mr Albert Bensimon, Malvern SA. For service to business, and to the community. Mrs Suzanne Bergersen, Sussex Inlet NSW. For service to swimming. Mr Harry Herman Better, Caulfield North VIC. For service to the Jewish community of Victoria.
Mr Russell (John) Beynon, Bairnsdale VIC. For service to the community of Bairnsdale.
Ms Jocelyn Bignold, Footscray VIC. For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Richard Beresford Bignold, Gymea NSW. For service to surf lifesaving. Mr William Hugh Biscoe, Angaston SA. For service to the community of the Barossa.
Mrs Helen Margaret Black, Pullenvale QLD. For service to the community of Pittsworth.
Mr Lawrence Peter Black, Pullenvale QLD. For service to primary industry, and to the community.
The Rev. Margaret Jane Blair, Healesville VIC. For service to the Uniting Church.
Mr Simon Leigh Bloomer, Boronia VIC. For service to veterans and their families. Mr Brian Stuart Blythe, Portsea VIC. For service to business, and to the community.
Mrs Rosalind Bodley, Brighton VIC. For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr David Kevin Booth, Kincumber NSW. For service to the community of Gosford. Mr Mark P S Bourchier, Adelaide SA. For service to the community of South Australia.
Dr Michael John Bowden, Rapid Creek NT. For service to the Indigenous community of the Northern Territory.
Mr Wayne Morris Bowden, East Keilor VIC. For service to music, particularly through brass bands.
Mrs Lillian Ruth Bowen, QLD. For service to the Indigenous community of Cape York.
Mr Peter William Boyes, Ashmore QLD. For service to the community of Queensland. Mr Connell Francis Brannelly, Moulden NT. For service to the community of Darwin.
Mrs Coralie Elizabeth Brannelly, Moulden NT. For service to the community of Darwin.
Mrs Eulalie Perry Brewster, Inverloch VIC. For service to the community of Inverloch.
Mr Jonathan Ashley Briggs, VIC. For service to community history. Rear Admiral Peter Douglas Briggs AO CSC (Retd), Mornington VIC. For service to the preservation, commemoration and promotion of Australian naval heritage.
Mr Darryl Gregory Brohman, Cronulla NSW. For service to rugby league. Mr Aubrey Gordon Brooks, Tanilba Bay NSW. For service to the community of Newcastle.
Dr Catherine Janet Brown, Fairfield VIC. For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Ms Noeline Mabel Brown, Mount Murray NSW. For service to the performing arts as an actor and entertainer.
Mr Raymond Brown, Bulli NSW. For service to conservation and the environment. Mrs Thelma June Bryan, Westcourt QLD. For service to youth, and to swimming. Mr Joseph Francis Buhagiar, Yass NSW. For service to the community of the Southern Highlands.
The late Mr Robert Charles Bulley, Balwyn North VIC. For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Judy Charlotte Burke, Daw Park SA. For service to community health. Ms Patricia L Burke, Brighton VIC. For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Robyne Margaret Burridge, Coconut Grove NT. For service to people with a disability.
Mrs Maree Rosalie Byrne, Bowral NSW. For service to the community of the Southern Highlands.
Mrs Georgina Byrom, Taringa QLD. For service to the Anglican Church of Australia, and to education.
Mr Kenneth James Callander, Randwick NSW. For service to horse racing as a journalist and presenter.
Dr Donald Graham Campbell, QLD. For service to trauma medicine. Mr Donald Percival Cant, Somerton Park SA. For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Karen Elizabeth Carey, Belrose NSW. For service to secondary education. Mr Cedric Lyle Carr, Highton VIC. For service to the community of Geelong, and to accountancy.
Mr Geoffrey Marc Carr, Tamarama NSW. For service to rugby league. Mr Peter James Carter, Lockleys SA. For service to canoeing. Mr Mark Caruana, Marayong NSW. For service to the Maltese community of NSW. Sister Monica Mary Cavanagh, Waverton NSW. For service to the Catholic Church of Australia.
Mrs Jahna Cedar, Aveley WA. For service to the Indigenous community of Western Australia.
Mr Umesh Chandra, Taigum QLD. For service to the multicultural community of Queensland.
Mr Kenneth Ray Chapman, Cabramatta NSW. For service to the community of Cabramatta.
Mrs Joy Charlton, Theresa Park NSW. For service to equestrian sports. Ms Judith Anne Charnaud, Warriewood NSW. For service to conservation and the environment in Timor Leste.
Ms Paulette Dell Cherny, VIC. For service to the Jewish community of Victoria. Mr Michael Wan-Man Choi, Birkdale QLD. For service to the people and Parliament of Queensland.
Ms Tasneem Chopra, Moreland VIC. For service to the community through a range of roles.
Dr Ian Melvyn Chung, Sans Souci NSW. For service to the law, to medicine, and to the community.
Dr Adele Chynoweth, Braddon ACT. For service to public history. Mr Klaus Vilis Cimdins, Frankston VIC. For service to veterans and their families.
Ms Sandra Joan Clark, Broken Hill NSW. For service to Indigenous education, and to the community.
Mr James Clarke, Jurien Bay WA. For service to the community of Jurien Bay. Ms Pamela Nance Clarke, Horsham VIC. For service to local government, and to the community of Horsham.
Mrs Robyn Madelon Claydon, Hornsby Heights NSW. For service to education, and to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Mr Anthony David Clifford, USA. For service to the Jewish community of Sydney. Mr Roger Alexander Clifford, Bellevue Hill NSW. For service to the Jewish community of Sydney.
Ms Susan Gaye Clutterbuck, Boolarra VIC. For service to people who are deaf or hard of hearing.
Mr Andrew James Coad, Como WA. For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Leif Robert Cocks, Willagee WA. For service to the conservation of endangered animals.
Dr Phillip Seldon Cocks, Waverton NSW. For service to medicine, and to medical associations.
Mr Robert Andrew Coffey, Warrnambool VIC. For service to the community of Warrnambool.
Rabbi Dr Jeffrey Cohen, Vaucluse NSW. For service to community health, and to interfaith organisations.
Mrs Marlis Cohen, Balwyn North VIC. For service to the Jewish community. Mr Peter Combe, Glenside SA. For service to the performing arts, particularly music for children.
Dr Michael Thomas Connor, Colac VIC. For service to medicine, and to the community.
Ms Helen Rosemary Connor-Kendray, Kingston TAS. For service to people with Parkinson's.
Mr Fred Conway, QLD. For service to conservation and the environment. Mrs Genelle Cook, Annandale NSW. For service to people who are deaf or hard of hearing.
Mrs Dallas Antoinette Cooper, Bellerive TAS. For service to badminton, and to the community.
Mr John Alan Cootes, Belmont NSW. For service to the community, particularly to social welfare organisations.
Ms Elizabeth Corke, VIC. For service to conservation and the environment. Mr Anthony John Corr, Beaumaris VIC. For service to cricket. Mrs Margaret Mary Cossey, NSW. For service to Indigenous literacy and special-needs education.
Dr Lynne Maree Coulson Barr, Melbourne VIC. For service to community mental health.
Mr Christopher Richard Cox, East Gosford NSW. For service to the performing arts, and to the community.
Mr Lindsay Hamilton Crawford, Bairnsdale VIC. For service to the community of Paynesville.
Mr Warren James Cree, Belrose NSW. For service to youth, and to the community. Mrs Joan Winifred Cribb, Kenmore Hills QLD. For service to higher education as a botanist, and to the community.
Mrs Julie Margaret Cromer, Randwick NSW. For service to disability support organisations.
Mr Peter Crook, Kinglake VIC. For service to the community of Kinglake, and to veterans and their families.
Mr William Richard Cruwys, Fairfield West NSW. For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Simon Charles Cubitt, Winthrop WA. For service to the community of southern Western Australia.
Mr Ashley Alfred Cupitt, Yungaburra QLD. For service to the community of Yungaburra, and to boxing.
Ms Susan Margaret Cure, Bellerive TAS. For service to swimming. Mrs Krystyna Cyron, Canley Heights NSW. For service to the Polish community of NSW.
Mr Robert Philip Dance, Frankston VIC. For service to waterskiing. Mr Thomas Frank Danos, Toorak VIC. For service to the law, and to the community. Mr Colin Bruce Darts, Albury NSW. For service to veterans and their families. Ms Anna Louise Davey, Albury NSW. For service to circus performance and physical theatre.
Ms Maude Alice Davey, Abbotsford VIC. For service to the performing arts, particularly as an artistic director.
Ms Beth Davidson, Anglesea VIC. For service to local government, and to the community.
Mr Ivo Douglas Davies, City Beach WA. For service to the community of the Wheatbelt region of Western Australia.
Mrs Ruth Adelaide Daws, Burnside SA. For service to netball, and to the community.
Mrs Barbara May Dawson, Zillmere QLD. For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Valerie Josephine Dawson, Redcliffe QLD. For service to the performing arts as a singer and songwriter.
Mr Gionni Di Gravio, Mayfield NSW. For service to community history, particularly as an archivist.
Mr Philip John Dickie, . For service to the print media as a journalist. Mr Maxwell Gordon Dingle, Sussex Inlet NSW. For service to the visual arts through curatorial roles.
Mr Barry Robert Dobson, Inala QLD. For service to athletics. Ms Jennifer Christine Doubell, Toorak VIC. For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Ms Kerrie Anne Dougherty, Wyoming NSW. For service to astronautical history as a curator.
Mrs Annette Douglass, North Parramatta NSW. For service to youth through Scouts. Mr Peter George Doukas, Ashbury NSW. For service to multiculturalism in NSW. Mr John Dring, Ashford SA. For service to the rail transport industry. Mr Peter James Dunn, Kuraby QLD. For service to community history. Mr John Dyball, Vincentia NSW. For service to education.
Mr Carter Edwards, Canton Beach NSW. For service to the broadcast media, particularly to radio.
Mr Frederick (Gary) Edwards, Camberwell VIC. For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Kathryn Margaret Edwards, Boroondara VIC. For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Robert John Edwards, Corrimal NSW. For service to the international community of Fiji.
Dr Zenaida Sicat Edwards, Lindfield NSW. For service to the community, and to heritage preservation.
Mr Brian Paul Egan, Charleville QLD. For service to people in rural areas through social welfare support programs.
The late Ms Christine Joyce Egan, SA. For service to the Indigenous community of South Australia.
Mrs Nerida Egan, Charleville QLD. For service to people in rural areas through social welfare support programs.
Prof. Diana Egerton-Warburton, Prahran VIC. For service to emergency medicine. Ms Faiza El-Higzi, Sunnybank Hills QLD. For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Hassib Elias, North Ryde NSW. For service to the Palestinian community. Clinical Associate Prof. Nicholas John Evans, Glebe NSW. For service to neonatal medicine.
Mr Richard John Farrant, Shell Cove NSW. For service to golf. Mrs Judith Feiglin, Caulfield VIC. For service to the Jewish community. Ms Judith Ferber, Carrara QLD. For service to the performing arts. Mr Mark Leeds Ferguson, Avalon Beach NSW. For service to veterans and their families.
Ms Marie Ann Ficarra, Cronulla NSW. For service to the people and Parliament of NSW.
Ms Carly Findlay, Melbourne VIC. For service to people with a disability. Mr Robert George Flack, Bendigo VIC. For service to the community of Bendigo, and to finance.
Mrs Louise Anne Flitcroft Paisley, Rosebery NSW. For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Mary Teresa Foley, Margate QLD. For service to the community of Redcliffe. Ms Kira Joy Fong, Broome WA. For service to the Indigenous community of the Kimberley.
The late Mr Peter Ford, Mackay QLD. For service to heritage railway organisations.
Mr Peter John Forster, Anglesea VIC. For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr Simun Franjic, Duffy ACT. For service to the Croatian community of the Australian Capital Territory.
Ms Kerry Lee Franklin, Highett VIC. For service to softball. Associate Prof. Cecily Jane Freemantle, Mansfield VIC. For service to medical research, particularly to population health.
Mr Paul Matthew Freestone, Keilor Village VIC. For service to the road transport industry, and to the community.
Ms Colleen Debra Furlanetto, Euroa VIC. For service to community health. Ms Glenise Gale, Howrah TAS. For service to swimming.
Dr Vincent Bernard Gallichio, Preston VIC. For service to medicine. Ms Sherryl Maree Garbutt, Brunswick VIC. For service to the people and Parliament of Victoria.
Mr Stephen Charles Garbutt, Wyrallah NSW. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Dr Murray John Garde, West End QLD. For service to the Indigenous community of the Northern Territory.
Mr Peter Phillip Gash, Lady Elliott Island QLD. For service to eco-tourism, and to aviation.
Mr Craig Robert Gear, Redfern NSW. For service to aged welfare and seniors rights.
Mr Dennis James Gee, Terrigal NSW. For service to surf lifesaving. Ms Linda George, Melbourne VIC. For service to music education. Mr Stephen (Mark) Gilbert, North Adelaide SA. For service to engineering, and to the community.
Mrs Eileen Mary Giles, Rockingham WA. For service to people who are homeless. Mrs Annette Massie Gillen, North Adelaide SA. For service to the community of South Australia.
Mr Reynold William Gilson, Kangaroo Ground VIC. For service to music through brass bands.
Mr Ronald Richard Giveen OAM (Mil), NSW. For service to veterans and their families, and to the community.
Dr Hazel Fern Goldberg, NSW. For service to respiratory medicine. Mr John Dale Golotta, VIC. For service to veterans.
Mr Jolyon Bryham Good, Sandringham VIC. For service to the community of Sandringham.
Mr William Arthur Goodrem, Surfers Paradise QLD. For service to the communities of the Mornington Peninsula and Southport.
Mr James Kevan Goodworth, Hervey Bay QLD. For service to education. Dr Antony Robert Graham, Darlinghurst NSW. For service to medicine as a vascular surgeon.
Mr Barry Lindsay Grant, Bangor NSW. For service to veterans and their families. Mrs Robyn A Gray, Eureka NSW. For service to community history. Mr Ian Russell Green, VIC. For service to Buddhism, and to interfaith relations. Ms Kerry Isabelle Greenwood, Seddon VIC. For service to literature as a writer. Mr Richard David Griffiths, Lyneham ACT. For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Geoffrey Ross Grinton, Blackburn South VIC. For service to the Uniting Church in Australia.
Mr Rodney Eric Grummitt, Mount Martha VIC. For service to youth through Scouts. Mrs Doreen Patricia Gunn, Seymour VIC. For service to aged welfare. Mrs Promilla Gupta, SA. For service to the Indian community, and to multiculturalism.
Mrs Annette Jane Guterres, Concord NSW. For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Paul Anthony Hackett, Artarmon NSW. For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr George Halvagis, Mentone VIC. For service to the community, particularly to people affected by crime.
Mrs Pamela Mary Hamence, Bridgetown WA. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Colin Hamley, North Balwyn VIC. For service to veterans and their families. Mrs Denise Hanly, Raceview QLD. For service to the community of Ipswich. Dr Ian Victor Hansen, Kew VIC. For service to the community, and to education. Mrs Vivienne Julie Harkness, Hawthorn VIC. For service to community health. Mrs Pauline Zoe Harris, Watsonia VIC. For service to the community. Mr Donald Leslie Harrison, Belmont VIC. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Michael Anthony Hartung, Milsons Point NSW. For service to sport for people with a disability.
Mr John Francis Harvey, Wandin North VIC. For service to motor sports. Mrs Nancye Margaret Hawke, Gerroa NSW. For service to the community of Gerroa. Ms Rosemary Anne Hehir, VIC. For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Peter Turnbull Hemery, Newport Beach NSW. For service to sailing. Mrs Elva Margaret Henderson, Bongaree QLD. For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Brian Douglas Hern, Walkerville SA. For service to the Uniting Church in Australia.
Mr Terence Robert Hetherington, Nowra NSW. For service to community history. Associate Prof. Ian Donald Hewson, Kew East VIC. For service to dentistry. Mr David Colin Hicks, Meadow Springs WA. For service to people with a disability.
Mr Neil Laurence Hirt, West Ulverstone TAS. For service to the community. Mr Andrew Paul Hoban, Avoca Beach NSW. For service to surf lifesaving. Mr Graham William Hobbs, West Beach SA. For service to youth, and to lacrosse. Mrs Karen Laurel Hones, Bundanoon NSW. For service to the community of Bundanoon.
Mr Erik Norman Horrie, Erskine Park NSW. For service to rowing. Mr Garry Robert Howe, Pakenham VIC. For service to the community of the Cardinia shire.
Mr Kenneth John Howes, Nambour QLD. For service to youth through Scouts. Mr Colin Horace Howlett, Richmond TAS. For service to local government, and to the community of the Southern Midlands.
Mr Tony Humphrey, Cremorne NSW. For service to community health through suicide prevention organisations.
Ms Gillian Ruth Hund, Arthurs Seat VIC. For service to charitable organisations. Dr Shane Thomas Huntington, Keilor East VIC. For service to science as a communicator.
Mr Ross Hutchison, Penrith NSW. For service to the community. Mrs Mary Julia Hutton, Stirling WA. For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr Giuseppe (Joe) Ienco, Mount Compass SA. For service to the community through charitable and multicultural organisations.
Mr William David Incoll, Monbulk VIC. For service to the environment, and to the community of the Dandenong Ranges.
Dr Geoff Lawrence Irvine, NSW. For service to the chiropractic profession. Mrs Elizabeth Irwin, Mildura VIC. For service to community health. Mr Noel Stanley Jackling, Albury NSW. For service to the community history. Mr Gregory Reginald Jackson, Lindisfarne TAS. For service to the community of Tasmania.
Dr Wesley Sidney Jame, Berwick VIC. For service to community health. Mrs Pauline James, Raby NSW. For service to veterans and their families, and to the community.
Ms Sandy Jeffs, Christmas Hills VIC. For service to mental health organisations. Mr Tommy Anthony Jeffs, Canowindra NSW. For service to the hospitality industry. Dr Joseph Vaughan Johnson CSC AAM RFD ED, Garran ACT. For service to veterans, and to the community.
Mr Vaughan Gregory Johnson, Longreach QLD. For service to the people and Parliament of Queensland.
Mrs Caroline Johnston, Toorak VIC. For service to the community. Mr Peter Charles Kahn, Clovelly NSW. For service to community history. Major Terry Kanellos (Retd), Pascoe Vale South VIC. For service to veterans and their families, and to the community.
Mrs Julie Keamy, WA. For service to the merino wool industry, and to the community.
Mrs Bronwen Jean Keighery, Subiaco WA. For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr Gregory John Keighery, Subiaco WA. For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr Peter Kelly, Antigua QLD. For service to veterans and their families. Ms Deborah Kenna, Orange NSW. For service to community health. Ms Mary Elizabeth Kenneally, VIC. For service to the performing arts. Mr David Leslie Kerr, Gelorup WA. For service to the community of Bunbury. Mr Russell Humphrey Kerr, Frankston VIC. For service to education. Mrs Marvelle Frances Kerslake, Mitchell QLD. For service to the community of Mitchell.
Mrs Vicki Lorraine Key, Sunbury VIC. For service to the community, particularly to emergency response personnel.
Mrs Dorothy Ruth Khoo, Wandal QLD. For service to the Chinese community of Rockhampton.
Brigadier Patrick John Kidd (Retd), VIC. For service to sport for people with a disability.
Mr Richard Louis Kidd, Julimar WA. For service to the community of Julimar. Mr Bruce Kimberley, Berowra NSW. For service to cricket.
Ms Sandra Lorelle King, Mackenzie QLD. For service to the Indigenous community. Dr Stephen Jeffries King, Youngtown TAS. For service to veterinary science. Ms Margaret Knight, Mount Martha VIC. For service to veterans, and to community commemorations.
Mrs Marie Knight, Coonabarabran NSW. For service to people in rural and remote areas.
Mrs Kay Frances Lane, The Hill NSW. For service to music, and to education. Ms Jillian Lange-Mohr, Leopold VIC. For service to education. Mrs Rhonda Margaret Langford, Moss Vale NSW. For service to music, and to education.
Dr Thomas William Langston, Ulverstone TAS. For service to music, and to the community.
Ms Diana Betty Laube, Tiatukia SA. For service to conservation and the environment.
Dr Robert Lavis, TAS. For service to the international community through dental programs.
Dr Morris Arthur Lee, Holland Park West QLD. For service to the international community of Bangladesh.
Mr Murray Stuart Lennon, North Wahroonga NSW. For service to the community of St Ives.
Mrs Lilian Selina Leonard, Pearcedale VIC. For service to community health. Dr Liang Joo Leow, NSW. For service to medicine, and to the community. Mr Christian Lhotka, QLD. For service to the community of Widgee. Dr Anthony John Lian-Lloyd, Quorn SA. For service to medicine, and to the community.
Mr Peter Liefman, Wheelers Hill VIC. For service to veterans and their families. Dr Sadanand Limaye, Walkerville SA. For service to medicine, and to the multicultural community.
Mr James Rodham Lindsay, Gisborne VIC. For service to the community of the Macedon Ranges.
Mr John Lindsay, Wonthaggi VIC. For service to the community of Wonthaggi. Mr Thomas Kelsall Lindsay, Coffs Harbour NSW. For service to the road transport industry, and to the community.
Mr John Mitchell Little, SA. For service to the community of the Barossa Valley. Ms Sarah Jane Lloyd, Birralee TAS. For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr John Lo Piccolo, Hillside VIC. For service to the performing arts. Mr Alan Claude Locke, Naremburn NSW. For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Ms Diane Margaret Lopez, St Kilda VIC. For service to local government, and to the community of Brighton.
Ms Rafaela Lopez, Footscray VIC. For service to the Hispanic community of Victoria.
Ms June Annette Lowe, NSW. For service to the Indigenous community of the Illawarra.
Mr Matthew Alan Luther, Gordon ACT. For service to nursing.
Mr John Francis Lynch, Grange SA. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Russell John Magee, Malvern East VIC. For service to the museums and galleries sector.
Ms Patrice Rene Mahoney, Wonthaggi VIC. For service to the Indigenous community of Victoria.
Mrs Diana Mahony, Oatlands NSW. For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Richard Treacy Mailey, Bonnet Bay NSW. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Ms Colleen Mandicos, Wollongong NSW. For service to aged welfare. Mr Peter Maniscalco, Hunters Hill NSW. For service to the Italian community of Hunters Hill.
Mr Colin George Mann, Tenterfield NSW. For service to aged welfare. Mr Michael Mannington, Bilgola Plateau NSW. For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Nicholas James Marchesi, Albion QLD. For service to people experiencing homelessness.
Mr Jim Ian Markovski, Williamstown VIC. For service to youth. Dr David John Marshall, Crafers SA. For service to orthopaedic medicine. Ms Gail Elizabeth Marshall, Point Piper NSW. For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Edward Leigh Maughan, Cameron Park NSW. For service to rugby league. Mr Kenneth Barrett McAllister, Wallington VIC. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mrs Helen Susanne McCaffrey, Concord NSW. For service to local government, and to the community of Canada Bay.
Mr Roger Wilfrid McCauley, Moonta SA. For service to the Uniting Church in Australia, and to the community.
Mr John Leslie McCoy, Mitchelton QLD. For service to the broadcast media, and to the community.
Ms Sally Anne McCutchan, St Kilda VIC. For service to the community through ethical investment organisations.
Mr Peter John McDermott, TAS. For service to the transport and tourism sectors. Mr Michael Joseph McDonald, Caloundra QLD. For service to surf lifesaving. The late Mrs Carolyn Narelle McDowall, VIC. For service to the decorative arts, and to the community.
Ms Anne McEwen, Eden Hills SA. For service to the Parliament of Australia, and to the community of South Australia.
Mr Barry Patrick McFarlane, Grovedale VIC. For service to cricket. Ms Dianne Joy McGrath, Golden Point VIC. For service to international humanitarian programs, and to the community of Ballarat.
Mr Duncan Alexander McInnes, Radford QLD. For service to agricultural show societies, to the dairy industry, and to the community.
Mr Kenneth Ray McIntyre, NSW. For service to veterans and their families. Ms Yvonne McKerrow Jennings, Lake Boga VIC. For service to the community of the Swan Hill region.
Dr Jennifer Ann McMahon, Newnham TAS. For service to education, and to sport. Ms Janelle Mary McMillan, Berriedale TAS. For service to the community through charitable fundraising initiatives.
Mrs Bridget Noreen McNamara, Shepparton VIC. For service to the community of Shepparton.
Ms Andrea Joy McNeil, Camberwell VIC. For service to swimming. Mr Peter Charles McPhee, Leeton NSW. For service to youth, and to the community. Mr Leslie Thomas Meiklejohn, Warwick QLD. For service to local government, and to the community of Warwick.
Mr Naim Melhem, Dandenong VIC. For service to the community through a range of roles.
Pastor Lance Gregory Mergard, Fortitude Valley QLD. For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
The late Mr Andrew John (Hank) Middleton, Aberfoyle Park SA. For service to Australian rules football in South Australia.
Dr Sarah Lavinia Midgley, Newtown NSW. For service to the LGBTIQ community. Mrs Catherine Anne Milgate, Strathfield NSW. For service to the community. Mrs Janette May Miller, New Town TAS. For service to people who are blind or have low vision.
Mr Lawrence Harvey Miller, Waurn Ponds VIC. For service to the community. Mr John Douglas Mills, Macksville NSW. For service to the community of Nambucca Heads.
Mrs Evelyn Missen, Eynesbury VIC. For service to youth, and to the community. Ms Susan Jennifer (Jenny) Mitchell, Newport VIC. For service to refugees, and to the community.
Mr William John Mitchell, Townsville QLD. For service to the law in Queensland. Miss Cheryl Lynette Moggs, Goondiwindi QLD. For service to the Indigenous community of Goondiwindi.
Mr John Stephen Molnar, Middle Park VIC. For service to charitable organisations.
Mr Gerald Clive Moore, Bomaderry NSW. For service to the Indigenous community. Mr Mark Anthony Morrison, Kempsey NSW. For service to vocational education, and to the community.
Mrs Monica Hilary Morse, Bathurst NSW. For service to local government, and to the community of Bathurst.
Mrs Daliah Moss, Broome WA. For service to international eye health programs, and to professional organisations.
Mrs Heather Motteram, Fullarton SA. For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mrs Elizabeth Macdonald Mourik, Wooragee VIC. For service to education, and to the community.
Mrs Barbara Janine Mullan, Norwood SA. For service to the creative arts. Mr Neil Mullard, Uraidla SA. For service to the community of Uraidla. Ms Kate Mulvany, Tempe NSW. For service to the performing arts. Ms Jodee Paula Mundy, Thornbury VIC. For service to the performing arts. Mrs Rosalind Kaye Murree-Allen, Newcastle NSW. For service to the community of Newcastle.
Mr Glenn Elliott Muskett, Hillarys WA. For service to aged welfare. Dr Gunvantrai Premji Naker, Sylvania NSW. For service to the international community, and to medicine.
Ms Sandra Kimlin Navalli, Newcastle NSW. For service to international education. Mr Cheung Yin Ng, Hawthorn VIC. For service to the Chinese community of Victoria.
Mr Phillip Wai-Shing Ng, Epping NSW. For service to Chinese language education, and to the community.
Dr Meng Chong Ngu, Strathfield NSW. For service to medicine in the fields of gastroenterology and hepatology.
Mr James Ingle Nicholson, Glenorchy TAS. For service to the community of Tasmania.
Ms Elizabeth Nield, Griffith ACT. For service to the performing and visual arts. Mr Lloyd Alwyn Nielsen, Mount Molloy QLD. For service to conservation and the environment.
Ms Deborah Mary Niland, Wollstonecraft NSW. For service to children's literature.
Ms Maree Therese Nutt, Newport NSW. For service to the international community through poverty eradication organisations.
Ms Catherine Marie-Claire Oelrichs, Coopers Shoot NSW. For service to the international community of Indonesia.
The Rev. Beth O'Neill, Blackall QLD. For service to the community of Blackall. Mrs Margaret Owen, Wembley WA. For service to conservation and the environment. Mrs Marlene Joy Owen, Gympie QLD. For service to the community of Gympie. Mrs Meryl Joy Packer, Kingston ACT. For service to the Lutheran Church of Australia.
Mr Rex William Packer, Kingston ACT. For service to the Lutheran Church of Australia.
Mr Maxwell Arthur Page, Nedlands WA. For service to the performing arts in WA. Mr Raymond Ernest Palmer, Rouse Hill NSW. For service to the community of Epping.
Dr Stephen George Papas, Indooroopilly QLD. For service to the community, and to dentistry.
Associate Prof. Maria Parappilly, SA. For service to science education, and women.
Mr Lucas Brooke Patchett, Albion QLD. For service to people experiencing homelessness.
Mr Ian Mead Paterson, Devonport TAS. For service to the community of Tasmania. Mr Andrew Guy Peake, Dulwich SA. For service to community history. Mrs Margaret Rose Pearce, Tuggerawong NSW. For service to the community. Mr Anthony Lester Pearson, Fountaindale NSW. For service to youth, and to the community of Gosford.
Mr Ian Kenneth Penny, Warracknabeal VIC. For service to the community of Warracknabeal.
Mr Armando Percuoco, NSW. For service to the community, and to the restaurant industry.
The late Mr Boniface Pirrimngip Perdjert, Wadeye NT. For service to the Catholic Church, and to the community.
Mr Wasantha Premalal Perera, Essendon VIC. For service to the Sri Lankan community of Victoria, and to engineering.
Mr John Winter Pickup, Mackay QLD. For service to the community as a regional radio broadcaster.
Ms Rosemary Plummer, Tennant Creek NT. For service to the Indigenous community of the Northern Territory.
Mr Trevor Plymin, James Creek NSW. For service to veterans and their families. Mr Nigel James Porteous, South Yarra VIC. For service to the community, and to the shipping transport industry.
The late Mr Ken Murray Potts, West Lakes SA. For service to Australian rules football, and to the community.
Ms Patricia Lorraine Powell, Rockingham WA. For service to people who are homeless.
Mr Mal Pratt, Minyama QLD. For service to surf lifesaving.
Mrs Margaret Ellen Primmer, Geelong VIC. For service to women, and to the community.
Mrs Donna Faye Prytulak, Northam WA. For service to veterans and their families. Mr Derek Peter Pugh, Rapid Creek NT. For service to education in the NT. Mr Craig Robert Purdam, O'Connor ACT. For service to sports administration, and to physiotherapy.
Dr Christopher John Quinn, Hamilton QLD. For service to research science in the field of plant systemics.
Mrs Marjorie Anne Quinn, WA. For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr John Graham Rae, Portarlington VIC. For service to the community of Portarlington.
Mr Michael Benjamin Rahilly, Walton on Thames United Kingdo . For service to sport for people with a disability.
Mr Edward Peter Ralston, Kaleen ACT. For service to sport for people who are blind or have low vision.
Mrs Sylvia Shirley Ramsden, Croydon VIC. For service to the community of Lilydale.
Mrs Joanna Helen Randell, Carmel WA. For service to the community through music. Mr Ronald Kenneth Ray, Kings Langley NSW. For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Carl John Rayner, Anglesea VIC. For service to conservation and environment. Ms Karen Jeanne Redman, Mount Barker SA. For service to music through concert bands.
Mrs Nerida Constance Reid, Hay NSW. For service to the community of Hay. Mrs Annette Gay (Honi) Reifler, NSW. For service to community health. Mr Jean-Pierre Reifler, Glenreagh NSW. For service to community health. Mr Jose Relunia, Penrith NSW. For service to the Filipino community of NSW. Ms Seri Franceys Renkin, Malvern VIC. For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mr Douglas Alan Renshaw, Bicheno TAS. For service to the community of Bicheno. Mr John Restuccia, Botany NSW. For service to surf lifesaving. Mr Nicholas John Roberts, Mount Martha VIC. For service to the community of Mount Martha.
Mr Graeme John Robertson, Kulin WA. For service to the community of Kulin. Ms Rebekah Sarah Robertson, Bentleigh VIC. For service to the trans and gender diverse community.
Mr Kerry A Robinson, Chatswood NSW. For service to local government, and to town planning.
Dr Andrew Kenneth Rollond, Glenelg SA. For service to medicine, and to local government.
Mr William Henry Romans, Mansfield VIC. For service to the communities of Mansfield and Bonnie Doon.
Dr Kim Frances Rooney, Launceston TAS. For service to medicine. Mrs Valerie Mary Rooney, Boronia Heights QLD. For service to war widows, and to the community of Logan.
Mr Ronald Rosenberg, Belfield NSW. For service to veterans, and to the community.
Mr Brian Stephen Rosengarten, Brighton East VIC. For service to community health.
The Rev. Albert William Rosier, Galston NSW. For service to the Uniting Church of Australia, and to the community.
Mr Bradley John Rossiter, Surfside NSW. For service to community of the Eurobodalla.
Mrs Tamara Eve (Timmy) Rubin, St Kilda East VIC. For service to the Jewish community of Melbourne.
Mr Adrian John Rumore, Lyneham ACT. For service to homeless youth, and to physiotherapy.
Mrs Geraldine Noreen Ryan, Mount Waverley VIC. For service to Irish dancing. Ms Julie Ryan, Ivanhoe East VIC. For service to secondary education. Ms Patricia Noeline Sabine, Rokeby TAS. For service to the museums and galleries sector.
Ms Wendy Anne Saclier, Curtin ACT. For service to the creative arts, and to women.
Mr Michael Francis Said, Montmorency VIC. For service to accountancy, and to public sector governance.
Mr Dennis Eric Sales, Penrith NSW. For service to tennis.
Ms Judith Anne Sammut, Doncaster VIC. For service to community health. Mr Tomas Santamaria, Delahey VIC. For service to volleyball. Mrs Barbara Elaine Sax, Findon SA. For service to the community. Mr Gary Schulz, Tea Tree Gully SA. For service to education, and to the community.
Mr Eric Ronald Scott, Drewvale QLD. For service to the performing arts. Ms Katrina Anne-Marie Sedgwick, VIC. For service to performing, screen, and visual arts administration.
Mr Robert Peter Selinger, Eastwood NSW. For service to the community, and to education.
Mr Terence William Shannon, Inverloch VIC. For service to the community. Mrs Sam Michal Sharman, Toorak VIC. For service to the Jewish community. Mr Paul John Signorelli, Blakehurst NSW. For service to the hospitality sector, and to the community.
Ms Catherine Mary Simmonds, Preston VIC. For service to the performing arts. Dr Meg Simmons, Alice Springs NT. For service to oral health in outback communities.
Ms Sheila Ellen Simpson, NSW. For service to nursing.
Mr Inderjit (Indy) Singh, Pymble NSW. For service to the international community through eye care programs.
Prof. Sarva-Daman Singh, QLD. For service to tertiary education, and to the community.
Mrs Lesley Grace Slater, Mount Waverley VIC. For service to people with a disability.
Mr Malcolm George Small, Coolbellup WA. For service to youth, and to veterans. Mr Barry Ronald Smith, North Richmond NSW. For service to local government, and to the community of Hunters Hill.
Mr Reginald Norman Smith, Glen Iris VIC. For service to youth through intercultural programs.
Mrs Suzanne Sofarnos, Williamstown VIC. For service to lacrosse. Dr Samiul Joseph Sorrenti, Hunters Hill NSW. For service to orthopaedic and sports medicine.
Mr Gregory Owen Speed, Jamisontown NSW. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mrs Judith Anne Speedy, Mirboo North VIC. For service to the community of Mirboo North.
Dr John Stanisic, Albany Creek QLD. For service to conservation and the environment.
Ms Suzanne Stanley, Docklands VIC. For service to sport, and to the community. Mr Arthur Joseph Stanton, Samson WA. For service to veterans and their families. The Hon. Roger Michael Steele, Larrakeyah NT. For service to the people and Legislative Assembly of the NT.
Mr Paul Michael Stewart, Williamstown VIC. For service to the community, and to the performing arts.
Mr John Stewart Stoddart, Islington NSW. For service to the performing arts as a designer.
Mr Peter Telford Stoker, Jindalee QLD. For service to the mining sector. Ms Georgie Robertson Stone, Bentleigh VIC. For service to the trans and gender diverse community.
Ms Jan Sutherland, Semaphore Park SA. For service to sport in South Australia. Mr Khalil Tartak, Greenacre NSW. For service to the Lebanese community of NSW. Ms Nenia Helen Tavrou, Ascot Vale VIC. For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Brian Keith Taylor, Kin Kin QLD. For service to rural and remote communities, and as an author.
Mr Allan Garry Tennent, Ascot QLD. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Patrick Daniel Tessier, Caulfield South VIC. For service to charitable organisations.
Ms Gillian Thomas, Kensington NSW. For service to community health, particularly to people with polio.
Mrs Janet Iris Thomas, Chapel Hill QLD. For service to youth through the Girls Brigade.
Mr Anthony James Thompson, Marysville VIC. For service to the community. Ms Christine Irene Thompson, Furnissdale WA. For service to local government, and to the community of the Murray shire.
Mr Murray Hamilton Thompson, Sandringham VIC. For service to the people and Parliament of Victoria.
Mr John Charles Thornton, North Fremantle WA. For service to the performing arts, and to the community.
Mr Leslie John Threlfo ESM, Berridale NSW. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Phillip Anthony Titterton, Mosman NSW. For service to rowing. Mr Robert Charles Titterton, NSW. For service to music through orchestras and ensembles.
Ms Kate Torney, Melbourne VIC. For service to the broadcast media, and to the cultural sector.
Mr Malcolm John Towle, Kingswood NSW. For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Dr Mark Tredinnick, Bowral NSW. For service to literature, and to education. Mr Alfred Robert Tregear, Doncaster East VIC. For service to Australian rules football.
The Rev. Father Christos Triandafyllou, Sans Souci NSW. For service to the Greek Orthodox community of Belmore.
Dr Andrew James Tridgell, Griffith ACT. For service to information technology. Ms Jane Turner, Elwood VIC. For service to the performing arts as a writer, actor and comedian.
The Rev. Dr Jennifer Gibson Turner, Watermans Bay WA. For service to the Baptist Church, and to Churches of Christ.
Mr Vernon Joseph Turner, Armidale NSW. For service to hockey. Dr Robin Katherine Uppill, Hawthorndene SA. For service to orienteering. Mr David van Nunen, NSW. For service to the visual arts.
The late Mr Daniele Velcich, Blacktown NSW. For service to the Italian and Croatian communities of Blacktown.
Mrs Dorothy Fay Vickery, Guyra NSW. For service to local government, and to the community of Guyra.
Mr Adam Charles Voges, East Perth WA. For service to cricket. Mrs Joan Rosemary von Bibra, Sandy Bay TAS. For service to education, and to professional organisations.
Mr Peter James Wallace, Henley Beach SA. For service to education, and to the community.
Mr Peter James Walsh, Beaumaris VIC. For service to the Catholic Church in Victoria, and to business.
Mr Robert Richard Walton, Red Cliffs VIC. For service to education, and to the community.
Mr William George Warburton, North Tamworth NSW. For service to the community of Tamworth.
Mr John Sydney Wareham, Springfield NSW. For service to aged welfare, and to the community.
The late Mrs Jacqueline Warner, ACT. For service to youth through Scouts. Mrs Vicki Warren, Maryborough QLD. For service to softball, and to hockey. Mrs Esther Meryl Watson, Belgrave Heights VIC. For service to the community of the Dandenong Ranges.
Pastor Francis James Watson, Belgrave Heights VIC. For service to the community of the Dandenong Ranges.
Mrs Jocelyn Yvonne Watson, Newstead TAS. For service to the community of Launceston.
Miss Beverley (Jean) Weaver, Nundah QLD. For service to conservation and the environment, and to the community.
Mr Christopher John Webb, Manchester Square NSW. For service to horticulture, particularly through botanic gardens.
Ms Emma Webb, Port Adelaide SA. For service to the performing arts. Mr David George Weil, Glen Iris VIC. For service to the community. Mr Garry Keith Wellington, Tarlee SA. For service to veterans and their families.
Ms Olive Wellington, Hopetoun VIC. For service to the community of Hopetoun. Mrs Adira Yael Werdiger, Caulfield North VIC. For service to the Jewish community.
Dr John Milton Wettenhall, Rosevears TAS. For service to the international community through water, sanitation and medical programs.
Mr Edmund John Wheeler, Flynn ACT. For service to the community through road safety initiatives.
Mr Alan William Whimp, Brookfield QLD. For service to people with a disability and their carers.
Mrs Tanya Maree Whitehouse, Camden NSW. For service to the community through social welfare initiatives.
Mr Robert John Wildermuth, Hendra QLD. For service to building and construction. Mr Graeme Roy Williams, Euroa VIC. For service to local government, and to the community of the Strathbogie shire.
Mr Gregory Wayne Williams, Bongaree QLD. For service to public administration. Dr Peter George Williams, Campbell ACT. For service to community health, and to medical education.
Mr Peter John Williams, Eaglemont VIC. For service to maritime history. Dr Treve Williams, Elizabeth Bay NSW. For service to veterinary science. Mr Bruce Anthony Wilson, Seacliff Park SA. For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr Edwin James Wilson, Crows Nest NSW. For service to the visual arts, and to the community.
Mrs Elizabeth Wilson, Lang Lang VIC. For service to the community of Lang Lang. Mr Michael John Wilson, Riverview NSW. For service to community health, particularly to diabetes research.
Mr Paul Clifford Wilson, Oatlands TAS. For service to the community of Oatlands. The late Mr Guy Alan Winship, Belrose NSW. For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mrs Julie Womersley, NSW. For service to lawn bowls.
Mr Neville Womersley, NSW. For service to lawn bowls.
Ms Carole Joy Woods, Camberwell VIC. For service to community history. Dr David Workman, East Melbourne VIC. For service to ophthalmology, and to international relations.
Prof. Clare Alice Wright, VIC. For service to literature, and to historical research.
Mr Wei Quan Xu, Mont Albert North VIC. For service to the Chinese community of Melbourne, and to football.
Mrs Lexie Eileen Young, Deloraine TAS. For service to the community of Deloraine.
Mr James Siang-Chung Yu, Lane Cove NSW. For service to the Chinese community. Mr Manfred John Zabinskas, Trentham East VIC. For service to animal welfare. Ms Irena Antonina Zdanowicz, Kew VIC. For service to the visual arts as a curator.
Mr Michael John Zekulich, South Perth WA. For service to print journalism. Mrs Eleftheria (Victoria) Zografos, QLD. For service to the multicultural community.
HONORARY MEDAL (OAM) GENERAL DIVISION Mr Toufic Thomas Saadeldine Zreika, Illawong NSW. For service to community, to local government, and to the law.
OFFICER (AO) MILITARY DIVISION Lieutenant General Gregory Charles Bilton AM CSC, NSW. Service in the appointments of Deputy Commanding General of the United States Army in the Pacific, Deputy Chief of Joint Operations and Commander Forces Command.
MEMBER (AM) MILITARY DIVISION Captain Warren James Bairstow CSC RAN, ACT. For exceptional service to the Royal Australian Navy in the field of command and leadership.
Captain Shane Andrew Craig RAN, NSW. For exceptional performance of duty in Royal Australian Navy command and management positions.
Brigadier Michael Charles Ashleigh, ACT. For exceptional service as Director Logistics - Army, Director General Strategic Logistics and Commander Australian Army Cadets.
Lieutenant Colonel Alyson Marie Auliff, QLD. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in malaria research.
Colonel Nicholas James Foxall, QLD. For exceptional service in command and leadership and significantly enhancing the operational effects and capabilities of the Australian Defence Force.
Major General Andrew William Freeman, ACT. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force as Commander 17th Brigade, Director General Land Operations, and Director Logistics - Army.
Brigadier Stephen John Jobson CSC, NSW. For exceptional service as Commandant Army Recruit Training Centre, Commander 16th Aviation Brigade and Commander Joint Task Force 646.
Colonel Andrew John McBaron, NSW. For exceptional service as the Director of Officer Career Management - Army, Career Adviser for General Service Officer Lieutenant Colonels, and Staff Officer Grade One Establishments.
Air Commodore Wendy Blyth, ACT. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in C-130J Super Hercules sustainment reform; and in P-8A Poseidon capability development and system sustainment.
Air Commodore Philip Stephen Gordon, ACT. For exceptional service in aerospace capability development, air combat preparedness and operations management and control for the Australian Defence Force.
Group Captain Leanne Patricia Lee, NSW. For exceptional service in airworthiness practice, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter operational certification, and E-7A Airborne Early Warning and Control sustainment for the Australian Defence Force.
Air Commodore Kenneth John Robinson CSC, NSW. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in international engagement, personnel management and administration, and combat support development and sustainment.
Air Commodore Gerald Anthony van Leeuwen CSM, ACT. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in aerospace capability development, major capital acquisition, and air combat sustainment.
HONORARY MEDAL (OAM) MILITARY DIVISION Chief Petty Officer Raechelle Nadine Henderson, ACT. For meritorious service in leadership, and advancement of the service as a Naval Police Coxswain.
Warrant Officer Anthony Donald O'Riley, WA. For meritorious service to improving the capability levels and wellbeing of Navy Submarine Force People.
Commander Richard John Singleton CSM RAN, NSW. For meritorious service to the Australian Defence Force in the fields of exercise and operational planning and the introduction into service of naval capabilities.
Commander Benjamin Brian Spurgin RAN, NSW. For meritorious performance of duty as a Navy Legal Advisor and instructor.
Warrant Officer Class One Joshua Paul Andrews, ACT. For meritorious service in achievement and exceptional commitment to the continuous advancement of Army's Geospatial Intelligence capability.
Captain John Thomas Land, NSW. For meritorious service as the Army Conservator, Australian Army History Unit, in support of the protection of Army's heritage.
Warrant Officer Class One Brian Geoffrey Moore, QLD. For meritorious performance of duty in personnel management, instructional leadership, executive events coordination, and ceremonial event management in the Australian Defence Force.
Warrant Officer Class One Roger John Read, NSW. For meritorious service as the Information Systems Engineer, Force Installation Team 31 from 2017 to 2019.
Warrant Officer Class One Andrew Peter Shore CSM, Campbell ACT. For meritorious service as the Regimental Sergeant Major of the 3rd Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment; and the Royal Military College - Duntroon, and as a Career Advisor in the Directorate of Soldier Career Management - Army.
Warrant Officer Class One Julie Anne Whittaker, NSW. For meritorious service as the Senior Technical Trade Warrant Officer and Career Advisor for Army Ammunition Technicians.
Warrant Officer Rudolf William Vitasz, NSW. For meritorious service to the Australian Defence Force in leadership and cultural development.
Warrant Officer Benjamin Robert Wright, ACT. For meritorious service in personnel recognition administration, major public relations initiatives, and organisational development in the Royal Australian Air Force.
HONORARY OFFICER (AO) GENERAL DIVISION Mr Hugo Wallace Weaving, Darlinghurst NSW. Service to the performing arts as an actor, and as a mentor of young writers, directors and film makers.
Dr Robyn Williams AM, Rozelle NSW. Service to science as a journalist, radio presenter and author, and to education.
HONORARY MEMBER (AM) Mrs Elisabeth Margaret Newman, Middle Park VIC. Service to women at the national and international level.
Mr Roland Sylvester Peelman, Glebe NSW. Service to music.
Ms Constance Kimberly Seagram, Launceston TAS. Service to tourism, and to business, in Tasmania.
Mr Glenn Barrie Shorrock, Darlinghurst NSW. Service to the performing arts as a singer, songwriter and entertainer.
HONORARY MEDAL (OAM) GENERAL DIVISION Ms Helen Patricia Oxenham, Cumberland Park SA. For service to the community through social welfare initiatives and advocacy.
Ms Brenda Jean Rayner, Kingswood SA. For service to music.
Mrs Fay Patricia Richards, Chirnside Park VIC. For service to people with a disability.
Dr Chaoyi Wei, . For service to international relations.
PUBLIC SERVICE MEDAL FEDERAL Ms Nguyen Thi Thanh An, Hanoi City, Vietnam. Fostering the Australia-Vietnam bilateral relationship in agricultural research.
Ms Karen Jacqueline Binnekamp, Chifley ACT. To health, particularly through improvements to the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, and subsidy of breakthrough medical treatments.
Mrs Penny Damianakis, NSW. Leading the provision of Centrelink services to vulnerable customers and refugee communities.
Mr Michael James Druce, Cronulla NSW. To nuclear medicine production. Mr David Roland Fredericks, Narrabundah ACT. For supporting the Government in achieving fiscal and budget policy objectives, and significant reforms in the Attorney-General's Department.
Associate Professor Matthew Roland Hill, Pascoe Vale South VIC. Materials development for industry and the Australian Defence Force.
Dr Dale Austin Lambert, SA. Use of artificial intelligence in surveillance and reconnaissance, command and control, intelligence and autonomous platforms.
Dr Adam Lewis, Higgins ACT. For application of geospatial information. Ms Helen Maree McDevitt, O'Connor ACT. For social policy innovation to improve the lives of the disadvantaged, particularly young persons and people with a disability.
Mr Mark Patrick O'Connell, QLD. For leading engagement with communities affected by PFAS contamination from legacy Defence firefighting activities.
Mr Nico Padovan, ACT. For program and policy delivery, including supporting the recovery and reconstruction of the livestock industry in North Queensland.
Ms Julie Anne Roberts, Giralang ACT. For exceptional delivery of executive support services to the national security community.
Dr Albin Frank Smrdel, Hughes ACT. For reforming the corporate arrangements of the federal courts, and structural reform for the Australian family courts system.
Mr Robert Sturgiss, O'Connor ACT. For the development of a world class inventory for greenhouse gases, and to accurate measuring and reporting of emissions for Australian companies.
Mr Damian John Voltz, Camp Hill QLD. For efforts to protect Australian sport from the threat of match-fixing, corruption and criminal exploitation.
Ms Lesley Watson, Isaacs ACT. Contributions to agency organisation and functioning, and to Australia's national security.
NEW SOUTH WALES Mr Christopher Mark Beatson, Avoca Beach. Service to the NSW Police Force. Mrs Wilma Falcone, Cecil Hills. Service to the social housing sector. Mr Mark David Grant, Service to education.
Ms Pippinella Wheatcroft Job, Service to drought affected communities. Mr Ronald Fredrick Kemsley, West Kempsey. Service to environmental rehabilitation in the Kempsey Shire.
Mrs Annette Elizabeth Moehead OAM, Wollongbar. Service to mental health care of aged persons.
Dr Victor Hutton Oddy, Armidale. Service to the primary industry sector, and to science.
Mrs Donna Osland, Malabar. Service to public programs at the Royal Botanic Gardens.
Mr Raymond John Smith, West Wyalong. For outstanding public service to local government in New South Wales.
Ms Vicki Telfer, Darwin. Service to industrial relations policy and reform in NSW.
Ms Katherine Ruth Tollner, Orange. For the outstanding public service to people with a disability in NSW.
VICTORIA Prof. Stephen Moile Cordner AM, Caulfield. Service to forensic medical and scientific services, training and research in Victoria.
Ms Shelagh Donegan-Bragg, Woodside. Service to education, and to people with a disability, in Victoria.
Ms Noelene Duff, South Yarra. For outstanding public service to local government in Victoria.
Mrs Christine Michelle Ferguson, Ballarat. Service to policy and program delivery.
Miss Reegan Odette Key, Ferny Creek. Service to emergency management systems in Victoria.
Ms Gabrielle Hedwig Levine, Service to community safety projects in Victoria. Dr James Richard Pearson, Service to forensic science, particularly to chemistry.
Ms Janine Louise Toomey, Kensington. Service to policy design and service delivery.
QUEENSLAND Mr Colin Brian Cassidy, Brighton. Service to economic development, corporate services and town planning in Queensland.
Ms Clare Frances Douglas, Cairns. Service to health administration in Queensland.
Ms Maureen Elaine Ervine, . Service to Indigenous families and communities. Ms Julie Etchells, Ipswich. Service to children and families in Queensland. Ms Helen Francis Ferguson, Service to social policy development and implementation.
Mr Michael Dermot Parker, . Service to local government administration in Queensland.
Mrs Janelle Sue Thurlby, McDowall. Service to financial management and planning. WESTERN AUSTRALIA Ms Pauline Bagdonavicius, Service, particularly through advocacy roles. Mrs Noelene Rae Jennings, Glen Forrest. Service, particularly to local government.
Mrs Lee Musumeci, Armadale. Service to early childhood education. SOUTH AUSTRALIA Mrs Jan Marie Cornish, Flinders Park. Service to asset management in local government.
Professor Edward (Ted) Tuckseng Mah, Medindie. Service to public health. Ms Deborah Pearce, Woodcroft. Service to people with a disability, and to SA Police.
ACT Mr George Abram Cilliers, Service to planning and development. Mr John Desmond Purcell, Kambah. Service to federal financial relations, and to the development of self-government.
NORTHERN TERRITORY Mr Kenneth Lindsay Davies, Fannie Bay. Service to children and families. Mr Gregory John Shanahan, Parap. Service to the justice system in the Northern Territory.
AUSTRALIANPOLICE MEDAL FEDERAL Assistant Commissioner Lesa Jane Gale Superintendent Jared Gordon Taggart Detective Superintendent Danielle Anne Woodward OAM NEW SOUTH WALES Det. Chief Insp. Robert Mark Allison Det. Spt. Anthony John Cooke Det. Spt. David Caldwell Darcy Det. Spt. Kerrie Anne Lewis Det. Spt. Peter James Mckenna Sgt John Francis Rayment Spt. Daniel Edward Sullivan Det. Spt. Gavin Kendall Wood VICTORIA Det. Spt. Peter John Brigham Det. Snr Sgt Mark William Chrystie Leading Snr Constable Andrew Neil Downes Spt. David Owen Jones Commander Elizabeth Anne Murphy Leading Snr Constable Patrick Joseph Storer QUEENSLAND Inspector Corey Mathew Allen Det. Snr Sgt. Michelle Therese Clark Det. Snr Sgt. Sasha Naomi Finney Spt. Craig Andrew Hanlon Chief Spt. Mark Patrick Wheeler Insp. Nyree Lona Whelan WESTERN AUSTRALIA Deputy Commissioner Colin John Blanch Spt. Dario Adriano Bolzonella Snr Constable Michelle Deborah Jesney Sgt. David John Johnson SOUTH AUSTRALIA Det. Sgt. Bernard Joseph Farrington Snr Sgt. First Class Tracy McLeod Gentgall Det. Sgt. David Paul Hunt TASMANIA Det. Snr. Constable Sharee Simone Maksimovic Commander Ian John Whish-Wilson NORTHERN TERRITORY Spt. Antony Stuart Deutrom AUSTRALIANFIRe SERVICE MEDAL FEDERAL Mr Christopher Charles Goff, Liverpool NSW.
NEW SOUTH WALES Mr John William Bevan, Lightning Ridge.
Mr Brett Davies, Green Point.
Mr Robert James Graham, Lismore.
Mr Raymond Randolf Hill, Curlwaa.
Ms Dawn Caroline Maynard, Port Macquarie.
Mr John Wayne Stuckings, Coleambally.
Ms Michelle Janine Thornley, St Georges Basin.
Mr Owen Leonard Tydd, Gunnedah.
Mr Graham Clifford Williams, Sussex Inlet.
VICTORIA Mr Gregory Francis Hitch, Cairnlea.
Mr George Ernest O'Dwyer, Barongarook.
Mr Graeme John Saunder, Alfredton.
Mr Peter John Shaw, The Basin.
QUEENSLAND Mr Steven John Barber, Townsville.
Mr Gregory Raymond Duncan, Stafford.
Mr Patrick Ross Kraut, Toogoolawah.
Mr Bevan James Love.
Mr Rodger (John) Sambrooks, Palmwoods.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA Mr Mark David Bowen.
Dr Neil Douglas Burrows, Rossmoyne.
Mr Richard Dennis Lawrey, Mundaring.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA Mr Kenneth Campbell, Mannanarie.
Mr Shane Mark Heffernan, Mawson Lakes.
Mr Samual John Sanderson, Bridgewater.
Mr Dennis Robert Taylor, Mawson Lakes.
TASMANIA Mr Mark Henry McDermott, Strahan.
ACT Mr Stephen James Angus, Tharwa.
Mr Russell Edward Goodall.
NORTHERN TERRITORY Mr Craig Andrew Slack, Bees Creek.
AMBULANCESERVICE MEDAL NEW SOUTH WALES Ms Clare Louise Beech.
Mr Michael John Bray, Croydon.
VICTORIA Mr William Allan Briggs, Mooroolbark.
Ms Rain Histen, Bayside.
Mr Terrence Patrick Marshall, Leopold.
Mrs Gail Sharp.
Mr Lance Francis Simmons, Bairnsdale.
Ms Susan Jane Walsh, Strathfieldsaye.
Mr Kenneth John Whittle, Kew.
QUEENSLAND Ms Tracey Anne Eastwick, Mackay.
Mr Wayne William Sachs, The Dawn, Gympie.
Mr Cary Strong, Ormeau.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA Mr Christopher Bradley Oakes, Two Rocks.
Mr David Saunders, Collie.
Mr Austin Shannon Whiteside, Mullaloo.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA Mr David Mark Jaensch, Whyalla.
TASMANIA Mrs Lorraine Joy Gardiner, Launceston.
Mr Han-Wei Lee, West Hobart.
EMERGENCY SERVICES MEDAL NEW SOUTH WALES Ms Allison May Flaxman, Penrith.
Mr Richard (John) Rooke, Wagga Wagga.
Mr Warren Noel Turner, Burradoo.
VICTORIA Mr John William Hooper, Stawell.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA Mr Ronald Francis McPherson, Swan View.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA Mr Maxwell John Coulson, Port Lincoln.
TASMANIA Mr William James Folder.
Mr Vincent Holthouse, Currie.
Mr Neil Gerard Van Veldhuizen.
ACT Mr Mubin Shareef Khokhar, Dunlop.
AUSTRALIANPOLICE MEDAL NEW SOUTH WALES Ms Jean Elizabeth Dally.
Miss Rebecca Joy Edwards.
Mr Amandeep Singh.
Mr Albert William Torrens.
VICTORIA Mr Stephen Cadman.
Mr Steven Douglas Comte.
Ms Tina Filopoulos.
Mr Stephen Peter Payne.
QUEENSLAND Ms Robyn Margaret Ernst.
Ms Simone Elizabeth Lourigan.
Ms Jenny Lee Lynas.
WESTERN AUSTRALIA Mr Samuel James Dinah.
Ms Cassandra Lee Gilbert.
Mr Benjamin Richard Leadbeatter.
Mr Gregory Peter Little.
Ms Leith Thomas.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA Ms Susan Jane Dighton.
Mr Bernard John Gelston.
TASMANIA Ms Elizabeth Moore.
ACT Mr Jason Paul Stockheim.
Bar to the Distinguished Service Cross AUSTRALIAN ARMY Brigadier John William Shanahan DSC AM, ACT. For distinguished command and leadership in warlike operations as the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation Resolute Support Headquarters Chief of Operations and as the Commanding General Train Advise Assist Command - South in Afghanistan from September 2017 to February 2019.
Distinguished Service Cross ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY Rear Admiral Jaimie Charles Frank Hatcher AM RAN, ACT. For distinguished command and leadership in warlike operations as the Commander Joint Task Force 633.
AUSTRALIAN ARMY Lieutenant Colonel R, For distinguished command and leadership in warlike operations while deployed as the Commander of a Special Operations Task Group in Iraq from June to December 2018.
Colonel Michael Andrew Say, NSW. For distinguished command and leadership in warlike operations while deployed as the Commander of Task Group Taji VII in Iraq.
Distinguished Service MEDAL AUSTRALIAN ARMY Bombardier Michael Richard Cobb, SA. For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as the Australian Counter Unmanned Aerial Systems Detachment Commander within Headquarters Joint Task Force 633, whilst deployed to the Middle East Region from October 2017 to June 2018.
Colonel Stuart Nicholas Kenny CSC, NSW. For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as the Chief of Plans for Train, Advise, Assist Command - South, Operation RESOLUTE SUPPORT, Afghanistan from January 2018 to January 2019.
COMMENDATION FOR Distinguished Service ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY Captain Sands Niall Skinner RAN, NSW. For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Aircraft Maintenance and Engineering Branch Chief within the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation Resolute Support Train Advise Assist Command - Air on Operation HIGHROAD from July 2018 to February 2019.
AUSTRALIAN ARMY Colonel B, For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Director Strategy and Plans, Headquarters Combined Joint Task Force - Operation INHERENT RESOLVE from January to September 2018.
Brigadier Peter James Connor AM, NSW. For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Commander of Task Group Afghanistan while deployed on Operation HIGHROAD from November 2017 to September 2018.
Captain D, For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Executive Officer and Operations Officer for a Special Operations Task Group whilst deployed to Iraq on Operation OKRA in 2018.
Corporal Daniel David Flynn, QLD. For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Force Protection Section Commander of the Train Advise Assist Command - Air mission in Afghanistan from August 2018 to February 2019.
Colonel Stephen John Gliddon AM, ACT. For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Chief of Future Operations, North Atlantic Treaty Organisation Resolute Support Mission, Afghanistan from November 2017 to January 2019.
Major Joshua Eden Higgins, For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Officer Commanding Training Team Victor, Task Group Taji Seven in Iraq from May to November 2018.
Corporal Lachlan Thomas Mitchell, NSW. For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as a Force Protection Section Commander for Train Advise Assist Command - Air, Afghanistan whilst assigned to Operation HIGHROAD from February to August 2018.
Colonel Gavin Andrew Stanford CSC, ACT. For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Chief of Future Operations within the Operations Directorate of Headquarters Combined Joint Task Force - Operation INHERENT RESOLVE from November 2017 to November 2018.
Brigadier Wade Bradley Stothart DSC AM CSC, ACT. For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Director Joint Plans and Assessment within the Headquarters Combined Joint Task Force - Operation INHERENT RESOLVE from December 2017 to December 2018.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIRFORCE Flight Lieutenant Brendon Scott Carraro, VIC. For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as Pilot in Command of MAMBO21, a Royal Australian Air Force C-130J-30, on 7 August 2017 whilst deployed on Operation OKRA.
Conspicuous Service Cross ROYAL AUSTRALIAN NAVY Captain Michael Bruce Devine RAN, ACT. For outstanding achievement in the application of judgement as Commander Task Unit 641.1.1 and Commanding Officer HMAS Anzac in the tactical planning and execution of Maritime South East Asia Deployment from March to June 2018.
Commander Bronwyn Adele Ferrier CSM RAN, ACT. For outstanding achievement in the management of occupational hygiene and environmental hazards in the Royal Australian Navy.
Captain Daniel John LeRaye RAN, SA. For outstanding devotion to duty as the inaugural Class Lifecycle Engineering Officer in Collins Class submarines.
Commander Jennifer Louise Macklin RAN, ACT. For outstanding achievement in the promotion of diversity and inclusion in the Royal Australian Navy.
Captain Anthony Bruce Miskelly RAN, ACT. For outstanding devotion to duty during the introduction into service of HMAS Hobart.
Warrant Officer Christopher John Rowley, ACT. For outstanding achievement and dedication in his leadership of the Royal Australian Navy technical workforce.
Commander Anita Louise Sellick CSM RAN, For outstanding achievement as Commanding Officer of HMAS Newcastle.
Commander Darlene Maree Williams RAN, ACT. For outstanding achievement in strategic organisational development as Military Assistant to the Chief of Joint Capabilities in the Australian Defence Force.
AUSTRALIAN ARMY Colonel Michael Rodney Ahern, ACT. For outstanding devotion to duty as Commander Australian Contingent, Operation ASLAN and Senior Military Liaison Officer for Juba within the United Nations Mission in South Sudan from June 2018 to January 2019.
Lieutenant Colonel Glen Allan Billington, NSW. For outstanding achievement as the Commanding Officer and Chief Engineer of the 19th Chief Engineer Works.
Lieutenant Colonel Darryl Robert Bridgeman, TAS. For outstanding devotion to duty as Commander Australian Contingent, Operation PALADIN, United Nations Truce Supervision Organisation (Israel and Syria) from October 2017 to October 2018.
Major Cassandra Campbell, For outstanding devotion to duty as the senior career advisor of the Royal Australian Corps of Signals, Directorate of Soldier Career Management - Army.
Lieutenant Colonel Judd Andrew Finger, QLD. For outstanding devotion to duty as Commander Joint Task Group 629 on Operation AUGURY from February 2018 to October 2018.
Lieutenant Colonel Dianne Grey, QLD. For outstanding achievement in the application of exceptional skills, judgement and dedication in the advancement of intelligence collection, analysis and assessment within the Australian Defence Force.
Lieutenant Colonel Stuart James Hill, ACT. For outstanding achievement as the Staff Officer Cyber Security and Commanding Officer Defence Security Operations Centre over the period 2013 to 2018.
Lieutenant Colonel Brendan Mark Hogan, VIC. For outstanding achievement as Staff Officer Grade One Land Range Safety, Combined Arms Training Centre.
Lieutenant Colonel L, For outstanding devotion to duty as the Command Legal Officer within Special Operations Command.
Lieutenant Colonel James Michael Bain Smith, ACT. For outstanding devotion to duty as Commander Australian Contingent and Chief of Operations, Operation MAZURKA, Multinational Force and Observers Mission, Sinai, Egypt from February 2018 to February 2019.
ROYAL AUSTRALIAN AIRFORCE Squadron Leader Janine Marie Fetchik, QLD. For outstanding achievement in the provision of legal services to the Royal Australian Air Force.
Squadron Leader Duncan John Flemington, QLD. For outstanding devotion to duty as the Commander of the Joint Task Force 639 Air Component Coordination Element during Operation RESOLUTE from January 2016 to December 2018.
Squadron Leader Clare Kathleen Fry, ACT. For outstanding achievement in aircrew human factors performance management and air safety accident investigation for the Australian Defence Force.
Sergeant William Booth Gill, QLD. For outstanding achievements in unmanned aerial system capability enhancement in the Royal Australian Air Force.
Squadron Leader Sean Andrew Hamilton, QLD. For outstanding achievement in fighter aircraft tactics development and training in the Royal Australian Air Force.
Wing Commander Matthew John Harper DSM, ACT. For outstanding achievement in air combat capability management for the Australian Defence Force.
Squadron Leader Craig Geoffrey Keane, SA. For outstanding devotion to duty in AP-3C aircraft electronic warfare capability development for the Australian Defence Force.
Sergeant Benjamin John Mason, NSW. For outstanding achievement in E-7A Wedgetail aircraft communications information systems and security support for the Australian Defence Force.
Conspicuous Service Medal Royal Australian Navy Lieutenant Peter Asimakis RAN, QLD. For meritorious achievement as a lead member of the Sea Training Unit Defence Cooperation Programme.
Petty Officer Victoria Ann Clarke, NSW. For meritorious devotion to duty in the field of Navy workforce management.
Lieutenant Commander Bernard Roy Dobson RAN, NSW. For meritorious devotion to duty during the introduction into service of HMAS Hobart.
Chief Petty Officer Melita Leigh English, NSW. For meritorious achievement in the performance of duty as the Fleet Legal Assistant.
Commander Lindsay Ridgway Gordon RAN, NSW. For meritorious achievement as the Deputy Director Submarines - Platform.
Commander Robert Bradley Halloran RAN, For meritorious achievement in the field of Navy training systems.
Leading Seaman N, For meritorious achievement as an Electronic Warfare Instructor within the School of Maritime Warfare.
Chief Petty Officer Zulkarnain Shah Naim, ACT. For meritorious devotion to duty as the Navy Advisor on Inter-Cultural Affairs.
Lieutenant Commander Steven Geoffrey Taragel RAN, QLD. For meritorious achievement as the Executive Officer of HMAS Cairns.
Australian Army Sergeant Dayne Robert Anderson, QLD. For meritorious achievement in developing virtual training systems integrated with existing live, virtual and constructive training that has improved enhanced Australian Army training methods and assisted the capability of international partners.
Warrant Officer Class One Craig Cutts, SA. For meritorious devotion to duty in administrative and logistic support to Australian Defence Force operations and training assistance in the Republic of the Philippines.
Warrant Officer Class Two Michael John Dixon, QLD. For meritorious achievement as the Squadron Sergeant Major at the 171st Special Operations Aviation Squadron, 6th Aviation Regiment from January 2016 to December 2018.
Warrant Officer Class One Leanne Marie Iseppi OAM, ACT. For meritorious devotion to duty as the Command Warrant Officer, Joint Task Force 633 whilst deployed on Operation ACCORDION from January 2018 to January 2019.
Colonel Craig Anthony Lauder, ACT. For meritorious devotion to duty as the Chief of Staff in Headquarters Joint Task Force 633 on Operation ACCORDION from March 2018 to January 2019.
Warrant Officer Class One M, For meritorious devotion to duty to the Special Air Service Regiment in the field of Parachute Rigger Supervisor 2008 to 2018.
Warrant Officer Class Two Desmond Peter McCoy, VIC. For meritorious achievement as the Company Sergeant Major of the Land Mobile Training Team under Joint Task Group 629 during Operation AUGURY from January to May 2018.
Warrant Officer Class One Brad James Millen, NSW. For meritorious achievement as the Intelligence Warrant Officer of the 51st Battalion, the Far North Queensland Regiment and the Regional Force Surveillance Group Liaison Officer to the Australian Maritime Border Operations Centre from 2017 to 2018.
Brigadier Paul Michael Nothard AM CSC, ACT. For meritorious devotion to duty as the Deputy Commander of Joint Task Force 633 whilst deployed on Operation ACCORDION from November 2017 to August 2018.
Colonel Simon Clive Palmer, ACT. For meritorious achievement in leading cultural change and governance reform within Reserve and Youth Division, Joint Capabilities Group.
Chaplain Peter Douglas Price, QLD. For meritorious achievement as the unit Padre displaying exceptional application of spiritual, pastoral and philosophical care at the Army School of Electrical and Mechanical Engineering.
Warrant Officer Class One Christopher Robert Ross, ACT. For meritorious achievement as the Personnel Operations Warrant Officer, J1 Directorate, Headquarters Joint Operations Command.
Lieutenant Colonel John Charles Sayers, TAS. For meritorious achievement as Commanding Officer of the 2nd Force Support Battalion.
Lieutenant Colonel Charles Christian Slinger, NSW. For meritorious achievement as the Staff Officer Grade One Air and Missile Defence, Combat Support Program, Army Headquarters.
Royal Australian Air Force Group Captain Robert John Elliott, ACT. For meritorious achievement in leading, planning and delivering critical intelligence, surveillance, reconnaissance and targeting effects for Joint Operations Command.
Flight Sergeant Tanya Marie Fraser, VIC. For meritorious devotion to duty in organisational administration and management as the Administrator for Specialist Legal Reserve Services in the Royal Australian Air Force.
Wing Commander Kylie Larrisa Green, For meritorious achievement in logistics employment initiatives, operational preparedness, and force generation development for the Royal Australian Air Force.
Corporal Lachlan Walker O'Kane, NSW. For meritorious achievement as the Surveillance Technician in Air Task Group 630.1.4 whilst deployed on Operation OKRA from August 2018 to February 2019.
Squadron Leader Brayden Joseph Pirlo, ACT. For meritorious devotion to duty in development and delivery of the first technical cyber threat intelligence capability for the Australian Defence Force.Sergeant Justin Wayne Regan, ACT. For meritorious achievement in air surveillance in the Defence Signals Intelligence and Cyber Command.
Word count: 16415
