Emma Webb Port Adelaide SA. For service to the performing arts, particularly in Port Adelaide.
Dr Chaoyi Wei For service to international relations.
David George Weil Glen Iris VIC. For service to the community through a range of roles.
Garry Keith Wellington Tarlee SA. For service to veterans and their families.
Olive Wellington Hopetoun VIC. For service to the community of Hopetoun.
Adira Yael Werdiger Caulfield North VIC. For service to the Jewish community of Victoria.
Dr John Milton Wettenhall Rosevears TAS. For service to the international community through water, sanitation and medical programs.
Edmund John Wheeler Flynn ACT. For service to the community through road safety initiatives.
Alan William Whimp Brookfield QLD. For service to people with a disability and their carers.
Tanya Maree Whitehouse Camden NSW. For service to the community through social welfare initiatives.
Robert John Wildermuth Hendra QLD. For service to the building and construction industry.
Graeme Roy Williams Euroa VIC. For service to local government, and to the community of the Strathbogie Shire.
Gregory Wayne Williams Bongaree QLD. For service to public administration in Queensland.
Dr Peter George Williams Campbell ACT. For service to community health, and to medical education.
Peter John Williams Eaglemont VIC. For service to maritime history.
Dr Treve Williams Elizabeth Bay NSW. For service to veterinary science.
Bruce Anthony Wilson Seacliff Park SA. For service to conservation and the environment.
Edwin James Wilson Crows Nest NSW. For service to the visual arts, and to the community.
Elizabeth Wilson Lang Lang VIC. For service to the community of Lang Lang.
Michael John Wilson Riverview NSW. For service to community health, particularly to diabetes research.
Paul Clifford Wilson Oatlands TAS. For service to the community of Oatlands.
The late Guy Alan Winship Belrose NSW. For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Julie Womersley NSW. For service to lawn bowls.
Neville Womersley NSW. For service to lawn bowls.
Carole Joy Woods Camberwell VIC. For service to community history.
Dr David Workman East Melbourne VIC. For service to ophthalmology, and to international relations.
Professor Clare Alice Wright VIC. For service to literature, and to historical research.
Wei Quan Xu Mont Albert North VIC. For service to the Chinese community of Melbourne, and to football.
Lexie Eileen Young Deloraine TAS. For service to the community of Deloraine.
James Siang-Chung Yu Lane Cove NSW. For service to the Chinese community of New South Wales.
Manfred John Zabinskas Trentham East VIC. For service to animal welfare.
Irena Antonina Zdanowicz Kew VIC. For service to the visual arts as a curator.
Michael John Zekulich South Perth WA. For service to print journalism, and as an author.
Eleftheria (Victoria) Zografos QLD. For service to the multicultural community of Queensland.
Toufic Thomas Saadeldine Zreika Illawong NSW. For service to the community, to local government, and to the law.
Officer (AO) in the Military Division of the Order of Australia
Lieutenant General Gregory Charles Bilton NSW. For distinguished service in the appointments of Deputy Commanding General of the United States Army in the Pacific, Deputy Chief of Joint Operations and Commander Forces Command.
Member (AM) in the Military Division of the Order of Australia
Captain Warren James Bairstow ACT. For exceptional service to the Royal Australian Navy in the field of command and leadership.
Captain Shane Andrew Craig NSW. For exceptional performance of duty in Royal Australian Navy command and management positions.
Brigadier Michael Charles Ashleigh ACT. For exceptional service as Director Logistics - Army, Director General Strategic Logistics and Commander Australian Army Cadets.
Lieutenant Colonel Alyson Marie Auliff QLD. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in malaria research.
Colonel Nicholas James Foxall QLD. For exceptional service in command and leadership and significantly enhancing the operational effects and capabilities of the Australian Defence Force.
Major General Andrew William Freeman ACT. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force as Commander 17th Brigade, Director General Land Operations, and Director Logistics - Army.
Brigadier Stephen John Jobson NSW. For exceptional service as Commandant Army Recruit Training Centre, Commander 16th Aviation Brigade and Commander Joint Task Force 646.
Colonel Andrew John McBaron NSW. For exceptional service as the Director of Officer Career Management - Army, Career Adviser for General Service Officer Lieutenant Colonels, and Staff Officer Grade One Establishments.
Air Commodore Wendy Blyth ACT. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in C-130J Super Hercules sustainment reform; and in P-8A Poseidon capability development and system sustainment.
Air Commodore Philip Stephen Gordon ACT. For exceptional service in aerospace capability development, air combat preparedness and operations management and control for the Australian Defence Force.
Group Captain Leanne Patricia Lee NSW. For exceptional service in airworthiness practice, F-35 Joint Strike Fighter operational certification, and E-7A Airborne Early Warning and Control sustainment for the Australian Defence Force.
Air Commodore Kenneth John Robinson NSW. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in international engagement, personnel management and administration, and combat support development and sustainment.
Air Commodore Gerald Anthony van Leeuwen ACT. For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in aerospace capability development, major capital acquisition, and air combat sustainment.
Medal (OAM) in the Military Division of the Order of Australia
Chief Petty Officer Raechelle Nadine Henderson ACT. For meritorious service in leadership, and advancement of the service as a Naval Police Coxswain.
Warrant Officer Anthony Donald O'Riley WA. For meritorious service to improving the capability levels and wellbeing of Navy Submarine Force People.
Commander Richard John Singleton NSW. For meritorious service to the Australian Defence Force in the fields of exercise and operational planning and the introduction into service of naval capabilities.
Commander Benjamin Brian Spurgin NSW. For meritorious performance of duty as a Navy Legal Advisor and instructor.
Warrant Officer Class One Joshua Paul Andrews ACT. For meritorious service in achievement and exceptional commitment to the continuous advancement of Army's Geospatial Intelligence capability.
Captain John Thomas Land NSW. For meritorious service as the Army Conservator, Australian Army History Unit, in support of the protection of Army's heritage.
Warrant Officer Class One Brian Geoffrey Moore QLD. For meritorious performance of duty in personnel management, instructional leadership, executive events coordination, and ceremonial event management in the Australian Defence Force.
Warrant Officer Class One Roger John Read NSW. For meritorious service as the Information Systems Engineer, Force Installation Team 31 from 2017 to 2019.
Warrant Officer Class One Andrew Peter Shore Campbell ACT. For meritorious service as the Regimental Sergeant Major of the 3rd Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment; and the Royal Military College - Duntroon, and as a Career Advisor in the Directorate of Soldier Career Management - Army.
Warrant Officer Class One Julie Anne Whittaker NSW. For meritorious service as the Senior Technical Trade Warrant Officer and Career Advisor for Army Ammunition Technicians.
Warrant Officer Rudolf William Vitasz NSW. For meritorious service to the Australian Defence Force in leadership and cultural development.
Warrant Officer Benjamin Robert Wright ACT. For meritorious service in personnel recognition administration, major public relations initiatives, and organisational development in the Royal Australian Air Force.
Public Services Medal
Federal
Nguyen Thi Thanh An Hanoi City, Vietnam For outstanding public service in fostering the Australia-Vietnam bilateral relationship in agricultural research.
Karen Jacqueline Binnekamp Chifley ACT. For outstanding public service to health, particularly through improvements to listings on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme, and subsidy of breakthrough medical treatments.
Penny Damianakis NSW. For outstanding public service through leading the provision of Centrelink services to vulnerable customers and refugee communities.
Michael James Druce Cronulla NSW. For outstanding public service to nuclear medicine production.
David Roland Fredericks Narrabundah ACT. For outstanding public service through supporting the government in achieving fiscal and budget policy objectives, and significant reforms in the Attorney-General's Department.
Associate Professor Matthew Roland Hill Pascoe Vale South VIC. For outstanding public service to materials development for industry and the Australian Defence Force.
Dr Dale Austin Lambert SA. For outstanding public service in the use of artificial intelligence in surveillance and reconnaissance, command and control, intelligence and autonomous platforms.
Dr Adam Lewis Higgins ACT. For outstanding public service through the application of geospatial information.
Helen Maree McDevitt O'Connor ACT. For outstanding public service through social policy innovation to improve the lives of disadvantaged Australians, particularly young persons and people with a disability.
Mark Patrick O'Connell QLD. For outstanding public service through leading engagement with communities affected by PFAS contamination from legacy Defence firefighting activities.
Nico Padovan ACT. For outstanding public service in program and policy delivery, including supporting the recovery and reconstruction of the livestock industry in North Queensland.
Julie Anne Roberts Giralang ACT. For outstanding public service through exceptional delivery of executive support services to the national security community.
Dr Albin Frank Smrdel Hughes ACT. For outstanding public service in reforming the corporate arrangements of the federal courts, and structural reform for the Australian family courts system.
Robert Sturgiss O'Connor ACT. For outstanding public service through the development of a world class inventory for greenhouse gases, and to accurate measuring and reporting of emissions for Australian companies.
Damian John Voltz Camp Hill QLD. For outstanding public service through efforts to protect Australian sport from the threat of match-fixing, corruption and criminal exploitation.
Lesley Watson Isaacs ACT. For outstanding public service through contributions to agency organisation and functioning, and to Australia's national security.
NSW
Christopher Mark Beatson Avoca Beach NSW. For outstanding public service to the New South Wales Police Force.
Wilma Falcone Cecil Hills NSW. For outstanding public service to the social housing sector in New South Wales.
Mark David Grant NSW. For outstanding public service to education in New South Wales.
Pippinella Wheatcroft Job NSW. For outstanding public service to drought affected communities in New South Wales.
Ronald Fredrick Kemsley West Kempsey NSW. For outstanding public service to environmental rehabilitation in the Kempsey Shire.
Annette Elizabeth Moehead Wollongbar NSW. For outstanding public service to mental health care of aged persons in New South Wales.
Victor Hutton Oddy Armidale NSW. For outstanding public service to the primary industry sector, and to science, in New South Wales.
Donna Osland Malabar NSW. For outstanding public service to public programs at the Royal Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
Raymond John Smith West Wyalong NSW. For outstanding public service to local government in New South Wales.
Vicki Telfer Darwin NT. For outstanding public service to industrial relations policy and reform in New South Wales.
Katherine Ruth Tollner Orange NSW. For the outstanding public service to people with a disability in New South Wales.
Victoria
Professor Stephen Moile Cordner Caulfield VIC. For outstanding public service to forensic medical and scientific services, training and research in Victoria.
Shelagh Donegan-Bragg Woodside VIC. For outstanding public service to education, and to people with a disability, in Victoria.
Noelene Duff South Yarra VIC. For outstanding public service to local government in Victoria.
Christine Michelle Ferguson Ballarat VIC. For outstanding public service to policy and program delivery in Victoria.
Reegan Odette Key Ferny Creek VIC. For outstanding public service to emergency management systems in Victoria.
Gabrielle Hedwig Levine VIC. For outstanding public service to community safety projects in Victoria.
Dr James Richard Pearson VIC. For outstanding public service to forensic science, particularly to chemistry, in Victoria.
Janine Louise Toomey Kensington VIC. For outstanding public service to policy design and service delivery in Victoria.Queensland
Colin Brian Cassidy Brighton QLD. For outstanding public service to economic development, corporate services and town planning in Queensland.
Clare Frances Douglas Cairns QLD. For outstanding public service to health administration in Queensland.
Maureen Elaine Ervine QLD. For outstanding public service to Indigenous families and communities in Queensland.
Julie Etchells Ipswich QLD. For outstanding public service to children and families in Queensland.
Helen Francis Ferguson QLD. For outstanding public service to social policy development and implementation in Queensland.
Michael Dermot Parker QLD. For outstanding public service to local government administration in Queensland.
Janelle Sue Thurlby McDowall QLD. For outstanding public service to financial management and planning in Queensland.
Western Australia
Pauline Bagdonavicius WA. For outstanding public service, particularly through advocacy roles in Western Australia.
Noelene Rae Jennings Glen Forrest WA. For outstanding public service, particularly to local government in Western Australia.
Lee Musumeci Armadale WA. For outstanding public service to early childhood education in Western Australia.
South Australia
Jan Marie Cornish Flinders Park SA. For outstanding public service to asset management in local government in South Australia.
Professor Edward (Ted) Tuckseng Mah Medindie SA. For outstanding public service to public health in South Australia.
Deborah Pearce Woodcroft SA. For outstanding public service to people with a disability, and to South Australia Police.
ACT
George Abram Cilliers ACT. For outstanding public service to planning and development in the Australian Capital Territory.
John Desmond Purcell Kambah ACT. For outstanding public service to federal financial relations, and to the development of self-government in the Australian Capital Territory.
Northern Territory
Kenneth Lindsay Davies Fannie Bay NT. For outstanding public service to children and families in the Northern Territory.
Gregory John Shanahan Parap NT. For outstanding public service to the justice system in the Northern Territory.
Australian Police Medal
Federal
Assistant Commissioner Lesa Jane Gale
Superintendent Jared Gordon Taggart
Detective Superintendent Danielle Anne Woodward
NSW
Detective Chief Inspector Robert Mark Allison
Detective Superintendent Anthony John Cooke
Detective Superintendent David Caldwell Darcy
Detective Superintendent Kerrie Anne Lewis
Detective Superintendent Peter James Mckenna
Sergeant John Francis Rayment
Superintendent Daniel Edward Sullivan
Detective Superintendent Gavin Kendall Wood
Victoria
Detective Superintendent Peter John Brigham
Detective Senior Sergeant Mark William Chrystie
Leading Senior Constable Andrew Neil Downes
Superintendent David Owen Jones
Commander Elizabeth Anne Murphy
Leading Senior Constable Patrick Joseph Storer
Queensland
Inspector Corey Mathew Allen
Detective Senior Sergeant Michelle Therese Clark
Detective Senior Sergeant Sasha Naomi Finney
Superintendent Craig Andrew Hanlon
Chief Superintendent Mark Patrick Wheeler
Inspector Nyree Lona Whelan
Western Australia
Deputy Commissioner Colin John Blanch
Superintendent Dario Adriano Bolzonella
Senior Constable Michelle Deborah Jesney
Sergeant David John Johnson
South Australia
Detective Sergeant Bernard Joseph Farrington
Senior Sergeant First Class Tracy McLeod Gentgall
Detective Sergeant David Paul Hunt
Tasmania
Detective Senior Constable Sharee Simone Maksimovic
Commander Ian John Whish-Wilson
Northern Territory
Superintendent Antony Stuart Deutrom
Australian Fire Services Medal
Federal
Christopher Charles Goff Liverpool NSW
NSW
John William Bevan Lightning Ridge NSW
Brett Davies Green Point NSW
Robert James Graham Lismore NSW
Raymond Randolf Hill Curlwaa NSW
Dawn Caroline Maynard Port Macquarie NSW
John Wayne Stuckings Coleambally NSW
Michelle Janine Thornley St Georges Basin NSW
Owen Leonard Tydd Gunnedah NSW
Graham Clifford Williams Sussex Inlet NSW
Victoria
Gregory Francis Hitch Cairnlea VIC
George Ernest O'Dwyer Barongarook VIC
Graeme John Saunder Alfredton VIC
Peter John Shaw The Basin VIC
Queensland
Steven John Barber Townsville QLD
Gregory Raymond Duncan Stafford QLD
Patrick Ross Kraut Toogoolawah QLD
Word count: 2434
