They are the names we’ll be discussing over the next 12 months, from Tokyo Olympics prospects to MPs, advocates, showbiz luminaries and business high flyers. These are who our experts nominate ...
Stephan Knoll, Transport Minister The high-profile Transport Minister, right, has started the year with a promotion to manager of government business, taking on a more senior role as Premier Steven Marshall’s chief tactician in Parliament. Some in the party see it as a new test on the way to possibly succeeding retiring Treasurer Rob Lucas and, ultimately, perhaps even Mr Marshall. However, rubber will have to hit the road in a big way this year as rail privatisations, road projects and Service SA centre closures must be achieved. The decision on South Rd tunnels looms as either very expensive, or disruptive, or both. As the public spotlight brightens, 2020 could be the year Mr Knoll either confirms expectations or fails them.
Kyle Chalmers, swimmer The superfish from Port Lincoln already commands a high profile, but in an Olympic year expect the hype and coverage to hit its greatest levels. Chalmers, 21, will be out to defend his title in the blue-ribbon 100m freestyle event in Tokyo in late July. There was little expectation on him to win gold when he stormed home at Rio in 2016, creating one of the most memorable moments of those Games. Returning as defending champion comes with added pressure. Chalmers will also be one to watch after the Games. Regardless of results there, attention will quickly turn to whether he commits to swimming longer term or turns his attention to his other sporting passion – football.
Alexander Hyde, Deputy Lord Mayor At the age of 26, he became the youngest deputy lord mayor of a capital city in Australia when he was elected to the Adelaide City Council role late last year. Cr Hyde, right, didn’t take long to make headlines, suggesting the New Year’s Eve fireworks show at Elder Park should be replaced with a laser and light show. As a member of the dominant Team Adelaide faction on the council, he will be in a position to push reforms with majority support. A former president of the Young Liberals, he also played a key behind-the-scenes role in Nicolle Flint’s federal election campaign in Boothby last year, where she retained the seat despite a concerted push against her. He could be cutting his teeth for a tilt at state or federal politics down the track.
Anne Ruston, senator As Minister for Families and Social Services, Senator Ruston is in charge of topical issues including Newstart, deeming rates and the cashless welfare card. Calls to increase Newstart will be a hot topic this year and record-low interest rates, which may drop even lower, will keep pressure on deeming rates – the assumed rate of income from investments used to means-test payments. Outside the ministry, Senator Ruston, right, now holds one of the strongest SA voices in Parliament, alongside fellow SA senator Simon Birmingham. She must defend local interests – none more so than the River Murray, given she is based in Renmark.
Mark Jones, Country Fire Service chief officer He was unveiled as the new CFS chief officer in August amid controversy about the selection process and questions around his bushfire expertise, having worked mostly for UK brigades. But since then, there has been little doubt about his leadership qualities throughout one of SA’s worst-ever bushfire seasons. Once this fire season is over, attention will swing to preparation for next year, including managing volunteer firefighters and their working conditions and the political issue of hazard-reduction burns. There also will be consideration around our aerial firefighting fleet and whether more resources – such as the giant Boeing 737 bomber – should be based in SA.
Matthew Nicks, Adelaide Crows coach It is hard to think of a South Australian in the sporting sphere who will be more heavily watched and scrutinised in 2020 than Matthew Nicks. He steps in as Crows coach following a period of significant upheaval and change. The former Sydney Swans player and assistant coach at Port Adelaide and Greater Western Sydney has already been lauded for his team-first ethos that players are said to be buying into this pre-season. If Nicks can bring fresh energy and help lift the Crows to a top 8 finish – something many predict is unlikely – he will be revered. If the Crows struggle, Nicks faces a long year at the hands of the club faithful.
Julie-Ann Finney, suicide campaigner Julie-Ann Finney’s son, David, a former Royal Australian Navy sailor who had been battling post-traumatic stress for a decade, took his own life, aged 38, last February. Attempts to get Australian Defence Force help had failed. Determined his death would not be in vain, Ms Finney is campaigning for a royal commission into the suicides of former military personnel. It has drawn widespread support but the Federal Government, and Prime Minister Scott Morrison, have failed to back it. Expect to hear a lot more from Ms Finney, right, who was The Advertiser’s inaugural Woman of the Year recipient in 2019.
Martin Hinton, Director of Public Prosecutions A former Solicitor-General, Mr Hinton stepped down from his role as a Supreme Court judge last year to get back to the practical side of the law. He will be restricted from appearing before his former colleagues in the Supreme Court for two years under the Australian Solicitor Conduct Rules, unless given an exception. In his first full year as DPP, Mr Hinton will have the final say on up to 12 murder, attempted murder and manslaughter cases. These include high-profile cases such as Caroline Nilsson, accused of murdering her mother-in-law, alleged poisoner Wendie-Sue Dent and the cold-case death of Colleen Adams. While not scheduled for this year, the spectre of the NCA bombing trial is also on the radar.
Sarah Snook, actress Homegrown star Sarah Snook will continue to light up our screens as Siobhan “Shiv” Roy in arguably the best drama on TV, Succession, which has just won the pre-Oscars Critics Choice Best TV Drama in Los Angeles. Season 3 of this compelling series about a fictional media family, screening on Foxtel, is one of the most anticipated shows of 2020 and won for Snook the 2019 Screen Australia Breakthrough Award and a Best actor nomination at the recent Critics Choice Awards. Fans will also soon see Snook starring in the upcoming American comedy An American Pickle, produced by and starring Seth Rogen.
Alex Cusack, actor Talent-spotted by local film director Sophie Hyde at a poetry reading, St Peters teenager Alex Cusack, below, last year made his acting debut in Hyde’s The Hunting, a four-part SBS TV drama, starring Asher Keddie and Richard Roxburgh. The Rostrevor College old scholar made it to the 2019 semi-finals of Channel 9’s hit series Australian Ninja Warrior. Cusack, 19, now has an agent and has been auditioning for other productions.
George Alice, singer The 16-year-old from Gawler kickstarted her career by winning the national Triple J’s Unearthed High competition in August. Her social following media soared from 3000 to 11,000 overnight after the-then Triple J’s Ben Harvey and Liam Stapleton – fellow South Aussies – surprised her at her school, Faith Lutheran College, in Tanunda. It’s been a “crazy whirlwind” for Alice – real name Georgia Mannion – ever since. The indie-musician left school to give her career a red-hot go. Alice, right, recorded a video to her winning hit, Circles, a staple on Triple J, and is landing spots on line-ups across the country, including the Laneway Festival next month.
Megan Schutt, cricketer If Australia is to retain its Twenty20 World Cup crown – and undisputed status as the best team in women’s cricket – on home soil this year it will likely rest on the inswinging form of Megan Schutt. The right-arm medium-fast bowler is the spearhead for the Aussies, SA and the Strikers, in the newly expanded Women’s Big Bash League. Since her international debut in 2012, the Morphett Vale girl has emerged as arguably women’s cricket’s most dangerous strike weapon, rated the top T20 and No. 2 one-day bowler on the ICC’s official rankings.
Ben Harvey & Liam Stapleton, breakfast radio hosts These two were also ones to watch, no, make that listen to, in 2017. Just 22 and 20, respectively, at the time, Ben Harvey and Liam Stapleton had been plucked from relative obscurity – Adelaide community station Fresh FM – for plum jobs at the ABC as the hosts of Triple J’s national breakfast show. Fast-forward three years and the duo are back in Adelaide after signing on with Nova 919. Stepping back into the commercial world, and in the highly competitive market of breakfast radio, their names will be on high rotation.
Tobi Pearce, co-founder of fitness business Sweat You can’t think of Pearce without thinking of Adelaide’s own, globally known, fitness queen Kayla Itsines. Together, the under-30 somethings – the youngest members of Australia’s Richest 250 in 2019 – have built a formidable global fitness empire, powered by social media. Sweat and Itsines have close to 13 million followers on Instagram alone. Itsines is the face and body of their Sweat online fitness empire, even since giving birth to her daughter Arna in April last year. Lately, Pearce, below, has been tapping Wall Street for investors. If his plans to bring on board a global investor come to fruition, they are clearly gearing up for a big 2020.
Josh Baker, hospitality entrepreneur Josh Baker can take a lot of credit for the city’s vibrant facelift. Mr Baker worked with former Labor minister John Rau on new legislation to open the first of Adelaide’s laneway bars, Clever Little Tailor, in 2013. The co-owner of cafes and bars Pink Moon Saloon, Whistle and Flute, Clever Little Tailor and Down the Road opened his most high-profile venue to date, Part Time Lover, in September. Last week, Mr Baker revealed his latest venture and biggest project to date – Funtopia, at Prospect. The venue, set to open in early February, will feature a jungle gym, electric go-carts, and climbing walls, while retaining a strong food focus.
Michelle Perugini, co-founder of Presagen Michelle Perugini has become a poster child in healthcare technology that has the potential to affect millions of lives globally. An extensive traveller and speaker, Dr Perugini has been taking Presagen – co-founded with Dr Jonathan Hall – to the world. Presagen’s Life Whisperer artificial intelligence platform, which helps identify healthy embryos in in-vitro fertilisation to improve pregnancy outcomes, has already caught the eye of global and national investors. Late last year, Flinders Fertility in SA became the first clinic nationally to offer Life Whisperer. No doubt investors will be watching Dr Perugini, below, and the company closely.
Flavia Tata Nardini, co-founder of Fleet Space Rocket scientist Flavia Tata Nardini is the fuel who powers space start-up Fleet Space Technologies. The company caught the eye of billionaire venture capitalists in 2019, who have invested nearly $11 million into the nano-satellite business. New investors include Horizon Ventures, owned by Hong Kong-based Li Ka-Shing, one of the world’s richest men. Other Investors include Momenta Ventures and Atlassian co-founder Mike Cannon-Brookes. Fleet’s four satellites – the size of a shoebox and much cheaper than traditional satellites – were launched last year, with further sets to follow on the back of capital raising.
Rob Mack, winemaker The 2018 national Young Gun of Wine winner and wine show judge was also a scholar of the exclusive Len Evans Tutorial in 2019. The McLaren Vale winemaker handcrafts micro-batch, minimal-intervention wines with a savoury edge. He’s humble with an enviable backlog of winemaking and judging knowledge. Mr Mack wasn’t raised as part of a wine family. He did an accounting degree and worked in wine-buying and merchandising in Sydney before deciding to make the good stuff. His background in business helped when he launched his Aphelion Wine label in 2014.
New Adelaide Crows chairman We don’t know who it will be yet, but it’s guaranteed to be a prominent South Australian who’ll bravely step into the role with plenty on their plate. Current chairman Rob Chapman last August signalled his intention to step down within 12 months from the post he’s held since 2009, paving the way for his successor to be in the chair before the end of this year. Chapman has not endorsed a replacement but has said the new chairman would likely come from the group currently on the board. This opens the door to names including club legend and media personality Mark Ricciuto, former federal MP Kate Ellis and SA Police Assistant Commissioner Linda Fellows.
Vaibhavi Lath, modelDiscovered by Finesse Models Australia, which also has South Australian international supermodels Lily Nova and Akiima on its books, Vaibhavi “Vi” Lath is the Adelaide agency’s brightest new star. Born in New Delhi, Vi, who moved here with her parents in 2007, is in her final year of a Bachelor of Psychological Science at the University of Adelaide. At 168cm, she’s significantly shorter than 175cm – the traditional height requirement for international catwalk models – but that isn’t holding her back. The 19-year-old’s just been signed to Elite Worldwide, which also represents Adelaide’s Adut Akech. Walking for Paolo Sebastian at last year’s Vogue Festival, Vi is also about to appear as the face of a national beauty campaign, after which she’ll take on the world.
Word count: 2245
