In her second year curating Writers’ Week, Jo Dyer has included a poet laureate, a Pakistani journalist who documented an honour killing, and Nigeria’s Chigozie Obioma who writes about an African spirit world
Adelaide Writers’ Week for the first time this year bumped up against the climate-conscious concept of flygskam; the Swedish word for plane shaming which is creating a class of people who refuse to fly because of fossil fuel emissions.
“It’s a thing,” says Writers’ Week director Jo Dyer. “Obviously when people are writing on these themes it makes sense but it’s also now a lot of writers generally.” One invited guest for next year’s event was in two minds, then accepted because the 2020 Adelaide Festival will be an audited carbon-neutral event, the result of mitigating strategies and offsets through a wind-powered project in Gujarat in India. A couple of weeks later he changed his mind; he just couldn’t justify flying all the way to Australia, knowing the climate damage that was being done.
That comes on top of an existing reluctance by some writers to come a long way, and certainly not in economy class. It’s helping to keep Writers’ Week on its toes, says Dyer, who is in her second year in the job, as does the growing competition from rival festivals and events.
“There seems to be a plethora of new events or programs coming up every year,” she says.
A couple of writers Dyer had in mind declined and then turned up on the list for this month’s Broadside event at Melbourne’s The Wheeler Centre – Monica Lewinsky and Zadie Smith, are featured, so maybe that says something about what might have been?
Even within Adelaide, Writers’ Week competes for talent. The Jaipur Literary Festival, under the umbrella of OzAsia, attracts writers from the Asian continent.
“It is, by the way, a fabulous initiative but yes, we wouldn’t have minded having (The Anarchy: The Relentless Rise of the East India Company author) William Dalrymple,” says Dyer.
Not that there is anything compromised about this year’s selection of prominent writers and thinkers who include the brilliant Nigerian author Chigozie Obioma, 33, whose first major novel, An Orchestra of Minorities, was short-listed for the Man Booker Prize. While the story is about a simple Nigerian chicken farmer who wants to better himself by getting an education, it is told from the viewpoint of his spirit or chi, which opens the story up into the esoteric world of Ebo cosmology. The orchestra of minorities, Obioma writes, is the plaintive cry of the birds after one of the flock has been taken by a hawk.
“There was that sense of impending doom, when you don’t know how it’s going to end but it’s not going to end well,” says Dyer. “But the journey you go through and the insight you get into these people … he is clearly such an accomplished novelist and a great thinker.” An Orchestra of Minorities with its glimpse into another world is at the heart of Dyer’s 2020 Writers’ Week theme of Being Human, a category broad enough to encompass anything from a chicken herder to Artificial Intelligence to Joy Harjo who is US poet laureate in the age of Trump. The theme seems to emerge almost unbidden each year, partly as a function of the writers who are available but also because what is being published tends to form its own literary Zeitgeist.
“In a way, fiction writing in particular is concerned with the idea of being human and being spiritual and emotional, so that made a whole lot of sense,” she says. “I guess it’s also ‘what does it mean to be human at a time when our environment, our world, our very existence, is potentially under threat?’.” Pakistani journalist Sanam Maher, who will join Obioma in the ticketed opening event, will tell the chilling story of Qandeel Baloch, the subject of her book, A Woman Like Her. Baloch, a kind of Pakistani Kim Kardashian, was a self-created social media figure who auditioned (and cried when she was eliminated) for Pakistan Idol, and whose outrageous online presence was her ticket out of the poverty in which she grew up. When Imran Khan, the ex-cricketer and Pakistan PM, ended his second marriage she began a campaign online to become wife number three. But Dyer says Baloch began a more serious social media debate with a senior imam in Pakistan who she later met, and posted naughtily about.
“She was murdered by her family, in a horrendously misnamed ‘honour’ killing,” says Dyer. “This all played out publicly and people predicted what was going to happen and kind of watched it happen.” In another example of cultural extremes, Chinese author Ma Jian will talk about writing in China, or attempting to, and how he now lives in exile in London, hoping that one day the totalitarian regime that governs his homeland will fall.
“His work is excoriating, it pulls no punches,” Dyer says. “His latest book, China Dream, is about the way the regime tries to get into the heads and minds of the population, and the cost of resisting.” While the competition might be keen, and climate change is influencing travel, Writers’ Week in Adelaide remains an accessible and popular event brimming with ideas and opportunities. Its free access invites audiences to come with open minds, ready to listen to and discover writers and books they may never have heard of and would never have paid to see.
“You see people arriving, program in hand and they know they want to see three or four authors but the rest of the day they will just look and see who piques their interest,” Dyer says. “It just changes so much the energy of the space, and that, coupled with being outdoors, gives it this laid back, truly festive vibe.” Adelaide Writers’ Week 2020, Pioneer Women’s Memorial Garden, King William Rd, Adelaide, February 29–March 5, adelaidefestival.com.au/writers-week
OTHERS TO SEE Jokha Alharthi (OMN) Author of Celestial Bodies, which won the 2019 Man Booker International Prize Tash Aw (MYS/UK) Author of The Harmony Silk Factory whose new book, We, The Survivors, is about a Malaysian man convicted or murdering a Bangladeshi migrant Tommy Orange (USA) Cheyenne and Araphao writer whose essays include alcoholism, opioid addiction and the challenge of urban life Hannah Critchlow (UK) Cambridge neuroscientist who suggests we have much less control over our lives than we think Yanis Varoufakis (GRC) Greek economist, academic and former politician who served as Minister of Finance in 2015 Damian Barr (UK) British writer, columnist and playwright, and author of You Will Be Safe Here Julia Phillips (USA) Debut author of the acclaimedDisappearing Earth, set in Russia’s far EastBart van Es (NLD/UK) Literary critic and writer, author of The Cut Out Girls about a Jewish girl who escaped the Nazis
CREDIT: WORDS PENELOPE DEBELLE
Word count: 1146
