Labor hypocrisy WHERE were these people protesting the outsourcing of train and tram operations when our pine forests were sold?
Money was consequently wasted on Adelaide Oval, the Motor Accident Commission, the Lotteries Commission and SA Power Networks, among others. Labor’s stand in this regard is pure hypocrisy.
KYM BRAY, Port Victoria Below the belt THE perennial political debates over privatisation seem to use it as a crutch. They also tend to entail a good deal of hitting below the belt. M. F. HORTON, Clarence Park Water visionaries ACROSS time there have been letters and comments in “Text Talk” in The Advertiser relating to building a system to transfer water from the wet top end to the much drier bottom end of the continent. I have submitted more than one letter on this subject myself.
But I have come to the conclusion that there is no person or government with the necessary brainpower to look at this obvious solution.
Our governments are fiddling with far less significant policies, and oppositions spend worthless time and energy on attempts to bring the governments down. It seems the wellbeing of the southern half of the continent is less important than protecting (and looking forward to) hefty pensions and cushy jobs.
And to hell with Australia and its future.
DENNIS PARKER, Yongala Radical thinkers THERE will never be an effective long-term vision for SA until the current dominant thinking that relies on being low cost, open for business and low tax is cast aside and replaced with truly radical, transformative thinking and action.
It was reformist thinking in London in the 1830s by the radicals and Whigs that developed the very idea of SA based on systematic colonisation and the early adoption of democracy.
It was radical thinking in SA in the 1930s by local industrialists, such as Edward Holden, along with key public servants and trade unionists, to adopt the then new Keynesian economic thinking and policies to industrialise and transform SA.
It will be radical thinking, and only radical thinking, that sustains prosperity and thriving in SA in the context of the still unfolding Chinese century, the robotic and artificial intelligence future and intensifying climate emergency.
STEWART SWEENEY, North Adelaide Make choice, Roo I DON’T mind Mark Ricciuto speaking his mind. But he has to make the choice to do it as a media person, quit the Adelaide Football Club’s board and stop alienating Crows fans and members.
LUKE WILLIAMS, Westbourne Park No-nonsense play MARK Ricciuto, because of your standing within the Adelaide Football Club and in the AFL community, any public comments you make will be highly regarded and will also be heavily scrutinised and remembered for decades.
In contrast this letter of mine, if published, will be quickly forgotten. Life’s experiences have taught me that to have a happy environment in the home, workplace, sporting arena, etc. it’s best to praise publicly and criticise privately.
While at times thoroughly agreeing with your cringe-worthy comments about past performances of the Crows, did they make the team play any better? No way.
In fact those words seemed to weigh heavily on the boys.
You were a great no-nonsense player Roo, and have become a wonderful servant of the club, but now is the time to unite the team. Let the coach do the coaching. Or are you a frustrated coach in waiting? We fly as one.
SILVANO BALLESTRIN, Happy Valley In good Nick GOOD to see Matthew Nicks appointed as Adelaide Crows coach. Let’s all hope that he doesn’t nick off too soon.
WAYNE NICHOLLS, Royston Park Can’t beat Cup COMPARING Australia’s richest horse race, The Everest, to the Melbourne Cup is like comparing Donald Trump to the Rockefeller family. Only one has true pedigree.ANTONIO DE IONNO, Dernancourt
Word count: 627
