The global pandemic – and the resultant work-from-home phenomenon – will have a major effect on how cities, suburbs, offices and residential houses are designed in the future Has COVID-19 killed the open plan? Will we see a renaissance of the McMansion to accommodate swanky home offices? These are the questions our top architects are asking as the world starts planning for a future which will forever be shaped by the pandemic of 2020.
Since the 1990s the design of offices has been primarily influenced by the “activity-based working” model. It’s sold as the modern way to work, with advancements in technology allowing staff to work from wherever they like in the office: at a desk, in a meeting room or even in the staff kitchen. But with COVID-19 forcing white collar workers, almost overnight, to work from home, a major shift in architectural thinking is brewing.
Some believe the health crisis will see the end of shared workspaces and open floor-plans, and the return of individual offices and segregated working areas, in a bid to minimise future health risks. Others argue there will be an accelerated shift to activity-based working as workplaces adapt to the flexible working environment many have become accustomed to in recent months.
David Cooke, the director of Adelaide architecture firm City Collective, which advises companies on workplace strategy, believes it will be a combination of the two.
“Humans, we’re social beings; we like to talk and we like to hang out with other human beings, and that’s why I think the office location isn’t dead,” he says.
“I think it’s (coronavirus) going to be an accelerator of change. I think office areas will reduce in size and then how the floor-plate gets cut up will also change to be more activity-based and individual-based. The rows and rows of desks, I think, will probably be replaced with more individual working pods.
“And if offices are going to be reduced in area, from a pure economics point of view, they will need to try to find ways to fill that area. I think there’s a great opportunity to provide different types of uses to support a quality experience, and bring more of that soft infrastructure – whether it’s childcare or end-of-trip facilities or whatever the next pressure point is. Is it a sleep zone? Is it a small GP clinic?
“No matter how happy someone is in their home office environment, they will want to leave at some point, and it’s the quality of that social amenity where I think buildings can really start to adjust and offer that.” For those who have already returned to the office, social distancing rules are likely to be in force, with restrictions on the number of people allowed in lifts and closed areas. While sensor-operated lighting and other features of modern buildings can limit contact with surfaces, new building technologies are likely to be developed to further limit future health risks.
Matthews Architects managing director Gerald Matthews believes COVID-19 will also inspire the development of new, safer building materials.
“I think it (coronavirus) will create more awareness of the idea that the spaces you inhabit affect your immune system, which is a very visceral way of saying it affects the ability of society to actually survive one of these things well,” he says.
“I think a short-term solution for things like lifts will be there’s an app, or you wave your hand or you speak to it and it can understand your voice.
“AI (artificial intelligence) will have a big role to play in terms of how do I use the machine of a building without touching it. But I also think humans will tend to innovate.
“The use of various metals has several centuries of history in terms of how we evolve alloys and metals – so there’s the idea that it doesn’t matter if you touch it because nothing can live on that surface for very long.” While Matthews agrees remote working will shape the future design of offices, he also suggests organisations may reconsider having a single headquarters to accommodate all of their staff.
The idea of a single central business district where people work, surrounded by suburban areas where people live, underpins the development of most modern cities. But Matthews believes that could change, with the pandemic potentially leading to a decentralisation of business activity.
“I suspect that we’ll see a few businesses trial the idea of instead of one massive headquarters where everybody lives, we have hubs where we don’t place all of our workforce, we don’t put all the eggs in one basket,” he says.
“We might have a general office that’s got all the sorts of general facilities that’s city-based, and then we might have several suburban satellite offices.
“If you’re going to be working on a particular project for the next two weeks, you go and set up in that office because you’re near that client or you’re near that site, or because that office has the facilities you need for those two weeks.” With more people spending less time in the office and more time at home, the design of apartments and houses will also adapt to the new remote working lifestyle. Working from home has appealed to many in recent months, with commute time freed up to spend with family, and the added flexibility to juggle work and home commitments.
While makeshift home offices arranged in spare bedrooms or other private areas of a home have been the short-term solution for many, Matthews says, in the longer term, innovative design will be the answer to maximising space.
“You’re either going to have to earn enough money to have a big enough house that you’ve got dedicated rooms for each different thing you do ... or the solution that I would love to see Australia pioneer is the idea of spaces that can transform,” he says.
“In countries like Japan this is a centuries-old tradition – the idea that this is the bedroom at night, then you wake up, you roll up the bedding, it goes into a cupboard, you open up another wall and it becomes the living space, you close that, you open something else. People used to be obsessed about the idea of efficiently using the footprint of your space by making the space itself change. And the tiny home architects of the world have led the charge in terms of showing how you don’t need a lot of space in order to make one space cycle through lots of different modes.” Designers from across Woods Bagot’s global architecture studio have already turned their thinking to how adaptable spaces could accommodate more activities at home. They recently collaborated on a new modular apartment design they’ve called “AD-APT”, based on an open-plan layout that “mode shifts” throughout the day.
During the day the apartment can be configured to provide a generous living and dining space, separated kitchen and work space, and two separate booths designed for focused work, entertainment or other activities requiring privacy.
At night the living room can compress to create a large master suite and second bedroom, separated from the spine of the home by a movable wall or curtain for privacy.
And, finally, in play mode, the apartment can be transformed into a wide open space for entertaining, meetings or other group activities. The firm’s 537 Elizabeth apartment project in Sydney draws on many of these ideas, with a flexible layout that enables spaces to be converted into a variety of rooms.
Woods Bagot associate principal Alex Hall says while COVID-19 will prompt physical changes to offices and classrooms over time, the changes to our home environment could be “far more rapid”.
“People have become more comfortable with working remotely, and will expect to be able to do so more often,” he says.
“Location can be a choice based on their tasks and activities, and not necessarily on where their company leases an office.
“Focused, productive work can be carried out at home, at times which best suit individual lifestyles, while collaborative and socially interactive activities will bring people together in a variety of spaces.
“We see this leading to the need for resilient homes, homes with the adaptability to support a range of activities throughout people’s days.
“Homes will need to provide spaces for exercise, entertainment, digital collaboration, connection and focus, alongside the traditional activities of eating, sleeping and washing.” Matthews hopes homes of the future will also stimulate those who are spending more time there.
“It changes the equation that maybe you care about different things in your home now that you’re spending two or three days a week there,” he says.
“I like the idea that people express their individuality in their home. One of the things that never ceases to amaze me is very few people ever say ‘I want a music room’, or ‘I want a room that’s just for my piano’, or ‘I want a room in which to paint’, or ‘I love pottery and I need a pottery studio’, or ‘I’m a writer and I want a tree house so I can go up there and write’.
“I find it weird people don’t express their passions in their home more often.” As architects contemplate how offices, schools, apartments, houses and other buildings will look in the future, the bigger question for planners and developers is how our cities and suburbs will evolve.
Cooke believes the pandemic has provided an opportunity to reassess Adelaide’s urban development, and transform Adelaide’s homogenised urban sprawl into vibrant, integrated and diverse neighbourhood centres.
“I think the whole idea of the local village, it’s almost an English notion where you’re able to have that mix: that high street environment, different housing types in and around the village, connections to education and open space,” he says.
“I think it’s almost those clusters of villages that should be the catalyst for this opportunity to rethink our cities.
“We’ve experienced something as a society that we thought we’d never experience over the past few months.
“We’ve got this opportunity to learn from this experience.
“I think there’s some really great opportunities to define Adelaide for the next 50 years out of this.” According Urban Development Institute of Australia SA chief executive Pat Gerace, those opportunities could involve a major rethink on investment in major road and transport infrastructure.
With traffic and congestion easing as more people work from home, Gerace believes infrastructure spending should be re-prioritised.
“A big thing that COVID-19 has highlighted for policy makers is that they should almost certainly reconsider the way they invest in road and transport infrastructure,” he says.
“Using South Rd as an example, we spend billions and billions of dollars continuing to upgrade it, but imagine a government that can put in place incentives to encourage working at home, which saw a reduction in traffic volumes by 20 per cent overnight and those funds were redirected. “A lot of the housing density and walkable neighbourhood policies in things like the 30-Year Plan for Adelaide are centred around public transport and cycling, but they still assume you go to and from work, not working from home.”
CREDIT: WORDS GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO MAIN PHOTOGRAPH NICK CLAYTON
Word count: 1874
