PART 5 OF 7
139 Harry Stamoulis & family $822 million Last year: $769 million 51. Melbourne. Property Principal. Stamoulis Property Group Stamoulis has residential and commercial property investments and projects dotted around Melbourne. One of his bigger deals was a $90.75 million purchase of a Woolworths distribution centre in suburban Mulgrave last year. The family business dates back to his late father Spiros and the Gold Medal Soft Drink company he ran for decades and sold in 2004, ploughing the proceeds into property before his death in 2007. Harry Stamoulis has since run the family concerns, which include Greek media assets.
140 Sam Hupert $792 million Last year: $860 million (combined with Anthony Hall) 65. Melbourne. Healthcare Co-founder, Pro Medicus Hupert and business partner Anthony Hall are an overnight success story almost two decades in the making. Hupert, a doctor, suggested in 1983 to technology expert Hall that they start a business. About 37 years later they are each closing in on the billionaire ranks as the share price of Pro Medicus, which develops software for radiologists, keep rising. Hupert also owns part of the private Yumbah Aquaculture, an abalone and shellfish farming business. Hall and Hupert sold down some of their shareholding last year, but still maintain a large stake in the business.
141 Dale Elphinstone $790 million Last year: $682 million 69. Burnie, Tasmania. Manufacturing Executive director, Elphinstone Group Elphinstone started his career as an apprentice with mining equipment giant Caterpillar in 1966.
Today he is Tasmania’s richest person and owns William Adams, which has the Caterpillar dealerships across Tasmania and Victoria. He makes his own earthmoving trucks and engines, having started building dump trucks from his father’s shed in Burnie in 1975. He also owns stakes in several ASX-listed companies. His daughter Kelly is managing director of Elphinstone Group.
142 Bruce Gordon $785 million Last year: $781 million 91. Media. Bermuda Owner, WIN Corporation Gordon may be finding it harder to make large profits at his regional media group WIN Corporation these days but he still wields considerable influence on the sector in Australia.
He holds big shareholdings in ASX-listed Nine Entertainment and Prime Media, and last year opposed a deal for the latter to merge with Seven West Media. Gordon bought WIN in 1979, after a stint as an executive at Paramount Pictures in the US, where he had moved after working for Lucille Ball’s Desilu. Having left school at 14 and performed as a magician to attract customers to the family fruit barrow in Sydney’s Pitt Street, he now lives in Bermuda and owns half of NRL club St George-Illawarra.
143 Bill James $771 million Last year: $595 million 70. Sydney. Travel Co-founder, Flight Centre After completing an economics degree in Sydney, James went to London in 1973, where he helped co-found Top Deck Travel with Geoff Harris and Graham Turner. The trio would later start Flight Centre, now one of the biggest travel agencies in the country. While James, a former finance director, has not had an executive role since 2000, he retains his Flight Centre shares.
His time is now devoted to pursuits such as the Kokoda Trail in Papua New Guinea.
144 Arnold Vitocco $767 million Last year: $750 million 54. Sydney. Property Director, Dart West Retail Vitocco is a western Sydney success story, undertaking big housing projects and owning half of one of the fastest-growing shopping centres in the country. He is in a joint venture with billionaire Tony Perich for the Narellan Town Centre, which has become the biggest family-owned centre in the country with $600 million in annual turnover across 72,000sq m of retail space. He also rescued the Max Brenner chain of chocolate shops, turning it around and readying it for expansion. Read more page 30
145 Frank Costa & family $760 million Last year: $688 million 82. Geelong. Agriculture, investment Costa stepped down last July from the board of the ASX-listed Costa Group after a tough 12 months for the fresh food giant that saw its share price fall as problems emerged with several of its crops. He maintains a large stake in the business, which began in 1993 when Costa’s father Tom and uncle Joe started a fruit shop in Geelong.
Costa build the business up before selling a large share to US private equity firm Paine Partners in 2011. He also has commercial property and residential land projects in and around Geelong
146 Trevor Lee $752 million Last year: $748 million 69. Brisbane. Agriculture Chairman, Australian Country Choice Group Lee’s family business started as HJ Lee & Sons in 1955, progressing to develop one of Australia’s first commercial beef cattle feedlots at Brindley Park, Queensland in 1968. Lee struck a deal to supply meat to Coles in 1974, a partnership that has survived its ups and downs since. Lee’s business now includes Australian Cattle & Beef Holdings, and the entire business employs more than 1400 people as one of the country’s biggest meat processors and cattle herd owners.
147 Max Beck $748 million Last year: $692 million 78. Melbourne. Property Chairman, Beck Corporation Beck has had a stellar career in the Melbourne property scene, building iconic projects such as 333 Collins Street in the CBD, the groundbreaking Eastside project at Jolimont, and many commercial blocks along St Kilda Road. But one of his best deals has been with old friend Lindsay Fox, with whom he bought Essendon Airport for $22 million two decades ago. The precinct has been transformed and is now valued at about $1.1 billion. Beck’s family clinched another unique deal last year, with US giant Blackstone agreeing to its first built-to-rent project at Caulfield where Beck’s son Sam is overseeing the $1.5 billion mixed-use Caulfield Village.
148 Jeff Chapman $744 million Last year: $839 million 72. Melbourne. Investment Founder and chairman, Bennelong Group Chapman part-owns one of the most successful boutique funds management operations in the past decade. His Bennelong takes stakes in boutique firms, some of which have ranked as the best performers on the market, and provides back-office and logistics services to the stock pickers. But it comes with a twist.
Chapman’s share of profits goes to his Bennelong Foundation, which supports grassroots programs across health and education programs that assist recently arrived migrants.
Chapman made his first fortune via the float and sale of his Sportsworld Media Group for more than $200m in 2000.
149 Chris Ellison $744 million Last year: $691 million 62. Perth. Mining Managing director, Mineral Resources Ellison has made his fortune from his mining services business Mineral Resources, but he has made a bigger splash with his property holdings.
He bought what is still the ninth most expensive residential property in Perth’s Mosman Park, a 7654sq m riverside holding, from billionaire Angela Bennett for $57.5 million in 2009, and has since shelled out another $11.6 million for two adjacent houses. Now he wants to demolish the bigger mansion and replace it with a seven-storey structure 3m lower than the original. Ellison has a large stake in Mineral Resources, which listed on the ASX in 2006.
150 John Symond $740 million Last year: $691 million 78. Sydney. Investment Founder, Aussie Home Loans Symond has extensive property and share assets, most of which are held overseas – including blue-chip US stocks, property in London and his $160 million luxury superyacht Hasna. But the man known as “Aussie John” is best known as the founder of the Aussie Home Loans mortgage broking business. Symond started the company in 1992 and built it up to be one of the best-known brands in Australia, before beginning its now full sale to Commonwealth Bank in 2008.
He completed the deal in 2017, taking a combination of cash and shares that has seen him emerge as one of the bank’s biggest individual shareholders.
151 John Borg 152 Michael Borg $732 million combined 48 and 53. Central Coast, NSW. Manufacturing Founders, Borg Manufacturing The Borg brothers are the names behind a quiet Australian manufacturing success story. Their Borg Manufacturing is based on the NSW Central Coast and makes melamine panels and components for joinery applications across five sites around the country. Their facility at Charmhaven is the leading manufacturer of cabinet doors in Australia and in January 2018 the business acquired Carter Holt Harvey’s particleboard business in Mt Gambier, South Australia. Borg Manufacturing employs 1800 people around the country and made a $37 million net profit from $651 million revenue in 2019. The brothers started their business from their parents’ garage in 1989 as a supplier of kitchen components on the Central Coast.
153 Zig Inge & family $729 million Last year: $707 million 94. Melbourne. Property Inge moved to Australia from Latvia and worked as a real estate agent before building houses and then moving into the commercial sector. His Zig Inge Group was a big retirement home owner before selling some of the business to Macquarie Capital in 2005. It sold out two years later in a deal that made Inge about $300 million.
He now has some retirement assets, as well as commercial buildings around Melbourne, and the Rivoli Cinema and Dineamic Foods healthy meals delivery business.
154 John Singleton $729 million Last year: $476 million 78. Sydney. Investment Owner, John Singleton Promotions While he is best known for his pioneering work in the advertising industry, these days Singleton has most of his money in a range of propertyrelated investments following the sale of his $80 million stake in Macquarie Media last year.
He owns pubs, such as the Elanora Hotel in Gosford bought for $25 million last year, has spent $4 million on the Bon Pavilion restaurant and bar complex on the NSW Central Coast, and has joined with Mark Carnegie and Gerry Harvey for a planned $1.5 billion revamp of the Entertainment Quarter in Sydney’s Moore Park.
He has even invested in the artificial intelligence real estate software firm Property Realm.
Singleton commenced his career in advertising in 1958, later running SPASM and John Singleton Advertising
155 Nick DiMauro $729 million Last year: $656 million 66. Adelaide. Property Owner, Angaet Group DiMauro is a one-time plumber who bought a delicatessen in the 1970s and went on to forge a property career. DiMauro has accumulated 18 commercial properties around Australia and New Zealand, many of which are shopping centres in Adelaide. He arrived from Italy as a child and worked as a telegram boy for the old Postmaster-General, before running his own plumbing business. DiMauro’s assets include the Raintrees Shopping Centre in Cairns, where a multi-million dollar revamp is under way.
156 Ori Allon $727 million Last year: $483 million 39. New York. Technology, property Executive chairman, Compass Real Estate Founding and then selling companies to Google and Twitter, and then a firm now valued at $US6.4 billion. Winning basketball championships as a team owner in Israel. Allon, who has Australian citizenship after a stint at universities in Melbourne and Sydney last decade, has achieved a lot before turning 40.
The Google deal came after he had developed a search algorithm as part of his master’s thesis.
Allon later sold another search business to Twitter, and then started the real estate tech firm Compass in New York. It has since undergone several raisings from investors, the latest giving it a $US6.4 billion valuation.
Compass has plans to grab 20 per cent of the US residential realtor market, combining its estate agents with cutting-edge market analytics.
Allon has also set up a movie financing business
157 Graham Tuckwell $723 million Last year: $683 million 63. Jersey. Financial services Chairman, ETFS Capital Tuckwell has made $600 million from the 2017 sale of the US and European operations of his ETF Securities, the exchange traded fund pioneer he started in 2002. He has since focused the business, now called ETFS Capital, on investing in a string of other businesses, including recently putting money into digital wealth provider WealthKernel and price verification platform Skylight IPV. Tuckwell has said he wants to move back to Australia, where he donated $100 million with wife Louise to build residence halls and provide scholarships at the Australian National University. But a court case in Jersey has heard Tuckwell admitted to making the big donations motivated by a large personal tax bill. Three private equity firms, minority shareholders in ETS Securities, are suing Tuckwell, alleging he refused to disperse funds from the 2017 sales.
158 John Camilleri & family $710 million 60. Sydney. Agriculture, property Managing director, Baiada Holdings Camilleri heads a family business that has long been a major player in poultry but these days is making plenty of money from long-held property assets. Just 24 years old when he took the helm of Baiada in early 1984, he and his brother Simon head a business with annual revenue of more than $1.6 billion, supplying chickens to Coles, Woolworths and KFC.
Camilleri had taken over in 1983 after Celestino “Charlie” Baiada, who started processing 30 chickens daily by hand in the family laundry and then built the business. The family also owns property firm Celestino, which made pre-tax profits of more than $100 million last year from projects in Sydney’s west and southeast Queensland. Camilleri is also prominent in horseracing and is best known for breeding the champion Winx at his Fairway Thoroughbreds operation.
159 John Higgins $710 million Last year: $696 million 65. Melbourne. Investment Chairman, Higgins Coatings Higgins is a scion of the Higgins family, which established Higgins Coatings in 1949 as a small 24-hour painting business. While he chairs the business, he also has extensive property assets, and with business partner Allan Myers pulled off one of the more canny deals in recent Australian business history. The pair paid less than $1 million for Polish brewery Grupa Zwyiec 30 years ago and it is now listed on the Warsaw Stock Exchange, with Higgins’ and Myers’ shareholding worth more than $700 million.
Higgins also owns a clifftop mansion at Portsea for which he paid $26 million.
160 Seumas Dawes $703 million Last year: $582 million 63. Sydney. Financial services Chairman, Pepper Dawes, a one-time credit and derivatives trader who spent three years as an adviser to then Treasurer Paul Keating, made his fortune from the non-bank lending business Pepper Group.
Pepper was acquired by the private equity firm KKR in 2015 for $682 million. Dawes also owns Astra Lodge at Falls Creek in Victoria, and the neighbouring Huski Apartments.
161 Ian Malouf $701 million Last year: $550 million 54. Sydney. Waste Management Founder, Dial-a-Dump and Ahoy Club The man dubbed “Australia’s richest garbo” has made his biggest splash yet, bringing his 54m superyacht to work in Australia. Mischief comes with a price tag of $500,000 per week, or $15,000 per hour, and dominated Sydney Harbour during the past summer. It is the local centerpiece of Malouf’s Ahoy Club, an online luxury charter business he formed after he felt ripped off by brokers who dominate the Mediterrean luxury yacht industry. But his wealth stems from Dial-a-Dump, the waste business he formed after leaving school. He sold it for $577 million in cash and shares to the listed Bingo Industries in 2018, and became a non-executive director. Read more page 18
162 Tim Gurner $700 million Last year: $652 million 37. Melbourne. Property Chief executive, Gurner Gurner is keeping up his fast pace of construction in the property sector, with work under way on his luxury $540 million apartment project St Moritz in Melbourne’s St Kilda. Gurner has only a handful of apartments left to sell there, and has also started building the luxury $280 million Victoria & Vine residences in Collingwood, which will also feature a private club for residents.
Collingwood is among the handful of inner-city suburbs Gurner’s eponymous property group has helped transform, and he has also built projects in Brisbane and Sydney. His first business was a gym, which he sold when he was 19 before enteringthe property industry
Word count: 2658
