These 66 scholars are Australia's leading researchers in health and medical sciences - one selected from each of the 66 fields in this discipline. They are the researchers with the highest number of citations from papers published in the last five years in the 20 top journals in their field. In each field we also name Australia's top research institution, the one with most citations in the top 20 journals in the field in the last five years.
Field Addiction Field leader Louisa Degenhardt, UNSW Lead institution UNSW
Field AIDS & HIV Field leader Matthew Law, UNSW Lead institution UNSW
Field Alternative & Traditional Medicine Field leader Jon Adams, UTS Lead institution Western
Field Anaesthesiology Field leader Paul Myles, Monash Lead institution Monash
Field Audiology, Speech & Language Pathology Field leader Sharynne McLeod, CSU Lead institution Uni of Queensland
Field Bioethics Field leader Wendy Lipworth, Uni of Sydney Lead institution Uni of Melbourne
Field Cardiology Field leader John Beltrame, Uni of Adelaide Lead institution Uni of Adelaide
Field Child & Adolescent Psychology Field leader Liz Pellicano, Macquarie Lead institution Macquarie
Field Clinical Laboratory Science Field leader Samuel Vasikaran, UWA Lead institution QUT
Field Communicable Diseases Field leader David Paterson, Uni of Queensland Lead institution Monash
Field Critical Care Field leader Craig French, Uni of Melbourne Lead institution Austin
Field Dentistry Field leader Sašo Ivanovski, Uni of Queensland Lead institution Uni of Adelaide
Field Dermatology Field leader Adele Green, QIMR Berghofer Lead institution Uni of Queensland
Field Developmental Disabilities Field leader Cheryl Dissanayake, La Trobe Lead institution Macquarie
Field Diabetes Field leader Sophia Zoungas, Monash Lead institution Monash
Field Emergency Medicine Field leader Zsolt Balogh, Uni of Newcastle Lead institution Monash
Field Endocrinology Field leader Peter Ebeling, Monash Lead institution Monash
Field Epidemiology Field leader Mary-Louise McLaws, UNSW Lead institution Monash
Field Gastroenterology & Hepatology Field leader Behzad Hajarizadeh, UNSW Lead institution Burnet
Field Genetics & Genomics Field leader Peter Visscher, Uni of Queensland Lead institution QIMR Berghofer
Field Gerontology & Geriatric Medicine Field leader Christopher Cleon Rowe, Austin Lead institution UNSW
Field Gynaecology & Obstetrics Field leader Sailesh Kumar, Uni of Queensland Lead institution Uni of Queensland
Field Health & Medical Sciences (general) Field leader Yohannes Kinfu, Uni of Canberra Lead institution Monash
Field Heart & Thoracic Surgery Field leader David Winlaw, Uni of Sydney Lead institution RCH Melbourne
Field Hematology Field leader Constantine Tam, Uni of Melbourne Lead institution Monash
Field Hospice & Palliative Care Field leader David Currow, UTS Lead institution UNSW
Field Immunology Field leader James McCluskey, Uni of Melbourne Lead institution Monash
Field Molecular Biology Field leader Debnath Ghosal, Uni of Melbourne Lead institution Monash
Field Natural Medicines & Medicinal Plants Field leader Anthony Carroll, Griffith Lead institution Griffith
Field Neurology Field leader Glenda Halliday, Uni of Sydney Lead institution Monash
Field Neurosurgery Field leader Jeffrey Rosenfeld, Monash Lead institution Monash
Field Nuclear Medicine, Radiotherapy & Molecular Imaging Field leader Rod Hicks, Peter Mac Lead institution Peter Mac
Field Nursing Field leader Debra Jackson, UTS Lead institution Griffith
Field Nutrition Science Field leader Luc van Loon, ACU Lead institution Monash
Field Obesity Field leader John Dixon, Baker Lead institution Monash
Field Oncology Field leader Freddy Sitas, Uni of Sydney Lead institution ANU
Field Ophthalmology & Optometry Field leader Fiona Stapleton, UNSW Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery Field leader Omar Kujan, UWA Lead institution UWA
Field Orthopaedic Medicine & Surgery Field leader Chris G. Maher, Uni of Sydney Lead institution Monash
Field Otolaryngology Field leader Richard Harvey, Macquarie Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Pain & Pain Management Field leader Michael Nicholas, Uni of Sydney Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Pathology Field leader Anthony Gill, Uni of Sydney Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Paediatric Medicine Field leader Alicia Spittle, Uni of Melbourne Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Pharmacology & Pharmacy Field leader Daniel Hoyer, Uni of Melbourne Lead institution Monash
Field Physical Education & Sports Medicine Field leader Gavin Davis, Monash Lead institution VU
Field Physiology Field leader Jonathan M. Peake, QUT Lead institution Monash
Field Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery Field leader Anand Deva, Macquarie Lead institution Macquarie
Field Pregnancy & Childbirth Field leader Caroline Homer, Burnet Lead institution Western
Field Primary Health Care Field leader Nicholas Zwar, Bond Lead institution Monash
Field Psychiatry Field leader Patrick McGorry, Uni of Melbourne Lead institution UNSW
Field Psychology Field leader Richard Moulding, Deakin Lead institution ACU
Field Public Health Field leader Adrian Bauman, Uni of Sydney Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Pulmonology Field leader Peter Frith, Flinders Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Radiology & Medical Imaging Field leader Weidong Cai, Uni of Sydney Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Rehabilitation Therapy Field leader Jennie Ponsford, Monash Lead institution Monash
Field Reproductive Health Field leader Helena Teede, Monash Lead institution Uni of Adelaide
Field Rheumatology Field leader Peter Nash, Griffith Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Social Psychology Field leader Luke Smillie, Uni of Melb Lead institution Uni of Melb
Field Surgery Field leader Mark Smithers, Uni of Queensland Lead institution JCU
Field Toxicology Field leader Bryan Fry, Uni of Queensland Lead institution Uni of Queensland
Field Transplantation Field leader Daniel Chambers, Uni of Queensland Lead institution St Vincent's Hospital
Field Tropical Medicine & Parasitology Field leader Una Ryan, Murdoch Lead institution Uni of Melb
Field Urology & Nephrology Field leader Declan Murphy, Peter Mac Lead institution Monash
Field Vascular Medicine Field leader Bruce Campbell, Uni of Melbourne Lead institution Monash
Field Veterinary Medicine Field leader Navneet Dhand, Uni of Sydney Lead institution Uni of Sydney
Field Virology Field leader Peter Walker, Uni of Queensland Lead institution UNSW
Patrick McGorry Psychiatrist University of Melbourne Research leader in the field of psychiatry Mental health has emerged as a major casualty of the COVID-19 pandemic. "Young people are really in trouble because they are so much more precarious in terms of where they are in life," says Patrick McGorry, executive director of youth mental health centre of excellence Orygen, and founder of the national network of headspace centres for young people.
"They're on the threshold of their productive life and obviously much more vulnerable to becoming mentally ill. They're more vulnerable to developing mental illness anyway, because that's the major risk period.
"Their whole transition to adulthood is much more insecure and fragile than it ever has been."
Professor McGorry was the 2010 Australian of the Year and is chair of youth mental health at the University of Melbourne. He is particularly concerned about surging youth unemployment rates in the pandemic and the huge disruption to secondary and tertiary education. "You're looking down the barrel of a major recession, which is going to impact more severely on young people than any other age group," McGorry says.
He is urging an attack on two fronts: prevention, by taking measures to revive the economy so that employment prospects can be improved, and secondary and tertiary education shored up; and strengthening the safety net of the mental health system, which "was already overwhelmed with demand even before COVID and now is experiencing a surge of at least 20 to 30 per cent increase in need for care."
However, McGorry is not in the blame game. "Of all countries in the world, we have actually named the problem. We've had commissions of enquiry and admitted failures, especially the Victorian government."
His interest in young people's mental health took root early, in the mid-80s, when as a trainee he established a research project at Melbourne's Royal Park Hospital, focusing on people who had had their first episode of psychosis. Their average age was 22. "It was quite obvious that they were terrified by the experience of coming into psychiatric care for the first time," McGorry says.
"They saw around them 45-yearolds with very severe chronic illnesses. Their needs were very different, yet they were presented with a very biased and pessimistic view of what their lives were going to be like.
"It was assumed by everyone that they were going to deteriorate and become chronically ill. What I have tried to do with a whole series of colleagues over the years is challenge that. I have a 'recovery philosophy'.
"We have tried to develop treatments and interventions that would increase the chance of recovery.
That meant shifting the focus to more community-based care and away from inpatient care, and having a lot more research to develop better interventions and combinations of interventions."
Orygen and the more than 100 headspace centres around the country - designed as safe places for young people experiencing mental health problems - are testament to that. "This area of research is absolutely cutting edge in in psychiatry; it's the earliest detection of serious mental illness," McGorry says.
He describes the headspace network as the primary tier of mental health. The COVID-19 crisis means providing another level is even more urgent. "The next tier of care would be for the more complex problems, like more severe depression, borderline personality, anorexia or psychosis - these problems are also very common," McGorry says.
"Governments have not built the second tier to the level it needs to be built. So that's what the ongoing advocacy is about now. Australia's in a better position ... to do this, but we have to make the decision to do it and it's going to cost substantial amounts of money. It will take billions."
Fiona Stapleton Vision Scientist, UNSW Research leader in the field of opthalmology & optometry They say that the eyes are the window to the soul. For Fiona Stapleton, they are far too often the site of disease and infection.
A world-renowned epidemiologist in eye disease, one of the avoidable issues Stapleton is addressing is the growing rate of infections across Asia caused by cosmetic and novelty lenses. They are designed to change iris colour and make them appear oversized giving the wearer a Japanese anime character appearance. They are often made in unregulated settings, using materials such as car paint.
"We are trying to understand how often they are used in the community, and (for) the people who wear them to understand what the real risk factors are," says Stapleton, who is working with researchers in nine countries. "With the research, we are trying to translate it into policy change and education, and working with practitioners to try and reduce the problem."
One of the most influential women in optometry globally, the unassuming Scientia Professor in the School of Optometry and Vision Science at the University of NSW has published 247 peer-reviewed papers, 21 book chapters and one textbook.
She has also attracted a staggering $11m in funding from government, industry and non-government organisations.
Stapleton moved from the UK in 1993 to take up a role with the new Co-operative Research Centre for Eye Research at UNSW.
"Solving industry problems, which is also about developing jobs and technology in Australia, has been a bit of a feature of how I've worked over the years," she says. This year Stapleton was named a lead researcher of a $3m project to develop artificial intelligence to increase the accuracy of patient diagnoses and referrals - a project led by technology firm Big Picture Medical.
She has been credited with influencing clinical practice in the areas of contact lens-related disease and corneal infections across the globe, and has gained international recognition for her work on a condition known as dry eye.
"Dry eye can affect around 40-50 per cent of the population, with 5-10 per cent of cases being severe enough to require treatment," Stapleton says. "It can be a costly and debilitating condition." She has a grant to look at the influence of the hormone estrogen on dry eye, as it is prevalent among post-menopausal women.
CREDIT: JULIE HARE
Word count: 1960
