PARENTS who wrongly believe fluoride is poison are contributing to an alarming rise in children as young as two having tooth decay.
Adelaide paediatric dentist Dr Gwendolyn Huang, pictured, said a variety of factors had fuelled the number of children having their baby teeth pulled out due to decay.
As well as poor diet, factors included infants having “milk on demand” – feeding constantly so their baby teeth are constantly doused in breast or bottle milk.
Other factors causing about half of youngsters to have cavities include three and four-year-old children grazing on snacks throughout the day rather than having main meals.
Dr Huang said this now extends to primary school where “brainpower” snacks in class time add to scheduled recess and lunchbreaks.
“These may be fruit snacks but then the children go on to have muesli bars or other snacks high in sugar at recess and lunch time, effectively grazing for much of the day,” Dr Huang said.
“We are also seeing more parents trying to reduce the amount of fluoride their children have in water or in toothpaste because they view it as a poison.
“The health benefits of fluoride are well known – it reduced the rate of tooth decay in the 1970s and 80s dramatically.
“While anything in high concentrations is not great, fluoride is recommended for a reason – it is considered safe and effective.” Dr Huang, based at Adelaide Paediatic Dentristy at Dulwich, said the issue of young children having baby teeth extracted due to extensive decay had been around for the past decade and while the numbers are not high, they were growing.
She said that ideally, children should see a dentist by the time they are 12 months rather than when they have a toothache or an injury from a fall, so the child is comfortable in the surroundings and parents can be educated about good preventive care for their baby’s teeth. Dr Huang will discuss the issue at the four-day Australian Dental Congress, in Adelaide, this week.More than 2000 delegates from around the world will gather to hear from more than 100 guest speakers on issues from artificial intelligence in dentistry to veterinarian dentistry.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH HEALTH REPORTER
Word count: 369
