A MILLION dollars a week for five years is not a bad start if you’re going to tackle a global issue like ending plastic waste.
But iron ore billionaire and philanthropist Andrew Forrest is not one to do things by halves.
And so far, he has given $1.5 billion to passion projects that stretch from early child education to smoking, slavery and, of course, eliminating plastic waste.
His determination was evident more than a decade ago, when Forrest was trying to raise money to develop a huge iron-ore project in Western Australia’s Pilbara region and many local funders turned their backs, wary of a past misstep in the resources sector but perhaps more wary of taking on the might of neighbours BHP and Rio Tinto.
Undaunted, Forrest went overseas, raised billions in investor capital and did it anyway. The result was Australia’s “new force in iron ore”, Fortescue Metals Group, which Forrest headed until 2011.
That success has made Forrest a very wealthy man – actually, Australia’s richest back in 2008 – but he has no ambitions to hold on to all of that wealth.
In 2013, Forrest and his wife, Nicola, signed up to The Giving Pledge, making a commitment to give away the majority of their money. And they’re clearly serious about it.
In May, the Forrests tipped another $655 million into their Minderoo Foundation, which they set up in 2001, bringing their total contributions to $1.5 billion.
Some $440 million has been committed, subject to conditions, to the Sea the Future program to encourage the plastics industry to move to a recycling model and away from single-use plastic – and to lobby for regulation if the industry eventually doesn’t move of its own accord.
It’s an issue close to the heart for Forrest, who recently completed a PhD in marine ecology.
The foundation has become a family affair, with daughter Grace heading up one of the focus areas – the Walk Free campaign to end modern slavery.
Minderoo’s annual report – released this week and showcased in its first national roadshow, which started in Adelaide on Monday – says it is “unashamedly audacious’’.
And while compassion, empathy and a desire to leave the world a better place are definitely high on the list of motivations, Forrest in particular is not shy about letting a bit of anger show – at those who lobby against his push to increase the legal age for buying cigarettes from 18 to 21, at companies that turn a blind eye to slavery in their supply chains and at those who are indifferent to suffering in indigenous communities. He has no time for tobacco companies, which he says are in the business of getting children addicted and using retailers as a front to lobby to sell their poisonous products.
Speaking about the much higher rates of smoking in the developing world, he puts it down to tobacco companies “preying” on the less well informed.
“That’s why they do not want it to go to 21 years of age, because at 21 years of age you’re informed, you’re much less likely to be peer-group pressured,’’ he said.
“But the marketing that goes into South-East Asia and into communities that are not well informed I honestly think is a complete crime.’’ He’s also unleashed on tech titans such as Facebook and Amazon this week, saying their artificial-intelligence-driven algorithms goading us to consume are dangerous and lack accountability.
Early-childhood intervention and support for new parents are also areas Minderoo has focused on, and in October it released an app that Mrs Forrest says draws on hundreds of millions of dollars worth of research to help parents give their children the best start in life.
Developed in partnership between the Minderoo Foundation and Telethon Kids Institute, the Bright Tomorrows app “uses tailored behavioural science techniques to provide families with everyday tips relevant to them and their child’’.
“We are so excited by this app because it gives parents, grandparents, and carers a multitude of tips and ideas right in the palm of their hand – and it’s all based on the latest science and information about a child’s brain development.’’
WHERE THE MONEY GOES Building Community The Minderoo Foundation works on developing partnerships across the arts, culture, community and environment portfolios.
Eliminate Cancer Working across multiple sectors to accelerate cancer research and improve prevention, detection and treatment by removing barriers and rewarding collaboration.
Flourishing Oceans Returning the world’s oceans to a flourishing state by eliminating overfishing and marine pollution and facilitating world-class research, pictured.
Frontier Technology Working on a range of technological projects that will define the governance of artificial intelligence and our data-saturated world.
Generation One Working with partners to secure employment outcomes for indigenous Australians through a “demand-led” training approach, as well as advocacy for employment and social policy reform.
Research Research plays a vital role in enabling the foundation to rapidly identify opportunities that will achieve social change.
Thrive By Five A long-term, evidence-based strategy to create a culture that prioritises children and will ensure that all Australian kids have the best start to life.
Walk Free Undertakes research to build the world’s most comprehensive evidence base of modern slavery – the Global Slavery Index, uncovering the scale of the problem andenabling robust solutions.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND BUSINESS EDITOR
Word count: 885
