1. JOB LOSSES Every job loss at ASC represents a worker with an uncertain future. In many cases, that worker will have a family and would have had hopes of a long career with ASC.
About 700 jobs could be lost if the full cycle docking maintenance contract is shifted from Adelaide’s Osborne shipyards to Henderson in WA.
Even if the contract is split, the change would affect hundreds of workers.
2. THE COST TO TAXPAYERS A recent report by Flinders University’s Australian Industrial Transformation Institute estimated the cost to shift the entire full-cycle docking contract from SA to WA would be about half a billion dollars, including $293 million in capital expenditure and a further $251 million in wages.
3. THE WA WORKFORCE WA has spruiked its ability to provide a ready-made workforce for the contract. But SA Premier Steven Marshall has pointed out the state, with a heavy reliance on resource extraction, has a history of a boom and bust economy.
Thousands of West Australians have been looking for work in the past few years but the Australian Mines and Metals Association recently announced the state was on the cusp of another mining boom with 30 projects, requiring 10,679 operational employees by 2024.
4. THE SA WORKFORCE SA has an established workforce of both blue collar and white collar workers with high level expertise in building and maintaining Collin Class submarines. Despite assumptions from WA that SA workers could shift jobs to begin submarine builds in 2024, or shift states, there is little evidence there is an appetite from the local workforce to do so.
5. SA SUPPLY CHAIN Benefits of the submarine maintenance contract extend well beyond the gates of the Osborne shipyard. Details released in Federal Parliament in August showed ASC had engaged 793 SA-based businesses in the submarine supply chain in the past three years. All contracts contribute directly or indirectly to submarine maintenance, meaning the loss of the contract could cost the local economy $400 million a year.
6. SA IS THE DEFENCE STATE SA has a track record of delivering, maintaining and securing defence projects. Air warfare destroyers, submarines, frigates and offshore patrol vessels will be built in SA as part of a $90 billion naval shipbuilding project.
Adelaide is at the centre of Australia’s new unmanned aerial vehicle fleet, complementing P-8A Poseidon aircraft for maritime surveillance, based at RAAF Base Edinburgh.
7. POLICY OVER POLITICS Prime Minister Scott Morrison has consistently maintained politics will play no part in the decision.
8. SPACE It is no coincidence that Adelaide is set to become home to the nation’s first Space Agency headquarters.
SA has committed significant resources to develop future industries that can work together, including space, defence, cyber and artificial intelligence.
9. SKILLS LOSS A report by ASC, the company that undertakes full-cycle docking on Collins Class submarines – mainly in SA, but also in WA – warned that shifting the entire submarine maintenance contract to the West could result in the loss of skills, knowledge and capability that ensures the vessels are safe and can defend the country.
10. LIFE DURING WARTIME WA Premier Mark McGowan has argued it makes sense for the maintenance contract to be done close to where the Collins Class submarines are based, HMAS Stirling, also known as Fleet Base West, on Garden Island, in WA.But ex-submariner and current SA Senator Rex Patrick says having sustainment at the same location as the fleet base was not a good wartime proposition.
Word count: 583
