An innovative approach has one unassuming local school finding new frontiers in education. Emily Macdonald finds out how
When aerospace engineer turned teacher Nicola Steele was completing her thesis she had two complex problems to solve.
How was she going to design a trajectory for a mission to Saturn’s largest moon Titan and why were there not more women to collaborate with her?
“(After graduating) I moved into a tech education company, where I had the opportunity to work with a variety of multinational companies around the Asia-Pacific region,” Steele says.
“This really showed me that education was what I was most passionate about. “I was always disappointed to be one of only a few women in the room throughout my engineering and finance days, and I wanted to try to make a difference.
“I returned to university to gain a teaching qualification and I’ve been at St Clare’s since then.” It was 2017 when then assistant principal Kerrie McDiarmid first tried to introduce an innovative approach to learning at St Clare’s College Waverley – a sustainability project involving a hive of stingless bees.
By 2021 she was the principal, even though promoting an existing staff member to the top job is virtually unheard of in the education sector.
The girls were connecting virtually with the likes of NASA mission operations manager for the New Horizons mission to Pluto Alice Bowman and Adelaide-based planetary and space scientist Dr Eriita Jones.
Steele had also been promoted to director of integrated learning. The school was ranked 29th in the state in the HSC (the highest performing of any Catholic school), and 63 per cent of students were named distinguished achievers with 33 per cent achieving an ATAR above 90.
“We are not an ATAR factory, we really do offer a very comprehensive and holistic approach to learning,” McDiarmid said.
“We also have high expectations and we have a very clear focus on a growth mindset at the school.
“While we don’t expect all the girls to be getting an A, we do expect you to meet your potential.” This year, the staff has worked hard to launch a start-up hub complete with pathways for students to pitch their ideas to industry.
Taylor Weetman, corporate social responsibility executive and STEM program specialist at Tata Consultancy Services, is sharing her expertise with the classroom.
When industry experts or community groups are available to answer the students’ questions in real time as the girls work towards an assessment deadline, the once immovable timetable is collapsed.
After all, why should the girls be shuttled off to an English class which can always be caught up on later when a world-renowned STEM expert is available to answer their queries that day?
McDiarmid has recently claimed a coveted national award as one of Australia’s Most Influential Educators in 2022.
However, she admits the change in the way the girls receive their education hasn’t been easy.
“At the moment we have this standardised discourse. There are multiple voices in the education space and there’s a tension between that standardised discourse and this future-focused agenda that we’re definitely working with,” McDiarmid says.
In 2020 and 2021, education providers across the globe struggled with the abrupt shift to remote learning.
But where others saw challenges, McDiarmid saw a way to finally break free of rigidity.
The NSW Education Standards Authority offered schools unprecedented flexibility during the pandemic and St Clare’s has no intention of giving that up.
“The pandemic has given us an opportunity to reimagine the classroom space, making that more porous, and I think that is definitely something we’ve continued at the school,” McDiarmid says.
“Even though we had such disruption and uncertainty, it also provided opportunity. Embracing some of those opportunities has allowed us to learn some things and find ways to move learning forward. We don’t want to lose that.” Fees for year 12 at St Clare’s sit at around $7500, compared to nearby eastern suburbs schools St Catherine’s and Moriah College, which charge more than $37,000 and $38,000 respectively.
There’s a lengthy waitlist for the college, which has 675 girls in years 7 to 12.
A number of the students lucky enough to score a place have already drawn on the partnerships the school has made with industry, the community and tertiary institutions to gain micro-credentials.
Others have gained corporate mentors and some have even taken their entrepreneurial projects to market with many more set to follow with the opening of the innovation hub.
Among them are students Suki Waddel and Olivia Zammit, who created the concept for an app they named Thriftr, which not only helps users locate their closest second-hand clothing stores but provides an insight into some of the bargains on offer.
Thriftr won last year’s prestigious national Techgirls competition and is now live.
Meanwhile, a separate project created by a student known as the Shadow Address – an address homeless people can use to make sure they are contactable – is being floated to community organisations as a solution to an ongoing issue.
Another student who is embracing the new way of learning is year 9 iSTEM and Entrepreneur Focus student Amelie Allen.
“For example, iSTEM classes currently involve app design and development, co-ordinated by Tata Consultancy Services, in which we had the opportunity to meet with IT engineers to learn about the scope of their work as well as explore career possibilities for our future,” Amelie says.
“Another example is the Space cross-assignment, whereby we had access to 3D animation experts through use of the program Block 42.
“Other integrated projects like the People and Technology project gave me the opportunity to enter into (ClickView’s) Aussie Inventions that Changed the World competition.
“I was able to partake in a mentor session with Mark Pesce – an American-Australian author, inventor, entrepreneur, engineer, broadcaster and teacher.” Just like her mentor Steele, the sky’s the limit when it comes to Amelie’s future.
“At this stage, my ideal post-school pathway is still forming, however, I would love to have a career that is STEM-related, something that exposes me to quantum mechanics or gives me the opportunity to address the future of humanity, whether that be through the sustainability of Earth or the colonisation of Mars,” Amelie says.
But engaging the students is only one half of the equation.
In May, Catholic school teachers followed the example of their public sector colleagues and took strike action for the first time in 18 years.
Teachers across the country are walking away from the profession in droves with burnout on the rise and their pay rise demands left unmet.
McDiarmid acknowledges it has been a challenging few years in education. St Clare’s teachers are given dedicated time outside the classroom to workshop and source talent for the innovative projects.
“I think you need to be creative about how you bring teachers along with you on the journey,” McDiarmid says.
“It’s about providing them with opportunity – you need to give them the time and the space to actually engage with the thinking, planning and development phases of these types of initiatives and opportunities to then reflect and have conversations about what we need to change.
“I think we have created a very collaborative environment at the school and we’re certainly blessed to have some very high-performing teachers here.
“It’s definitely a balancing act and it’s something we are very cognisant of, that we don’t create that sense of burnout for teachers.
“Fortunately, engaging in authentic learning opportunities like this does invigorate the staff and make them want to come to work because they can see the joy the girls get out of it. It’s also an opportunity for them to engage in learning in a different way themselves.” Steele has been working with year 7 students on a cross-curricular project called Post-Earth Pioneers, in which students develop a plan for humanity’s survival beyond our planet.
“Because multiple subjects are involved in the project, our students can better see the connections between what they are learning in different classes but also the real-life applications of this knowledge,” Steele says.
But the thing this aerospace engineer finds most fulfilling is helping girls reach for the stars.
“Nothing makes me happier than when one of my year 12 students tells me they want to study engineering or mathematics at university.” The future is also looking bright for McDiarmid. Next year she will move into the role of principal of St Mary’s Cathedral College, the oldest Catholic school within the Archdiocese of Sydney. The boys’ school is undergoing a transformation and is working towards becoming a kindergarten to year 12 co-ed college with potential for a dual campus.
“It is a privilege to be the first female lay principal of the college and oversee the introduction of young women into one of the oldest Catholic schools in Australia,” she says.
“It has been an honour to be part of the growth journey of St Clare’s College and to be witness to the individual and collective achievements that have set this school apart. I know that the school is well positioned to continue its trajectory of success, and I look forward to hearing of the amazing achievements to come. “Indeed, as a leader in the same Sydney Catholic Schools network of schools, I look forward to continued partnerships and opportunities to work with the St Clare’s community.”
CREDIT: Emily Macdonald
Word count: 1567
