The OECD’s education chief came to Adelaide armed with eye-opening statistics showing the need for reform. TIM WILLIAMS reports
TO produce better results, we must have smaller classes.
Western nations teach students the skills they need for life while Asian schools just do rote learning.
Students must learn coding from pre-primary years.
Poverty is destiny.
Not so, says the OECD’s education and skills director Andreas Schleicher, who delivered a myth-busting speech to an Adelaide conference this week.
His directorate oversees the Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA), which tests 15-year-olds from more than 80 countries in reading, maths and science every three years.
The tests measure not just knowledge, but capacity to apply it to real world problems. As evidenced by Mr Schleicher’s quickfire presentation to 450 teachers at the Adelaide Convention Centre, the OECD keeps stats on a range of skills now considered crucial to success in the workforce, such as collaboration and communication.
On some of these measures, Asian nations such as China and Singapore perform better than Australia, despite often having classes of 45 students instead of 25.
Mr Schleicher says Australian teachers have high teaching loads. They might have smaller classes but they spend so many hours in the classroom that there’s little time left to work on becoming better teachers.
He says in China and elsewhere, teachers are given much more time for professional development, to plan for “team teaching” joint activities across classes, and to observe and learn from other teachers’ classes.
He also points to international research showing there is no correlation between class size and teacher job satisfaction.
In much of the Western world, it seems, we’re just not good at practising what we preach. Mr Schleicher says surveys of UK teachers show almost universal support for teaching practices that facilitate kids to make their own discoveries, as opposed to old-style “chalk and talk”.
Yet when students are surveyed, the UK ranks among the very worst nations for teaching that focuses on getting children to memorise content.
BUT before we engage in gleeful taunting of Brexit-beleaguered Britain, Australia doesn’t fare very well on that measure either.
This just won’t cut it in a world where artificial intelligence is coming to take our jobs, Mr Schleicher says.
“The kind of things that are easy to teach and easy to test are easy to digitise, to automate,” he says.
“The world no longer rewards us for what we know. It rewards us for what we can do with what we know. The kind of education we have today is making second class robots instead of first class humans.” On equity, Mr Schleicher says across the world disadvantage is compounded because the most highly educated science teachers work in the wealthiest schools, though the Chinese and the Nordic nations put top teachers and leaders in the most needy schools.
He also acknowledges that performance gaps between schools are largely accounted for by socio-economic factors. But constant debate over the differences between schools masks the much greater performance disparity of students within schools, a problem “hidden from policy and practice”.
AND on the broader myth that disadvantage cannot be overcome, he points to the fact that in PISA maths, the most disadvantaged 10 per cent of students in one Chinese province perform as well as the 10 per cent most advantaged kids in the US.
“That shows us clearly that poverty is not destiny.” Mr Schleicher, who heads the OECD’s Future of Education and Skills 2030 project aiming to help nations best prepare their students for the uncertainties of a changing workforce, does not suggest change is easy.
“Everyone supports reform, except for their own children,” one of his slides reads.
Education systems are full of vested interests and the costs of reform are immediate, while the benefits are long-term and uncertain.
Curriculums are “a mile wide and an inch deep”, he says, full of things that are there simply because they always have been. Trigonometry, for example, is a staple of maths classes across the OECD, yet Mr Schleicher says university experts he consulted say it’s not critical to developing “mathematical thinking”.
And today, it’s modes of thinking to solve problems that trump content.“Can you think like a mathematician? A scientist? A historian? A philosopher?,” he asks. In that vein, he says “coding is just one tool”. What matters is that students develop “computational thinking” and understand how algorithms work.
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS
Word count: 739
