Moon, Mars missions ‘worth billions’ for Aussie businesses
AUSTRALIAN businesses will reap a multi-billion-dollar windfall from their work on the landmark mission to the moon and Mars, NASA bosses say.
In an exclusive interview with the Sunday Mail, the US space agency’s deputy administrator, James Morhard, also said an Australian astronaut could fly to the moon within five years.
He said commerce and private industry help would be crucial to the project’s success and NASA’s deal with the Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency, which was signed last week, would need expertise in mining, including finding rare minerals, and proven cutting-edge technologies.
Speaking at the US space agency’s headquarters in Washington DC, Mr Morhard said international partners were critical to the success of President Donald Trump’s goal to return to the moon by 2024.
“It is our intent to create more commerce in space, which is going to provide great opportunities for the Australian space agency and the companies in Australia that are involved,” he said.
“So, that’s where I see it expanding. For us, we have the same challenges, a lot of it is funding challenges. How do you do that?
“Well, in (the) Apollo (moon mission) we owned and operated everything. “We’re looking to work with industry so we’re basically having industries providing services to NASA so we can leverage their assets for the future of our space programs, which will make it a lot more affordable.” Asked if that was worth “billions of dollars to local businesses”, he replied: “Absolutely. All over the country and all over world. That’s why we welcome international partnerships, especially Australia.” Mr Morhard’s comments came after the Australian Space Agency thrashed out a deal during Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s US visit.
Asked about the deal by the Sunday Mail last weekend, Mr Trump said he wanted to use the agreement as a launch pad for the bold Mars mission.
Mr Morrison, who has repeatedly and enthusiastically talked up the deal’s economic possibilities, later announced a $150 million boost – the tripling of the agency’s budget ­­– to help local businesses develop new technologies to support the “inspirational campaign”.
Officials said the moon program deal, titled Artemis, would share knowledge in areas such as astronomy, space-life science, robotics, human health, automation as well as remote-asset management and medicine.
The five-year investment will help “foster the new ideas and hi-tech skilled jobs” and help guarantee Australian businesses are the “partner of choice” to fit out NASA missions, the Government said.
Mr Morhard and the Australian Space Agency’s chief, Dr Megan Clark, inked the deal at NASA last weekend as Mr Morrison watched alongside Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, who controls the US purse strings.
NASA believes the mission will also help inspire a new generation and help uncover the next big invention or scientific research.
COMMON products created via space travel include camera phones, CT scans, athletic shoes, dust busters, ear thermometers, wireless headphones, laptops and baby formula.
Mr Morhard, a former US Navy analyst who Mr Trump confirmed as NASA’s 14th deputy administrator in October last year, said hi-tech industries of importance included firms involved in artificial intelligence, robotics and 3D printing.
NASA says that the millions of tonnes of moon ice represented new power, fuel and science.
“Keep in mind, too, the Australian work with NASA is multifaceted; there are a number of things we are working towards, including sounding rockets and things of that nature,” he said.
“As far as Artemis goes, you all have an amazing ability, as you know, in mining.
“We have discovered there is water ice on the south pole of the moon. We know there is water on Mars, and we have got to go and get there, make sure we are correct in our estimations and then is it feasible, is it economically feasible, to mine that water?
“When I say that, we’re talking about hydrogen for power and oxygen for fuel. You have the ability to possibly find metals on the moon, too.” But the space program is controversial and expensive, which Mr Morhard acknowledged meant funding was its biggest challenge. In May, the mission’s budget blew out by $1.6 billion.
MR Morrison this week told New York business leaders his government’s cash injection would not be sent to NASA but be spent on helping local firms earn a slice of a growing economic pie.
“We’ll learn things about what’s happening in other places about how to do that,” he said.
“And you know we don’t know what we don’t know when it comes to these things. That’s the great excitement of space exploration.
“So, what this is about is jobs. It’s 20,000 jobs we’re going to have in our space industry by 2030 and a $12 billion industry by 2030. So, that’s worth investing in.” Mr Morhard admitted the Mars project was “ambitious”, “tough” and “hard” to accomplish but he said they would “absolutely” get there.
“We have done this before,” he said. “Right now, we’ve landed nine times on Mars. We landed on the back side of Mars. So, that part we have got a handle on.
“Is it hard to get to 2024? Yeah, but you know what? It has focused NASA. We are capable of doing it and I see a change here I hadn’t seen when I got here.” Mr Morhard raised the hope of further exploration into “deep space” and would “look” at whether an Australian astronaut could be hired after Adelaide-born Andy Thomas worked on the International Space Station. The mission will send the first woman to the moon.
“We are blessed to have you all as friends and we all just really look forward to working together in the Artemis program,” he said.
ADL. FUTURE ADELAIDE LIFTOUT INSIDE ESCAPE
CREDIT: ANDREW HOUGH WASHINGTON
Word count: 965
