AUTONOMOUS killer drones, cyber attacks and war in space are no longer confined to movies. Science fiction has met science fact on the world’s battlefields.
Today is the 70th birthday of the Geneva Conventions and for people caught up in terrible armed conflicts, these rules of war are more important than ever.
Every day, from Syria to South Sudan, wounded people pass through military checkpoints for medical treatment, medics provide lifesaving health care, children receive life-sustaining food.
The laws of war are quietly in play, protecting millions of people, soldiers and civilians alike. Every day, civilians are evacuated and military commanders ensure that they do not target civilians who are not part of the fight.
Every day child soldiers are demobilised and the law is respected on the battlefield. These rules tell fighters who and what can and cannot be targeted. They determine the basic protections for prisoners of war. They describe the means and methods of warfare.
Despite what you see on TV, war is not a free-for-all, in large part because these laws exist. Yet it is naive to say that the laws of war are universally respected. Too often lives are lost when hospitals are bombed, aid workers are denied access to people who rely on them for food and other assistance or when infrastructure such as water supplies and electricity grids are destroyed.
Are these rules good enough or do we need new ones? My experience as a military lawyer with the Australian Defence Force serving on several deployments overseas has shown me that these laws are critical for saving lives.
Despite that, we continue to see shocking violations of the laws around the world. A lack of respect for the law leads to devastating humanitarian consequences and shows that we would be much worse off without the laws of war.
The current state of affairs isn’t perfect, but giving up on these vital rules would be a huge mistake.
I agree wholeheartedly with Australian Red Cross CEO Judy Slatyer who recently said that the laws of war preserve the core of our common humanity. They were created for the worst of times.
That was the case 70 years ago when the Geneva Conventions were adopted after tens of millions of civilians were killed in World War II and world leaders said that must not happen again. It’s also the case now as technology is changing the way wars are waged.
Cyberwarfare and weapons with artificial intelligence are here — this is no longer just in movies. Remotely controlled weapons are already in use in the battlespace. In the future, warfare may be less about human operated machines fighting each other, than warfare between the machines themselves.
All this raises big challenges for the laws of war. Serious ethical questions arise when you surrender human control from decisions that determine who lives and who dies. Can we make machines responsible for upholding laws that factor in the principle of humanity? If they get it wrong, who is held accountable?
On the flip side, there could be humanitarian advantages to using technology in military operations. What if sensors could be used to determine who and what should be targeted based on biometric computer-held data, such as facial and voice recognition or if attacks could become more precise to limit “collateral damage”?
Where we fight wars is changing. The battlefields of this century have become cities and densely populated urban areas where the risk of civilian casualties is high.
TOMORROW’S battlespaces are not just on earth but also in space. We must be able to deal with what’s happening in war now as well as keeping an eye on the future.
Space is becoming militarised. A “Space Force” is being considered by the United States and other governments. It reveals the strategic importance of space for military operations.
Given these developments, there is serious work being undertaken in a joint international effort by universities in Australia, Britain and the US, called The Woomera Manual. It aims to better articulate how warfare in space may be constrained by the Law of War. We need to make sure that any unnecessary violence can be prevented by putting these laws into practice on earth and in space.
With these rapid changes it is remarkable that laws negotiated 70 years ago are still able to do their job.
The laws of war apply as effectively to soldiers and tanks as they do to robots. Are killer robots and star wars coming? Yes and the Geneva Conventions remain as critical and relevant as ever. These laws, accepted by virtually every government worldwide, provide the essential balance between protecting human life and military necessity for whatever the future of war has in store.PROFESSOR DALE STEPHENS IS DIRECTOR OF THE UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE RESEARCH UNIT ON MILITARY LAW AND ETHICS AND CHAIR OF THE AUSTRALIAN RED CROSS INTERNATIONAL HUMANITARIAN LAW ADVISORY COMMITTEE IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
CREDIT: DALE STEPHENS
Word count: 824
