WITH work habits changing, SA small businesses are being advices to increase the level of technology-based skills training they providing employees or risk being left behind, according to a report from BankSA.
The Trends economic bulletin shows there are a number of new technologies SA businesses could embrace to reap the economic benefits but workers need to be better prepared.
BankSA chief executive Nick Reade said Trends identified that by 2030, South Australian employees will be missing two to three of the key skills required across our state's key growth industries.
"This doesn't mean that we're short of people for the job, it means that we're short of people with the right skills for the job," he said.
"People, not technology, are central to driving value in these industries, making it important that we address potential skills shortages that will result from their growth.
"It's estimated that at least 75 per cent of new jobs in the future will demand some ability in science, technology, engineering and maths.
"We can see this in our own state's economic future as it will be emerging industries, that are highly reliant on technology and STEM skills, and emerging areas such as cyber security and artificial intelligence, where much of the incremental growth will come from.
"A lack of investment in relevant skills will hold back SA's ability to fully capitalise on new technologies to drive a stronger economy in the future."
The report identifies three actions businesses and industries could take to mitigate skills shortages including greater investment in training and upskilling, attracting skilled migratns from interstate and overseas, as well as attracting returning expats, and working to incorporate the right skills focus into all levels of the education system.
RELATED READING: Migrants may play vital role in building regional SA
Dairy industry in search of skilled workers
Mr Reade said Australian businesses spend $7 billion on recruitment to fill skills needs, yet only $4 billion on training.
"One of the best ways to avoid skills shortages would be to flip those numbers and start spending on upskilling instead of recruitment, because as skills shortages worsen, the cost of recruitment will only grow," he said.
"It is important the federal and state governments work together to increase funding for training and skills development needed for these industries.
"The traditional education system also has a major role to play in ensuring SA's long-term skills needs are met. This does not necessarily mean changing the school curriculum every time a new technological development occurs. But curriculums do need to change to keep up with the evolving landscape that they are preparing students for."
Mr Reade said the Trends report debunks fears that new technologies will lead to mass unemployment in the future.
"Technology isn't a substitute for people," he said.
"Australia has seen more than 1.8 million jobs created in the past decade - during a time that most would agree has been a period of rapid technological change.
"It is the nature of the work that has changed - we've moved away from manual 'routine' work and replaced it with 'non-routine' cognitive work.
"Robotics has removed more repetitive and largely mundane tasks, with more challenging and interesting jobs being created for people."
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Click here to sign up to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
Word count: 560
