THE state government is committed to growing SA's agriculture and horticulture industries - critical drivers for our state's economy.
The government has identified agtech, which looks at how digital technology can improve food production, as a key area to help provide this growth.
Last month we made another announcement in the agtech space, with the state government supporting the development of 'Foment - SA's Wine and Tourism Tech Revolution'.
This new program will offer support to wine and tourism start-ups to help them take advantage of new advanced technologies.
I made this announcement with Premier Steven Marshall at the 17th Australian Wine Industry Technical Conference held in Adelaide recently, which was attended by more than 3000 people.
This year's conference at the Adelaide Convention Centre included displays showcasing the many aspects of wine production, from presses, to storage and bottling solutions, as well as innovative agtech involving artificial intelligence and satellite technology.
While this was all mainly targeted at the wine industry, a lot of the technology can crossover to many areas of agriculture and horticulture.
I met with many SA businesses that had either come up with some innovative ideas or were already using cutting-edge technology to their advantage.
One of the businesses had developed a revolutionary web application that automatically locates crop field boundaries and monitors crop health at a continent-scale.
In a global first, the application has mapped and measured every grape vine row within Australia.
Another young man had developed a simple attachment which turns your mobile phone into a microscope.
This then allowed the user to take a closer look at pests or diseases, which could be growing on their crops, and help identify them.
These are two great examples of innovative technology that could help boost productivity in SA's agriculture and horticulture industries.
Earlier this year, the state government announced we would be forming a Ministerial AgTech Advisory Group, which will help our farmers to adopt new technologies and provide them with the tools to find efficiencies and compete on the world stage.
It was fantastic to receive some quality nominations for this group, including some of SA's brightest agtech stars.
We are working through those nominations and I look forward to announcing the inaugural group in the coming weeks.
CREDIT: TIM WHETSTONE
Word count: 379
