AN Australian warship that is powering towards a dangerous Middle Eastern zone had its “brains” made in Adelaide.
As tensions between the United States and Iran flare after a missile attack against a US base in Iraq – where Australian and New Zealand troops are also based – the Royal Australian Navy’s HMAS Toowoomba, pictured, with 190 sailors on board are heading to join allied forces.
The ship’s combat system, which controls all the missiles, radars and artificial intelligence on board was made in Mawson Lakes.
And one of its greatest defences – BAE Systems Australia’s Nulka active missile decoy, which fires into the air and lures enemy missiles away from the ship to fall harmlessly in the water – is also an Adelaide invention.
BAE is also doing work on the Evolved Sea Sparrow Missile, which can take out supersonic enemy missiles.
SAAB Australia has customised the 9LV combat system for Australian ships. The 9LV gathers information about any friends and enemies nearby, and coordinates responses from the weapons systems.
The 9LV controls everything from lasers to missiles. It can simultaneously fight threats from mines, planes, ships and submarines, while observing all around it. The system is also used for humanitarian missions – most recently on a ship helping people affected by bushfires.
SAAB managing director Andy Keough said the 9LV fuses all available information together so a human commander can make a decision.
“The combat system allows the commander to build a tactical picture around them to work out who are the good guys, who are the bad guys, and who are the neutrals,” he said.
Combat system engineering group manager Jim Bourke said complex and emerging threats in the region means more sophisticated defences and arms that work swiftly in a congested space had to be developed.
Software engineer Charlie Rocklyn said she was “building parts of the brain of the ship … something that’s going to support our people in the defence forces”.
Australia has deployed HMAS Toowoomba to the Strait of Hormuz where it could face threats from Iran.It will support the allied forces for about six months.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD STATE EDITOR
Word count: 359
