A LEADING Adelaide medical research company has had clinical trials into potentially lifesaving vaccines scrapped for failing to meet minimum standards.
SA Health has confirmed the cancellation of the influenza and hepatitis B vaccine trials at Flinders Medical Centre, which SA Best MP Frank Pangallo says has invalidated crucial data and left participants and researchers in limbo Southern Adelaide Local Health Network (SALHN) chief executive Sue O’Neill said biotechnology company Vaxine had not met mandatory requirements – but did not provide any further detail.
Ms O’Neill said other Vaxine projects were still awaiting ethics and safety approval.
“Our priority is to always deliver safe and appropriate research trials to our community and we continue to work closely with researchers to ensure research is delivered safely,” she said.
Vaxine made international headlines when they became one of the first companies to start clinical trials for a swine flu vaccine in 2009.
The company on Tuesday announced a world-first after designing a flu vaccine using only artificial intelligence.
Health Minister Stephen Wade told State Parliament that he had met with staff from Vaxine and was looking into their concerns.
He said it was concerning that the research protocols at the SALHN were different from those at other health networks.
Latest SA Health figures show there have been 19,428 influenza cases across the state so far this year, compared with 1515 at the same time last year. There have been 45 deaths.
Mr Pangallo, pictured, accused SA Health of putting their budget before research and community welfare.
“SALHN demanded clinicians at Flinders Medical Centre who were undertaking these trials to terminate them on the spot,” Mr Pangallo told The Advertiser.
“This action – overnight – scrapped more than 20 years of research that had gone into these trials, resulting in potentially hundreds of millions of dollars in commercial damages to Vaxine – the originator of this advanced vaccine technology.“This SA-developed, world-beating vaccine technology is now instead being advanced through a clinical trial in the US, supported by the US government. The treatment offered hope of extending the life of people with pancreatic cancer but SALHN have robbed them of that option because it keeps stalling the approval process for motives only known to itself.”
CREDIT: MITCH MOTT
Word count: 375
