As large consultancy firms ramp up their legal offerings, some traditional practitioners are starting to fight back
Times are good for Australia's corporate law firms. Kenneth Hayne's royal commission was a boon for those representing the banks and financial services sector, and the regulatory fallout from that inquiry is a solid source of work.
The royal commissions into aged care and disability services and the big infrastructure spends of several state governments will ensure corporate firms remain busy. Business deals and class actions have also topped up the flow of work.
"There should be growth for the firms that are good enough to capture it," says Gilbert + Tobin Lawyers partner and chief operating officer Sam Nickless.
And that, for many firms, is the key challenge - winning business in today's highly competitive market.
"It's hypercompetitive," says Justin Whealing, head of legal services at practice advisory firm ECP Legal.
"It is an environment where corporates use a range of services. They're not wedded just to one firm. You have other firms trying to muscle in on a lot of this work from the outside - whether it's by poaching partners who might have relationships, by competing aggressively on price, or looking to build a critical infrastructure around financial services to get on the panels of the Big Four or the international corporates or financial institutions as well."
Top-tier national firms, recent international arrivals and full-service mid-tier firms are all competing aggressively to win the work. Additionally, the Big Four professional services firms are making a more concerted push into legal services and legal startups are trying to pick off specific aspects of legal practice.
It is in this environment that firms' leaders are setting out to win a bigger share of corporate legal work.
As they look to the future, managing partners - or chief executive partners or chief operating partners, as some are called - are mapping out how their firms should respond to the increased competition and how they can best respond to advances in technology which Continued page 24 From page 15 on the one hand can make legal work cheaper and more efficient, but also risk significant disruption for traditional business models.
In the near future some firms will look more or less the same as they do today — albeit larger if their managing partners’ strategies pay off — but others are examining more radical changes. Thomson Geer, for instance, is considering splitting the firm into two distinct entities, one to carry out business-as-usual, process-type legal work and the other for the high-value bespoke legal work.
A key question for firms is where to pitch themselves. Many, particularly top-tier firms, have chosen to specialise in two or three areas of the law. Even mid-tier firms which offer the full suite of legal services pitch themselves as specialists in a handful of specific areas.
Clyde & Co, for instance, is focusing on litigation in the transport, oil and gas and energy, insurance, security and safety sectors. “The market needs to know what you wish to specialise in and excel at,” says Michael Tooma, the Australian managing partner of the global firm.
The specialisation by larger and mid-tier firms comes with the emergence of boutique specialist players, be it in litigation or mergers and acquisitions, which will sit on corporate panels in their areas of expertise with larger firms such as King & Wood Mallesons or Herbert Smith Freehills.
ECP Legal’s Whealing says specialisation is necessary for all firms. “If you’re a mid-tier firm and you’re seen as middle of the pack in all your areas, you’re struggling, and there’s a question mark over your future,” he says. “Firms realise that it’s good to be seen as market leaders in certain areas — maybe not all your areas, but in certain areas you can charge more if you’re seen as an expert and a leading law firm in those areas.” It’s a strategy pursued by mid-tier practice Russell Kennedy, which emphasises its strengths in health and aged care, commercial work, corporate work, property and government. “We’re what you call a fullservice firm, but our growth strategy is around those sectors,” says managing director and principal Paul Gleeson.
Managing partners acknowledge that specialist or bespoke work can have very healthy profit margins. “When something truly is a defining moment and you really want someone in there who is going to sort of swing the difference your way, I guess that’s when people may be more prepared to pay for the kind of expertise that we offer,” says Sam Nickless at Gilbert + Tobin, which focuses on transactions, disputes and regulatory matters.
As a result, many top-tier firms have exited the low-margin, highvolume work in areas such as insurance and employment. And this in turn has created opportunities for others.
Insurance and employment law are profitable practice areas for Sparke Helmore thanks to economies of scale. “We do lots of it. We have the processes down pat. We’re constantly doing legal process improvement work in relation to our volume practices,” says Phillip Salem, managing partner.
But as the absorption of banking and insolvency firms Kemp Strang and Henry Davis York into other firms demonstrates, it’s not always easy in the current competitive environment to profit from what have become commoditised parts of legal work.
“The areas of law which are on the perennial commodity slope, broadly the baseload insurance work, baseload banking work, baseload property leasing conveyancing work, are substantial,” says Joel Barolsky of professional services management consultancy Barolsky Advisors. “These are major areas of law, so they’re combined significant volume, but firms are less and less able to extract a significant premium in those areas, and it’s hard going.” For some firms which undertake this lower margin work, the earnings cover the rent, electricity and other costs and essentially allow them to open for business. “It provides that baseload of revenue for them to be able to work, and then hopefully they get slightly higher premiums in more specialist areas,” says Barolsky.
A growing space for some mid-tier firms is private client practice, which most of the top-tier firms walked away from over the past few years. Barolsky says this is slowly becoming a more profitable practice area as baby boomers retire and look to pass wealth down to the next generation.
With property prices having soared over the past decades, the amounts at stake in private client work are much higher and so clients will pay a premium for estate planning and family law matters. “It’s not like this rocket that’s going off. It’s a slow-moving trend, but it’s on the upward trajectory,” he says Technology forms a major piece of many firms’ strategies. Each is exploring how to use technology in different ways, but with more or less the same end goal — to find more efficient and cheaper ways of delivering legal services to clients. For firms working in highvolume, low-margin areas of the law, technology is central to remaining competitive. Others are drawing on technology solutions to deliver some of the repetitive process-driven work that can form part of a major matter, such as discovery.
“There’s a real shift in the industry to embrace and adopt existing and emerging technology and for firms to position themselves to take on board that technology as part of the way in which they deliver legal services,” says Clyde & Co’s Tooma.
“We see artificial intelligence in particular being a huge opportunity in terms of law firms — both in terms of building that capability within firms offering services, but also teaming up and partnering up with that capability to bridge the gap between legal services and solutions that the market requires.” Sparke Helmore expects in the future to partner with clients in delivering services and to deliver allied services — those services which might help with the preparation and presentation of a legal matter, but strictly speaking are not legal services.
The firm is working with the University of Newcastle on a legal design and innovation program which is exploring the intersection between law, design and technology, and what digital disruption means for the future of law students and lawyers.
The firm’s national managing partner, Phillip Salem, explains the rationale for moving into allied services: “Where there’s a solution that a client of ours needs, and that solution might not be traditional legal work, we’re not shying away from proffering that solution where we’ve got some good understanding of what needs to be done, even if it’s not in the legal space.” Firms are also slicing and dicing their practice areas and legal expertise differently. Where in the past many firms might have had practice groupings around discrete areas of the law, such as insurance, building and construction, and competition and consumer law, there is an increasing trend for firms to focus on a specific industry and build teams across various areas of legal practice.
Baker McKenzie national managing partner Anthony Foley explains: “More and more we are thinking about our business on a demand side rather than the supply side. We’re organising our resources and activities not so much around the tradition of what it is a lawyer does — i.e. a corporate lawyer versus a banking lawyer, et cetera – and much more around what it is that a client buys — a healthcare practice versus a consumer goods and retail practice, et cetera.” Clyde & Co assembles global teams to target the head offices of clients in an attempt to win its work around the world. Thus, it might bring in experts from several jurisdictions to pitch to a South Korean contractor, for instance.
Joel Barolsky says firms are trying to go beyond just cross-selling and becoming deeply collaborative in the way they approach clients’ problems.
“They are bringing other expertise into the mix — technology specialists, potentially partnering with third parties, other consultant advisers, the Big Four,” he says. “It’s working in a much more collaborative model than almost a bilateral kind of model that they’re perhaps used to in the past where you had one partner servicing a client.” Along with adopting technology, moving into allied services and better tailoring practice structures to clients’ needs, tried and true methods are still important — specifically taking over smaller firms and poaching successful partners.
Along with aiming for organic growth in its key practice areas of health and aged care, commercial and corporate work, property and government, Melbourne-based Russell Kennedy recently merged with Sydney’s Aitken Lawyers as the first step in becoming a national firm and will eventually merge with a Brisbane firm. It will also bring in lateral hires with client connections from other firms as demand grows, says Paul Gleeson.
Like any other commercial enterprise, law firms exist to turn a profit, but Whealing says that when ECP Legal surveys managing partners, it’s not the profit motive that keeps them up at night, so much as the people component of the business.
“It’s not unusual for them to tell me, ‘If we get our operations right, then the scoreboard takes care of itself and the cash registers continue to tick over’,” he says.
Even so, firms are also bringing in more outside expertise to support their operations and in particular business development. “Law firms are hiring more non-lawyers, too, which is a good thing.
You’re seeing technology arms at law firms and chief information officers and larger business development and marketing departments as well,” says Whealing.
Another key point of differentiation for firms is whether they are part of a global firm or are national and independent.
Baker McKenzie national managing partner Anthony Foley sets out the benefits of being part of a global firm: “It gives us access to clients, to resources, to learning opportunities that are just not normal in the Australian legal market,” he says.
As business becomes more global and as legal disputes cross multiple jurisdictions, global firms or those with strong alliances will pick up work from their offshore counterparts.
But it can be a double-edged sword. Global firms can miss out on work if the source is a firm which competes in their home market — for instance, a competitor in London of UK Magic Circle firm Linklaters would not refer work to Linklaters-aligned Allens in Australia.
Independent firms, however, can have “multiple best friends”, says Joel Barolsky.
DEGREES OF SEPARATION As Adrian Tembel considers the next wave of growth for Thomson Geer, he is pondering splitting the firm into two separate entities to reflect two distinct types of legal work.
The chief executive partner at Thomson Geer says there are fundamental differences between what he calls the transactional specialities such as mergers and acquisitions, and the more volumedriven, process-driven work, and each might be better housed in its own separate vehicle. This could better reflect the mindset of the lawyers who carry out these types of work and the client needs.
"It coexists in our firm very, very well, but we are turning our mind for our next 10 years to should there be some degree of separation. We don't want to lose the benefits of that scale and being a diversified house," he says.
Areas of elite legal practice that provide bespoke and specialist advice to clients are compatible with a very autonomous creative environment and conventional thinking says that can be achieved only in this private partnership model. "You don't formally report to anyone. You've got autonomy. You feel important and you feel autonomous and you progress accordingly," says Tembel.
If clients are seeking a bespoke piece of work, they are comfortable in dealing with a single partner and trust expertise.
However, Tembel says the processdriven work requires discipline around collaboration and reporting and systems, and investment in those systems. Among the lawyers working in the area, the aspiration for partnership and autonomy may not be so high.
"It's a much more corporate environment. The clients require it. They need consistency. They need scale. They need systems. They need depth. And so, maybe that's a little more compatible with that corporate model," he says.
"If they're going to appoint you to carry out a million transactions every three years and it needs a team of 25 people, it needs robustness, it needs risk management. They need to know that you're financially stable - that you've got excellent management. They'll want to see audit reports."
In the decade of Tembel's leadership the firm has followed what he describes as a "very conventional, rational strategy" of taking part in the consolidation of mid-market firms to swallow up several smaller firms to expand beyond Sydney and Adelaide to Melbourne and Brisbane. It will open in Perth soon.
While some larger firms have eschewed some practice areas, Thomson Geer is proudly full-service. "We've never been snobs. We think that if we can service all the different components of the clients' needs and create deeper connectivity, we like that," Tembel says.
"We don't claim to be fundamentally different to everyone else because we're actually quite similar to many firms, and many of those firms are great."
Another leg of the firm's strategy is moving into allied services. Its investment this year in Canberra-based Endeavour Consulting to form TG Endeavour is likely to be the first of several similar transactions.
"We think we've probably got two or three moves like that one to further supplement the core legal capability. That's got a few years to run, and we think that creates comparative advantage."
BEYOND THE LAW When Sparke Helmore national managing partner Phillip Salem outlines the firm's growth plans, he doesn't focus on being a law firm. "We say that we want to be the market-leading Australian professional services business, and those words are quite deliberate," he says. "We're no longer just a law firm.
We're a market-leading professional services business."
While legal expertise remains at the core of the firm's offering, it is also operating in areas that are adjacent to its practice areas, which Salem calls allied services. The first is the spin-off consultancy arm, Sparke Helmore Consulting, which will provide tax advisory and strategic business consulting.
"We have a number of other special purpose vehicles that we have in mind," he says. "Some are client-sensitive. Some are still in the making. But we do intend to go.
TRAVELLING NORTH Russell Kennedy's recent merger with Sydney's Aitken Lawyers is the first step in a long-term vision to move the firm beyond its Melbourne base and across the eastern seaboard, says principal and managing director Paul Gleeson.
Gleeson acknowledges the merger is at the tail end of the consolidations that have swept through mid-tier law firms over the past decade, but says it was only in the last four or five years that Russell Kennedy's corporate clients started demanding a stronger Sydney presence.
The firm also took its time in picking the right merger partner, with Gleeson not wanting to make the mistakes he had seen in others firms' mergers, which can become problematic and distracting.
"It's never one plus one equals two. It ends up being one plus one equals eight or something. We wanted one plus one to equal two point something and to give us something to grow," he says.
"We were looking for a firm that was not as big as we were, not so we could take it over but because we wanted to merge the two firms in a way where there was no collateral damage and there was alignment of client types and a critical amount of alignments of the industries we are in."
The merger adds around 30 staff from Aitken to take the larger firm to a total of 270 lawyers. It also adds areas of practice which Russell Kennedy hasn't previously offered or where Aitken is stronger, such as family law and estate planning. "There are certain types of private client work that can be and are very profitable and they're also growing," Gleeson says In particular, there is more demand for estate planning as Australia undergoes the demographic shift that is seeing large amounts of wealth passed down to the younger generation.
A demographic shift in legal practice is also providing opportunities. Gleeson explains that when large firms exited estate planning 15 or 20 years ago, many practitioners left and set up their own practices, but many of them are now retiring.
The firm will also build up the Sydney practice in areas where the Melbourne office has been strong, such as health and aged care, commercial work, corporate work, property and government.
The firm has a "sector-driven growth strategy" and aims to grow organically around industries that are growing, such as health and renewable energy.
Nonetheless, the firm will also bring in lateral hires with client connections from other firms as demand grows, and potentially make some small acquisitions in the coming years. "We do these things fairly slowly, and that might be a criticism levelled at us from others, but we do it in a way that we hope is sustainable and will give us growth."
And while there is an ambition to expand further north, Gleeson says Russell Kennedy will take its time, as it did with the Sydney merger.
"I would like in five years for Russell Kennedy to be in Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane, and be well established in each of those jurisdictions and be seen as certainly at least an eastern seaboard firm with a strong reputation in sectors that matter. It would probably be, if you're going to guess at the size, at least half as big again as it is now."
HOME AND AWAY Clyde & Co partner Michael Tooma is recognised as one of the pre-eminent health and safety lawyers in Australia but a lot of the work he does is in overseas jurisdictions. "I'm able to bring that expertise to different jurisdictions outside of Australia and work with my local colleagues to deliver a high-quality service in those jurisdictions," says Tooma, who is also the managing partner at the Australian branch of the global firm.
It's an example of the way lawyers at Clyde & Co work across jurisdictions and across the firm to leverage the advantage of being a global firm in 47 different countries. "We operate as a single partnership around the world with a single profit pool, single strategy and single accountability. That gives us a competitive advantage in the Australian market," says Tooma. "We bring global expertise to the table regardless of the jurisdiction in which the work originates."
The firm is pitching at global clients who want a uniform quality standard, uniform service, uniform billing and, in many cases, expect and demand global uniform rates.
Clyde & Co was established in Australia in 2012 and now has 26 partners and more than 120 legal staff in Brisbane, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney.
The other leg of the strategy is deep specialisation - to focus on litigation in the transport, oil and gas and energy, and insurance, security and safety sectors.
"Australia's a very sophisticated market for legal services. You need to be focused on what your strategy is and pursue that relentlessly. The market needs to know what you wish to specialise in and excel at," says Tooma.
"We don't see ourselves as a broad-range commercial firm. We're never going to be a mergers and acquisition firm. We see ourselves as a global firm specialising in those niche industries."
He says the focus is the reason for the firm's strong revenue growth in Australia - 28 per cent in the 12 months to April 31 with expectations of similar growth for the current year. Much of the growth is organic, but the firm also aims to grow by "aggressively pursuing a lateral partner recruitment strategy", Tooma says. "We are constantly in discussions to bring the right people into our firm to fuel that growth and that excellence in those industry specialisations."
To win clients, the firm has what Tooma calls "pursuit teams" which focus on particular jurisdictions and industry sectors. "We will have a strategy with a globally connected team pursuing Spanish-owned contractors or Chineseowned contractors or Korean-owned contractors. There'll be teams of people globally that will be pursuing those companies at their global headquarters to try and secure the entirety or a share of the wallet globally," he says.
Tooma expects opportunities in the Asia-Pacific region to arise from China's giant belt and road infrastructure initiative, as well as in the emerging practice areas of anti-terrorism and risk management, compliance and litigation arising from the use of drones.
GLOBAL SPECIALIST Baker Mackenzie plans to keep growing in Australia by leveraging its position as an international firm and specialising in a few key areas. "I expect we're going to do it by continuing to do - and do better - what we already do well," Anthony Foley, national managing partner of Baker McKenzie's Australian offices, says of the firm's growth strategy. "I don't think it's any secret that this firm is in a special position in terms of cross-border work and inbound investment and we see that pretty regularly in some of our leading work."
The firm's focus is on cross-border transactions and inbound investment, changing markets such as energy and data and content, and infrastructure.
"We have the benefit of acting for the subsidiaries of some of the world's largest multinational companies," Foley says. "We are obviously selective about the areas that we want to work in, and we have less interest in doing work on big panels at low rates compared to some of our peers."
A lot of the operational work for large Australian corporates such as insurance work or bank panel work is becoming increasingly commoditised. "Like any good business, and certainly like any large law firm, I think that we're being selective about our areas of focus and we're trying to build on our natural competitive advantages to turn that into higher market share and profit," he says.
Foley says the firm is also responding to the changing needs of in-house counsel, who have become more integrated within the business and in the wake of the banking royal commission are being asked to act as the moral compass of the business.
"You have to ask not just what they can do but what should they do, which is one of the big things that comes out of Ken Hayne's royal commission report. That translates for us in the law firm into needing to be able to do so much more than just give a legal answer," he says.
"When you've got a really good relationship with your external lawyer, they don't just tell you what you can do, they actually do share with you what you should do, but it's a really challenging thing for a lawyer."
Baker Mackenzie is looking to technology to provide more efficient services to clients and Foley says its global scale gives it an advantage. Technological innovation needs to be customised for the needs of the business and the clients. This isn't possible with off-the-shelf products, and as a result, firms need scale to make the sort of capital investment required.
"Many Australian law firms just don't operate on that scale whereas we are in Silicon Valley as we speak looking to acquire artificial intelligence ourselves to be able to deploy in our business," Foley says. "We see the combination of our scale in terms of procuring and building the technology together with the insights that we have which will go to the content we have available as really coming together to provide something which is unusually special for our clients."
EXPERTISE WITH TECH Like many other firms, Gilbert + Tobin Lawyers pitches itself to clients on the basis of its legal expertise, but chief operating officer Sam Nickless says this alone is not enough.
Firms in Australia don’t have the luxury of just being able to say to clients: “We’re just going to be the best and it’s going to be a handcrafted piece of expertise every time,” Nickless says.
“You need to be also pursuing an agenda around productivity”, which is where the strategy's second leg — capacity — comes in, augmenting the legal expertise with technology solutions. It lets the firm compete on price.
“Getting that right means you can make sure you can deliver the expertise the client needs, but not force the client to make some sort of trade-off on price that they don’t feel comfortable about,” Nickless says.
“It’s making sure we can deliver the client the total package in such a way that the client doesn’t have to go and unbundle it themselves.” Nickless says the firm aims to offer an integrated solution, containing high-value, highly complex expertise-driven tasks and lower value, less expertise-driven tasks that could be automated or done in a better way.
The firm has also made what Nickless describes as a strategic investment in startup law firm Legal Vision, which leverages technology and process efficiency to deliver legal services. He expects tech and process efficiency to be a major part of the legal market in the future. This being so, G+T’s minority stake is a hedging stake in a disruptor.
“Their primary business and core business is focused on legal services for SMEs — and they have automated and productised that to the point where they can do that very efficiently,” he says. He expects that sometimes G+T will collaborate with Legal Vision to deliver a piece of work to a client and other times it will refer business-as-usual work to them.
G+T has also diversified into consulting through G+T Innovation, which provides legal technology and systems for in-house legal teams.The firm has grouped its practice areas around the three key moments in a company’s commercial cycle — transactions, disputes and regulatory matters. “When we really want to be there is when clients in the life cycle of a commercial business or even a government enterprise have those defining moments.” Nickless agrees that this sort of work provides better profit margins, but adds: “Our clients are still pretty discerning though, so they’ll still know how to make sure they’re getting value for money.” While G+T is a full-service firm, Nickless says some of its practices are smaller than those of larger full-service firms. Its property team, for instance, would be less likely to be carrying out business-as-usual leasing for a property owner but would be there for really large lease transactions or helping on a major corporate transaction that has a lot of property assets embedded in it.
CREDIT: Story; CHRISTOPHER NIESCHE
Word count: 4771
