The local council election, every four years, has provided the Naracoorte, Lucindale and surrounding communities the ability to review, replace or reinstate members of the region to represent in council.
Naracoorte Lucindale Council candidates for mayor and councillor have presented their statements to the Electoral Commission and local community through a "Meet The Candidate" night in anticipation and preparation for voting.
Make your vote count Official postal voting material for both mayoral and councillor positions will be mailed out to eligible voters between Friday, October 14 and Thursday, October 20.
Most electors receive one voting pack, however, people who have properties or entitlements for a different election may receive more.
If anyone believes they have been omitted from the council voters roll due to an administrative error, they can request voting material by completing a form from the Electoral Commission South Australia at www.ecsa.sa.gov.au.
Postal voting will close at 5pm on Thursday, November 10 with scrutiny and the counting of votes taking place on Saturday, November 12, beginning at 9am.
MAYORAL CANDIDATES Patrick Ross I have lived and worked in the Naracoorte Lucindale Community for over forty years. I'm married to Wendy and three adult children, Meg a nurse, Alec a pilot and farmer and Ben a blacksmith. I am passionate about my family, farming and the community in which I live.
I have played tennis and hockey for Lucindale over the years, now days I spend some time both hunting and fishing and enjoying the natural beauty that the Southeast has to offer.
I have been a strong advocate for the wetlands of the Southeast and their over drainage and have managed a large environmental Project in the Taratap District for nearly 10 years. Being the Group Officer with the Lucindale CFS Group over the past few years has seen me at the pointy end of some very serious fires which have impacted on our community and for my work with the Community was awarded the 2022 Citizen of the Year Award which is a great honour.
The Naracoorte Lucindale Community needs Strong authentic leadership which has a focus on the Integrity of leadership based around sound policy and great outcomes for all within our community.
Erika Vickery As Mayor I have worked hard to drive many positive community and economic changes for our district. I strongly believe that we need to work together to continue this focus on: maintaining and growing our infrastructure assets, effectively managing our finances and continually improving our services for the wellbeing of all our communities.
I am proud that under our current leadership the Naracoorte Lucindale Council is in a strong financial position.
This puts us in a good position for our future plans and priorities, some of which include the long term plan for improvements at the Naracoorte Regional Livestock Exchange, improvements and maintenance of our rural road network, implementing projects for the Naracoorte town centre rejuvenation, Lucindale Musgrave Avenue rejuvenation, amenities and playground at the Frances recreation grounds and progressing the Naracoorte Regional Sports Centre.
I stand for strong leadership and transparency, with community interests at the heart of Council decision making. I have extensive community connections in our towns and farming areas, and a wealth of experience working with all levels of government to further our goals.
I have the experience, energy, time and dedication to serve our community as Mayor.
COUNCILLOR CANDIDATES Tom Dennis I am economically conservative with a goal to make government as small as possible while still carrying out all its necessary functions. When assessing policy, I decide does it help the aspirational individual, with a mind always to protect the environment.
When it comes to Social Policy, my focus is on protection of personal freedoms, equal rights for all members of our community and the removal of obstacles for the aspirational individual seeking to thrive through hard work and determination.
My work and social life allows me to move around the community where I try to engage with as many people as possible on council matters. I form my policy decision making from in depth study, discussion, and education, and will always be open to listening to the debate in chamber.
I promise not to be influenced by bullying in the media, small influential pressure groups and highly motivated single-issue individuals. My position on matters will be thought through, considered, and made after the necessary work and research has been completed to obtain the best outcome for the community.
If elected, I will act positively to continue growing the prosperity our community has enjoyed over the last four years.
Ken Banning I am standing for council as I believe that local government should be open and transparent. After a career in farm management and as a self-employed farmer, I know how to work to budgets. I will bring a prudent, practical and common-sense approach to council's financial affairs. As a ratepayer I have a strong focus on increasing levels of maintenance to council owned assets particularly the road network.
I would like to see the new Council actively assist business and residents get through the red tape involved with new building and or business applications. Both measures are vital for the future prosperity of the Naracoorte Lucindale Council area. I have always contributed to the community in which I live.
I have been a CFS volunteer for over 35 years with the Lucindale, Hynam and now Stewarts Range Brigades.
I have been involved in local sporting clubs as a player and sponsor and served as a Lucindale Lions member for 13 years. (6 years as the SE Field days treasurer). I am married to Wanda, have two children, who grew up in this area. It is time for a change. Make your vote count.
Andrew Downward G'Day. Listening, communicating and helping people achieve in an open, honest and transparent way are skills I can share as your councillor. Naracoorte is home to many of us, with a natural water course flowing through our town we can establish it further, along with other icons for locals and visitors.
Helping our town to thrive are our recent arrivals from other countries, as well as people from Frances, Kyby, Hynam, Lucindale, Avenue and Farming districts within.
By working together with understanding and respect we can increase our opportunities in tourism, health, education, agriculture, viticulture, retail etc. Backed by good open and honest communication we can turn opportunities into good outcomes for our community.
Most of you know me, the successful businesses I've operated and the committees I've supported and led.
Damien Ross As an elected member I have been actively involved in significant projects:
The restructuring of management and renovation of most significant community asset the Regional Livestock Exchange. The relocation and linking of the library to our town hall of which has now become an amazing asset to our community. If re-elected member my priorities are:
Continue to foster engagement with the community regarding their expectations in particular our road infrastructure. Continue the implementation of our community visions obtained through recent Masterplans. Commencement of the North Park Lands masterplan that will involve the protection of our valuable open spaces and allow community input into the future use of land under pine plantation. I wish to champion the completion of a mini masterplan of our community health infrastructure. I believe this plan could then be used to highlight the community priorities for health infrastructure and in turn assist with the lobbying for future investment. I look forward to the introduction of livestreaming of council meetings for the community to see and hear exactly how council is operating. I seek your valued support for my re-election as an honest, open and effective representative of our wonderful community.
Julie Earl I have lived and worked in the Naracoorte Lucindale district with my family for nearly 40 years. As a rural property owner, teacher, business owner, volunteer, disability support worker and Councillor, I understand the priorities of our diverse community. I work hard to analyse, research and discuss issues in order to make well-informed decisions. I believe that investment of ratepayer dollars and resources must aim to meet the needs of rural and town residents equitably.
Community priorities I support include:
Protection of the North Parklands as community green space for conservation and recreation Controlled rates and spending - fair allocation across whole Council district New library - completed, offering a wide range of well-attended programs Strategic road upgrades - improved maintenance and development of rural road network Wellbeing programs that embrace cultural inclusion, the arts, health, and social connection Appropriate rezoning to encourage industry, tourism and sustainable housing growth Masterplans for modernising and upgrading townships facilities Efficient work practices and good governance Genuine two-way communication and public consultation that builds trust between Council and residents As your advocate, I pledge to listen, respond and be accountable. Let's build community together.
Derek James It's been an honour and a privilege to represent the community of Naracoorte and Lucindale for the past four years. The decisions we have made as elected councilors have created improvements across all sectors of the district. I seek re-election to continue to improve our facilities, infrastructure, roads, and other key assets to promote business opportunities, employment, and tourism.
I continue to be active across the community, contributing my time and effort wherever needed, in whatever capacity is required. I believe in knowing your roots, and keeping your feet on the ground so that any decision is well informed, and for the betterment of all.
I have an Honours Degree in Construction Management, and previous experience as a Quantity Surveyor and Construction Estimator. I have run my own business involved in planning, development, facilities, and construction management for over 20 years.
I currently sit on the Naracoorte Regional Livestock Exchange board, as well as the Board of Hockey SA as Vice President. I am a co-founder of Blue Dwarf Space, a start-up reimagining the space sector regulatory process.
If elected, I commit to continuing to use my experience, and my ethos of hard work and dedication, to make Naracoorte, Lucindale and other surrounding communities a place where families, businesses, and the community prosper. I live, work and play here in Naracoorte, and I am proud to call it my home.
CONTINUED PAGE 11
CREDIT: Neave Moore
Word count: 1718
