With his push-it-to-the-limits training regimen – and a few free kicks from actor Russell Crowe – Chris Feather has built an unlikely fi tness cult. Regular gym junkies need not apply
I NSIDE THE mirror-less gym at 98 Riley Street in the inner-Sydney suburb of Darlinghurst, winter sun pours through the window to illuminate a scene of physical exhaustion. Prone bodies are sprawled over the black rubber floor that’s speckled with chalk dust and sweat. A man with eightpack abs rocks in a foetal position gasping for air, while his gym partner grimaces as he makes a forlorn attempt to shake the lactic acid from his legs. A woman in tiny shorts with superhero arms stares plaintively at the digital timer on the wall as it counts down to the end of the one-minute recovery. The second it hits zero, everyone hurls themselves into action once again. Their ordeal is known as “FYF”, an acronym that reflects the spirit of this workout that takes place every week at 2pm. It stands for F... You Friday. But what looks like a punishment ritual is, in fact, an unlikely honour at the 98 stable of gyms. FYF is an invitation-only session reserved for 98’s trainers and a hand-picked group of the gym’s fittest members. Today, 10 people – eight men and two women in their 30s and 40s – have split into pairs to battle through rounds of a four-minute circuit. Each person must grind their way through eight burpee pull-ups, followed by eight kettle-bell snatches with alternate arms. Next, it’s straight into 18 air squats before burning 1675 kilojoules on a SkiErg – a machine that replicates the cardiovascular nightmare of crosscountry skiing. At the end of this circuit, there’s a 60- second rest. Then it’s repeated again and again, until the hour-long session is up. Everyone is dressed in black: the colour hides the sweat better. One man with a shaved head stands out, mainly because he’s far bigger than the rest. This is Chris Feather, the 40-year-old co-founder of 98. At times, his progress seems laboured due to his heavyweight build, yet Feather moves with the relentless power of an icebreaker. Each move is tackled with methodical stoicism, every pull-up executed with the strictest form. At the end, when most people are groaning on their backs, Feather stays upright, wiping the sweat from his sizable brow and strolling over. “That’s one of those real headf... workouts,” he says in his thick Yorkshire accent with a grin. It may be the gym’s benchmark, but FYF is emblematic of 98’s broader ethos, mainly because it’s unapologetically tough. The gym’s strength and conditioning programs are not designed for dabblers who want to get a light sweat on. They’re psychologically demanding sessions built to improve athletic performance. Feather is upfront about the challenge. “Getting fit is hard. Getting strong is hard. Maintaining it is hard,” he insists. “That’s why so many people aren’t fit and strong. But if you’re looking for a shortcut, you’re never going to get fit.” This straight-talking is unusual in the fitness industry. That’s because, if a training program sounds prohibitively difficult and requires ongoing effort, people are less likely to sign up. It’s far more inviting if presented as achievable in a short time-frame, hence the preponderance of six-week body transformations or weight-loss challenges spruiking results in 28 days (a period specifically chosen because it sounds like less than a month). Yet Feather dismisses these hollow promises. “There’s no magic pill,” he shrugs. “If you want the results, it’ll be hard work and it’ll take time.” From a business perspective, 98 can feel wilfully uncommercial. Aside from the severity of the workouts, the emphasis on strength training requires the supervision of elite trainers who, for safety reasons, can only oversee small classes, impacting the financial returns. The knock-on effect is that 98 is pricey compared to mainstream gyms, with the all-access membership costing $89.95 a week. Consequently, 98’s numbers are still limited, with about 700 members across the two gyms in Sydney (Darlinghurst and Bondi), Melbourne (Cremorne) and Brisbane (West End) with another 1300 signed up to the 98 fitness app. Yet significant expansion is imminent. The number of venues is expected to double in the next six months, with new gyms on the cards for Adelaide, Canberra and Sydney’s northern beaches, along with another space in partnership with the AFL’s Sydney Swans. Feather is also in “serious talks” regarding eight further venues, including international prospects in Singapore and London. Irrespective of this growth, the gym has gained a cult following. The editor of Men’s Health magazine, Scott Henderson, trained at 98 for six years, often going to Riley Street twice a day. “I was obsessed,” he admits. Within the fitness community, revealing you work out at 98 is like a form of shorthand that shows you’re ultracommitted. “It’s almost like the exclusivity of 98 is the brand,” Henderson says. “It’s a badge of honour, for sure. Chris doesn’t actually want everyone and that’s probably why he’s been slow to expand, because there’s not that many people who take their training that seriously.” The clientele may be hard core, but it’s star-spangled as well. Celebrities spotted training at Riley Street include actors Jai Courtney and Taika Waititi and musician Ed Sheeran, alongside a host of athletes from cricket’s David Warner to the All Blacks’ Owen Franks. But the biggest name associated with 98 is Feather’s co-owner and business partner, Russell Crowe. “I couldn’t have done it without Russell,” Feather acknowledges. “There’s no two ways about it.” SIX WEEKS earlier, I meet Feather in another of his starkly monochromatic gyms that opened this year in Melbourne’s Cremorne, a suburb packed with media agencies and too much street art. Standing at six foot five (196 centimetres) and weighing more than 125 kilograms, Feather is double-take big. People of that height often stoop as though embarrassed by their stature. Feather always stands tall. He’s wearing a black sweatshirt, black shorts, black socks and black sneakers. Throw in the millimetre-length hair, grizzled stubble and ears crumpled from his playing days as a rugby league forward, and he’d be an intimidating presence if he wasn’t so modest. Asked, for example, about the national records he held on the SkiErg, he suddenly grows bashful. “Can’t even remember,” he mutters. Feather puts his appetite for “hard graft” down to his upbringing in Haworth, a Yorkshire village in England’s north. His mechanic dad, Brian, started his own business servicing heavy-duty diesel vehicles. Six days a week, his father would rise at 4am, only returning home after 7pm. “Where I’m from, hard work is just valued,” Feather says. His mum, Janet, was an English teacher before she retrained as a life coach. “So that stuff you see on social media now about ‘resilience’ and ‘not being afraid to fail’, well, Mum told me all that 25 years ago.” Growing up with his massive build in England’s rugby league heartland, Feather inevitably picked up an oval ball and signed his first professional contract for Wakefield in the Super League at 18. Between 2001 and 2009, Feather amassed 178 appearances playing for Wakefield, Leeds, Bradford and Castleford. Predictably, he insists he was “a very average player”, but always fared well in the gym. “You know those players who are shit at training, then go out in the park and are geniuses?” he says. “Well, I was the other way.” During Feather’s time at Castleford, a chance encounter would change his life. In Australia, Russell Crowe had become co-owner of the South Sydney Rabbitohs in 2006 and set about improving the side. As part of that mission, he wanted to reach out to Bradford Bulls’ rising star Sam Burgess, but needed an introduction. Eventually Crowe called Dean Widders, an Indigenous player formerly at Souths who’d since moved to Castleford. “Russell contacted Deano and said, ‘I don’t suppose you know anyone who knows Sam Burgess, because I want to have a chat to him,’ ” Feather explains. “Deano was like, ‘Yeah, actually, there’s a lad who plays on our team, called Chris, who’s his best mate.’ ” Feather and Burgess were indeed close from their time at Bradford. On the back of Crowe’s call, Feather, Burgess and Widders were invited down to Nottinghamshire’s Sherwood Forest, where the actor was playing the title role in Ridley Scott’s Robin Hood. “I couldn’t believe it because I obviously loved Gladiator,” Feather recalls. “We went down, saw Russell on set, then all went to the pub and sank 10 pints of Guinness. We had a great time.” Following that meeting, Crowe would eventually convince Burgess and his three brothers to move to Australia to join Souths. He’s expected to rejoin Souths next year as assistant coach, after a tumultuous time in which he was forced to stand down from an introductory coaching role following an NRL investigation in 2020 that fined him $30,000 for taking drugs and threatening a rival player. His ex-wife, Phoebe Burgess, also made accusations against him, including of domestic violence; NSW Police investigated but did not press charges. But while meeting Crowe was clearly significant for Burgess’ life trajectory, those pints of Guinness would soon prove equally fateful for Feather. S EVERAL WEEKS after our initial chat in the Melbourne gym, I’m sitting with Feather (again dressed all in black) over a cup of tea in a Darlinghurst cafe. He’s in the middle of recounting his most gruelling challenge, when he completed a 42 kilometre marathon on the rowing machine, sustaining 500-metre splits of one minute, 53 seconds: a terrifying speed that he somehow maintained for more than two-and-a-half hours. But the anecdote is persistently interrupted as passers-by keep stopping to say hello. Each time, Feather patiently obliges with smiling pleasantries and affable chit-chat. Indeed, he’s unusually respectful all round; when I get up to pay, for example, he carefully tucks my chair back underneath the table. This old school gallantry feels somehow unexpected given his hulking physicality and the casual expletives that punctuate his speech. Feather has lived in Australia since 2010, when he was lured out by Burgess who, already happily installed in Sydney, kept rhapsodising to his friend about the sunshine and beaches. The decision to move to Australia ended Feather’s professional career, as it meant declining a three-year deal from Castleford – a decent contract for a 29-year-old approaching the tailend of his playing days. But Feather was ready for civilian life. He promptly moved in with Burgess, who was living in a spacious apartment owned by Crowe in Potts Point. Finding himself without a job, Feather promptly got himself a milk round. Every morning, he’d rise at 3.30am and run over the Harbour Bridge to North Sydney, where he’d deliver crates of milk to cafes and office blocks, before strolling back past the Opera House and through the Botanical Gardens. “Every morning, I’d have this pinch-myself moment; I couldn’t believe I actually lived here.” Feather was still playing a bit of semi-pro rugby league for the Wyong Roos on the NSW Central Coast, but life felt blissfully carefree. “I was loving it,” he recalls. “I realised I wanted to stay in Australia.” The problem Feather now faced was securing a visa when he had no trade. Another football mate suggested becoming a personal trainer and, lacking any other ideas, he stumbled into what would become his lifelong vocation. But Feather was baffled by what he encountered both on his PT course and in the Fitness First gym where he’d started training. As a sportsman, gym sessions had revolved around trying to get stronger, fitter and faster. “Players always used to say, ‘It’s no good looking good in your Speedos if you’re shit on the field’.” In contrast, modern gym culture seemed pitifully shallow and obsessed with mirror selfies and aesthetics. “There was this huge disconnect between what professional athletes were doing and what the fitness industry was doing,” Feather says. Nevertheless, he persisted, knowing the PT qualification was his best route to a visa. It was then that Crowe made another unexpected call. The Oprah Winfrey Show was filming on the forecourt of the Sydney Opera House and Crowe had been invited to appear alongside Jay-Z and Hugh Jackman. “I get this phone call from Russell saying, ‘What are you doing on Friday? I need a security guard. You haven’t done it before? Don’t worry – it’s just for show.’ ” Backstage on set, Crowe heard about Feather’s personal training and dangled an opportunity. Crowe owned a building at 98 Riley Street that contained a small gym. Feather could rent the space for $250 a week to train clients. “I could see [Chris] was searching for something,” Crowe tells me by email. “Something he could make his own, something that would define him.” The actor also needed some help. For his upcoming role in Man of Steel, Crowe had to lose weight and follow a strict program from his American trainer. Feather started overseeing Crowe’s workouts to keep him on track. But as the production date neared, the American trainer needed to check on his charge’s progress. During one gym session, Crowe mentioned that the trainer was coming to Sydney alone – could he take him out for a meal? Feather met up with a wiry, grey-haired man in his mid-50s, whom he took to a cheap Thai joint on Victoria Street. Initially, Feather was most struck by the skinny man’s appetite. “He ate double what I did – I was amazed!” But the man’s capacity for pad Thai wasn’t his only attribute. Mark Twight was a world-renowned climber turned trainer who, as a Vanity Fair profile put it, had created “a new standard for male physiques in Hollywood action films”. Since retiring from climbing, Twight had built an invitation-only gym in Salt Lake City where he trained climbers, mixed martial arts (MMA) fighters and navy SEALs, people for whom a fitness deficit could have mortal consequences. He called it Gym Jones – a play on the name of the notorious 1970s cult leader Jim Jones – due to the fanatical dedication of his members. The gym had forged a strong reputation in Hollywood on the back of Twight’s work on the 2006 film 300, a sword-and-sandals epic about Spartan warriors. Enlisted to whip the cast into loincloth shape, Twight accomplished the task with such eye-popping success that he became the go-to trainer of the film’s director, Zack Snyder, subsequently turning Gal Gadot into Wonder Woman and Henry Cavill into Superman. Feather knew none of this. But when Twight invited him for a training session, he found himself unable to complete the intense 15-minute session that combined bodyweight moves with a range of static holds. Despite this humiliation, Twight had forged a connection with the Yorkshireman. “He said, ‘I’ve seen enough of you over this week and I’d really love you to be a part of what we’re doing,’ ” Feather recalls. “‘ We’ve got this eight-week course at our gym; I’d like you to come and do it.’ ” As Feather was still fairly directionless, the offer came at the right time. He immediately booked a ticket to Utah, a decision that delighted Crowe, who credited Twight with making him the strongest he’d ever been in his life. I F GYM Jones was the fitness cult that its name evokes, Feather certainly drank the Kool Aid. Under Twight, the gym’s philosophy revolved around powerlifting, calisthenics and team-work. But the muscle that Twight was most eager to train was inside the skull. “There was a lot of mindset stuff about how your body can go further than your mind,” Feather says. The prevailing tone was clear by the names of the workouts. “Tailpipe” was so called because it’d left people so oxygen-deprived the effect was like sucking on a car exhaust. Another was simply called, “Death by burpee.” Feather returned to Sydney as an accredited Gym Jones trainer and was itching to put some of the principles into practice. “I wanted to open a gym that valued performance and hard work over aesthetics and ego,” he says. Making people stronger – both physically and mentally – was the fundamental goal, and Crowe was fully on board. “The way I saw it,” the actor writes, “the gym was my personal space, I didn’t want it full of lycra warriors more focused on their phones than their workout. I wanted to be in a room where everyone had the same mindset. It wasn’t a social place, it was a work space.” Feather teamed up with Kevin Toonen, a former high-performance coach for the Australian Special Forces, to design a progressive strength program that was planned a year ahead in 12-week blocks. But the severity of 98’s new direction proved a turn-off to the gym’s Sydney eastern suburbs clientele. Membership numbers tumbled. “I’m trying to push this to Russell as a business model and he’s like, ‘F...ing hell, it’s dropped off 75 per cent since you’ve implemented this program.’ And I’m like, ‘Mate, stick with it. Trust me.’ And then the next month, it was even worse …” Making any gym business financially solvent is challenging. The recent near collapse of the global fitness empire F45 may have stemmed from its overly aggressive expansion and multimillion-dollar celebrity endorsements, but even the most humble gym still faces the challenges of high start-up costs, a saturated marketplace and member retention. Gyms start, look successful, then fail on a fairly regular basis, and have done for decades. And due to its uncompromising demands, Feather’s fitness formula was a particularly hard sell. Yet instead of reverting to more accessible classes, Feather stuck to his vision – a luxury, he admits, he could only afford thanks to Crowe. During the next three years, the actor waived 98’s rent and didn’t apply any financial pressure. “Russell wanted to build something special. For him it wasn’t about money,” Feather says. Nor would this be Crowe’s only act of generosity. In 2017, Feather, who’d just had his first child, proposed a deal to buy a 25 per cent stake in 98. Aware of his new family responsibilities, Crowe insisted Feather take 75 per cent for the same price, which, Feather says, was already “very, very fair”. Shielding the gym from financial implosion, this early backing allowed 98 the time to forge its identity and reputation. Meanwhile, the hardcore members who stuck with the program began to see the strength gains Feather promised would come. Today, Crowe insists he always believed in his copartner’s approach. “The thing is, we didn’t care if what we were doing suited everybody,” he notes. “Unlike other gyms, we weren’t trying to please the crowd. We were looking for like-minded, goal-oriented people. The idea behind 98 is that only 2 per cent of people who walk into a gym are genuinely ready to focus on their absolute best. 98 isn’t for everyone.” Fortunately, that niche market did expand as interest in extreme fitness started to grow. With gym culture going mainstream over the past 20 years, more people began seeking out sterner physical challenges, whether in CrossFit, triathlons or events like Tough Mudder. A study last year, for example, found a 345 per cent spike in the global participation of ultra-marathons over the past decade. Yet even within this context, 98 still triggers a strange form of evangelical zeal. At the Melbourne gym, for example, I meet Adam Trippe-Smith, a serial entrepreneur in the beer and beverage industry. He started training at 98 in 2018 and became so besotted he moved his entire company – a keg business called Konvoy – into the office space above the Sydney gym for better access. He now offers all his staff free memberships to 98. “I just loved what it was doing for me physically and also mentally,” says Trippe-Smith, who noticed a knock-on effect, where the training forced him to take better care of himself, which in turn sharpened his professional focus. “It’s a high-performance environment, so you don’t really want to go in unrested with a hangover,” he adds. At 47, Trippe-Smith is older than you’d assume 98’s target market might be. Equally surprising is the fact that the gym’s gender split is almost 50-50. Boasting an Amazonian physique to go with her multiple SkiErg world records, Kate Hilliard is the manager of the Riley Street branch and a former state swimmer. What drew her to 98 was the culture of results over aesthetics. “With women in sports, there’s often a lot put on how you look,” the 30-year-old says. “But there’s none of that here, because performance is king.” In addition, Hilliard found the emphasis on building strength to also prove empowering outside the gym. “Particularly for women, you get this confidence of your capability,” she adds. “You stop looking at yourself as a piece of décor.” IT WAS this high-performance mindset that captured the attention of the Sydney Swans. When the AFL team began planning its redevelopment of the Royal Hall of Industries building at Moore Park into a $70 million sporting and community hub, it wanted to include a commercial gym. The gym it turned to was 98, which is expected to open for business at the end of this year. Feather is visibly thrilled about the Swans deal. Driving over to Moore Park to check on the construction in his matte black ute, he becomes so animated about the project he’ll later forget where he’s parked his car. The partnership is significant, in part, because of the access it offers to the Swans database of around 150,000 people. If just over 1 per cent of those members sign up to the 98 app – which costs $9 a week – it could generate close to $750,000 in annual revenue. That would make a profound contribution to a business that, despite its impassioned following, hasn’t netted Feather huge returns. He currently rents a house in the coastal village of Austinmer, north of Wollongong, with his wife, Kate, and two children, Ruby, 5, and Jack, 2. A capital raising to accelerate 98’s growth remains a future possibility, but he’s wary of attempting it before he can demonstrate what he believes is the company’s true valuation. “Growing a business is like having 10 pots and seven lids,” Feather sighs. “You’re constantly moving the lids around to cover the pots that you need.” There is the din of heavy machinery and smell of wet concrete as Swans chief operating officer Drew Arthurson guides Feather around the shell of a building, now in construction, in the shadow of the Sydney Cricket Ground. We pick our way past exposed girders and forklifts, until we reach the 460-square-metre space where the Swans are paying for the gym’s fit-out. “We love what 98 represents,” Arthurson says, highlighting what he perceives as the gym’s aligned values of “humility, resilience and commitment to hard work”. Yet for Feather, this deal is special because of the validation it brings. His original goal with 98 was to bring the training mentality of professional athletes to the public. That 98 is now being recognised by an elite sports team feels like a true affirmation. “I’m really proud,” Feather says, circling the carpark looking for his ute. “I haven’t been so excited about anything for a long time.” AFTER SEVERAL hours in Feather’s company, I can appreciate what Crowe describes as his “northern English strength of character” that essentially translates to old-fashioned decency spiked with roughhewn charisma. Yet I’m still wrestling with the unyielding nature of the 98 vision. It all seems unnecessarily hard. Feather is adamant that any worthwhile training demands long-term commitment. “We’d never do a ‘sixweek challenge’ at 98, because what about the next 25 years?” If you’re serious about getting fitter and stronger, he believes, you have to train (scarily hard) for the rest of your life. This merciless approach seems unrealistic for most able-bodied people. Yet Feather is convinced 98’s principles offer benefits whatever your level. It’s why he demands that everyone who works for him – including his accountants and lawyers – follow the 98 regimen. As I continue to question this hard-boiled approach, his exasperation shows. “What’s your other option?” he says. “You either train regularly or you live an uncomfortable life and die earlier.” Given this stand-off, I’m forced to try out 98’s training for myself. It can’t hurt, I suppose. Except that, of course, it does – and that’s basically the whole point. Suffice to say, I’m not a steel-lunged gym-rat but a soft-bellied, 40-something whose password is the strongest thing about me. Nevertheless, I turn up for a 6.30am session at the Melbourne gym and slot into a group class alongside five men and five women. Today’s challenge is a 30-minute time trial on a SkiErg machine, where the goal is simply to cover the greatest possible distance. When it’s finally over, I lurch away from the SkiErg and crumple to the ground. My eyes sting with sweat and I can’t stop coughing. Afterwards, I limp through Richmond towards the CBD, trying to ignore the spasms in my lower back. Yet by the time I cross the frost-covered grass beside the MCG, I’ve surprised myself by forking out $239.99 for an annual subscription to the 98 app. Perhaps I’ve been hood-winked by the unfamiliar sensation of an endorphin rush. But my reasoning is this: if life persists in getting tougher, perhaps I need to train harder to keep up. Six weeks later, this purchase feels predictably rash. I follow the app’s “training from home” program for a good, ooh five sessions (all right, four) before real life intrudes. I strain my back attempting “150 burpees for time”, my two kids get gastro, my wife starts a new job and I’m hammered by a multi-car pile-up of deadlines. The prospect of sprint drills at dawn quickly pales. Then, before I know it, I haven’t laced up my gym shoes for a month. But I really am still planning to get stronger, you understand. Right after I learn the difference between good intentions and self-delusion. n
CREDIT: Luke Benedictus
Word count: 4363
