Call to support young people in search for jobs
A YOUTH Futures Guarantee to help young people transition from school to tertiary education and the workforce is needed, particularly in a global pandemic that is reducing employment opportunities, according to a new report by the National Youth Commission.
After an 18-month inquiry, the commission releases its report today as it begins its week-long Youth Futures Summit, that will include a question-and-answer session with Prime Minister Scott Morrison.
Commissioner Sophie Johnston, pictured, said there was now a need for a national youth plan. “We now have a perfect storm in the combination of the pandemic, the economic downturn and climate change and young people will be among the most seriously impacted by all three.” Ms Johnston said.
The “futures guarantee’’ would form part of an overall plan, Ms Johnston said. The report outlines nine factors the guarantee should cover: Education and training, job creation and links to employers, employment services, fair pay and income security, climate justice, housing, health and wellbeing, transport and local community support.
The inquiry says finding work is an increasing problem for young people, with the unemployment rate for those aged between 15 and 24 more than double the overall rate.
“Young people represent a disproportionate share of immediate and longer-term job losses, working in industries that were already characterised by precarious income and wage theft; in particular, hospitality, tourism and retail,’’ the report says.
“As a generation, young people are taking the hardest hit, and will be affected for decades to come as the population ages.’’ Uniting Communities SA has been part of the inquiry and its advocacy and communications manager Mark Henley said young people were finding it increasingly difficult to reach that first step on the employment ladder.
“COVID has reduced employment generally and reduced the opportunity for entry-level jobs even more,’’ Mr Henley said. “I suspect this is the toughest job market new entrants have faced since the Great Depression.’’.
He said difficulties had not just been caused by the COVID-19 economic crash but also by the increasing casualisation of the workforce and the rise of automation and artificial intelligence. Mr Henley said a youth guarantee would be helpful if it concentrated on areas such as paid job placements, recognition of entrepreneurial skills, and linking arts and design to STEM learning, as well as income support, affordable housing and mental health services.
CREDIT: MICHAEL MCGUIRE
Word count: 403
