A WORLD leading medical imaging company from Adelaide has raised $4.5 million from private investors and the State Government to enable it to help couples with fertility difficulties.
The investment will accelerate the commercialisation of Presagen’s Life Whisperer product, which uses artificial intelligence to identify healthy embryos in IVF with the aim of improving pregnancy outcomes for infertile couples globally.
The new funding for the Lot Fourteen-based company comes after 12 clinical trials across Australia, the USA, Malaysia and New Zealand over the past two years said Presagen chief executive officer, Dr Michelle Perugini.
“The product is expected to be on sale in Australia over the next couple of months. It’s going through the FDA in America at the moment and we expect it to be on sale at the end of the year there.
“We’ve done the hard yards and I am so excited about getting the product in the hands of patients.” The investment, which includes $3 million from Australian investor Jungle Capital Group and US investment firm 3Lines Venture Capital, will also enable Presagen to explore other medical applications beyond IVF using its advanced image-based medical diagnostics platform.
The SA Government has pitched in with $1.5 million from its $28 million Research, Commercialisation and Startup Fund which helps entrepreneurs take their innovations to global markets.
“Successful companies will refund the government investment and keep their intellectual property in SA,” Minister for Innovation and Skills, David Pisoni, said.
“We were looking for $4.5 million,” Dr Perugini said.
“We went to the government and said it would provide confidence to our private investors if we got government support and they understood.
“We already had investment (which took six months), going to the government was to get the quantum of funding.“It surprised me how fast the government was and how vehemently they supported us and the process was very sensible.”
CREDIT: RICHARD EVANS
Word count: 314
