TWO of SA’s most promising female technology entrepreneurs have this year raised millions from astute local and international investors for their global-impact businesses in healthcare and space.
Presagen, co-founded by Dr Michelle Perugini, raised a total of $4.5 million from Jungle Capital group in Australia and US private investor 3Lines Venture Capital, with the SA Government also pitching in.
The funding will help commercialise its Life Whisperer artificial intelligence (AI) platform. Life Whisperer uses AI to identify healthy embryos in in-vitro fertilisation (IVF) with the aim of improving pregnancy outcomes for infertile couples globally.
Last week, Flinders Fertility in SA became the first clinic nationally to offer Life Whisperer. Number 1 Fertility in Melbourne will offer it from next year.
In October, Presagen launched its AI Open Projects platform to allow clinics globally to crowdsource data to build AI medical products.
“We have made significant progress over the past few months,” Dr Perugini told The Advertiser.
“Our Life Whisperer product is nearing final approval in Europe, and approvals are in progress in the US and South East Asia.
“AI Open technology is solving a huge global data privacy problem by allowing our AI to iteratively learn from globally distributed datasets without ever moving that data to a central location.” Presagen now has 13 full-time staff in Adelaide with two more employees coming on board in the US within months.
Rocket scientist Flavia Tata Nardini is the fuel that powers space start-up Fleet Space Technologies, which she co-founded.
The company caught the eye of billionaire venture capitalists earlier this year, who have invested nearly $11 million into the nanosatellite business. New investors include Horizon Ventures, owned by Hong Kong-based Li Ka-Shing, one of the world’s richest men. Other investors include Momenta Ventures and Atlassian co-founder Mike Cannon-Brookes.
Fleet’s four satellites – the size of a shoebox and much cheaper than traditional satellites – were launched last year. The investment is expected to boost Ms Nardini’s long-held desire to connect the world through better communications. “Every giant leap of human progress stemmed from a communications breakthrough,” she has previously told The Advertiser. “That’s why we started Fleet.”In 2017, Fleet raised $5 million from investors, including Blackbird Ventures and Grok Ventures, alongside matched seed funding from the SA Government.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 380
