DEXUS PROPERTY GROUP (DXS) BUY Dexus manages a $27 billion property portfolio, $13 billion of which it owns directly (office and industrial, and $14 billion it manages for third-party clients. Majority of revenue is generated through direct property investment, 80-90 per cent, with 10-20 per cent derived through its funds management and trading operations. With a strong position in Sydney, Dexus is well positioned to take advantage of the low vacancy rates of 3.5 per cent. With bond yields rising on optimism around US/China talks, and recession worries lower, property REIT such as Dexus have come off. However, if volatility spikes up, it could be a stable place for a good yield.
SPARK INFRASTRUCTURE (SKI) SELL Spark invests in regulated utilities infrastructure assets, including water, electricity and gas distribution, and sewerage assets. The Australian energy regulator sets how much regulated utility companies can make based on a set return, or Weighted Average Cost of Capital. Part of this calculation is based on bond yields which have significantly dropped from the last review. All of this is factored into the current share price, however you may want to exit Spark now in favour of options with more flexibility in their price negotiations, or other options with more upside growth potential.
ETFS ROBO (ROBO) BUYOne of the potentially biggest drivers of the recent market optimism is the upcoming trade talks between the US and China, with both countries already making token gestures that they are willing to come to the table this time around. If you are an optimist, and you wanted to play the upside of a positive negotiation outcome, you could consider the ETFS Robo global Robotics and Automation ETF. ROBO aims to track the performance of the ROBO global robotics and automation index, and with a management fee of 0.69 per cent provides a highly diversified exposure to the long-term artificial intelligence, automation thematic.
CREDIT: Catapult Wealth portfolio manager TIMOTHY HASELUM
Word count: 323
