LAID-BACK Aussies could be in for a shock as more than half of workers lack the skills they need for the future and most do not even realise it.
LinkedIn research reveals just 39 per cent of Australian professionals are concerned about the pace of change in their industry, yet employers say less than half of their staff (49 per cent) have skills to keep up.
LinkedIn learning solutions head Jason Laufer says it is surprising Australians are so much more relaxed than their Asia-Pacific counterparts. Workers in Singapore (65 per cent), India (62 per cent) and Japan (55 per cent) are significantly more likely to be daunted by the pace of change.
Laufer says Australians are historically laid back but their confidence may be misplaced.
Still, many understand they need to keep learning to stay relevant. “Almost a third of workers have quit their job because they were not getting the right learning and development opportunities,” he says. “It’s the responsibility of both those in the workforce and employers to do something about it.” He says elearning and digital platforms, such as LinkedIn Learning, allow workers to upskill when and where it suited them.
HubSpot Asia Pacific director James Gilbert says elearning does not replace university degrees but works alongside them as a “hybrid approach”. “(University) sets you up with the foundation then (elearning gives) the most relevant context for your role,” he says.
Gilbert says elearning lends itself to careers that are evolving, such as digital marketing, or those that have not previously existed.
Short online courses can be used to hone both technical and soft skills. Laufer says technical skills in artificial intelligence, big data and cloud computing all continue to be in demand, but soft skills are also valued.
Hays Australia and New Zealand managing director Nick Deligiannis says soft skills are increasingly important as technology takes over many routine and repetitive aspects of jobs.The latest Hays Salary Guide reveals the soft skills most sought by employers are problem solving (62 per cent want this), communication (58 per cent) and critical thinking (47 per cent).
Word count: 350
