THE number of job advertisements listed on SEEK increased by 8.6 per cent last year, with trades and services, information communication technology and healthcare sectors driving the growth. Latest figures from the SEEK Employment Report reveal the number of advertisements for South Australian-based roles increased by 9 per cent in 12 months.
Tasmania recorded the biggest jump in job ads between the 2017 and 2018 calendar years – up 25 per cent – followed by Western Australia (15 per cent), Victoria (11 per cent), and Queensland (9 per cent).
The ACT and NSW recorded 6 per cent and 5 per cent more jobs, respectively. SEEK Australia and New Zealand managing director Kendra Banks says the growth is good news for jobseekers, with the 2018 employment market stronger than the previous year.
“More encouraging is that growth in the employment market has come from a diverse range of industries,” she says.
“There is demand for candidates who can carry out highly technical roles, to those who can support the frontline service needs of our population, such as in healthcare roles.
“(There is) demand for people in our labour market who can work on and with technology and AI (artificial intelligence), as well as those roles where technology and AI is less prevalent, such as high-touch variable roles such as nursing and aged care.” Nationally, the sectors with the largest percentage increase in job ads were mining, resources and energy (32 per cent), government and defence (24 per cent) and community services and development (18 per cent).
Last week there were about 4800 mining, resources and energy jobs advertised on SEEK, including about 1700 in mining engineering and maintenance. There were also about 5400 government and defence jobs – with 2300 in state government – and 4300 community services and development jobs, including 1800 in aged and disability support.The SEEK Employment Report also revealed the average advertised salary on SEEK increased 3.9 per cent year on year.
Word count: 326
