JOBSEEKERS will need to finetune their application processes if they want to stand out in an increasingly competitive job market in 2020.
Recruitment consultancy ASPL chief executive Kris Grant says it is important for candidates to stay up-to-date with what employers are looking for.
“Every organisation requires candidates to hold a specific skillset but regardless of the industry, we are noticing a recurring theme in what all employers are looking for,” she says.
KEYWORDS More employers are taking advantage of algorithms to filter out spam and irrelevant job applications that do not mention keywords specific to the role and/or industry.
“It’s more important than ever for jobseekers to fill their resume with words relevant to the industry, organisation and the job ad itself,” Grant says.
“By creating accurate and detailed applications, you are likely to be in a better place for the recruitment process.”
EMOTIONS “Emotional intelligence (EQ) is a measure of a person’s social and emotional skills, and it’s something HR teams are starting to place a higher value on when hiring,” Grant says.
Being able to perceive, use, understand and manage emotions is something that can make jobseekers stand out in a large pool of candidates.
TECHNOLOGIES Upskilling is a necessity in the ever-evolving technology landscape. “It’s a great way to not only future proof your career but can also lead to promotions,” Grant says. “Emerging technologies like artificial intelligence and cloud computing are dominating the workplace, so it is easy to get left behind if you don’t take charge of your skillset.”
SOCIALS Recruiters are increasingly focused on marketing their company and brand through social media and jobseekers should do likewise.
“Sell yourself as the ideal candidate – after all, you don’t want to miss out on job offers all because of an out-of-character photo on Facebook,” she says.
HOBBIES “Show you can maintain a work/life balance,” Grant says. “The world is getting faster, busier and more overwhelming, with fewer opportunities to switch off. So, it is highly valuable for employers to see that you have interests outside of the job description, whether it’s a sport, a hobby or volunteer work.”It can also help employees to form deeper relationships with potential colleagues.
Word count: 366
