A $1M prize is up for grabs in a South Australian Innovation Challenge that will kickstart a 10-year science strategy for the state.
The aim is to use research and innovation to drive economic growth and create well-paid, fulfilling jobs.
The $1m challenge will be funded by the State Government, which will also put $7m over a four-year period into a series of initiatives to link industry and researchers.
“Historically, industry-research collaborations and new technologies have been critical to creating and sustaining successful economies and communities – something that is necessarily front of mind around the world in the wake of COVID-19,” Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni said.
The strategy, called EXCITE from Excellence, Collaboration, Innovation, Translation and an Enabled workforce, sets goals for the state.
These included positioning SA within the top quartile of rankings from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development on research toward better health, economic growth, productivity and climate smart goals.
SA’s chief scientist Caroline McMillen said the strategy would draw top-level researchers to work in SA.
“EXCITE will connect game-changing ideas with small and large businesses across priority industry sectors to build competitive advantage,” she said.
Benchmarks will be set on how much money is being spent in SA as a proportion of the overall gross state product. The strategy aims to reverse a trend of SA’s share of spending on revenue for research at higher-education institutions being in decline.
Benchmarks also will be set on business expenditure on research and development. Greater use will be made of innovation precincts such as Lot Fourteen, Tonsley and Mawson Lakes to get industry and academics to collaborate.
To steer development of a more scientifically skilled workforce, SA will host an annual forum and ambassadors will be appointed as champions of diversity in the fields of science, technology, engineering, maths and medicine (STEMM).
Measurable goals will be set in the number and sex of students in STEMM courses, of the educational level of permanent migrants and the number of researchers in government, business and higher education. Opportunities to pursue include quantum computing, artificial intelligence, new energy sources, space technology and the fusion of technology and creative arts, the strategy says.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 368
