SMART fun MATH SOLVER Free, iOS/Android This is the kind of app that could rescue both students struggling with algebra and parents trying to teach them about it. Microsoft’s Math Solver is a free app that employs artificial intelligence to scan a handwritten or printed maths problem, convert it into text, and break it down into steps so students can see how the app solved the equation. It can also search the web for video tutorials on the maths problems in question, and deliver a daily quiz.
STOOP INBOX Free, Apple iOS/Google Android Curious people often have the messiest inboxes; choked with information they want to read alongside missives from work, school, and creditors that they have to see. Stoop Inbox has created an ingenious way to separate the two. It’s a service just for newsletters, giving each user their own Stoop Inbox email address and suggesting updates to which they can subscribe in categories as diverse as golf, tech, design, and Bitcoin.
BEACHSAFE Free, Apple iOS/Google Android With warmer weather and school holidays approaching, this app from Surf Life Saving Australia is worth a look. It’s designed to keep you up to date with the latest hazards (like shark sightings and rips) as well as the hours lifeguards patrol the beach, and give you a weather forecast, right down to the water temperature. You can also use this app to scope for new spots to visit, however, with details about picnic areas, showers, and playgrounds.
SMILE Free, iOS/Android The appeal of pocket monsters is being used for good in Pokemon Smile that is designed to get kids brushing their teeth thoroughly. Young players can collect up to 100 Pokemon by brushing the bacterial gremlins off their teeth, and the app uses the camera on their device to help them visualise the problem and put a Pokemon virtually atop their head. Regular brushing in the app wins virtual awards as well as unlocking characters.
BAD CHESS Free, iOS/Android What if you combined a highbrow, refined game of skill with a random lucky draw? That’s the idea behind this entertaining app that should appeal to both skilled chess masters looking for a challenge and newbies trying to have some fun. Rather than the usual pieces, each game delivers a random assortment, and pits you against an artificially intelligent partner.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 393
