CHARGE YOUR GLASSES NEW streaming service Binge has just launched in Australia and what better way to celebrate than with a big night in. Here at delicious, we’ve already made our first movie selection. Now all that’s left to do is drag out the doona and pour ourselves a drink.
While there’s nothing wrong with finishing off that open bottle, the right drinks pairing can add an extra dimension to your film-watching experience. You’ll find romantic comedies are funnier following a glass of bubbly (and the love interest gets a bit more attractive, too). If you want to immerse yourself in that British period drama, nothing sets the scene better than a botanically driven G & T. Without further ado, here are our favourite flick and drink pairings for your next Binge session.
Natural wine and Terminator 2: Judgement Day Erina Starkey – Restaurant and News Editor In a world where artificial intelligence has enslaved the human race, you can rest easy knowing your vino is biodynamically farmed with as little intervention from Skynet as possible. Something bright and funky such as the 2019 Das Juice McLaren Vale Sangiovese Rose is a reminder than mankind is worth saving.
Liquorice tea and Death Becomes Her Hayley Incoll, Creative Director I’m looking forward to rewatching Death Becomes Her. Who can resist a classic ’90s film with Meryl Streep and Goldie Hawn? My perfect pairing would be a detoxifying and youthful brew, such as liquorice tea, which is good for both the skin and tummy. T2 have the perfect potion – Organic Beauty Queen loose-leaf tea.
Talisker 18-Year-Old Single Malt Scotch and Elizabeth I and Her Enemies John Hannan, Digital Editor Sure, you could watch Jurassic Park or Black Hawk Down, but for a thrilling, action-packed night, I’ll be watching Elizabeth I and Her Enemies followed by back-to-back reruns of Antiques Road Trip with a dram or two of Talisker 18-year-old Scotch.
Daiquiri and Westworld Samantha Jones, Editor I know what you’re thinking. Surely with that name she’ll have a cosmopolitan and watch reruns of Sex and the City (pictured). But no! I’m going to settle in for the new season of Westworld with a classic daiquiri in hand – I just hope I can follow the plot after the rum.
Warm-spiced Montenegro with The First Wives Club Phoebe Wood, Food Director Much to the dismay of my family, I’m that person. The one who likes to watch the same movie again and again until they can recite every line. So I’ll be donning a pantsuit (it’ll be sweat pants) like it’s 1996 and watching The First Wives Club with this warm Montenegro. I might be a creature of habit with movies, but I like to mix up my drinks!
Word count: 458
