COMMONWEALTH Bank’s tech innovation arm has launched a small business platform, offering entrepreneurs $500 for signing up.
Backr is the latest fintech propped up by CBA’s tech investment division X15 Ventures, with the application designed to be a digital guide for small business owners in the first year of operation.
The web app provides small business owners with a centralised platform for registration needs, invoicing and business plan formulation.
In a tech update on Tuesday, CBA chief executive Matt Comyn said the drive for digital business growth had become more apparent in the era of COVID-19, highlighting tech innovation as a key growth area within the Australian and global economies.
“Through Backr, we hope to help thousands of new digitally enabled small businesses get off the ground,” Mr Comyn said. “This is now more important than ever given the need to drive the economic recovery.” The app is set to launch in September with the $500 grants available to eligible businesses who register before October 31.
X15 Ventures managing director Toby Norton-Smith said the app simplified the daunting process of trying to launch a new business. He also noted launching great ideas into the market would be crucial once Australia emerged from the pandemic.
“Backr is a portal for aspiring entrepreneurs and microbusinesses looking to set up shop,” he said.
The coronavirus pandemic has placed a significant amount of downward pressure on the banking industry. Mr Comyn said COVID-19 had accelerated the structural shift towards digital banking particularly within the household lending market, where nearly 80 per cent of CBA’s home loan book derived from digital interactions.
x15 Ventures has provided multi-million-dollar funding to buy now, pay later company Klarna in a bid to lure the payments giant to Australia to compete with Afterpay.
In the same update, the bank announced a $US10m partnership in two technology investment funds – Square Peg and Zetta Venture Partners – which it intends to use to support the scaling up of small Australian fintechs.
Square Peg co-founder Paul Bassat said Australia had the potential to be an important player in fintech.
“It is not just COVID impacting the economy,” he said.
“We are also witnessing the long-term impacts of technology disruption, which is creating headwinds and op-portunities for Australia.” Zetta Venture Partners is an American-based fund that invests in artificial intelligence companies.
CREDIT: GERARD COCKBURN
Word count: 393
