JULIE Bishop’s post-political career has expanded to five jobs – but most MPs who retired at the May federal election continue to hunt for work.
Business sources told the Sunday Mail Ms Bishop’s pay packet will be more than double what she earned in Canberra as the foreign minister.
Ms Bishop revealed her latest position will be on the board of the Human Vaccines Project, which is working on a single vaccination against major global infectious diseases.
She has already accepted several lucrative board positions, including joining the international advisory board of powerful artificial intelligence firm Afiniti – which aims to improve customer service – as well as private aid contractor Palladium. She will also replace John Langoulant as chair of Perth’s Telethon Kids Institute after his 14 years of voluntary service on the board. And she will also become the next chancellor of the Australian National University.
Ms Bishop will also pocket a six-figure annual pension, equal to 75 per cent of a current MP’s base salary, plus additional cash for senior positions held during her parliamentary career.
But the Sunday Mail understands some of Ms Bishop’s colleagues have been overlooked for key government jobs.
This has prompted criticism about the best way to use the skills of former MPs. An analysis by the Sunday Mail revealed most politicians who retired or were booted out of parliament in May are still searching for jobs. Former prime minister Tony Abbott will fill a vacancy on the board of the Australian War Memorial in Canberra but a raft of other MPs are hoping and waiting for government appointments.
Former disability services minister Jane Prentice, who does not receive a taxpayer-funded pension, said former MPs had a lot to offer but were being overlooked for government jobs.
“I have been flattered by the number of offers by community groups but I also need something to pay the mortgage,” she said.Former trade minister Steven Ciobo, who is eligible for a government pension, wouldn’t confirm rumours he had lined up a job overseas, saying he was enjoying retirement. Former minister Craig Laundy is working in his family’s Sydney hotel business.
CREDIT: ANNIKA SMETHURST POLITICAL EDITOR
Word count: 362
