MP calls for crackdown on ‘repulsive’ replicas
PEOPLE found in possession of sex dolls that look like children would be jailed for up to 10 years under a plan that’s gaining support in State Parliament.
SA Best MP Connie Bonaros said she was alarmed by the “repulsive” products, which are made in countries including Japan and China and are being intercepted by border officials on their way into Australia.
The dolls are lifelike representations of children as young as five, and features including body type and eye colour can be custom made to order.
Robotic dolls are also being produced that have heartbeats and use artificial intelligence to give verbal cues, as well as tracking eye movement and assuming sexual positions.
The Federal Government’s Australian Institute of Criminology has reported 133 detections of the products, which have been defined as “objectionable goods” by authorities.
Ms Bonaros said it was crucial that state laws ensured punishment of people who were producing or possessing the dolls. Under legislation she intends to bring to a vote later this year, both offences would attract up to 10 years in jail.
Ms Bonaros said she was fearful the dolls would lead paedophiles to offend against real children and they should be treated in the same way as child pornography material.
“Childlike sex dolls are an emerging and increasing form of child exploitation material that must clearly be criminalised to prevent children from being abused, as the dolls normalise abusive behaviour towards children,” she said. “There is absolutely no evidence that childlike sex dolls have any therapeutic benefit in preventing child abuse.
“We need to stay ahead of changes in technology. We cannot sit idly by when this disturbing, sickening phenomenon continues to grow.” SA Opposition legal affairs spokesman Kyam Maher said the products were “completely inappropriate” and should be outlawed.
“Labor wholeheartedly supports this Bill and looks forward to working with SA Best to ensure its passage through Parliament,” he said.
Federal Parliament has also examined an explicit ban on the dolls. SA Attorney-General Vickie Chapman is on leave and will consider the details of the proposed crackdown in coming weeks.
A Government spokeswoman said there was agreement that the dolls should not exist in SA.She said the SA Best plan “ensures beyond doubt that these products are captured in existing provisions”.
CREDIT: DANIEL WILLS STATE POLITICAL EDITOR
Word count: 394
