A SPACE for researchers in health and defence to work together on ideas and innovation has been created in Adelaide.
UniSA and professional services company Accenture have joined forces to set up the space at the Innovation Collaboration Centre on North Tce, city.
It is aimed at showcasing technologies affecting business and industry, including artificial intelligence, blockchain and augmented reality, while helping local start-ups and other South Australian-based businesses.
It will also be a place for co-creation and collaboration with UniSA researchers, government bodies, start-ups and community groups.
UniSA’s vice-chancellor, Pro­fessor David Lloyd, said the collaboration would offer start-ups and industry sectors access to ideas that would help transform their operations and “step ahead of the game”.
“Co-located with UniSA’s already highly successful innovation hub, the ICC, Accenture at UniSA will deliver a showcase for new technology solutions with an emphasis on the health and defence sectors where UniSA has a network of strong partnerships and collaborations,” he said.
Accenture said the joint arrangement was for the space to create a global showcase which had widespread economic and social impact.
“By combining the best minds in academia and industry and utilising the latest technology, we want to achieve meaningful change for the citizens of SA in impactful ways across critical areas such as health,” said Edmund Gardner, Accenture’s managing director of health and public service and the innovation lead for the Asia-Pacific, Middle East and Africa.
“Another of our aspirations, is to focus on job-creation and ensuring the next generation possess the in-demand skills and experience required by employers in the next decade,” he said.
Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni said the partnership presented important opportunities for the state.
“Bringing together private enterprise and academic expertise is a win-win,” he said.“The university has a network of links to the health and defence sectors through both research and teaching, and Accenture has global expertise in the kind of technological innovations that transform business and industry.”
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 329
