A REVAMP of the SACE Research Project and new industry-driven Year 12 subjects in cybersecurity, the space business and advanced technologies are among key changes planned for the state’s senior secondary certificate.
The Research Project will no longer be a compulsory Year 12 subject under the SACE Board’s response to last year’s State Government-commissioned, independent review. But students will still have to complete it at some point in their senior schooling – either as a 10-credit (half-year) subject in Years 11 or 12 or as an optional full year (20-credit) version in Year 12.
The Research Project allows students to look at any topic of their choosing in depth. It has been criticised for being compulsory and limiting students’ other subject choices, and for suspicions some parents help too much. But Flinders University research has found it was a better predictor of success at uni than the ATAR.
SACE Board chief executive Martin Westwell said one issue with the current Research Project was that it was so broad some students found it hard to choose a topic. As such, the revamped version would have more defined options including entrepreneurial or community activism projects and those tied directly to vocational studies and career pathways.
“While we have received significant correspondence from schools and teachers who recognise how valuable the Research Project is for our students, we know from the findings of the SACE review that the current subject is not universally valued and needs to change,” Prof Westwell, pictured, said.
Subject to extra funding, which would be needed for all planned changes to the SACE, a pilot of the new Research Project would be run in 2020 with a view to a full rollout in 2022.
The SACE Board also wants to introduce new “industry framework subjects” at Year 12.
The content would be largely determined by emerging industries, the idea being that in rapidly evolving areas, it would cut the lag time for curriculum to catch up with industry needs. Subjects could include cybersecurity, the space industry, ‘industry 4.0’ - the fourth industrial revolution covering artificial intelligence, advanced manufacturing, and the internet of things - and healthy ageing technology. Prof Westwell said “two or three” could be offered in any given year.
“I don’t know anybody else in the world who’s doing anything quite like this,” he said.
The SACE Board aims to embed, in assessable ways, “capabilities” such as entrepreneurial, critical and creative thinking, personal and social communication, ethical and intercultural understanding, literacy and numeracy, and ITC across all SACE subjects.Prof Westwell wants to tackle the review’s recommendation of “fewer but deeper” tasks. He said Year 12 students were “definitely over-assessed”.
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 448
