hibernation - REMOTE CONTROL Tinder Free, Apple iOS/Google Android Tinder’s newest feature could move another part of your life into a video chat window. The app is adding video calls to help users who’ve matched meet and chat at a safe social distance. The one-on-one calls can only happen when both users swipe right on one another, and if they’ve tapped the video icon to get started. As a safety measure, video daters are also asked to rate the behaviour of their mate after a call ends.
RememBear: Password Manager $US3/month, Apple iOS/Google Android Amid a spike in cyber attacks, it’s a great time to secure your gadgets with fresh and complicated passwords. This Canadian password-managing app has several things going for it: it’s adorably bear-themed, it doesn’t cost a lot, it syncs passwords across your devices, and it’s easy to use. RememBear is also compatible with different operating systems and can be unlocked with a fingerprint or face scan.
PictureThis — Plant Identifier Free, Apple iOS/Google Android If your version of getting outside again involves gardening, this app could solve problems and save (plant) lives. The best feature of PictureThis is its ability to identify plants, shrubs and flowers using artificial intelligence, even giving you interesting facts and tips when it does. This app, recently madeover, will also let you register your plants and remind you when they need watering.
Barre Workouts — Down Dog $7.99/m, Apple iOS/Google Android
Inspired by ballet, the workouts in this app look graceful … even if you’re starting from a much clumsier base. Down Dog delivers new workouts for users every day, with videos to show exactly how they should be done. There’s no equipment required, apart from a sturdy chair, and you can choose to target a specific part of your body if you want.
Flippy 2 — Smart Flashcards Free, Apple iOS Whether you’re tackling homeschooling or cramming for an important online trivia showdown, this app can be a handy study buddy. Flippy 2 lets users create their own digital flashcards, group them by subject, and receive revision reminders. You can also download flashcards created by others. Users can tap on the cards to reveal answers, swipe left to mark them as unknown, and swipe right if you’re confident of the answer. A unique way to learn.
CREDIT: With Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 391
