IF you want to emigrate to Australia, it seems you have got a better chance if you speak like a bogan, rather than someone who has mastered the Queen’s English.
English-born and Sydney-based solicitor Fiona Trime, 29, was shocked when the computer program relied on by the Federal Government to judge the language skills of visa applicants marked her down.
She speaks flawless and educated English but artificial intelligence marked her speech as merely “competent” – well below the “proficient” or “superior” grade she expected.
The poor result could mean the difference between being allowed to live and work in Australia or being sent home because only top applicants are invited to apply for a permanent visa based on factors including their age, education and how well they speak English. Ms Trime studied at the revered London School of Economics before moving to Australia in 2016, where she completed a Juris Doctor degree at Macquarie University.
Her boss at leading litigation firm Levitt Robinson, Stewart Levitt, has written a book of poetry and still thinks Ms Trime speaks better English than he does.
Yet when tested on her ability to repeat basic sentences such as “You can get taxis outside the station” or describe simple images such a family reading a picture book, Ms Trime scored only 64 per cent.
“I should be the perfect candidate to pass with flying colours,” she said. “If the com-puter cannot understand me for whatever reason, what chance do others have?” The Pearson test software that graded Ms Trime matches wave-forms of speech with a model response, without any human oversight.
Experts in the tests, run by firms including global education giants Pearson and International English Language Testing System, say being fluent is not necessarily enough to score highly.
Native English speakers are turning to tutors to help them pass a test in their own language. Sydney PTE Academy teacher Maxim Adams said: “You can’t stop speaking to gather your thoughts because the software marks you down if there are too many gaps ...
“You’re marked against native speakers, so speaking fast and in a colloquial style is useful. If you’re too stilted and over-enunciate, it can diminish your mark.” Asked how someone from England could score poorly, Pearson said it could be down to nerves. It said tests were scored with “exceptionally high accuracy and impartiality”.
The Home Affairs Department encouraged visa applicants to shop around in its five accepted testing firms to “choose the most appropriate test for their circumstances”.
GET YOUR NEWS FIRST, GET IT FAST Download our app
CREDIT: JACK MORPHET
Word count: 432
