Absolutely! As long as you go into it with the right mindset, say the experts. Follow our guide to using online dating apps
Single, 50-plus and ready to mingle? You’re in good company – there are about 2.3 million single Aussies over the age of 50.
And it seems they’ve embraced online dating, with new research showing that, on average, this age group spends 103 minutes each week looking for love online.
Perhaps even more surprising is that older Australians have really embraced this new dating trend, with a recent YouGov poll finding that 75 per cent of baby boomers are comfortable admitting to meeting someone online, as opposed to just 44 per cent of millennials.
So how should later daters approach apps like Tinder and Bumble? With a sense of fun and a ‘yes’ attitude, says relationship expert Dr Nikki Goldstein.
“If you haven’t dated in a really long time, just take a chance and use some of these experiences as practice dating,” she says.
“Don’t feel that everyone has to meet some criteria, because what it really might take is some confidence-building in the dating world. It’s about saying: ‘I can go out on a first date; I can manage this whole money debate over who pays for what; and I survived my first hook-up.’ It means saying yes to more dates than saying no.” Tinder does have its drawbacks – the only age bracket above 50 is the vague ‘55+’ for one thing. And older women have criticised the platform for making them feel invisible as men their age tend to focus on meeting up with much younger women. Dr Goldstein says it’s important to do your research before signing up to a dating app.
“What are your intentions? If you just want a random hook-up, there’s an app for that [for more on casual flings, turn to page 16].
However, if you’re looking for a more serious, mature relationship, there’s an app for that, too.” We’ve done some research to get you started...
3 dating apps for over-50s 1. Lumen (free, in-app purchases from $9.99) Promises both fun and security. The app uses artificial intelligence to verify the age of users (minimum age is 50), as well as clever rules to prevent spamming and harassment.
2. SilverSingles (free to $49.95 for 12 months) More of a matchmaking site for over-50s than a hook-up app, but very well regarded. Users complete a 30-minute personality questionnaire before being sent possible matches.
3. RSVP ($14 to $56/month) One of the first online dating sites in Australia, this one is now very popular with mid-lifers. The majority of users are older than 35 and looking for a serious relationship.
ADDITIONAL WORDS: LYNNE TESTONI & LIZ GRAHAM
Word count: 457
