THE nation is underestimating just how quickly automation and robotic technology will sweep through and up-end the workplace, the chief executive of Telstra has warned.
Andy Penn says the new 5G network will deliver far more than just a faster smartphone and the change Uber has brought to the taxi industry and Airbnb to the hotel sector is “just the beginning” of a deep shake-up in how people live, work and play.
“They (Uber and Airbnb) are merely the canaries in the coal mine of disruption,” Mr Penn told the National Press Club yesterday.
“We may feel like we are already in a world of incredible change. “However, we are rapidly approaching a tidal wave of technology innovation where the rate of change will never be as slow again as it is today.” Mr Penn said the 5G mobile network, along with cloud computing and artificial intelligence, would drive the rollout of automation and robotic technology on a massive scale.
Telstra launched 5G two months ago.
It is also in the process of cutting 8000 jobs by 2022 and has warned changing technology means more roles could go after that date.
Mr Penn said 5G’s low latency – the delay between a command being given and the response – was a key feature that made if significantly different from what had come before it. “While latency can be slightly annoying when you are streaming a video or waiting for a web page to load, it is mission critical in many applications in automation and robotics,” he said.
“It is increasingly difficult to describe the sheer scale and implications of the changes digital technologies are driving in Australia and across the globe.” The head of the nation’s biggest telco continued his assault on the government agency behind the national broadband network, saying the prices it charged retailers such as Telstra to resell broadband packages meant they were not making any money from them.
This, said Mr Penn, would stop telcos from investing in the next generation of telecommunications technologies if left unchecked, he said.
A wide range of technologies were needed to fill the exploding demand for data, he said. “It is important the economic structure of our industry does not create an unnatural bias towards one form of telecommunications technology over another,” he said.
Mr Penn said 5G would not render the NBN redundant. But he warned telcos would look to bypass it with other technologies if they could not make money from it – a development that could easily undermine the profitability of the $51 billion national infrastructure project. “While … 5G is not going to replace the NBN, it does present the opportunity for many customers to be switched to mobile,” Mr Penn said.
“This would be incredibly damaging for the NBN and would have the effect of putting further upward pressure on wholesale prices, thus compounding the problem.” A fierce push by Mr Penn on the NBN wholesale pricing drew fire from NBN Co boss Stephen Rue, who has argued its prices in part reflected the $2 billion it would pay to Telstra this year.Those payments, made to access Telstra’s ducts and infrastructure, would consume up to 20 per cent of the NBN’s revenue in coming years, Mr Rue said.
CREDIT: JOHN DAGGE
Word count: 547
