GADGET GURU Dyson V11 Outsize $1299, dyson.com.au In an age where vacuum cleaners can be programmed to clean your floors when you’re not even home, it takes a lot to win attention.
But there is so much technology – and so many sensors – packed into Dyson’s latest stick vacuum that it’s worth a second look.
The V11 Outsize certainly does what a vacuum should – it sucks and promises to do so more powerfully and effectively than others of its kind.
But arguably the biggest advantage of this Dyson invention is the tech it uses to automatically adapt to different floor types.
A Dynamic Load Sensor checks resistance in the vacuum’s brush 360 times a second and determines what type of floor it’s cleaning. The result is enough suction on carpet to get the crumbs out and a clean tiled or wood floor without as much unneccessary noise.
The V11 also features a larger battery for up to an hour’s use, a much bigger dirt compartment, an LCD display for modes and battery life, and a total of seven vacuum heads for almost every conceivable use.    — JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
MOTOROLA G8 $329, motorola.com.au Motorola’s latest budget-friendly smartphone offers a unique addition that you wouldn’t expect for less than $400.
This phone comes with three rear camera lenses and an imagine engine powered by artificial intelligence to capture not only wide-angle shots but extreme close-ups (you’ll never look at your keyboard in the same way).
The 6.4-inch device also packs in a rear fingerprint sensor, headphone jack, and comes with new gestures to make up for not having a home button.
— JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
CLASSIC ALBUM BLOOD ON THE TRACKS Bob Dylan (1975) How do you choose a Bob Dylan record for a “classic albums” column when, without exaggeration, there are a dozen that easily fit the description?
The Freewheelin’ Bob Dylan, The Times They Are a-Changin’, Highway 61 Revisited, Blonde on Blonde, Desire, Time out of Mind – most singers would retire happy if they released just one album half as good as any of these.
So, yeah. Tough job. However, I can’t go past the one Dylan album that I come back to time and time again – 1975’s Blood on the Tracks.
The record wasn’t exactly warmly received on its release, with reviewers particularly scathing about the “shoddy” and “trashy” instrumentation, but with time it came to be viewed as a classic, a perfect example of the confessional album.
Widely thought to be a reaction to Dylan’s failing relationship with his wife Sara, Blood on the Tracks opens with bona fide rambling classic in Tangled Up in Blue, then rolls into longing love songs Simple Twist of Fate and You’re a Big Girl Now.
Then, just when you’ve been lulled into a false sense of calm, Dylan drops one of his most bitter and resentful tracks ever – Idiot Wind. “Idiot wind”, he sings, “Blowing every time you move your mouth”. Ouch!
Meet Me In The Morning is a bluesy gem, Shelter from the Storm is, well, close to perfect, and Buckets of Rain, with its slinky, looping guitar run and half-asleep vocal is a flawless full stop. A diamond in a catalogue overflowing with gems.     — NATHAN DAVIES
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON NATHAN DAVIES
Word count: 548
