THE man who killed Michelle Stephanie Foster had the “bizarre, grandiose and persecutory” belief that he lived in a simulation and she was an “artificial intelligence”, it has been revealed.
The Supreme Court yesterday found Jayden Tayne Lowah not guilty of murdering Ms Foster – outside the Colonnades Shopping Centre in 2018 – because he was mentally incompetent due to “entrenched” schizophrenia.
CONTINUED PAGE 4 Victim’s mum: System failed killer and my girl FROM PAGE 1 It heard evidence that Lowah, 22, believed killing the mother of two would free him from “mind control” and reunite him with his “original parents” on another planet.
It also heard Lowah’s illness had been repeatedly misdiagnosed and wrongly blamed on drugs since he was 15, resulting in “lost opportunities” to help him and prevent Ms Foster’s death.
Those opportunities came after Lowah tried to kill his father as a teenager and when he attacked two strangers “to prevent the world descending into chaos” just six weeks before killing Ms Foster.
After that incident, the court heard, Lowah warned doctors he was feeling homicidal, yet he was trusted to keep voluntarily taking his antipsychotic medication.
Outside court, Ms Foster’s mother Andrea said Lowah had “fallen through the cracks” of the state’s mental-health system.
“He told mental-health workers he was going to kill,” she said. “If that was not a red flag, what is?” “When does the system see he’s been like this since he was 15, that he wanted to kill his father, that he was going to kill somebody?
“Since this man was a child, he’s needed help but nobody gave it and so he killed … someone didn’t do their job, and my child suffered because of that.” In October 2018, Lowah attacked Ms Foster outside the shopping centre at Noarlunga, inflicting severe head injuries by striking her head on to a concrete path.
She was found lying facedown in a pool of blood by a cyclist who tried to save her life, while Lowah looked on saying “I did that”.
Yesterday, prosecutor Carmen Matteo extensively quoted two expert reports outlining Lowah’s long history of mental illness and violent offending.
She said experts agreed he was paranoid and “predisposed to extreme anger”. He was convinced he was the “chosen one”, and was being persecuted by the simulation’s architects.
While he had planned to kill either himself or another person to “end the simulation”, she said, his interactions with Ms Foster were amicable at first. That meant the decision to kill her was likely spontaneous.
Justice Sam Doyle remanded Lowah in secure mental-health detention custody until August, when he will impose a limiting term. That term is a period under mental-health supervision equal to a prison sentence. Lowah’s term, under state law, will be for life.
CREDIT: SEAN FEWSTER
Word count: 467
