He really is back! But this time around Arnold Schwarzenegger has put the old team together again for another outing as the Terminator, writes James Wigney THE Terminator movies have always painted a bleak picture of the future of humanity.
In the five movies starting with director James Cameron’s original 1984 breakout hit about a cyborg assassin sent back in time, the human race has faced annihilation again and again at the hands of sentient machines and nuclear Armageddon.
That ever-repeating scenario would be enough to make anyone doubt our survival, but veteran Hollywood superstar, Arnold Schwarzenegger, who has played the killer machine in different guises in all but one of the Terminator films, takes a different view.
“I think we have a good chance of making it,” says Schwarzenegger in his unmistakeable Austrian accented tones, talking up Dark Fate, the sixth film in the franchise and the first to reunite him with his long-time friend Cameron and original star Linda Hamilton, inset above, since the worldwide smash Judgment Day in 1991. Schwarzenegger has been the one constant for the Terminator movies – even the one he couldn’t appear in while he was Governor of California featured his digital likeness.
The first film catapulted him from a bodybuilder with acting aspirations into a superstar, and kicked off a career that saw him become one of the richest and most powerful figures in Hollywood, which he then parlayed into a political career.
His tenure as a Republican in charge of the Golden State saw him take charge of the world’s fifth largest economy and was characterised by environmental initiatives such as the nation’s first cap on greenhouse gas emissions. A fierce critic of the current occupant of the White House, Schwarzenegger has been outspoken about climate change and clean energy ever since and believes public attitudes will shift.
“I am a very optimistic person so I see us turning and getting control over the environmental situation,” Schwarzenegger says.
“I think that people will come to their senses eventually and I think the key thing is that we keep talking about it . It’s no different than the fitness movement. Forty years ago everyone said there will never be gymnasiums all over the place and now they have them everywhere.” While it’s widely acknowledged that the first two Terminator films are among the best sci-fi action films ever made, the quality dropped off markedly after creator Cameron checked out, going on to direct Titanic and then Avatar, both of which became the highest grossing films ever. Cameron has been politely dismissive of Rise of the Machines (2003), Salvation (2009) and Genisys (2015), saying : “I don’t have a lot of respect for the films that were made later”.
Schwarzenegger, however, says he’s proud of them all, although admits there is something special about getting the original team back together.
“I think that Jim Cameron has approached it that way and maybe Linda Hamilton has approached it that way but I don’t,” he says, when asked if he pretended the later sequels didn’t exist for the purposes of continuity on Dark Fate.
“I know that I made Terminator 3 and 5 – I didn’t make 4 because I was Governor then – so I don’t pretend that I didn’t.
“I enjoyed making those but I have to say it’s much better when you have Jim Cameron and Linda involved. It really makes this one of the original Terminators.
“It’s like putting Terminator 1 and 2 in to a blender and mixed it up and what came out is Terminator 6.” Schwarzenegger’s version of the relentless steel skeleton wrapped in flesh in Dark Fate is once again slightly different, having lived a quiet life as a human for decades and making his own decisions rather than receiving programmed orders from his artificial intelligence overlords from the future.
“He kind of struggles with being half-machine and half-human because up until now I have played half-machine, half-human physically but not mentally. This is the first time we see him struggling mentally with what that means.” Underneath the beard and wrinkles however, lurks the same efficient machine with super strength and endurance, meaning that the now 72-year-old Schwarzenegger had to move and act as he did more than three decades ago.
No problem, says the still-shredded fitness freak.
“I can do my stunts still and I can do the physical stuff still because I train every day and stay physically fit and then when I do the stunts I prepare myself,” he says.
There are limits though, even for nearly unkillable Terminators. “It was always the rule that whatever I can do I will do and whatever is dangerous to do because it can get you killed, then you let the stunt guys do it.”SEE: TERMINATOR: DARK FATE, OPENS TODAY
CREDIT: James Wigney
Word count: 807
