What a racquet ON tennis tantrums, it seems petty penalties such as fining an offender one or two points for behavioural offences miserably fail to address the problem.
If a player belts his or her racquet on the court in a tantrum, why not make the offender play, say, the next three games using only the racquet he or she smashed?
I will leave it to your regular consultant/correspondent Wayne Nicholls to advise on remedies for infringements such as foul language, abusing umpires, etc. And, perhaps most of all, appropriate muzzles for serial screaming and grunting players.
DAVID FARROW, Plympton Your local ABC PERHAPS Georgina Downer might reflect on the fact that if the Liberal Government hadn’t cut funding from the ABC (“Downer avoids banana peel, The Advertiser, yesterday), more programs might have been produced in SA.
ROBYN KOSMIDER, Belair Bananas outfit WHAT a joke from your reader who claimed GetUp! is “not about left-wing politics but application of common sense” (The Advertiser, yesterday).
This leftist organisation dressed in Bananas in Pyjamas clothes is about as impartial as the ABC.
BRUCE BURFORD, Adelaide Nursing praise I WONDER how many people realise the stress and strain the average nurse goes under every day at work.
I have just come out of Flinders Medical Centre. The day I left, a nurse came on duty at 7am. She had left at 9.30pm the night before, and was still smiling and helpful to all of her patients. She was not an isolated case – the great majority of these wonderful people work where even a minor mistake could cost a patient’s life.
They are overworked and underpaid, but our lazy and useless politicians want to cut their numbers to save money.
How about we go the other way. Cut the number of politicians, and their pay, and improve what is really needed.
RAYMOND KEITH WILSON, Morphett Vale Overseas scams REGARDING the letter “Beware scams” (The Advertiser, 5/1/19), I was fed up with these calls too, until I was told to ring my phone provider (Telstra in my case) and ask to have all overseas calls blocked.
Since then, not one of these scumbags has rung. The only problem is if you have relatives or friends who call from overseas and you can’t do this.
LYN SIMMONDS, Salisbury Plain GP diagnosis IT’S good that artificial intelligence can help doctors (“Taking a selfie for the doctor”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
It’s tough being a GP because there are thousands of diseases. It took 57 years for my connective-tissue disorder to be diagnosed – and I was a GP. Doctors do their best and can only do so much. I advise patients to get second or more opinions and never give up. GPs must assume it’s a physical illness until proven otherwise. The labels “psycho-somatic” and “malingerer” should be used with caution.
ARTHUR GIANNOPOULOS, Mitcham Making the grade I REFER to the opinion piece by Caleb Bond about teachers’ lieracy and numeracy (The Advertiser, yesterday).
The problem begins at the top with university lecturers not teaching correct English, so how are graduates able to teach English to their school students?
On what foundations are these learned lecturers basing their knowledge, which gives them the ability to teach our new school leavers correctly?
We need to be using the “teaching English as a second language” curriculum to teach our children, not just the international students, whose first language is not English. Why should our own children miss out on learning English correctly? The argument by teachers, and one principal with whom I spoke, is that the English is too correct. Yet international students are achieving high marks in English and Australian students are not. One example of poor language use is a TV commercial that says “there ‘is’ no crawlies”. This is becoming so prevalent in our speech. “Is” is singular, “are” is plural – “There are no crawlies.” LYNETTE UNDERDOWN, Hillcrest Dirty diesel SO those with diesel-fuelled vehicles are paying more than those who use unleaded petrol (The Advertiser, yesterday).
Diesel fuel has been referred to as “dirty diesel” because its emissions are worse than unleaded.
They also emit more particulates, inhaled by self-styled health fanatics who jog through city streets every day apparently unaware they are breathing them in.
Therefore isn’t it entirely appropriate that people who buy diesel-fuelled vehicles pay more for the damage they are doing to the environment?
ROBERT McCORMICK, Bridgewater Merger dream TIM Lloyd’s opinion piece (The Advertiser, 7/1/19) calling for a sea-change by joining SA and the Northern Territory brought a smile to my face.
My first response was The Castle quote “Tell him he’s dreaming”. We have seen how poorly and inefficiently SA and NT have been run. Neither has politicians of sufficient calibre to make a success of any union.
No current state or federal politician, male or female, has the vision required to lead this country to its full potential.
We will continue to muddle along in our mediocrity. Sadly.MICHAEL PRUS, Fairview Park
Word count: 835
