Think of the kids IT appears we may soon be subjected to a national election. So I would like to make a plea on behalf of some defenceless members of society.
I refer, of course, to people in hospital beds, young children in kindergartens or primary schools and residents of nursing homes.
In the past, many such folk have been subjected to clearly uncomfortable visits by aspiring politicians.
They are unable to run away or defend themselves. A swarm of media crews often invade their privacy, too.
This practice must be banned or, at the very least, the victims given an adult-size baseball bat for defence, granted the right to silence and immunity from prosecution.
PAUL BUXTON, Westbourne Park The non-surplus IT’S astonishing that the Prime Minister and his Treasurer keep going on about being “back in the black” when the truth is that come June, the Budget will still be $4.16 billion in deficit.
There will need to be some very optimistic projections come to fruition for the Budget to show a tiny surplus in June 2020.
CHRIS DALAS, Kilkenny GetUp! Labor ties WHILE the electoral commission found that GetUp! was not a political party, it should have found that it did indirectly receive funds from Labor through the Australian Workers’ Union when Bill Shorten was its leader.
Funding may well be arranged in such a way that it appears to come from many small donors but the reality is that how those funds are used is decided by people with strong links to the Labor Party.
Directly or indirectly, Labor is providing GetUp! with access to contact information intended to enable political parties to specifically target electorates such as Boothby.
While the information may not be confidential in itself, Labor is making it easy for GetUp! to do the work of campaigning for the party.
As such, GetUp! needs to be considered a branch of the ALP and treated accordingly.
K.M. GUNN,Lower Mitcham Money talks NO wonder the majority have no faith in governments when you hear stories about a Chinese billionaire seeking a passport for himself and a quick citizenship deal for his wife and daughter, via Peter Dutton’s approval.
Where has trust and integrity gone?
Nothing’s changed over the centuries.
The rich can buy anyone or anything, while the lower echelons of humanity struggle to have faith in the powers to be.
E. LITTLE, Seaford Rise Hail AI PROFESSOR Anton van den Hengel is right to urge Australia to embrace artificial intelligence (The Advertiser, yesterday).
Heaven knows, we’re pretty short of the natural thing.
MARIS DABARS, Murray Bridge Adani’s clean coal IF the world’s biggest smelters of all the various ores that Australia exports cannot access the high-grade, low-emission black coal from the Adani mine, they will source it from countries selling the poorer-quality, high-polluting brown coal from any of a number of countries that are desperate to sell it.
Wind and solar are not reliable enough to provide consistent, uninterupted power. Only nuclear or coal can.
These people, mainly the Greens, want us all to go back to walking or riding a bike everywhere, weaving baskets and eating lentils.
Unfortunately, there are enough people who are unable to think for themselves: young, idealist, but completely naive.
MICHAEL PRUS,Fairview Park Bank rip-offs A GREAT article about banks ripping people off on currency exchange (“The great currency conversion gouge”, The Advertiser, 8/4/19).
I’m surprised that the other fees charged were not discussed, such as those for ATMs, account-keeping, direct debit, late-payment, dishonoured cheques, coin-counting, loan applications, monthly administration and so on.
There is probably a fee charged for charging all of the bank fees. Someone once told me that the way to get $1 million in the bank was to deposit $2 million and wait a couple of years.
PHILIP MATTHEWS, Hallett Cove No help for Hutt St ONCE again, Hutt Street Traders’ and Residents’ Association spokesman Wayne Copely chooses to dispute and distort SAPOL statistics of reported crime in the southeast corner of the CBD (“Hutt St traders, residents dispute police call-out figures”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
I suggest that he represents a small but very vocal group concerned more with the value of their investments than the well-being of the Hutt St Centre and its provision of essential services to men and women experiencing homelessness.
A recent neighbourhood day event gave many people a chance to learn about the great work being done by the centre and to be reassured that their plans for the future were limited to enhancements of the services they offer to their clients and to enable them to better manage their behaviour in the surrounding neighbourhood.
It is a pity that a series of beat-ups promoted by vested interests aided and abetted by a compliant media are being reignited by a spokesperson of the Hutt Street Traders’ and Residents’ Association.
How does this help the centre? How does it build on the strength of the traders? And how does it promote the many attributes of living in the CBD?DAVID PLUMRIDGE AM, Adelaide
Word count: 842
