GADGET GURU Mario LEGO Starter Course $90, lego.com Not only is this a crossover between Nintendo and LEGO, but a crossover between LEGO and technology.
The famous plumber in this 231-piece set comes with animated eyes, a Bluetooth connection, and a tiny display on his chest that will let you know when you’ve collected a gold coin or hit a mystery box.
The Mario figure connects quickly to an app, where you’ll also find instructions on how to construct the course and get him spinning, jumping, and potentially falling over with sound effects.
— JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Google Pixel 4a $599, store.google.com Mid-range smartphones are enjoying a moment in 2020, luring buyers with advanced features stolen from pricier phones while demanding hundreds of dollars less.
And, in that context, Google might have been smart to delay the Pixel 4a launch until more people were ready or it.
This highly anticipated budget Android gadget is only pocket-sized at 5.8 inches and, unlike many of its ilk, it only features one 12-megapixel camera on its back panel. But it makes up for the latter with artificial intelligence and smart camera modes.
Using this technology, the Pixel 4a cannot only snap portrait-style images but pictures with a high dynamic range for colours that pop in challenging light, and photographs in the darkest of environments, like astrophotography.
This phone also features a rear fingerprint sensor, fast charging, a standard headphone jack, and access to handy Google software additions like Live Caption for videos. It only comes in one size and one colour, however, and its screen is not of the same calibre of its expensive rivals.
— JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
CLASSIC ALBUM THRILLER Michael Jackson (1982) The King of Pop’s 1979 LP Off The Wall was a radical departure from his Motown sound, delving into funk, R&B and, most notably, disco.
It yielded the hit singles Don’t Stop ‘Til You Get Enough and Rock With You, and proved to be something of a coming of age for Michael Jackson, who was keen to shake off his reputation as a “child star” and emerge from the shadow of his famous family. Buoyed by the record’s success, Jackson doubled down on its follow-up, Thriller.
Inspired by Tchaikovsky’s The Nutcracker Suite, of all things, the singer set out to make an album where “every song was a killer”. Most people agree that he succeeded, and their love of Thriller ensured that it became the biggest-selling LP of all time.
Teaming up with Off The Wall producer Quincy Jones, Jackson laid down a record that produced an astounding number of hits, with The Girl Is Mine, Billie Jean, Beat It, Wanna Be Startin’ Somethin’, Human Nature, P.Y.T. and Thriller all going top 10, with Beat It and Billie Jean going to the coveted number one spot.
But this was a record bigger than the sum of its parts. It was a record that changed pop music forever, ushering in everything from the moonwalk to the emergence of the music video clip as a serious art form.
The 13-minute long horror-style clip for Thriller, in particular, stunned audiences with its Hollywood-like production values. This wasn’t the usual “mime for the cameras” pop music video clip.
And it’s Thriller that ushers in the most exciting section of the album, with the song rolling in to Beat It – featuring the unrivalled guitar skills of Eddie Van Halen – and then the close-to-perfect dance funk track Billie Jean.
Jackson went on to make more great records before his untimely death in 2009 – perhaps most noticeably 1987’s Bad – but Thriller remains his defining work.
— NATHAN DAVIES podcast WIND OF CHANGE Spotify or other podcast providers Not for a second do I rate myself as a music guru, but when the first few bars of Wind of Change comes on, I start nodding my head and tapping my feet. Yeah, I remember this song. It was huge.
The power ballad from the German band the Scorpions was all the rage in the early 1990s. “I follow the Moskva … Down to Gorky Park … Listening to the wind of change.” It was popular in Australia, but off the charts in Eastern Europe, where it became an anthem for social revolution in the wake of the fall of the Berlin Wall and the imminent collapse of the Soviet Union.
Thirty years later, Wind of Change is back in the spotlight as the subject of one of the most popular and captivating podcasts of 2020. Over eight episodes, journalist Patrick Radden Keefe investigates a rumour that the song wasn’t written by the Scorpions at all; rather, it was a product of propaganda written by an American Central Intelligence Agency with a goal of selling democracy behind the Iron Curtain. It’s a fascinating tale told with wit and verve, and featuring countless interviews with ageing rock stars, retired CIA operatives and convicted drug barons. Well worth a listen. — PAUL ASHENDEN
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON NATHAN DAVIES PAUL ASHENDEN
Word count: 834
