MOST sensible Australians probably don’t trust either side of politics to establish a policy on welfare that works for all Australians.
And you can’t blame them.
Too often debate around welfare recipients is dominated by unhelpful stereotypes.
One side argues “dole bludgers should get off their backsides” and go get a job. The other side argues there are simply not enough jobs in parts of Australia to keep everyone employed.
The reality is both sides are right.
One side doesn’t want to admit there are young Australians sitting in subsidised housing, preferring to eke out an existence devoid of gainful employment. The other side doesn’t want to admit the real prospect for many Australians is that they can lose their job for a raft of reasons beyond their control and then find it terribly difficult to find another one.
This week, federal Opposition spokeswoman on employment Terri Butler kickstarted a conversation about welfare reforms in Australia.
Ms Butler hinted at a Shorten-led government revamping the system by not punishing jobseekers, ditching the need for unemployed people to apply for 20 jobs a month and ­redesigning Work for the Dole.
The Coalition quickly seized on the comments, suggesting Labor had gone soft on welfare recipients and pointing to figures that showed the cost of welfare in Australia was declining.
Former prime minister Tony Abbott took to Twitter.
“People on unemployment benefits are supposed to be looking for work,” he tweeted.
“Applying for one job a day is hardly unreasonable. These proposed changes show Labor is now the welfare class party, not the working class one.” In short, Shorten and co. are going to be labelled as soft on bludgers. But many in party ranks and the social-services sector believe the Labor leader squibbed it in Adelaide late last year when he didn’t use the national conference to announce a guaranteed rise in Newstart.
And locally, both the business and social services sectors see some merit in Butler’s proposal.
Business SA’s senior policy adviser Estha van der Linden supports a reduction in the number of jobs that the unemployed are forced to apply for.
She argues the emphasis should be on jobseekers applying for roles applicable to their skillset, not just a mandatory number of jobs each month.
“We know it wastes their time and it wastes the prospective employer’s time,” Ms van der Linden said.
“We’ve heard from a number of employers who are swamped with applications for roles where candidates aren’t suitable and it can be frustrating and time consuming for them.” Business SA has also raised concerns with the Jobactive system set up to link jobseekers with jobs.
“Business SA thinks there should be better checks and balances to ensure jobseekers are referred for jobs which they’re qualified for or suited to,” Ms van der Linden said.
“There’s no point referring someone for a senior role if they don’t have management experience, or don’t have adequate qualifications, just to tick a box.” SACOSS senior policy officer Greg Ogle said the system was punitive instead of supporting people back into work.
“It almost stigmatises and punishes jobseekers by putting a raft of obligations on them,” he said. “The obligations do not address the issues that stop people getting work.” As with Business SA, SACOSS is critical of the job agencies tasked with getting unemployed people into work.
“A lot of the people we speak to say the job providers are not helping people into work but when they find work themselves the job providers want to claim that and get the payment for services they frankly have not provided,” Mr Ogle said.
State Employment Minister Kelly O’Dwyer last month released a review of ­employment services that also recommended moving away from a “punitive” system.
The report revealed that in 2007, almost one in five employers said they used the system. But last year, only 4 per cent did.
Ms O’Dwyer has also pointed to international evidence that shows the effectiveness of compliance penalties at increasing workforce participation, both as a deterrent for those who are not penalised and for changing the behaviour of those who are penalised.
In Australia, there was an increase in attendance from 65 per cent in 2013-14 to 87 per cent in 2015-16 following changes in 2015 that meant job seekers’ payments were temporarily withheld until they attended a reconnection appointment.
From July laast year, a compliance framework was introduced that targets penalties for those who are persistently and deliberately non-compliant.
Ms O’Dwyer believes early evidence is that the targeted compliance framework has significantly reduced unnecessary penalties while increasing attendance.
The conflicting positions highlight the difficulty in undertaking welfare reform.
But more importantly, they show the issue needs an evidence-based response devoid of political grandstanding.
What Australia needs is long-term plan that is proactive but still flexible enough to adapt to change.
A plan that considers the long-term impact of artificial intelligence on the workforce.
A plan that considers how older Australians can transition from one career to the next.
A plan that ensures people with a disability are recognised for their abilities and given employment.
A plan that ensures older Australians are cared for by a workforce that is itself earning enough money to remain in the industry.And a plan that can achieve what all reasonable Australians want – a transition from welfare to work for as many as possible.
CREDIT: MATT SMITH
Word count: 899
