While most female actors are benched soon after their age clicks over 45, Hollywood remains committed to casting – usually in key roles – many men in their 70s or more, writes Penelope Debelle No one sets out to be ageist but what exactly is behind the recent run of blockbuster movies starring men who are not just elderly but ancient? Unlike women who, leaving aside royalty like Meryl Streep or Helen Mirren, start losing their bankability after 45, Hollywood producers seem very relaxed about putting male stars forward as actors audiences want to watch.
The latest in a long line of old man movies is Paul Hogan’s The Very Excellent Mr Dundee, which was due to be released in April but has been held over because of the coronavirus pandemic. Let’s not be cruel but the Byron Bay sun hasn’t been kind to the loveable Hoges, whose blond machismo and larrikinism made him a superstar. But Crocodile Dundee was 34 years ago, followed two years later by Crocodile Dundee II. Not even surgical uplifts and impeccable veneers can alter the fact that Hoges is now 80 years old.
The Very Excellent Mr Dundee is retreading Crocodile Dundee grounds, only this time he is about to be knighted and has to stay out of trouble before the event. “I’m not really Crocodile Dundee you know – just a character I play in a movie,” he says at one point. It’s a star-studded cast of favourites that includes Olivia Newton-John, Chevy Chase, Luke Hemsworth and John Cleese, and, who knows, maybe there are enough Hoges fans still out there to make their effort worthwhile.
Certainly the artistic success of The Irishman justified using Robert De Niro and Al Pacino as the leads in the film adaptation of I Heard You Paint Houses, the biography of mob hitman Frank Sheeran (De Niro) who claims to have murdered corrupt union leader Jimmy Hoffa (Pacino), with the brilliant Joe Pesci returning to the screen as a mobster head.
Instead of using younger actors then switching to older, the film pioneered special effects that de-aged the main characters, in De Niro’s case taking him from his early 20s to 80. The vexed question of how to make old men young again relied on artificial intelligence software and motion capture technology, which filmed the men as they were, then made them young.
But age is a subtle thing with many forms and there is more to turning back time than lifting the sag and cleaning up the blotches; there is something intrinsic in facial expressions and body movements that define age just as much as hair colour.
The results were clever; their eyes were brightened and everything was smooth and yet you couldn’t quite disguise De Niro’s lack of agility as he stepped gingerly over stones to throw a gun into the sea. A younger man would have run.
But the film was good – so good it was a presumed frontrunner for best picture after Netflix qualified it for an Oscar by giving it limited theatre screenings before its streaming release. Until Parasite came along, with its hot cast of young Koreans.
Harrison Ford is another one who is not ready to leave behind the limelight. Having appeared in smaller films for a decade, the relaunch in 2015 of Star Wars with Episode VII: The ForceAwakens was followed two years later by an iconic appearance with Ryan Gosling in Blade Runner 2049, reprising Ridley Scott’s cyberpunk classic Blade Runner from 1982, which starred young Ford as a burnt-out cop hunting down rebel replicants. In both cases, and with last year’s Star Wars Episode IX: The Rise of Skywalker, Ford’s inclusion was a nostalgic delight for fans.
But his casting in The Call of the Wild as John Thornton, the kindly frontier man living in the freezing Klondike region of the Yukon in Canada, turned a classic into another old man movie when a younger man might have saved it. An old man and a fake dog weren’t quite what author Jack London would have dreamt of for his story about a pampered dog who is stolen and mistreated, answering the call of the wild until he is saved by Thornton and learns how to trust again. The CGI dog already gave the film a hollow look, which was worsened by the efforts made to make Ford look younger.
There was a time when critics took to Roger Moore for playing James Bond in Octopussy with a much younger love interest (Swedish model Maud Adams) because he was too old for the part, but looking back he was only 57. Tom Cruise is almost 60 and planning his next round of Mission: Impossible.
Liam Neeson has been doing old man movies with creaky stunts for some time. He was 56 when he made the first of the Taken franchise and that was 12 years ago. He has since been in Star Wars: Episode IX and last year’s Men In Black: International.
There is no reason at all why older actors can’t star in films, when it’s appropriate. The Irishman spanned a huge range of time, which gave the idea veracity, but the idea of Hoges trying to revive the warmth and affection we had for his younger self seems a forlorn hope, just as casting a creaky Harrison Ford as a man living off the land seems an unnecessary stretch.
As for the women, Julianne Moore, one of the best of her generation, has already made a film about Alzheimer’s, Still Alice. She starred as a linguistics professor diagnosed with the disease not long after her 50th birthday. It was a brilliant exploration of the desolation that comes with losing yourself, while you are still aware of it, and her bravery as an actor was rewarded with critical acclaim and a healthy box office. It’s just a pity there aren’t more women like her who – unlike Jane Fonda, size zero and looking prone to breakage in the heavy-handed comedy series Grace and Frankie – carry their stories along with them.
CREDIT: Penelope Debelle
Word count: 1019
