It’s now easier than ever to check your health at home, but what risks come with convenience?
If you could discover whether you’re one of the 10 per cent of people who can expect to live a little longer than most, would you want to know? There’s no invasive test — you can do it yourself at home send it off to a lab and wait to find out if you’re genetically blessed to enjoy a longer life. Welcome to the world of home health testing.
This saliva test, developed by scientists at the University of Edinburgh, looks at a dozen parts of the human genome that impact lifespan, including five genome areas that haven’t been tested before. When it becomes available, the test is expected to cost around $300.
Scan the shelves of your local pharmacy or Google ‘home health tests’ and you’ll be swamped by DIY kits that promise to diagnose everything from pre-diabetes to a sexually transmitted infection. Others check the state of your thyroid health or use your DNA to deliver a tailored diet and exercise plan. Then there are the smartphone apps that analyse your symptoms to give you a health diagnosis. And you can expect plenty more to come, with the global DIY health-test market estimated to reach $500 million by 2020.
But how effective and accurate are these tests, and should you be relying on them to discover the truth about the state of your health?
“The benefits of the home health tests are that people may be more likely to do them,” says Dr Harry Nespolon, the president of the Royal Australian College of General Practitioners.
“Many people are still reluctant to go to their GP for a smear test or cervical sampling, or to do a poo test to check for bowel cancer. If someone is more likely to do these kinds of tests at home, that’s better than not being tested at all.” But there are inevitable drawbacks. Associate Professor Neale Cohen, the director of Clinical Diabetes at the Baker Heart & Diabetes Institute, says accuracy is a key consideration. “Doing tests at home is convenient — as long as they’re accurate and properly accredited. There are a lot of people making money out of these tests and they’re not all well conducted or well controlled. For example, there’s a risk you may be told you have diabetes when you don’t — or told you don’t have it when you do,” he warns.
And you’d still need to see a health professional, depending on the results. “You may end up having the test done again to make sure it was done correctly in the first place,” says Dr Nespolon. And when you receive the results of a home test, they may be difficult to interpret, which could cause unnecessary anxiety, he adds.
“Don’t underestimate the insurance side of this situation, either. Insurance companies ask if you’ve had genetic testing and if you’ve had some of these tests done, which may load your insurance policy. People need to think about why they’re doing these kinds of tests. They shouldn’t be done for ‘fun’ because once you receive results, that information can become hard to ignore.” Here, we ask the doctors for their opinions on some of the popular home health tests available to you ...
$500m The estimated value of the DIY health-test market by 2020 SOURCE: Kalorama Information
THE DNA-BASED FITNESS PROFILER FitnessGenes (from about $290, fitnessgenes.com) Now you can get your DNA profiled to have a personalised fitness and nutrition program created for you. Based on your DNA extracted from a saliva sample, experts create a plan of when and how you should work out and what foods you should eat for a healthy body and weight.
“I’d like to see the evidence behind this,” says Dr Nespolon. “Just because you have certain genes doesn’t mean you express those genes. I think you’d be better off seeing a dietitian and an exercise physiologist who may give you more incentive to do the hard work if you want to lose weight.”
THE DIABETES DETECTOR MyHealthTest ($35, myhealthtest.com) A finger-prick test that uses a blood sample to check your thyroid health or assesses your risk of pre-diabetes and diabetes.
“I wouldn’t recommend the thyroid test,” says Prof Cohen. “If you’re tired and think it’s because of an underactive thyroid, see a doctor because tiredness can relate to various medical conditions. Early detection is important for diabetes, though, which is a positive of this test, but you wouldn’t diagnose diabetes based on a single test. You’d need to be tested by your GP to confirm that.”
THE STI TEST iCare Multi STD Test Pack ($69.95, buystdtestkits.com) Check yourself for gonorrhoea, syphilis, chlamydia and hepatitis B with a simple DIY swab or a finger-prick blood sample. The sample is inserted into a test cartridge that displays results within minutes.
“These tests aren’t bad because essentially the answer is ‘yes’ or ‘no’. If people won’t go to a doctor, these tests are the next best thing,” says Dr Nespolon, who warns that it’s still possible to get a false negative, however.
THE NO-NEEDLE GLUCOSE MONITOR FreeStyle Libre ($92.50 for the Sensor, $95 for the Reader, freestylelibre.com.au) This system gives you a glucose reading without having to prick your finger. The small sensor applied to your upper arm stays in place for 14 days. You then use the reader to do a one-second scan over the sensor for results.
“We use this device for people with diabetes who take insulin and who would otherwise need to prick their finger four or five times a day,” says Prof Cohen. “It doesn’t have government funding so costs about $50 a week to use, but it’s great for keeping an eye on sugar levels.”
THE CERVICAL SCREENING SoloPap ($120, solopap.com.au) This kit tests for HPV and is a traditional Pap smear, too. You register the unique kit-identification number online, provide some basic health information and do the test using a cylinder-like speculum, which has a design that makes the process less intrusive. Then you mail the sample to a lab and the results are sent to your doctor.
“This is a legitimate way of testing for women who find the smear process too much,” says Dr Nespolon.
THE HEALTH DIAGNOSIS APP Ada app (free on the App Store and Google Play) This app was developed with more than 100 doctors and scientists. You tell Ada your symptoms, answer some questions and get a diagnosis.
“The National Health Service in the UK uses a similar app called Babylon Health,” says Dr Nespolon. “This is a step up from Google, but these kinds of apps tend to give you the worst-case scenario.“Artificial intelligence apps are still in the early stages of development and the diagnostic skills vary depending on the condition. You’re probably better off seeing your doctor.”
CREDIT: WORDS; SARAH MARINOS
Word count: 1153
