MICHELLE PERUGINI
Co-founder and CEO, Presagen
■ Made by Humans: The AI Condition(Ellen Broad) My Christmas reading list is focused on understanding the global biases in artificial intelligence (AI) development. Bias is a huge issue in the development of AI as the AI system is trained by humans who are inherently biased, and use data that contains bias.
There have been many examples where human bias, or bias in human data, has led to AI that is racist, sexist, or constrained to a biased subset of the population. This book explores a global perspective from AI experts about how to mitigate bias in AI, when humans are creating the AI and designing all of the rules and regulations governing its use.
■ Invisible Women: Data Bias in a World Designed for Men (Caroline Criado Perez) The second book talks about the global under-representation of women in data. This is a huge issue with creation of AI and raises many challenges around the bias of AI.
MATT KAY CEO, Beach Energy Man’s Search for Meaning (Viktor Frankl) It covers Frankl’s journey to find life’s purpose having been a prisoner at Auschwitz.
For a more lighthearted read, I just picked up a used copy of Michael Palin’s diary covering the Monty Python years (Diaries 1969-1979 –The Python Years) from the Oxfam Store on Hutt St; it’s a great place to load up on books.
TAMMY BARTON Founder, CEO, MyBudget Game Changers (Dave Asprey) This book was recommended to me by Paul Southgate, MyBudget’s head of people and performance. I enjoy listening to Dave Asprey’s Bulletproof podcast, so reading his latest book was a no-brainer. It outlines nearly 50 life hacks that Asprey has gathered from talking to more than 450 top performers on his podcast.
The book is a source of inspiration for anyone thinking about their life, wanting to take responsibility for their happiness, or interested in developing more powerful habits.
■ The Art of Inspiring Innovation and Transformation (Andrew Vorster) This book was gifted to me by the author. Andrew is an innovation expert who has helped MyBudget stay abreast of technology changes in the financial services field.
He’s very aware of the technology transformation MyBudget is undertaking and his book is a reminder that innovation is a process about people and purpose, not just technology.
■ Face to Face (Brian Grazer) I heard about this book via the Joe Rogan Experience podcast. Grazer is a movie producer and his book is an interesting insight into his interactions with people such as Bill Gates, Barack Obama, Eminem and lots of other celebrities.
But, more importantly, it’s a distillation of what Grazer has learned about connecting with people on a personal, face-to-face level.
If I think about MyBudget’s success, much of it has come down to how our staff connect with our clients. Face to Face is a reminder about the power of personal connection, which is especially relevant in this digital age.
TREVOR COOKE CEO, Commercial & General ■ The Square and The Tower (Niall Ferguson) How can you go past a book that claims “Everything we thought we knew about history is wrong”? This book takes an interesting look back at the power of networking – people working together – in a world normally dominated by emperors, kings and popes.
■ 12 Rules for Life. An Antidote to Chaos (Jordan B. Peterson) Peterson has attracted his fair share of controversy in recent years but I do think it’s worthwhile to examine issues from different perspectives.
■ ABC Saturday Extra, Summer Series with Geraldine Doogue (Podcast) Stories featuring expert commentators – largely about international politics and business – but told in an accessible and engaging way and centred around issues that also matter to us here in Australia.
■ Making Sense with Sam Harris (Podcast) Sam is a neuroscientist and he tackles the very big questions about reality and how our brains work while also getting into politics and society.
KIMBERLEY GILLAN SA state lead, Charter Hall Becoming (Michelle Obama) Michelle Obama is an incredibly iconic woman who I admire for her passion and belief in staying true to herself and her family. Her inclusiveness and natural leadership is a quality that is refreshing for a woman in her position, with a platform to influence change.
I am interested to read of her milestones and challenges faced prior to when her life became so public, and how this prepared her for life in the White House, forming a part of US history.
■ Daisy Jones and the Six (Taylor Jenkins Reid) I’ve read a lot of great reviews on this book, where it has been described as “incredible”, “intoxicating” and “unforgettable”. It takes readers back to the iconic age of rock ’n’ roll in the ’70s.
It tells the story of Daisy Jones, a singer and “It” girl, who joined the rock band The Six, making her mark in music history.
■ Chat 10 Looks 3 (Podcast by Annabel Crab and Leigh Sales) This has been recommended to me by a good friend. The political commentator and award-winning journalist started a podcast to discuss what they are reading, watching, cooking and listening to. This is a lighthearted series, sharing with the world their witty banter and infectious friendship.
JACQUI MCGILL Non-executive director, Economic Advisory Council member and chair of TAFE SA ■ The Economics of Arrival – Ideas For A Grown-up Economy (Katherine Trebeck and Jeremy Williams) This book is about challenging how we think about economic growth. It was recommended to me by an economist and should an interesting read. My fiction stack is a little large and I am looking forward to reading Chris Hammer’s Silver, Melissa Lucashenko’s Too Much Lip, and Josephine Rowe’s Here Until August.
ADAM BANNISTER Managing partner, Minter Ellison Adelaide ■ The Grid (Gretchen Bakke, PhD) Bakke delivers an exceptionally readable overview of the US electricity grid and its failings. Despite shortcomings with the system itself, The Grid lays out a positive story and points to what is required for the future. A useful framing of some of the challenges that we face.
■ Emotional Agility (Susan David, PhD) David recently presented to our partnership. She is an incredibly engaging and informative speaker. In the book, David lays out four key principles to enable us to thrive in environments of constant change and to assist others to do the same. A very helpful, self-help text.
■ The Border (Don Winslow) This is the final book in Winslow’s War on Drugs trilogy (Power of the Dog, The Cartel). Like the books that came before it, this is a harrowing, desolate and compelling account of American society and the failure of its drug policies. Gripping, but not for the faint-hearted.
NICK READE Chief executive, BankSA ■ Tribe of Mentors (Timothy Ferriss) This book provides tips from various innovative businesspeople around the world. ■ Will it Fly? (Pat Flynn) How to test whether a business idea might work.
■ Nothing Ventured (Jeffrey Archer)A bit of fiction.
Word count: 1170
