b+s beauty editor Kelsey Ferencak finds out how new technology is transforming the hair world
The local haircare industry is set to reach $1.3 billion this year, so it comes as no surprise that the influx of high-tech gadgets, in-salon services, apps and innovative at-home products are promising that bad hair days will no longer exist.
According to David Mannah, managing director of industry magazine The Journal, the future of hair is all about technology.
"This year is all about beauty tech, from enhancing the client experience via multi-dimensional, personalised technology through to product technology and innovation," he says. "They're constantly in flux, evolving to suit the needs of today's consumer. Clients are becoming increasingly product savvy, no longer relying on branding for all their information. They're researching ingredients and delving into the formulation process, and the industry is adapting and following suit."
SALON SERVICES According to renowned Australian hairdresser Richard Kavanagh, 95 per cent of stylists believe they do a full and thorough consultation with each and every client. But clients don't agree, with seven per cent feeling they have only ever experienced a thorough consultation once.
These findings were the inspiration behind Piiq, Kavanagh's latest innovation, a digital-consultation experience set to revolutionise the hair industry.
Coming soon to a hair salon near you, Piiq is a digital mirror that works as an interactive service, which your hairdresser operates through a tablet. It's equipped with face-shape and eye-colour analysis, and takes 120 measurements from your face to match you to celebrities, so you can see what you'd look like with a variety of haircuts and colours.
"It's apparent that there's a real disconnect for the client experience at hair salons, mostly leaving the customer feeling dissatisfied with the hair-consultation process," says Kavanagh.
"From a client's perspective, it means you'll get a thorough consultation from your hairdresser and you'll be understood.
It makes it all about you rather than being about the trends, the haircut or the hairdresser. It's a truly personalised experience for customers."
From there, the hairdresser logs a hair analysis into the system and you can view product recommendations based on your hair type.
Not only does Piiq take visual hair references to the next level, it also works as an online-shopping tool, allowing customers to buy from your hairdresser and pick up products at the end of your appointment if you wish.
Once your stylist is finished, a 360 photo is taken and stored on the device. "You'll have the security of knowing that your records are stored not just as words, but as visuals, too, so when you come back to the salon and you loved what they did, they've got a visual reference of that exact look," says Kavanagh. "This means there's much less risk of having one of those terrible hair surprises."
But the future of specialised salon services doesn't stop there. "I'm aware of technology that's going to be coming into the hair industry in the next 18 months to two years that's going to allow the hairdresser and client to understand hair much better," he says. "It's hair analysis built into styling tools, so we'll be able to do trichological readings for your hair while styling it."
Artificial intelligence (AI) and augmented reality (AR) will also be huge for both clients and stylists alike. "AI, from an educational point of view, will teach hairdressers everything from trends to techniques, while the advancement of AR technology will allow clients to try before they buy," says Kavanagh.
Another category gaining major momentum is scalp health, with some salons now specialising in services like hydrotherapy and trichoscopy to measure improvements.
"I use hydrotherapy techniques on my clients and at home in my own regimen," says trichologist and stylist Simone Lee.
"It involves using both cool and warm water simultaneously on the scalp (not hot or freezing cold). This technique assists with blood circulation, so that vital nutrients and hormones can quickly travel to your skin's surface, nourish your cells and help tighten pores."
MANE CHANGERS Hair care is no longer limited to a shampoo, conditioner and treatment. In fact, the latest innovations are now taking skin care's approach with multi-step routines and a deeper focus on scalp health becoming increasingly popular.
Take French skin care brand Sisley for example. Last year, it launched a hair care line, taking its knowledge of skin composition and extending it to the scalp and hair, making it a natural progression for the brand. Formulated with concentrated plant extracts, essential oils, antioxidants and proteins, its range has seen Sisley marked as a powerful new player in the hair category.
Technology and science play a huge part in hair care, too. "One of the most profound advancements in the hair sphere has been the development of 'plex' technology, which has revolutionised the hair-lightening process," says Mannah.
"To put it simply, formulas work to repair hair bonds that have been damaged during the lightening process, restoring these broken bonds and leaving hair stronger, more shiny and healthier, with breakage significantly reduced."
Then there's the vast array of new products in the anti-ageing, at-home hair-colour and natural categories.
"More and more people are turning to a simpler, more natural approach to ingredients in their hair care. People are trying to find solutions that are as close to natural as possible, while retaining the benefits of research-based, results-focused products," explains Kavanagh.
Mannah agrees: "There's been an influx of sulfate-, paraben- and cruelty-free products over the past few years, as well as vegan ones. I believe these will continue to grow in popularity. Not only are they better for your hair and scalp in the long run, they're also more sustainable from an environmental standpoint."
Try these products that put innovation in your strands: 1 OLAPLEX HAIR PERFECTOR NO.3 ($49.95, adorebeauty.com.au) Like rehab for your hair, this bond rebuilder repairs damaged hair from over-colouring, bleaching and hot-styling tools.
2 JULIEN FAREL HYDRATE RESTORE ($44.95 for duo pack, itvsn.com.au) Created with intuitive Anti-Ageing Balance technology - the science where the precise amount of ingredient is delivered to the living hair strand - this formulation of bio-actives like hyaluronic acid and resveratrol (used in skin care) works to strengthen, hydrate and protect. 3 CHRISTOPHE ROBIN TEMPORARY COLOR GEL ($51, adorebeauty.com.au) Made from 92 per cent naturally derived ingredients, this revolutionary at-home gel colour covers greys and adapts to your hair's natural shade but without changing your hair's structure.
4 HARPER + ARLO MOISTURE TREATMENT ($29.95, hairhousewarehouse.com.au) This new Australian brand wants you to think about natural hair care differently. Not only are the cosmetic-grade, organic formulas beneficial to your strands, they also make a big difference to the amount of chemical runoff in water - impressive eco-credentials!
5 TUCKER BROWNE THICKENING TEXTURE LOTION ($35, tuckerbrowne.com.au) Formulated with the Aussie man in mind, this lotion thickens hair and stimulates growth with its powerhouse blend of kelp, cactus, caffeine and niacinamide.
THE TECH EFFECT From styling tools to smart gadgets and apps, there's a buzzy device for every hair type 1 MODIFACE HAIR COLOR APP (free on iTunes + android) Gone are the days of cartoonish apps that let you play around with different wigs. Instead, the new generation of hair-colour changeups allow you to explore realistic effects live.
2 TANGLE TEEZER WET DATANGLER HAIRBRUSH ($22, asos.com/au) The latest innovation from the much-loved Tangle Teezer range has stronger, longer teeth than the original but still boasts its antibreakage effects, promising to get through wet, knotty strands without damage.
3 GHD GLIDE HOT BRUSH ($210, ghdhair.com/au) The latest launch from GHD works to smooth, rather than straighten. The combination of short and long bristles means you can brush through larger sections of hair, while the ceramic heating technology reduces frizz.
4 MUK BLOW 3900-IR PROFESSIONAL HAIRDRYER ($179.95, mukhair.com)Muk's revolutionary blow dryer uses infrared lights imbedded in the barrel to infuse a gentle sauna-like heat deep into your hair shaft for fast drying time, added shine and moisture protection.
CREDIT: KELSEY FERENCACK
Word count: 1333
