Wellington Knitters group will be starting up again for weekly meetings at the Wellington Library from 14 June. Meeting from 10am-12pm the knitters participate in a Knit for Love program, sending their beautiful hand-knitted rugs to Sydney to be passed on to overseas charities and communities in need. Anyone is welcome to join in the sessions.
Mobile Service The Mobile Service Centre will be parked at the Wellington Library on Thursday 20 June from 9.30am-3.30pm. The Australian Government Mobile Service Centre is supporting rural communities by providing convenient access to Australian Government payments and services. This specialised vehicle offers a wide range of face to face and self service assistance for rural families, older Australians, students, job seekers, people with a disability, carers, farmers and self-employed people. Information about the Department of Veterans' Affairs programs and support services for veterans and their families will also be available.
New Books 'The Land Girls' by Victoria Purman. Melbourne 1942: War has engulfed Europe and now the Pacific. For spinster Flora Atkins nothing much has changed. Tending her dull office job and beloved father and brother, as well as knitting socks for the troops, leaves her relatively content. Then one day a stranger gives her brother a white feather and Flora's anger propels her out of her safe life and into the Australian Women's Land Army. There she meets Betty, a former shop girl keen to do her bit for the war effort and support her beloved, and the unlikely Lillian, a well-to-do Adelaide girl fleeing her overbearing family and the world's expectations for her.
'Machines Like Me' by Ian McEwan. Britain has lost the Falklands War, Margret Thatcher battles Tony Benn for power and Alan Turning achieves a breakthrough in Artificial Intelligence. Machines Like Me takes place in an alternative 1980s London. Charlie, drifting through life and dodging fulltime employment, is in love with Miranda, a bright student who lives with a terrible secret. When Charlie comes into money, he buys Adam, one of the first synthetic humans and designs his personality.
CREDIT: Wellington Library
Word count: 343
