How you can still commemorate our Anzacs this year
TWO old photographs of a ­father and son who served in World War I and II respectively have inspired calls to share your images of Diggers this Anzac Day.
Cheryl Creasey sent in the pictures of veteran Benjamin Creasey and his son Leslie Douglas Creasey for our Old Photos page.
As a 20-year-old Benjamin Creasey enlisted in March 1915 and was attached to the Royal Army Service Corp.
His son Leslie Douglas Creasey, who fought in World War II with the 2nd AIF, is with his mother Edith.
Ms Creasey, who is the daughter-in-law of Leslie, said: “Benjamin was a motor mechanic and transported supplies.
“While he served in France he met Edith Jennison, who is the lady in the photo with Les. She was a nurse but also drove ­ambulances. They married in December 1918 in Nottinghamshire.” The following year she gave birth to Les.
“Les was a sickly boy and doctors recommended that his parents get him out of the smog and damp of Lincolnshire,” Mrs Creasey said.
This forced the family’s hand and in 1926 they moved to Australia, settling in Cooma near the Snowy Mountains.
Ben worked as a warden in the NSW prison system, guarding prisoners in Goulburn and Long Bay.
Ironically his son would to go on to guard Japanese prisoners during World War II.
Leslie Douglas Creasey signed up in December 1941 in the Australian Army Service Corp, 1st Australian Division and trained in the infantry.
Les was based at Adelaide River in the Northern Territory, preparing for a Japanese invasion that never came.
Initially, he was involved in the transport section but for the last 260 days he was based on the Indonesian island of Morotai guarding Japanese war criminals.
Les went on to have four sons including Robert, who has been married to Cheryl for 46 years.
“All Les’s sons mentioned that their father never spoke about much of his war service,” Ms Creasey said.
The images have been brought to life by IBM, which has combined state-of-the-art artificial intelligence technology to turn photos from black and white to colour.
With Anzac Day gatherings cancelled due to COVID-19 concerns, The Sunday Telegraph is calling on readers to celebrate in a different way by sending in their images.
The paper will then publish the images next week and on April 26.Send pictures to photo@­sundaytelegraph.com.au
CREDIT: BEN PIKE
Word count: 405
