British online takeaway food service Just Eat, which bought Australian meals delivery service Menulog for $US687 million ($1.025bn) in 2015, says the group has returned to growth in the June quarter and is making money after adding 3000 new delivery restaurants to its books.
Menulog had launched 25 new delivery zones in its Australian business to the end of June, and delivery now covered more than 70 per cent of the addressable population, Just Eat said in an update to the market.
Last year Just Eat was forced to slash the value of Menulog by 40 per cent new players brought intense competition to the sector.
But the food delivery chain, the nation’s biggest online meals delivery platform, now looks to have regained its momentum and profitability.
Just Eat said it had deployed a new dynamic pricing model in one Australian city, along with a pilot trial in Denmark and Britain where data and analytics technology was showing positive results with a flexible delivery fee that reacted to order volumes, traffic and the weather.
It is the latest food retailer to use artificial intelligence to improve efficiency as variables like the weather and traffic influence customer orders, with McDonald’s Australia last week equipping 140 drive-through sites with its own AI platform called Dynamic Yield. Speaking to analysts for its latest quarterly performance, Just Eat told investors the “Australian delivery business was gross profit-positive in the six month period”.
“Australia has returned to growth and delivery has broken even at a gross profit level,’’ the company said.
“The second quarter saw a welcome return of order and revenue growth in Australia, as we continued to scale our delivery business,’’ chief financial officer Paul Harrison said.
“Encouragingly, April was our first full month of gross profit in delivery. “We’ve successfully returned to order growth in Canberra, Perth, Brisbane and Adelaide as our teams reached out and visited and optimised some 820 marketplace restaurants, while also signing up delivery restaurants to the platform.” Although its active customers fell slightly to 2.6 million across Australia and New Zealand, revenue was up strongly to £27.3m ($49m) for the June half, up from £21.6m in 2018.
The meals delivery business is a hot segment of the food retail sector. Newer players and aggressive existing firms have chipped away at the dominance of Menulog, which once had three million active customers.
Larger retailers are getting into the meal kits and food delivery space, with Woolworths in June sealing a $30m deal to snare a 9 per cent stake in subscription-based meal kit provider Marley Spoon. Marley Spoon is the second-biggest operator in the $500m meal kit delivery sector.
Coles is working on a meal delivery service with Uber Eats.
Just Eat recently launched data analytics technology to deliver dynamic pricing.Interim CEO Peter Duffy told investors dynamic pricing allowed the company to optimise delivery revenue and order ­volume.
CREDIT: ELI GREENBLAT
Word count: 484
