I Am Mother (Netflix) is a low(ish)-budget Australian film from a first-time director, but you'd never know it. It ticks all the boxes in terms of filmmaking on the cheap - a limited number of characters in an enclosed environment forced to overcome a threat from outside - and it does so with invention, elegance and economy. But it looks a million dollars. Well, many, many millions of dollars in fact. And it doesn't look even slightly Australian.
The plot is simplicity itself. Humanity has been wiped out. The day after this mass extinction event, in a high-tech facility that's part bunker, part womb, a robot takes a human embryo from storage and begins the slow, careful process of raising it.
Years pass, and eventually this human is a teenager (Danish actress Clara Rugaard, who was in fact closer to 20 at the time I Am Mother was shot in Adelaide's film studio in late 2017). She has never been outside because Mother (the robot, voiced by Rose Byrne) has told her it's not safe. The planet has been poisoned, the result of humanity's war on itself. Go out there and Daughter will surely go the way of her ancestors.
Everything changes, though, when there's a loud bang on the door. It's another human, Woman (Hilary Swank), bleeding from a wound and demanding to be let in. Warily, Daughter admits her, all the while terrified she is also granting entree to whatever toxins lurk outside. But, Woman insists, the only poison is the one planted in the girl's mind by the droid who claims to be raising her, but is in fact the face of the enemy.
Who's telling the truth here? Is there even a single truth to be told?
That's the question at the heart of this taut philosophical thriller. In search of an answer it traverses a fair amount of terrain, both physical and metaphorical: the relationship between humanity and artificial intelligence; the nature of the greater good; the pros and cons of helicopter parenting; what fate do we as a species seem set upon, and do we deserve it?
It's rich material, handled brilliantly by first-time feature director Grant Sputore, a West Australian, working from an intelligently wrought screenplay from American Michael Lloyd-Green.
Despite the sci-fi, post-apocalyptic premise, the film mostly does things the old-fashioned way, with Mother played by a man in a suit - Luke Hawker, who also served as project supervisor for New Zealand's Weta Workshop, a role that meant he was in charge of the design of the suit he was wearing as well as its on-screen performance.
I Am Mother - which was originally simply called Mother, until Darren Aronofsky's mad-brilliant Mother! came along - may or may not point the way to the future of our planet. But it certainly does point the way to one version of the future of filmmaking in this country - international, inventive, and enabled by the generous tax and funding incentives offered by our state and national film bodies long before Netflix entered the frame.
I wouldn't want to think there's no longer room in our industry for stories that speak of and to the particularity of the Australian experience. But I'm happy to celebrate a work that aims for the universal, and in almost every respect delivers on it.
CREDIT: Karl Quinn
Word count: 559
