The next stage in the transformation of Blackfriars Priory School is about to start, with the development of a state-of-the art, two-storey building.
The building, adjoining the landmark Aquinas Centre, will become home to Blackfriars’ new food science and hospitality offerings, plus see an expansion of the school’s acclaimed STEM program.
From 2024, food science will complement the school’s existing health, physical education and science programs and provide an explicit pathway from the middle years to SACE Stage 1 and 2 nutrition and/or food technology.
Together with hospitality, it will also deliver a springboard for students exploring a VET course at TAFE.
The building will also feature a new school canteen, cafe and a hub for Year 9 students.
Principal David Ruggiero said it was an exciting time for the school. “We’re planning to start construction in early 2023, with completion anticipated for the start of the 2024 school year,” Mr Ruggiero says. “Upstairs, there will be three STEM project rooms. One will have dedicated virtual reality, robotics, electronics and 3D printing.” Blackfriars’ cutting-edge STEM programs have gained global attention in recent months. STEM co-ordinator Matthew Wallace and a group of students were interviewed by US-based representatives of the Intelligent Community Forum about Blackfriars’ science, technology, engineering and mathematics credentials.
The school was also successful in securing a grant from the Andy Thomas Space Foundation to participate in its Mars Program – one of only a handful of South Australian schools to make the cut.
“That has allowed me some time to develop a unit of work around satellite technology and communication technology,” Mr Wallace says. “We’re committed to getting students to where they desire and exposing them to a range of fields, rather than just the traditional chemistry, biology, physics. We can be part of preparing students for the cutting-edge future and that’s exciting.” Meanwhile, Mr Ruggiero has also announced the construction of several 3x3 basketball courts, available for use by both primary and secondary students.
“So, exciting times ahead. A wonderful time to be at Blackfriars,” he says. Blackfriars Priory School (08) 8169 3900 blackfriars.sa.edu.au
Word count: 347
