FLEET Space Technologies’ expansion into the US is a perfect example of what South Australia can offer to the whole world and, literally, the universe.
It should inspire and usher in a new wave of innovation as Adelaide positions itself at the heart of the nation’s space race.
The Lot Fourteen-based company has strong ties in Adelaide as one of the country’s first space start-ups.
It now employs dozens of South Australians in not just hi-tech space roles, but also in corporate jobs.
The fact the company has employed an Adelaide man to lead its new team in the US is a strong indication of the company’s commitment to SA.
Fleet’s groundbreaking satellite technology can detect critical minerals beneath the Earth’s surface, particularly in areas where the environmental impacts of mining would be low.
This kind of technology should be used worldwide to help achieve global net-zero goals, while also helping countries get access to critical resources.
But this kind of tech isn’t just for Earth. Fleet is set to use these satellites to explore the moon and also Mars for water and other resources that could sustain human life, as part of NASA’s Artemis mission starting in 2024.
SA is swiftly becoming defined by its hi-tech innovation.
Adelaide was selected to host the Australian Space Agency in the burgeoning Lot Fourteen district, which is also home to a suite of other rapidly growing tech companies, such as homegrown nanosatellite success story Myriota.
Another local success story is LVX Global, a little-known Internet-of-Things company which has offices in Los Angeles, Dublin and Asia but last year determined that Adelaide and Lot Fourteen was the right place to base its international headquarters.
SA has been known for its innovation for generations: the Hills Hoist, the Stobie pole, and the discovery of penicillin to name a few.
Now our brightest minds seem to be well and truly aiming for the stars. Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Gemma Jones, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 338
