Satellite capabilities are an increasingly important component of our strategic communications and connectivity, and therefore it is vital that Australia remains at the vanguard of space-related skills, innovation and secure, sovereign technology solutions.
Geostationary satellite technology is critical for Australia, given that we have an entire continent to connect. The importance of sovereign space capabilities can’t be over emphasised, and satellite capabilities play a particularly important role in the technology mix.
Optus provides satellite capabilities in Australia, by Australians and for Australians. The Australian Government also realises this significance and has relied on our capabilities to provide critical strategic communications, from coast to coast and as far away as Antarctica.
We own and operate a fleet of satellites and have invested more than $2 billion in an Australian satellite network, launching 10 satellites, operating 13 spacecraft and providing support to more than 100 international space programs.
Satellite capabilities deliver much-relied-on services for regional, rural and remote consumers and small businesses including free-to-air TV services for more than a quarter of a million Australians in regional and remote locations where a reliable TV signal is not otherwise available.
Satellite Small Cell technology has been a critical element of the Government’s Mobile Black Spot Program, delivering mobile signal to remote communities like William Creek in far north South Australia for the first time. Mobile “SATCATs” (a satellite cell on a trailer that use satellite transmissions for coverage in a limited range, without the need for infrastructure) keep Australians connected following outages caused by extreme weather events or national disasters.
And this Australian Space Week, when we must we recognise our responsibility to grow Australia’s STEM capabilities in this sector by nurturing our domestic talent to become our future space leaders that ensure we can lead, not just keep up with world trends. They will become our innovators, our advantage.
The space sector holds many opportunities for young Australians. Not just those who want to study at university, but also those who want to learn a trade. The space sector holds promising futures for young Australians who feel more comfortable building things just as much as it can for those who want to crunch numbers.
Australia must keep up – and lead – as new technologies emerge. Soon, we become the first satellite operator in Asia Pacific to launch a software-defined satellite – “Optus 11” – that can provide both flexible concurrent broadcast and broadband services and can be augmented and adjusted in space – which is a tremendous improvement over previous ‘fixed’ service settings as it allows experiences to be optimised for end users.
As we celebrate another year of Australian Space achievement it’s important that we stay hungry for pushing the limits.
As we continue to explore the vast universe that is beyond our planet, we will continue to be there for every small step and every giant leap, ensuring we educate and upskill our future leaders and take innovation to new levels, with aspirations to go where no Australians have yet to go!
Kelly Bayer Rosmarin is Optus CEO
Word count: 498
