Southern Launch has announced it recently finalised approvals from landowners for the construction of the first two rocket launch facilities for the Whalers Way Orbital Launch Complex.
The approvals take the project a step closer to developing a space launch facility which would offer rocket launches for both Australian and international organisations.
The company had its first test launches from the Koonibba Test Range in September 2020, and hopes to launch from Whalers Way as soon as possible.
The Whalers Way site will encompass over six kilometers of southward ocean frontage, with more than 3000km of open ocean to the south.
While there has been concerns about the impact the rocket launches would have on the local environment, Southern Launch said the site was chosen "to maximise safety to people and the environment".
"As such no rocket will need to overfly delicate marine environments or any populated areas as they fly out over the Great Australian Bight to space," the company said.
"Additionally, the site allows direct injection into polar and sun synchronous orbits, at a greater launch frequency.
"The leased area covers Southern Launch's proposed safety exclusion zones for rocket launches in entirety within the site boundary, and does not impinge on any government, public or private land."
Southern Launch said the future construction of the complex and operational activities would be of "significant benefit" to the Eyre Peninsula community, the local economy and, more broadly, Australia.
"Furthermore, it will establish South Australia as a leading contributor to the global space economy and employment."
Southern Launch said that with the advancement in satellite technology, more operators of small satellites were preferring dedicated launches over grouped launches and operators wanted to avoid delays of the other payloads on the same rocket.
It said studies had estimated that about 600 launches would be performed yearly, using compact dedicated launches, further increasing to 1000 launches per year within the next decade.
The company added that South Australia was primed to hold such launches due to its key location to the poles.
CREDIT: Luca Cetta
Word count: 342
