South Australia's premier AgTech conference AdvanceAg has been rescheduled for October in Adelaide after being postponed due to COVID-19 restrictions.
The conference, which brings together farmers, cutting-edge technology, businesses, developers, researchers and innovators, has locked in more than 30 exhibitors, more than 25 speakers and has sold 350 tickets to date.
It will now take place on October 17 and 18 at the Adelaide Convention Centre.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister David Basham said the AdvanceAg event would adhere to all COVID-19 protocols in the state.
He said the state government had worked with keynote speakers and other stakeholders who were due to come from overseas, interstate and across the regions, to ensure AdvanceAg could proceed.
This includes keynote speaker Peter Wren-Hilton from AgriTech New Zealand, who will present 'From NZ to SA: Why AgTech is not just another buzzword', plus Myriota co-founder and chief executive officer Dr Alex Grant speaking about satellite technology lifting agriculture.
"There are many people looking forward to attending AdvanceAg and we are excited about the opportunity for collaboration and showcasing technologies for agriculture that are available today," Mr Basham said.
"AdvanceAg will feature some of the brightest minds in the world of agricultural technology demonstrating how new innovations can help solve real-world problems.
"The conference will include thought-provoking panel sessions and exciting concurrent speakers for a range of sectors including meat, livestock and dairy, grains and broadacre, horticulture, and viticulture."
Mr Basham said the conference would also dive into the latest AgTech topics across monitoring, sensors and imagery, automation, connectivity, IOT and data use, and software.
As AdvanceAg's platinum sponsor, Elders managing director and chief executive officer Mark Allison was pleased to see the event would go ahead.
"We see real value in bringing together an audience of producers, technology providers and everyone in between to make this happen - so we are pleased to be returning to the rescheduled AdvanceAg as Platinum and Keynote sponsor," he said.
To purchase tickets to attend AdvanceAg, or for more information, visit advanceagsa.com.au.
CREDIT:
Word count: 338
