There has never been a better time for producers to start building their digital agriculture plans.
In the recent federal budget, the government outlined a new program called the Technology Investment Boost.
The Treasurer said this would help businesses embrace the digital revolution.
The program is available to businesses that turn over less than $50 million and eligible farmers who are looking to take their first steps with agritech will be able to claim a 120 per cent deduction for their investment in their tax.
Producers looking to invest in technology that is relatively inexpensive, easy to understand and has a clear and demonstrable return on investment need look no further than Farmbot.
This is a modern remote water monitoring solution.
Water is the lifeblood of agriculture and it's critical that producers know how much water they have, how much is being consumed and whether there are any issues that could cause water loss.
Historically, producers who are well aware of the critical importance of water drive to manually check water on a daily basis.
Farmbot automates this process, using sensors to monitor water level and providing the farmer with SMS alerts when things look to be going wrong.
Alerts are sent in near real-time, which means if there are any issues, farmers will know about these within minutes.
In fact, the solution is configured to work either via the cellular network or via inexpensive satellite technology - meaning information about water is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week from anywhere at any time.
This creates invaluable peace of mind for producers, many of whom see an investment in Farmbot as an inexpensive insurance policy.
SA producer Craig Brewin said Farmbot had averted several crises at his Maranoa Downs operations.
"Recently we had just gotten home from checking on the Rendelsham property, when we got an alert to say there was an excessive fall in one of the tanks," he said.
"A pipe had let go.
"We hadn't planned on going back there for a couple of days, so it was lucky we got the alert.
"There could have been a lot of water lost and our livestock put at risk."
Farmbot also pays dividends for farmers who want to learn more about how their water infrastructure is working.
Mr Brewin said the system helped them manage their pumps better.
"Just because a tank is full, doesn't mean there isn't a problem under the surface - like a pump that is working too fast, or not fast enough," he said.
"Understanding how hard our pumps were working is something we probably wouldn't have picked up."
CREDIT:
Word count: 439
