DAVID BASHAM Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister AUSTRALIA'S premier AgTech conference in 2021 is finally here!
On October 17 and 18, more than 500 people will join the Premier of SA and me at the Adelaide Convention Centre for an event that has been many months in the making.
What makes AdvanceAg different to other agtech events is the focus on technologies that are available for adoption on-farm right now.
While it is important to continue thinking about the blue sky technology solutions that can improve the efficiency of farming practice in the decades to come, our biggest target is encouraging South Australian farmers to adopt technology already available across Australia.
If this technology uptake is successful, we envisage considerable productivity and profitability improvements on-farm.
The major change to this year's conference from the successful 2020 version is the addition of farmers presenting alongside the technology developer.
Attendees will get a unique insight into how readily adoptable technologies can benefit a farm business, straight from the farmer themselves.
The other change to this year's conference has not come about by choice but is actually very fitting for an agtech conference.
Due to COVID-19 border restrictions, a number of our interstate guests in areas unable to enter SA will be presenting virtually.
Our New Zealand keynote speaker, founding executive director of Agritech New Zealand and now head of Global Alliances, Peter Wren-Hilton, will present virtually.
He will then be followed in-person by the chief executive officer and co-founder of South Australian success story Myriota, Alex Grant.
Viewpoint
The way we use satellite technology is proving a game changer for the agriculture industry.
The agtech sessions are jam packed with technology solutions in industries such as grains, meat, livestock, dairy, horticulture and viticulture.
Most importantly, a large number of attendees are farmers from across the state's regions.
These farmers see the benefits of collaborating with agricultural businesses, agtech start-ups, technology developers, educators and anyone involved with agtech.
This year's exhibitor showcase is huge with almost 45 businesses involved and the opportunity to participate in a 'Yellow Brick Road' event - agtech style!
We are also thankful for having the support of some Australia's leading agriculture and agtech businesses as sponsors.
The conference will round out with a panel session discussing the rapid pace of changing technology in agriculture and the 'Pitch to Farmers' with five agtech businesses pitching to the audience who will then vote for the $10,000 winner via the conference app.
A survey of those who went to the 2020 AdvanceAg conference found about 88 per cent would likely attend a future AdvanceAg.
Additionally, 76pc of farmers and producers said AdvanceAg was likely or highly likely to accelerate their adoption of agtech and ultimately benefit their business.
We've taken that feedback on board and AdvanceAg 2021 is bigger and even better.
This is one event in a challenging 2021 that you do not want to miss.
See you there!
Details: advanceagsa.com.au
CREDIT:
Word count: 493
