A PROMINENT Adelaide Hills real estate agent, Matt Smith, has spoken out against a council-panel approved, 46m NBN telecommunications tower on the outskirts of Mylor.
And Mr Smith’s wife, Lucy Quigley-Smith, who has an adjoining property, has appealed against the Adelaide Hills Council panel’s decision in June this year to approve the wireless tower in a primary production zone at Lot 10 and 12 Crossing Rd, court documents show.
The appeal will now be heard in the Environment, Resources and Development Court next month.
Thirteen Mylor residents appeared at a panel hearing on July 11 where the application was assessed and approved.
Mr Smith said on Monday the decision should be overturned because the SA Water-owned land is signposted as a biodiversity and conservation site.
“No dumping, no collection of firewood, no removal of native vegetation… (but a) 46m steel structure, no worries,” Mr Smith said in a video.
“It’s a very high tower equivalent to a 12-storey building; it will be highly visible in an area of … scenic value.
“There has been very little real explanation why other sites aren’t suitable. “We would prefer the NBN to avoid putting it in this area altogether as it’s a biodiversity site.” Local households were originally promised wireless technology under the NBN rollout but were assigned NBN Sky Muster satellite earlier this year after negotiations with a local landholder to build a tower fell through.
Local MP Rebekha Sharkie said the community had undertaken a “significant amount of advocacy” since to convince NBN to provide wireless.
“NBN was going to give the district satellite technology once negotiations on the original tower site fell through but they spent more than a year investigating several alternative sites,” Ms Sharkie said.
“I have been advised there will be no further investigations. “This is the last opportunity for premises on the outskirts of Mylor to have access to an NBN wireless tower.” However, she supported Ms Quigley-Smith’s right to appeal against the proposal. A NBN spokesman said the tower would provide network access to more than 320 properties.
CREDIT: BEN CAMERON
Word count: 347
