SMARThacks UPGRADING YOUR TELEVISION TO WATCH ULTRA HIGH-DEFINITION CONTENT IS LIKE PUTTING ON A NEW PAIR OF PRESCRIPTION GLASSES TELEVISION There’s a reason Hollywood actors are concerned about the arrival of ultra high-definition content.
This technology is the difference between showing them at their most well-lit and refined, and allowing fans to count the pores on their nose.
Such is the detail in 4K broadcasts of films including Justice League, Birds of Prey, Atomic Blonde and Joker.
You can inspect actors’ beard hairs (if you’re into that), spot flaws in special effects make-up and, at its best, notice new details in scenes you’ve seen many times before.
In short, watching a film in 4K is like putting on a new pair of prescription glasses.
And this is what I noticed after upgrading to Foxtel’s 4K offering; an option available if you’re willing to have a satellite dish installed on your roof and a new set-top box beneath your telly.
It’s also one of very few ways to access 4K movies, TV shows and broadcasts in Australia, despite booming sales for 4K and 8K TVs.
For those considering the upgrade, this is what you need to know about smartening up the idiot box.
WHAT’S THE DIFFERENCE?
Just like the jump from standard-definition to high-definition video, 4K or Ultra HD content supports greater detail and more pixels on the screen.
In fact, 4K offers roughly four times as much detail as its predecessor. In technical terms, the Ultra HD standard is defined as 3840 pixels by 2160 pixels, compared to the 1920 by 1080 pixels of high definition.
Naturally, you must have a TV that supports this resolution to see it and 4K TVs are typically generous in size.
These TVs are becoming the standard for all screens over 40 inches, however. Samsung’s latest 2021 TV range, for example, was dominated by 8K and 4K screens, with only a handful of high-definition TVs offered at the cheapest end of the market.
DO YOU NOTICE IT?
Full disclosure: I don’t like cricket, nor do I love it. But people who do say seeing it in person is a superior experience; that the atmosphere of crowds in bucket hats and actual buckets, boasting Hawaiian garb, raising equally colourful banners makes the game greater than a person chucking a ball on a strip of dirt.
And 4K cricket broadcasts communicate that better than most. The detail in 4K footage from BBL games is stunning. You can recognise faces in the crowd, forensically inspect the pitch yourself, and lip-read the sledges – perhaps one of the best additions for the non-tragics.
Plus, NRL and ARL games are screening on Fox Sports Ultra HD this season, including live 4K broadcasts.
In addition to sports – which will undoubtedly be the biggest drawcard for many – Foxtel offers a 4K movie channel. It delivers a mix of native 4K content – movies created specifically for the latest screens – and those that have been upscaled. The difference between them is noticeable, but both give you the impression of an eyesight upgrade.
WHAT DO YOU NEED TO SEE 4K?
Foxtel is currently the only company broadcasting 4K live in Australia due to its use of satellite technology. The same bandwidth is not yet available for free-to-air channels, which are restricted to HD.
Subscribers need a 4K TV, satellite, iQ4 box, and access to sport, movie and HD packages to see the content.
Some video services also deliver 4K in Australia, however, including Netflix, Disney+, Apple TV+ and Stan. Those keen to stream shows in 4K will need to check the fine print, however, as some (like Netflix) charge extra for 4K access and all users will need a broadband connection supporting 25 megabit per second downloads to stream higher resolution footage consistently.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 637
