THE spread of Covid-19 is emerging as the most significant global event since the end of World War II 76 years ago.
There are plenty of challengers but Covid wins the gold because it is global and still growing.
And if it’s not Covid, then what has been more significant?
The emergence and continued development of mobile telephones and new technology is hard to ignore. They’ve changed the world in ways that were almost incomprehensible even a decade ago.
Few changes have had more impact than the development of the contraceptive pill. And also the acceptance of gender equality.
The rise and fall of communism in eastern Europe rates highly. Particularly with the gathering power of Communist China.
Satellite technology, man walking on the moon and the exploration of Mars are remarkable achievements. And the globalisation of the world economy has produced enormous change, not only financially, but culturally, strategically and socially.
With this has come international terrorism on levels never before experienced. Medical advances like organ transplants and the conquest of deadly diseases like poliomyelitis have had a profound impact.
The emergence of Islam cannot be overlooked and nor can the real or perceived concerns about global warming.
All of these contenders are important, but none is bigger than Covid. This random list of events since 1945 was prompted last week when I had my second AstraZeneca vaccination, the biggest single event of my year. I had no adverse reaction. Having two shots of AstraZeneca is comforting. I’m not Covid-safe but I’ve done as much as I can to strengthen my resistance against this cursed virus.
Oh, I hear the anti-vaxxers say Covid is not really a problem and that vaccinations are dangerous. But in NSW about 90 per cent of people who have contracted Covid in recent weeks have not been vaccinated. Only 5 per cent had been fully vaccinated.
These figures strengthen the argument for making vaccinations compulsory. People should be required to opt out of the vaccination program not, as it stands, opt in.
In the first half of next year Australia’s population could be vaccinated, yet the socially quarrelsome, the bellicose minority, will remain without cover.
They believe civil rights, the ability to follow their own pathway whatever the social cost, means they don’t have to be vaccinated.
Never mind that they might contract Covid and pass it on, or that they may be endangering the weakest and most vulnerable people in our community. If people choose to opt out they should face penalties. They should be denied entry to public functions, hotels, bars and restaurants, and forfeit travel opportunities.
Already the AFL is considering banning patrons who have not be vaccinated from matches next season. Children of the anti-vaxxers may be excluded from childcare or even school. And their social welfare entitlements could be cut.
The argument that vaccines are dangerous is not supported by figures. When five million vaccinations had been given in Australia there were 76 possible cases of blood clotting.
The chances of catching Covid and becoming dangerously ill are far greater. Here’s a rough, if slightly amusing, analogy.
Imagine there were one million goats on the Greek holiday island of Santorini and one goat was highly aggressive and a danger to public safety.
Would authorities evacuate the human population from Santorini, eliminate all the goats, or tend to the handful of people who may have been injured by the rogue goat?
The chances of being attacked by that goat are about the same as developing thrombosis from a Covid jab.
It is understandable that people are nervous about Covid and its potential cure. Social media is full of tales of woe about AstraZeneca. So far, 18 per cent of Australians have been fully vaccinated. The quicker everyone is covered, the quicker life will return to something like normal. And perhaps Covid will tarnish its status as the most significant global event of the past 76 years.
CREDIT: Rex Jory
Word count: 660
