New satellite units will protect region
Emergency services personnel and local communities will have greater communicators capabilities in the event of a disaster following the launch of NBN Co's Disaster Satellite Service.
As part of the federal government's $8.7 million Strengthening Telecommunications Against Natural Disasters Package, $7 million has been allocated to install satellite units across the country, with a number to be located on the Fleurieu.
Locally, the Hindmarsh Valley CFS is the first location to receive the service, which aims to boost the support offered to communities and emergency services personnel during and in the aftermath of emergency events, including bushfires and floods.
About 100 satellite units will be installed across the country by the end of the year, including two locations on Kangaroo Island.
The service provides a back-up communications connection using satellite technology and will be switched on to 'disaster mode' during an emergency event, providing free full satellite broadband functionality, including Wi-Fi and video streaming.
Member for Mayo Rebekha Sharkie recently met with NBN Co representatives in Victor Harbor and said six satellite units would be installed within the electorate.
"This infrastructure will be vital for residents to be able to communicate during emergencies to let their loved ones know they are safe and to coordinate emergency relief efforts," Ms Sharkie said.
"During last year's bushfires NBN Co's Road Muster trucks provided emergency workers and evacuated residents in the Adelaide Hills and Kangaroo Island with Wi-Fi and a place to charge their phones.
"It is important that we get our emergency telecommunications services right to best support our communities during difficult times."
NBN Co's fleet of portable satellite services has also been boosted, with a $1.7 million grant provided to purchase five additional Muster Trucks and 12 additional Portable Satellite Kits. This equipment can be rapidly mobilised to support communities with Wi-Fi connectivity when they are most in need.
NBN Co chief development officer regional and remote Gavin Williams said the devastation of last summer's bushfire emergency had reinforced the importance of connectivity in disaster situations.
"While, of course, we hope never to see a repeat of last summer's events, we welcome the opportunity to further increase our capabilities to support retail service providers, emergency services personnel and the communities impacted by these devastating events," Mr Williams said.
Read more via: victorharbortimes.com.au
CREDIT: Jack Manning
Word count: 390
