HEALTH software start-up Splose has raised $1m from investors as it looks to boost subscriber numbers ahead of a potential overseas expansion.
The company has rapidly grown and evolved its business model since it was established as a website developer in 2018, and now has close to 2000 monthly users of its practice management platform, which is designed to support allied health and NDIS providers.
Founder Nicholas Sanderson said the company was on track to have 10,000 monthly users by the end of next year, and the latest capital injection would support the company’s growth ambitions.
“This funding round is to really get up to 10,000 monthly active users,” he said.
“We expect that this capital raise will give us between 12 to 18 months of runway, it is to bring on a COO, which we’re actively hiring for now to really help us on the operational side of things.
“It’s really about accelerating the growth ... and then after that we would then be looking at an international expansion.
“Obviously the Australian NDIS is such a growing market, the spend is only increasing, and there’s more participants entering the scheme.
“There’s such a big market here that we want to have a presence in, but the next logical steps are New Zealand and UK, because they are moving towards a process that gives the person more control of their money like the NDIS.” Early financial backers of Splose included Nick Chigwidden from PhysioXtra, Garry Winter from WRP Legal and Cibo Espresso co-founder Roberto Cardone, who each put money into the company in 2020, while the state government also chipped in $100,000 through its Seed-Start program.
Mr Sanderson said the latest capital raise came from within the company’s existing network of supporters, which included a mix of healthcare providers and business owners.
He said a large focus of the company’s software was on reducing NDIS participant wait times by replacing outdated and clunky software with an integrated platform that eased the administrative burden on healthcare providers.
Through the use of online forms and service agreements, report writing and case management tools, scheduling functionality and automated invoicing, Splose claims to save practices an average of 10 hours a week in administration or $30,000 per year.
“Everyone knows there’s challenges around NDIS, the inefficiencies throughout the process, so what we can really focus on is the part that happens after the participant is approved for their NDIS plan,” Mr Sanderson said.
“Our mission really lies with improving the efficiencies of NDIS providers so that when a participant is ready to receive important support, that their provider can efficiently on-board them, provide them support and make sure that their funds are managed correctly.” Splose currently employs 11 staff at its base within the Stone & Chalk start-up hub at Lot Fourteen.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 471
