BUSINESS OPPORTUNITIES - SPONSORED CONTENT Rethinking inside the square that was home to South Australia’s biggest hospital is opening up a neighbourhood for innovative industries and unique cultural experiences
What do you do with a huge site on the most prestigious boulevard of a capital city where a public service was provided for a hundred years but has now moved on? For Adelaide, the answer was to scrub up its heritage and infuse it with the life of new industry.
This is the plan for Lot Fourteen, former home of the Royal Adelaide Hospital on North Tce.
The heart of a neighbourhood positioned between universities, a new high school, galleries, prime retail and entertainment strips, sport stadiums and the peace of botanic park lands.
Backed by state, federal and local governments, Lot Fourteen is open for business and fast taking shape, including being the centrepiece of a $550 million City Deal investment.
“It has the potential to drive massive investment, new jobs and business creation as well as providing a real focal point for visitors,” South Australian Premier Steven Marshall says.
“We’ve been developing plans to transform the site into the most exciting urban development project in the country. The focal point will be an innovation and entrepreneurship precinct for space, defence, cyber, machine learning and future industries.” Among a fleet of new enterprises from culture, learning, hospitality and tourism sectors, one of the first key tenants to anchor Lot Fourteen is the Australian Space Agency. It is being joined by the SmartSat CRC, which has raised $245 million for research and development since the International Astronautical Congress in 2018.
“Establishing the Australian Space Agency comes at a pivotal point in the history of space,” Marshall says. “Satellite technology is becoming more affordable.
We have real expertise in South Australia around nano-satellites, cube sats and small sats. Lot Fourteen will have assembly facilities for small satellites. One of the early tenants, Inovor, has a contract to provide a satellite to CSIRO. It is the first of many as the world moves from large satellites to much smaller satellites operating in constellations.” Another early tenant, Myriota, which provides low-cost satellite connectivity for the Internet of Things, has won the support of investors, such as Boeing.
While looking to the future, Lot Fourteen retains its links with local history in the architecturally significant buildings on the site, and deeper into history with government investments of at least $150 million to build the Aboriginal Art and Cultures Centre. “This will be an iconic global gallery showcasing our incredible collections of art and artefacts,” Marshall says.
Another dimension to Lot Fourteen will be an International Centre for Food, Hospitality and Tourism Studies, a drawcard for international students.Lot Fourteen will complement existing innovation precincts at Tonsley, Waite, Technology Park and Mawson Lakes, as well as defence facilities at Osborne and Edinburgh. It connects with fibre optic network GigCity, offering broadband speeds of up to 10 gigabits per second. “Interestingly, our site is not being curated by government or the university sector but rather by our Chief Entrepreneur, Jim Whalley,” Marshall says. “He is the founder and chair of Nova Systems, a global aerospace consulting company. Our aim is for him to curate a neighbourhood which will have undergraduates, postgraduates, global companies, start-ups, scale-ups, government departments. There is nothing like this in Australia.” The University of Adelaide’s Australian Institute for Machine Learning will occupy one refurbished heritage building, while the Massachusetts Institute of Technology has announced a Living Lab in partnership with Optus and BankSA. Innovation hub Stone & Chalk will spearhead support and mentoring for start-ups and scale-ups; a government-backed Defence and Space Landing Pad will give rentfree offices and advisory services to foreign companies. Already on site are Presagen, Daitum, Chamonix, Neumann Space and a stable of firms headed by entrepreneur Anton Andreacchio.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 643
