DEFENCE RESEARCH - SPECIAL REPORT M1 Abrams tanks, light armoured vehicles, a heavily-armed Tiger reconnaissance helicopter, soldiers and cadets were all gathered for the annual Chong Ju live fire training exercise at the Puckapunyal army based in Victoria last month — an impressive display.
However, arguably the most powerful force on the field was Tanya Monro, the country’s Chief Defence Scientist.
Professor Monro is in a position to influence defence research priorities for decades to come as head of the Defence, Science and Technology (the research and development arm of the Department of Defence), with its almost 2200 scientists and engineers.
She is also a departmental deputy secretary and responsible for the DOD’s science, technology, engineering and mathematics workforce.
Her Chong Ju experience began with a flight from Canberra to Melbourne in a C17 Globemaster, her first journey in a military aircraft. Once at the exercise she rode in an armoured personnel carrier at the back of the live fire demonstration.
Her lasting impression?
“An overwhelming sense of what you can do with really well-functioning teams,” Professor Monro says.
“That sense of scale and cohesion, clarity and purpose. It wasn’t about the technology, it was about what the technology can do in effective teams that have clear purpose. What I’m really passionate about is creating new knowledge — or new science, new technology — but pulling it through to have an impact, to make a difference.
She explained the appeal of the job, to which she was appointed in January: “It combines the science and technology, which has always been my passion, with an organisational leadership role and connects to impact in a really powerful way. But there’s also an opportunity right now for DST and for Defence to play a role in thought leadership and starting to shape, nationally, some of the R&D that’s done, to have an impact in defence in a way that’s not really ever happened on a national level before.” Breaking new ground is Professor Monro’s modus operandi. Her intelligence and commitment were harnessed to physics from the moment she encountered a gifted teacher in Year 9 at Sydney’s SCEGGS Darlinghurst.
“I could suddenly see how maths was the language of physics, which was a way of understanding the universe. And for me that was it. I was sold,” she said.
She emerged from the University of Sydney in 1998 with the Bragg Gold Medal for the best physics PhD in Australia. The string of awards and honours that followed it are testimony to her outstanding achievement in her own discipline.
After some years at the University of Southampton in the UK, she was lured to the University of Adelaide in 2005 to set up the Centre for Expertise in Photonics.
She already had a son and twin boys were born the year after her return. She was named 2011 South Australian of the Year and in 2014 went to the University of South Australia as deputy vice-chancellor research and innovation.
Professor Monro calls DST “unquestionably the No 1 research institution in the country in terms of its connection with the end user of its research”.
She accepts “if you look at the scale of research we do in DST it is dwarfed by the scale of the national R&D enterprise in the 40 universities and of course CSIRO and other publicly funded agencies”.
She has a wish list of projects that fall within the nine priorities of the Next Generation Technologies Fund DST manages, set up by the federal government in 2016 and allocated $730 million for the next decade.
Those priorities are: integrated intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance; space capabilities; enhanced human performance; medical countermeasure products; multidisciplinary material sciences; quantum technologies; trusted autonomous systems; cyber; and advanced sensors, hypersonic and directed energy capabilities.
“There’s a nice long list. What I’d like to do, building on that, is use communities of thought leaders from across the country to help take those broad umbrella areas and start to shape them into some slightly meatier and more specific challenges,” she said.
Enter the “moon shot”.
“Defence has some really big long-term opportunities and challenges that can be cast as big moon shots: national missions, really inspiring challenges that bring people together. We want to work with academic and industry colleagues around the country to shape that into big challenges that we take on as a nation,” she said.
One example is the Smart Satellite CRC, a recently announced $243m co-operative research centre, focused on smart satellite technology for defence.
“It was developed based on the strategy DST had developed for space. But what it did, through the CRC mechanism, is reach right across the country into academia and industry and pull together the largest ever single investment in Australia in space technology,” she said.
Her desire for that specificity also applies to the DST, whose strategic plan expired at the end of last year. A draft for the next one was put on ice until the next Chief Defence Scientist was appointed.
Professor Monro is now ready to modify and hone: “I’m starting the discussion internally and with the key stakeholders about whether it is aspirational enough, or whether we need to reshape or reposition it. I think our next stage is an opportunity not to develop a strategy for ‘DST’ but actually develop a strategy for defence science and technology — that’s a significant distinction — essentially with us claiming and taking responsibility for that leadership role nationally.” This is tied to what Monro calls the Australian Defence Force’s “great appetite for new game changing technology. The opportunity is for us to evolve as an organisation to be able to better shepherd that. We already collaborate with all of Australia’s universities and we understand where the best people are across the nation and in all the key areas.
“We aspire to work with them and with industry to help the ADF harness that national research and development ecosystem. That’s our role.
“That’s why our next stage will be a strategy for the science and technology that defence needs into the future. So it won’t be just about what we do organisationally or internally but about how we work as part of defence to help harness the national capabilities.” The rationale is simple: “If you look at Australian research in the international context it has been rather more ‘bottom up’ than many countries. There are good reasons for that and it’s produced some wonderful things. But there’s also a role for layering that bottom up with ‘top down’.” Moon shots yield unexpected benefits, she argued.
“If you went back and assessed the some of the biggest impacts of something like the original moon shot you could argue [it was] that the generation of people that came after that were so inspired by it that they chose to go into the sciences, the legacy that that’s led to. We can never underestimate the inspiration value of a wonderful challenge,” she said.
“There are big national challenges and obviously they go broader than defence — some of them are environmental. But in the defence domain there are still very exciting things that we can define that bring people along and sort of focus activity.” Asked about the contentious $50 billion submarine contract awarded to France’s Naval Group, she returned a nuanced response.
“What I’ve seen so far gives me the sense that the right science and technology advice is being put on the table at the time when these important decisions and discussions are happening and that it’s being appropriately considered. Frank and fearless impartial science advice,” she said.“When it comes to any military system or platform you purchase, technical capability is always the key factor — it must be able to do things it needs to do. But ultimately it’s never the only factor that has to be considered. There’ll also be policy and other considerations that are an important part of the decision as well as, of course, the role of political decision-makers.”
CREDIT: Jill Rowbotham Higher Education Writer
Word count: 1343
