THE latest company to land at Lot Fourteen will pioneer new satellite technology to capture images in space and transmit them back to Earth in real time.
LUX Aerobot manufactures satellite balloons, which are released into the stratosphere, between 15km and 45km in altitude, equipped with cameras.
The technology will allow the company to produce a live digital twin of the continent and capture data for use across sectors including mining, precision agriculture and defence.
Executive director Katrina Albert said the business moved its Australian headquarters from NSW to SA after being attracted to Adelaide’s focus on space-related technologies.
“We wanted to be close to the Australian Space Agency and in South Australia the space industry, as well as key customer segments such as mining, is booming,” Ms Albert said.
LUX also received $80,000 from the South Australian Landing Pad program, set up to support companies looking to make their first investment in the state, create jobs and grow new industries.
The company will use its funding towards legal costs, financial services, design and accommodation.
Ms Albert said as a result of the funding, the company has been able to employ three extra staff – the business now has six employees – and attract more national and international talent to SA.
The team would double again within six months to support its work with the defence and mining sectors.
“We have been able to work with local South Australian mining companies, as well as large players such as Rio Tinto, to create a digital twin of their operating mines,” she said.
The company will also work with the CSIRO in modelling disease outbreaks for the agriculture market, and would showcase its technology to the defence sector, to support bushfire monitoring.
Trade and Investment Minister David Ridgway said LUX’s move to Adelaide demonstrated the state’s growing global reputation as a key player in the space industry.
“With the national space agency and mission control centre located at Lot Fourteen in Adelaide, we have been able to highlight to the world South Australia’s capabilities within the space sector,” Mr Ridgwaysaid. “As a result, we’re seeing more and more companies choose our state to set up or expand, which is great news for our local economy, as well as for the companies already operating here as it enables further collaboration and opportunities for research and development.” TO FIND OUT MORE ABOUT THE LANDING PAD PROGRAM GO TO DTI.SA.GOV.AU/INVESTMENT/SOUTH-AUSTRALIAN-LANDING-PAD
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE
Word count: 409
