CAMERAS on phone towers could spot smoke in scrub using “deep learning” technology, then ping a control centre to send a firefighting drone to stop fires before they spread.
That’s just one of a range of new bushfire technologies that the Adelaide-based national satellite centre is looking at.
The University of South Australia’s Professor Andy Koronios has just been confirmed as the chief executive of the SmartSat CRC, and the centre has moved in with the Australian Space Agency at Lot Fourteen.
As well as detecting bushfires as soon as they start, new satellite technology will ensure that mobile phones keep working in the middle of an emergency. The internet of things will see people able to put sensors on their property to track and predict a fire’s spread.
Prof Koronios, pictured, said these technologies already existed, but it’s the next-generation satellites being sent into orbit that would integrate them. He said the centre was one of the “engines” that would power up the state’s space industry. It has joined more than 100 industry members to develop “the next generation of satellite communications”.
Prof Koronios said the smoke detection technology would be much faster than someone calling 000, especially when they don’t know exactly where the fire is. “The on-ground communications might be destroyed but you would have the satellite systems all integrated and they then communicate with the incident response centre, which could send planes or drones,” he said. “The faster you detect fire, the better it is.” The Los Angeles Fire Department has been using firefighting drones since 2017. They can locate hot spots with infra-red cameras, guide firefighters out of danger and even drop water or retardant.
Bushfires can destroy mobile towers, or the power networks that fire them. But plans to send more cubesats into Lower Earth Orbit will mean everyone’s mobile phone is effectively a satellite phone.
A third way satellites will help during bushfires in the not-too-distant future is when Australia gets its own Earth observation satellites, that authorities will be able to point directly at fires to get more information.The role of satellites in bushfires will be a topic at the first International Space University conference in Adelaide starting on Friday.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD STATE EDITOR
Word count: 374
