ERIC Webb and the team at Calibre Aviation, Emerald, are standing by to offer pastoralists and growers valuable assistance in the aftermath of Queensland's latest rain event.
Mr Webb said staff and machinery, including Calibre's airwing, were primed and ready to help the farming sector fight back against prickly acacia, brigalow suckers, weeds and other ground pests likely to flourish following rain.
"The farmers know it's going to cost money to put a helicopter or plane up or a tractor out on the ground and they don't need to be told about prickly acacia," Mr Webb said.
"They know their land better than anyone and they know they've got it and it has to go if they want to grow grass," he said.
"But they do need to understand we're here to help if needed. We've got the people, the equipment and the herbicides."
Calibre Aviation began as Webb Helicopters in 1984 and has worked locally, and through the Central Highlands, Bowen, Galilee and Surat Basins, Cairns, Horn Island, Northern Territory, New South Wales and South Australia.
Calibre's pilots are among the most experienced in the business and at least one has logged more than 10,000 hours in the air.
Mr Webb said Calibre Aviation hold numerous safety and management certifications including a Certificate of Approval from the Civil Aviation Safety Authority (CASA).
Calibre's equipment inventory includes sling load seeders (600ltr) granular encoded seed, pellet applicator, spray equipment (400ltr) and a Kenworth T401 truck with 18,000ltr capacity Jet A1 (fully dangerous goods licensed and compliant).
"All this means we can be on the spot and work from the paddock and that's a cost saving for the guy on the land.
"We come in with fuel and pellets and whatever other chemicals are needed, load the aircraft and off they go."
He also said Calibre tailors tasks to the needs of its client, uses satellite technology to identify target areas, consults with the property owner before and after and uses proven products.
"With the Tebulex Regrowth Control pellet, we fly it on to brigalow suckers and once it gets a bit of rain the herbicide is slowly released into the root system and takes out the suckers. Just as importantly, you can leave the cattle in the paddock."
To allay fears of landholders living some distance from Calibre's base in Emerald, Mr Webb said the company would soon tour country where prickly acacia was prevalent.
"If enough are interested we could plan to do a few places at the same time and that would be the most economical way."
CREDIT: Alan Welburn
Word count: 431
