As the global industrial landscape shifts dramatically, the big thinkers are looking to space.
In the case of Alex Grant, the focus on space began almost a decade ago at the University of South Australia’s Institute for Telecommunications Research, where the ground work was laid for small satellites.
Since then he has established Myriota, a company specialising in relatively low-cost satellites that offer a myriad of possibilities for the world and particularly regional and remote Australia.
In space terms “low cost” means about $1 million.
To put it into context Dr Grant says the large geo-satellites used to supply the National Broadband Network cost about $300m. But he is hopeful costs will come down dramatically in the near future, opening up the vast potential of space to many.
“We’re at the same point in time as what we where in the 1980s with computers,” Dr Grant said. “Innovation happens. That’s where I see space technology is headed.” The potential uses of satellites seem as limitless as space itself. Dr Grant sees Myriota as a “provider of global connectivity for the Internet of Things”, with a broad range of applications including environmental management, asset tracking and monitoring and predicting maintenance.
“The challenge or the problem Myriota is facing in Australia is that, even though 99 per cent of the population has mobile phone coverage, only 30 per cent of the geography has,” he said.
“More than two-thirds of our continent has no affordable means of getting data for these kinds of applications and if you include maritime regions, it’s close to 90 per cent.” Myriota overcomes that problem by providing internet connectivity direct from tiny little devices on the ground to a nano satellite in space the size of a loaf of bread. They are put into place through a type of “ride sharing” arrangement, whereby dozens of small satellites piggyback into orbit with a larger device.
“The exciting thing is the satellites that we use are in polar orbit. They’re kind of running north-south so they come up over the poles roughly every 10 minutes,” Dr Grant said.
“They’re orbiting perpendicular to the direction the earth is rotating, and what that means is every one of those satellites sees every corner of the earth at least four times a day.” At this stage the practical applications are largely focused on the agriculture sector, including monitoring livestock water tanks and water systems.
In the past the impediment has been the cost, but as satellite technology was developed and embraced, the price would fall, Dr Grant said.“The fact we now have an Australian space agency is helping to open international doors and it’s really providing a point of focus nationally,” he said. “People should be excited about this stuff. Space is exciting but what excites me is using space to have a significant impact on the ground.”
CREDIT: Robyn Ironside; Aviation Writer
Word count: 481
