DEFENCE RESEARCH - SPECIAL REPORT Deep long-term partnerships are key to success
We are living in a complex, unstable and fast-changing world, which means trusted defence research and innovation is more important than ever. Defence is investing $1.3 billion in the research and development of emerging technologies to maintain its war-fighting edge.
Technology is enabling states to engage in malign activities, either to support their aims in a conflict (hybrid warfare) or below the threshold of war to achieve their objectives (grey-zone). That technology is also enabling a broad range of threats posed by non-state entities.
Such adversaries will increasingly use technology and environmental threats to interrupt the global world order, requiring new developments in science and technology to counteract them.
Advances in artificial intelligence, autonomous systems, advanced materials, space and quantum technologies are rapidly moving out of laboratories into real-world applications.
For defence, shaping and embracing these technologies is critical to prevent potential threats and exploit them for Australia’s capability advantage.
Defence Science and Technology (DST) is leading the research into evolving technologies to better prepare the Australian Defence Force (ADF) for the future.
DST works with industry, universities and international allies to deliver world-class technology capabilities, playing a special role as a trusted adviser to the ADF. Through these alliances and the understanding that comes from being embedded in the defence enterprise, the ADF is able to harness scientific expertise, embrace new technology and solutions, reduce costs and stimulate innovation.
Two of Defence’s major efforts are in artificial intelligence and autonomous systems. Artificial intelligence, which includes machine learning and deep learning, is playing an increasing role in assisting humans to solve complex problems using vast amounts of data from different sources. Defence researchers are capitalising on the new wave of machine-learning techniques to tackle problems that are intractable using traditional methods, such as protecting data networks from cyber and electronic warfare attacks.
Linked to AI are autonomous systems that already operate efficiently in controlled environments such as mining and manufacturing. Intelligent automation will improve the ADF’s awareness and surveillance capability. It can, for instance, rapidly integrate data from a range of sources to intercept an incoming missile before it strikes. For autonomous systems to work in unpredictable contested environments, we need humans and trusted autonomous systems to work together to achieve operational goals.
Defence is investing $50 million over seven years in the Defence Cooperative Research Centre for Trusted Autonomous Systems to deliver trustworthy technologies based on human-machine teaming.
DST researchers are also collaborating with Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States to test and exploit the latest developments in autonomous technologies. The international Autonomous Warrior exercise in Jervis Bay last year provided Defence with a clearer picture of how autonomous systems might be used in an integrated way on land, sea and air to remove people from harm’s way and multiply force effectiveness.
Quantum technologies will ultimately change the way information is processed by resolving previously uncomputable problems. DST is leveraging the world-leading quantum research capabilities at Australia’s universities to shape the development of quantum technologies that will impact our defence and national security into the future. To this end, we have established a Quantum Research Network under the Next Generation Technologies program.
Eleven projects worth $6 million, focused on quantum sensing, navigation, timing and communication applications have commenced to date under teams from five Australian universities and Quintessence Labs in Canberra. Quantum technologies are projected to have a significant impact on Defence, including virtually unbreakable cybersecurity barriers and secure long-distance communication.
Australia’s growing focus on a national space program is providing new opportunities for inexpensive, small satellite technology called cubesats to provide significant data and communications capabilities for Defence.
In 2017, DST launched the exploratory Buccaneer CubeSat mission, which collected the first colour picture of the continent by an Australian satellite. The main Buccaneer mission will take place in mid-2021 to calibrate and optimise the performance of the Jindalee Operational Radar Network (JORN).
In future, cubesats such as Buccaneer could be networked with other unmanned aerial assets to provide affordable strategic surveillance for Australia.
Defence is making the single largest contribution of $12 million to the SmartSat Cooperative Research Centre (CRC) being established in South Australia, with nodes across Australia. The CRC will grow industry capability to build world-class space systems in Australia and reduce our reliance on foreign technology.
Through deep, long-term partnerships, funding, and innovation programs, Defence is committed to facilitating the development and utilisation of advanced technologies. This will enhance Australia’s future preparedness, spur the development of unique world-class sovereign capabilities and create economic value.Professor Tanya Monro is the Chief Defence Scientist.
CREDIT: Tanya Monro
Word count: 776
