SPACE
A SPACE Infrastructure Fund to turbocharge the fledgling industry will cost $19.5 million over four years.
The Federal Government aims to triple the size of the sector to $12 billion, dramatically increasing our share of the global industry.
By 2030, 30,000 people will work in the sector. The Australian Space Agency, Mission Control Centre, and a Space Discovery Centre, all in Adelaide, will be at its core. Of the $19.5 million in the fund, $6 million is for Mission Control, where start-ups and small and medium-sized enterprises can control, test and develop satellite technology. It will be a more modern version of the famous mission control centre at NASA in Houston, and will be open to the public.
The $6 million for the Space Discovery Centre, part of the Adelaide City Deal, is in additon to the infrastructure fund. It will be an interactive centre similar to Questacon in Canberra. “Australia’s pioneering space sector is developing rapidly and we need to maximise this growth for the benefit of the broader economy,” Space Minister Karen Andrews said.
“The space fund will support the Coalition’s plan to help create 1.25 million more jobs over the next five years.
“Our investment in space is underpinned by the new 10-year Australian Civil Space Strategy that will also help to ensure the space sector can gain a larger share of the US$350 billion global space economy.
“The strategy sets out how governments, researchers and industry can work together to ensure space meets the $12 billion target by 2028.” The Government has also promised more money for women and girls in science, technology, engineering and maths as part of a spend on the “jobs of the future”.
Women and girls continue to be under-represented in the sector. A $3.4 million package will support females in STEM subjects and showcase STEM skills to children.
The majority of the jobs of the future will require STEM skills, and the Government is hoping the space industry will inspire students to pick up STEM subjects. At the same time, there is a concern that there will not be enough highly skilled workers to meet demand in the naval shipbuilding industry. “To ensure our children can compete for jobs in the coming decades, we need to build a stronger Australian workforce with more STEM skills,” Ms Andrews said.
Labor’s policy was for the Australian Space Agency to be in Canberra, however, it has said it would not overturn the decision to base it in Adelaide if it wins the May election.Adelaide was chosen because it is home to some of the nation’s most successful satellite start-ups including Inovor, Fleet Space Technologies and Myriota, and because its home at Lot Fourteen will help create an industry “ecosystem”.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD STATE EDITOR
Word count: 462
