Rapid response THE heroic and exhausting work of the CFS and those who fight fires alongside them deserves better help from technology.
It is time we found ways to identify fires much faster.
Surely we have satellite technology that will recognise and accurately locate small heat spots?
For example, a fire on Kangaroo Island started from dry lightning strikes – presumably quite tiny to begin with.
Could a heat spot-recognition system have picked them up almost as soon as they started?
Could CFS ground controls then have dispatched water bombers and follow-up ground crews to douse the small fires before they became big ones?
Can we afford not to find ways of speeding up our response to fires? HAMISH RAMSAY, Unley Blaze scapegoat IT defies belief that quite a number of contributors seem to need a scapegoat for the bushfires devastating large areas of our country.
Fossil fuel, climate change and Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s trip to Hawaii are the preferred culprits.
They tend to ignore the fact that the flames were spread by unseasonal winds on tinder-dry country. This is a natural phenomenon in Australia since time began.
Fossil fuel did not accelerates the fires and the Prime Minister, even if he had been here and with his faith behind him, could not have prevented the destruction caused by this natural tragedy.
Spreading unsubstantial hysteria seems more popular.
Did anybody make a New Year’s resolution to actually look facts in the eye? A. BOWERS, Glenelg North Left-wing con job HAVING grown up during the 1960s, heatwaves were the norm. As they are now. If anyone had said then “Why doesn’t the Government do something about this weather?”, they would have been laughed at. And rightly so.
Now, many people are demanding the Federal Government do something about it. With only about 1.4 per cent of the world’s emissions, Australia can do virtually nothing.
If we ceased exporting coal it would destroy our country’s economy. The coal produced here is among the cleanest in the world, and China would obtain dirtier coal from elsewhere if they ceased using ours.
This would actually increase fossil fuel emissions worldwide and further affect our climate.
The shortsighted greenie Left, and the increasing number of people who are becoming indoctrinated, are ignoring this big picture.
I will not be conned.
BRUCE BURFORD, Adelaide Be responsible IT is a little infuriating to read letters from people whining about China and India’s carbon emissions while simultaneously defending Prime Minister Scott Morrison.
These people would do well to read about the logical fallacy called “whataboutism” – attempting to discredit a position by claiming hypocrisy without addressing the argument.
Imagine a moral philosopher coming along and saying it was perfectly fine to murder people because some other people are already doing it. The truth is, however, that no serious philosopher would espouse such a theory, as it would be laughable.
I have a feeling that even the people writing these letters understand deep down that it is an incredibly weak defence.
Australia is by far the world’s largest exporter of coal.
So, let’s start showing some ethical responsibility instead of handballing the problem on to someone else.
ALEXANDER BASTIRAS, Kings Park Firecracker fears THE $100,000 spent on, and the appropriateness of, the CBD fireworks will be discussed at the first Adelaide City Council meeting on January 28 (“Laser focus on future of Adelaide’s NYE fireworks”, The Advertiser, 31/12/19).
While the fireworks argument is so topical, fireworks as fundraisers in country and metropolitan areas need to be addressed. For example, Mylor Primary School conducts a bonfire and fireworks in a wildlife corridor every year.
The “Online” talk in The Advertiser (1/1/20, 2/1/20) for and against fireworks was revealing. Those against pointed out the detrimental impact on the environment of pollution and debris and the terrifying and harming effect on native and domestic animals birdlife.
And then there is the off-handed disrespect that lighting fireworks shows to firefighters and people who have lost everything. But Peter took the cake for the most ludicrous for argument by claiming children would need to go to a museum to learn what a firecracker looked like.
ERIC PHILLIPS, Findon Family fallout NATASHA Bita did an excellent job in raising an important issue occurring in our Family Court (“Lawyers face penalties for dirty tactics in family disputes”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
And, while some lawyers have said it only happens occasionally, it should not be happening at all. Every time divorce lawyers “burn off the opponent” by using expensive delaying tactics designed to send the other side broke, there is also a huge cost to people’s emotional wellbeing and, consequently, to relatives and friends.
Children are often also affected because those around them are stressed and often say things that they should not hear about their other parent.
Another situation I have noticed is that the whole process becomes a huge battle that has to be won, instead of a process whereby both parties are supported to get the best outcome for both of them.
I think this is extremely important when children are involved through no fault of their own.WENDY NICHOLSON, Woodside
Word count: 858
