A UNIVERSITY PROFESSOR SAYS THE NORTH QUEENSLAND TOWN IS AN IDEAL BASE FOR LAUNCHING COMMERCIAL ROCKETS JUST AS THE STATE GOVERNMENT ANNOUNCES CASH TO ASSESS THE VIABILITY OF SUCH A PROJECT. ALREADY, THE GOVERNMENT SAYS THE SPACE INDUSTRY IS WORTH $760M A YEAR TO QUEENSLAND AND THE SKY IS THE LIMIT, WRITES TESS IKONOMOU A NORTH Queensland town has been earmarked as the best location for the state’s first commercial rocket launch site, with hopes it could be operational by 2022.
Rockhampton-based CQUniversity Professor Steven Moore (pictured) has been leading the push for Bowen to be chosen, having written a white paper outlining the scientific arguments and economic benefits to the region.
“Bowen, I think, is the best site to launch from in the country,” he said. “You want to launch east, that’s the way the Earth rotates, it’s almost like a slingshot, you want to get that energy.
“It’s close enough to the equator to get 96 or 97 per cent benefit of the Earth’s rotation.
“It’s very dry, if you start heading north up to Cairns or Townsville it starts to get a lot wetter, so that’s also a factor. More sunnier days, more chance of launch.” The state government this week announced a study into the viability of a launch site near Abbot Point, north of Bowen.
“I think it’s great news, it’s something we’ve been working towards for a couple of years, they’re finally making the case for it,” Dr Moore said.
“I think it’s a win all around.
“There’s quite a big infrastructure network up there, from a state government point of view there’s a large slab of state development land around Abbot Point as well.
“The centre itself won’t be very big. But you’ll need a two to three kilometre exclusion buffer zone around it.” Dr Moore said the growing market for nano satellites meant universities, companies and even farmers could be developing their own.
Global space companies will be included in the consultation to help Queensland take a larger share in the multi-billion-dollar industry.
“Our space industry already supports more than 2000 jobs and generates $760m in annual revenue for Queensland businesses,” State Development Minister Kate Jones said.
Dr Moore said he hoped the industry could be launching satellites as early as 2022, citing “the rapidly growing trajectory”.
“I think it’d be great for tourism. I’ve spent 20 years in the States working with NASA and whenever there’s launches in Kennedy Space Centre there’s caravans for tens and tens of kilometres,” he said.
“I think it will be a big drawcard and I know one of the things they want to put in there is a viewing platform as well.
“I think it will be really good for education. At my university we’ve been talking about how we can integrate satellite technology into our engineering and information technology programs.
“It will hopefully be a big driver for young school kids to consider STEM-based careers.” Adelaide-based space company Southern Launch is building the world’s largest private launch site in South Australia. It is the second site developed by Southern Launch, which plans to build Australia’s first commercial rocket launch site on the southern tip of Eyre Peninsula.
CREDIT: TESS IKONOMOU
Word count: 537
