Livestock producers have been told that a trial of digital technology for livestock management is showing some cost-saving positives.
Meat & Livestock Australia's Digital Livestock 4.0 project has been trialled for the past year by the Carwoola Pastoral Company in southern NSW.
The operation comprises 16,000 hectares over four properties in the Canberra and Yass region, and runs a 900-head self-replacing Angus herd and 13,000 sheep.
Speaking at Red Meat 2019, Carwoola general manager Darren Price said when they were approached by MLA the task set was simple.
"Separating the hype from the happening was the role of the trial," he said.
"Some of these things that I first heard about 30 years ago continually come up and are presented as being ready, and commercial.
"The theme was separating what we've seen in the media as hype, to what's really available."
Carwoola has ended up with about 400 individual devices, which includes about 200 cattle tags for tracking livestock.
Other devices include water monitors ranging from rain and trough gauges to weather stations.
Satellite imagery is also being used to assess pastures across the properties to help with decisions on stocking and movements, and some drone technology has been trialed as well.
MLA digital agriculture program manager Darryl Heidke, told the conference while the project's looking at on-farm technical solutions, it's driven by the demand from consumers to know more about the products they purchase.
"Consumers are demanding more information on how and where the product is produced," he said.
"Consumers who are paying more for the product want transparency, not only on-farm, but all the way through the supply chain."
Mr Price said when they started putting the technology in place it quickly became clear it wouldn't be as simple as first thought, but using it for monitoring water supplies had already paid off.
"Typically, a water run travelling about 14 kilometres takes me an hour and in summer, we're doing that seven days a week," he said.
"Annually that's about 180 days and I've worked out the cost to the business is about $20,000.
"I've been able to reduce the need to go to these troughs so regularly by 70 per cent.
"We still do physical checks, but it gives me a really good early warning system."
The digital trial has has also given Mr Price the ability to track bulls during joining and the movements of the herd.
Soil probes are also being used to make irrigation decisions.
The project is also being implemented on Windy Station near Quirindi in northern NSW.
Owned by the Romani Pastoral Company, the station comprises 25,000ha run over two blocks 15km apart.
For many years, the station operated a 3000-head feedlot supplying cattle to Woolworths, but a change in management shut that down and the focus has since been on cattle production and cropping, with the aim to eventually have a 4500-strong breeding herd.
Windy Station manager David Lee told the conference when they were approached about joining the digital program they were already looking at what technology could be used to cut costs and make the operation more efficient.
"What we had was a list of problems and we wanted to find solutions," he said.
These included water monitoring, as well as pasture and weather monitoring.
Satellite technology for monitoring pasture is being implemented and GPS is already being used to track bulls.
CREDIT: Campbell Cooney
Word count: 566
