DEFENCE Minister Linda Reynolds has called on SA and WA to stop “making unsubstantiated claims” about the potential impacts of moving submarine maintenance jobs.
The WA Senator met with Premier Steven Marshall in Canberra yesterday, amid a backdrop of a war of words between the two states over the future of the jobs.
Senator Reynolds emphasised the Federal Government has not made any decision about the location of full-cycle docking for the Collins Class submarines.
The $90 billion naval shipbuilding plan and SA’s efforts to grow its work -force were also discussed.
Mr Marshall, pictured, who visited Parliament House with Defence SA boss Richard Price, said he had put forward a “very compelling offer” comprising infrastructure investment, an existing workforce and skills training, to ensure maintenance jobs for a “very long” time.
“Linda Reynolds is fully aware of the capability that we have in SA,” he said, adding it was the home of the Collins Class submarines.
“The people of SA should be absolutely assured that I will not leave one single stone unturned in our quest to get every single piece of work we possibly can for the fantastic defence industry.
“I’ll leave the public campaign up to (WA Premier) Mark McGowan.” Mr Marshall also briefed Prime Minister Scott Morrison ahead of his trip to the US today about SA’s work in the space sector, and the start-ups leading the charge in new satellite technology.
Mr Morrison said space industry investment was a huge opportunity for the state and the nation.
“I’ll be keeping in close contact with the Premier on the meetings I have in the US and insights we glean so we can work to take advantage of those opportunities and ultimately create more jobs,” Mr Morrison said.
His endorsement of SA as the capital of space, defence and cyber security comes as high school students from several schools, including Heathfield High School, learn to write code and ensure network security.The Schools Cyber Security Challenges aim to teach budding cyber experts about data sharing to prepare them for the jobs of the future – including at the $8.9 million Australian Cyber Collaboration Centre, set to be located at Adelaide’s Lot Fourteen precinct.
CREDIT: JADE GAILBERGER FEDERAL POLITICAL REPORTER
Word count: 372
