Save the Children are providing support and relief to the around 28,000 children affected by the natural disaster as recovery efforts in the country continue.
Temporary learning and child friendly spaces will be set up around Tonga to help around 28,000 children who have been affected by the volcanic eruption and subsequent tsunami.
Save the Children will provide school bags, hygiene kits and cash assistance to affected families as it's anticipated the scheduled start to the school year will be pushed back while the full extent of the damage is being assessed.
The CEO of Save the Children Fiji said the organisation is incredibility concerned for the mental wellbeing of children in the Pacific nation, with the natural disaster causing alot of distress and anxiety.
"There is absolutely a need for psychosocial support and counselling for children," Shairana Ali said.
"We still don't have a lot of information about how families have fared on those low-lying islands, so we are very concerned for the safety and the wellbeing of children."
Power has been restored to 90 per cent of the country and some international phone calls are now available but communication networks largely remain affected after a major underwater cable was damaged.
Telstra is waiving charges for calls and texts from home phones, post-paid services and mobiles for customers reaching out to family who have been impacted by recent events from Saturday.
The Australian telco has provided technical support and satellite technology over the past two days, which arrived in Tonga on Thursday following the departure of an Australian C-17 plane carrying humanitarian aid and supplies.
HMAS Adelaide loaded with critical humanitarian supplies will also provide aid, leaving Brisbane on Friday and taking five days to reach Tonga.
Reuters, quoting an Australian defence spokeswoman, has reported that an aid flight that left Brisbane on Thursday turned around in midflight after late notification of a positive COVID-19 case on board.
Tonga's COVID-free status has complicated aid delivery.
Defence Minister Peter Dutton said Australia would be sending more planes to help with recovery efforts.
"They need support on the ground to help them rebuild as quickly as possible, in particular their communication system which has been done. That is a real problem," he told the Seven Network.
CREDIT: Dominic Giannini
Word count: 378
