Satellite imagery has helped find more than 1,000 southern hairy-nosed wombats in South Australia's Mallee region, indicating the species is thriving in the arid ecosystem.
The images have formed part of a survey investigating wombat population numbers within Yookamurra Sanctuary, which protects 5,000 hectares of crucial habitat in the Murray-Darling Basin.
Senior field ecologist Helen Crisp said the satellite technology mapped potential wombat warrens, which were a complex network of burrows.
Ms Crisp used the maps to track down warrens in the field, & was then able to determine if the mammals were living inside.
"At the moment we have visited over 650 sites ... & of those, over 500 have been wombat warrens," she said.
"You can tell if a wombat warren is active with a wombat in it based on tracks, scats — so poo — & also just excavation around the burrow entrances," she said.
"If you are really lucky, you can see them on the warren itself."
Visual clues were not the only tools Ms Crisp used to know if wombats were using the burrows below.
"Sometimes when you are approaching these warrens, you hear this sort of grumble from under the ground & [you see] a puff of dirt going up into the air," she said.
Complex formula used to tally wombat numbers
Determining population numbers of the southern hairy-nosed wombat was a complex task that required more than simply counting the mammals spotted or overheard.
Ms Crisp used an "activity index" to estimate how many wombats were likely living in a single warren.
"It is a bit technical, but if you have got one active burrow in a warren, then there are 0.43 wombats in that warren system," she said.
"So, if you've got 10 active burrows, you can multiply it by that index & that gives you a very conservative number of your wombat population."
So far, Ms Crisp's research indicated more than 1,000 southern hairy-nosed wombats were living in the Mallee sanctuary.
"It just shows we are doing a great job at the moment of protecting these animals.
"We are very lucky to see these amazing animals at their warren, & there're some areas out there which are very dense with warrens, particularly areas that have a lot of native saltbush."
The research was expected to be completed in the coming weeks.
Word count: 390
