THE energy market operator will be given new powers to store emergency gas supplies to help manage the worsening energy crisis.
In emergency talks on Wednesday, state and federal minsters also agreed to fast-track work on a new “capacity mechanism” that will incentivise investment in on-demand energy generators, with a focus on renewables.
SA Energy Minister Tom Koutsantonis revealed the state government would pass new legislation next week to give the country’s energy regulator greater powers to monitor gas prices.
“(Now it will be) uniform, where every state will have transparent, open gas pricing market mechanisms … for the Australian energy regulator to look at and find out exactly what the contracts are worth to try to identify any behaviour that could be inappropriate,” he said.
“That legislation is in parliament and we want to pass it next through as a matter of urgency through both houses.” Setting the stage for a battle with the opposition, Mr Koutsantonis (pictured) accused the Marshall government of dragging its heels on the Bill while in power.
“The Marshall government had agreed to the legislation but not implemented it because they wanted to derogate South Australia,” he said.
Following the meeting on Wednesday, federal Energy Minister Chris Bowen declared the ministers had “unanimously” agreed on “11 different pieces of action”.
“This meeting was never designed to solve all the problems in one go,” he said, warning there were “no silver bullets” or “magic answers”.
Mr Bowen said the Australian Energy Market Operator would be given powers to procure and store gas in reserve to stave off supply crunches.
“Australians might be surprised to learn that power did not exist. (The operator) could not procure some gas and keep it in reserve to be released for urgent and crisis situations,” he said.
Mr Bowen also said the energy ministers agreed to form a national plan to transition to renewable energy, in what he said would be seen “in time as a significant development”.
“The reason why we are in this crisis today is because there hasn’t been enough planning about the changes that are necessary,” he said.
He decried “not enough planning, not enough transmission investment and … more tries than Wally Lewis to get an energy policy”, referring to the legendary rugby league player.
Mr Bowen said the Australian Energy Market Commission would release a new draft design of the capacity mechanism in coming days, with ministers pushing to implement it “as a matter of some urgency”. Pressed on whether it should support coal-fired power stations, Mr Bowen said he wanted it to prioritise new energy storage technology.
CREDIT: GABRIEL POLYCHRONIS
Word count: 437
