CSIRO's Newcastle energy centre has played a pivotal role in the development of next-generation energy storage technology that will be unveiled by the US Department of Energy on Friday.
New Mexico-based Sandia Laboratories, a private energy research and development agency, will receive US$25 million to build a 1 megawatt demonstration plant with a minimum of six hours of storage.
The project is being developed as part of the Biden Administration's commitment to low-cost energy storage solutions.
The technology converts sunlight into stored thermal energy by heating particles to more than 700 degrees.
The thermal energy can then be used to power a turbine, generating on-demand electricity at any time.
Australia's involvement in the project has been managed by the Australian Solar Thermal Research Initiative, a $100 million consortium established through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency and CSIRO.
A pilot-scale of the US facility has been built at CSIRO Newcastle.
READ MORE:
Hydrogen as a carbon free fuel enabled by CSIRO brilliance Teenagers gather at the CSIRO Energy Centre in Newcastle for the annual Aboriginal Summer School for Excellence in Technology and Science
Energy Renaissance partners with CSIRO to create new battery technology The Australian National University and the University of Adelaide were also partners in the project.
Australian Solar Thermal Research Institute director Dominic Zaal said the convergence of numerous game-changing trends, including more engaged consumers, a changing energy mix, and rapid technology advancements were creating unique integration challenges for the Australian electricity market.
"Central to these challenges is the need to supply secure, reliable and affordable clean energy solutions 24/7," he said.
"Concentrated solar thermal is a technology option that can help meet this need. It can provide multiple-hours of thermal energy storage that can be readily used to generate electricity or heat on demand.
"This is important because photovoltaics and wind are intermittent generators. They can only generate when the sun is shining or the wind is blowing."
IN THE NEWS:
Nationals suspend Upper Hunter MP Michael Johnsen's membership over rape allegation PODCAST: Wayne Pearce speaks with Barry Toohey on the eve of Mitchell Pearce's 300th game Singing and dancing to return as COVID-19 NSW restrictions ease Sacked manager Jill Gaynor wins six-figure unfair dismissal damages payout from Newcastle council In profile: Who is Upper Hunter MP Michael Johnsen Low-cost, grid-scale energy storage is one of five priority areas for investment under the Federal Government's Technology Investment Roadmap.
"The technologies Australia is developing, and the Government is supporting, will deliver global benefits," Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said.
"Australian-developed solar cell technology is already used in more than 60 per cent of commercial solar panels globally.
"Zero emissions, dispatchable energy sources like concentrated solar thermal storage will be needed to back up increasing shares of renewable energy."
In January 2021, Minister Taylor and Special Presidential Envoy for Climate John Kerry agreed to establish a joint Australia-US working group to advance cooperation on low emissions technologies.
Our journalists work hard to provide local, up-to-date news to the community. This is how you can continue to access our trusted content:
Bookmark: newcastleherald.com.au Download our app Make sure you are signed up for our breaking and regular headlines newsletters Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Instagram Follow us on Google News
CREDIT: Matthew Kelly
Word count: 547
