Big batteries are now all the vogue with a series of announcements this month heralding a new era for NSW energy storage.
AGL, owners of Liddell and Bayswater power stations, have now signed agreements with two energy storage companies Wrtsil and Fluence to secure under non-exclusive framework agreements to supply up to 1000MW of grid-scale battery storage.
AGL Chief Operating Officer, Markus Brokhof said Wrtsil and Fluence were chosen through a competitive tender process for their capability, experience and pricing as well as their alignment with AGL's values and strategic objectives.
"This framework agreement is another example of AGL getting on with the business of energy transition and will enable delivery against our commitment to build 850MW of grid-scale battery storage by FY2024," Mr Brokhof said.
"Wrtsil and Fluence are both global leaders in energy storage technologies, ensuring we are investing in the highest standards for performance, reliability and safety.
"We are already well advanced with our planning process and these framework agreements will reduce tender timeframes for individual projects, enabling faster project schedules and commercial operation.
"We're excited to see our grid-scale battery plans begin to come to life; we know energy storage technology is critical in creating cleaner and smarter distributed energy infrastructure.
"Our grid-scale battery plans provide critical firming capacity to the market and will play a leading role in the energy industry's transition over the coming decades."
This announcement from AGL follows on from news Origin Energy would be building a 700-megawatt capacity battery at its coal-fired power plant in Eraring, south of Newcastle.
The question has to be asked if we have all these new storage batteries coming online in the few years - what role for gas in particular the gas energy plant proposed for the former aluminium smelter at Kurri?
Last year, AGL announced plans to build batteries at Loy Yang A power station in Victoria (200MW), Liddell power station (150MW) and Broken Hill (50MW) in NSW and Torrens Island (250 MW) in South Australia.
Mr Brokhof said AGL has been Australia's largest private investor in renewables and is now leading in the development of storage technology such as batteries, ranging in size from grid-scale to residential.
CREDIT:
Word count: 365
