JUST 35 minutes north of Australia sits East Timor.
It couldn’t be more different to South Australia. When I last flew in, the pilot aborted landing after noticing a pack of wild dogs on the runway.
One million people live outside of major urban centres, scattered across a rugged interior. Hundreds of thousands go about modest lives in near-isolation, detached from the modern world by tall mountains, crumbling roads and raging rivers.
Helping its remote communities, and others like them the world over, could provide a key to SA’s economic future.
Like every South Australian, I watched as our state faced Holden’s and Mitsubishi’s departure. It hurt the state. But we bounced back.
Now Adelaide is enjoying a proliferation of new industries.
I returned home last year after living in Sydney. The opportunities around Lot Fourteen spoke to the limitless pot-ential of our state. That MIT and the Australian Space Agency are setting up highlights the unique liveability of our city and capacity of our people.
The question facing SA’s economy is no longer: “How do we get out of this mess?” Instead we are asking: “What next?” For government and industry, this requires thinking creatively about the opportunities in our region and further afield. China will likely hoover up our goods for years to come. But we can’t put all our eggs in one basket. We can develop products that solve some of the world’s toughest problems, and work with the Federal Government to open untapped markets.
Of those remote East Timorese villages, few have electricity. It’s the same in the Pacific Islands, where seven million people can’t turn the lights on. In Indonesia and the Philippines, tens of millions are crying out for a solution to their energy poverty. There are still a billion people without proper access to electricity globally. Many of them buy kerosene or diesel to burn lanterns and stoves; this alone is a $50 billion global market itching to be disrupted.
Power is cheaper when it’s generated locally. Solar and storage are usually the best bet. This is where SA can step up.
One of the exciting developments in Adelaide’s northern suburbs is the emergence of Tindo, one of Australia’s few solar-panel makers. That it is thriving proves it is possible to make problem-solving technology here in SA. And Australia has some of the world’s largest lithium reserves – essential for making batteries. The state is developing world-leading energy-storage technology.
Our identity was once tied to an industry that got the world moving. Next, we should aspire to be the state that helps turn the world’s lights on.Ed Cavanough is McKell Institute Policy Manager
CREDIT: ED CAVANOUGH
Word count: 444
