A Barossa wine giant is set to benefit from new thermal energy storage that will maximise energy and productivity for Australian primary industries.
Glaciem Cooling Technologies, which has received support from the Federal Government through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA), will install new energy storage technology at Pernod Ricard, Rowland Flat.
The initiative, involving three pilot projects, is expected to reduce refrigeration and air conditioning costs.
Of the $2 million on offer, $470,980 will be directed towards the Pernod Ricard Winemakers project.
Glaciem, with the University of South Australia (UniSA), has developed a new saltwater storage technology solution for refrigeration that maximises energy efficient cooling at off-peak times.
The company will demonstrate the value of integrating renewable energy and thermal energy storage across the three sites, also involving Reef HQ Aquarium in Townsville and Ceravolo Orchards in Oakbank, SA.
Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister said the project will improve energy usage, help industry to reduce emissions and significantly lower electricity costs through the cooling process during wine making.
"The government is pleased to support new technology that delivers real outcomes such as lower prices and emissions reduction," Minister Taylor said.
Federal Barker MP Tony Pasin also welcomed the announcement, noting the benefits to the local business and the wider industry.
"This is an exciting project for Pernod Ricard. Not only will this reduce the business' output costs and reduce emissions but they are taking part in a project that will ultimately benefit the whole renewable energy sector," Mr Pasin said.
"It's a win, win with immediate and long term benefits for the local wine industry."
Meanwhile, Glaciem's technology allows for energy use to be timed to access lower electricity rates in off-peak times and when renewable energy is being generated on-site.
The unit is recharged when energy is at its cheapest and then uses the stored energy for cooling applications during peak times.
Glaciem also uses environmentally friendly coolant and a smart control and forecasting system developed by UniSA to optimise the storage system's operation based on weather forecasts, electricity price forecasts, and customer demand forecasts to maximise customer savings.
The trial of this innovative cooling technology aligns with the government's policy to reduce greenhouse gas emissions and support renewable energy generation through advanced technology development.
Word count: 377
