SOUTH Australian publicly-listed company 1414 Degrees has outlined a cheaper, long-term plan for the Port Augusta site that was previously home to SolarReserve’s proposed $750 million Aurora energy project.
The ASX-listed company on Friday announced it is buying SolarReserve Australia II Pty Ltd, which owns the Aurora Solar Energy Project near Port Augusta in SA and two solar sites in New South Wales for $2 million. The acquired business will get a new name and operate as a subsidiary of 1414 Degrees.
“Initially we will look to set up a pilot plant, which will involve potentially installing a 70 megawatt (MW) solar panel farm and one or two modules of our thermal energy storage system (TESS),” 1414 Degrees executive chairman Dr Kevin Moriarty told The Advertiser.
Over time, government and stakeholder approvals will be sought to vary or submit a new development application to provide up to 400MW of solar PV together with the installation of the TESS-GRID technology in a phased manner.
The site already has SA Government development approval for a 70 MW solar PV farm.
1414 Degrees’ patented TESS stores energy as latent heat in molten silicon. Essentially the system uses solar, wind or gas to melt silicon – at 1414 degrees Celsius – to store and discharge the energy at an optimal time for each customer. As well as producing electricity, excess heat can also be used in industrial processes.
The idea was born in 2009, when Adelaide businessmen Harold Tomblin, John Moss and Robert Shepherd engaged an ex-CSIRO scientist to develop a device to harness the potential of silicon as an energy storage material.
Dr Moriarty joined the company in 2015 to help with commercialisation, and led the company to an ASX listing in September last year by raising $16.3 million.
“We will now get our engineers to complete a feasibility study over the next two months on the full scope of the project, but over the long term, the output of our solar-TESS plant will be the same as what SolarReserve had proposed but at a more reasonable cost that will be appealing to investors,” Dr Moriarty said.
SolarReserve’s Aurora Solar Energy Project was made up of a 70 MW solar PV farm and 150 MW of generation from a concentrated solar thermal plant (CST).
The company had secured a tender to supply all of the South Australian government’s power needs, but failed to find funding and abandoned the project earlier this year.
That project was expected to create work for 650 people during a 2½-year construction period, and 50 continuing full-time positions.
Dr Moriarty said the TESS pilot plant could cost a little over $100 million, but could be cheaper if the company decided to buy renewable energy from nearby farms.
Progressing the development will create jobs during construction, then long term jobs for operators of the generation and storage plant and industries using the heat energy, the company said.
“The unregulated high-voltage transmission line to the OZ Minerals Carrapateena and Prominent Hill mines is being constructed along the boundary of the Aurora Solar Energy Project, and provision has been made for a substation at the existing Aurora site with direct connection to the Davenport substation in Port Augusta.
“Davenport is part of the major transmission networks to Eyre Peninsula, Adelaide and the new interconnector to New South Wales.” “We will reopen negotiations with OzMinerals and ElectraNet as soon as the acquisition is complete.” Dr Moriarty said that the Aurora Solar Energy Project will be developed and financed in the subsidiary company, and 1414 Degrees will control and manage the project.“We’ve had a lot of interest from infrastructure and investment funds seeking to invest in the potential of our technology and this large solar farm will generate significant revenues while supporting the staged development of our large-scale energy storage technology. “The advanced status of this project is expected to result in early revenues.” Port Augusta Council Mayor Brett Benbow said he would be seeking more information on the project, “which sounds positive”.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 673
