A NEW $650 million solar project outside Port Pirie will provide a much-needed jobs windfall for the community, the “elated” local mayor says.
EPS Energy yesterday announced Planning Minister Stephan Knoll had approved its $650 million Bungama Solar project planned near Port Pirie.
It follows the NSW-based business earlier this month winning approval for its $1.17 billion Robertstown Solar project near the Mid North town.
Mayor Leon Stephens said his community was “over the moon” about the job prospects for Port Pirie, which was battling an unemployment rate about twice the national average.
The project will create 275 direct jobs during construction, and the company’s economic modelling shows it will create about 410 indirect roles in the surrounding community.
“I know they’re only short-term jobs but you just can’t imagine what it’s going to do for this community,” Mr Stephens said. “Hearing that just topped my day off..” Construction work is expected to begin in the second half of next year, taking about 18 months. Once the build is complete, about 10 people will find work servicing the site.
The project will be a timely boost for the Upper Spencer Gulf town, following uncertainty over the future of its lead smelter.
Bungama Solar includes a 280MW solar farm with 140MW integrated battery storage, compared with the Robertstown project’s 500MW solar farm with a 250MW storage system. Along with providing a jobs boost for the region, it could potentially create extra work for SA-based components manufacturers.
EPS Energy director Steve McCall, pictured, said the company hoped to secure as much of the technology as possible in SA, such as components for the solar farms’ steel-based tracking systems and energy storage technology.
“I’m talking to a number of suppliers at the moment about the possibility of manufacturing in SA,” Mr McCall said.
“We’re pushing hard to establish an industry there. Really, it’s about talking to all the various technology partners and saying, ‘What can you actually assemble or manufacture in SA’.”EPS Energy also wants to build a third solar farm near Whyalla, but that development is in its early planning stages. The company is working to secure financial backers for Robertstown and Bungama.
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE
Word count: 365
