Today’s bathrooms are nature-inspired sanctuaries, but with ever-rising costs, harsh reality sneaks in the door They may be the smallest rooms in the house, but today’s bathrooms, from the family bathroom to the squeezy powder room, are big on impact. Shedding the modesty of the past, they are getting larger and making a statement – insipid and lacklustre just won’t wash.
“We often receive briefs to dedicate more of the footprint of a new home or renovation to the bathroom, ensuite and powder room,” says architect Adam Higginbotham, of Michiru Higginbotham.   That’s reflected in bigger spends, with an average cost of $25,000 up 15 per cent on last year, according to Michael Sobol, proprietor of Harvey Norman Bathrooms. But that increase could be due to rising costs as much as homeowners’ urge to give the room star power.  Here, the current hottest trends.
Escape route That lock on the door isn’t just for privacy – it symbolises a desire to shut out a scary world. “As Covid-19 deepens our connection to the spaces around us, customers are transforming their bathrooms from merely functional to refuges that offer respite and a grounding feeling,” says Daniela Santilli, bathrooms and kitchens merchandising leader, Reece Bathrooms. “They are re-imagining the bathroom as a day spa or boutique sanctuary, and investing in products that elevate daily routines and embrace innovations to give them new experiences, such as luxe, tactile materials and smart technology.”
Easily LED Forget banks of downlights – we are seeing more inventive lighting solutions. Wall washes create atmosphere and are much more inviting, with sconces, aka wall lights, becoming statement pieces. “A light mounted to a feature wall or a mirror doesn’t just provide atmosphere, but it can also help carry the home’s design aesthetic into the bathroom,” says Georgette Criticos, of GIA Bathrooms. “For added ambience, we are introducing LED lighting to niche shelving beside the bath and under a vanity for soft lighting, handy in ensuites when partners may be getting ready at different times and not wanting to interrupt each other,” adds Chelsea Gomes, of Ultimate Kitchens and Bathrooms.
Frond embrace We just can’t get enough of nature, literally bringing it into the room with house plants or by including a window that looks out to a secret garden. “Private gardens in bathrooms provide a connection to nature and light in what can be otherwise a sterile environment. They are often combined with a light well to ensure natural light,” says Blake. And the plant selections are not always what you might expect. “Plants are a continuing trend, with homeowners styling bathrooms using traditional house plants and even pampas grass,” says Michael Sobol.
Green is not just for plants either. While neutrals still rule, colour is making a splash, especially in outdoor hues. “Expect to see more greens, in pastels, sage and emerald greens in 2022,” says Michael. “Green is a great way to refresh your bathroom without overpowering and encourages positive wellbeing. Around 60-70 per cent of our bathrooms feature coloured products.”
Natural selection For that grounding feeling, we are inviting the outdoors into our bathrooms. “Organic and curved forms are firm favourites, with shapes representing the natural world speaking to the trend towards creating a sanctuary,” says Daniela Santilli, from Reece Bathrooms. And also materials from nature. “We like walls or floors in a natural material, so that the veining or movement in the stone or grain in the timber brings texture and warmth,” says Adam. In a similar vein (pardon the pun), there is an emphasis on the handcrafted, says Blake Letnic, of Blake Letnic Architects. “Whether ceramic tiles or tadelakt render, handmade finishes and their natural variation ensure tactile and visual variety, reflective of materials in their natural state.” “Timber vanities are especially popular,” adds Daniela. “Timber injects warmth and texture.”
Showers with praise We love our showers, not just for washing but also a sensual experience. “Showers are the feature customers are least likely to compromise on,” says Daniela. “They are loving Innovative technology, such as the Grohe RainShower SmartActive with three spray settings to energise, restore or calm at the touch of a button, from a gentle tingle to a vigorous massage.” “Larger showers, complete with a seat, double as steam rooms and we often see dual showerheads in master ensuites, for two to shower together,” says Adam. “Our customers love the combined bath and shower wet area,” says Georgette. “Most commonly paired with a freestanding bath, it allows for a large open space, where they can enjoy the best of both. A clear showerscreen emphasises the open look.” “If you have a long, rectangular space, a wet room embraces both bath and shower without sacrificing a spacious feel,” adds Chelsea. It’s also a way to future-proof your space, enabling easy access when mobility is reduced. Again, with our showers we are getting close to nature – very close. “Architects have been pushing the limits by exposing the shower directly to the elements. Putting a twist on the morning shower ritual, it lets you engage with the weather – and there’s no showerscreen to clean!” says Blake.
Tiles with attitude Architect and designers are getting playful with tiles, relishing their endless shapes, sizes, patterns and profiles. “Ceramic kit kat (finger) tiles, marble mosaics and glazed subway tiles are all studio favourites,” says Michiru Cohen, of Michiru Higginbotham. But just on feature walls for visual interest and used in moderation to avoid the room looking OTT. “We might mix up the format, size or shape of a tile or stone, rather than using too many colours.” On the other walls, larger format tiles or porcelain panels mean less grout and easier cleaning. “Bringing depth to walls, profiled stone tiles are a popular means to provide relief against flat, smooth surfaces,” says Blake. On-trend profiles include fluting or ribbing. “We are designing a lot of bathrooms with terrazzo floor and wall tiles,” says Georgette, of GIA Bathrooms and Kitchens. “A recent bathroom features peachy terrazzo tiles, the warm tones accentuated by brushed-brass tapware.”
Keeping costs down With supply chains shaky due to a pandemic and now a war in Europe, homeowners are shopping local, to avoid long waits and save money. “The Reece Australian Bathroom Report 21-22 reveals an incredible 70 per cent of those surveyed ranked locally sourced manufacturing as a key decision criterion,” says Daniela. “Onshoring materials reduces costs, lead times and, by reducing the distance travelled, results in a smaller carbon footprint,” says Adam. And, with soaring building costs, he and fellow architects and designers are seeking less expensive solutions. “For example, tiling only in areas in direct contact with water, such as around baths and showers, reduces the labour-intensive laying of tiles.”
On reflection Mirrors are upping their design credentials. “They come in finishes that match with joinery and vanity materials, so the mirror no longer feels out of place with other key items,” says Daniela. “We are steering away from the frameless mirrors of the past, to finely detailed frames,” says Blake. “Whether brass, steel, aluminium or bronze, the frame conceals junctions in materials, as well as being an attractive element in its own right.” And forget that mirror cabinet that simply reflects… Smart technology offers the following: on-and-off sensors, LED lighting (dimmable, of course), adjustable light colour, demister, Bluetooth speaker, digital clock and even a magnifier. “Having these features not only looks great, but elevates people’s lifestyles – and impresses any guest!” says Michael.
Basic instincts Basins are matching baths for boldness, with homeowners keen to explore materials and patterns. “The next big material trend comes in basins, especially with metallics, for example the Kado Aspect stainless-steel basin,” says Daniela. “And the speckled look is in, adorning solid-surface basins like the Omvivo Villa.” “A feat of stonemasonry, integrated stone basins are a beautiful expression of material, as if the basin had been carved from a block of stone,” says Blake. “They often feature in powder rooms, where basins don’t need to withstand so much wear and tear.”
Clean and fresh 1 EVERY HOME WILL WANT A BIDET Perhaps we are more hygiene conscious with the pandemic. “Smart toilets (combining loo and bidet) are one of the most talked about considerations when renovating a bathroom,” says Michael. “The trend is at least one per household. They are more hygienic and better for the environment.” They let you set your water pressure, water temperature and drying temperature, all at the push of a button. And save on loo paper, another plus!
2 WALLPAPERS MOVING BACK IN Powder rooms, too, are designed to impress. “We get frequent requests for powder rooms near entertaining zones,” says Michiru. “These spaces are celebrated as the ‘show’ bathroom and often have bolder use of colour, luxe fittings and finishes similar to those in high-end hotels.” Highly patterned wallpaper adds further zap. Because the room’s small, owners can make a splash without stressing the budget. 3 Planning: Homeowners are shopping local, to avoid long waits and save money. Onshoring materials reduces costs... and results in a smaller carbon footprint
CREDIT: Words; Chris Pearson
Word count: 1516
