–
Thursday July 22
–
The hard lessons of remote learning
Students who watch recorded videos of lectures tend to drift into a “surface” approach to study, rather than the preferred “deep” learning, says new research into mathematics online learning.
University of South Australia maths lecturer Sven Trenholm surveyed 93 maths undergraduates (30 in Australia, 63 in the UK), then interviewed the Australian students.
“Regular video users tended to rely more on ‘feelings of rightness’ rather than analytical or logical thinking typically associated with learning mathematics,” Dr Trenholm said.
“The study suggests that regular use of recorded video lectures for learning mathematics is, overall, not conducive to learning maths at a deep level but rather appears to facilitate a ‘surface’ approach which has a negative impact on academic outcomes for maths undergraduates.”
–
Wednesday July 21
–
UTas pushes ahead with Sandy Bay
The University of Tasmania has appointed the architect that will manage the long-term strategic plan for the sustainable development of its Sandy Bay campus.
Melbourne-based Clarke Hopkins Clarke will lead a multidisciplinary team of architects, urban planners and specialised consultants and conduct extensive community consultation throughout the remainder of 2021 to create a plan for the site that UTas vice-chancellor Rufus Black calls “much-loved”.
The plan for housing – aimed to transform Sandy Bay into a “micro-suburb” — is part of the multimillion-dollar plan which has seen the shift of the university to central Hobart.
“The urban renewal project aims to create a sustainable community with a mixture of housing, including attainable housing, education, aged care, commercial and retail spaces, and associated infrastructure,” Professor Black said.
“It will also remain the home to the university sporting fields and facilities.”
–
Winners in the ARC research commercialisation and training round
UNSW Sydney and Monash University were the big winners in the $74 million Industrial Transformation Research Program funding round announced Wednesday, with each scoring two new facilities.
The federal government announced eight new ARC Industrial Transformation Research Hubs and eight Industrial Transformation Training Centres.
UNSW received funding for a Connected Sensors for Health hub and for a Resilient and Intelligent Infrastructure Systems in Urban, Resources and Energy Sectors hub.
Monash received funding for an Advanced Manufacturing with 2D Materials research hub and a training centre for Optimal Ageing.
The other 12 projects were spread across the country. Funding was approved for research hubs for Intelligent Robotic Systems for Real-Time Asset Management (USyd), Nutrients in a Circular Economy (UTS), Supercharging Tropical Aquaculture Through Genetic Solutions (JCU), Functional and Sustainable Fibres (Deakin) and Digital Bioprocess Development (UniMelb).
Training centres were approved for Accelerated Future Crop Development (ANU), Facilitated Advancement of Australia’s Bioactives (MQU), Energy Technologies for Future Grids (UOW), Behavioural Insights for Technology Adoption (QUT), Bioplastics and Biocomposites (UQ), Healing Country (Curtin) and Next-Gen Technologies in Biomedical Analysis (UWA).
–
Tuesday July 20
–
International students are not cash cows
Australia must stop treating international students as a commodity if it hopes to hold its own against competitors such as Canada, the US and the UK.
The warning comes from Study Group Australia which has provided transition courses for thousands of these students into universities.
“Our persistent focus on the economic contribution merely reinforces a negative perception that we treat them as cash cows who don’t deserve the rights we would afford to potential citizens,” Study Group Australia managing director Alex Chevrolle said.
“Our policies and the narrative when talking about international students need to better reflect the significant long-term benefits they offer as future residents of this country.
“Census data indicates highly educated and higher income migrants boost productivity and workforce participation, as well as contributing to the economy and society through higher taxes. Furthermore, they contribute to the increasingly diverse fabric of Australia’s cultural life.”
–
Art of the possible at Uni of Adelaide
This week’s Art of the Possible Festival at the University of Adelaide bridges technology, innovation and art with a range of student works as well as events, speakers and concerts.
Students have collaborated internationally — with Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Bath Spa University, Berklee College of Music and New Space Journal in Washington DC — and locally, with the university’s own Australian Institute for Machine Learning, the Sia Furler Institute of Contemporary Music and Media and the Andy Thomas Centre for Space Resources.
Sia Furler Institute director, Thomas Hajdu, said the idea was to offer students real-world experience in running a festival and operating a lean business start-up. “The students manage every element from planning, design, content curation, sponsorship and marketing, with each student taking on a role in line with their career aspirations,” Professoe Hajdu said.
“It’s a very hands-on way for students to develop leadership and entrepreneurial skills.”
The festival runs until 22 July. Events will be live-streamed and the exhibitions are available online. People who have registered or plan to register for the festival will be sent a link to a live-stream.
–
CSU academic gains national higher education role
Charles Sturt University associate professor Deb Clarke has been elected vice president of the Higher Education Research and Development Society of Australasia (HERDSA).
The organisation encourages and disseminates research on teaching and learning and higher education development.
“Teaching is my love and passion and I strive to build capacity of new scholars in teaching and learning through scholarship and professional learning opportunities,” Dr Clarke said.
She has already served four terms on the executive committee of HERDSA, whose president Kogi Naidoo, is a professor and academic dean at the Institute of Health and Management.
HERDSA is planning a series of webinars focusing on learning and teaching in times of Covid-19 this year, to be followed by a conference in Melbourne next year.
–
Monday July 19
–
CDU lecturer’s therapy dogs are a hit
Hannah Taino-Spick left the defence force wanting to do something “people-focused”. She found the answer in training therapy dogs to comfort and help people in need and with disabilities.
The Charles Darwin University social work lecturer and PhD candidate trained Roxy and Quinton to work with children and adults in Darwin and Palmerston who are in challenging situations, such as learning to read, and facing court.
As part of the Good Dog Animal Assisted Intervention program started by Ms Taino-Spick, they visit primary schools, libraries, and in courtrooms where children are being sentenced. “Their presence lowers children’s anxiety and helps normalise their day,” Ms Taino-Spick said. “The court system can be quite foreign and rigid, and they just bring a sense a normality to the children involved.”
She also taken the dogs to her lectures at CDU. “I also want to show my students that social work is a broad practice that can happen in every shape and form,” she said.
She wants to extend the service to the entire Northern Territory and to the military and veteran communities.
–
Ecology award to UOW and UNSW Sydney
The Ecological Society of Australia (ESA) has awarded gold medals to the University of Wollongong’s Kristine French and UNSW Sydney’s Richard Kingsford in recognition of their contributions to the study of ecology in Australia.
ESA president Bek Christensen said they had both made “sustained and invaluable contributions to the understanding of Australian ecology.”
“They have been pioneers and world leaders in their respective fields, fostered and mentored the next generation of scientists and given back to the research community through their leadership and service roles,” Dr Christensen said.
Professor French, who is director of UOW’s Janet Cosh Herbarium investigates how anthropogenic disturbances interrupt populations and communities.
“My career has never focused on one area; it has had many facets,” Professor French said. “My PhD supervisor used to tell me I would have a problem with focusing on a single line of research and that is still the same 30 years later.”
Professor Kingsford, who is director of UNSW Sydney’s Centre for Ecosystem Science studies the impact of water resource developments on rivers and wetlands. “Hopefully, environmental scientists will get the same level of recognition of their work reflected in government policies and decisions that our medical colleagues currently enjoy,” Professor Kingsford said.
–
Events coming up
HES Academic Quality Forum (29 July, 12pm-1pm online)
The theme of this webinar is Creating a Sustainable Academic Workforce and will explore what the academic workforce of the future might look like and how quality and academic standards can be sustained in an ever-changing environment.
Knowledge Commercialisation Australasia Annual Conference (8-10 September) RACV Royal Pines Resort, Gold Coast
The conference theme is Global Partnerships and Commercialisation themes. It also features the annual KCA awards that celebrate the achievements of members, and highlight “top tier work” in Australasian tech transfer.
Quantum Australia 2021 (8-10 September) Doltone House, Sydney and online
Sydney Quantum Academy’s conference and careers fair for the rapidly growing quantum technology industry. It’s for researchers, businesses, government decision makers, start-ups and big tech.
Australian International Education Conference (5-8 October) Gold Coast Convention and Exhibition Centre and online
AIEC 2021 will explore new horizons for international education with five key subthemes: global challenges, digital innovation, life and learning, policy and politics, and strategic insights.
Collaborate Innovate 2021 (New date of 18-20 October, instead of 9-11 August). Hotel QT, Canberra
The Cooperative Research Centre Association conference will feature an early career researchers competition, the annual Ralph Slatyer address, and the 30th anniversary of the CRC Innovation Showcase at Parliament House.
5th Annual TEQSA Conference (24-26 November)
Save the date, more information is coming.
–
Word count: 1500
