HOW TO Strong and safe options for beautiful entryways that will also bring you joy at every greeting You only get one chance to make a great first impression, so finding a fabulous front door should be an open and shut case. While looks are important, an external door must also be secure and made from materials perfectly suited to the type of home, its orientation and location.
Australian architecture is an eclectic mix of styles and our climate can be harsh so experts suggest an external door combines both form and function.
“Your front door plays a big part in your home’s protection so you want to choose the best exterior door material you can get. The one best suited to your home will depend on your personal preference and style, design of your home and your budget,” says Rachel Edwards, doors and window buyer at Bunnings.
“Remember to consider functionality in addition to style, for example if you are after a dark colour on your entrance door then consider looking beyond timber – aluminium, composite or UPVC (unplasticised polyvinyl chloride) are good alternative options,” she adds.
A front door in a different timber like Blonde Oak or Sliced Pacific Maple will give your home an instant lift
When one door opens ...
Safe and sound Safety is always a concern, but a security screen can really clash with some architectural styles. “Security doors have come a long way with their design and innovation so can offer a stylish and practical option. Our Adjusta-Fit range can be fitted to any door space on the spot with a few turns of an allen key. To avoid a security door altogether, there are options such as smart security, adding a door viewer, and ensuring you have a good deadbolt or a mortice lock,” Rachel says. And with smart technology such as Google or Ring doorbells, there’s a hi-tech alternative to bulky screen doors for security conscious homeowners.
Material facts Front doors in Australia tend to be solid timber which is subject to weathering, says Rachel. External timber doors require a light reflective colour to reduce the potential of bowing, twisting or warping, she adds. The darker the door, the more heat it attracts so choose a paint colour with a light reflective value (LRV) of 50 plus. If a darker colour is essential for you, consider an alternative material to timber.
Get the look If you want the front door to be a focal point, choose a shade that complements the home’s weatherboard, render or brick. Even the selection of handles, rails and hinges should be carefully considered. “There are plenty of doors that will suit period homes. You might find looking at different timber like a Blonde Oak or Sliced Pacific Maple will give your home an instant lift. The Hamptons look is on trend and complements a wide variety of facades, she adds. Aluminium doors not only provide strength against the elements, but add a sleek industrial look while glazing incorporated into front doors is ideal for brightening dark hallways.
CREDIT: Words; Kirsten Craze
Word count: 515
