The government has allocated $49 million towards constructing a new facility at Mile End, next to the Netball SA Stadium.
The development will include a strength and conditioning gym capable of accommodating multiple sports and teams; a specially-designed indoor court with smart technology; sport-specific ergometer training zones; and an environment chamber for simulated heat, humidity and altitude stress training.
For the past 21 years, SASI has operated out of the former Kidman Park High School site.
Sport Minister Corey Wingard said the new facility would provide high-performance athletes with access to state-of-the-art training facilities and leading-edge integrated technologies.
“SASI was Australia’s first state-based sports institute but has never had its own purpose-designed facility that is fit-for-purpose and for the past 21 years has operated out of the old Kidman Park High School,” he said.
“Despite that, South Australia has developed and produced some of the best athletes in the world and this investment will help build on that legacy.”
Mr Wingard said the new headquarters would also help SASI achieve its target of contributing at least 10 per cent of Australia’s team medals at both the Olympics and Paralympics.
“This investment will also give our state greater opportunities to grow our economy by attracting national and international training camps and elite programs,” he said.
South Australian marathon runner Jess Stenson (nee Trengove), who has represented Australia at multiple Olympics and Commonwealth Games, said the existing complex was “tired” and she was “very excited” a new facility would replace it.
“We have incredible professionals there at SASI and it will be really nice now that facilities and resources will match that level of professionalism,” she said.
Adelaide swimmer and Olympic 100m freestyle champion Kyle Chalmers agreed.
“I think we’re very fortunate already here in South Australia but to go one step better ... it’s going to make my job a whole lot easier,” he said.
Premier Steven Marshall said the new headquarters would create about 200 jobs during construction, which is expected to start in 2022 and be completed by mid-2023.
Meanwhile, Adelaide Venue Management Corporation CEO Anthony Kirchner has told a parliamentary committee hearing on Monday that the government’s planned $700 million multipurpose sports and entertainment arena would pull in “in excess of $100 million in revenue each year” and cost “in the order of $80 million” a year.
“We’re looking at jobs during the construction phase of in the order of 7000-plus jobs, and during the operational phase over a 30-year period you’re looking at around 24,000 jobs,” he said.
The Advertiser revealed in March that the centrepiece of the Liberal government’s re-election bid was a $700 million arena, to be built between Adelaide’s railyards and the River Torrens.
It would be capable of hosting basketball, netball and tennis, as well as concerts.
The arena would replace the Adelaide Entertainment Centre.
Mr Kirchner would not reveal at the committee hearing the estimated value of the AEC.
“It will be going to market and for us to flag that in this manner may prevent us from getting the maximum commercial return ... (which) will go to the state government,” he said.
AA Newsfeed Playlist
Word count: 504
