Integrated Irrigation is the manufacturer of the Internet of Things (IOT) farm monitoring product line BushLinx.
This tracks rainfall, temperature, relative humidity, wind speed and direction, evapotranspiration, Delta-T, frost events and fire danger index.
Data from the weather station is used in conjunction with BushLinx soil and temperature probes.
The information is displayed on the farmer's tablet, phone or computer.
Integrated Irrigation started in 2010 in Penola, South Australia, in the IOT farm monitoring industry - mainly servicing those with irrigated crops and pastures.
The company began by utilising software and field hardware - including data loggers and sensors - from other manufacturers to deliver services and monitoring systems to customers.
In recent years, it has built its own range of field hardware, sensors and software under the brand of BushLinx.
Company owner Tim Powell said he did this because he found he could not deliver what customers were asking for with other manufacturer's products and, in particular, their software.
"Now we can deliver soil moisture monitoring systems, weather stations, tank level, water metering and alike to customers in SA and Victoria," he said.
"We have been doing this for more than a decade, with a reputation for strong service and product reliability.
"We routinely service all agricultural sectors, from irrigated and dryland cropping to private weather stations, publicly-available weather station networks across regions, water metering, water budgeting and stock water systems monitoring using tank levels and water flows."
Mr Powell said his BushLinx software gave Integrated Irrigation the ability to accept data from a wide range of sources.
He said it routinely accepted data from third party data loggers and could expand the customer's farm sensing activities with its own data loggers.
"This provides a transition from older technologies to new ones without the need to replace all of the existing hardware," he said.
"A great piece of feedback we have received frequently in recent months is how our style of displaying data is easy to read and navigate.
"It provides a clear, up-to-date assessment of on-farm conditions for activities such as irrigation, spraying and harvesting.
"Due to how we display forecast data, customers can quickly gain confidence in the accuracy of near-term forecast data that allows forward planning around activities like spraying and harvesting to be made ahead of time and get the job done right."
Micko Gruetzner, a top wine grape producer at "The Apsley" in Apsley, Victoria, said soil moisture monitoring was a "must have" technology for him.
"I would be guessing and lost without it now that I've got it," he said.
"I find the way BushLinx helps me to assess the water needs of my vines and plan my irrigation activities accordingly ahead of time not only benefits the product we grow, but gives me the confidence to spend time with the family knowing I don't have to go and check irrigation that day in our vineyards some 50 kilometres away."
Integrated Irrigation's business growth has been achieved through providing excellent service and going the extra mile to ensure equipment is working and customers are receiving data they can use to make decisions, rather than just amassing a lot of data.
Mr Powell said he look forward to expansion to meet client needs in future.
CREDIT:
Word count: 542
