A former federal Liberal minister, Mr Briggs said PwC Australia analysis ahead of Tuesday’s Federal Budget showed “sky-high iron ore prices” and improving national jobs figures had poured more money into government coffers than expected.
Defence Minister Peter Dutton has opened discussion on the nation’s defence needs, declaring on Anzac Day that a military battle over Taiwan’s independence “should not be discounted” and Australia must be “realistic” about China’s antagonistic behaviour.
Mr Briggs, who as Mayo MP was a close political confidante of Mr Dutton, said these escalating geopolitical tensions meant an increase in defence spending was likely over the next five to 20 years.
“I think the Budget will put more emphasis on our defence needs, whether that’s the infrastructure that supports the defence forces, whether that’s the equipment that they need, or whether that’s the big pieces of kit, like ships, like submarines,” he said.
“Clearly an improved budget position, as our analysis is showing, allows the government some more flexibility in being able to deal with those issues.”
This might include further consideration of an upgrade of the Adelaide-built Collins class submarines, to manage the so-called capability gap before future submarines – also to be built in Adelaide – are ready for service in the early 2030s.
Intelligence and international security expert John Blaxland has warned the west and China are locked in a “power contestation” on a level the world has not seen since the Soviet Union Cold War. “China’s delay in releasing information, the allowance of flights out (of the country) well after the period they knew it was problematic, the influence over the World Health Organisation, the removal of critical journalists from Beijing, the control of the story speaks to an approach by China that I think Peter Dutton is very right to question,” said the Australian National University professor. “It is highly implausible that China has just somehow overnight turned off the growth in (COVID-19) numbers. “There are estimates by reputable organisations that the stats are out by an order of magnitude of ten if not more.”
Mr Briggs said SA was well placed to capitalise on multiple fronts, including building or upgrading ships and submarines, as well as developing smart technology to deal with emerging cyber threats.
“South Australia has a unique advantage in that space and the State Government has done well to put an emphasis on it,” he said.
“It’s an emerging challenge for our country, it’s an emerging challenges for the globe and, clearly, conflicts in the future will be driven, in part, in this space.”
The Advertiser revealed a cyber attack on government computer networks last November, believed to have emanated from China, triggered the extraordinary activation of the State Crisis Centre – a co-ordination point for significant threats or emergencies.
PwC in July will open a national hub in Adelaide to train workers in cybersecurity, cloud computing and financial auditing to meet a greater demand for Australian-based services triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Word count: 485
