Job-creating hi-tech firm shows the way
STRONG local supply chains provide the key link to success in South Australia’s advanced manufacturing sector, a leading industry figure says.
Anthony Kittel, managing director of electronic systems maker Redarc, says the ­Lonsdale-based business has been able to overcome the Covid-19 challenges due to rising demand locally and overseas – and its secure ­relationships with other firms.
Redarc, which makes equipment primarily for recreational vehicles, has experienced “fairly staggering” growth, taking on 90 new ­employees and enjoying a 60 per cent revenue rise.
“We’ve come through it (the pandemic) very well ­because we’ve got a very strong local supply chain – a number of our key suppliers are based right here in South Australia,” he said.
“It's been important for us because they’ve been able to support us, and as we’ve grown they’ve been able to grow with us and guarantee that we’ve kept up with the raw materials needed.” Mr Kittel said the lack of international travel had also helped the company, as people in Australia and overseas increasingly looked for products to enhance their vehicles to help them “explore their own backyards”.
Redarc, which has a turnover of more than $100m and exports to 33 countries, has a workforce of about 300. ­Earlier this year it unveiled plans to invest $20m on the rollout of a “smart factory”.
Mr Kittel said it was pleasing new career pathways were unfolding in the advanced manufacturing and hi-tech sectors.
“In more recent years, manufacturing might have lost a bit of its attractiveness for young people as an industry to become involved with,” he said. “But the technologies we’re employing – such as data science, augmented ­reality, artificial intelligence – means there are just so many opportunities opening up in manufacturing now.” Challenges facing the ­advanced manufacturing and hi-tech sectors will be on the agenda for this week’s seventh Flinders University Conversation. The 13-week campaign, in partnership with The Advertiser, brings ­together leading South Australian voices in round table discussions about some of the big issues facing the state.
It is hoped the campaign will encourage people to share thoughts and ideas, and embrace a fearless approach to creating solutions.
Other industry figures taking part in Wednesday’s 45-minute event – hosted by business editor Cameron Eng­land – include BAE Systems’ head of industrial strategy, Sharon Wilson, technology entrepreneur ­George Freney and Flinders University’s John Spoehr.
The panel will discuss a range of industry issues, such as the opportunities pre­sented under the banner of Industry 4.0 – also known as the Fourth Industrial Revo­lution of automation and smart technology – Australia’s dependence on imports, demand for skilled workers and the impact of last month’s federal government decision to scuttle the $90bn Naval Group submarine contract.
The event will be streamed live on advertiser.com.au on Wednesday at 10.30am. Questions can be submitted through advertiser.com.au or on Twitter via #fearlessconversations.
The Advertiser #FEARLESS CONVERSATIONS Flinders University
CREDIT: DAVID GOLDSMITH
Word count: 491
