The CapHat Hoodie has an adjustable aperture in the hood that fits over a standard cap, protecting ears and the back of the neck from the sun, while also extending the peak of the cap to offer more protection for the nose and face.
It’s the brainchild of Coromandel East couple Bernie and Melissa Sharrad, who initiated the patent process more than five years ago after appearing on TV series Shark Tank in 2016.
“Prior to having kids, I used to fish quite a bit on the west coast of South Australia and everyone tended to wear their favourite hats,” Mr Sharrad said.
“I made something out of paper towel and duct tape and put that over my hat and that’s where it all started really.
“Then Melissa had a basal cell carcinoma cancer removed in 2013, like a lot of other people do, and that was a real moment for us – it was the catalyst.
“I’m really passionate about the product and I think it has the potential to disrupt the cancer statistics.”
The Sharrads’ company, CapHat Sun Protection, also manufactures a range of other products that can be attached to caps and other styles of hats to improve sun protection.
The products are manufactured in Adelaide using Australian materials and are sold on the company’s website and on Amazon in Australia and the US.
Mr Sharrad, who works as a project consultant to BHP, said that he was now investigating opportunities to partner with major brands in a bid to promote the concept across the world.
“We have a proven concept with plenty of sales, and on the back of the patent news, we are investigating licensing options in both Australia and the US,” he said.
“Companies like Nike, Asics, Under Armour are at the cutting edge of the latest materials and technologies.
“We’ve already pitched to Nike and we’re hoping to partner with a company like that to take our idea and utilise it in their range.
“We need someone to help us take it to the next level – having a patent validates our idea and now we need a Nike, an Asics or another big ­company, we need the influencers and the marketing.”
Word count: 357
