The board, which co-ordinates the key national agencies, has been tasked with redesigning the way the market works.
The current market “is no longer fit for purpose for the energy transition and beyond,” board chair Kerry Schott said.
“We are focused on modernising the market, unlocking value for consumers and boosting consumer protection, removing red tape and making it easier for businesses to get in and offer the services customers may want to buy.
“We’re moving in the right direction, but major changes are needed.”
The latest directions paper on what reforms are needed from 2025, published on Tuesday, says building the new system while keeping the lights on is critical.
The board welcomed retail prices trending lower but said “bill shock” was still a major problem for vulnerable consumers.
It recognises the extraordinary growth of solar power by households.
In an analysis of the health of the electricity market, it noted a period in South Australia in 2019 where 64 per cent of need was met by rooftop solar. That was already exceeded in 2020 when 76 per cent of the state was supplied by rooftop panels with grid-scale solar farms supplying the rest.
The board wants household solar panels to have flexible input to the grid.
Echoing recent laws in SA for new installations, it wants panel exports to be restricted if there is an excess of energy supplied compared to demand, which can lead to instability.
But it also wants households to be able to export more than the current default limits when the grid can accommodate the power - which would earn households more money.
SA Power Networks is now trialling this smart technology.
The Energy Security Board also wants households to have more control over prices they pay according to time they power hot water, pool pumps and other energy hungry appliances.
Across the national market, the board expects 61 per cent of generation capacity now provided by coal to be retired by 2050.
Up to three times that capacity – or 50GW – of major wind and solar projects are on the drawing board as well as 6GW to 19GW of new dispatchable generation such as fast-start gas, batteries and pumped hydro.
The board wants some of these flexible, dispatchable resources to be keep in reserve but “valued in the market (with) an incentive to be available when they are needed”.
It warns major investment is needed in transmission or “there will be higher prices for consumers”.
The board said the proposed $2.4bn SA-NSW interconnector is likely to be full.
Huge renewable energy projects — totalling more than ten times the interconnector’s 800MW capacity – are planned in SA plus more in southwestern NSW.
This was not necessarily a bad thing, the board said.
It would be better to have excess generation that could not access transmission lines than paying to build a line which was underused.
Federal Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor said redesigning the electricity market was the “most critical energy reform governments have been tasked to deliver by National Cabinet”.
“The national electricity market is at a turning point, with expanding choices, new technologies and large-scale replacement of thermal generation needed as older power stations leave the market,” he said.
“Taking action now is critical and will minimise disruptions, and avoid unintended consequences.”
The market must have “long-term signals for private sector investment in reliable generation and storage, to replace exiting generators with like-for-like capacity”, Mr Taylor said.
Word count: 555
