But what many high-net worth buyers covet most is anonymity, and with a lot of money flowing into the state from uber rich interstate buyers, many go to great lengths to keep their identities hidden from the public eye.
From the tourist meccas of Port Douglas and the Whitsundays, to grand homes in Toowoomba, hillside mansions in Townsville and beachfront blocks in Bundaberg, there is big money flowing into every corner of the state.
Here we look at some of the biggest listed and secret sales of the financial year across regional Queensland, and who has bought what and where.
MORE NEWS: $9m: ‘Bargain’ North Queensland coastal estate listed for sale
Strike it rich with these unique outback QLD properties
Majority of QLD homes now cheaper to buy than rent
***
BRISBANE
1 Leopard St, Kangaroo Point
Buyer: Karl Morris, Ord Minnett CEO and Brisbane Broncos chairman
Seller: Huihui Zhai and Zijian Zheng
Sale price: $15 million
Sale date: May 2021
In Brisbane, the biggest sale recorded in the 2020/21 financial year was a clifftop mansion at 1 Leopard St, Kangaroo Point.
The deal made headlines when it emerged Broncos chairman Karl Morris had bought the six-bedroom, six-bathroom home on 1184 sqm.
The home was once the city’s most expensive when it changed hands for $18.48 million back in 2017.
***
GOLD COAST
41-45 The Promenade, Isle of Capri
Buyer: A Chinese buyer from Sydney (name not on public record)
Seller: Bruce and Carolyne Coulson
Sale price: $27 million
Sale date: October 2020
The three-level house on a sprawling Isle of Capri estate at 41-45 The Promenade sold to a buyer from Sydney.
At the time, the sale was the biggest ever in Queensland, but an off-market sale at Sunshine Beach soon eclipsed that.
The Isle of Capri vendor, Bruce Coulson, founded and later sold the Kool Kids early-learning centre chain.
The recently completed residence occupies three blocks totalling 2961 sqm and boasts some of the best main river and skyline views in the city.
While the identity of the Chinese buyer remains a secret, the next big sale went to Bob Ell, executive chairman of Leda Holdings.
The billionaire developer bought 187-191 Hedges Ave, Mermaid Beach, for an eye-watering $22.6 million in August last year.
RELATED: Gold Coast mega mansion sets new QLD home sale record
***
SUNSHINE COAST
17 Webb Road, Sunshine Beach
Buyer: Name not on the public record
Seller: Margie and Murray Charlton
Sale price: $34 million
Sale date: June 2021
Sitting on a 2015 sqm battle axe block, the fan-shaped, three-level house at 17 Webb Rd in Sunshine Beach changed hands in an eye-watering $34 million deal.
It was an offer too good to refuse for vendors, Margie and Murray Charlton, as it was almost double the $18 million their neighbours got three years ago — despite their neighbours’ property being almost twice the size.
RELATED: Beach house smashes QLD record selling for $34 million
***
TOOWOOMBA
1 Bridge Street, Mount Lofty
Sale price: $2.5 million
Sale date: April 14
This impressive family residence is spread over two levels, and has been extended and renovated.
It had been held for 35 years before it was sold earlier this year, and offers stunning views, multiple living areas, seven bedrooms, a tennis court, pool, double garage and established gardens, all on a 4679sq m block.
Features include a flowing layout that combines indoor/outdoor living, a private entertaining deck with stunning northern views, multiple living areas with ducted heating throughout, a stunning stone kitchen, seven bedrooms with built-in wardrobes and a master suite with escarpment views and a luxurious ensuite.
***
HERVEY BAY REGION
45 Eagle Beach Parade, Dundowran Beach
Buyer:
Seller:
Sale price: $1.92 million
Sale date: April 28
This modern home on a beachfront 2049sq m block has four bedrooms and three bathrooms, and features high ceilings and a custom-made block feature wall.
There is also sandstone columns and stone bench tops, a median room or fifth bedroom, a
master suite with a spa ensuite and luxurious walk-in robe overlooking the pool, a cozy lounge/dining space overlooking the pool and the open plan area and a modern kitchen.
Outside there is an outdoor entertainment area, views of the Coral Sea, outdoor kitchenette and landscaped gardens.
***
BUNDABERG REGION
54 Barolin Esplanade, Coral Cove
Buyer: Interstate lawyer
Seller: Local farming family
Sale price: $1.575 million
Sales date: November 11, 2020
This Feng Shui-inspired 1200sq m grand residence sits on a 2414sq m oceanfront block, with the title to the high tide water mark.
It has 180 degree views of the Pacific Ocean, and has five bedrooms, five bathrooms, three living spaces, three-car attached accommodation, a huge built-in bar, wine cellar and 15m pool.
Other features include a grand entry/lobby that looks down the 37m long hallway to the ocean views, a guest room, a vast family and games room, a formal lounge room with a recessed fire place, a formal dining room and a chef’s kitchen.
In another sale, a 1812sq m block of land at Bargara sold for $2.35 million in May.
It was sold to the state’s richest vendors, who sold their Sunshine Beach residence for a record $34 million last month.
***
GLADSTONE REGION
570 Springs Road, Agnes Water
Buyer: Rip Curl founder Doug “Claw” Warbrick
Seller: Local farming family
Sale price: $8 million
Sale date: February 12, 2021
Located overlooking the famed local surf break, the property was bought by Rip Curl founder Doug “Claw” Warbrick in an off-market sale in February.
Rip Curl was founded in 1969 in Torquay, Victoria, by surfing mates, Warbrick and Brian Singer.
RELATED: Rip Curl founder catches a break and lands dream property
The iconic surf brand was sold to outdoor retailer Kathmandu in a $350 million deal in 2019.
Not much is known about the property, but public records show the 8.89ha site, which includes a few dwellings, was valued at $1.15 million in June by the Valuer-General.
It is understood it was owned by the same farming family for generations, and that they would not sell unless the price was right.
Records also show the surfer-turned-business mogul has a love affair with the region, with his company name linked to four other Agnes Waters properties, plus properties on the Gold Coast and in Northern NSW.
PRD Agnes Water principal James White declined to comment on the identity of the buyer, but said the region was attracting some “very cashed-up buyers”.
“We sold a $2.75 million property to billionaire buyers from Melbourne in an off-market sale,” he said.
“Over the past decade, we have been running at about 150 sales a year, but this yea, we are back to the glory days of 450 to 500 sales a year.
“There is a lot of high-net worth buyers looking here, many from interstate, and places like Noosa.”
***
ROCKHAMPTON REGION
265 Archer St, The Range
Buyer: Local businessman
Seller: Local doctor
Sale price: $1.65 million
Sale date: February 19, 2021
This 478sq m, four-level luxury residence has five bedrooms, four bathrooms, multiple living and dining areas, both indoor and out, smart technology, an in-ground pool and landscaped 981sq m grounds.
Other features include a gym, office, media room, rumpus room, a kitchen with a butlers pantry, a soaring void in central living area, high ceilings, a spacious alfresco living/dining area with a kitchen and barbecue, a resort-style pool, pool hut, bathroom and waterfall, plus landscaped gardens and a garage/workshop.
***
MACKAY
29 Doyles Road, Balnagowan
Buyer: Not yet on the public record
Seller: Wade Moohin of Moohin Homes
Sale price: $2.3 million
Sale date: June 28, 2021
One of the most viewed houses in Queensland so far this year, this waterfront statement residence has five bedrooms, three bathrooms and parking for 24 cars.
It has a 112m river frontage and is the ultimate family playground on 2.3ha.
Features include a bar room, kids retreat, 12m saltwater pool, four-bay garage and an array of shed and garage space.
Added extras include 150,000L of rain water tanks, a bore, solar panels, and a separate studio complete with its own wet bar, games room, store room, patio and bathroom.
Luxury features include a Travertine tiled front entry, a large stone feature wall, a cantilever staircase, state-of-the-art technology, a galley kitchen and a master retreat with an oversized walk-in-robe that doubles as a dressing room.
***
TOWNSVILLE
32 Stirling Drive, Castle Hill
Buyer: 1300 Smiles boss Daryl Holmes
Seller: Businessman Adam Carmichael and wife Daniella
Sale Price: $6 million
Sale date: October 19, 2021
The hush-hush off-market sale of this statement residence eclipsed the highest ever residential sales price of $3.85 million by a mile.
It is not known just what $6 million gets you in Townsville as there are few photographs of the residence, but industry insiders with knowledge of the hillside mansion say no expense was spared in its construction.
The Carmichael’s, who relocated to Brisbane after selling up their auto dealerships in Townsville, bought and demolished a house in one of the capital’s most sought-after suburbs.
The couple revealed they had engaged famed architect Joe Adsett and builders Graya Construction, the team behind some of the most luxe celebrity and ritzy homes in Brisbane, to craft their new dream home.
***
PORT DOUGLAS
1-3 Wharf St, Port Douglas
Buyer: Carlton Premiership player Fraser Brown
Seller: Businessman and tourism identity John Morris
Sale price: $8.25 million
Sale date: December 8
The record for a home sale in the idyllic far north Queensland town of Port Douglas was smashed with the sale of this luxurious estate.
The spectacular property was the long-time home of millionaire businessman and tourism identity John Morris, who built the residence 30 years ago.
The five-bedroom, six-bathroom Wharf St address has capacity for more than 100 guests and was designed to double as a corporate retreat.
It’s set among landscaped grounds that include natural stone gardens and a freshwater stream. The floorplan follows a U-shaped configuration, with one wing used for entertaining and the other wing for guest bedrooms and private family living spaces.
***
CAIRNS
21 Knott Court, Whitfield
Buyer: Chinese developer Benny Wu
Seller: Patrice Knott
Sale price: $5.29m
Sales date: November 6
Inspired by the Italian Renaissance style of Andrea Palladio and overseen by architect Andrew Simpson of Total Project Group, this Whitfield mansion took years to sell, but when it finally did, it made international headlines.
With over 1400sq m of living spaces, six bedrooms and seven bathrooms, the almost 7000sq m block represented one of Cairns’ most sought-after real estate sites.
Features include a grand porte cochere, a stunning master suite, twinned bedrooms sharing a central music room, a guest suite with a private bar and terrace, a gym, two offices, a wine cellar, casual and formal spaces, a centrepiece kitchen, a self-contained guest apartment and an eight-car underground garage with a workshop, and its own city views.
Outside there is a pool, multiple terraces and landscaped gardens.
***
WHITSUNDAYS REGION
Lot 3 Mandalay Road, Mandalay
Buyer: Horse racing personality Alan Galloway
Seller: Hog’s Breath Cafe co-founder Don Algie
Sale price: $6.5 million
Sale date: August 3, 2020
Call Mark Beale 0404 498 790
Sold off-market, Chesapeake Estate achieved the highest sale price on the Whitsunday mainland since 2018, when Mandalay estate sold for $14 million to a Sydney family.
Mr Galloway, of the world famous Alabar horse breeding stud in Victoria, fell in love with the architecturally-designed Chesapeake when he saw it from the air.
“I was flying and I saw the mountain with Chesapeake on the top at 1000ft above sea level, it was like a beacon,” Mr Galloway said.
“It’s a magic location here. Johnny Depp stayed at the bottom of the mountain when they filmed Pirates of the Caribbean.”
Mr Algie built the four-bedroom house on the site, boasting 360 degree views to Shute Harbour and Hamilton Island from every room.
The property comes with not one, but two, helicopter pads and a 25-metre lap pool.
RELATED: Hog’s Breath Cafe founder sells Whitsundays mansion
(Source: realestate.com.au; CoreLogic; public records)
Word count: 1861
