The start of spring and warmer weather traditionally marks the start of the peak real estate season.
This year, we’ve already seen an unusually strong housing market over the winter months.
CoreLogic’s latest research estimates that for the three months to July – usually a quieter time for the market - the ‘sales to new listings’ ratio for South Australia was 2.0, well above the national average of 1.4. What this means is for every two properties sold, only one was added for sale, which would quickly lead to a shortage of available stock.
The combination of a strong residential property market and a likely further seasonal increase in buyer interest in coming months means it’s important you’re in a position to act quickly when the right property comes along.
Consider seeking pre-approval for a home loan, understand the market you’re entering, and access a property report, available through lenders such as BankSA, to help inform your decision making.
The current sellers’ market is also benefiting from increased use of technology for buying and selling – the trend has been supercharged by the pandemic – making it easier than ever to soundly explore and buy properties remotely. Buyers are more and more reliant on online content, while many auctions are now also able to be held virtually.
Real estate agents are incorporating video tours in their online listings, and many are using drones to provide a 360-degree view of the property and surrounding neighbourhood.
Other new marketing techniques include use of artificial intelligence, virtual and augmented reality, and data analytics to help buyers and sellers better understand the market.
The use of technology in the home can also improve the prospects of selling. Buyers are checking the property is connected to NBN or has 5G-coverage, and they’re attracted to homes that are already set up to embrace the latest smart technology.
So if you’re a buyer or seller this spring, timing and financial readiness are likely to be important factors in ensuring you get ahead in a competitive market. Do your homework, know what you can afford and make the most of new technologies to make the process easier and faster.
CREDIT: BEN OWEN BANKSA STATE GENERAL MANAGER; CONSUMER
Word count: 370
