HOUSEHOLDS with solar panels should have more of a say on selling their power and greater control on pricing, according to the Energy Security Board.
The board, which co-ordinates the key national energy agencies, has been tasked with redesigning how the market will operate after 2025.
The market “is no longer fit for purpose for the energy transition and beyond,” said chair Kerry Schott, pictured.
“We are focused on modernising the market, unlocking value for consumers and boosting consumer protection, removing red tape and making it easier for businesses to get in and offer the services customers may want to buy,” she said.
The latest directions paper on needed reforms, to be published today, says building the new system while keeping the lights on is critical.
It recognises the extraordinary growth of household solar. It noted a period in South Australia in 2019 when 64 per cent of need was met by rooftop solar. That jumped to 76 per cent last year. The board wants household panels to have flexible input to the grid.
Echoing recent laws in SA for new installations, it wants panel exports to be restricted if there is an excess. But it also wants households to be able to export more than the current default limits when the grid can accommodate the power.
SA Power Networks is now trialling this smart technology.
The board also wants residents to have more control over prices they pay according to time they power hot water, pool pumps and other energy hungry appliances.
Across the market, the board expects 61 per cent of generation capacity now provided by coal to be retired by 2050.
Up to three times that capacity – or 50GW – of big wind and solar projects are on the drawing board as well as 6GW to 19GW of new dispatchable generation such as fast-start gas, batteries and pumped hydro. The board wants more value assigned to these resources, with incentives when they are held in reserve.
Major investment is needed in transmission or “there will be higher prices for consumers”.
The proposed $2.4bn SA-NSW interconnector is likely to be full with renewable energy projects totalling more than 10 times its 800MW capacity planned in SA.
Federal Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor said the market was “at a turning point, with expanding choices, new technologies and large-scale replacement of thermal gen-eration needed”.
The market must have “long-term signals for private sector investment”, he said. page 40: business daily
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 417
