CONSTRUCTION has kicked off on billions of dollars of state-of-the-art office towers across Australia that will reflect a new level of pandemic inspired workplace expectations.
According to a survey by Cordell and CBRE Research, 13 major office towers in CBDs around Australia either started construction late last year or are forecast to start in 2022.
They include software giants Atlassian HQ, a 40-storey $1bn-plus concrete-and-timber tower next to Sydney’s Central Station; a $600m 38-storey tower at 205 North Quay in the Brisbane CBD that will house Services Australia; and Mirvac’s 31-level tower at 383 La Trobe St in Melbourne’s legal precinct near Flagstaff Railway Station.
The towers will reflect the shift in A-grade offices. While green, wellness and high tech features have been incorporated into office design for some time, the pandemic has accelerated and intensified their adoption, increasing their desirability for companies who want to ensure staff commute to their expensive pieces of real estate.
In Adelaide construction has started on the Walker Corporation’s 27-storey Festival Tower between SkyCity and Parliament House,’ The green all-electric tower is part of the $1bn Festival Plaza project, and is expected to be completed by the end of 2023.
Fund manager Centuria started construction of a $40m office building before Christmas in front of the Wilson carpark on Wyatt St in the Adelaide CBD.
The six-storey building will comprise 4600sq m of A-grade office space, a rooftop garden, retail areas and end-of-trip facilities. It has secured tenant pre-commitments for more than half of the available floor-space.
Leading architects Hassell Brisbane studio principal Kirsti Simpson said the most important issue for the new breed of office towers was that they must make their mark.
“The one thing is to have a distinct product in the market,” she said. Offices are no longer thought of as a bricks and mortar space where workers automatically come to every day. Instead they will be seen as places for collaboration, connection and inspiration.
More like an A-grade hotel in many cases, new office towers will have impeccable green credentials and include an increased use of sustainable materials/designed to future-proof from potential impacts of climate change.
They will also have smart technology to monitor water, electricity and waste energy efficiency in the building.
Many of these buildings will have outside areas like so-called skygardens and include facilities such as gyms, swimming pools, meditation retreats and a range of eating and drinking options. Inside there will be purified air.
Increasingly the design of offices is being merged with the comfort of home, meaning offices are including comfortable seating, warm lighting, curtains, indoor plants, outdoor seating, plush carpet and noise reduction/sound absorbing materials like partitions and rugs.
Ms Simpson said her clients were becoming more involved in the design of workplaces which had ensured “new and interesting criteria” in the Covid era.
“Wellness features in an office building were once an optional extra, but now they are seen as absolutely essential,” she said.
AMP Capital chief economist Shane Oliver said Australian CBDs were in the midst of a “structural” change due to Covid.
“The more this goes on the more people will migrate to working from home in the suburbs,” he said.
Last year, $16.5bn worth of office assets (valued at over $5m) were sold across Australia, compared to $8.1bn in 2020.
CBRE Pacific regional workplace strategy director Janet Martin said suggestions that there would be a mass exodus from Australia’s CBDs were “reactionary and premature”.
“There is still a role within the CBD as a major activity centre as we manage the virus better, particularly after the peak which will occur in the next month or so,” she said. Ms Martin said the reason people went into the office would be different from the pre-Covid era when it was expected staff would just turn up.
CREDIT: PROPERTY CHRIS HERDE
Word count: 640
