Townsville’s entrepreneurial talent.
That’s the view of Smart Precinct NQ managing director Matt Steine.
The not-for-profit organisation, formally opened in September, offers growth consulting and support for local based businesses that strive to be nationally and internationally competitive.
The organisation which is funded by Townsville City Council and the State Government, provides mentoring, connections, education, fundraising tips and resources to local entrepreneurs looking to scale nationally and globally.
“Our aim is to create an ecosystem of high growth globally competitive businesses that are based in the North,” Mr Steine says. “Ultimately we want to make sure that anyone who is starting a business or wanting to grow a business in Townsville has the support they need to succeed as though they were living in Sydney or Singapore.”
Mr Steine says he firmly believes Townsville can be one of the best places in Australia to get a start up’s first client.
“This is one of the benefits of us being a relatively small city, that if you’ve got a great product here, no one is more than a phone call away before we can put you in touch with a potential client that could use that product,” he says. “And what we’ve heard from businesses is that their first customer is far more important than grants or loans.”
Smart Precinct NQ, which has offices in Walker St the city, has a high- powered board including Townsville Mayor Cr Jenny Hill, SafetyCulture project lead Blake Pelling, JCU professor Ian Atkinson, software developer Stuart King, senior software developer Tristan Davey, TAFE Queensland director of education and training Ian Smythe and Cubic general manager Mark Horn as well as representatives from key businesses and stakeholders.
“It’s a volunteer board so obviously everybody there is there with a community spirit in mind,” Mr Steine says. “There is a real strength in Smart Precinct NQ having the support of the board, and having access to their networks.”
The role of business mentorship can’t be underestimated.
Smart Precinct NQ carried out surveys with businesses that started in Townsville and moved.
“We asked them why they moved to a different city,” Mr Steine says. “And often it was because they struggled to get access to the right kind of advice and support in growing their business.” Having worked for Facebook in Singapore and experience in innovation and entrepreneurship at the
Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade, Mr Steine understands how important great advice can be.
“I think that the mentoring approach is really critical to help peopl,” he says. “To have somebody that’s already gone through and faced and solved some of the challenges that they are facing today. That is why this idea of an ecosystem being developed is so important.”
Smart Precinct NQ’s Chair of the Board is Stuart King, CEO of Fierce Ventures, a local STEM innovator based in Townsville, who says collaboration is the key to accelerate business success.
“For us to achieve our long term vision, it’s essential that all the different stakeholders in the community collaborate,” he says. “We already have a number of organisations in the community servicing businesses. But there’s no one really working with early stage companies and helping someone who has an idea to be given the support they need, particularly early on in their business journey.”
Mr King, a father of four, has worked in cities across the world from London to San Francisco, as well as Sydney and Melbourne.
“I want my children to have those opportunities while living in the city,” he says. “I want them to be able to do cutting edge, world-class, work right here. I would love for my children, in say ten or 15 years, to be able to do the kind of work that I’ve been able to do in the past in cities across the world, but to do it here in Townsville.”
Mr King says the world has changed a great deal due to COVID-19.
“We’ve seen an acceleration of the idea of remote work, and remote companies, and distributed work, so Townsville is well-placed to take advantage of that,” he says. “I see this as a great opportunity in Townsville for us to get things up and running and to figure what is the next set of opportunities for companies that haven’t been created yet.
“Townsville is home to some of the best entrepreneurial brains in the world. We want to keep that talent in the city and and support those business to achieve success on a global scale.”
Kate Pearce - Healthy Little Eaters
I’m a registered nurse and founder of Healthy Little Eaters, which is a business that enhances the lives and health of children, through play. The vision is to inspire every child to feel like a superhero and eat like one.
The game works simply through matching together 24 bright, jumbo, high quality playing cards with colour coded boarders (a healthy food and a body part) and piecing together a giant floor puzzle – a puzzle that shows the visual link and similarity between wholefoods and our body.
The game is simple enough for a three year old and children diagnosed with learning difficulties but complex enough for a 10 year old boy living on a farm in Goondiwindi to practice his reading, learn new terminology around nutrition and human anatomy and use his imagination to create multiple ways to play and connect with his family.
Not only is Healthy Little Eaters a fun new game, it’s a growing culture – a culture where children are connected, understand and love their bodies - a culture where healthy eating is considered, superhero like.
What initially inspired you to establish the business?
Having healed my own health concerns and digestive issues through changing my diet and discovering the healing powers of foods. I wanted to teach my children this vital information as early as possible, so they didn’t have to undo the negative side effects of an unhealthy diet that myself and many other young adults do. I searched for games and educational resources only to find there was nothing available and with this, Healthy Little Eaters was born. The game worked so well in encouraging my children to eat fruits and veggies that I had to make more and share it with the world.
What has been your most fulfilling business achievement?
Healthy Little Eaters has been featured in multiple magazines, newspapers and radio stations throughout Australia and has partnered with Nutrition Plus - a charity organisation aimed at improving the diet of indigenous children.
The game has received outstanding feedback from parents, teachers, dietitians, nutritionists, gp’s and feeding therapists with over 900 games sold, some of which were international.
Most recently, I was nominated by Smart Precinct NQ to attend the Flair Incubator selection bootcamp in Toowoomba – a program, that if selected, would provide me the opportunity and mentorship to take my business from regional NQ to the world.
What has been one of your biggest hurdles to success in your business development?
What did you do to overcome it?
Consistency. In the early days of my business I very much lacked consistency. The periods that I did put a lot of time and energy into my product and business I would see wonderful results and when I didn’t, I wouldn’t see any results.
When I became much more aware of this, I looked at the consistency plans of other successful businesses. I now do something everyday, even if it is small, to improve or make my product known, yes – even if I don’t want to.
CLaire Lawson - T-Air
When my new home was under construction, I designed a solution to a very common bathroom problem; towels not drying quickly, becoming smelly and unhygienic.
I designed a unique style of towel bar that mimicked how people hang towels on the washing line - spread wide, full length and away from the wall, which were then installed in her new bathrooms.
These towel bars were so effective that friends and the Master Builder judges insisted I patent my design. The rest is history as they say; T-air was born (towels suspended in air).
The T-air goal is to transform the way we accessorise our bathrooms, with equal priority given to style, functionality, and hygiene.
What initially inspired you to establish the business?
It happened by chance, when people saw the towel rails in my new bathroom. They wanted to know where they could buy some, to then find out I had designed them. As more and more people asked me to create different models, I kept designing and creating.
That is one of my problems, I love creating, so now there are many different models for use throughout the home (bathroom, kitchen, laundry, BBQ, and even the ‘man cave’).
It is the enthusiasm of others and happy customers that keeps my business going.
What has been your most fulfilling business achievement?
The first big achievement was being invited to display T-air products in the Innovation House which focuses not only on creating energy and water efficient homes, but also healthier homes. It’s very exciting to see a handful of builders that are serious about leading change in the building industry and actually sourcing innovative products to sincerely help their clients.
Despite the majority of people purchasing T-air products for the modern stylish design and value add functionality, I get the most satisfaction every time someone comes back and tells me about the hygiene benefits they have experienced with T-air products, as hygiene was the driver for my first ever product for our new home.
What has been one of your biggest hurdles to success in your business
development?
What did you do to overcome it?
Being very passionate about locally made products, I tried very hard to get my products manufactured in Townsville. This was a huge challenge, as all businesses were set-up for industrial scale manufacturing rather than creating a product of acceptable quality for the interior of stylish homes. In the end the process was too ‘clunky’, time consuming and costly for it to be sustainable.
Luckily from the help and connections of Smart Precinct, Advance Queensland and TAFE Qld, I was very lucky to find a manufacturer in the Gold Coast that now is a ‘one stop shop’ of very high quality products suitable for bathrooms, kitchens etc.
Dr Olaf Rusoke-Dierich - iScope
I’m a doctor with 20 years hands on and research experience. I studied in Germany medicine and hold a PhD. My passion is diving hence I wrote two books about diving medicine (one in German the other in English) https://www.springer.com/gp/book/9783319738352
I came to Australia in 2003 worked for several years in ED and became eventually a GP. Being a GP was actually my initial reason to study medicine.
A few years back I saw the need of new devices for GPs. The current devices are using centuries old technology and don‘t support minor procedures like ear wax removal or foreign body removal from the eye. Hence, I developed the iScope which is a digital revolution in medical devices for GPs. It supports procedures on eye and ear and eases documentation by taking digital images and transferring them wirelessly to the computer or other digital devices.
To bring it to the market I founded JD Sanmed in 2018 and engaged Ontogo as the commercialisation team. In collaboration with Medical Device Partnering Program (MDPP) in Adelaide we developed a proof of concept prototype. We are now looking for investment partner to finalise the product development and bring it to the market.
What initially inspired you to establish the business?
I saw the potential of iScope improving patent care and supporting GPs with a high quality, affordable and practical day-to-day device which combines all devices needed in general practice into a single device. The inspiration to built JD Sanmed came from the achievements of my wife Judith. She is a living example of how to turn dreams into a very solid business which is based on a combination of good education and hard work. But I am also influenced from my German background and my family. My grand aunt was married to a successful entrepreneur who had series of inventions which are still around worldwide. I remember her stories vividly. Maybe that inspired me to become and inventor too. Additionally, I love solving finding solutions for unsolved problems.
What has been your most fulfilling business achievement?
Being selected by the MDPP and having a prototype and being able to hold my invention in my own hands.
What has been one of your biggest hurdles to success in your business development?
What did you do to overcome it?
The first big hurdle was coming from a clinical background and transition into a commercial mindset. I engaged with Ontogo, which is a Brisbane based commercialisation team which brings in years of experience in medical devices. They provide not only support but also guidance on this path. We all enjoy working together.
The next hurdle is the fundraising for a medical device start-up. Medical devices take longer to create revenue and finding the right investors is not easy. But by continuing our commercialisation path we continue building the company and reducing risks which are coming with every start-up or new device. By reducing commercialisation risks we receive now more interest from potential investors and I am optimistic that we will find the matching investment partners. I think by doing the right things investors getting more confidence in what we are doing and standing for.
Mick Devine - Calxa
I founded Calxa in 2008 with Alex Lewis in 2008 with the intention of making reporting easier for small businesses, not-for-profits and accountants. From my experience with my previous app, we knew that integrating directly to the accounting system could save users hours or days of effort every month. From complex management reporting to full cashflow forecasts, Calxa was designed to take people away from error-prone spreadsheets and give them back their time.
We released the first desktop version in July 2010 and moved it online to a browser app in 2017. Originally working with MYOB, we added Xero integration in 2011 and QuickBooks Online a few years later. Now Calxa can be used with any accounting system. From our roots in small businesses, we’re now working with larger, multinational companies using complex ERP systems. Calxa was born and bred in Townsville and this is where we plan to stay.
What initially inspired you to establish the business?
Frustration with reporting in spreadsheets! Both of us had come from accounting/bookkeeping backgrounds and spent many hours helping businesses prepare reports for banks, management boards or grant providers. There had to be a more efficient way to do this.
Extracting data from the accounting system was the key to gaining this efficiency. Then providing structured reports with minimal risk of error and automated processes would complete the story.
I was MYOB’s first developer partner back in 2000, building the first cashflow application integrated to an accounting system. It wasn’t perfect but it demonstrated the concept and that there was a market need for it. We used the lessons learnt from this pilot app to design and build the first version of Calxa and set the foundations for future growth.
What has been your most fulfilling business achievement?
There have been a few memorable achievements in the past 12 years but two stand out:
Firstly, was achieving $1m in donations to Not-for-Profits. Right from the start we knew we wanted to work with community organisations and the charity sector but we also were aware of the financial constraints faced by small and medium organisations. Working together with Connecting Up in Adelaide, we committed in 2011 to give away $1m worth of our software. It took 4 years to reach that first million target but it demonstrated to us the impact our app could have. Small NFPs have the same complex reporting requirements as their larger counterparts but often operate with part- time and less skilled staff. We wanted to make a difference and this was something we could do that achieved that. We’re a few weeks away now from our next target, totalling $2m dollar donations.
Secondly, was the MYOB Partner Choice Award in 2017. We have won a handful of awards over the years for technological innovations which is always nice. However, being recognised by an entire industry of accounting professionals and thousands of MYOB partners across Australia and New Zealand, was special. Recognition from peers in the industry truly validates the work we do.
What has been one of your biggest hurdles to success in your business development?
What did you do to overcome it?
Even though we’re in the business of helping people forecasting cashflow, having sufficient cash was a major challenge for us at various points in our journey. We started with cash in the bank and a customer base we transitioned from our previous app so we had an advantage over many. It’s still a challenge though when you need to market a new product and you want to grow it quickly to reach your break-even point. There were times when we borrowed from friends and family, times when we stretched the credit cards to the limit.
In some ways, life could have been easier for us if we’d sought external investment. We did look into that but we couldn’t find an investor who shared our goals and values – and that was more important to us than quick cash (and a subsequent quick exit). We wanted to build an app that made a difference to our customers: the not-for-profits, the small businesses and the accountants. Our goal hasn’t just been to make millions. We have created a truly innovative application that serves the needs of our customers.
So, we had to solve our cashflow challenges by carefully managing them. Fortunately, we had our own software for forecasts! We had to keep the team small, we had to work long hours and be creative at times. It also made it important for us to run a profitable business. That’s not always fashionable in the software industry but we wanted to ensure our long-term success both for the security of our team and for our customers.
Professor Ian Atkinson and Govinda Pandey – LIXIA
Govinda Pandey
I’m the CEO of Rockfield and co-founder of LiXiA, Rockfield is a national niche engineering consulting firm that was spun out of JCU more than 20 years ago to disseminate advanced engineering analysis to Australian industry. Rockfield is headquartered in Townsville and has branch offices in the capital cities. LiXiA is a new tech company formed through the collaboration of Rockfield with JCU. LiXiA’s vision is to provide real time data, from city to bush, through sensors attached to electrical poles to measure their structural integrity. This information will assist electrical distribution networks to implement a more time and cost efficient maintenance program.
What initially inspired you to establish the business?
When the mining downturn started to hit our industry hard around 2013, Rockfield had to pivot, and pivot quickly to build its resilience and sustainability by leveraging our core skills in advanced analysis. We realised that there were literally trillions of dollars worth of infrastructure assets worldwide, such as bridges and power poles, that were at their end of design life, but due to economies of scale, could not be replaced. The current method of managing the integrity of these assets is primarily through visual inspections and simplified desktop engineering assessments. Back then, a system of wireless sensors, referred to as the internet of things (IoT), had already started to emerge as a powerful technology, making an impact on a number of industries. Despite its size and influence, the infrastructure industry has always been very traditional, rigid and resistant to change. We saw this as a great opportunity to connect IoT with this industry and accelerate it into the digital era. We focused our university connections and began collaborating with CSIRO Data61. A new product / platform was borne and spun off as LiXiA which is an acronym for “living infrastructure through informatics and analytics”. LiXiA’s target industry encompasses the world’s ageing electrical utility industry, One measure of success for LiXiA would be the establishment of a new IoT sunrise industry in Townsville.
What has been your most fulfilling business achievement?
- To lead a successful and highly distinctive consulting engineering company from Townsville with a developing national footprint.
- To be part of a team co-creating a digital solution for the management of the world’s ageing electrical distribution network.
What has been one of your biggest hurdles to success in your business development?
Although we are getting an incredible amount of support from all quarters, including that from Smart Precinct NQ and Advanced Manufacturing Hub Townsville, the risk aversity of big organisations is still a major hurdle. This can get further compounded by their procurement policies that can hinder start-ups vehemently attempting to penetrate markets.
What did you do to overcome it?
The customer discovery process is very critical to overcome this. Identifying lead users, finding and empowering champions within these big organisations, co-creating a solution with them and demonstrating value through small trials are critical to the success of any start-up. The good news is that the level of sophistication within the asset intensive industries has gone up significantly other the past few years. It’s about finding and energising the key drivers of change within these organisations.
Dr Lisa Elliott Australian Crayfish Hatchery
I’m a PhD scientist with extensive skills and knowledge in aquaculture (20 years in industry and 10 years in research), microbiology, immunology and phageology. Over the past 10 years, I’ve been responsible for a diversity of projects including the successful development and application of bacteriophage preparations to control bacterial disease outbreaks in the veterinary, aquaculture, and human medicine sectors. Since 2008, I’ve overseen the research, development and project management of bacteriophage projects as applied to therapeutic development of multi-drug resistant bacterial infections (superbugs), and the management of research teams.
Having gained global recognition for my skills in phage therapy development for a range of animal production systems and bacterial pathogens, I was an invited speaker at the World Nutrition Forum in Munich (2014) in recognition of my leading-edge research in phage treatment as alternatives to antibiotics.
What initially inspired you to establish the business?
In 2013 I was contracted to undertake a project titled “Eliminate factors inhibiting redclaw farming from reaching its full potential”. This project lasted two years and was the catalyst to establish Australian Crayfish Hatchery (ACH).
With more than 20 years in the aquaculture sector redclaw crayfish was the first industry to really excite me. Redclaw aquaculture ticks all the right boxes; environmentally sustainable, economically robust and a huge commercial market demand. However, the commercial production of seedstock (craylings) for stocking of growout farms was undeveloped”. This was the trigger that sparked the passion to establish ACH and provide industry leadership and invest in the development of state-of- the-art technology and world leading sustainable freshwater crayfish production.
What has been your most fulfilling business achievement?
ACH has an amazing, and truly inspiring, team. Working with the team has resulted in the development of technologies that are the first of their kind. ACH have achieved production outcomes never seen in the industry (on a global scale) using environmentally sustainable methods.
Of significance is the development of a fishmeal-free feed using insect meal as the protein source and the use of bacteriophage instead of antibiotics to control bacterial issues. We are proud to say we are a totally fishmeal-free and antibiotic-free hatchery. ACH was awarded “Top Innovator- Australian Seafood” at FISH 2.0 in Silicon Valley USA in 2019 due to our innovative technologies.
What has been one of your biggest hurdles to success in your business development?
Changing the current small-scale production mindset currently dominating the industry. The current industry is dominated by small scale farms happy to produce small and inconsistent volumes of crayfish using stocking methods that are not at commercial scale. Due to its ‘cottage industry’ status this has prevented industry from being able to supply any significant market and thus prevented expansion. ACH can produce and supply a consistent number of craylings all year however there are not enough commercial farms to take them. Our challenge has been to educate the current industry participants in new intensive culture methods and to encourage investment in the development of large commercial intensive production farms in NQ and NT that can produce all year and tap into the current USD8.0 billion global market.
What did you do to overcome it?
ACH is working hard to provide workshops and information to current and potential industry entrants with the most up to date production technologies. On 26 th November 2020 ACH held an event named Redclaw 2020 where a range of politicians, policy makers, farmers and potential investors were invited to hear guest speakers, taste test redclaw crayfish and tour the ACH facility. This event was to educate and encourage investment in the redclaw industry in NQ.
Word count: 4091
