THE road to the Holy Grail of fantasy footy starts here.
After 23 home-and-away rounds, the champion of KFC SuperCoach will claim $50,000 in cash and the best trophy ever created in Australian fantasy sport.
How do you put yourself in the running for ultimate footy bragging rights? It’s free, easy and fun.
Head to supercoach.com.au to register, pick a guernsey for your team, and start picking your squad of 30 players.
You can pick from all 18 AFL clubs, and the only catch is you need eight defenders, 11 midfielders, three rucks and eight forwards.
And they all must fit under the $10m salary cap.
That can disappear quickly so make sure you pick a mixture of top-end superstars, mid-priced bargains (look for players returning from injury or ready to jump to the next level) and rookies. These players, priced under about $210,000, are crucial to KFC SuperCoach success so watch for players selected in round 1 teams.
You can make unlimited changes to your team until round 1, then your team is locked in. You’ll have 35 trades during the season to cover form and injuries, with five all-new trade boosts to give you an extra trade when you need it most.
There is also an optimise button to pick the best 22 each week and a new trade assist to suggest the best trade for your team every round using our smart technology.
The last step is to join a league or create one to play against your mates for bragging rights, ultimate glory and a shot at that incredible trophy.
What are you waiting for?
Who should you pick in 2022? Here’s a player from each team who could be a great KFC SuperCoach buy.
ADELAIDE JOSH RACHELE $185k fwd The Crows’ top draft pick kicked three goals in each practice game. Start him on the field with confidence.
BRISBANE LIONS LACHIE NEALE $543k mid Almost $200k cheaper than this time last year after an injury-interrupted season when he still averaged 100. Could average 120 this year. Get on.
CARLTON PATRICK CRIPPS $455k mid Burnt many coaches last season but looks as fit as ever and torched the vaunted Demons midfield in the AAMI Series. Could be a sneaky bargain.
COLLINGWOOD NICK DAICOS $194k mid Arguably the Pies’ best player in their last practice game and should be one of the first picked in your team.
ESSENDON DARCY PARISH $621k mid Exploded into the elite midfielder club last season, can he get even better? Could set your team apart from the pack.
FREMANTLE WILL BRODIE $224k mid Hard midfielder couldn’t get a regular game at Gold Coast but might be part of the Dockers’ starting midfield.
GEELONG TOM STEWART $586k def One of the most reliable performers in KFC SuperCoach. Never seems to play a bad game.
GOLD COAST MATT ROWELL $343k mid Scored off the charts in his first four AFL games. Can he get back to that? Signs in the pre-season were very positive.
GWS GIANTS STEPHEN CONIGLIO $261k mid/fwd Could be the steal of the season after receiving a big price discount. Ignore his 2021 numbers, he’s ready to be a star again.
HAWTHORN JAMES SICILY $448k def Heavily discounted price after missing all of last season with a knee injury but has slotted back into his old intercepting role.
MELBOURNE MAX GAWN $657k ruck Premiership skipper has dominated KFC SuperCoach, averaging 120-plus for four seasons. Will Luke Jackson eat into his points this year? Probably not.
NORTH MELBOURNE JASON HORNE-FRANCIS $207k mid No.1 draft pick is expensive for a first-year player but worth every cent on the evidence of a super impressive pre-season.
PORT ADELAIDE ZAK BUTTERS $444k fwd Has shown enormous scoring potential but it’s a gamble based on his inexperience and history of getting injured.
RICHMOND DUSTIN MARTIN $504k fwd/mid Returning from a horror kidney injury but looked sharp in the pre-season games. Always scores big against Carlton in round 1.
ST KILDA JACK STEELE $686k mid One of the top scorers in KFC SuperCoach, the Saints skipper just does everything well. Big tackle numbers are a nice points boost.
SYDNEY PADDY McCARTIN $158k fwd/def One of the great things about KFC SuperCoach is selecting players you never thought you would. He’s cheap and getting games.
WEST COAST HUGH DIXON $102k ruck/fwd Late addition to the Eagles’ list is as cheap as they get. Stick him on the bench in the ruck or forward line.
WESTERN BULLDOGS JACK MACRAE $700k mid The most expensive player in KFC SuperCoach won’t let you down. Scored under 100 once in 2021 ... it was a 97.
Word count: 774
