BRISBANE audio technology firm Audeara is shouting its latest business deal from the rooftops.
The ASX-listed firm, which makes the world’s only full-fidelity headphones with a built-in hearing test, has signed a global supply agreement with giant audiology retailer Amplifon that will see its products available across all of Amplifon clinics globally.
Founded by James Fielding and Alex Afflick in 2016 as a small, crowdfunded project, Audeara is now valued at close to $10m.
The men originally planned to develop the headphones as a medical screening device for remote areas, but soon realised the potential for the product to be used in everyday life for people with impaired hearing – from watching television to Zoom meetings.
Fielding (illustrated) says the headphones use the principle of “better not louder”, adjusting sound so that people ultimately are prevented further hearing loss. The headphones also make it easier for people living with loved ones suffering hearing impairment. “We talk about buying the headphones and saving the marriage,” says Fielding. The company’s latest deal has huge potential given Amplifon is the biggest audiology retailer in the world with 11 per cent of global market share and more than 9200 points of sale across 25 countries. As part of the deal, Amplifon will purchase a minimum 5000 headphones during the second half of the year.
Since listing just over 12 months ago, Audeara has established supply agreements with all major Australian audiology clinics including Connect Hearing and Blamey Saunders, both wholly owned subsidiaries of Swiss hearing giant Sonova, as well as leading US supplier Oaktree Products.
It has been a big year for Fielding, 34, who last year was named the University of Queensland’s distinguished young alumni for entrepreneurial leadership.
NEW HIRE BRISBANE nutrition company Flavour Creations has hired Peter Harding-Smith as its new chief financial officer.
Harding-Smith was previously chief financial officer for oil and gas company Comet Ridge and Anteo Diagnostics. Flavour Creations chief executive Bernadette Eriksen says Harding-Smith’s extensive experience will be a great asset as the company continues to expand its markets.
Founded in 1997, the company develops thickened drinks, powders and other products for people living with dysphagia. Dysphagia occurs when there is a problem with the neural control or the structures involved in any part of the swallowing process.
The company employs more than 100 people at two facilities in Brisbane, including a state-of-the-art manufacturing facility in Tennyson, and a business hub in Acacia Ridge.
HOT PROPERTY A SYDNEY-BASED private investor has snapped up a prominent office building in Hamilton for a cool $46.5m. The building, 365 Macarthur Ave, is fully leased to Chevron, one of the world’s leading integrated energy companies.
City Beat hears the buyer was drawn to the building’s location in the heart of the priority development area of Northshore Hamilton.
The riverfront precinct will accommodate the main athletes village for the Brisbane 2032 Olympic and Paralympic Games.
The building was constructed in 2016 for the multinational energy company, which committed for an initial term of 15 years. CBRE agents Jack Morrison and Adelaide O’Brien brokered the deal for vendor RF Corval alongside Peter Court, Mike Walsh and Fred Le Fanue from Cushman and Wakefield.
CREDIT: GLEN NORRIS; CITY BEAT
Word count: 534
