TONSLEY-based X-ray systems manufacturer Micro-X has made a potential breakthrough into one of the largest high-end security screening markets in the US.
The US Government’s Department of Homeland Security has selected Micro-X’s wholly owned subsidiary in Seattle for two early-stage contracts worth $US4m for systems to progress its new concept for airport passenger self-screening.
Micro-X will get up to $US1.5m in stages to design and manufacture a prototype self-service baggage scanner, subject to conditions including formal contracts, a design review and delivery time-frame capped at 12 months for the prototype.
DHS agency Transportation Security Administration screens two million passengers daily across 440 US airports. TSA wants to enable self-service checkpoints with security screening and automated threat detection.
Micro-X is prototyping a similar scanner for the UK Government, using an array of miniature X-ray tubes which enable accurate automated detection of explosives and prohibited items.
The second contract, worth $US2.5m, involves designing a self-screening checkpoint portal to house the scanner and potentially other smart technology to verify documents and body scanning. Micro-X will lead the 20-month design contract as part of a consortium that also includes Melbourne-based Elenium Automation and Monash University as well as a German imaging solutions provider and a US software company.
The second contract also involves payment in stages, subject to formal contracts and milestones.
The awarding of both the contracts with DHS and commencement of work is expected in early 2021 with Dr Brian Gonzales, Micro-X’s US-based chief scientist, leading the projects.
Micro-X will hire imaging and software engineers in Seattle to execute the sensitive areas of these proposals, while the Tonsley team will also look for another six systems engineers for the X-ray and imaging system work that will be done in Adelaide.
Managing director Peter Rowland said the selection “accelerates, funds and validates” Micro-X’s entry into global airport security markets. “The scanner is just one part of it, but if we could make inroads with the portals, that’s a market of 8000 to 12000 portals just in the US,” he said.
“And with a growing push by the aviation industry to harmonise security systems, testing our technology and proving it in the US takes our expertise to a whole new level.
“We didn’t expect it, but we are on a bit of a roll and loving it.” Micro-X, an Australian sharemarket-listed company, saw its share price surge 41 per cent to close at 26c yesterday.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 405
