THE South Australian Sports Institute will have its own purpose-built headquarters for the first time in its 39-year history after the state government announced it would build a new multimillion-dollar base.
It has allocated $49m to a new facility at Mile End, next to the Netball SA Stadium.
The development will include a strength and conditioning gym capable of acc­ommodating multiple sports and teams, a specially designed indoor court with smart technology, sport-specific ergometer training zones, and an environment chamber for simulated heat, humidity and altitude stress training.
Sport Minister Corey Wingard said on Monday the new facility would provide ath­letes with access to state-of-the-art training facilities.
“SASI was Australia’s first state-based sports institute but has never had its own purpose-designed facility that is fit for purpose,” he said.
Mr Wingard said the new headquarters would also help SASI achieve its target of contributing at least 10 per cent of Australia’s team medals at Olympics and Paralympics. Mr Wingard said the facility would attract national and international training camps.
SA marathon runner Jess Stenson (nee Trengove), who has represented Australia at Olympic and Commonwealth Games, said the existing complex, at the old Kidman Park High School, was “tired” and she was “very excited” that a new facility would replace it.
“We have incredible professionals at SASI and it will be really nice now that facilities and resources will match that level of professionalism,” she said.
Olympic 100m freestyle champion Kyle Chalmers agreed. “I think we’re very fortunate already in SA … but it’s going to make my job a whole lot easier,” he said.
Premier Steven Marshall said the headquarters would create about 200 jobs during construction, expected to run from 2022 to mid-2023.
Labor sport spokeswoman Katrine Hildyard welcomed the investment in elite sports but said many community clubs and state sporting organisations were struggling to attract small grants.
Meanwhile, Adelaide Venue Management Corporation chief executive Anthony Kirchner told a parliamentary committee hearing on Monday that the government’s planned $700m multipurpose sports and entertainment arena would attract “in excess of $100m in revenue each year” and cost “in the order of $80m” a year. The Advertiser revealed in March that the centrepiece of the Liberal government’s re-election bid was a $700m arena, to be built between the railyards and River Torrens.
CREDIT: ELIZABETH HENSON
Word count: 386
