SHOWERS ON SHOW Fluted-glass shower screens reflect our love of texture, while being elegant, too. “The newest trend is ribbed-glass shower screens and dividers,” says Michael. “Chic without obscuring views or sacrificing light, they provide subtle texture,” as seen in this Pohio Adams design. “We are loving fluted glass,” says Carole.
“It adds interest where plain glass would lack presence.” Lambert Campbell Design ups the ante by framing that glass in steel. “The Crittall shower door with fluted glass is one of our favourites. We love the wrought-iron work and its handmade imperfections.”
FUTURE PROOFING “Bathroom longevity is at the forefront of renovators’ minds, who are readily embracing smart design and product choices,” says Daniela. “We’re seeing more open spaces and layouts (seen in this bathroom by Brett Mickan Interior Design) together with sensor toilet flush buttons and tapware, plus thermostatic technology in showers.” With the push of a button, you can set the perfect temperature. “Technology can range from radiators that double as towel rails, to hidden showers and built-in media units,” adds Michael. Future-proofing is revealed in other ways, too. “Tapware with a universal inwall body, so that the trimkit – the visible part of wall-mounted tapware – can be easily changed will encourage regular updating to reflect trends,” says Daniela.
Trend watch Go with the flow with these bathroom developments ● Resort-inspired bathrooms with an organic, textural feel.
● Textured tapware in aged brass, gunmetal and nickel.
● Textural basins using new technologies such as solid surface. ● Curves for a softer look.
● Timber to echo nature.
● Non-rectified marble and-hand-crafted tiles for tactility. ● Fluted showerscreens.
● Decorative lighting like wall sconces for elegance and mood. ● Smart toilets.
TILE STORY Hand-crafted tiles are in vogue. “Handmade concrete tiles from Morocco and fabulous rich hand-glazed tiles allow for personalised bathrooms,” says Chris Adams. Meanwhile, slender finger tiles are replacing mosaics and subway tiles. “Finger tiles are a modern version of subway, only more versatile,” says Carole. “Because they are small, they allow you to curve walls, add shape to areas and the simple repeat pattern is textural, adding interest without being overwhelming.”
THE LATEST ON LOOS “Smart toilets are one of the most talked-about considerations when renovating a bathroom,” says Michael. “They are more hygienic and better for the environment.” Bringing smart technology to the humble toilet pan, they are a bidet-style toilet with water nozzles (set to desired temperature) and an adjustable seat. “This Toto type of toilet is growing in popularity,” adds Carole. “It represents luxury.” And no Covid toilet paper worries.
LIGHT SHOW Lighting is to the fore, especially wall sconces for ambience. “Downlights light up a room like a tennis court. Now we are looking for more subtlety. Sconces are decorative and make a room sing,” says Carole. “We love sconces, widely used to add mood and soften a space,” adds Kathryn.
It’s all about basins Matte is marvellous and new materials open up new colours Basins are bathroom heroes and innovative materials favour tactility over sheen. “Solid-surface and ceramic deliver concrete and stone looks,” says Daniela, who says earthy colours are on the way. “Solid-surface is a man-made material that looks like stone, but with a softer feel so you can do much more with it,’’ says Carole. “It also takes colour well.” 1 Parisi ‘Isy Oak’ 100 floor vanity, $2650, Domayne. 2 Timberline Allure round basin, $269, Harvey Norman. 3 Contura 530 solid surface inset basin, $791; and 4 Rectangle 530 inset basin, $519, Caroma.
Word count: 587
