I own a Toyota Prius and would like a new EV hybrid that’s not an SUV. Can you recommend a hybrid sedan on sale now or soon?
Jenny Lowe, email I’m unsure if you’re after a self-charging hybrid (like your Prius) or a plug-in hybrid version where you have an electric battery range typically around 50-80 kilometres, plus a normal combustion engine. Plug-in hybrid sedans are rare. There’s the Hyundai Ioniq Plug-in Hybrid fastback, but at more than $52,000 drive away you may as well get the full electric version for $2000 extra. You could buy a new Prius but it’s a very dated car. For better hybrid buying – no plugging in required – try Toyota’s Corolla and Camry hybrids.
POOR CONDUCT The semiconductor shortage holding up car manufacturing is stupid. It endangers jobs and has a run-on effect to suppliers of traditional “real” car components. As a message to car designers, non-essential electronic gadgets add expense and weight and can actually be dangerous. We need gadgets like we need Covid. The world managed without electronics built into vehicles for 110 years. I’m very annoyed.
Fred Gibbs, email The semiconductor shortage has been a huge wakeup call for the car industry and there really are no winners. You make some fair points, but while we could survive without the likes of digital dashboards (Peugeot reverted to analog gauges in its latest 308 model), these little chips play their part in airbag deployment, fuel injection management, power steering, electric windows and much more. Electric cars? Their semiconductor count is multiples more than in combustion vehicles. I agree modern cars often have unnecessary tech – digital climate control for example – but it’d be irresponsible to remove lifesaving smart technology.
JUKE BOX DRAMA My wife’s considering a new Nissan Juke. She loves its shape and size but we’ve heard there are problems with the automatic transmission. Have you heard of such problems and has Nissan done anything to rectify it?
Michelle Dewstow, email The Juke gets one transmission: a dual-clutch automatic. It’s okay when up to speed, but my test notes said at low speeds it’s “jerky, hesitant and at times awful.” Nissan has implemented a software update for the transmission since then, but I’ve not tested it. It’s a driveability rather than reliability issue, so test drive a Juke and see how it performs at low speed. Try reverse uphill parking to really challenge that gearbox. Your wife may love the Juke’s looks, but these don’t matter if she doesn’t enjoy its drive. Current Juke owners can get a free transmission software update at Nissan dealers.
UNKNOWN CHARGE Perhaps when testing electric vehicles you could put the price of a complete replacement battery pack?
Jeff Rook, email We’d love to, but it would be something of an irrelevance. Most EV manufacturers give an eight-year battery warranty (MG offers only seven), so if there’s failure or too much degradation during that period you pay nothing for a replacement. With rapid battery advances and (hopefully) falling battery prices, it’s impossible to know what a replacement cost will be in eight years’ time.
AT MY LIMIT My 2019 Audi S5 doesn’t have speed-sign recognition technology, nor, I believe, does any other Audi in Australia. It’s available in European Audis but Audi Australia won’t turn it on. Why and does anyone know how I can enable it?
Rob Rayner, email An Audi Australia spokesman confirmed speed-sign recognition is not available on any of its vehicles “due to the fact that we have a range of signage standards and conventions here, even between different states and territories.” I’m yet to receive a response as to why other car brands offer the technology despite having the same road sign challenges. It’s personal opinion, but I think we can do without speed sign recognition – it’s proved unreliable on many of my car tests. Perhaps Audi found likewise.
FIT FOR PURPOSE Re your comment “hybrids only prove their efficiency in town,” I can’t agree. We did a round trip from Brisbane to Toowoomba and our 2019 Toyota Camry Hybrid returned 4.3L/100km. That included highway, climbing the Range and driving in town.
John Lapworth, Hybrid Owners Club of Qld.
Incredible economy John. I’ll rephrase it and say hybrids make better sense for urban rather than rural/highway drivers. As we all drive differently, I’ll use Toyota’s official economy figures. The 2.5-litre petrol Camry uses 5.4L/100km in extra-urban (highway) tests and 9.3L/100km in the city. The 2.5-litre Hybrid uses 4.2L/100km and 4.3L/100km respectively in the same tests. The hybrid is more efficient than the petrol model on the open road, but the biggest gains are realised in stop-start traffic. I think the Camry Hybrid’s a great car, but there are reasons to pick a non-hybrid version. There’s a torque converter auto gearbox rather than a CVT, a full-size spare wheel and a 1200kg rather than 400kg tow rating.
IAIN CURRY GETS ANSWERS WRITE TO MOTORING AT CARS@NEWS.COM.AU OR PO BOX 2808, GPO SYDNEY, 2001
CREDIT: IAIN CURRY
Word count: 838
