I’ve read that what used to be around 180,000 Qantas points business-class return to London (before Covid) now takes about 980,000 points. Can you explain why, please?
After some sleuthing (and much time spent speaking with the team at Qantas), I must admit to remaining a little confused. The points required for Classic Flight Rewards seats have not changed since June 2019 and a return business-class Classic Flight Reward from Sydney to London remains 289,200 Qantas Points (plus taxes, fees and carrier charges). At least in one case, Covid-19 has changed nothing.
That said, the availability of Classic Flight Rewards can vary throughout the year and by market, depending on demand, with millions of Classic Flight Reward seats available across both international and domestic routes to be booked with points. My advice? To keep checking the site and if you find the points still seem too high for the trip you’re planning to take, call the Qantas team to see if they can assist.
For everyone else pondering how Qantas points works, there are two ways that members can use points to book flights on qantas.com: Classic Flight Rewards and Points Plus Play – the former allowing members to use their points for use on Qantas, Jetstar, Oneworld member airlines and other partner airlines. These points are fixed and will not change with time of booking.
The latter, Points Plus Play, allows members to use their points to buy any fare on qantas.com or jetstar.com and travellers have the choice of using points to pay for the fare in full or partially, mixing cash with points to pay for that fare. The points required for a Points Plus Pay flight booking are not fixed and change depending on the cash price of a specific fare.
Princess Cruises requires the cruise personaliser to be completed using the Medallion app via “smart technology”. I don’t have any smart equipment so I’m having trouble booking in.
I hear you. I’ve lost track of the number of times the “convenience” of tech has failed me in the past couple of months (don’t even get me started on the Australian Travel Declaration app).
With Princess Cruises, I can see what the company was trying to do. The Medallion app is an all-in-one that interacts with your Medallion, a wearable disc that serves as an access point to information about you so you can personalise your onboard experience. It’s ridiculously convenient – if you have a smartphone or tablet.
You mentioned in your email that the team at Princess told you to borrow someone else’s smartphone, buy one or buy an iPad, so I contacted the team again to see if you can use any other method. They responded that once guests book a cruise, they can become “ocean ready” on their own computer or device and guests can access Cruise Personaliser with their booking number. The team added that if further help is required, guests can connect with the call centre, who can help complete this process.
In forums around the globe, other cruise passengers have had success with some android phones up to four years old (updates can help), but what works for some does not work for others. If it doesn’t work with your phone and Princess Cruises is unable to assist in a satisfactory way, your choices (aside from walking away) are limited, I’m afraid.
Many passengers go down the path of borrowing a smartphone or buying a secondhand one. As people are updating them with alarming regularity, you can pick up a refurbished phone quite cheaply on Kogan and Amazon marketplaces.
NEED HELP?
Doc Holiday is still on duty during the Covid-19 crisis. Send your questions to docholiday@news.com.au or keep up with Doc at escape.com.au/doc-holiday Personal replies are unfortunately not possible
Travel updates PITCAIRN REOPENING With most of its community now fully vaccinated, Pitcairn Island will welcome cruise ships and other visitors from March 31 with strict Covid protocols. Visitors must provide proof of vaccination at time of booking, return a negative PCR test within 72 hours of boarding and self-isolate for seven days before also.
2022 TRAVEL TRENDS Close to three in four Australians plan to go big on their next trip, Expedia’s 2022 Travel Trends Report finds, a phenomenon the company has dubbed GOAT (greatest of all trips). Along with splurging, 24 per cent want a digital-detox holiday, 28 per cent want off-the-beaten track trips, and 14 per cent hope for a holiday fling.
KAUNAS 2022 Looking for a new year bucket-list wild card? Kaunas, Lithuania’s second-largest city, has been voted the European Capital of Culture for 2022. Noted for its art (check out the Devils’ Museum, with about 3000 fiendish depictions), architecture and Nordic restaurants, it shares the title with Luxembourg’s Esch-sur-Alzette.
FREE TESTS FOR VIC Up to 34 million free rapid antigen tests will be available to Victorians by the end of January, health minister Martin Foley has announced. Details on how they’ll be distributed had yet to be confirmed when we went to print, however the move is expected to make interstate travel for those in the state a little easier.
CREDIT: Dilvin Yasa; Doc Holiday
Word count: 861
