Without a doubt, one of the major wins of the past couple of years has been the opportunity to spend more time at home with loved ones. By loved ones, we mean our two or four-legged pets who are cherished parts of the family. So how do you leave your little fur babies when it’s finally time to head back to the office for a full day or you’re finally planning a weekend away?
As the back-to-work mandates filter through the states, leaving pets for the day is about to be reality.
Of course, pets will be safe at home but there are a few ways to keep them happy while you’re out, says Dr Katrina Warren.  “Don’t fuss around your dog or make a big deal before you leave – always keep your departures and arrivals calm and quiet.  “Leaving behind something to entertain your dog can act as a really great distraction,” she says. “When leaving your dog unsupervised around any treats, be sure you feel confident that your dog’s chew strength is up to the task.” Dr Katrina says setting up a “doggie den” will give your pet a safe space to retreat to, while pet doors add freedom for dogs and cats to stay in or wander outside.
However, if the only one fretting is you, installing an interactive pet camera is worth considering. From cameras that are activated by movement to ones that offer voice recordings and interactive speakers, you can keep in touch, even when you’re not there. Automatic food dispensers can take care of regular mealtimes without worry, while choosing a longer-lasting litter can keep your cat clean and content, too.
1 Calming beds Doughnut beds, those snug, super-fluffy faux fur beds with raised sides can be the cure that calms an anxious pet. Whether it’s separation anxiety, an old or confused pet, loneliness, much needed warmth or a highly-strung cat or dog who doesn’t like thunder or loud noises, these calming beds have become a stress-relief solution for pet owners worldwide. “Often to feel safer and more secure, dogs might try to burrow into a blanket or furniture or find a place where they feel snug and protected,” says Dr Chris Brown. “When your pup uses a calming bed in conjunction with proper training and vet-directed treatment, you can help reduce your pup’s stress.”Leaving some of your clothing near their bed will also comfort your pet when you’re not at home.
2 Pet cameras Not all of us can set and forget, and many of us, yes, will fret when pets are left behind. So don’t. Pet cameras are so advanced and range from motion activated to interactive tech that lets you be in the moment, call out to pets, hear them and make them feel as if you are still around. Some pet feeders come with cameras too, while others will send a live feed to your phone or can record footage so you can watch them play, sleep or eat. “Even the most loving and caring and dedicated pet-owner might, at times, want or need to go away for a holiday or work trip,” says Dr Tim Sharp, a mental health blogger. “And, it’s not always possible or appropriate to take one’s pet along on these occasions. For many pet owners, then, the prospect of time away can invoke stress and anxiety; which can potentially ruin the time away and which doesn’t serve anyone well.” From two-way audio cameras such as the Furbo to apps such as Barkio, you’ll be able to stay in touch and get away.
3 Automatic feeders
Some pets, like cats and fish, are less needy than others and can be content to be without you for extended periods – as long as someone, or something, is feeding them daily. That's where automatic feeders can revolutionise your life and allow owners to enjoy a night away, once in awhile. Smart kibble feeders, automatic treat dispensers and bubbling water fountains work for cats, rabbits and dogs, and can be motion activated or set to timers to feed pets up to six times a day. Owners can also make voice recordings to call their pet to meals. If you do plan to use an automatic feeder when you go away, set it up a few days in advance so you can see how the machine works and how your pet reacts to it, to ensure they are not afraid of its sounds and mechanics, and also to see if it dispenses the correct amount of food, and when you want them to have it, too.
4 Pet doors Security is a top priority for pet parents, when they’re at home and when they aren’t too. Pet doors are a great option if you have a secure backyard and a dog or cat who likes a bit of sunshine or exploring. That said, no one wants to see a pet bolting out the door and down the street, especially if you have tradies over who don’t know how to close a door behind them. Pet gates are similar to toddler gates and work a treat if you need to enclose an active pup in one part of the house. Smart technology is also making indoor-outdoor pet doors safer too. Whether it’s peace of mind, security and safety, or so strays don’t enter your home at night, microchip-enabled smart doors allow your pet access while timers can ensure they are locked in at night. A chip in their collar allows them to scan in and out, and unlocks the door for them to enter, but not the riff raff, should other small animals or vermin come knocking. GPS trackers in collars can also monitor your cat or dog’s location should you wonder where Fido is digging in the yard.
5 Long lasting litter Cats dislike mess and need a clean litter tray, so if you are planning to go away for a night, or even the weekend, the top tip is to leave an extra litterbox out, says television vet Dr Chris Brown. While automatic feeders can take care of their meals, their litter requires pre-planning so you don’t arrival home to the stench of urine and faeces. “It’s a frustration for all of us clean freaks,” he says. “That clean and pristine cat litter only stays that way for a matter of seconds.” Long lasting, or multi cat litters, and absorbent cat wee pads that soak up smells are good options that can last up to a week. Clumping litter will contain the mess for longer too, while crystals and zeolite pellets can dehydrate and drain liquid, neutralising smells. If you don’t like mess, consider housing litter trays in a contained space such as a laundry cupboard with a door flap, or a converted sideboard (above) which allows for privacy and also stops litter mess being spread throughout the room.
CREDIT: Words; Trudy Oram
Word count: 1155
