2021 CROPPING FARMER OF THE YEAR CROPPING FINALIST KINGARA FARMS Polkinghorne family LOCK, SA THE Polkinghornes from South Australia’s Eyre Peninsula farm in a league of their own.
The family – comprising Tim Polkinghorne, his wife, Ellen Hardy, and Tim’s parents, Andrew and Jenny – run a well-oiled operation focused squarely on harvesting the best possible returns from their paddocks, using the latest technology, while reinvesting in their greatest asset – their soil.
Their Kingara Farms business is stretched over 40 kilometres near Lock as part of a deliberate ploy to spread risk across different regions, soil types and rainfall patterns.
Regardless of where the rain falls, some of their country will produce profitable yields thanks to a complex management regime and the inclusion of technology.
In fact, it’s through adoptation of smart technology that the family has really made its mark. They haven’t rushed out and spent up big on the biggest or best, rather cherry picking technology they know they can achieve a solid return on investment from.
These include a protein meter for their harvester, which allows them to blend their wheat to produce an even line for delivery and produces maps which leads to a more targeted approach for inputs.
They’ve also incorporated vegetation index maps which show crop biomass – providing them a bird’s eye view to see what areas of the paddock are doing well and which aren’t through the growing season.
“Our aim is to bring the weaker areas up to get uniformity in production and to increase yield overall,” Tim says.
Despite a tricky season last year, with sub-par rain during the growing season followed by unwelcome rainfall at harvest, Tim said it had worked out to being one of their best yet.
That was thanks to the ability to plan and then manage the crops regardless of what the weather throws at them and to know exactly how their crops were performing due to their tech tools.
Looking ahead to this year’s cropping season, the Polkinghornes have locked in their fertiliser and chemical supplies and have even bought a self-propelled sprayer fitted with weed seeker technology, at an additional cost of $200,000, to maximise efficiency. It’s a plan that makes not just dollars, but sense
Word count: 375
