The Morrison government will invest $2.7 million to subsidise advanced smart meters for households, businesses and schools to monitor energy use, forecasting power bill savings for consumers who allow the energy companies to control household appliances.
The My Energy Marketplace program will be rolled out by the Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA), which needs the data to see where, when and how much energy is coming back into the grid through the huge growth in rooftop solar and could use the program to tap into household batteries. About 5000 households and businesses and 250 schools nationally will be accepted into the program.
The data collected will be shared with the Australian Energy Market Operator, which faces a challenge in integrating new power sources into the existing grid.
"Whether it's rooftop solar, battery storage, energy efficiency, controlling electricity loads and appliances remotely, or the uptake of electric vehicles, we need better data to effectively run the future grid consisting of more and more decentralised consumer energy assets," ARENA chief Darren Miller said.
ARENA is working on the My Energy Marketplace with private company Wattwatchers, which will stump up the remainder of the funding for the $8 million program.
By signing up to the program, households can use the new smart meters to reduce their energy use by allowing retailers to tap into connected appliances such as air conditioners and refrigerators to control the temperature during peak periods.
While purchase and installation costs will be subsidised, participants will have to contribute, with households set to pay between $200 and $400 over three years, depending on individual factors.
Wattwatchers chief executive Gavin Dietz said energy networks and market operators faced a "mission critical challenge" to manage the transition to higher penetration of renewable energy into the national grid.
"With more and better data, consumers will be better informed to buy their energy," Mr Dietz said. "They can identify and take action on energy efficiency opportunities, both behavioural and appliance-driven, and use energy at times that suit them."
Australia is a world leader in rooftop solar, with panels installed on 2.2 million homes.
The Energy Market Operator forecasts rooftop solar will generate 25 per cent of energy consumed by 2040.
Around one-third of households in Queensland and South Australia have rooftop solar installed, and 15 per cent of Victorian and NSW homes have solar panels.
CREDIT: Mike Foley
Word count: 394
