TECHNOLOGIES such as smart parking and CCTV, as well as an indigenous business hub, are the final pieces of Adelaide’s $551 million City Deal.
The landmark agreement, uniting all three levels of government on a vision for Adelaide over the next decade, will be signed today.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison said the deal meant “more jobs and more opportunities” because it focused on growing Adelaide’s population, the innovation economy and its global reputation in culture and the arts.
CONTINUED PAGE 4 Smart moves as City Deal set to be sealed FROM PAGE 1 “Our combined investment and co-operation across the federal and state Liberal governments and local councils highlights that we all believe in Adelaide and SA and how we can make it an even better place to live,” Mr Morrison said.
Mr Morrison, Cities Minister Alan Tudge and Technology Minister Karen Andrews will join Premier Steven Marshall and Adelaide Lord Mayor Sandy Verschoor in Adelaide today to sign the deal.
The Federal Government’s commitment also includes a further $10 million for smart technologies initiatives for residents, businesses and visitors in the CBD, alongside a $12.6 million commitment by the city council to investigate initiatives including smart parking and CCTV.
The Government will also provide $3 million for an indigenous business hub that will be designed with local consultation to promote innovation, incubation and start-ups.
The Advertiser this week revealed more than $100 million was committed by the Federal Government for several projects at the old Royal Adelaide Hospital site, including a new Mission Control Centre at the Australian Space Agency and funding for an Aboriginal art gallery.
However, the deal also includes piloting a new visa program in Greater Adelaide over the next three years to attract talented and skilled overseas workers.
Mr Tudge said it would lift Adelaide and South Australia to new economic heights.
“It will directly focus on growing Adelaide’s innovation economy, supporting population growth in the city and across the state, and boosting Adelaide’s burgeoning cultural and tourism economy,” Mr Tudge said.
Premier Steven Marshall said it was “fantastic” that the Federal Government had continued to back his plan to improve South Australia. “Our combined investment is a great example of what happens when governments work together to deliver productive infrastructure and more opportunities,” Mr Marshall said.
“This deal has a focus on transforming Lot Fourteen into a job generating innovation hub, while also boosting our cultural economy.” Funding for the $551 million deal will be delivered over the next decade to meet project milestones.
The Advertiser understands that projects such as the Australian Space Agency will be allocated funding in the April 2 Federal Budget.
A spokesman for Opposition infrastructure spokesman Anthony Albanese said that if elected, Labor would honour “any budgeted element” of a City Deal, and would build on it under its “city partnership model”.
WHAT’S IN THE CITY DEAL Lot Fourteen Development $364 million from the State Government Innovation Hub Up to $20m from the Federal Government Aboriginal Art and Cultures Gallery Up to $85m (Federal) International Centre for Tourism, Hospitality and Food Studies $30m (Federal) Australian Space Agency Headquarters $26m (Federal), $2m (State) for the agency, as well as $4.2m towards a Space Innovation Fund, $2.2 million on supporting initiatives Australian Space Discovery Centre $6m (Federal) Mission Control Facility $6m (Federal), $2.5m (State) Smart technology $10m (Federal Government), $12.6m from Adelaide City Council Indigenous innovation and incubation $3m (Federal) The Heysens at Hahndorf $9m (Federal) Carrick Hill House $3m (Federal) The Mitcham Hills Trail and Glenthorne Trail$2m (Federal)
CREDIT: JADE GAILBERGER
Word count: 592
