ABORIGINAL GALLERY WORLD FOOD SCHOOL HILLS’ HEYSEN HUB
ADELAIDE will become home to Australia’s greatest Aboriginal art gallery, with the Federal Government promising to invest $85 million towards the project.
The deal will be unveiled today as part of a $129 million plan to boost the economic benefit of the city’s world-renowned arts, food and cultural scene under the Adelaide City Deal.
The gallery, to be built at Lot Fourteen, the old RAH site, has been the dream of Premier Steven Marshall.
Cities Minister Alan Tudge told the Sunday Mail the projects would boost the cultural economy of South Australia and drive continued visitor growth. “More visitors means more jobs,” Mr Tudge said.
“This will be a key theme of the City Deal, which will soon be officially signed by the Prime Minister and Premier.” CONTINUED PAGE 8 PM seals $129m City Deal to secure culture hub FROM page 1 Today’s announcement will include funding for: A NEW Aboriginal Art and Cultures Gallery at Lot Fourteen – $85 million AN International Centre for Food, Hospitality and Tourism at Lot Fourteen – $30 million A NEW visitor centre at Carrick Hill in Adelaide’s foothills – $3 million CONSTRUCTION of The Heysens at Hahndorf, a dynamic arts hub to celebrate the life and work of Hans and Nora Heysen – $9 million DEVELOPMENT of smart technology walking trails at garden and national park tourism sites – $2 million.
Mr Marshall said the funding injection from the Morrison Government would ensure that the State Government’s vision for Lot Fourteen was closer to being fully realised.
“Our vision, with the support of the Federal Government, will transform Lot Fourteen into a job-generating hub for generations to come, and is yet another example of what can happen when governments work together to deliver,” Mr Marshall said.
Federal Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said the funding was evidence that the federal Liberals believed in SA by investing so heavily in job-creating projects. “These investments can guarantee Adelaide is a must-visit destination for arts, culture and heritage,” Mr Birmingham said.
The funding announcement will place pressure on federal Labor. Opposition infrastructure spokesman Anthony Albanese has vowed to overhaul the city deal concept if Labor is elected at the federal election, expected in May.
But he has also vowed to honour any deals inked before Labor is to come into office.In December, Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced Lot Fourteen would be the home of Australia’s first space agency. Last week the federal and state governments launched an expressions-of-interest process to design a $100 million hub, which will be a base for researchers and entrepreneurs at Lot Fourteen.
CREDIT: MATT SMITH NATIONAL AFFAIRS EDITOR
Word count: 445
