RAA is seeking a state budget investment boost in regional SA to reduce road trauma and grow tourism.
The state's leading mobility organisation called for the State Government to deliver a number of regional road projects, which includes potential upgrades to the Riddoch and Dukes Highway.
While it was announced in December last year that an overtaking lane between Naracoorte and Keith on the Riddoch Highway would be delivered, RAA believes three overtaking lanes need to be constructed.
For the Dukes Highway, they believe an upgrade to accommodate autonomous freight transport and connected vehicle technology is desirable.
RAA's submission to next month's state budget focused on improvements to the SA's regional road network, after last year saw the state record its highest road toll since 2010, with 114 people losing their lives.
RAA spokesman Charles Mountain said the statistics highlighted the crucial need for continued investment in the road network, and why RAA has been lobbying for a boost to state's annual road maintenance budget.
"Infrastructure SA has classified 75 per cent of South Australia's road surfaces as being in poor condition," he said.
"So we welcomed the joint announcement in September by the Federal and State Governments of an extra $46 million to be spent on road upgrades.
"We are looking for this good news to continue with a commitment from the State Government to increase the annual road maintenance budget from $110 million to $160 million."
Mr Mountain said an additional $145 million extra per year over the next five years would eliminate the backlog of work that needs to be completed.
Supporting the state's tourist economy is another key proposition in RAA's state budget submission.
An RAA member survey in September found more than 90 per cent of respondents will holiday in regional South Australia in the next year, due in part to coronavirus pandemic travel restrictions.
To enhance the appeal of regional towns, RAA is seeking the establishment of a $20 million State Government Main Street Makeover Fund.
Mr Mountain said revitalised public places encouraged both visitors and local residents to spend time in a town rather than simply passing through.
"Many South Australian regional towns are centred on a main street, often with attractive heritage-listed buildings,'' he said.
"The makeover fund could provide enhancements such as upgraded footpaths, better pedestrian lighting, seating, public art, additional landscaping and provision for smart technology such as Wi-Fi.
"These types of improvements could be planned and implemented relatively quickly, creating work for local businesses and deliver long-term benefits for the whole community.''
He said this would be an opportunity for councils to work with their local communities to develop an application for Main Street Makeover co-funding to revitalise their main streets.
RAA is also seeking to support tourism by asking the State Government to deliver a number of broad projects.
One of the projects include; improving mobile data coverage in the state's national parks and other key tourist locations.
RAA would also like to see the State Government help local councils develop cycling trails, which would build the state's reputation as a cycling and wine destination.
Finally, they would also like to see investment in a network of electric vehicle fast charging stations across the state.
RAA will be eager to see whether their suggestions have been taken onboard when the 2020-21 State Budget is handed down on November 10.
CREDIT: Taylor Harvey
Word count: 564
