Two public drinking water fountains are up and running at Myponga, and have been approved by locals and visitors alike since the opening weekend of the Myponga Reservoir Reserve.
One of the fountains is at the reserve, while the other is situated at the new community playground.
The fountains are supplied with water from the town's working reservoir, showing users how the water has been cleaned and treated for supply through the local town network.
On the fountains is art created by Aboriginal artist Paul Herzich.
SA Water customers, strategy and innovation general manager Anna Jackson said the design showed some of the waterholes specific to Aboriginal groups from across South Australia.
"Including these special designs on the Myponga fountains is part of our commitment to reconciliation, and is just one of the ways we're demonstrating this in our work with communities around the state," she said.
The fountains are part of a larger program which makes tap water more accessible across the state, and Ms Jackson said users were encouraged to bring their own water bottle to more public places to reduce single-use plastics.
"Smart technology in the fountains allow our team to remotely monitor them, generating cleaning and maintenance schedules, and built-in solar lighting keeps them illuminated and easy to find at night," Ms Jackson said.
"There are clear environmental benefits of choosing tap over bottled water, but it's also better for your hip pocket - more than 90 per cent of the cost of a bottle of water actually comes from its lid and label."
District Council of Yankalilla mayor Glen Rowlands said locals appreciated the new facilities.
"We continue to work closely with SA Water and have formed a great partnership, and it's rewarding to see the community and visitors to the town benefit from our collaboration," Glen said.
"We've had various suggestions from the community and recently installed fountains in Main Street Yankalilla and on the Normanville Foreshore, bringing an environmentally-friendly solution to the two areas."
The Myponga Reservoir Reserve was opened to the public on April 14.
CREDIT: Dani Brown
Word count: 346
