The City of Victor Harbor is making serious moved to reduce its carbon footprint on the environment.
At its October council meeting, the City of Victor Harbor elected members considered two agreements in relation to street lighting.
One related to expenditure on street lighting replacement and the other related to income from carbon credits.
City of Victor Harbor Group Manager Governance and Finance Kellie Knight-Stacey said council had an opportunity to be one of the first regional councils in South Australia to change all residential street lights to Light Emitting Diode (LED).
"In doing so, this will represent the single greatest electricity reduction project in council's history, saving approximately $2.8 million over the life of the new LED lights and resulting in greenhouse savings of about 3200t CO2-e (CO2-e, or carbon dioxide equivalent, is a standard unit for measuring carbon footprints)," Ms Knight-Stacey said.
It equates approximately to an annual average greenhouse emissions reduction of 160t CO2-e.
Ms Knight-Stacey said given significant recent electricity price rises and more uncertainty from 2019 and onwards, the impetus to reduce energy use is clear and cost savings would be immediate.
Council has around 2100 street lights.
"The new LED streetlights to be installed will reduce energy usage dramatically. For example, the existing 80 Watt Mercury Vapour streetlights which make up almost half of council's street light stock use 82 per cent more energy than the replacement 14W LED," Ms Knight-Stacey said.
City of Victor Harbor SA Power Network P-Category street lights are currently operating under one of the most expensive operating tariffs.
Transitioning to LED lights under the PLC model over one year is expected to cost approximately $660,000.
At the council meeting elected members endorsed SA Power Networks (SAPN) Public Lighting Customer Funded tariff (PLC) as the preferred approach to deliver a bulk lamp replacement program and transition the City of Victor Harbor, P-Category Street lighting to LED lighting technology.
The Carbon Deed Licence agreement between the City of Victor Harbor and Australian Integrated Carbon Financial Services Pty Ltd was also endorsed, but not without opposition.
Councillor Andrew Robertson questioned the selection of Australian Integrated Carbon Financial Services as a partner to council.
"How did we select them. I am not happy with the deed of licence and believe it is dreadful," Cr Robertson said.
Councillor David Kemp demanded great transparency and information on the deed and moved an adjournment on the agenda item. The adjournment was defeated.
Ms Knight-Stacey said carbon credits from the energy savings achieved through the LED street lighting upgrade will, over the life of the project (five years), be expected to provide council with around $13,000 in income that could fund further council environmental projects in the coming years.
Council will undertake a community awareness campaign relating to the LED Street Lighting Transition Arrangements in the lead up to the project implementation.
"Benefits of the Carbon Deed agreement are achieving a modest financial return, ability to participate in the Australian Government's carbon trading market, leveraging additional benefit from council lighting investment, and re-investment of the return dividend back into council/community sustainability initiatives," Ms Knight-Stacey said.
Council has budgeted to change over to the Public Lighting Customer Funded (PLC) model comprising of the placement of Light Emitting Diode (LED) fitted with smart technology.
City of Victor Harbor Mayor Moira Jenkins said the council was very focused on saving money for the community, as well as play its part for the environment.
"The LED lighting will reduce carbon emissions which is good for the environment. This initiative shows the City of Victor Harbor is a leader in our community on environmental and energy issues," Dr Jenkins said.
CREDIT: Michael Simmons
Word count: 611
