Several local councils are opting to replace street lights with efficient LEDs (light-emitting diode) and enter into new contracts with SA Power Networks after the Local Government Association of South Australia negotiated a better deal with the electricity distributor.
LGA president and Tumby Bay mayor Sam Telfer said the contracts would start in January 2020, covering more than 90 per cent of the state's councils.
"Electricity is a major cost for councils, but working together and aggregating our spend allows us to lock in massive savings for our communities," he said.
"Over the past six months LGA Procurement has negotiated new electricity contracts on behalf of the sector that will deliver around $14 million in savings to participating councils.
"This is an outstanding result that will drive downward pressure on rates."
The Tumby Bay District Council voted in early October to purchase its 518 street lights outright and replace them with 453 LED street lights, spending $180,000 on the upgrade.
The council will buy the lights direct from a supplier and pay SA Power Networks to install them, rather than paying an annual tariff and an electricity retailer under the previous system.
The council's chief executive officer Trevor Smith said it would save the council up to $800,000 over 20 years.
"We're hoping they can be installed this calendar year," said Mr Smith.
"Savings will commence right from when they are installed."
Port Lincoln City Council chief executive officer Stephen Rufus said the council was in the process of putting together a business case.
"Our proposal is that we'll actually purchase the lights and some of the options we're looking at are units that enable other technology like smart technology," he said.
Mr Rufus said this could include things such as Wi-Fi or CCTV.
"CCTV is obviously something we'd be very interested in," he said.
The city council has about 1650 lights and has budgeted $650,000 this year for their replacement.
Mr Rufus said the business case would likely be presented to council in February or March next year.
The Streaky Bay council opted to purchase its 325 lights, which were replaced with LEDs in mid-October.
Elliston council had its 217 lamps replaced however elected to continue to lease the lamps from SAPN, and Lower Eyre District Council will do the same.
Elliston council chief executive officer Geoff Sheridan said the council would still see savings through the energy efficient globes.
Mr Telfer said the contracts' energy provider for street lighting, traffic lights and pedestrian crossings also used 60 per cent renewable energy from a wind farm.
CREDIT: Lauren Fitzgerald
Word count: 430
