There is a big international involvement in the building of the solar farm just outside Katherine.
Earthworks have already started.
The solar farm is owned by Italy-based ENI.
A UK-company, BSR EPC, won the contract to build it.
The 33MW solar farm will feature about 70 hectares of photo-voltaic panels with a 5.7MW battery energy storage system recently added.
Power produced from the project will be fed into the NT's grid under a deal signed last year with Jacana Energy.
Last year the NT Government costed the project at $40 million and said it would create more than 100 jobs during construction to be the largest renewable energy generator in the NT.
The solar farm is expected to be operational by the end of this year.
BSR EPC, the UK's leading large-scale solar contractor, was selected to deliver engineering, procurement and construction for the solar farm.
The Katherine project was developed by a joint venture between Australian company Epuron and the UK's Island Green Power before its purchase by Eni.
Eni is the operator and owner of the Blacktip Gas Project and has a non-operated interest in the Bayu-Undan gas and condensate field and in the associated Darwin LNG plant.
The battery storage system was added during project design to "provide stability to the Northern Territory's 200MW grid".
To give the battery a sense of scale, the battery system famously built within 100 days by Tesla boss Elon Musk in South Australia is 100MW.
The Katherine battery will use smart technology to smooth fluctuations in generation (ramp-rate control) and manage energy supply according to local demand (frequency response), reducing strain on the grid.
Smoothing and output forecasting will also be achieved via the installation of cloud coverage predicting technology.
It is believed the solar panels will be mounted on single axis trackers to increase yield.
After switching on the capacity, the British solar contractor will also operate and maintain the solar-plus-storage complex in Katherine.
It said it would support its Australian activities from a newly-opened office in Sydney.
"The town of Katherine is an excellent location to site a solar farm," Katherine Solar Pty Ltd has previously said.
"The area's solar resource is superior and avoids the cyclone-prone coast to the north. Katherine is located at the southern end of the Darwin-Katherine Interconnected System, the electricity network serving the majority of the NT population."
The solar farm secured a development permit in 2017 and entered into a power purchase agreement with Jacana Energy last year.
While you're with us, you can now receive updates straight to your inbox each Friday at 6am from the Katherine Times. To make sure you're up to date with all the news, sign up here.
CREDIT: Chris McLennan
Word count: 453
