Visitors to the Expo can see first-hand Jayco’s vehicles for travelling Australia on your own terms. Caravan and RV manufacturer Jayco continues to shake up the Australian travel vehicle industry with the introduction of world-first, smart innovations, a highlight of its product range on show at the Expo. Jayco Adelaide chief executive Matt Slee says smart technology is a key focus for Jayco and forms part of its broader approach to innovation. “Jayco’s has a clear innovation strategy – we want to manufacture the best RVs in the world and the smart technology you’ll see in a large number of our 2019 ranges is just the start of things to come,” he says.
Jayco will have seven 2019 vans at the Expo, including two premium products with a virtual personal assistant – Amazon’s Alexa. “Jayco is the first RV manufacturer in the world to produce a caravan that comes with its very own personal assistant, which will make caravanning holidays even easier,” Mr Slee says.
“The introduction of Alexa means simple voice commands, such as ‘Alexa, turn on the lights’, ‘Alexa, what’s the weather forecast?’ will be actioned.
These premium ranges also showcase another new tech feature for Jayco’s RV Connect platform, the Wi-Fi extender.
This system captures wi-fi signals from a significantly increased range and provides maximum security and mobile internet speed with 4G capability.
Other highlights include a 12V electric awning operated by a phone app, which is standard on all Jayco Journey and Silverline caravans and Jayco Conquest and Optimum motorhomes.
A number of 2019 models are fitted with Jayco’s JHub phone app technology.
“We’ve introduced new phone app technology available in a number of our products, which is exclusive to Jayco,” Mr Slee says.
“This means users will be able to monitor water usage and see the battery’s estimated time to discharge, all from their smartphone when within Bluetooth range.” Jayco Adelaide is planning on showcasing seven 2019 models at the Life and Travel Expo.
Find out more information aboutJayco’s RVs and caravans at the Expo.
Word count: 341
