AFTER receiving just 212 millimetres of rain for the growing season, deciding to invest in new machinery this year could have been a gamble for Owen cropper Lachlan Wood, but he believed limiting complications during harvest was a priority.
Mr Wood bought a brand new John Deere S770 header this season to help boost harvesting efficiency across 1600 hectares of crop.
With his previous header, Mr Wood had experienced issues with grain loss and uneven straw spreading at harvest.
"We upgrade headers after about 1200 hours or about every four years," he said.
"Harvest is the most important time and we want to use the latest technology and avoid breakdowns."
Mr Wood has also continued to invest in machinery for consistent grain quality across the farm so there were "no big surprises at the silos".
So far, the Harvest Smart technology feature that uses cameras, scales and operating efficiency data for precision harvesting had been the most helpful to achieve this, he said.
"I set the sample quality using my top priorities for grain quality and it uses cameras in the auger and bin to maintain it," he said.
Mr Wood especially wanted to monitor grain loss, foreign material and broken grain.
"The amount of grain that is either blown out the back of the header or into the straw that is spread across the paddock can increase and decrease, depending on the height of the crop," he said.
"The header will either slow down or speed up to make sure the desired amount of grain waste that was set is maintained consistently across each paddock."
Mr Wood said to calibrate grain waste, a section of crop is reapt and windrowed into a strip, then grains are counted and calculated into grains a square metre and then into kilograms a hectare.
"It will adjust to match the figure calculated," he said.
Mr Wood said "real time" grain sample cameras were "incredible" to help monitor the amount of chaff and straw being collected, as well locate cracked grain.
"If foreign material is getting too high, it will adjust to match what you pre-set," he said.
"It checks if it is thrashing correctly and if it begins to fill with too much straw or chaff, it will increase the fan speed to clean it more efficiently or shut the concave up slightly."
Mr Wood said a pressurised header front was another improved feature while reaping field peas.
"It pressurises and follows the contour of the crop. It direct heads and leaves a substantial amount of vine to lower foreign material collection and soil erosion," he said.
Mr Wood said grain bin scales also determined crop yield and header efficiency, while also calculating expected fuel usage across a paddock.
CREDIT: VANESSA BINKS
Word count: 459
