Enjoy ocean views without living at the mercy of the elements. That’s just one benefit of living in this cleverly designed West Beach family home, which comes with all the bells and whistles 5 2 5
A West Beach home has been custom-built for family living and entertaining, and easily hosts the largest parties inside and out, year round.
Chris Henderson and John Dundon designed and built the property themselves, moving into their dream home in 2010.
“We’ve got three kids and we all have big personalities, so we wanted something where we all had our own space and our own area and not be under each other’s feet,” Ms Henderson says. “When we first designed the house, my youngest couldn’t see over the kitchen bench – now he’s six foot two. We are very much about trying to keep the kids close. Many of their friends come here and they’ve had huge parties and sleepovers downstairs. It’s great that we’ve got the space where they want to get their friends over and do that here at home.” Ms Henderson says the couple spared no expense in creating their dream home, paying particular attention to the finest details.
“We put everything into this place, and it really has been an incredible home,” Ms Henderson says. “We project managed the entire thing and selected every handle, every colour and I even went to Melbourne to personally select the piece of granite for the kitchen.” The home, set over three levels, has up to five bedrooms, all set on the upper level.
On the ground floor is a living room opening to a study, an office, a central patio, and a large open-plan kitchen, dining and family room flowing out to a covered alfresco area with an outdoor kitchen overlooking a large lawn and a 20m inground pool with a water feature.
One of the home’s highlights, Ms Henderson says, is the outdoor kitchen, which easily allows seamless indoor and outdoor entertaining.
“That’s a true outdoor kitchen,” she says.
“Because we designed it ourselves we were very conscious of building it to suit the way we live. I personally hate when you eat outside having to cart everything out and back in again, so it is a fully equipped kitchen. It has its own crockery, cutlery, everything’s out there – it has the same fridge we have inside, so it’s really easy to enjoy that space. We use it all the time and the blinds we have out there are wind resistant – we had my husband’s 50th out here one July and we had the heaters on and it was just like another room.” On the lower level is a teenager’s retreat or storage area, a cellar and a 12.27m x 8.68m garage. Quality fixtures and fittings abound in the 700sqm home, including an eight-person lift, a security system and smart technology. The kitchen has a self-cleaning oven, an induction cooktop and a convection steam oven.
“It’s a very versatile house and we’ve designed it so it really satisfies every member of the family,” Ms Henderson says.
“As much as we designed it to be beautiful, it also had to be practical and functional, so it’s really low-maintenance and easy to look after.” Ms Henderson says the home’s location – set back from the waterfront but still close enough to it to enjoy its lifestyle – is ideal.
“It’s a beautiful street – it’s close to a park and you can walk to the shops,” she says.
“We don’t get sandblasted here and we value our privacy, so we’ve designed it so you could be home but nobody would know from the street, so it’s very private and very safe.” Ms Henderson says the home’s tilt-up construction made it incredibly versatile and appealing to a range of buyers.
“Because it’s built precast, you can change the interior to whatever you want,” Ms Henderson says. “The lift would make this place great for older people, while the basement area could easily be modified to make it perfect for a car enthusiast, an online business, or a professional working from home who wanted to work downstairs and live upstairs.” With the children growing up, Ms Henderson says the time has come to downsize, and that after all the effort they’ve poured into it, they will miss the home terribly.
“It will be very hard to say goodbye to this place – it was an absolute labour of love.” 4 Ocean Ave, West Beach Contact agent for priceAgent: Ouwens Casserly Real Estate, Judy Myers 0405 105 467. Land size: 880sqm. Features: The home has a 5kW solar system, an eight-person lift, smart technology, a security system, two balconies with sea views, and more than 700sqm of living space. Expressions of interest: By Tuesday, March 19 at 5pm. Open: 11.30am to 12.15pm today and tomorrow.
CREDIT: Tom Bowden
Word count: 814
