With the warmer months on the way, Energy Rating Systems has a variety of options for airconditioning systems so you can be ready before summer arrives.
Kent Town homeowner Fiona has already benefited from a modern upgrade after her old ducted reverse cycle airconditioner was no longer up to scratch. Fiona found it hard to find a suitable airconditioning unit for her two-storey house.
“It was a problem-solving exercise to get one that would fit the confined space,” Fiona says.
So she contacted ERS to help find an appropriate new reverse cycle system. Energy Rating System’s extensive expertise soon found a solution to suit her application.
“ERS put a lot of effort into getting the right one and it’s been a very positive experience,” she says. “The new unit is quieter, more efficient and easier to use.
Her new heating/airconditioning system operates over three zones in the house, two upstairs to provide zoned cooling and heating to bedrooms and a bathroom, and the third in the downstairs living area.
Fiona says two noticeable differences are the quietness of the system’s fans and the short time it takes changing a room’s temperature. She says the old system took more than 10 minutes to begin operating well enough to make a difference to comfort levels in her home.
And the running costs are much lower than Fiona’s former system too. The latest generation of airconditioners run quieter, use 40 per cent less power and have smart technology. The action-activated sensors and wi-fi control via a smart phone or computer gives you the option to get your property cool or warm before you arrive home — or double check you have turned them off when you leave home.
With 45 per cent of a typical power bill going on heating and cooling, it is worth considering a new, more efficient system.
The latest solar battery storage technology is also compatible with new airconditioners and will further increase your savings on energy costs.
Energy-Hub, 71 Port Rd, Thebarton, 8272 9899, energyratingsystems.com.au
Word count: 338
