THE newly lit up King William Rd looks like an airport runway, according to locals.
This follows the installation of a $1.3 million lighting system by Unley Council, as part of its controversial $15.5 million upgrade of the shopping strip.
The council said it had lowered the light’s illumination in response to a “handful” of complaints.
“A review of illumination levels was undertaken and levels were set to 70 per cent at that time, which is currently what is in place,” a council spokesman said. “This illumination level can be adjusted as required.” The council is also spruiking the environmentally friendly nature of the lights, but some residents say they are considering wearing sunglasses – at night – when they to drive on the Hyde Park thoroughfare.
Mark Clisby, from the Unley Residents Association, said the lights were the “final straw” in the project, that has faced ongoing criticism, mainly about the lack and difficulty of parking. “If the council’s vision was to turn the road into something resembling an ugly airport terminal and runway, then it has been successful,” Mr Clisby said. “Their appalling new street lights dominate the precinct, destroying what was previously a charming boutique shopping strip.” Mr Clisby said people had complained to him that the lights were too low, too angular, extended too far horizontally across the road and were far too bright. Emma Kardachi, from Nido and Joybird restaurants, said the ambience was not right. “I think at night it’s too bright,” the marketing manager for the Kardachi Food and Wine Collective said.
“It’s very contemporary lighting but they haven’t achieved the right mood and the ambience is not quite what we hoped for.” Ms Kardachi said she would raise the street lighting with the council. “We’re very grateful for all the changes but the street needs a bit of soul back,” she said.
“On the whole it’s lovely it’s all finished and when the trees grow, it will be even better.” The lighting was set at just 20 per cent during the recent Gourmet Gala Festival to create a more intimate atmosphere.The council said it was in discussion with a “well-respected” South Australian industry leader in smart technology to develop intelligent lighting controls which would change illumination in response to vehicle detections.
CREDIT: CRAIG COOK
Word count: 383
