SOUTH Australians could slash hundreds of dollars off their power bills under a scheme that allows householders to turn appliances off and on remotely.
The State Government and electricity company Amber Electric are giving away 800 electricity bill-busting smart devices as part of an $800,000 trial.
The scheme will allow homeowners to use an app to cut back on electricity consumption when market prices are high, and use more when the price drops.
Amber Electric chief executive Chris Thompson said savings of between $150 and $300 a year were possible under the scheme, which works by giving customers direct access to the wholesale market price which fluctuates every 30 minutes.
“This means that customers will directly benefit when we automatically shift their hot-water system or pool pump to use power when wholesale prices are cheaper,’’ he said.
On offer are 400 smart devices to control when you use the household hot-water system, 400 smart devices to control when the pool pump goes on, as well as batteries for 200 customers.
Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan, pictured, said the grant to Amber Electric would allow direct access to market prices and the ability to manipulate household consumption.
“Households and small businesses are set to be the big winners from the smart technology being trialled by Amber Electric,’’ he said. “The smarter we get with demand management, the cheaper our electricity will become.
“The benefits of demand management are clear – a more reliable grid, which will result in fewer blackouts, more renewables being able to be used and lower energy bills for all South Australians.” Mr Thompson said the added benefit was that SA prices were low when large amounts of renewable wind and solar energy were being offered on the market, increasing the consumption of green energy. The funding will be drawn from an $11 million pool set up by the State Government to investigate ways of decreasing demand during times of peak power use.
Cutting back on demand is a priority for the state and federal governments to avoid blackouts.
Customers get to keep their smart devices after the trial and must sign up as an Amber customer for a minimum period of 12 months with a $10- a-month subscription fee.THOSE INTERESTED IN APPLYING TO BE PART OF THE TRIAL CAN FIND MORE INFORMATION AT AMBERELECTRIC.COM.AU/ADR
CREDIT: MILES KEMP
Word count: 392
