FROM voice-activated lights, to phone-controlled airconditioning and security systems, Australian homes are getting smarter.
It’s a technological revolution that South Australians are embracing. Data from technology analysts Telsyte shows the Australian internet of Things (IoT) “at-home” market grew 57 per cent over a 12-month period to $1.1 billion in 2018. It is forecast to reach $5.3 billion by 2023.
The term IoT refers to the integration of internet connection into everyday objects, allowing them to send and receive data.
And builders are catching on, with Regent Homes Lightsview display property set up as Adelaide’s first smart exhibition home, and considered to be the smartest display home in the country.
The five-bedroom Rhind Rd home features the latest technology by Schneider Electric, Google and Savant Home Automation, allowing users to adjust features of the home using voice commands.
Regent Homes general manager Ryan Gazzard said the benefits of smart technology went well beyond simply convenience and entertainment, able to kill all power to the home, aside from the supply to the fridge and freezer, with the tap of an app.
“The technology is so intuitive now that we have the ability for the house to recognise when it is generating the most solar energy and let you know via an alert that this would be the best time of the day to turn on your water heater for the pool,” Mr Gazzard said.
“I can press four numbers in my phone from anywhere in the world and I can activate or deactivate the whole home.
“There are a lot of behaviours attached to energy in your home and how and when you use it and they all contribute to dollars that run up the bills.” Mr Gazzard said smart tech could make a real difference in the everyday lives of South Australians.
“This stuff used to be expensive and difficult in days gone by but today it’s never been easier and it’s never been more cost effective,” he said.
“It used to be a gimmicky thing but the technology is now so intuitive that it can actually make a difference for things like energy consumption.” Linden Park’s Pam and Dal Sihota are planning their build with Regent Homes. Mrs Sihota said she was attracted by its ability to make the home run more efficiently.
“As working parents with kids, we are in and out of our house all the time and, with energy costs constantly rising, something that will help make it easier will definitely be something to consider,” she said.“We’ve got to consider the costs of the future too and if this sort of technology can help make a difference then it should be a consideration, if it’s affordable.”
CREDIT: TOM BOWDEN REAL ESTATE EDITOR
Word count: 456
