On September 26 you will lecture at the University of Newcastle's New Professors Talk: Think Big, Start Small and Move Quickly: Ways to Make Things Happen. Can you give us an idea of what you will be saying?
I will be reflecting on a 30-year career in research and innovation. During that time I've seen things that work and things that don't, so I'll be drawing on that experience and sharing what I've learnt. I'll also particularly reflect on how Seeing Machines went from a university start-up to a global leader and discussing how great ideas, when transformed into reality, can positively impact on our lives and change the world.
Prior to your current role, you founded Seeing Machines, a company which commercialises new technology. What were the biggest lessons you learnt in terms of what is crucial to success in innovation?
Think big, start small and move quickly. You have to have global ambitions, and think about what your competitive advantage is. You also need to recognise that it won't happen overnight, but you need to be agile enough to act quickly on opportunities. If you don't take the opportunities when they present themselves, somebody else will.
As a professor of systems engineering at the Australian National University, you developed technology for human-machine interaction. Can you give us an example of one such project that was memorable?
The work we did that led to the foundation of Seeing Machines certainly stands out. We were researching driverless cars and looking at how the human can interact with the machine in self-driving vehicles.
At CSIRO, you built the research capabilities to address Australian national challenges. How so?
One area was the need to develop smart farming of the future. For example, we looked at precision agriculture with technology such as virtual fencing. Instead of electric fencing we could use GPS and smart technology to create sounds that could essentially herd cattle and move them to areas that would benefit farmers.
What is crucial for success in innovation?
Create a big vision which has impact, focus and is achievable. Ensure you are adequately resourced for success and be organised to make it happen Ask yourself if your idea is feasible, desirable and viable. You need an unwavering commitment to talent Treasure teamwork and collaboration Live and breathe performance management Always remember that leadership does matter You say a "big vision" is vital to tackle our national problems. What issues most concern you?
Climate change is obviously a major issue right now, and water droughts - a big problem in the Hunter at the moment, as well as across Australia. There's a real need for us to find renewable energy resources and to ensure we have better food production systems.
What is needed to address them in a timely and responsible manner?
We need government, big business and industry to unite and work collaboratively to solve these issues. They won't be addressed if we operate in silos.
Where does Australia sit on a scale of 1 to 10 with its innovation prowess?
I'd say a six or a seven. The ideas are certainly there, but it's the ability to convert and execute them that is lacking a little. Activities in progress don't count!
The biggest threat to our nation's innovation?
Lack of investment. We need investment in research, education and innovation. In the future, eight out of 10 jobs will require technology and we'll have a knowledge workforce. We need adequate investment to educate our future workforce so they have the required skills to innovative and change the world for the better.
Are governments adequately committed to innovation at a policy level?
Look, at a policy level I think they are, but policies are only useful unless you implement them. I think a good example where it is working is the defence innovation space. The Australian Government's Defence White Paper 2016 included an industry policy statement, but this has been backed up with the resources and the programs to help deliver that policy. You need all of those elements for it to really work - the policy, the resources and the programs.
Where are the green shoots in innovation; where will they position Australia by 2030?
The green shoots are coming from our universities and small to medium-sized enterprises, as well as through government agencies like CSIRO. These organisations, if they work together, can put Australia at the forefront of solving the world's major issues. However, we need the investment to back them up - green shoots will wither unless you support them.
I'm also interested to see how the Government's $50 billion Future Submarine program will develop. While the submarines are going to be built in Adelaide, there is still an opportunity for the Hunter region to contribute.
Professor Zelinsky's New Professors Talk is at 5pm on September 26 at the Newcastle Conservatorium. Tickets are free, but registration is essential via Eventbrite
Word count: 820
