From Page 1 Alexandrina Mayor Keith Parkes welcomed government funding contributions and recognised the strong community support for the project over many years of planning and advocacy.
"The Goolwa Wharf Precinct Revitalisation Project has been long-awaited by the Alexandrina community," Mr Parkes said.
"This outstanding collaboration from all levels of government, combined with other major grant-funded projects such as the Mount Compass Recreation Park and Strathalbyn Town Centre Revitalisation Project, will build a high level of confidence within the entire Alexandrina region, demonstrating that we are 'open for business' and that we are a great place to live, work and play.
"We are thrilled with the projected economic and employment benefits during the two to three year construction period, as well as the generation of on-going jobs in the region.
"We also know the project will bring substantial social benefits to the community who enjoy what the precinct has, and will have, to offer into the future. It couldn't have come at a better time for our community, as we look to recover from the impacts of COVID-19."
Member for Finniss David Basham who has been advocating for the project since his 2018 election said he was thrilled.
"This is a tremendous outcome for the entire region. The implementation of modern concepts and smart technology to such an important part of our heritage and history will deliver a great precinct and tourism attraction with much to offer visitors," Mr Basham said.
"This is a vital investment in the future of Goolwa, and very welcome news for local businesses which rely on tourism."
Member for Mayo Rebekha Sharkie also welcomed the funding announcement.
"I have been advocating for this $7.5 million project and writing letters of support for Alexandrina Council's grant applications for a number of years now, so I am delighted that our community's persistence has finally paid off," Ms Sharkie said.
"The wharf precinct is a historically significant site for South Australia and... has been in urgent need of restoration and upgrading for some time."
As part of the BBRF, Alexandrina Council also received $25,000 for the development of a Ngarrindjeri-led cultural tourism plan.
Read more via: victorharbortimes.com.au
CREDIT: Jack Manning
Word count: 362
