SMARTdaily HOW TO CHOOSE THE BEST SOUND AND PRICE FOR THE FESTIVE SEASON THEY’RE small, helpful and about to swamp Christmas trees across Australia. Smart speakers also are falling in price, growing more useful, and offering better sound and greater privacy protections this year.
Experts say the smart home technology is set for a second boom this Christmas, and sales will soar by more than 30 per cent as more households adopt the technology for the first time and others hook up more rooms.
The smart home trend is also expected to be fuelled by a new entrant from Apple that has significantly dropped its price, as well as curiously shaped upgrades from market leaders Google and Amazon.
Apple’s second smart speaker, the HomePod Mini, captured the attention of many in the industry when it launched last week for $149, undercutting the company’s original HomePod by $320 and introducing a much smaller form.
Futuresource analyst Alexandre Jornod says it also shows Apple is not giving up on the smart home market yet.
“The dominance of Amazon and Google has led many to see the smart speaker market as a two-horse race but the new HomePod Mini from Apple shows that the Cupertino giant is far from conceding defeat,” he says.
“This new model places Apple firmly at a mass-market price point.” Telsyte’s Internet of Things Home Market Study recently revealed more than one in four Australian households were using a smart speaker by the end of June and, of those homes, more than third used more than one smart speaker.
The technology was most commonly used for playing music, the firm found, followed by announcing weather forecasts, setting alarms, reading the news and announcing messages.
But Telsyte principal researcher Foad Fadaghi says Australians are starting to experiment with new uses for their smart speakers, using them to control other connected devices such as lights, TVs and doorbells, making phone calls and sending text messages, and to complete homework assignments.
Their falling prices — with all three companies offering smart speakers for $149 or less — also made them more attractive.
“They’re priced to sell for Christmas, they’re priced to be experimental, and people won’t feel bad if they buy it and give it a try for a few months,” Fadaghi says. “One of the concerns potential buyers had is how long these were going to last before the next one came out, but the price point overcomes that problem.” He says the speakers also serve as a “critical gateway” to smart home technology and will play a role in the expected 30 per cent spike in sales of the tech this year.
Litepages chief executive Ben Rogers says he adopted smart speaker technology early as a way to control other devices around his home and hasn’t looked back.
“I started with turning the lights on and off,” he says. “Now we use them for everything from setting the alarm to playing music through networks we’ve set up through the house. It can also control things like airconditioners, the TV and fans.” Rogers now has five Google Home speakers built into furniture around his house so he’s never stuck for how to spell a word or for a weather forecast.
Have a ball IT’S bigger than a tennis ball, smaller than a shot put, and capable of getting a room full of people dancing. Apple’s latest HomePod is a powerful handful of technology that addresses concerns raised about its first smart speaker. The HomePod Mini is cheaper and smaller, and brings much-needed extras to a crowded smart speaker market, including privacy, clarity, and the ability to yell at members of your household across devices.
It has some downsides too, however, and its usefulness will depend on what devices you use and where you get your music. The HomePod Mini, launched last Friday, is aggressively priced for an Apple gadget and its tech compares well with competitors. Songs sound particularly crisp and well balanced, with voices prioritised. At 50 per cent of full volume, HomePod Mini sound is at its best and capably fills a room. Its limitations start to appear at 75 per cent, but so might your neighbours.
CREDIT: Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 702
