LAWN bowls are out. So are entertainer kitchens and gardens. But swimming pools and cafes are in. As are low-maintenance, small kitchens and patios.
Smart home technology and gadgets are also a must – including electric car chargers – for baby boomers, who are set to revolutionise communal retirement villages.
Unlike their parents who sought contentment in their old age, they want to remain independent, with an easy lock-up-and-go home so they can travel whenever they want. With 40 per cent of that 56-74 age bracket still working, an office is also a must.
RSL LifeCare chief executive Graham Millett says its latest survey, Retirement Home of the Future, shows baby boomers are saying loud and clear that they don’t want to age like their parents or grandparents.
“Increasingly, we’re hearing baby boomers are after innovative homes that make their lives easier,” Mr Millett said. “That includes smart-home features with added security allowing residents to lock up and travel around Australia or abroad.” With 5.2 million baby boomers in Australia – who make up a quarter of the country’s population – they are likely to get what they want.
Previous research from RSL LifeCare found 60 per cent in that age group expect to fund their own retirement. They want independence, travel and foodie experiences such as culinary and vineyard tours, and restaurant visits.
Baby boomers like golf, yoga, pilates and tai chi. Cycling is popular with those under 60.
The defining image of older generations – lawn bowls – has little or no attraction for the Vietnam War protest generation.
Retirees Grant and Barbara Dreghorn, who moved to Pozieres Retirement Village in Port Macquarie on the mid NSW coast, said travel was top of their plans for 2022.
“We want to do a lot of international travel, as well as trips around Australia,” Mrs Dreghorn, 68, said.
When at home, one of the big attractions of their retirement village is the pool and cafe, while the bowling green is rarely used. “Years ago, that’s what residents wanted but not anymore,” she said.
CREDIT: JULIE CROSS
Word count: 347
