SIXTY specially designed houses for people living with disabilities are to be built across South Australia by the end of this year.
Brisbane-based purpose-built disability housing provider, the Cocoon Group – a new entrant to SA – has begun work on its first home in Encounter Bay, a four-bedroom dwelling. The initial rollout of all houses is expected to be completed by the end of this year with a further 62 houses in place by December 2022.
The SA scheme for National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) participants was launched at the Adelaide Convention Centre on Thursday night before 400 attendees, including the mayors of Adelaide, Onkaparinga, Playford and Salisbury.
The initial homes will house about 250 residents and are expected to create more than 500 jobs across the state.
Spokesman Max Mason said the houses would be spread across SA in order to ensure residents were not displaced from friends and family.
The houses will be located from Victor Harbor up to Munno Parra West. “People with disability have consistently said that housing is the biggest barrier to living the life they want,” Mr Mason said. The housing, which will be for NDIS participants, is in the heart of local communities he said and offers a range of three, four and five-bedroom fully fitted and accessible homes.
Each purpose-built home has a carer’s room with ensuite, and offers each resident privacy and independence Smart-home technology will be integral to each new home with wheelchair access a staple and blinds and windows opened electronically.
Mr Mason said annual expenditure in the SA disability support market was expected to hit $1.5 billion this year, with about 32,200 people in SA accessing it.
Cocoon Group executive chairman Zaffar Khan said he was committed to growing the supply of specialist disability accommodation (SDA) and supported independent living (SIL) housing in SA.
“The NDIS is a profound change for people who require SDA and SIL housing and we are immensely proud to be part of this transformation,” he said.
“By continuing to partner with people with disability, NDIS providers, investors and governments, we believe that we can play a major role in stepping up to the challenge of providing high-quality housing for people with disability.”The homes will be owned by the Cocoon Group, with maintenance and rent paid via the NDIS.
CREDIT: RICHARD EVANS
Word count: 390
