RETAIL BUNNINGS is ramping up its efforts to win over tradies, snapping up a small tool retailer which focuses on builders and high-end do-it-yourself enthusiasts.
The acquisition comes as Bunnings managing director Mike Schneider works to unleash a new wave of growth at the hardware giant, now the single largest business unit within Wesfarmers.
Bunnings yesterday announced it would buy leading South Australian tool retailer Adelaide Tools. The sale price was not disclosed.
Adelaide Tools is a 70-year-old, family-owned and operated business serving trades professionals and DIY enthusiasts through five stores in the South Australian capital.
It also offers more than 8000 products for sale online.
Mr Schneider said Adelaide Tools was a quality business with a great team, premium brands and a reputation for great customer and after sales service.
“The acquisition, which is subject to regulatory approval, will allow us to improve the way we connect, serve and engage with trade customers and is aligned with our strategy to accelerate the growth of the trade business,” he said.
Mr Schneider said Adelaide Tools would continue to operate under its own branding but the acquisition would give the hardware giant insight into the dynamics of the trade market.
“While our businesses are very different, we see strong alignment between the Adelaide Tools and Bunnings brands with both businesses having a strong focus on team, advice and service,” he said.
“We believe this acquisition will deliver even more choice and convenience for trade customers.” Adelaide Tools director Rob Peach said it was a good outcome for the business, employees and customers.
“This shows a vote of confidence in the South Australian retail market and is great recognition for the brand that we have built over the last 70 years,” he said. “We are also pleased that Bunnings intends to continue to run the business as Adelaide Tools.” Since Wesfarmers spun off Coles late last year, Bunnings has become the major profit driver for the Perth-based conglomerate, which also owns Kmart, Target and Officeworks.
Bunnings lifted sales by 5 per cent to $13.2 billion and earnings by 8.1 per cent to $1.63 billion for the year to June.
As well as looking to grab more of the tradie market, Bunnings expects ongoing population growth, changing demographics, higher-density living, smart home technology and demand for online shopping to underpin new growth avenues.
It is working to increase its sales of kitchen, bathroom and flooring products, and window coverings, as well as provide more installation and in-home assembly services ranging from putting in hot water systems to assembling barbecues.
Mr Schneider also aims to make the chain more relevant to a younger generation of homeowners and renters by providing more do-it-yourself advice tailored for projects within apartments and townhouses.
Shares in Wesfarmers gained 0.8 per cent yesterday to close at $39.26.
The acquisition... will allow us to improve the way we connect, serve and engage with trade customers and is aligned with our strategy to accelerate the growth of the trade business.BUNNINGS MANAGING DIRECTOR MIKE SCHNEIDER
CREDIT: JOHN DAGGE; ELI GREENBLAT; with THE AUSTRALIAN
Word count: 512
