This modernised character home is ideal for those looking to live large with the lot 5 4 4
Set on a spacious 1138sqm allotment over two titles in a popular suburb, this beautifully extended sandstone character home offers the lot for families looking to enjoy the good life.
Built in 1912, the five-bedroom home underwent a comprehensive renovation in 2008 to create a timeless blend of old-world charm and contemporary features – including an ideal parents’ retreat upstairs. The flexible floorplan offers a host of living and sleeping options on the ground floor – with a saloon, study/library and sitting room among several generous-sized bedrooms. There are also two bathrooms.
The focus of the lower level however is the modern open-plan living, dining and kitchen area at the rear which in turn overlooks a spectacular outdoor entertaining space, making the most of the English-inspired gardens.
The kitchen is well equipped with Miele appliances, granite bench tops, an electric oven, gas and induction hotplates, two dishwasher drawers and a fantastic walk-in pantry.
Directly off the entertaining space is a solar heated pool that can be enjoyed all year round. This is complete with its own pool house, which would be perfect for visiting guests or as a teenager’s sanctuary as it is fully equipped with a bathroom, a built-in kitchenette and a loft space.
The entire upper floor in the main home has been designed as a private sanctuary for parents. Aside from the master bedroom – which is complete with its own veranda overlooking the treetops of Hawthorn – the floor also includes a private living room, a dressing room and a luxurious bathroom.
The property is also equipped with smart home technology – lights, blinds and airconditioning are connected to a C-Bus controller. There is also an intercom to the front gate, as well as an NBN connection and Sonos speakers.
25 Egmont Tce, Hawthorn $2 million to $2.2 million Agent: Klemich Real Estate, Georgie Young 0431 929 953, Oren Klemich 0418 829 009.Land size: 1138sqm. Offers: Close Tuesday, March 24 at noon. Open: 1.30pm to 2pm today and tomorrow.
CREDIT: David Goldsmith
Word count: 355
