Patagonia, Rio Negro, Argentina If, as the band Chicago is to be believed, everybody does need a little time away, then surely this place wouldn’t be a bad part of the world in which to spend it. And, after all the world’s going through, who could blame us for wanting to forget about toilet paper, social distancing and flattening the curve for a while and escape to an unrushed lakeside haven of peace and tranquillity; all azure skies, still waters and forested mountains. Of course, while travel restrictions are in place, it’s really all just a fantasy, but there’s nothing wrong with dreaming, is there? This slice of Argentinian luxury is a recently reconditioned 1945-built villa in Llao Llao which wants for absolutely nothing – from the jacuzzi and sauna to the maids’ quarters and wine cellar. The villa is the centrepiece of a parklike 12,000sqm property which also boasts a guesthouse, a boat mooring and heated infinity swimming pool. I’m not sure I can stand to be kept away … Price upon request
Bruny Island, Tasmania How’s this for a dome to call your island home? It’s been described as Bruny Island’s most unique house, but that’s not doing it justice. There’s probably not too many others like it in the rest of Tasmania – and it would probably rank pretty highly in terms of out-there properties right across Australia as well. Built in 1996, the well-rounded home is almost part of the scenery. Surrounded by bushland and with the water’s edge just steps from the door, the self-sufficient residence boasts views over Apollo Bay and the D’Entrecasteaux Channel. The geodesic dome, which has solar-powered batteries and ample water, features mezzanine sleeping quarters, with a fully-lined boathouse providing further accommodation options. About a 10-minute drive from the Roberts Point ferry terminal, it’s definitely a case of dome sweet dome.
$595,000
157 West 57th St, New York If you’re going to wake up and find yourself in the city that never sleeps, you might as well be comfortable. And if you could get some decent views into the bargain, you’d probably consider yourself being king of the hill. I don’t know if this is truly “top of the heap” living – as the agent’s description only goes as far as to say it’s a “high-floor” apartment – but it still looks like you’re getting world-class views from virtually every window, including those over Central Park. “Residence 37A” is a luxury one-bedroom home situated on what is apparently the most prestigious block of mid-town Manhattan. Overlooking the famous Carnegie Hall, the apartment block known as One57 anchors the “Billionaire’s Row”. Aside from all the state-of-the-art features of the apartment itself – from white oak floors and smart home technology throughout to Italian marble and onyx finishes in the bathroom – residents can also enjoy a host of private amenities such as 24/7 doormen, porters and concierge service, a function room with a full catering kitchen and/or in-residence catering, a library with a billiards table and 7m aquarium, an arts and crafts studio, and a screening and performance room. Oh, and there’s also a pet wash room to keep Frankie looking his best, too.
$7.4 millionAll overseas properties for sale through Christie’s International Real Estate. Christiesrealestate.com
CREDIT: Compiled by David Goldsmith
Word count: 550
