THE pandemic has exposed security flaws in smart-home technology from light bulbs to fridges, door locks and washing machines that pose serious privacy risks for Australians.
Researchers have unearthed technical problems in “hundreds of millions of devices” in recent weeks, leaving homes open to attacks, as well as critical problems with the Wi-Fi routers that connect them to the internet.
And security professionals say homeowners are failing to take basic precautions when installing smart devices – akin to “giving hackers a door into your house” at a time of heightened security fears.
Among the new threats, Israeli security agency JSOF found 19 networking problems dubbed Ripple20 affecting “millions” of products including those from HP, Samsung, Phillips and Intel, and cyber security firm ESET discovered vulnerabilities in three smart-home hubs, including a model from Fibaro sold in Australia.
Video from unsecured Australian security cameras also showed up on a Russia-based website last month, and it followed security problems in an iBaby monitor, smart garage door platform, connected light bulbs, a video doorbell, and keyless locks.
McAfee cyber security spokeswoman Alex Merton-McCann said with many people now working from home, in lockdown the threat of cyber attacks from well-resourced foreign actors was growing.
“I hope the big cyber attacks happening in Australia at the moment will provide everyone with a bit of a wake-up call about what they need to do in their own patch,” she said.
“We need to realise if we are going to have connected devices, we need to be proactive (with security) and take this stuff seriously because it can have catastrophic effects.” Home technology consultant Paul Skelton said he had already heard a growing number of “horror stories” with consumers buying do-it-yourself smart-home gear failing to change default settings or set new passwords, and learning about security risks the hard way. “It can be just as devastating to have people break into your files, your photos, your network.” Bitdefender senior e-threat analyst Liviu Arsene said the company recently recorded successful attacks on Wi-Fi routers that had changed users’ settings and redirected legitimate web addresses to sites with malware pretending to be from the World Health Organisation.
Despite the emerging risks, research firm Telsyte estimates Australian households will have more than 30 devices connected to the internet by 2022, driven by connected lights, cameras, plugs, “and other smart appliances such as speakers”.
Calamity cyber security expert Daniel Lewkovitz said potential buyers should avoid cheap, no-name products in stores and online, regularly check all connected appliances for software patches, and make the hard decision to throw devices out or disconnect them if they were no longer being supported by manufacturers.
“With the advent of the internet fridge, we’re going from having a device that is expected to last for 10 to 20 years to having a device that will probably be out of date in six months,” he said. “These things can be plugged in and forgotten about. The forgotten relics will become the asbestos of the internet.” Dr Vincent Candrawinata, founder of health firm Renovatio, said he did plenty of research before setting up his home with smart devices controlling everything from the airconditioning to music played throughout different rooms. His smart home gadgets include connected cameras, a video doorbell, Google smart speakers, door sensors, and even an internet-connected control for his garage door.
“It’s mostly for peace of mind but if you go away on holidays, or a weekend trip, you want to leave your house knowing its secure and if something happens you know.
“It’s not just about criminal activity, but leaks or windows blowing open,” he said.
TIPS FOR SMART HOME DEVICES ■ Always change the default password ■ Use a unique, complex password for all devices ■ Turn on two-factor authentication, if possible ■ Check for software updates regularly ■ Only buy smart devices from longstanding, reliable brands ■ If it’s no longer supported, disconnect it from the internet
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 659
