With the cost of home automation rapidly falling, apartment developers have turned to 'smart building' features as a selling point to move their projects off the books in a rapidly slowing market.
The trend is not lost on appliance giant Harvey Norman, which has teamed with listed hardware minnow Quantify Technology to sell light-switch style units that enable voice or app-based control of lighting, temperature, curtains and audio-visual and security systems.
Six months ago Harvey Norman's commercial arm set up a showcase apartment at Stable Group's upmarket Burcham Apartments in the inner city suburb of Rosebery.
The devices have been installed in all 96 apartments, while the project also includes other tech-heavy features such as automated number plate recognition, electric vehicle charging points and fingerprint lift controls.
So far the retailer has orders covering 1000 apartments and is "working towards" 2000 more.
"Smart home automation is one quarter of the price it was five years ago and three times as good," said Alan Stephenson, who owns the retailer's NSW commercial franchise.
Nowadays, devices enabling a voice and app-controlled blind, lighting, temperature and AV control can be fitted for $8000 to $16,000 - a fraction of the median Sydney apartment price of around $700,000.
"It's a bit like a navigation system for a car," he said. "It used to be an add-on product for a BMW or Mercedes and now standard in Hyundais."
Quantify CEO Brett Savill said currently less than 25 per cent of Australian homes had any type of automation, "but that will double in the next five years because Google and Amazon are fighting it out for the next growth market after the iPhone market".
He likened the sector to the 10-year transition of mobiles from basic communication devices to pocket computers.
"If you are going to have a mass market home automation industry, it needs to go through that transformation," he said. "We need to embed computing in the wall and make it absolutely intuitive and seamless so it's not clunky."
Mr Stephenson said to date developers had been reluctant to embrace home automation features, for fear the technology will be redundant by the time the project is completed.
Harvey Norman initially saw only sluggish demand when it set up its home automation arm 18 years ago based on clunky hard-wired technology.
"There's always been a nervousness," he said. "But we now have been able to demonstrate to developers and architects that (the devices) are easy to install and program and easy to use. And most importantly they are upgradeable."
Buddy Technologies chief executive David McLauchlan said Australian households were behind the pace of key markets such as the US, where one in three households had voice-control devices.
The Adelaide based company recently acquired LIFX, the biggest maker of smart light bulbs globally behind only Philips.
Controlled via app or voice, smart globes range between $20-30 for an entry-level unit to more than $100 for one with infrared capabilities.
"Smart homes are at the very nascent stages in Australia, but the rate of adoption is outpacing elsewhere," he said. "It's like when black and white TV was standard - if you watched a colour TV once you would never go back."
But home builder AV Jennings reports little demand from prospective customers for smart-configured housing, possibly because the technology is so easy to retrofit.
AV Jennings national design manager Richard Baker said consumers appeared to value security and lighting features over the ability to open curtains remotely.
"Tech savvy customers realise they do just the priority things first and then expand down the track," he said. "I suspect there's need for an education process, as many buyers don't know about the level of tech and they view it as gadgetry."
He said "feedback from the coal face" suggested smart home technology was not front of mind.
"But I wouldn't be surprised if certain components start to appear on buyers' wish lists, even if it's not all about clapping your hands and everything snapping shut."
  CREDIT: Tim Boreham
Word count: 670
