FEARLESS CONVERSATIONS YOUR FINANCIAL SECURITY – WHO IS IN CONTROL?
THE idea of cryptocurrency replacing traditional banking increasingly appears an impossible dream, Fearless Conversations panellists say.
They say the recent collapse of bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies, combined with uncertainty around the future of central banks producing their own digital currencies, show crypto is a gamble.
Flinders University senior accounting lecturer Michelle Yeong, pictured, said crypto came about because people were “not very happy with traditional banks” and wanted to decentralise finance.
“The reason for the collapse is many people who jumped into this bitcoin craze do not understand and treat it as a speculative asset,” she said. Australia could have its own digital currency, but it would be controlled by our Reserve Bank, Dr Yeong said.
Bendigo and Adelaide Bank chief economist David Robertson said too much emphasis had been put on bitcoin as a trading tool and not enough on the blockchain technology that underpinned it.
Blockchain delivered “wonderful applications” such as smart contracts – automated executions of financial agreements – and would be behind some big future inventions, he said. “Crypto is a highly speculative asset class and I’m not even sure it’s an asset class – it’s just a highly speculative proposition.” UniSuper state manager Tristan Barnes looked at crypto through the lens of the Pareto principle in finance and nature in which 80 per cent of wealth always ended up with 20 per cent of the population.
“Money, no matter how you distribute it, will always find its way back up to only a few hands,” Mr Barnes said.
“And even if you dosh it out again, it’ll always find its way up. (Regarding) the whole concept of socialisation of finance, I worry potentially that will end up with only a few people controlling everything.
“Look at social media. That’s one of those classic cases where it’s about giving everyone a voice.
“But what we’ve got is Twitter and we’ve got Meta (Facebook) and that’s about it.” Milestone Project Management director Nick Peacock said: “You hear a lot around a lot of conversations about when it’s going well, and right now I’m hearing nothing.”
CREDIT: ANTHONY KEANE
Word count: 361
