Enrico Palermo today starts his new role as head of the Australian Space Agency.
He comes to Adelaide from Virgin Galactic’s Mojave Desert site in California.
The Australian-born engineer, who is well-connected in the lucrative British and US space sectors, will lead the charge to create 20,000 new jobs in Australia’s space sector by 2030.
Companies such as Adelaide space start-up Southern Launch would be crucial in helping the sector grow, Mr Palermo said ahead of his first day.
“Access to space is a key strategic growth arm for the agency and I think Australia can play a significant role,” Mr Palermo said.
“There are several companies already progressing on a pathway for launch sites or rocket capabilities.”
The space agency would release seven road maps over the next 12 months outlining plans to grow the industry.
In its first road map, released last month, low-Earth orbit satellites and quantum communications were identified as some of the priority target areas in the space communications sector.
“We’re going to look to … build upon the amazing areas of national capability that we have today, whether it’s in earth observations, robotics, and other key areas,” Mr Palermo said.
He also aimed to connect Australian businesses more deeply with the global space sector.
He would draw on a network developed through his past work and from his time at the International Space University, in France.
In his 14 years with Virgin Galactic, Mr Palermo rose to chief operating officer.
He also helped Mr Branson establish The Spaceship Company.
“Under my tenure, we were able to put Spaceship Unity, which is the first spaceship we built, into space twice,” he said.
Federal Industry Minister Karen Andrews said on Wednesday: “2021 is shaping up to be a big year for space as a rapidly evolving sector and an enabler of other high-growth industries, like manufacturing.”
Space was one of six priorities in the Federal Government’s $1.5bn strategy to revamp manufacturing.
“I look forward to working with Enrico to position Australia as a major space player, one that boosts our national economy and generates thousands of new jobs in the next decade,” Ms Andrews said.
Word count: 343
