CRYPTO crooks have been dubbed the new-age bank robbers, “mugging” budding investors in front of their eyes, and making off with tens of millions of dollars in virtual currency.
Bitcoin has been revealed as the biggest target of the shysters in a string of scams from fake exchanges, phishing attempts and hacks, to investment tricks known as “pump and dumps” and “rug pulls”.
In some digital robberies, muggers even steal access to investors’ wallets (accounts) to perform irreversible and untraceable transactions.
Cybersecurity expert Dr David Lacey, chief executive of IDCare, Australia’s national identity support service, warns cryptocurrency is now the Wild West and the number of “snatch and grab” online muggings is rising.
But in many cases there are no sheriffs to help when someone gets robbed. Victims can often see where their currency has gone but cannot identify who took it because of the anonymity given to traders – ironically one of cryptocurrency’s big drawcards.
Australians lost $55.3m to cryptocurrency scams in the year to October, according to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, with Bitcoin involved in most scams — up 155 per cent from 2020.
The biggest theft worldwide was an $800m hit on the Poly Network exchange that held hundreds of millions of dollars in cryptocurrency for investors, including ethereum, polygon and binance smart chain. (However, the crooks have since claimed they were just exposing vulnerabilities and have started returning the currency.) It is one of more than 90 cryptocurrency exchanges that have gone out of business this year, most taking their customers’ investments with them, according to Crypto Wisser. Criminals also recently stole more than $4.6m from investors in a fake Squid Game-themed cryptocurrency, which soared to a value of $US2860 ($A4044) per coin before its creators withdrew funds in an apparent “rug pull” scam.
Dr Lacy said the initial appeal of cryptocurrency trading – security and encrypted transactions that were unhackable – were now being used against it.
“The great irony is you can see your balance go across the blockchain (ledgers) but you don’t know who it belongs to because of the anonymity,” Dr Lacey said.
Avast cybersecurity expert Stephen Kho said the crimes showed how careful Australians should be investing in anything online but particularly cryptocurrency, which did not offer the same security as standard financial transactions.
“Blockchain technology is hard to trace and hard to track, whereas if someone steals your credit card number and you report it you might get the money back,” he said. “With cryptocurrency, if they steal the money, it’s gone.” Mr Kho said bitcoin was a target for scammers due to its high profile and worth. “Currently bitcoin is worth about $A80,000 per coin, which is 100 per cent growth from last year,” he said.
“Whenever things go up and down like that we see a massive spike in malware (and scams).” Sydney woman Kim, who did not want her last name used, lost her life savings in a cryptocurrency scam after she was groomed by crooks.
The distraught 29-year-old appeared to have made an almost 50 per cent profit on her $57,000 investment when crooks froze her account and asked her to pay a “tax” to release it. But authorities advised her she could lose any further money she paid to them.
“I was gamed. They got me in by saying I would make money. I started investing small amounts, $20 or $50, made some money, and I was able to cash out,” Kim said.
Kim reported the theft to the ACCC’s ScamWatch and police but officers warned she was unlikely to see her investment again.
Like Kim, Melbourne entrepreneur and Kokaine clothing co-owner Andrew Lin lost thousands of dollars after investing in cryptocurrency. In his case, the exchange holding his cryptocurrency suddenly closed, taking his investment with it. Mr Lin was left with no way to recoup his funds.
“As a young, dumb kid I liked this one token (currency) and it was only available on one exchange so I bought some and it looked good and it did pretty well,” Mr Lin said.
He said his $1000 investment would now have grown substantially but he “tries not to look back on things I’ve lost”.
“It’s taught me to go with better-known exchanges,” Mr Lin said. “Some people are holding billions of dollars in cryptocurrency so security is key, just like you expect your money in the bank to be safe.” Queensland is also about to see what is believed to be the first cryptocurrency fraud case of its kind in Australia.
A Gold Coast cryptocurrency firm, Modern Assets Australia, is being sued in the Federal Court by a French national, Alexandre Raffin, 28, who had $800,000 worth of crypto stolen by a third party. The robber made off with the cash and deleted their account.
Modern Assets has said it would be “vigorously defending the allegations” and denied the claims made against it.
ACCC deputy chair Delia Rickard said investment scams were “more prevalent than ever,” and cryptocurrency was being exploited to lure victims. Some scammers pretend to have highly profitable cryptocurrency trading systems based on their individual expertise, she said, or through algorithms they have developed.
CREDIT: NATALIE O’BRIEN JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 870
