What is cryptocurrency?
Cryptocurrency, or crypto for short, is digital currency that does not rely on banks to verify transactions. It is facilitated by peer-to-peer sales that can enable anyone anywhere in the world to send and receive payments via the internet. Crypto uses a decentralised system to record transactions and issue new units, called “coins” or “tokens”. Advanced coding and encryption behind transactions and digital “wallets”, where you store crypto, aims to give holders total security over their coins.
How does crypto work and what is the blockchain?
Cryptocurrencies are distributed on a public ledger, called “the blockchain”. It is a secure and encrypted record of all crypto transactions updated and held by holders.
Is cryptocurrency tangible?
No, an important fact to know is that while you own currency, it is not tangible. What you own is a key that you can transfer to another person, or sell from your exchange wallet, without the input of a third party.
How is cryptocurrency created?
Units of crypto are created through a process called “mining”, which uses intensive computer power to solve complicated mathematical problems to generate coins. Many brokers exist from which to buy crypto, such as Australian-owned exchanges Coinspot and Independent Reserve.
What are NFTs?
A non-fungible token, known as an NFT, is a form of digital artwork that is individualised. In short, “non-fungible” means the artwork cannot be replicated. Think of it like trading cards, if you swap one trading card for another, you don’t get the same card. But NFTs are not solely restricted to digital artwork.
Developers are beginning to examine other uses for NFTs, such as contracts of sale for homes.
Wait, but can I just save an NFT file someone paid lots of money for? Technically, you can simply right-click and save a JPEG file that may have sold for $10,000. But it still would not be yours. Ownership of the work, like physical artwork, has many copyright protocols and reproduction rights. It is traded on the blockchain just like any other crypto and has a transaction history logged. For example, anyone can buy a Picasso print but there is only one original.
How do I make money off NFTs?
The key factor in NFT ownership to understand is that consumer interest and hype drives the market. Similar to trading cards or art, rarity and the volume of interested buyers influences its worth. Researching into projects created by reputable people or companies through sites like Twitter and Reddit is the first step to understanding NFTs. Once you have an understanding, you can make a purchase, but you must know that at any moment, the price could skyrocket or plummet. Like any investment, never put in more than you are willing to lose.
What is the metaverse?
The “metaverse” is an incredibly new concept. It is still in the early stages of development but essentially it is an online 3D universe that combines different virtual spaces.
It will, when it is further developed, allow users to work, play games, meet and socialise in an online space. Online video games currently provide the closest thing to a metaverse-like experience.
What does the expert say?
Yawn Rong, co-founder of Crypto SA, an Adelaide-based business that assists crypto-based start-ups and facilitates major transactions of currencies, said NFTs can on one hand be used to exhibit social status, similar to buying a luxury car or watch, and on the other, used for profit.
“It is like a lottery. You either make lots of money or can lose it all … that is important,” Mr Rong said.
He said collections that were limited, like Bored Apes Yacht Club that minted 3000 NFTs, allowed purchasers to gain access to “the upper echelon” of exclusive social communities. “When you have that NFT, and you wear that NFT, say in your Twitter profile, you can then start to engage in conversations with other members of Bored Apes,” he said.
CREDIT: PATRICK JAMES
Word count: 660
