27 TO 57
27 Angela Bennett $3.38 billion Last year: $2.39 billion 76. Perth. Mining, investment Owner, AMB Capital Partners While Bennett is intensely private, she made a rare foray into the spotlight last year when she was subject to an ugly court battle with brother Julian Wright. The Federal Court dismissed Wright’s claims that he had been duped out of a one-third stake in Wright Prospecting, through which hundreds of millions in iron ore royalties flow annually, by Bennett and their now-deceased brother Michael Wright, after their father Peter Wright’s death in 1985. Wright Prospecting was formed by Peter Wright, a one-time business partner of Gina Rinehart’s late father Lang Hancock, and accounts for Bennett’s wealth. She has ploughed much of it into investment house AMB Capital, which has more than $1.6 billion of assets in property, financial services and energy and resources, according to documents lodged with the corporate regulator.
28 Morry Fraid & family 29 Zac Fried & family $3.16 billion combined Last year: $2.81 billion 70 and 49. Melbourne. Retail, property Executive chairman and executive deputy chairman, Spotlight Group Fraid and Fried have big plans for their Spotlight haberdashery chain, wanting to open 150 new stores over the next five years as part of big expansion plans. It is building its biggest ever Spotlight at Maroochydore on Queensland’s Sunshine Coast as part of a $250 million mixed-use project that includes their other brands, Harris Scarfe and Anaconda. The private Spotlight Group has about 10,000 employees and $2.1 billion in annual sales, making it one of the biggest retail groups in Australia. It traces its roots back to Fried’s late father Ruben and uncle Morry Fraid, the group’s executive chairman, working at their family stall at the South Melbourne Markets before opening the first Spotlight in suburban Malvern in 1973.
The group also has 1.5 million square metres of land in its portfolio, only about a third of which has been developed.
30 Solomon Lew $3.09 billion Last year: $2.70 billion 75. Melbourne. Retail, property Chairman, Premier Investments Lew’s Premier Investments doubled its profits in 2021, as sales for brands such as Peter Alexander, Just Jeans, Dotti and Jacqui E thrived despite retail stores being hit by Covid closures throughout the year. Premier also owns the popular Smiggle children’s products retail chain, and there are other retail and property investments in the family, including commercial property in the US. Lew started in business aged 18, when he took over the family firm Voyager Solo and supplied dresses and clothing to Myer. More recently, he has been a voluble critic of the modern Myer’s management and urged its board to step aside at various times. He topped up his Myer holding in late January to now have almost 20 per cent of the company’s shares under control.
31 Michael Hintze $3.08 billion Last year: $3.00 billion 68. London. Financial services Executive chairman, CQS Profits for Hintze’s London hedge fund CQS almost halved to about $US70 million in 2021, after a tough 2020 that saw Hintze miss out on the big upswing in global markets after Covid first hit. Hintze is the majority owner of CQS and a big backer of the Tory party in Britain, and also has extensive philanthropic interests. He also owns MH Premium Farms Australia, which has more than 19 rural properties across the country spanning 87,500ha.
32 David Hains & family $3.00 billion Last year: $3.00 billion 91. Melbourne. Investment Chairman, Portland House Group Hains is one of the legends of Australian business, having done everything from turning around steel mills in the US to running factories in India, undertaking property developments around Australia and breeding a Melbourne Cup winner. Hains’ Portland House hedge fund invests in global equities, currencies, fixed income and other assets. His daughter Cathy is a horse breeder and son Paul founded the online magazine Aeon.
Hains’ other sons work at Portland House. Stephen Hains manages the bond and derivatives division, Richard handles managed funds and Michael the equities holdings.
33 Laurence Escalante $2.99 billion Last year: $2.15 billion 40. Perth. Technology Founder, Virtual Gaming Worlds Escalante burst onto the scene in recent years, with his social gaming business Virtual Gaming Worlds racking up huge profits – entirely overseas. The Perth-based company has online poker and slot-machine style games such as Chumba Casino, in which players buy virtual currency or so-called gold coins to compete with under a sweepstakes model.
Escalante, a one-time teenage Hungry Jack’s employee who would spend hours playing video games and later became a financial planner, founded VWG in 2010. Profits trebled to almost $300 million last year and is buying a Bombardier Global 7500 jet.
34 Hui Wing Mau $2.94 billion Last year: $10.15 billion 71. Hong Kong. Property Chairman, Shimao Property Holdings Hui’s wealth falls in line with the share price decline of his Shimao group, one of China’s biggest property developers.
Like other Chinese property players, Shimao has struck some financial problems, leading to some defaulting on loans and having to offload some assets. The moves have hit the share price of the Hong Kong-listed Shimao hard. Once a textile factory worker, Hui has Australian citizenship after earning an MBA from the University of South Australia in the 1990s.
35 Gerry Harvey $2.83 billion Last year: $2.91 billion 82. Sydney. Retail Executive chairman, Harvey Norman Harvey Norman posted a record profit last year, as customers flocked to the furniture and electronics retailer in big numbers. The firm, which Harvey started 40 years ago with late business partner Ian Norman after they sold their previous chain Norman Ross, continues to be a big presence on the Australian retail scene. Harvey and wife Katie Page run the business, which has had to cope with lockdowns in recent months. Harvey’s stake in the business is the main source of his wealth, though he also owns the Magic Millions racehorse auction business. Harvey Norman also operates stores in New Zealand, Singapore, Malaysia, Ireland, Slovenia and Croatia.
36 Maurice Alter & family $2.62 billion Last year: $2.64 billion 96. Melbourne. Property Founder, Pacific Group The Alter family wealth is based on large Melbourne shopping centres, though it is also diversified through some private equity and debt and mezzanine financing lending.
Pacific Group half-owns Melbourne’s Werribee Plaza and Epping Plaza, while PFG Australia undertakes private lending and Albany Capital has investments in US medical technology, biotech and other health-focused firms, and also has a stake in the blockchain gaming platform firm Animoca Brands that has been valued at more than $US5 billion. Pacific Group is run by Alter’s son Sam. Alter migrated to Melbourne from Poland in the 1950s and established the business in 1979.
37 John van Lieshout $2.56 billion Last year: $2.45 billion 75. Brisbane. Property Owner, Unison Projects and JVL Investment Group Van Lieshout, his parents and his 12 siblings arrived in Australia in 1960 from the Netherlands. Ten years later he started a furniture business called Super Amart, which is now one of Australia’s biggest retail chains. Van Lieshout sold the business to private equity in 2006 but retained ownership of the freehold. Property has underpinned his wealth since, and Van Lieshout now owns development company Unison Projects and investment arm JVL Investment Group. Unison has a string of subdivision projects along the Queensland coast and northern NSW
38 Bruce Mathieson $2.50 billion Last year: $2.40 billion 78. Gold Coast. Property, gambling Founder, ALH Group Mathieson is no fan of public company life, but his biggest investment is now found in the ASX-listed Endeavour Group after his joint venture with Woolworths ALH Group was spun out as a separately listed company last year.
Though Mathieson’s son Bruce Jnr subsequently left an executive position, Mathieson remains Endeavour’s biggest shareholder and sits on its board as a non-executive director. Endeavour owns the ALH chain of pubs and hotels, as well as bottle shop brands Dan Murphy’s and BWS. Mathieson is a veteran of the pub scene, buying his first hotel in 1975, and has since bought and sold more than 9000 around Australia. He also owns large landholdings on Melbourne’s outskirts.
39 John Hancock 40 Bianca Rinehart 41 Ginia Rinehart 42 Hope Welker $2.46 billion each Last year: $2.73 billion each Shareholders, Hancock Prospecting The wealth of Gina Rinehart’s four children is traced to the trust fund that holds 23.45 per cent of the giant Hancock Prospecting mining business. There has been an ongoing legal battle regarding the Margaret Hancock Trust, of which the four children have an equal share. Most avoid the limelight, though John Hancock has emerged as an advisor to New York-based fund manager Lind Partners and has a lucrative investment in lithium company Vulcan Energy.
43 Prudence MacLeod $2.46 billion Last year: $2.33 billion 63. London. Investment Macleod is the eldest daughter of News Corp executive chairman Rupert Murdoch, and her wealth is based on her share of the $US12 billion the Murdoch family received when 21st Century Fox merged with Disney in 2019 in a $US71 billion deal. She and her husband Alistair MacLeod have invested in several startups, including Canva via their Macdoch Ventures group, and Macdoch’s agricultural arm’s assets includes Wilmot Cattle Co.
44 Marc Besen & family $2.44 billion Last year: $2.45 billion 98. Melbourne. Property Chairman, TarraWarra Besen is one of the legends of Australian business, building huge property holdings and retail investments over several decades. His daughter Naomi Milgrom owns the Sussan retail chain, which traces its roots back to Besen’s late wife Eva’s parents, who owned Melbourne lingerie shops.
Besen’s biggest property investment was the Highpoint shopping centre, which the family sold out of for $680 million in 2017. The group now invests in property projects in Australia and the US, while Besen owns the TarraWarra winery and art museum in Victoria’s Yarra Valley.
45 David Teoh 46 Vicky Teoh $2.34 billion combined Last year: $2.58 billion 66 and 65. Sydney. Telecommunications Founders, TPG Telecom David Teoh and wife Vicky remain significant shareholders of the ASX-listed TPG despite stepping away from the business in the past year. Teoh stepped down as TPG chairman in March 2021 after previously successfully battling to merge his TPG Telecom with Vodafone Hutchison in a deal worth $13 billion. The Teohs had started what was initially known as Total Peripherals Group in 1996 when they moved to Australia from Malaysia, building it into an internet services provider and then acquiring other telecommunications firms. The couple sold a big chunk of TPG shares last December, after which the share price fell, and have other property and startup investments.
47 Leonie Baldock 48 Alexandra Burt $2.8 billion combined Last year: $1.80 billion 50 and 48. Perth. Mining, Wine Directors, VOC Group, owner, Voyager Estate Baldock and Burt are the daughters of Michael Wright, son of the late Peter Wright, who was the one-time business partner of Gina Rinehart’s father Lang Hancock. They derive their wealth from the hundreds of millions in iron ore royalties that flow their way via Wright Prospecting to their VOC Group. Wright Prospecting is half-owned with their aunt Angela Bennett and is paid royalties from Rio Tinto’s iron ore projects in Western Australia. Burt’s Landsmith Collection owns tourism assets such as the Voyager winery Estate and the Bullo River Station in the Northern Territory
49 Andrew Budzinski $2.28 billion Last year: $1.73 billion 46. Limassol, Cyprus. Financial services Founder and chief executive, International Capital Markets Few members of The List received as big a payday as Budzinski did last year, when he collected a $906 million dividend from his foreign exchange and crypto trading firm International Capital Markets. The company, which Budzinski founded in 2007, claims to be the biggest forex trader in the world, making money from its clients trading in the risky financial derivatives known as CFDs, taking positions on currency movements and other commodities, stocks, indices, bonds, and cryptocurrency instruments. Budzinksi owns the Sydney-headquartered business, but now lives in the south of Cyprus.
50 Brett Blundy $2.28 billion Last year: $1.94 billion 62. Monaco. Retail, agriculture Executive director, BBRC Worldwide Blundy has come a long way since starting in retail with a single record store in suburban Melbourne. That was the basis of the Sanity music chain, and Blundy has gone on to own and sell such brands as Bras’n’Things and Honey Birdette. Now based in Monaco, his BBRC Worldwide has large stakes in ASX-listed companies, including jewellery retailer Lovisa, footwear firm Accent Group and homewares brand Adairs. The bulky goods retailer owner Aventus is set to merge with Home Co, with Blundy selling down his stake as part of the deal, and he also owns more than 6 million acres of cattle stations and 180,000 head of cattle across the Northern Territory. It makes BBRC the 10th largest single private land owner in the world.
51 Vivek Sehgal $2.21 billion Last year: $2.88 billion 65. Delhi. Manufacturing Chairman, Motherson Sumi Systems Seghal heads India’s largest car parts manufacturer, Motherson Sumi, but has plans to expand in four key non-automotive areas. He is scouring the market for acquisitions in the aerospace, logistics, technology and health sectors, with ambitions to be more prominent in fields ranging from IT services to making medical devices.
Sehgal, who established the business with his mother in 1975, gained Australian citizenship in 1997 after a stint in Sydney as part of a business migration program.
52 Nick Politis $2.18 billion Last year: $2.12 billion 80. Sydney. Car retailing, property Owner, WFM Motors and director, AP Eagers Politis is the most successful car salesman in Australia, with an empire that includes dozens of his own car dealers in Sydney, Melbourne and Queensland and a large stake in the ASX-listed AP Eagers. He also has extensive commercial property holdings, but is best known as chairman of the NRL club Sydney Roosters. Politis moved to Australia from Greece in the 1950s, settling in Queensland, where his family ran a cafe and later dabbled in property. He would work at Ford and later ran and owned the City Ford dealership in Sydney, becoming the first jersey sponsor in rugby league in 1976 with the Roosters.
53 Russell Withers & family $2.17 billion Last year: $2.11 billion 75. Melbourne. Retail Owner, 7-Eleven Holdings Withers and the family of his late sister Beverley Barlow own the 7-11 convenience store chain, having opened the first store in Australia in 1977. The group keeps growing and has more than $3.5 billion in annual sales, though it was ensnared in a wages scandal in 2015 when underpaying of salaries was found to be rampant. Withers stepped down as chairman and also left his role on the Australian Olympic Committee. The group also owns the Australian arm of the Starbucks coffee chain.
54 Khalil Shahin 55 Samer Shahin 56 Yasser Shahin $2.17 billion combined Last year: $1.93 billion 57, 53 and 45. Adelaide. Retail Joint owners, Peregrine Corporation The Shahin family own one of the least-known yet ubiquitous companies in Australia. Their Peregrine Corporation is the biggest private company in South Australia, with annual revenue of more than $2 billion for a group that employs 3500 people. Peregrine owns the On The Run (OTR) service station chain, Smokemart and Gift Box chains, and the Reliance Petroleum distribution business. The brothers now own the group, started by their late father Fred in 1984 when he purchased a small BP service station in Woodville Park, South Australia.
Peregrine also owns Krispy Kreme in its home state, The Bend motorsport park and Adelaide commercial property.
57 Michael Heine & family $2.15 billion Last year: $2.46 billion 72. Melbourne. Financial services Joint managing director, Netwealth Heine and son Matt run the ASX-listed Netwealth, which has been one of the most successful floats of recent years. The wealth management group listed on the ASX in 2017 and has since trebled in value. It has more than $56 billion in funds under administration, as more wealth managers use its platform and services. Heine started the business in 1999, after previously working in commodity trading for the family business Heine Brothers. It was a business that took Heine around the world, including behind the Iron Curtain during the Cold War, and he also bought and sold radio stations and commercial property before finding success in wealth management.
Word count: 2719
