RECYCLED wastewater has come up trumps in new research from the University of SA comparing the performance of different water sources in irrigating greenhouse-grown tomatoes.
The research found water quality and deficit irrigation schemes each had significant effects on crop development, yield and water productivity - with recycled wastewater achieving the best overall results.
Testing different water sources on greenhouse-grown tomatoes, recycled wastewater outperformed both groundwater, and a water mix of 50 per cent groundwater and 50 per cent recycled wastewater.
Researchers also confirmed that growers using deficit irrigation strategies - irrigation that limits watering in a controlled way - performed best at 80 per cent capacity, ensuring maximum water efficiency while maintaining excellent crop growth and yield levels.
Lead researcher and UniSA PhD candidate Jeet Chand said since water was an extremely valuable commodity in dry and arid farming regions, efficient irrigation strategies and alternative water sources were essential for agricultural production.
Related reading: Citrus traced using blockchain technology
"Deficit irrigation is a strategy commonly used by farmers to minimise water use while maximising crop productivity, but finding the most effective balance for greenhouse-grown produce can be tricky," Chand said.
"In our research we tested optimum water deficit levels for greenhouse-grown tomatoes, showing that water at 80pc of field capacity is the superior choice for optimal tomato growth in the Northern Adelaide Plains.
"These results were enhanced by the use of recycled wastewater, which not only fares well for plants (by delivering additional nutrients) and for farmers (by reducing the need for fertiliser) but is also great for the environment."
Ninety per cent of SA's tomato production occurs on the Northern Adelaide Plains, which contains the largest area of greenhouse coverage in the whole of the country.
The UniSA study simulated tomato growing conditions in this region across the most popular growing season and over two years.
It tested groundwater, recycled wastewater and a 50:50 mix of both, across four irrigation scenarios with soil moisture levels at 60pc, 70pc, 80pc and 100pc of field capacity.
While the highest growth levels were achieved through 100pc field capacity, mild water stress - 80pc water capacity - delivered positive water efficiency without significant yield reduction.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 384
