You may recall that ahead of the 2019 federal election, the Australian Dairy Industry Council (ADIC) published a list of policy priorities and initiatives we wanted to achieve during the next term of government.
These priorities covered primarily trade and market access issues and initiatives around sustainability and natural resource management.
Among the asks that we put to all political parties was the need for the federal government to continue pursuing an ambitious trade agenda.
This included ratifying the Indonesia-Australia Comprehensive Economic Partnership Agreement, minimising negative impacts on the dairy industry arising out of an Australia-European Union Free Trade Agreement, developing a trade deal with the UK following Brexit, and developing and implementing an action plan with industry to remove non-tariff barriers from trade agreements.
We also identified a number of priorities around mitigating climate change, providing better funding for drought preparedness, commissioning the CSIRO to develop a transformational water-supply blueprint for Australian agriculture, and providing tax relief to businesses installing or upgrading to more energy-efficient or renewable energy systems.
It is less than two years after that election, which the Liberal-National Coalition won, and everything on the industry's wish list has been delivered or is underway.
The Indonesia-Australia CEPA and Peru-Australia free trade agreement both came into force last year, while representatives from 15 countries also signed the Regional Comprehensive Economic Partnership (RCEP).
Australia is in talks to finalise trade deals with the Gulf Cooperation Council, India, UK and the Pacific Alliance.
In December 2020, the government awarded a $76,000 trade grant to Dairy Australia (DA) for an engagement plan with India.
And the dairy industry is pushing back hard against the EU's demands that any free trade agreement include Geographic Indications of Origin (GIs), banning Australian dairy manufacturers from using a smorgasbord of common cheese names on the grounds that names like feta are unique to specific regions in Europe.
In combatting climate change, the government is providing financial incentives to organisations and individuals, through the Emissions Reduction Fund, so they can reduce their greenhouse gas emissions and improve their energy efficiency.
"We also made it a central part of our federal election platform to advocate for more funding for drought preparedness.
"In response, the government invested $3.9 billion in the Future Drought Fund, and is expected to grow to $5 billion.
Under this initiative, various programs, such as the Farm Business Resilience Program, were established.
We also asked the government to invest in a transformational water-supply blueprint for Australian agriculture. The government has since established the National Water Grid Authority to lead Australia's national water grid.
And then there's the $22 million support package, developed in consultation with Australian Dairy Farmers (ADF), that was promised to the dairy industry during the 2019 election.
Of this, $10 million was used to deliver energy-efficiency grants for dairy farms to replace existing equipment with higher efficiency equipment, carry out on-farm energy audits or carry out monitoring of energy usage and emissions.
An additional $8.1 million was injected into the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission's agricultural unit to work on fair trading and competition for the dairy and agriculture sector and to employ a dairy specialist.
The $3 million Starting Farms Cooperative Program was established to provide grants to assist farmer groups form cooperatives and other collaborative business models.
DairyBase Budgeting was launched from a $500,000 grant awarded to DA.
An extension of DairyFeedBase, it will enable farmers to access historical data and estimate business performance for the current season.
And ADF received $150,000 to deliver a milk supply agreement template that complies with the dairy industry code of conduct and $300,000 to develop a real-time payment system using blockchain technology.
All of this goes to show that the dairy industry continues to be well-represented in Canberra, and both ADF and the ADIC will ensure that issues affecting the sector are front of mind for our decision-makers in federal parliament.
CREDIT: Terry Richardson, ADF president
Word count: 654
