Our dairy industry has navigated a challenging environment this year - from a horrific drought to a once in a lifetime pandemic.
We have been lucky that throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, domestic demand for dairy has remained strong and we have maintained the support of federal and state governments to continue working and producing dairy products.
Agriculture is, and always will be, an essential industry.
As we reflect on the past year, I am mindful that we are embarking on what could be a monumental change to dairy industry structures. Whatever happens, it is worth recalling that ADF has represented dairy farmers for over 78 years.
At all times, our success has rested on collaboration between states and the persistence and patience, knowledge and judgement of individual farmer representatives. We are in the process of significant deliberations about the future of our industry, and it is vital that we demonstrate these time-tested qualities.
I have spoken often of the need for collaboration across the industry, but it usually takes a crisis to reveal how well we can work together.
The onset of COVID-19 quickly reminded us of what we have in common. The rapid and collaborative response to this issue spoke to some of the underlying requirements for an industry-wide culture to underpin ongoing success. As chair of the National Response Group (NRG), which comprised ADF, the Australian Dairy Products Federation, and Dairy Australia, I saw:
All organisations and individuals committed to safeguarding our industry and ensuring the safety of employees across the supply chain; Goodwill by all and a commitment to consensus decision-making; Agreement that people needed to be engaged at all levels and at all times; Unanimous support for the strategic response that was developed; and A focus on long-term outcomes in the face of short-term uncertainty. The NRG is not often used, but this year it showed that outcomes are determined by what happens in an organisation, not how it is shaped.
I want to also highlight some of the projects ADF has worked on during the past year.
Firstly, we continued our involvement as a partner in the Australian Dairy Plan.
A key outcome of the Dairy Plan, developed through extensive consultation, was a commitment to reform industry structures as a way of streamlining processes, reducing duplication between organisations and ensuring that advocacy arrangements are well funded.
ADF has a major role to play in this reform process, as we move to implement a new industry structure that aims to benefit all parts of the dairy supply chain.
Our duty is to ensure that this new structure not only maintains the farmers' voice, but strengthens the industry's capacity to advocate on a broad slate of important issues. While we are all eager to get to the finish line, this journey is just beginning. It is a process that will continue throughout the next year, culminating in an industry-wide vote.
Aside from our role in the Dairy Plan, ADF has developed several projects for the federal government, represented the Australian dairy industry on a number of fronts, and maintained strong relationships across government and industry.
In fact, I believe our relationship with government has never been stronger.
In accordance with a $1.01 million commitment made by the federal government to ADF ahead of the 2019 federal election, ADF this year developed a standard form contract that meets the requirements of the new Dairy Industry Code of Conduct, facilitated the commencement of a milk trading platform, and instigated the development of a blockchain and traceability framework.
ADF played a lead role in the Dairy Industry Code of Conduct, which was enacted on January 1, 2020. A review of the code is scheduled to occur next year to assess its impact in addressing some of the findings of the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission's Dairy Inquiry.
Working with the National Farmers' Federation (NFF) and state dairy farmer organisations, we lobbied successfully for changes to legislation to crack down on illegal farm trespassers. We've always said that farmers deserve to run their businesses free from the fear of being harassed by animal activists, and Canberra listened.
I want to thank our members for their continued support and contributions.
We all own the success of ADF, and member support is crucial to ensure dairy farmers have an effective voice in Canberra and elsewhere for years to come.
CREDIT:
Word count: 727
