Before joining Morgan Stanley in 2014 Triantafilidis was chief investment officer of Legg Mason International Equities’ London affiliate firm, Esemplia.
Before that he was head of equities at both Vontobel Asset Management and Swiss Re (where he was also head of tactical asset allocation).
In deciding to return to his home town of Adelaide, Triantafilidis faced a career dilemma.
“Larger firms in asset management looked at my background and thought I should be in a senior role, and then smaller boutiques said ‘we don’t really know you, we haven’t worked with you’,” he says.
“But I felt wealth management was a big opportunity in Australia and that a more structured institutional style approach would work.”
Top 100 Advisers 2021
Having worked for institutional clients of Morgan Stanley, Triantafilidis knew the US-based giant well and – what’s more – had known the firm’s newly appointed local head of wealth management, Ian Chambers, for more than two decades.
“Adelaide is actually quite a good market in terms of its client base and there are plenty of opportunities to get it right,” he says.
“I felt I could add something by being very focused on the investment side and delivering returns. And I could do it on the global platform, which no other firm really has.”
Triantafilidis stresses he’s a financial adviser rather than financial planner, which means focusing on strategic investment advice rather than providing advice on structuring investments or superannuation strategies.
His clients include high net worth individuals and families, self-managed super funds and not-for-profit organisations.
“My own specialty is asset allocation and equities portfolio management, with a particular emphasis on international equities,” he says.
“My team’s specialty is in providing a complete portfolio management service for clients who prefer independent control of their wealth, but who want their portfolio professionally managed.”
Triantafilidis’s global experience has enabled him to restructure client portfolios for more international diversity, beyond the local dividend driven approach. “We have changed the focus of a number of traditional Australia-only clients and also reoriented the portfolios of not-for-profit clients,” he says.
“That has been done not only by adding significantly to international equities, but through broader fixed income (from typically hybrids and term deposits) and also adding alternative investments such as private equity.”
He’s also not afraid to advise on alternative investments such as private equity, unlisted real assets, hedge funds and commodities.
Cryptocurrencies remain off limits, although the firm globally has a watching brief on both “cryptos” and the underlying blockchain technology.
Triantafilidis says that initially he did not see how a typical adviser could add value for clients – and how their worth could be quantified.
“If a client wants to know how good you are, how do you prove it,” he says. “In asset management you have an obvious track record of performance.”
In 2015 Triantafilidis set up the first of several model portfolios, as a standard route for investors to get access to the best domestic and international ideas.
Both have easily outperformed the relative benchmark indices.
“These model portfolios have now been made available to clients as discretionary separately managed portfolios which is an efficient option for both clients and for me as an adviser.”
At the onset of the pandemic, Triantafilidis admits he initially underestimated the economic and market impact of the virus.
However by early April last year he hosted a conference call for clients that drew on the view of the firm’s equities experts that the market had bottomed already (indeed it had, on March 23).
“We advised our clients not to panic sell and we generally saw very little selldowns across our clients’ portfolios,” he says.
“In fact many clients took advantage of some price weakness across the market to add to their equities exposure.”
Now a three-times consecutive entrant on the Barron’s best adviser list, Triantafilidis says he and his team are focused on helping clients enjoy their goals and – just as importantly – enjoy the opportunities that their wealth affords.
“I aim to preserve and grow the real value of clients’ wealth,” he says.
Word count: 651
