THE world’s dominant cryptocurrency bitcoin has continued its record-breaking run, passing $US34,000 ($44,000) for the first time on its way to what some are predicting will be a likely $US100,000 valuation, and mainstream acceptance.
Bitcoin on Sunday hit a high of $US34,792.48, after soaring by more than 300 per cent last year. The decade-old coin now has a market capitalisation of more than $US600bn, following ticks of approval from PayPal – which has announced it will accept cryptocurrency for online payments – and credit score company FICO, which has launched a cryptocurrency risk assessment solution for banks.
The currency has proved extremely volatile throughout its existence, including in March when it lost 50 per cent of its value in two days in the early days of the pandemic.
With markets closed over the weekend however, bitcoin has surged to new highs, and has added more than 50 per cent to its value since it passed $US20,000 two weeks ago.
“It’s very likely that the asset will eventually pass $US100,000 per coin,” said Sergey Nazarov, co-founder of Chainlink, a global blockchain project.
“People have been steadily losing faith in their government currencies for years, and the monetary policies resulting from the economic impact of the coronavirus have only ­accelerated this decline.” Analysts from Citibank and JPMorgan have been bullish on bitcoin, with a leaked report from Citi in December describing the cryptocurrency as “21st century gold”.
Bitcoin was founded on October 31, 2008, when an anonymous founder (or co-founders) known as Satoshi Nakamoto published a white paper on an electronic mailing list, describing a peer-to-peer digital currency that did not need traditional financial institutions for transfer.
Antoni Trenchev, co-founder of cryptocurrency lender Nexo, said institutional investors would probably boost ­prices further this week. “Bitcoin will be on the road to $US50,000 probably in the first quarter of 2021,” he said.
Statistics from Australian-based cryptocurrency exchange Independent Reserve show that nearly one in five Australians now own some form of cryptocurrency, and 17.3 per cent of the population are “wary” of it, down from 21.3 per cent in 2019. “Aussies are getting behind crypto like never before, which isn’t surprising when you know how we love to back the underdog,” Independent Reserve chief executive Adrian Przelozny said. “Australians are now more likely to view the world’s dominant crypto as a store of value, an investment vehicle or money.”
CREDIT: CRYPTOCURRENCIES DAVID SWAN
Word count: 401
