Teens in training DR Tanveer Ahmed calls for resilience training for South Australian youth (“Resilience lessons for teens”, The Advertiser, Monday).
SA is in the ideal situation of having two ready-to-go programs developed here. They are university reviewed as best practice and are chafing at the bit to provide for more youth.
Operation Flinders includes an eight-day outback walking program proven to improve the optimism and resilience of participants.
The Youth Opportunities personal leadership program is a 10-week (one day a week) coaching program. This program develops powerful skills and confidence in life skills.
Both are marvellous not-for-profit organisations. It is time for them to be made available to all young South Australians.
COLIN MURDOCH, Port Lincoln
Cost of bitcoin PEOPLE should be aware that transactions with crypto, and Bitcoin in particular, have an enormous carbon footprint, due to the computational power required to update the blockchain ledger (“Bitcoin Bowsers”, April 4).
A single bitcoin transaction results in 400kg of CO2 which is larger than the footprint of the average Australian home for 10 days, and 83,000 times larger than the footprint of a single Visa credit card transaction. Imagine paying with carbon intense currency to drive a carbon intense vehicle!
That’s insane, granted the scale of the challenge of addressing climate change in front of us.
DR JASPER LEE Norwood Ibis Olympics I’M not sure about the choice of an ibis for an Olympic mascot. The decision might come with a big bill.
JENNY MARSHALL, West Beach Strong country CONTRIBUTOR Brian Measday and others have advocated the end of coal and gas usage for some time (“Green vote”, The Advertiser, Monday).
Do these types of activists think for a moment how this madness is contributing to the weakening of our sovereignty as a nation?
The world’s greatest polluter is setting up strategic military bases on our doorstep.
Europe may return to buying more coal and reinstating nuclear for their much-weakened energy needs.
Europe’s climate-change folly has been exposed by its reliance on renewables and Russian gas.
Mr Measday, services like hospitals, health and education that you take for granted are partly funded by our coal and gas exports.
As for voting, I won’t be backing the so-called independents. I believe some independents are puppets for wealthy people who invest heavily in renewables. These ones are aligned with Labor and the Greens. I am not a mug.
And I certainly resent being taken for one by climate-change activism and its cult-like followers.
ROMAN RAUTENBERG, Murray Bridge Smart trade CONGRATULATIONS to the federal government on concluding the historic Australia-India Free Trade Agreement.
Aside from the commercial benefits to both countries, it strengthens the relationship with AUKUS and sends a message to Mr Xi Jinping that democratic nations are also united in trade.
The FTA also has a real shared social benefit as well.
I believe the substantial cohort of Australian Indians will feel delighted with the closer ties brought about by this government’s efforts.
PETER LAFFREY, Netley Check all pythons MONTY Python lovers would have had a laugh about the report of a wandering python found in Morphett Vale.
Residents in the southern suburbs with a missing python were encouraged to contact Snake Catchers Adelaide.
How many had to check? MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood
Word count: 542
