SPORTS NON-FUNGIBLE TOKENS ARE THE MODERN VERSION OF TRADING CARDS MONEY First it was tennis and cricket, and soon Australia’s other major ball sports should be enticing collectors and investors into the brave new world of non-fungible tokens.
Better-known as NFTs, these are unique pieces of digital art, videos, in-game items or other data stored on a digital ledger known as blockchain, and bought using cryptocurrencies.
The total market is tipped to grow to about $100bn within three years. Basketball led the global NFT sport collectable trend with the hugely successful NBA Top Shot collection of video highlights, while Tennis Australia launched them at the Australian Open in January. Cricket NFTs were launched by the ICC in January too, allowing collectors to buy video highlights of Aussie and international cricket stars.
It is understood that football codes and the National Basketball League are working on their own NFT projects. The tennis NFTs on the sweet.io platform include digital artworks of racquets, umpires’ chairs and short videos of famous matches and players. More than 3400 have been launched since January and about 1500 have been sold – ranging in price from $9.99 to $2500.
Tennis Australia’s metaverse and NFT project manager, Ridley Plummer, says a marketplace function for the AO NFT collection will open soon.
“From our standpoint, success was getting the project up and running,” he says. “We weren’t going to measure success by how many we sold, how quickly we sold them or the price we got for them. We’ve taken a lot of learnings from this first iteration.” While each NFT is unique, there can be thousands of versions of one video, image or other file – just like non-digital artwork prints.
But some Top Shot NFTs sell for crazy prices – LeBron James videos have fetched more than $100,000.
The ICC cricket NFTs attract some big prices too, with a video of a four hit by Indian great Sachin Tendulkar in 1992 selling for $17,000 this month. ICC head of digital Finn Bradshaw says it launched its NFT program because “we think this is the next evolution of fandom”.
“It allows cricket fans to own some of the most iconic moments in ICC cricket history … we are still in a beta phase, but it’s been really exciting to see the passion of those fans who are involved in it so far,” he says.
Australian cricketers on NFTs include Pat Cummins, Steve Smith and Meg Lanning, and Bradshaw says the fancraze.com marketplace that offers them will include “more legends of the game”.
Tribeca Financial chief executive Ryan Watson has noticed increased interest in NFTs and sees a bright future for them in sport, but with one caveat. “Do your research – if you don’t understand what it is or what it does, stay away from investing in it,” he says.
Cryptocurrency exchange CoinSpot market analyst Mack Robertson says more leagues and teams are jumping on the bandwagon.
Robertson says there is a big misconception that NFTs are a scam. “It’s important to know that NFTs themselves are not scams or get-rich-quick-schemes,” he says.
“However, there are some crooks who are scamming people with hopes of using NFTs to become rich. There can be bad players in every industry, so … do your own due diligence.
Steven Penson, 28, started investing in art NFTs last year and says he would consider investing in sports NFTs because they are an evolution of collectibles from traditional baseball cards.
“Instead of a static image on a medium that is subject to environmental damage and degradation, sports NFTs will always remain in mint condition,” he says.
“To all the potential NFT buyers out there, the advice I would give is don’t invest more than you can afford to lose.
How to buy 1 Buy cryptocurrency on a reputable crypto exchange – Ethereum is the most widely used digital currency for NFTs.
2Create a crypto wallet through your exchange and transfer your crypto into it. 3 Connect your wallet to a NFT marketplace – opensea.io is the biggest, but several sport NFTs have their own marketplaces.
4 Buy the NFT at its listed price or make a bid. If it’s successful, you are an owner. Source: CoinSpot
CREDIT: Anthony Keane
Word count: 708
