SIX SUCCESSFUL BUSINESS LEADERS GIVE ADVICE TO YOUNG PEOPLE ON ACHIEVING FINANCIAL GOALS COST OF LIVING GETTING control of your financial planning when young is more critical than ever. But what advice would industry leaders in Australia give to their more junior selves? From banking to nest eggs and taking a step on the property ladder, we asked what money lessons they wish they’d known and their best tips for you.
SET YOURSELF AN EARLY WEALTH TARGET AND WORK HARD Create a personal asset target for a number of years, underpinned by annual actions. That’s the advice of Reject Shop chief executive Andre Reich. “Ideally, the asset could be one where you can personally add value to improve its worth such as a business or property. Avoid over-capitalising on assets or experiences that typically depreciate,” he says.
Reich also says “work hard and be a good person”.
LIFE IS FOR LIVING BUT TRY PROPERTY Janine Allis, who started Boost Juice in her mid-30s in 2000, is more relaxed, suggesting millennials spend and enjoy, noting most are still working out what they want to do.
“Forget about savings as many in their 20s (there are exceptions) really are working out their lives. Life, if you are lucky, is long and there is time enough for knuckling down and budgeting,” says Allis, who has overseen the business expand to 580 stores across 13 countries.
But if you’re looking to get serious about money, get into the property market, she says.
“The best non-taxable asset you can get is your own home, so get a small block of land with a little house on it and renovate it. This is a forced saving and mostly the money you put into it will come back to you at some point and it will come back tax free.” GET PROFESSIONAL FINANCIAL ADVICE Reserve Bank of Australia board member Carol Schwartz, who set up an aerobics and dance studio at 25, says seeking specific advice is critical.
“I was aware enough to know what I didn’t know, so I employed an accountant to advise me on how to structure my fledgling business – remuneration for staff, payment of rent, how to do the bookkeeping, etc. It was money well spent,” she says.
“So I would advise any young person either setting up a business or taking on a salaried role to get good, professional financial advice – it will save you time and money as you embark on what is hopefully going to be a successful and satisfying career.” LEARN THE FACTS ON SHARE TRADING AND SUPER Vogue Australia editor-in-chief Edwina McCann recommends taking control of your finances early and “get into the property market”, noting she wished that she had bought a property sooner.
“I also would say learn about share trading. Try to understand how the finance system works or how the personal wealth system operates so that you can take more control of that as you get older,” McCann says.
The fashion icon also says to take interest in your super and make sure it’s not “languishing in different accounts” as you move jobs.
“With blockchain technology, we should be able to own our financial data and I think that’s a really important thing we should be pushing for.” PUT AWAY 10 PER CENT Chair of Financial Planning Association of Australia, Marisa Broome, says her dad taught her that every time she earnt some money to put away 10 per cent of her gross earnings into a so-called “savings bucket” for either a car or house.
“In those first few years you often get big pay rises, so it’s really important to keep living on less and not just using up all this extra money that’s coming your away.” STICK TO SAVINGS GOALS Macquarie Group’s head of deposits and payments Olivia McArdle says focus on two things: understand where you are spending your money and have clearly defined savings goals.
“By tracking your spending habits you can get a really good feel for where you can or need to cut back as it can be an eye opening experience because you should know where your money is going,” McArdle says. “Think about opening multiple savings accounts for different savings goals so you stay organised and can clearly see how you’re tracking,”
CREDIT: LILLY VITOROVICH
Word count: 722
