Vegemite, Victa lawnmowers and the Hills hoist may have our hearts, but there’s plenty more where they came from Australia no longer makes the Ford or Holden cars we were once famed for. Yes, they’re still available but they come from Japan.
Even Koala, the bedding furniture company which donates a percentage of profits to saving our iconic cuddly marsupial, doesn’t manufacture mattresses down under any more.
It’s a story we hear over and over, and so it’s easy to see why so many Australians believe we no longer make anything at all. But that just isn’t true. We do, in fact, have plenty of incredible brands right here on Aussie soil.  And, with skyrocketing shipping prices caused by Covid, the higher costs of transporting bulky home building and furniture products means this is the perfect time to look closer to home.
“Can you imagine how much better off we’d be if we all bought Australian-owned and manufactured products?” asks Stormtech managing director Troy Creighton.
Especially since CoreLogic recently announced the collective value of Australian homes hit $9 trillion in September – a whopping $1 trillion more than they were worth just six months earlier.
JOBS FOR OUR COUNTRYFOLK There are many other economic and ethical benefits to buying building and renovation products from locally-owned companies.
These include reduced transportation costs, job creation and of course, less waste.  “There used to be a significant labour saving to go offshore, which meant many of our local manufacturers stopped making things here,” explains Global Greentag international program director David Baggs.
But things are changing. An imported building product shortage is looming, with order times for fancy imported materials blowing out to three months or more and Australian builders finding it hard to get imported structural timber and door hardware, making it the perfect time to buy local.
LONG LEADS TIMES Stylist Heather Nette King says September used to be the cut-off date to get European furniture, appliances and building products delivered to Australia by Christmas – but this year, that date was moved forward to July.
“What used to be a 10 to 12-week turnaround is now at least six months for some things, especially if it’s from Italy,” she says.
Meanwhile Australian small and medium businesses are innovating to create lean manufacturing processes that shorten ordering times and make bespoke designs or colours to order.
Take Sanctuary Makers, a tile company that can create unique colours and designs for bathroom, kitchen, splashback and floor tiles which can be delivered in days or weeks rather than months.
The tiles cost between $49 and $120 a square metre, which is much cheaper than most European brands. Run by a geophysicist Matt Venn, Sanctuary Makers doesn’t hold large amounts of stock and reduces waste and energy costs to focus on creating better designed decorative tiles for a discerning Australian market.
“We’ve put people ahead of profits because we believe that making the product here has more benefits,” Matt says.
OUR INNOVATION Polytec creative services director Paul Shaddock points out that the decorative panel company which makes kitchens and wardrobes began in a NSW garage 30 years ago but now exports all over the world, regularly investing hundreds of millions of dollars into creating more Australian-owned and made products.
The Polytec inventors are the Borg brothers, who now own other Australian manufacturing businesses like Crossmuller and Plantation Pine Products, which recycle and reuse materials to transform them into particle board products.
“It’s all Australian made and there are 2100 people with jobs because of it,” he says.
Stormtech’s Troy Creighton’s – whose dad invented and patented a unique bathroom drain used all over the globe – employs 50 people in Nowra, NSW, to make stainless steel grates and drains.
“The future of Australian manufacturing is being led by lots of manufacturers, it’s a new wave that’s very different to the past 40 or 50 years,” he says.
“We will be cost-effective. We will be price matching and creating shorter lead times to become a reliable supplier locally and internationally.”
Oz Swaps Before you buy imported goods, see what we have Australians have always made bulky building products like bricks and steel on shore. We have a history of making carpets here, too. Finding Australian-owned companies who manufacture in Australia and use local materials and employees deliver the greatest economic – and often ethical – benefits.
Here are a few other suggestions to go local when you next renovate: Instead of tiles made overseas, try Sanctuary Makers tiles which can be designed and made to your specifications for around the same price as most imported tiles.
Instead of imported natural or manufactured stone benchtops, try Australian-made terrazzo from Fibonacci Stone or polished concrete from Concreative.
Instead of imported flatpack kitchen cabinets or built-in wardrobes, try specifying Polytec decorative products which are fully Australian-owned and manufactured here.
Instead of an imported sink, invest in an Australian-designed and locally made Oliveri sink.
Our future homes will be different Sustainability and energy expert Alan Pears says the way Australians build, renovate and live in their homes is about to be revolutionised by technology and pressure to reduce carbon emissions. The former RMIT professor says even the humble mobile phone camera is part of the technology efficiencies sweeping through manufacturing to help us make bulky products more efficiently on shore here in Australia. “Just being able to take a photo on a building site makes things faster and easier,” he says, explaining the costs of robotic manufacturing equipment is now similar in Europe, Australia and what were once traditionally lower-cost countries like China. Tools like Building Information Modelling systems, blockchain, robots and drones will also help manufacturers find faster and better ways to make things, while confirming sustainability claims for consumers. “The shipping crisis both raises transport costs and creates scarcity of imported products, so it can certainly be significant,” he says.
CREDIT: Words; Alex Brooks
Word count: 987
