ENVIRONMENT MAKING ETHICAL CHOICES ABOUT YOUR CLOTHES AND HOW YOU BUY THEM MAY HELP SAVE THE WORLD Fast fashion is a major environmental issue, with the global fashion industry contributing more greenhouse gas emissions than France, Germany and the United Kingdom combined.
It produced about 2.1 billion tonnes of GHG emissions globally in 2018, according to a report by McKinsey and Global Fashion Agenda – about twice that of the pre-Covid aviation industry.
But before you go nude to save the planet, experts say small changes to the clothes we buy and how we buy them can make a big difference.
Yuko Oka, merchandise planner for fashion designer and retailer UNIQLO Australia, says Australians are becoming more conscious of the sustainability impacts of their fashion choices.
“We’re continuing to see growth amongst our sustainable products and categories, which tells us the buying behaviour of the Australian consumer is changing,” she says.
“We’re constantly evolving the way we create clothing to ensure we’re helping make the world a better place.
“An example of this is when we use yarn created from used plastic bottles to make new clothes such as our Fluffy Yarn Fleece Full-Zip Jacket. We also produce stylish bags incorporating yarn from nylon thread waste.
“As a brand, we want our customers to make ethical choices at our stores without even knowing it.” So how can consumers make more sustainable fashion choices?
QUALITY OVER QUANTITY Fast Retailing group executive officer Yukihiro Nitta says one of the most sustainable things anyone can do is to only purchase clothes they know they will use often.
He recommends avoiding items that you will not want to wear beyond a season or two.
“Prioritise brands that offer high quality, durable products, where there is a focus on simple, timeless style, rather than fleeting trends,” he says. “Choose clothes you will love and enjoy wearing often and for a long time.” CHOOSE BRANDS WISELY Each year, Baptist World Aid Australia produces a report on the ethical and environmental practices of global fashion brands.
Its 2021 Ethical Fashion Report, which assessed 420 brands across 98 companies, found 37 companies received an A or A+ for environmental sustainability, including Adidas, Etiko, H&M, Hallenstein Glasson Holdings, Kmart and Target Australia, Inditex, Nike, Nudie Jeans Co, Patagonia and UNIQLO.
This was based on factors such as whether they assessed the environmental impact of their top three fibres, benchmarked water use, and mitigated the in-use and end-of-life impact of their products.
Nitta says reputable brands should also create annual sustainability reports outlining goals and actions or make this information available.
“This information should include details of efforts not directly related to products that customers see – such as eliminating plastics and other waste and reducing greenhouse gases in the supply chain,” he says.
“When doing so, look for brand commitment to meaningful, independent targets or international standards, such as the Paris Agreement, or for partnerships with reputable independent NGO stakeholders, such as the United Nations.” UNIQLO’s greenhouse gas emissions targets are aligned with Paris Agreement objectives and are verified by SBTi (the Science Based Targets initiative). The company’s RE.UNIQLO program also recovers used UNIQLO items for donation to people in crisis, and partners with Toray Industries to recover, clean and rejuvenate the down from recovered items then make new UNIQLO products, such as jackets.
BUY PRE-LOVED Before purchasing an item of clothing, consider second-hand stores. As well as charity op shops – such as Lifeline, Vinnies, Salvos and Australian Red Cross – there are also boutique stores dedicated to preloved designer brands, and online marketplaces, including “buy, swap, sell” Facebook groups, dedicated to specific brands.
Similarly, apps such as AirRobe Marketplace allow people to list and buy preloved fashion with payment protection.
HIRE ATTIRE If you are looking for an outfit you plan to wear just once consider hiring rather than buying new. Some companies offering this service include GlamCorner, The Volte, Designerex and Style Theory.
Transforming the fashion industry Coffee sneakers Every pair of sneakers from Finnish company Rens is made from six recycled plastic bottles and 150g of coffee waste, with the natural rubber sole derived from a milky sap-like material harvested from the Hevea brasiliensis tree without harm.
Recycled bottles Recycled PET bottles are used to create UNIQLO’s fleece and DRY-EX products, including polos and sportswear.
Carbon-positive cotton Nobody Denim is taking manufacturing transparency to the next level, producing a collection of jeans that is traceable from the cotton farm to the store. It has partnered with FibreTrace, which uses blockchain technology to embed luminescent pigments into cotton fibres, allowing them to be scanned and marked at each processing tier from ginning and spinning, through to final stage production. A QR code on the swing tag allows consumers to read about the product’s journey. The jeans are made with Good Earth Cotton from a NSW farm that has been independently certified as carbon positive – producing less CO2 than it absorbs.
Saving water The faded look of UNIQLO’s BlueCycle jeans is created without the need for large amounts of water and manual labour. The technology reduces the amount of water used in the jeans finishing process by up to 99 per cent.
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 870
