The tail end of economic support has kept business failures subdued, as 258 slipped into administration and liquidation across the country in October.
The low numbers come as the Victorian and NSW economies both exit crushing lockdowns, with many businesses continuing to enjoy rent abatement, debt deferrals, and economic support.
The preliminary figures from the Australian Securities and Investments Commission shows NSW was the worst-hit state for business failures, but the figures are tracking well below pre-pandemic levels. But industry watchers have noted signs are now pointing to more assertive actions coming from creditors demanding delinquent businesses pay up.
The NSW toll of 83 businesses in liquidation and administration in October compares to the 132 in the state that went bust 12 months previously. This was compared to the 346 that shut their doors in NSW in October 2019.
Victoria saw 78 business busts in October, followed by Queensland with 47 failures and Western Australia with 29.
Clayton Utz national restructuring and insolvency practice head Timothy Sackar said businesses were still operating in an environment of significant Covid relief.
He said it was unsurprising numbers were down, but December and January may see a lift of insolvency figures as more businesses fail.
“Early calendar 2022 will be very interesting, we’re starting to see already some corporate clients not pressured or forced but being encouraged to have some of those post-Covid business plan conversations,” he said.
Mr Sackar said the looming threat of interest rate hikes in 2023 may put heed to some lenders to start calling in non-paying debts.
“The reality is if you’re a major four, a shadow bank or an alternative financier at the end of the day you’re going to have to produce a return,” he said.
NSW construction firm Rombro Constructions entered administration in October, with documents showing the move coming months after company operator Richard Romano first raised financial issues.
Documents submitted to ASIC show Mr Romano met DW Advisory in July, well before he tipped the business into administration in October.
The Leichhardt-based builder had been in business since 2011 working across a range of residential projects.
An early creditors’ report shows the company owes at least $978,861.55, including a $121,877 tax debt.
Mr Romano, Rombro Constructions director, has himself put in a claim for $74,751 on the business.
Equifax general manager commercial and property services Scott Mason said although insolvency numbers were tracking well below 2019 levels data was showing a lift in court wind-ups.
Mr Mason said 2021 had seen a small lift in insolvencies in the second quarter while the “insolvency can has been kicked down the road three or four months”.
Mr Mason said data was also showing an increasing number of business exits, when operators simply shut their doors without entering insolvency.
“In the smaller end of town there are strips of shops that are shutting their doors,” he said.
Cryptocurrency consultancy Blockchain Global was placed in liquidation in mid-October following a second winding-up application being lodged against the company that was behind the failed attempt to list Bitcoin Group on the ASX in 2016.
Tourism and hospitality businesses appear on the October list of insolvencies, which also includes Geelong-based Southern Bay Brewery, owned by Adelaide-based Nick Warming. Atlas Gaming, and its associated entities were also placed in voluntary administration, with News Corp Australia reporting this week that former premier and current Hawthorn president Jeff Kennett was owed more than $600,000 as a result of the failure.
Oracle Insolvency Services founding partner Nick Cooper agreed that the creditors calling in debts at the moment were largely private companies supplying other firms, rather than the ATO.
“Liquidations may well be slightly up and down for now but eventually the tax office will come looking for the money it is owed,’’ Mr Cooper said.
“That’s when we believe there’ll be a steady upward trend in insolvencies as the ATO methodically calls in its debts.
“Lockdowns have hit the hospitality industry hard especially in the eastern states and we expect to see more cafes and restaurants run into trouble as well as those in personal services industries like hairdressers and beauticians.” Additional reporting:Cameron England
CREDIT: David Ross
Word count: 696
