Builders, restaurants and crypro pioneers were hardest-hit Collateral damage from the scourge of Covid played an outsized role in many of Australia’s most significant corporate collapses in 2021.
From the squeeze of lockdowns to the pressure on supply chains, pandemic-spawned challenges were a common thread running through many of the unravelings.
Looking ahead to 2022, insolvency and restructuring experts expect much of the same as the intensifying battle against the Omicron variant reduces some of the benefits expected to flow from the reopening of state borders.
In terms of both size and controversy, the spectacular demise of supply chain financing multinational Greensill was easily the most significant crash of the year.
The Queensland-based empire, headed by Lex Greensill, imploded with $4.9bn in debt, a stunning end for a global company which was once worth as much as $7bn and only launched in 2011.
The demise of the Forum Group of managed services providers also caused quite a stir.
The companies went down owing almost $400m, with major creditor Westpac alleging Forum and its former chief executive Bill Papas created fake leasing invoices and forged signatures to secure finance, often for goods that allegedly did not exist.
The Federal Court in October made orders for the arrest of Mr Papas in Greece, after judge ­Michael Lee said Mr Papas “repeatedly disobeyed” court orders and was seeking to avoid being served with key legal documents.
As in past years, construction industry disasters accounted for many of the most notable crashes.
Daniel Grollo’s Grocon building group tumbled into administration with about $104m in debts but creditors decided against liquidating all 88 companies.
Instead, they voted for a deed of company arrangement’ to allow them to keep trading and pay back just a part of the money owing. While the Australian Taxation Office will claw back 43.9c on the dollar, subcontractors and other big creditors agreed to settle for less than 3c.
The outlook is far less bright for creditors of failed Privium Group, which left hundreds of unfinished homes across the country and is now in liquidation with $80m owing.
Liquidators believe a toxic combination of soaring construction costs, mainly from higher labour and materials expenses, and big dividend payments to related parties led to its undoing. Liquidators are seeking to hold a public examination of key executives.
The collapse of high-rise construction firm ABD in December could be of equal magnitude, with initial estimates suggesting creditors may be owed as much as $80m.
Major steel fabricating company SA Structural collapsed beneath a crippling debt load of more than $64m. The crash, which left 200 workers jobless, came as the firm was involved in 15 major projects.
In a sign of the times, several digital currency operators went to the wall in 2021.
Failed cryptocurrency business Blockchain Global fell in a heap with debts in excess of $50m, more than twice the amount first estimated by administrators in October. Investors claimed they were owed up to $50,000 in missing currency.
Rival outfit myCryptoWallet also collapsed, although it’s not yet clear how much debt it had amassed. Clients allege they are owed up to $40,000 and the business had just shy of 20,000 customers.
Elsewhere in the tech sector, poker machine technology company Atlas Gaming and its related entities fell over with nearly $4.5m in debts.
Among those out of pocket was former Victorian premier Jeff Kennett, who was owed just over $600,000.
Communications business ­Superfone came unstuck after a $300,000 fine was imposed by the competition regulator for improperly selling phone plans to vulnerable consumers.
In the health arena, one of the nation’s biggest poppy growers, Palla Pharma, went under after demand for painkillers nosedived largely as a result of the pandemic. Administrators hope to sell or recapitalise the business.
While plenty of hospitality, tourism and retail enterprises buckled over the year, there were a few bright spots as well.
Fruit and vegetable distributor In2Food Australia, which sends goods to cafes, restaurants, aged care homes and commercial kitchens, narrowly avoided the scrap heap.
The company, which fell into administration with nearly $70m in debts, was sold to Produce Republic, with the deal saving the jobs of about 400 workers.
Golden Century, a Chinese dining institution in Sydney, succumbed to $4.5m in debts but creditors accepted a rescue plan proposed by the family behind the business.
A similar reprieve helped save the restaurant and hospitality group backed by former Wallabies skipper George Gregan and wife Erica. Their GG Leasing, which operated nine venues across Brisbane and Sydney, tumbled into administration with more than $1m in debts, a victim of lockdowns and fewer workers in city centres. But creditors approved a rescue plan that allows the group to keep trading, albeit slimmed down somewhat.
A second chance also helped revive Australian Fashion Labels, which unravelled under a $12m load of debt. The Adelaide company was subsequently relaunched under new ownership, with the state’s chief entrepreneur Andrew Nunn at the helm.
An equally positive outcome played out for Tourism Adventure Group, which operates ­NOMADS and Base backpacker hostels on the east coast.
The business, which turned over $150m in 2019 from its 25 ­venues across Australia and New Zealand, succumbed to border closures and lockdowns.
But creditors approved a deed of company arrangement’ to allow the business to continue trading in the expectation of substantial pent-up demand for travel as borders reopen.
Asked what the new year holds, Andrew Fielding, BDO’s national leader for business re­structuring, said he was already noticing a slight uptick in company failures.
Following scathing findings by the banking royal commission, banks and the ATO frequently held off pursuing legal action over debts, he said.
“There’s been no appetite to go after anyone. Because of the publicity and reputational issues, the banks would rather walk away from the debt than pursue it,’’ Mr Fielding said.
“It’s OK for the ATO to go after overpayments of JobKeeper but not go after companies hit by the pandemic. They’re just not taking action.’’ But with pressure growing from the prudential regulator to pursue defaulters early in the new year, Mr Fielding said he believed the ATO would ramp up activity after the federal election by targeting dormant “zombie’’ companies. He also tipped a continued wave of building companies going out of business as cost increases and supply chain issues exact a growing toll. “More builders go bust in a boom than in a bust,’’ Mr Fielding said.
CREDIT: ANTHONY MARX
Word count: 1076
