The South Australian Dairyfarmers' Association (SADA) traceability trial is officially underway.
Cutting-edge technologies will be used to improve supply chain visibility and industry transparency as part of the trial, which was officially launched by SA Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development David Basham at Mount Compass.
SADA Dairy Action Plan Officer Ashleigh Pulford said the trial, which would be funded completely by the
SA Dairy Industry Fund, was about creating the most open and transparent supply chain in history.
"This trial is about the use of blockchain and distributed ledger digital technologies so there will be
complete visibility across the supply chain," she said.
"SA is leading the way in the development of this technology by using the Hedera Hashgraph protocol, the same distributed leger system being governed and endorsed by companies such as Google, IBM and Boeing.
"Until now labelling has been the source of trust for consumers in Australian and international markets, but this technology will allow all participants in the supply chain - including consumers - to track the milk from the farm to the product they hold in their hand.
"Consumers will be able to see details as simple as temperature every step of the way, while farmers will be able to see wherever in the world their milk ends up."
SADA President John Hunt said the State Government set a direction when in September 2020 it launched an industry-led plan to grow SA's food, wine and agribusiness sectors to $23 billion by 2030.
"The dairy industry is delighted the government heard our call and adopted SADA's Dairy Industry Action Plan as part of its $23 billion by 2030 plan," he said.
Mr Hunt said in 2017/18 farm gate sales of milk contributed $195 million to the State economy and just four years later that amount rose to almost $284 million.
"The industry is committed to both continuing that growth and to increasing production amount from 500 million litres per year to 700 million," he said.
Minister Basham said the trial was an exciting step for the South Australian dairy industry.
"South Australia's dairy industry punches well above its weight and this trial is another shining example of that," he said.
"The Marshall Liberal Government has taken on the Dairy Industry Action Plan policy in the $23 billion by 2030 plan and we know traceability is an important element, particularly for international markets.
"This traceability trial fits well with the Government's AgTech Strategic Plan and we look forward to seeing the results."
The South Australian Dairyfarmers' Association (SADA) welcomes the release of national traceability guidelines.
The guidelines were announced during yesterday's (September 7) meeting of the National GS1 Traceability Advisory Group (NGTAG), where Australian Government Senator Susan McDonald officially released the Australian Dairy Traceability Guideline.
At the meeting SADA's Dairy Action Plan Officer Ashleigh Pulford also announced the association's SA Dairy Alpha trial, which will be the first in the nation to use the new standards and will be officially unveiled on September 10.
Ms Pulford said the guidelines provided a common approach for the Australian dairy industry to capture and share all information throughout the supply chain, from producers all the way to the consumer.
"This information is vital to reinforcing our clean, green and safe image," she said.
"Everyone in the supply chain relies on trust and transparency in the products they produce and consume, so traceability allows all participants to track the milk from the farms to the shops.
"It's fantastic there are now guidelines that will both put the dairy industry across Australia on the same page and help future proof our industry."
To view the guidelines, visit www.gs1au.org/for-your-industry/dairy.
CREDIT: Michael Simmons
Word count: 611
