IN 1991, Bob Hawke was ousted as Prime Minister by Paul Keating, the first Gulf War began with air strikes against Iraq, the first website was built and put online and on the Gold Coast the then little-known trade exchange system Bartercard was born.
Next week Bartercard marks 30 years in operation – three decades marked by growth and decline, international expansion and a disastrous stockmarket listing, and the return of the company into private hands.
The network today encompasses 30,000 members and businesses engaging in transactions worth $600 million a year. This is the Bartercard story.
In the early 1990s Germany-born Andrew Federowsky, a recent arrival in Australia, was talking with a security guard at a Surfers Paradise nightclub when he mentioned a new company modelled on trade exchanges established in the US.
The exchanges were essentially a third party to non-cash transactions between members who exchanged goods and services within the network.
“It was the best thing I’d ever seen and I knew within a couple of months that’s what I wanted to do for the rest of my life,” Mr Federowsky said this week at the Bartercard Southport office.
He first got to know Brisbane businessman Brian Hall and later Wayne Sharpe and soon after created a model that has stood the test of time.
“We had a few people who jumped in including two franchisees – one from Sydney and one from Melbourne and Gosford. We said we would create Bartercard.
“Brian had a good client who bankrolled all our printing. He accepted a currency that he was just about to print.” That “currency” was Bartercard trade dollars.
He said the timing was important as was positive media coverage from the Australian Financial Review and ABC program Four Corners.
“Remember, we just came out of the recession we had to have. The country was in a shambles.
“Everybody was doom and gloom and interest rates were 17 per cent. People were going out of business left, right and centre. They were desperate for a good news story. They picked us up. We had a telecom commander system with six lines. The first thing you come on in the morning and all the lights were on with phone calls.” Within the first year they had 1000 members and by 1993 they had expanded internationally going into New Zealand.
Mr Federowsky said Bartercard took off because it worked: “So if you had a restaurant … you may get a couple come in and pay with Bartercard. Your account gets credited and theirs gets debited and then you can use that credit for services you need for anything from pest control to signwriting.” Bartercard’s profile expanded massively from its sponsorship of Indy and especially the Miss Indy competition.
“We became good mates with many of the drivers. I moved into the Marriott and we took the drivers jet skiing. I even had one of the reporters from the Bully call me and ask to talk to Dario Franchitti. I said, ‘I’m not the agent’ and he said ‘but you’re always with him’.” Bartercard’s growth continued. In 2001 it was in Australia, New Zealand, the UK, Hong Kong, Sri Lanka, Malaysia, Lebanon, the United Arab Emirates, Jordan, Thailand and the United States, with turnover exceeding $800 million in 2000. Bartercard had become the world’s largest trade exchange system.
That same year Retail Food Group founder Murray d’Almeida was made non-executive chairman of its board.
The current co-owner of Bartercard – Tony Wiese – was a relative later comer to the company. He came on as an investor in 2007 as part of a management buyout of the Australian arm involving Trevor Dietz, Mr d’Almeida and Mr Hall from Bartercard International which was controlled by Mr Sharpe.
Two years later Mr Wiese was CFO of the company and five years later helped to float what was then retagged as BPS Technology on the ASX.
The float valued the business at $58.5 million and for FY15 it was forecasting revenue of $51.6 million and a net profit of $6.5 million.
All did not go according to plan in later years.
Following its acquisition of Entertainment Publications, Mr Dietz, Mr Hall and Mr Wiese left BPS Technology in February 2018 following a bruising battle for control of the company with investment funds. One-fifth of its workforce was slashed on the Gold Coast.
In May 2018, Mr Wiese and long-time Bartercard executive Raj Pathak succeeded in taking Bartercard back into private hands.
Mr Pathak said buying back Bartercard was the fulfillment of a vision held by his son Mihir, who passed away in 2017: “It was his vision that we should buy out this company. I lost my purpose and this gave it back.” Mr Pathak said being both an owner and learning to work alongside Mr Wiese involved compromise and patience.
“When we met the magic happened. Year one was very tough for both of us. It is a new relationship so we had to get to know each other.
“I can be probably impatient whereas he is a man with depth and patience. “So we complemented each other big time. Bartercard today has evolved and it’s modernised and we both have a passion for small-to-­medium-size business.” Last year, Bartercard gave birth to cryptocurrency Qoin.
“That has opened up a whole new world,” Mr Wiese said. “Bartercard was born out of the recession we had to have and Qoin has come out of COVID.
“We have 500 people looking after the merchants, onboarding the new merchants. That is all done by Bartercard. Bartercard will become the service arm for the Qoin currency but it also still has the trade dollars for use between Bartercard members. It is a bit of an evolution. We always say Bartercard is the mother of Qoin.”
HAPPENINGS OF 1991 ● Bob Hawke starts the year as Prime Minister ... but doesn’t see the year out, with Paul Keating ousting him in December.
● The Gulf War, Operation Desert Storm begins with air strikes against Iraq. ● The first website was built at the CERN labs and put online on August 6. It would take 9 minutes, 15 seconds to download a 1MB file. A 1GB file would take 154 hours, 19 minutes and 15 seconds.
● Darryl Braithwaite released his iconic hit song Horses.
● Dr Hannibal Lecter chilled us to the bone in The Silence of the Lambs. ● Warner Bros. Movie World Opens on the Gold Coast, Clint Eastwood, Mel Gibson, Kurt Russell and Goldie Hawn attended the gala opening.
● The Simpsons debuts on Network Ten.
● The Adelaide Crows play their first game in the AFL, Hawthorn win the premiership and Penrith Panthers are the Australian Rugby League premiers.
● Singer Ed Sheeran is born.
● USSR comes to a formal end on December 21.
... And Bartercard first opened for business in a small office in Southport with just 100 members.
BARTERCARD February 8, 1991: Bartercard founded in Southport with a single office and 100 members.
1992: Reaches 1000 members.
1993: Bartercard New Zealand opens — first international licence sold. 1995: Bartercard International opens.
1996: Bartercard UK opens.
1999: First members website launched with 10,000 members.
2001: Named in BRW’s Top 100 fastest-growing companies. UAE Bartercard opens. 2003: Platinum Card launched.
2012: First mobile app launched.
2014: Bartercard lists on ASX as BPS Technology.
2015: Bartercard South Africa opens.
2018: Bartercard goes back into private hands.
2020: Bartercard introduces the Qoin blockchain. February 8, 2021: Celebrates 30 years in business.
CREDIT: ALISTER THOMSON
Word count: 1260
