It’s been the talk of the fairways of Melbourne’s most prestigious private golf courses in recent weeks: the decision of blue blood Melbourne wealth management giant JBWere to stop providing general advice and trading services to retail clients.
Letters advising their retail clientele — which means those who have less than $2.5m in ­assets or $250,000 in income — of the change started lobbing in letterboxes across Melbourne this month.
Those affected clients who subsequently inquired whether they could stay with the House of Were apparently were told they would have to pay a hefty annual fee of more than $10,000.
Not surprisingly, Margin Call hears the now NAB-owned investment house has lost a few friends in the process, most ­notably some of its most elderly clients who, we also hear, are yet to get a phone call from their adviser informing them of the change, which takes effect at the end of next month.
A letter to one, seen by this column, bluntly says: “We wish to advise you that we plan on ­formally closing your account with JBWere on 29 January 2021.” And then comes the kicker: “NAB offers a self-directed wealth service called nabtrade, which provides online investing and research. Please call us on the number below if you would like information regarding the services offered by nabtrade.” Nothing like keeping it in the family.
Strange timing There is also talk NAB and Were are going to package up their investment management products and sell them to clients via the NAB banking platform under the guise of general advice, a much lower-cost option than the current structure.
The problem inside Were for years has been that retail clients cost it money and generate little revenue, so such a plan has been on the drawing board for an ­eternity.
But the timing of the decision to make the change just before Christmas, especially after the COVID-19 year from hell for Melburnians, is intriguing to say the least.
It comes after NAB earlier this year decided to combine the leadership of Were, its private bank NAB Private and online trading platform nabtrade under Were chief executive Justin Greiner.
Were has also lost some high-profile names in recent months — notably Neville Azzopardi, James Wright and Jason Chequer — to Melbourne wealth management upstart Sayers.
Liberty float riches The December rush to complete the year’s final floats is proving lucrative for firm founders and execs, including high-profile non-bank lender Liberty Financial.
After a rocky road to listing, the Sherman Ma-founded group will join the bourse on Tuesday, triggering bonus rights across the board and management.
That includes Ma himself, who along with being the largest shareholder with an $864m stake upon listing is also the group’s executive director.
Ma will receive 334,039 bonus rights upon the completion of the $320m IPO — worth just over $2m based on the offer price of $6 a pop, but with disposal restricted across three tranches for up to five years from the listing date.
Chief executive James Boyle and chief financial officer Peter Riedel, formerly of Deloitte’s M&A division, will each net 668,087 rights — worth $4m — on top of their fixed annual salary of $840,000.
And the bonuses keep coming for the group’s directors, all poised to receive a one-off services fee of $120,000, elected to be received in securities.
The eventual raising completes what has been a busy year for chairman Richard Longes, the former Lendlease director who has also been involved in the recent spin-off of the Investec property fund which he chairs, now known as Irongate.
Independent directors Peter Hawkins and Leona Murphy also take a $120,000 bonus in shares, taking their holdings to 398,600 and 103,000 respectively.
Bigger paydays still are in store for the founding shareholders of the group — Michael Moh, son of the late Chinese furniture maker and entrepreneur Laurence, will have a stake valued at 27.5 per cent, worth $500m upon listing, whileformer Freddie Mac chief Gregory and wife Christine Parseghian hold a stake of $49m.
Yurt learnings The defamation trial against Nine’s Joe Aston has brought to light all manner of insights into the reporter himself, the applicant Elaine Stead, but also blown open what was repeatedly described as the start-up “ecosystem” and all its quirks.
One key point of contention for the parties has been a private Instagram post by Stead relating to a “joke” about crowd-funding a trip to Mongolia, to spend seven days in a yurt unlocking “learnings” through a program run by Queensland’s office of the chief entrepreneur.
If you’re asking what such an office might be, you’re not alone. The very existence of such a role was a line of questioning early in the two-week trial, with counsel on both sides of the case admitting they had been unaware of its existence, noting also a similar role in South Australia.
The southern state may soon be the only one left at the end of the year, however, as Queensland mulls the future of the voluntary role after current chief entrepreneur and blockchain adviser Leeanne Kemp hangs up her hat on December 31.
Kemp has held the role for two years, extended after 12 months, following inaugural chief Mark Sowerby, who worked closely with Stead as managing director at Blue Sky, and after him Shark Tank’s Steve Baxter.
But the state’s innovation minister, Stirling Hinchliffe, last month signalled the future wasn’t looking bright for the role, telling an estimates hearing an advisory council could be a better option for the Annastacia Palaszczuk-led government.
Whether that’s for a lack of candidates or concerns of the roles efficacy is unclear, but Margin Call’s guess is that venture capitalists in the state will have to find other reasons for their yurt trips.
Troubles emerge Locally listed gaming stock Emerge is feeling the heat of allegations of a pyramid scheme at its affiliate Crowd1, following on from queries from the market operator over the past month.
And its truly a global affair.
The South African-based Crowd1 and its parent company Tecnologia de Impacto Multiple (TIM) — registered in Madrid — has been the subject of regulatory complaints by New Zealand, Mauritius and Philippines regulators alleging the fund was operating a fraudulent investment scheme.
Those concerns seem to have been sailed over when it comes to the ASX, with Emerge shares allowed to return to trade last week after a series of three inquiries and more than a month of suspended trade for the gaming group.
It was business as usual on Monday, with Perth-based chairman Bert Mondello (also on the board of recent market debutant Douugh) and chief Gregory Stevens spruiking that the $80m group had hit 50,000 paying subscribers for its MIGGSTER social gaming platform, in line with its agreement with the Spanish tech group.
No mention though of TIM’s Swedish head Johan Stael von Holstein stepping down as chief, citing “health reasons”. Shares fell though, which could suggest plenty are still not convinced.
INSIDE MARGIN CALL Bonuses all round as Liberty Financial floats
CREDIT: MELISSA YEO ; CHRISTINE LACY MARGIN CALL
Word count: 1182
