A lightning response vaccination unit targeting infection outbreaks is part of the Morrison government’s battle plan to curb Covid-19 and raise vaccination rates by the end of the year.
Scott Morrison has unveiled the Doherty Institute’s modelling which has guided that nation’s blueprint for living with Covid which indicates 20 to 39-year-olds are most likely to spread the virus.
Gladys Berejiklian has set a target of 6 million vaccinations by the end of August, as NSW records 199 new local cases.
Queensland has recorded 16 new cases of locally-acquired Covid-19, all which have been linked to the Indooroopilly Delta cluster. The total number of cases associated with the cluster is now 47.
Vaccination rates by SA4
Tom Dusevic 11.30pm: It’s worth giving Covid-19 vaccine incentives a shot
Australia is spending $8bn on its Covid-19 vaccination program, which is a pittance against the economic cost of lockdowns and damage to livelihoods and lives.
Yet having invested so much buying miracle drugs developed at warp speed, we need to find the best way – from messaging to logistics – to get vaccines in arms.
Scott Morrison has outlined ambitious targets of fully vaccinating between 70 and 80 per cent of the eligible population, or 14.4 million to 16.5 million people, to move into the next two phases of reopening the economy. But to achieve them we’ll need more ­robust and bespoke incentives than the Prime Minister’s “freedom passes” or appeals to the “Australian way”.
FULL STORY
Joseph Lam 10.45pm: Exposure list stretches to far-north Queensland
Queensland Health has listed a number of new exposure sites in Cairns as authorities undertake genomic sequencing to determine whether a man who tested positive for Covid-19 in the far-north city on Monday has the Delta strain.
Anyone who visited the following venues during the listed exposure times is urged to get tested and to isolate immediately regardless of the result:
● Cairns: Bayleaf Balinese Restaurant, corner Gatton St &, Lake St: Thursday, July 29, from 12.45pm to 2.15pm
● Cairns: 1300SMILES Dental Practice, Cairns Central Shopping Centre: Waiting room and reception area, Ground level, 1/21 Mcleod St: Friday, July 30, from 8.40am to 10.30am
● Cairns: Fitzroy Island Adventures, Ferry to Fitzroy Island, Cairns Marlin Marina, 1 Spence St: Saturday, July 31, from 9am to 10am
● Fitzroy Island: Fitzroy Island Adventures, Ferry to Cairns, Fitzroy Island Jetty: Saturday, July 31, from 3.45pm to 4.30pm
● Cairns North: Cairns Airport baggage carousel, 1 Airport Av: Thursday, July 29, 2021, from 11.15am to 11.45am
Anyone who visited the following venues during the listed exposure times is urged to get tested and to isolate until a negative result is received:
● Cairns: JB HIFI, Cairns Central, Store 1-2, Level 1, 1/21 Mcleod St: Thursday, July 29, from 12.10pm to 12.50pm
● Cairns City: Blu Marlin Bistro, Pier Cairns, 1 Spence St: Saturday, July 31, from 8am to 9am
● Cairns City: Reef Fleet Terminal Pier Cairns, 1 Spence St: Saturday, July 31, from 8am to 9am
● Cairns North: Cairns Airport baggage carousel, 1 Airport Av: Thursday, July 29, from 11.15am to 11.45am
Anyone who visited the following venues during the listed exposure times is urged to get tested and to continue to monitor for symptoms:
● Brisbane to Cairns: Qantas flight QF708 (Casual contact unless contacted by a Public Health Official), Thursday, July 29, from 9.17am to 11.15am
● Cairns: Cairns Central Shopping Centre, 1/21 Mcleod St: Thursday, July 29, from 12pm to 1pm; Friday, July 30, from 8am to 10.30am
Joseph Lam 10.05pm: HK reduces quarantine period
Hong Kong has reduced its quarantine period for countries deemed low and medium risk, with vaccinated tourists able to travel the region after seven days in hotel quarantine.
Under the new rules vaccinated Australians, only if permitted to leave the country, could be travelling to Hong Kong after seven days in hotel quarantine from August 9.
“All inbound travellers are required to present prior to boarding proof of a negative COVID-19 nucleic acid test result conducted within 72 hours before the aircraft’s scheduled departure time and confirmation of a room reservation at a designated quarantine hotel in Hong Kong,” a statement from the Hong Kong government read.
The government also said it would strengthen vaccination and testing arrangements for airport and quarantine staff.
READ MORE: Covid returns to ground zero
Greg Brown 9.20pm:PM open to a lottery but not cash splash
Scott Morrison has lashed ­Anthony Albanese’s proposal to pay people to get Covid-19 jabs as a “vote of no confidence in Australians”, but left the door open to ­implementing a vaccine lottery.
The Prime Minister said Labor’s proposal to give $300 to everyone who was fully vaccinated by December 1 was a “bubble without a thought”.
“It says to them that their health concerns that they might have about a vaccine can be paid off. And I don’t think that’s the view of Australians,” Mr Morrison said on Tuesday.
“I think doing it for themselves, their family, their communities and for their country is what motivates them to do this.”
However, Mr Morrison said the government would “look at” proposals for a vaccine lottery if an ­increased uptake was needed, ­arguing there was a “big difference” between a lottery and Mr ­Albanese’s cash handout policy.
“The fiscal difference is pretty huge … and we’ve had lots of private offers of how things like that might work,” Mr Morrison said.
“But the primary reason why Australians are going to do this is because Australians know that it’s good for them, their family and their country.”
FULL STORY
Richard Ferguson 8.35pm:Life more of a right than jab refusal
The biggest civil liberties group in NSW has backed vaccine mandates in high-risk workplaces and jab passports to get into stadiums and nightclubs, saying life itself is a fundamental right.
Business groups have begun to call on Scott Morrison and the national cabinet to begin setting out rules for employers who want to make vaccines compulsory for workers as the vaccine rollout and eligibility for Covid-19 jabs ramps up.
The Law Council of Australia has joined constitutional experts to declare vaccine mandates in workplaces reasonable, and lawful in certain circumstances and under public health orders.
NSW Council for Civil Liberties president Pauline Wright this week told The Australian that targeted vaccine mandates were not an incursion on Australians’ freedoms.
“It’s within the rights of employers to say to employees I need to keep everyone safe. The right to life, the right to be free of disease, is pretty fundamental,” she said.
“And with vaccine passports at a nightclub, for example, you make a deal at the door. You’re saying if you come into my premises, I have to think of my staff.
“We would oppose a blanket mandate across the population as that offends freedoms – people have religious views, for ­example – but looking at each ­instance (in different workplaces), it’s hard to see an incursion on liberties.”
Hotel quarantine and residential aged-care workers are the only groups currently mandated to receive vaccinations as a condition of employment.
FULL STORY
Dennis Shanahan7.50pm: Bad cop, good cop shift a political landmine
Anthony Albanese has stepped on a landmine of his own making with his $6bn proposal for $300 cash payments for vaccination.
It’s bad policy created for political reasons and could turn out to be bad politics as well.
The Opposition Leader’s surprise plan came as he had Scott Morrison under pressure and was benefiting from attacks on the Prime Minister’s “failure” on the Covid-19 vaccine rollout.
Before parliament resumed on Tuesday, Albanese was in the political ascendancy and Morrison’s leadership was failing after the Delta virus outbreaks and economic lockdowns in NSW, Queensland, Victoria and South Australia.
Albanese’s case was that Morrison had failed the “only two jobs” he had in 2021 – to deliver enough vaccines and to prevent quarantine breaches from sparking new outbreaks.
Albanese was also aware that while legitimate campaigns for an opposition, his blaming Morrison made him look negative, carping and a whinger without a positive alternative to what the Coalition was doing.
So without warning or widespread consultation within the ALP, Albanese announced his plan for a $300 payment for every Australian to get fully vaccinated, which he costed at a total of $6bn, including $5bn between now and Christmas.
Albanese enthusiastically described it as positive, constructive, practical and common sense with “no downside” or negative impact.
FULL STORY
Joseph Lam 7.10pm:Stadium carparks to be drive-through jab hubs
Carparks at major sporting stadiums could be turned into drive-through vaccine hubs as early as nex month.
The federal government is considering the move as part of an overhaul to give people aged 30 and over the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine, Nine News reported on Tuesday.
Shopping centres will also reportedly be involved in the drive-through push, while “flying squads” of nurses will begin going into workplaces to vaccinate employees as early as October, the report said.
MORE TO COME
Stephen Lunn6.35pm: Regional exodus from big smoke
About 11,800 more people fled capital cities to the regions than moved from the country to the big smoke in the three months to March, more than in any quarter since records began two decades ago.
Melbourne and Sydney led the way, losing a net 8300 and 8200 people respectively to the regions, Australian Bureau of Statistics data reveals.
Brisbane had the biggest net gain of people either from elsewhere in Queensland or interstate, adding 3300 to its popu­lation from overall internal migration, including 2600 from interstate.
“(Overall) Queensland gained the most people from net interstate migration (+7000) over the March 2021 quarter, while ­Victoria lost the most (-4900), closely followed by NSW (-4500),” the figures detail.
There was higher volatility overall in the interstate movement of people than in the same period last year when Covid-19 was first starting to affect free movement.
More than 16,400 more ­people moved interstate in the March quarter this year ­compared to the 2020 March quarter, the ABS data shows. NSW was the leaving point for most of those moving to Queensland, with 3800 packing their bags to move north of the Tweed.
FULL STORY
Joseph Lam5.53pm:Queensland exposure sites swell by more than 30
More than 30 new exposure sites have joined the Queensland Covid-19 exposure list including shopping centres, fast food chains, schools and after-school care facilities.
Queensland Health has called on anyone who visited the following venues to isolate immediately, get tested at their soonest opportunity and to remain in quarantine regardless of the result for 14 days.
Indooroopilly: JKA Karate, Holy Family School Hall, 37 Ward Street: Tuesday, July 27, 2021 from 6pm to 7.40pm; Thursday, July 29, from 6pm to 7.40pm
Indooroopilly: Australian Girls’ Choir practise - Brigidine College, 53 Ward St: Wednesday, July 28, 2021, from 5pm to 6pm
Indooroopilly: Sushi Train Indooroopilly, Shop 2, Indooroopilly Junction, 100 Coonan St: Thursday, July 29, 2021, from 6.12pm to 7.15pm
Indooroopilly: Mr Toys Toyworld, Indooroopilly Shopping Centre: Saturday, July 31, 2021, from 10.16am to 10.26am
Indooroopilly: Coles, Indooroopilly Shopping Centre: Saturday, July 31, 2021, from 10.28am to 11.10am
Indooroopilly: Hanaromart, Level 1, Indooroopilly Shopping centre, 322 Moggill Road: Saturday, July 31, 2021, from 11.25am to 11.50am
Indooroopilly: Izakaya Sushi, Level 1, Indooroopilly Shopping centre, 322 Moggill Road: Saturday, July 31, 2021, from 11.40am to 12.05pm
Indooroopilly: McDonalds Indooroopilly, 78-80 Coonan Street: Saturday, July 31, 2021, from 11.50am to 12pm
Indooroopilly: Kmart, Level 1, Indooroopilly Shopping centre, 322 Moggill Road: Saturday, July 31, 2021, from 11.55am to 12.15pm; 12.05pm to 12.15pm
Indooroopilly: ALDI, Indooroopilly Shopping Centre: Saturday, July 31, 2021, from 11.57am to 12.38pm
Kenmore: Lees & Henschell Optometry Kenmore, 12 Wongabel St : Monday, July 26, 2021, from 3pm to 3.30pm
Pullenvale: IGA Pullenvale, 8 McCaskill Road: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 8.15pm to 8.35pm
Southport: Kua Thai Isan Traditional Thai Restaurant, Sungold Arcade, 153C Scarborough St: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 12.30pm to 2pm
Spring Hill: Brisbane Girls Grammar School – All of campus Including Open Day Event and Extracurricular activities, 70 Gregory Terrace: Friday, July 30, 2021 from 8am to 8.30pm
Sunnybank: K & L Endo, Level 1, Sunnybank Specialist Centre, 243 McCullough St: Thursday, July 29, 2021, from 9am to 12pm
Sunnybank: Endoscopy Suite and Recovery area, Sunnybank Private Hospital, 245 McCullough St: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 7.55am to 12.15pm
Sunnybank: Udonya Tokoton Restaurant, Shop 86 Sunnybank Plaza, 358 Mains Rd: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 11.40am to 12.20pm
Sunnybank: Formosa Asian Market, Shop 88 Sunnybank Plaza, 358 Mains Rd: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 12pm to 12.40pm
Sunnybank: Female toilet near Coles, Sunnybank Plaza, Sunnybank Plaza, 358 Mains Rd: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 12.15pm to 12.30pm
Sunnybank: Coles, Sunnybank Plaza, Sunnybank Plaza, 358 Mains Rd: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 12.20pm to 1.15pm
Sunnybank: K & L Endo, Level 1, Sunnybank Specialist Centre, 243 McCullough St: Thursday, July 29, 2021, from 9am to 12pm
St Lucia: Darwin’s Café, Building 94, The University of Queensland, Slip Road: Thursday, July 29, 2021, from 11am to 11.45am; 2pm to 2.45pm
St Lucia: St Lucia Pharmacy, 26 Hawken Dr: Saturday, July 31, 2021, from 11.20am to 11.30am
St Lucia: Georgie Parkes Swim School, 2 Hawken Drive: Friday, 30 July, 2021, from 3pm to 3.45pm; 4.15pm 4.45pm
St Lucia: Outside School Hours Care, Ironside State School, 2 Hawken Drive: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 3pm tom 3.35pm
St Lucia: UQ Playground St Lucia, Sir William MacGregor Drive: Saturday, July 31, 2021, from 10am to 11am
St Lucia: OHSC classrooms and play area, Playhouse Parent and Childcare Centre, UQ St Lucia Campus: Thursday, July 29, 2021, from 3.08pm to 5.21pm
St Lucia: Briki Espresso & Gelati Bar St Lucia, 2/28 Hawken Dr: Tuesday, July 27, 2021, from 3.40pm to 4pm
Toowong: Grill’d Toowong, Shop G44/9 Sherwood Rd: Wednesday, July 28, 2021, from 5.15pm to 6pm
Toowong: Sharee Skye Dance Classes, 9/39 Campbell St: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 3pm to 5.15pm
Toowong: Kmart, Toowong Village Shopping Centre, Shop L28, 9 Sherwood Road: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 4.05pm to 5.05pm
Woolloongabba: Princess Alexandra Hospital, Emergency Department waiting room, 199 Ipswich Rd: Friday, July 30, 2021, from 7.29pm to 8.35pm
Max Maddison5.05pm:PM takes aim at Queensland CHO on vaccines
Scott Morrison has taken aim at Queensland chief health officer Jeanette Young saying her view “isn’t the national view”, while cash incentives won’t “shift the dial” of vaccine hesitancy,
The Morrison government’s reopening roadmap, based on modelling done by the Doherty Institute, sees society effectively resume as normal with 70 per cent coverage of the population aged 16-years and older, before almost all restrictions are removed at 80 per cent coverage.
While responding to doubts about the ability to reach that level of vaccination coverage, the Prime Minister said he believed in Australians responding to the challenge, before saying he didn’t believe Labor’s cash incentive would change people’s intentions.
“We need to get more points of presence so people can go and get it,” Mr Morrison told 3AW on Tuesday afternoon. “I don’t think it does shift the dial. What does shift the dial is you can go and get it and you can get it now.”
With mixed messaging undermining the rollout of AstraZeneca, Mr Morrison attempted to assuage concerns about the vaccine. He then took aim at Ms Young, who had refused to back down on her warnings about the jab.
“She can have that view, but that doesn’t align with what ATAGI thinks, it doesn’t align with what the Therapeutic Goods Administration thinks, and it doesn’t align with what the chief medical officer thinks,” he said.
“That’s not the national view, that’s not the medical view being put forward by General Frewen.”
READ MORE:COMMENT: Young’s AZ stance is dangerous
Tom Dusevic3.45pm:Crack vax unit at heart of PM’s battle plan
A lightning response vaccination unit targeting infection outbreaks is part of the Morrison government’s battle plan to curb Covid-19 and raise vaccination rates by the end of the year.
According to the National Covid Vaccine Campaign Plan for Operation Covid Shield, a new crack National Response Option “is an opportunity to increase vaccination capacity when and where required” in the event of an outbreak.
The new unit will be dispersed nationally and be on call to move quickly.
The co-ordinator general of the National Covid-19 Vaccine Taskforce, Lieutenant General John Frewen, said “while there are many factors involved in reducing the spread of COVID-19, vaccination is the most effective means we have to build nation resilience”.
The new unit is “intended to be capable of supporting the states and territories in achieving or exceeding targets either by reinforcing success or addressing delay in extraordinary circumstances”.
“Once we reach threshold vaccination rate levels, we will be able to live with this virus and begin our recovery,” the plan says.
“The National Response Option will be dedicated solely to the task of administering vaccinations and will maintain a high level of readiness in the event of a callout, being dispatched to the location directed to provide between 2000 and 3000 additional vaccinations daily over the course of a two-week campaign.
“Consumables and vaccines will be progressively held with the National Response Option as supply permits during 2021.
“The workforce will be made up of NCVTF-controlled contractors not employed by other jurisdictions. It will consist of 50-100 FTE clinical staff, plus the required non-clinical staff.
“The workforce will reside in nationally dispersed locations and concentrate in a single location at the discretion of the Co-ordinator General.
“Clinical Governance will be at the direction of the Commonwealth, working in close conjunction with the state Chief Medical Officers for licensing, and will address cross border movement requirements in the event of border closures”.
LG Frewen said that “intrinsic to this plan is a collaborative assessments process to identify strengths and weaknesses to ensure the plan’s overall success”.
“The plan also realises the establishment of a National Response Option that will be able to react and support States and Territories when the need for additional vaccine capacity is required.
“This is a critical endeavour for our nation. We all need to work together to ensure that we protect our people and recover as quickly as possible from this pandemic. Together we can get this done.”
COVID-19 Australia: Cumulative vaccinations by state
Max Maddison2.45pm:‘No comparison’ between virus vaccine, child jabs
Anthony Albanese has drawn attention to comments by Scott Morrison about the “no jab, no pay”, as he tried to draw a parallel between the two immunisation incentive programs.
Amid a fierce Coalition attack on Labor’s $6 billion vaccination incentive scheme, the Opposition Leader unsuccessfully tried to table a transcript of the Prime Minister’s press conference from earlier on Tuesday, where he claimed the policy wasn’t necessarily designed as an incentive.
While citing comments by Mr Morrison, who previously said the policy was an “important initiative aimed at boosting child immunisation rates”, Mr Albanese asked whether the policy was “wrong then or today”?
But Mr Morrison said there was “no comparison” between child immunisation rates and the federal government’s attempts to vaccinate the entire population.
“The point I was making was to draw a comparison between that and what was occurring at that time is not a proper comparison. Mr Spooker, the Leader of the Opposition might be desperately trying to put some clothes on his ill-thought proposal.
“No Jab No Pay” was a policy initiative delivered under the Abbott government which saw tax benefits withheld from parents of children who were not fully immunised.
FOLLOWlive ASX updates at Trading Day
DAVID ROGERS 2.35pm:RBA leaves rates, taper plan unchanged
The RBA has left its target interest rates unchanged as expected, while surprising economists by leaving its plan to taper its bond purchases to $4bn in early September and keep it at that level until at least mid-November.
Economists widely expected the RBA to reverse its taper plan due to Covid lockdowns.
AUD/USD has consequently soared 0.5% to 0.7395.
Max Maddison2.23pm:PM to Labor: Support rather than undermine vax program
Scott Morrison has told Labor to stop “undermining” the vaccination program, as he moves to mitigate attacks on the pace of the rollout and the hotel quarantine system.
In a slimmed down Question Time on Tuesday afternoon, lacking a number of MPs due to Covid restrictions across the country, the Prime Minister responded to a question from Anthony Albanese which asserted widespread outbreaks demonstrated that Mr Morrison had failed his job.
“If the Opposition, if the Labor Party, if they want to support this national effort, Mr Speaker, then I invite them to spend more time supporting the vaccination program than undermining it,” Mr Morrison said.
Mr Morrison also continued to attack Labor’s $6 billion vaccination incentive program, after the opposition leader invited him to adopt the policy.
“The Leader of the Opposition’s proposal is a vote of no confidence and an insult to Australians, suggesting they won’t get vaccinated unless you dole out the cash,” he said.
“Over these years in opposition, this Labor Party has learnt absolutely nothing. The cash splashes of their last untargeted, ill disciplined fiscal recklessness, Mr Speaker, is writ large again.”
READ MORE: Telstra makes payphones free
Ellen Ransley 2.19pm:Two major cities Aussies are abandoning
The populations of Sydney and Melbourne fell by more than 8000 people in the March quarter as Brisbane and Perth boosted their numbers.
Internal migration figures, released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on Tuesday, revealed Brisbane gained the most people through net internal migration (+3300), while Melbourne lost the most (-8300) in the March 2021 quarter.
Melbourne’s net loss was closely followed by Sydney (-8200).
Of the net gain to Brisbane, 710 people relocated from other parts of Queensland, while 2600 arrived from around the country.
A net loss of 11,800 people from Australia’s capital cities through internal migration was recorded in the first three months of the year, the most significant amount in 20 years.
“This was the largest net loss on record since the series started in 2001, surpassing the previous record net loss set in the September 2020 quarter (-11,200),” the ABS report stated.
“The net loss was the result of 54,400 arrivals (down from 55,400 in the December 2020 quarter) and 66,300 departures (up slightly from 66,000) to non-capital city areas.”
Internal migration by capital city, March 2021:
Sydney: Arrivals: 20,270; departures: 28,439; net: -8169
Melbourne: Arrivals: 20,267; departures: 28,540; net: -8273
Brisbane: Arrivals: 23,373; departures: 19,999; net: 3274
Adelaide: Arrivals: 8239; departures: 8180; net: 59
Perth: Arrivals: 11,662; departures: 10,108; net: 1554
Hobart: Arrivals: 2168; departures: 2457; net: -289
Darwin: Arrivals: 259; departures: 3512; net: -139
Canberra: Arrivals: 6076; departures: 5938; net: 138.
– NCA Newswire
Ellie Dudley2.00pm:Positive case detected in Cairns
A positive case of Covid-19 has been detected in Cairns, in far north Queensland.
An investigation by Queensland Health is under way to determine the status of the case.
Queensland Health said it was still unclear whether the positive notification was an active or historical case, according to reports from the Courier Mail.
The new potential case comes as Queensland recorded 16 new locally acquired cases of Covid-19 on Tuesday, tallying the state’s current Delta cluster to 47 cases.
Olivia Caisley 1.50pm: Phony conflict: Premier ‘not at odds’ with expert advice
Scott Morrison has rejected claims that NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian’s target of reducing the state’s restrictions after achieving a 50 per cent vaccination rate contradicts Doherty Institute modelling, declaring it is a “phony conflict”.
As parts of the state enter its fifth week of lockdown Ms Berejiklian on Tuesday flagged restrictions could be eased once NSW reaches six million jabs and if case numbers are lower by the end of August.
Chief Medical Officer Professor Paul Kelly says Australians can look forward to a “soft landing” once the country reaches its vaccination targets. Under national cabinet’s four-stage road map, Australians will see an easing of restrictions once 70 per cent of Australians are fully vaccinated. “The modelling very clearly shows that once we get to a certain point in the vaccination strategy, which is in the next few months, we will be able to look at that point and say that we can see a soft landing from this in a way that no other country has seen to date and that’s the great hope that we see in this modelling,” he said. “It will be tough to get there, and after we get that the vaccination will also continue to rise, but we'll need to have those other public health and other measures in place as well.”
The Prime Minister said Doherty Institute modelling that supports an end to lockdowns once national vaccine rates hit 80 per cent was a separate issue.
“We’re talking in one instance about a national vaccination strategy where short, sharp lockdowns are the response during the suppression phase before you move at 70 per cent into the next phase where that isn’t as necessary or at all necessary, and certainly almost completely unnecessary once you get to 80 per cent,” he said. “That is a separate issue as to how you come out of a lockdown you’re already in.”
He cautioned Australians not to conflate two issues.
“I think we need to be careful that we’re not mixing two issues here. This (the Doherty modelling) is not a vaccination rate to break out of an existing lockdown. This is a vaccination rate that enables Australia as a country to move from phase A to phase B to phase C. So I think we’ve got to avoid sort of phony conflicts here,” he said.
READ MORE: Bramston – Rebuilding trust Morrison’s first step to recovery
Max Maddison 1.31pm:Coalition MPs oppose ADF on streets to fight virus
Members of the Morrison government with libertarian concerns say the Coalition shouldn’t be putting the army on the streets to deal with Covid outbreaks, and shouldn’t be demonising unvaccinated members of the wider community.
The Coalition held their first joint party room meeting for the Spring parliamentary sitting weeks on Tuesday morning. And some members used the opportunity to question the draconian measures implemented by state and federal governments to stem the spread of the virus.
According to sources present at the meeting, one member, who said they weren’t “anti-vaccination but pro-freedom”, conceded their views were likely to be in the minority of the party room and wider community, and asserted people needed to have a freedom of choice and freedom of movement.
As a corollary, they said the Coalition shouldn’t be preventing people from employment or services if they chose not to get vaccinated, and shouldn’t be restricting overseas travel. Another member retorted that those rights went both ways, and people could choose to avoid people who hadn’t been vaccinated.
Nationals senator Matt Canavan weighed in to defend the ability for people to choose whether they got the vaccine, saying they were effectively making a decision on their health, as he cited overseas evidence, which showed vaccines didn’t stop the spread of the virus.
READ MORE: ADF releases war crime reform plan
Olivia Caisley1.05pm: Vaccine incentives ‘not needed yet’
Vaccine rollout commander Lieutenant-General John “JJ” Frewen says he doesn’t think vaccination incentives are needed just yet amid calls from federal Labor for a $300 payout for those who get both jabs.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison says the Doherty Institute's modelling outlining vaccination targets have been released as part of Australia’s “plan to live with the virus”. “That plan is based on common sense precautions that prevail and is based on a pathway on vaccination that provides the protection necessary to ensure the many tools we have to suppress the virus and its impacts on lives and livelihoods are held at bay,” he said. “The targets that are part of this plan, the vaccination targets of 70 per cent to get to the next phase and 80 per cent to Phase C are based on the world’s best scientific analysis and economic advice.” Mr Morrison said “more than 30,000 lives” had been saved due to the country’s COVID-19 response with one in five Australians now fully vaccinated. “We now have one in five Australians who have received double dose, we now have two in five Australians who have had a first dose, we have around two-thirds of Australians aged over 50 who have had a first dose," he said.
“We’ve got really strong signs that the vast majority of Australians intend to come forward to get vaccinated because it’s the right thing to do,” he said on Tuesday. “And that really is the best incentive right now, to do it for themselves, their friends, families, communities and for the country. Right now we don’t think incentives are necessary and it’s really pleasing to see how many Australians are willing to get vaccinated.”
Scott Morrison blasted Anthony Albanese’s calls to dole-out $300 payments to Australians who get vaccinations as a “bubble without a thought.”
The Prime Minister on Tuesday said Covid-19 was a serious public health crisis and not a game show, declaring he trusted Australians to do the right thing without monetary incentives.
“I think the proposal that has been put forward by the Labor Party and Mr Albanese is a vote of no confidence in Australians,” Mr Morrison said.
“It says to them that their health concerns that they might have about a vaccine can be paid off and I don’t think that’s the beauty of Australians. I’ve seen Australians respond with courage, determination and kindness over the past 18 months.”
Lieutenant-General Frewen said that “even” rates of vaccination across the nation are essential going forward.
“It’s really important that we vaccinate the nation as consistently and as evenly as we can,” he says.
“The data that we released yesterday gives good insight into how progress is going and we’ll be watching very carefully from here on in to see where some areas are moving ahead and where other areas are falling behind and we’ll be adapting the plan and offering additional assistance to those areas that do need to be brought along a bit more quickly.”
READ MORE: Vaccination only way out of our golden cage ‘trap’
Olivia Caisley12.50pm:Early, short, sharp lockdowns ‘most cost-effective’
Josh Frydenberg says Treasury analysis shows “early interventions, short, sharp lockdowns, are the most cost-effective way” to handle Covid-19 with vaccinations the key to returning to normal.
The Treasurer on Tuesday said until Australia gets to a national vaccination rate of 70 per cent, state and territory governments need to move fast to lockdown or risk a greater economic burden.
“These numbers underline the imperative of Australians getting vaccinated.
It is the way out of this crisis and it is the way to avoid longer, more severe, lockdowns (in the future),” Mr Frydenberg said.
“The second key finding or outcome from the economic analysis is that the economic cost comes down significantly. If government’s work quickly to get on top of the virus … early interventions, short sharp lockdowns are the most cost effective way to handle the virus, particularly at the current time.”
It comes as the NSW Berejiklian government was criticised for taking too long to implement a lockdown over the state’s Delta outbreak.
Mr Frydenberg said the stage four lockdown restrictions in Victoria in August last year cost the national economy $3.2bn a week, while the state’s stage three restrictions in May 2020 cost the economy $2.35bn.
The Treasurer says the numbers underline the imperative of Australians getting vaccinated.
READ MORE: Sloan – Grandkids won’t thank us for flawed Treasury advice
Olivia Caisley12.40pm:New vaccine strategy: Jab the young sooner
Professor Jodie McVernon from the Doherty Institute says 20-39-year-olds are most likely to spread the virus and epidemiologists are proposing a reorientation of the national vaccine strategy to get this group vaccinated as soon as possible.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison says 30,000 Australians or more would be dead if we had not responded the “Australian way”.
“Yes, children can get Covid and we are concerned about them becoming infected, but they’re nowhere near as good (at spreading Covid-19) as their parents are,” she said.
“So this virus’s case, it’s really the 20 to 39 years category, who are the big spreaders, and they will bring it home for their children … and to their own parents, and this is the group now where they’re proposing the reorientation of the strategy.”
Max Maddison 12.36pm:Morrison blasts Albanese’s vaccination ‘bribe’
Scott Morrison has launched a blistering attack on Labor’s cash incentives, saying Anthony Albanese has “lost belief if he thinks he needs to bribe the Australian people”.
The Coalition held their first joint party room meeting for the Spring parliamentary sitting weeks on Tuesday morning.
The Morrison government has launched several attacks on the opposition’s cash incentive policy which will see $300 paid to every person who receives both vaccinations by December 1. The Prime Minister questioned Labor’s $6 billion proposal during the meeting, saying the “ill-conceived” idea was “all bubbles and no thought”.
Political leaders who contribute to vaccine hesitancy across the nation by failing to incentivise, encourage and educate people to get the COVID-19 jab are “playing with fire”, political focus groups say. Opposition leader Anthony Albanese called on the federal government to throw in financial incentives by paying Australians $300 if they are fully vaccinated by the year’s end. Simon Welsh, director of Redbridge Group Australia, says there is an expectation amongst swing voters that the government will work to address problems over “confusing and mismatched messaging”. “Those governments who really aren’t getting behind and incentivising, encouraging and educating people, those governments that aren’t seen to be doing those things are playing with a bit of fire,” he told Sky News Australia. “There’s a voter cohort there, what we call a contestable voter cohort – that’s voters who swing and can be persuaded at elections, particularly in those suburban, middle-class contestable voter cohorts that are really looking at government and saying, ‘you’re contributing to this, you need to do more, you’re affecting my life through your confusing and mismatched messaging and we really have a high expectation of you trying to fix this vaccine hesitancy problem’. ‘I think if we don’t get the 70 or 80 per cent and these voter cohorts will look at that and say, ‘government, you contributed to that problem, I wouldn’t want to be in the shoes of those governments at that point.”
Moreover, Mr Morrison said the policy wasn’t about overall health, but rather Labor’s inability to manage the economy, which was reminiscent of Kevin Rudd’s investment in school halls, according to a party room source.
Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce also weighed in, questioning how much Labor would pay people to brush their teeth or get a measles shot, joking that Labor had found the cure to Covid for just $300 per person.
He added that the ALP hadn’t consulted the relevant authorities, which followed Mr Morrison asking why the ALP hadn’t sat down with Covid-19 vaccine commander Lieutenant General John Frewen since he had started in the role.
Olivia Caisley 12.32pm:Outbreaks still out of control with 50-60pc vax rate
Professor Jodie McVernon from the Doherty Institute says a national vaccination rate of 80 per cent would help to reduce the chance of lockdowns.
She said their modelling found that at 50-60 per cent vaccination, there would still be “rapidly growing outbreaks that would be very difficult to control” and that above 70 per cent that risk is far lower.
Scott Morrison said that once you get to those higher vaccination rates of 80 per cent, “the sort of death, hospitalisation and infection rates is what you expect to see with something like the flu.”
Olivia Caisley12.27pm: ‘Australian way has saved 30,000 lives’
Scott Morrison has defended the government’s response to the crisis, declaring he has chartered an “Australian way” throughout the pandemic that has saved more than 30,000 lives.
Amid criticism over his government’s handling of the vaccine rollout, the Prime Minister on Tuesday said early challenges had been overcome and Covid-19 deaths had been prevented.
“An Australian way with Australian results that are different to almost every other country in the world bar a few – an Australian way has saved more than 30,000 lives,” he said.
“30,000 Australians and more would be dead today were it not for the Covid response that Australia has put in place.”
READ MORE:Delta hits national economy for $12bn
OLIVIA CAISLEY 12.20pm: PM unveils blueprint to reopening nation
Scott Morrison says the world is in a serious battle with the highly virulent Delta strain and Australia must continue to adapt to a shifting situation.
The Prime Minister on Tuesday is unveiling the government’s blueprint to reopening the country, based on health and economic modelling provided by the Doherty Institute and Treasury.
“This has been a long war against this virus, and there have been many, many battles,” he said.
The government’s plan, which was released on Friday after a marathon meeting with national cabinet, outlines four stages ending in a post vaccination phase where Australians live with Covid-19 in a similar way to the flu.
NED-4300-Geographic-Vaccination-Rates-Map
“Last Friday I announced Australia’s plan to live with the virus and I announced the whole country’s plan to get us back to that position where we can ultimately live with this virus in the same way that we live with other infectious diseases that are present in the community, and we can get on with our lives,” he said.
“That plan is based on common sense precautions that is based on a pathway to vaccination that provides the protection necessary to ensure the many tools we have to suppress the virus and its impact on lives and livelihoods.”
Mr Morrison says Australia is not alone in the battle against Covid-19, highlighting the fact that he spoke with his Greek counterpart, Kyriakos Mitsotakis, last night.
“This has been a long war against this virus, and there have been many, many battles, and this is a fierce one when it comes to the delta strain. “As I have said on many occasions, Australia is not alone in this battle.”
READ MORE: How safe is your suburb? Vaccine rates revealed
Rachel Baxendale 11.49am:Vaccinated avoiding hospital, ICU in Victoria
There are currently 10 Victorians in hospital with coronavirus, three of whom are in ICU, and one of whom is on a ventilator.
The number of people hospitalised represents just under five per cent of the 220 people who have been infected with the Delta variant of the virus as a result of Victoria’s current NSW-derived outbreaks.
No one among those hospitalised has received two doses of Covid-19 vaccine.
With 124 active coronavirus cases remaining in Victoria, including up to seven overseas-acquired cases, chief health officer Brett Sutton said 90 per cent of close contacts linked to the current community outbreaks had been released after completing their fortnight in quarantine.
About 3000 close contacts remain in isolation, with health department authorised officers conducting compliance visits to 525 households on Monday.
There are currently 9000 households isolating in Victoria as a result of returning from red zones over the past fortnight, including 1100 households who returned from southeast Queensland on Monday.
Of Victoria’s four new community-acquire Covid-19 cases on Tuesday, two are linked to a workplace associated with the Young & Jackson Hotel cluster, one is a household contact linked to a cluster of cases sparked by a red zone arrival home quarantine breach in Coolaroo in Melbourne’s outer north, and one is a workplace contact of a traffic controller at the Moonee Valley Racecourse testing centre, who tested positive last week.
READ MORE: NSW ICUs prepare for ‘worst-case scenario’
Ellie Dudley11.35am:LGA at epicentre has lowest rates of vaccination
Gladys Berejiklian has rejected accusations that her government has failed south west Sydney, after it was revealed the epicentre of the state’s latest outbreak has the lowest rates of vaccinations in Sydney.
About 14.6 per cent of people aged 15 and over are fully vaccinated in Sydney’s south west, while the North Sydney and Hornsby area had the highest rate of double vaccination with 26.9 per cent.
NED-4300-Geographical-Vaccination-Rates-NSW
The NSW Premier said the low rates in the area are due to a young population.
“The age of that population is younger than the state average,” the NSW Premier said.
“Until recently, health advice precluded a lot of people from coming forward and getting vaccinated.
“Now the health advice has changed, given the outbreak, we have made concerted efforts, whether it’s mobile clinics, ramping up pharmacy access.”
Ms Berejiklian also pointed to Qudos Bank Arena, which will be open as a mass vaccination clinic for the public on August 9, after it has finished vaccinating year 12 HSC students.
READ MORE: Reluctant Young flags AstraZeneca rethink
Ellie Dudley11.20am:NSW to consider ‘freedom’ vax incentives
NSW premier Gladys Berejiklian says the state government will look at “freedom” incentives rather than cash incentives for people who get the Covid-19 jab, rejecting federal Labor’s plan to have $300 paid to everyone who is fully vaccinated.
“Look, we’ve been looking at incentives for some time in the New South Wales government,” Ms Berejiklian said.
“We’re focusing on what we believe people want at this stage. They want peace of mind that they can move more freely, send their kids to school, work.
“Any incentives around those things we think are great motivators so we’re looking at those options.”
Ms Berejiklian said her government would “encourage people” to get vaccinated by providing them with additional freedoms, which she believes is “the best motivator of all.”
She said incentives would be “linked to our plan for what life looks like on August 29.”
NED-3589-Vaccine-Passports-graphic
Ellie Dudley11.15am:53 NSW cases in ICU, 11 under 40
NSW has 53 cases of Covid-19 in the ICU, which chief health officer Kerry Chant says “underscores the severity” of the virus.
“We are seeing more hospitalisations associated with the Delta strain,” she said.
“We have five cases in their 20s, six in their 30s, three in their 40s, 18 in their 50s, 11 in their 60s and 10 in their 70s.”
Twenty of the 53 cases in the ICU are requiring ventilation.
Dr Chant said 43 of the 53 people in ICU are not vaccinated.
“It really is quite tragic that we’ve still got people in their 90s that are unprotected, people in their 80s, 70s and 60s, notwithstanding other age groups that are not protected,” she said.
Ellie Dudley11.12am: Berejiklian sets target of 6m jabs by end of August
Gladys Berejiklian has set a target of 6 million vaccinations by the end of August, saying vaccinations are the key to NSW reopening.
Up to 3.9 million jabs have been administered across the state so far.
“In New South Wales at the moment, we have 3.9 million jabs of vaccinations that have been provided, and thank you to everybody taking up the vaccine,” the NSW Premier said.
“By the end of August, I’d like to see that go to 6 million jabs.
New daily cases in New South Wales
“We know that 10 million jabs gives us 80 per cent of the adult population vaccinated.”
Ms Berejiklian has hinted at future incentives for people who receive the jab.
“Whilst I alluded to incentives yesterday, we are very keen to explore what opportunities we can provide,” she said.
“In particular we know that people value their freedom, their desire to go back to work, their desire to engage in community life and those are the type of incentives that we’ll be looking at over the next little while.”
Ellie Dudley11.02am: NSW records 199 new virus cases
NSW has recorded 199 new locally-acquired cases of Covid-19 as infections in greater Sydney continue to surge.
At least 50 cases were active in the community for the entirety of their infectious period.
A total of 104,536 tests were conducted in the 24 hours to 8pm last night.
Ellie Dudley10.43am:New cases infectious in community for up to six days
Queensland chief health officer Jeannette Young says the lockdown will be lifted once all locally-acquired cases have been in isolation for their entire infectious period.
NED-4196-QLD-Restrictions-lifting
The state recorded 16 new cases of Covid-19 on Tuesday, bringing the latest cluster to 47.
The lockdown of 11 high risk LGAs in south east Queensland has been extended until 4pm on Sunday, but Dr Young said it would not lift until positive cases had been quarantining for the required time while infectious.
“Someone who’s been in quarantine for their full infectious period doesn’t concern me. It’s people who have been out and about, so there are more exposure sites,” she said.
Dr Young said “most” of Tuesday’s cases have been infectious in the community, some for up to 6 days.
Ellie Dudley 10.25am:New case detected in Sydney nursing home
Wyoming Nursing Home in Summer Hill has confirmed one new case of Covid-19 has been recorded in a vaccinated resident, growing the facility’s cluster to 21.
All 19 residents who have tested positive have been transferred to local hospitals, as have the other unaffected residents who live on the top floor of the facility.
Meanwhile the two staff who have shown positive tests, continue to be in isolation, a statement from the nursing home said.
“More than 80 per cent of the 65 residents and 60 staff are currently vaccinated and we expect a further round of vaccinations to be offered to any residents, who have previously declined, be undertaken over the next few days, while we are encouraging all staff to get fully vaccinated,” the statement read.
“The facility continues to work closely with the health authorities to undertake daily COVID-19 testing and contact tracing of all staff and residents of the facility.”
The home defended accusations of a “Christmas in July” function being the source of the outbreak, claiming the event was “simply a normal lunch for residents, with Christmas decorations and carols being played.”
All close contacts of the staff are in isolation and the facility remains in a full lockdown.
READ MORE: ‘Christmas in July’ turns super-spreader
Ellie Dudley10.20am: Queensland to take 150,000 new AstraZeneca doses
Queensland’s pharmacy guild will accept 150,000 new doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine from the federal government as the state gears up to fight an evolving outbreak of Covid-19.
Queensland health officer Yvette D’Ath said she has spoken to pharmacists and understands the new doses will be administered “in a matter of days.”
“I phoned the pharmacy guild and asked them if they had 150,000 vaccines available of AstraZeneca can they … get this in the arms of Queenslanders across south east Queensland in a matter of days? They said yes, they will take it,” Ms D’Ath told reporters.
“So, I asked the commonwealth, do whatever approvals you need to give today, get the 150,000 vaccines here tomorrow and we will ensure that more Queenslanders are getting vaccinated by the end of this week.”
In Queensland’s 60-69 year old age group, only 20 per cent have received their first dose of the vaccine, Ms D’Ath said.
Eighteen per cent of Queenslanders are fully vaccinated.
Ellie Dudley10.10am:Source of Queensland outbreak still unknown
Queensland chief health officer Jeannette Young says she is “concerned” state authorities are still unaware of how the state’s latest Covid-19 cluster began.
“I’m concerned that we don’t know how this outbreak has happened,” she told Tuesday’s press conference.
Sky News Political Editor Andrew Clennell says Queensland Chief Health Officer Dr Jeannette Young’s stance on AstraZeneca is concerning. Dr Young reiterated her earlier calls discouraging anyone below the age of 60 to receive the AstraZeneca jab. This is despite the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation urging those in that age group to consult their GP. “With an outbreak and lockdown now in South East Queensland, this is concerning,” Mr Clennell said. "Particular with over 18s in Sydney encouraged by federal government advertisements to get the AstraZeneca jab.”
“We know the very first two cases that arrived in Queensland on 29 June, but I don’t know how it’s got from either of those two people to the first family in that Indooroopilly area.”
Dr Young said the key to understanding the outbreak was testing.
“We need to continue testing throughout the 11 LGAs and throughout Queensland,” she said.
“It is really important so we can make sure that we don’t have any other transmission events, any outbreaks happening.”
The lockdown of 11 high risk LGAs in south east Queensland is expected to end at 4pm on Sunday, which Dr Young said is “absolutely my aim”.
Ellie Dudley10.04am: Queensland records 16 new local virus cases
Queensland has recorded 16 new cases of local-acquired Covid-19, all which have been linked to the Indooroopilly Delta cluster.
The total number of cases associated with the cluster is now 47.
A total number of 34,718 tests were conducted in the state over the past 24 hours.
“We now have 7995 Queenslanders in quarantine and at least 4,089 in home quarantine but probably much more than that while all of us in the south-east have to stay home,” deputy premier Steven Miles said.
“Those who are subject to home quarantine directions are legally required to stay home. They cannot leave home except in an emergency or to get a test.”
The LGAs in Queensland currently in lockdown are City of Brisbane, City of Gold Coast, City of Ipswich, Lockyer Valley Regional Council, Logan City, Moreton Bay Region, Noosa Shire Council, Redland City, Scenic Rim Regional Council, Somerset Regional Council and Sunshine Coast Regional Council.
Max Maddison9.59am:Albanese refuses to condemn Young’s AZ remarks
Anthony Albanese has refused to condemn Queensland’s chief health officer Jeannette Young, despite concerns her emotive language on AstraZeneca could contribute to vaccine hesitancy.
Dr Young has drawn staunch criticism for her ongoing criticism of AstraZeneca, saying she didn’t want 18-year-olds being given the vaccine, despite her advice being at odds with official recommendation from the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation.
Offered two opportunities to repudiate Dr Young’s position on breakfast television on Tuesday morning, the opposition leader declined both, instead saying he wasn’t going to “join a pile on”, before deflecting to attack the Morrison government for insufficient supplies of vaccine.
“People should be vaccinated with whatever vaccines are available. It’s as simple as that. Okay, but the problem. The problem here has been the government had two jobs this year,” Mr Albanese told Sky News.
Moments later on ABC Breakfast News, Mr Albanese again refused an opportunity to criticise the soon-to-be Queensland governor, blaming vaccine hesitancy on Scott Morrison holding late night press conferences.
“And so, we encourage people to be vaccinated. We need to get those vaccine rates up. It’s as simple as that. If your doctor says go, then go,” he said.
Ellie Dudley9.17am: When to watch Queensland, NSW virus updates
State authorities in both Queensland and NSW are expected to front the media this morning to address the growing concerns of their respective Covid-19 outbreaks.
Queensland health minister Yvette D’Ath and chief health officer Jeannette Young are expected to hold the state’s press conference at 10am, while Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is still in hotel quarantine.
Queensland’s lockdown has been extended to 4pm Sunday after 13 new locally acquired cases of Covid-19 were recorded on Monday.
Sky News Political Editor Andrew Clennell says Queensland Chief Health Officer Dr Jeannette Young’s stance on AstraZeneca is concerning. Dr Young reiterated her earlier calls discouraging anyone below the age of 60 to receive the AstraZeneca jab. This is despite the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation urging those in that age group to consult their GP. “With an outbreak and lockdown now in South East Queensland, this is concerning,” Mr Clennell said. "Particular with over 18s in Sydney encouraged by federal government advertisements to get the AstraZeneca jab.”
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian will provide an update on the state’s Covid-19 situation at 11am.
She will present alongside health minister Brad Hazzard and chief health officer Kerry Chant.
A total of 207 new cases of locally-acquired Covid-19 were detected in NSW on Monday, at least 51 of which were active in the community for the entirety of their infectious period.
READ MORE: PVO – Jeannette Young’s AZ stance is downright dangerous
Jack Paynter9.12am:How to get your Covid vaccine in days
A new tool is allowing Australians to see where they can get a Covid-19 jab in their local area as thousands rush to book their appointments online.
The federal government’s eligibility checker ‘nearest’ and ‘earliest available’ sort functions shows Aussies where they can get an AstraZeneca vaccine within just days and do their bit to help end lockdowns forever.
Vaccine Locator
The checker allows people aged 16 to 59 years old to select whether they would consider the AstraZeneca vaccine, which opens up dozens more appointment times and locations nearby.
Appointment times can then be made within days, and potentially on the same day for those eagle-eyed users.
Those who don’t want to consider the AstraZeneca vaccine are taken through a more rigid eligibility process, but there are limited appointments available for the Pfizer jab for those eligible.
The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation recommends the Pfizer vaccine as the preferred option for those aged 16 to 59, but those aged 18 to 59 can get the AstraZeneca jab following an appropriate risk/benefit assessment and consent process.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced on Friday that at a nationwide vaccination rate of 80 per cent broad lockdowns would no longer exist, and those who were vaccinated would be given greater freedoms – including on travel.
Mr Morrison said states could only move to the next transition stage – ‘Phase B’ of managing the virus – if the entire country reaches a vaccination average of 70 per cent.
“To get to that next phase, all of Australia has to get there together,” Mr Morrison said.
The would mean Australians could “start saying goodbye” to lockdowns, with the nation to transition away from lockdowns and restrictions would ease significantly for vaccinated people. – NCA Newswire
READ MORE: Pharmacies’ concern at jabs risk in hot spots
Robyn Ironside 8.53am:Qantas, Jetstar to stand down 2500 workers
Qantas and Jetstar will stand down 2500 employees in response to the extended Greater Sydney lockdown, Brisbane’s latest lockdown and related border closures.
The announcement to the ASX came a day after the federal government agreed to pay aircrew affected by lockdowns and border closures a Covid relief payment of $750 a week.
All affected workers would get two weeks notice, with pay continuing until mid-August. No further job losses were expected, after Qantas and Jetstar axed 8500 roles last year.
READ the full story here
Ellie Dudley 8.49am:Ardern to skip parliament after undergoing Covid test
New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern will miss the first day back in Parliament after a three-week recess as she awaits the results of a Covid-19 test after catching a cold from her daughter.
A spokesman for Ms Ardern said she appeared to have caught a cold that her three-year-old had picked up at preschool.
Ms Ardern will work from her Wellington residence at Premier House, but won’t be able to attend Question Time.
New Zealand is largely free of coronavirus and has had no cases in the community since February.
Ms Ardern’s duties will be carried out by deputy prime minister Grant Robertson.
READ MORE:China puts millions back into lockdown
Max Maddison8.40am:Labor’s $300 cash for vax plan a ‘token bribe’
Nationals senator Matt Canavan has described Labor’s plan to provide $300 to encourage uptake of vaccines as a “token bribe” which will confirm people’s fears, as he says the keys to the country have been handed over to “public health overlords”.
The Queensland senator said the idea was little more than a “gimmick” which wouldn’t work, and said Anthony Albanese needed to get out and speak to people who were vaccine hesitant.
“But if you are concerned about some impact on your health, how is $300 going to work? It’s probably going to have the opposite effect,” Senator Canavan told Sky News on Tuesday morning.
“Hopefully the government won’t listen to this because I don’t think it will work, it will be counter-productive and, of course, waste billions.”
He also took aim at public health officials who were too narrowly focused on suppressing cases of Covid, and failing to take into account a broad array of factors, including people’s livelihoods and mental health.
“How’s that being balanced against the cost. Who’s doing the calculation? It seems to me we’ve just given the keys to power over to public health overloads who only have one thing in mind,” he said.
“They’re not Nostradamus. They’re not bringing down tablets from Mount Sinai. They’re making judgments about risk just like all of us have to do in life, and ultimately the best judge of our risk is you, and people can make their own decisions.”
READ MORE: Editorial – Time to recognise Covid successes
Rachel Baxendale8.22am:Victoria records four new local virus cases
Victoria has recorded four new locally-acquired coronavirus cases and one overseas-acquired case in the 24 hours to midnight on Monday night.
The local cases have all been linked to the state’s current outbreaks and are in people who have been in quarantine throughout their infectious periods.
New daily cases in Victoria, from July 10, 2021
Tuesday’s four new local cases follow two on Monday, four on Sunday, two on Saturday, three on Friday, seven on Thursday, eight on Wednesday, and an outbreak peak of 26 on Thursday July 22.
Only two of the 30 cases over the past seven days had not been in quarantine for the duration of their infectious period.
This includes a traffic controller in his 20s who tested positive for coronavirus after working at the Moonee Valley Racecourse drive through Covid-19 testing centre.
Investigations are ongoing into how the traffic controller contracted the virus.
Aside from a work colleague who the man is understood to have infected when the pair car-pooled, all testing centre colleagues have tested negative for the virus.
Victoria’s latest cases bring the total number of community acquired cases since two incursions from NSW emerged almost three weeks ago to 220.
There are currently 124 active cases, including up to seven active cases acquired overseas.
At least 89 of those infected during the current outbreaks have recovered, and more are expected to do so in coming days.
The latest cases come after 22,217 tests were processed on Monday – up slightly from 21,417 on Sunday, but down from 25,779 on Saturday, 32,760 on Friday, 43,542 on Thursday and 24,340 the previous Monday, and well down from the July 20 Victorian record of 59,355.
READ MORE: ‘Border bubble’ mandates bolstered
Max Maddison 8.10am:Albanese: Cash incentives good for health and economy
Anthony Albanese has taken aim at the Morrison government’s criticism of Labor’s financial incentives to encourage people to get fully vaccinated, saying the idea is “not only good for health, but good for the economy”.
Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese has pledged to offer $300 cash payments to everyone who receives both doses of a Covid vaccine before December. However, new research by the government which was leaked to The Australian indicates they do not necessarily believe financial incentives are the best option. The research suggests restrictions relief and things like frequent flyer discounts would be better incentives. Since there is no guarantee there will be an election before December it is believed Labor hopes to either take the political credit if the government adopts their idea, or that the government will be forced to admit they do not have enough vaccine supply for everyone to be double jabbed by December.
After a Labor caucus meeting on Monday decided on the $6 billion policy to encourage uptake of vaccinations, Finance Minister Simon Birmingham rubbished the ideas as “unnecessary, unlikely to work and a little bit insulting”.
Mr Albanese said the policy was consistent with the advice of chief medical officer Paul Kelly, and said the negative reception was typical of the federal government, which “says no to everything as it’s first response”.
“If you look at Scott Morrison, he changes his mind and his view on things from day to day, let alone, week to week,” Mr Albanese told Sky News on Tuesday morning.
“So we’ve put this forward, we’ll wait and see what next week’s reaction is or tomorrow’s from Scott Morrison, but it’s a constructive idea, and I think it is a real pity that it’s been dismissed so readily by the government.”
READ MORE: Bosses push mandated workplace jabs
Ellie Dudley 7.48am: ‘Not safe’ for HSC students to return to class
The decision to have year 12 students returned to school in mid-August is “premature”, says NSW Teachers Federation President Angelo Gavrielatos.
Teachers and HSC students in Sydney are calling on Premier Gladys Berejiklian to reassess a return to face-to-face learning as medical experts reveal young people are driving the current outbreak. Tens of thousands of students will be travelling up to 20 kilometres to attend school and some teachers are alarmed by the prospect of students from 100 postcodes travelling into hotspot areas. NSW Teachers Federation President Angelo Gavrielatos told Sky News Australia there was "deep concern” regarding the premier’s announcement that all HSC students would return to face-to-face learning on August 16. “That would see state-wide, 76,000 students face-to-face in year 12 and some 6,500 teachers,” he said. “Across Greater Sydney that’s 50,000 students and in the eight hotspot areas that’s 21,000 students and more than 2,000 staff. Incredible amount of mobility in and out of the lockdown areas and that’s causing us deep concern. “This is not about whether kids should come back to face-to-face, of course they should, but it should occur when it’s safe to do so.”
NSW recorded 207 new cases of Covid-19 on Monday, as the highly-infectious Delta variant of Covid-19 continues to surge around the state.
Premier Gladys Berejiklian last week announced 20,000 doses of the Pfizer vaccine would be administered to year 12 students in high risk areas, to prepare anyone in the state completing their HSC to return to school on August 16.
Mr Gavrielatos said he believed while case numbers remained high it was not safe for students to return to school.
“These are very, very difficult and concerning times and we certainly believe that the announcement made by the Premier last week was premature,” he told Channel 9’s Today/
“Students do transmit this virus and unfortunately 25 per cent of all cases are young people under the age of 19.”
Mr Gavrielatos said the plan could see up to 600 young adults and teachers on any one site.
“That’s a lot of people,” he said.
“We want our students back to face-to-face teaching and learning. We want them back but we want them back when it is safe to do so.”
READ MORE: Kids to get jab as crisis grows
Ellie Dudley 6.55am:Labor $300 vaccine offer ‘won’t work’, says Birmingham
Federal Finance Minister Simon Birmingham has condemned the ALP’s plan to offer cash in return getting vaccinated claiming it is “unnecessary” and “won’t work”.
Under the proposed $6 billion incentive revealed by Labor on Monday, everybody who is fully vaccinated against Covid-19 by December 1 would receive $300.
“It is all very well for Labor to say, “Well throw some money at the problem.” That’s what they have always done,” Senator Birmingham told Channel 9’s Today.
“It is what they did when they were last in government with the Global Financial Crisis, just throw money around in a scattergun way. Our approach has been to be guided by principles, principles that making sure spending is targeted, it is proportionate, it is focused on getting the exact outcomes that are necessary.”
Senator Birmingham said research developed by the Behavioural Economics Team of the Australian Government indicated paying people for jabs would not work. “We can’t just throw $6 billion around against the evidence,” he said. As revealed by The Australian on Tuesday, the government will likely prioritise non-financial incentives, including partnering with businesses to provide discounts and frequent flyer point bonuses, ahead of a US-style cash approach.
Senator Birmingham said it was “insulting” to the people who have already received their vaccination.
Labor leader Anthony Albanese said on Tuesday anyone who had already received the jab would also get the payment.
Senator Birmingham also followed up Scott Morrison’s backing of exemptions for those who were fully vaccinated, and said that plans for a vaccine passport were “being established”.
“Certainly we’re making sure the technologies are in place for people to be able to demonstrate that they have been vaccinated,” he said.
“It’s very important that people have that ability, particularly when it comes to overseas travel in the future, not just in terms of what rules Australia might put in place, but the rules other countries might put in place, as well.”
READ MORE: Internal friction heats up in ALP over renewables
Ellie Dudley 6.30am:$300 jab payment ‘something we need to do’: Albo
Federal Labor leader Anthony Albanese has doubled down on his party’s plan to offer $300 to every Australian who gets fully vaccinated, claiming it is “something that we need to do”.
Under the proposed $6 billion incentive, everybody who is fully vaccinated by December 1 would receive the cash payment as a new encouragement to have the country vaccinated quicker.
“If everyone did it, it would be $6 billion. If 80 per cent, the figure we’re aiming for, was done, it would be just under $5 billion,” Mr Albanese told Channel 9’s Today.
“But that’s a small amount compared with the $2 billion a week that these mass lockdowns are costing our national economy.”
“This would be good for our health, but also would provide a much-needed stimulus at a time when workers and small business is really struggling to get by as a result of these lockdowns,” Mr Albanese said.
READ MORE: ‘Freedom incentives’ to spur vaccination as Scott Morrison rejects cash
Ellie Dudley6am:Brisbane Grammar latest school to be infected
Brisbane Grammar is the latest school in Queensland to be infected with Covid-19, after three students and a parent tested positive for the highly contagious Delta variant.
Seven schools in total have now been put on high alert after students or staff members have returned positive readings for the virus.
In an email sent late from the school on Monday night, the Brisbane Grammar School community was told of the rising case numbers.
“Queensland Health has tonight confirmed two further Brisbane Grammar School students have tested positive for Covid-19,” the email, acquired by the Courier Mail, read.
“BGS now has four confirmed Covid cases – three students and one parent.
“This development does not change the directives already in place, which have been communicated previously by the School.”
Defence Minister Peter Dutton has been forced into home quarantine amid Brisbane's current COVID-19 outbreak. Mr Dutton was due go to Canberra this week for the return of Parliament. However, Mr Dutton is now subject to a 14 day stay-at-home directive because his son attends a school impacted by the latest health advice in the state.
Earlier on Monday evening, Brisbane Girls Grammar School parents were also advised that a student had contracted the virus. The student attended school last Friday between 8am to 6pm.
The latest case comes after a parent attended the school on Friday from 5.25pm for several hours for an open night, and later caught the virus.
Queensland Health has also urged all students and staff at St Joseph’s College Gregory Terrace to get tested for Covid-19 after students from the school shared a bus with a student from another school who had tested positive.
At least seven schools have been caught up in the latest cluster, with confirmed cases among students, parents and teachers at Indooroopilly State High School, Ironside State School, Brisbane Grammar School, Brisbane Girls Grammar School and St Peters Lutheran College in Indooroopilly.
READ MORE: Vaccination only way out of our golden cage ‘trap’
Ellie Dudley5.45am:Vaccinated Westmead Hospital worker tests positive
A fully vaccinated Westmead Hospital worker has tested positive for Covid-19, forcing at least 36 colleagues into immediate isolation.
The worker had been on the job for three days while infectious.
“A Westmead Hospital staff member has tested positive to COVID-19,” a statement issued from the Western Sydney Local Health District read. “The staff member worked for three days while infectious last week. The staff member was fully vaccinated.”
Sky News Political Editor Andrew Clennell says he has been told that unfortunately "around 24 intensive care unit nurses at Westmead Hospital" have been defined as close contacts after a ward clerk infectious with coronavirus entered the hospital. Mr Clennell said, "19 orderlies have also been defined as close contacts". "A very concerning situation when it comes to hospital staffing," he said. "New South Wales Health has confirmed this afternoon that my numbers on this are roughly correct".
NSW recorded 207 new Covid-19 cases on Monday, and the death of a man in his 90s in southwestern Sydney.
READ MORE: Delta Covid-19 variant hits national economy for $12bn
Charlie Peel5.15am:Young won’t back down on AstraZeneca warning
Epidemiologists and commonwealth officials have repudiated Queensland chief health officer Jeannette Young’s repeated comments discouraging young people from having the AstraZeneca ­vaccine, as the outbreak in southeast Queensland escalated.
Dr Young’s stance on Monday that she didn’t want 18-year-olds being given the vaccine was at odds with official advice from the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation, which recommended all adults in hot spots should “strongly consider” speaking to their doctor about taking the vaccine.
Deputy chief medical officer Michael Kidd said the outbreak in southeast Queensland, which has put 11 local government areas under lockdown, met the threshold to be considered “significant”.
Health Minister Greg Hunt insists the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation’s revised recommendations remains the “guiding light” amid concerns over blood clotting associated with the AstraZeneca jab in younger Australians.
“ATAGI has reaffirmed their previous advice that in a large outbreak, the benefits of the Covid-19 vaccine AstraZeneca are greater than the risk of the side effects occurring, for all age groups,” Dr Kidd said.
“The ATAGI advice remains that Pfizer is the preferred vaccine for those under 16 but the AstraZeneca vaccine is available to anyone over the age of 18.
“But we are wanting people to have a discussion with their trusted medical practitioner, general practitioner, and to provide informed consent before they receive the AstraZeneca vaccine.”
Dr Kidd’s advice came hours after Dr Young said she “remained firm” on her edict from June that she did not want young people to be given the AstraZeneca vaccine.
“I said I didn’t want 18-year-olds to have AstraZeneca, and I still don’t,” Dr Young said.
Read the full story here.
Geoff Chambers5am:‘Freedom incentives’ to encourage vaccine take-up
Scott Morrison will pursue “freedom incentives” ahead of cash payments under the national cabinet’s four-phase reopening plan, with new research commissioned by the federal government warning that large financial ­incentives and lotteries have had “little to no impact on longer-term vaccination rates”.
The government ­received advice last week outlining the merits of financial ­incentives as other countries, including the US and Britain, announced inducements to maintain the momentum of their vaccination programs.
The research — prepared by the Behavioural Economics Team of the Australian Government, led the Health Department and officials at Prime Minister and Cabinet – concluded that financial incentives were “unlikely to drive vaccine uptake in Australia”.
Venues NSW Chairman Tony Shepherd says subject to government approval, his organisation is pushing for those who are unvaccinated against COVID-19 to not be allowed to attend live sporting matches.
Instead, the government will likely prioritise non-financial incentives, including partnering with businesses to provide discounts and frequent flyer point bonuses, ahead of a US-style cash approach. Joe Biden said last week $100 should be paid to people who were fully vaccinated.
Ahead of vaccine supply ramping up in September, the government is examining a range of incentive options considered crucial for Australia to progress to the second and third phases of national cabinet’s reopening plan, requiring 70 and 80 per cent vaccine coverage.
Anthony Albanese will today put forward a $6bn vaccine plan which proposes a $300 payment to all Australians who get vaccinated by December 1.
But the BETA research said financial incentives could set an “expensive precedent for future vaccine strategies”.
U.S. President Joe Biden on Thursday urged local governments to pay people to get vaccinated against COVID-19, and set new rules requiring federal workers to provide proof of vaccination or face regular testing, mask mandates and travel restrictions.
READ the full story, by Geoff Chambers and Greg Brown, here.
Chris Griffith4.45am:Covid vaccination certificates ready for your phone
Covid vaccination certificates are now available for storing on your phone and can be accessed via the myGov site and app, or via the Medicare Express app. You need to have had both doses of the jab for your COVID-19 digital certificate to be available to you as a digital record. It takes the form of a PDF file and isn’t tethered to blockchain.
You can add your Covid vaccination certificate to Apple Wallet on an iPhone, which will make it easy to produce should you be required to show it, for example in the future on international flights.
The certificate paves the way for federal and state governments to grant access and concessions to fully vaccinated Australians who present less of a health risk out and about.
READ the full story here.
Word count: 11780
