A PAIR of Adelaide entrepreneurs who have ridden the remarkable highs and lows of the cryptocurrency markets, have turned their attention to nurturing Adelaide’s fledgling blockchain industry.
Michael Zhang and Yawn Rong, who run blockchain advisory firm CryptoSA, are planning to launch a new blockchain incubation program by the middle of this year after opening a shared workspace – CryptoSA Lab – on Morphett St in the CBD.
Mr Rong said the business partners had learnt a great deal during the past two years investing in initial coin offerings (ICOs), and it was now time to pass that knowledge on to the local blockchain industry.
“At the end of last year the passion to invest in ICOs – it went cold globally – and so we thought if we keep investing we’re not making much,” Mr Rong said.
“So we had to think creatively. If we want to be in this industry in the long-term, really we need to be focusing on more of the educational perspective.
“We’d been on this rollercoaster in 2017 and 2018, the craziest time in the cryptocurrency world, and we’d seen a lot of things – we saw how many people lost their entire savings and we’ve seen people making millions by doing really well. We wanted to convert our knowledge to the people of Adelaide.” One of CryptoSA’s first ventures in cryptocurrency came in 2017, when it started arbitrating Bitcoin markets in Australia and China. That was brought to an end when Chinese authorities closed down the country’s cryptocurrency exchanges later that year, and so the firm turned its attention to investment in ICOs.
However, its big break came in July last year, when CryptoSA became the first Australian sponsor for the Gibraltar Blockchain Exchange.
Sponsor firms vet projects looking to list on the digital currency exchange, and provide support to issuers as part of a rigorous application process.
“A sponsor’s role is to help the exchange do the third party due diligence,” Mr Rong said. “We have developed an almost 400 page manual for performing due diligence.
“We assess the token listing on the exchange based on the financial records of the token project, the legal aspects of the token project, the smart contract of the project, the team members and also the project itself.” Mr Rong said the ICO market had matured in recent months, moving away from a “pump and dump” philosophy to one focused on developing blockchain technology and applications.
“Everything has cooled down, people who wanted to grab quick money have left, and people that really want to push the blockchain industry forward are now reshaping the whole industry.” As the world’s biggest cryptocurrency, Bitcoin sets the trend for other digital currencies and ICO projects. After peaking at more than $25,000 in December 2017, Bitcoin crashed last year, dipping to below $4500 by December, before making up some ground in recent months. It currently trades at around $7500.
Mr Rong said CryptoSA would draw on its experience during a tumultuous couple of years to develop its new incubation program, which is expected to launch by the middle of this year.
“The knowledge we use to do the due diligence on the exchange, plus the experience we learned over the course of 2018, and because we invest in asset tokens – that allows us to see things from multiple angles,” he said.
“I’ve been also studying quite intensively how to create a start-up, what services start-ups need, what mentors they need, what infrastructure they need, and so the course is developed based on all of this.” Mr Rong said CryptoSA had developed strong venture capital connections globally and had chosen a group of advisers and mentors to support the incubation program, which would run for five to six months.“We need projects that are self sustainable and add value for businesses in South Australia,” he said. “We want to facilitate the community here and encourage businesses here in South Australia to adopt blockchain technology. If we can do that then we can develop a blockchain industry here and help turn around the South Australian economy.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 688
