A new system of connecting southern rock lobster fishers to consumers to China could be coming to ports at Kangaroo Island and Port Lincoln.
The Two Hands digital marketplace initiative is looking at expanding its operations to South Australia. The companies founders recently visited Kangaroo Island during a tour of potential processing areas.
Two Hands is working with Australian fishers and farmers to redefine how consumers source and consume local produce, including avoiding wet markets in China and providing 100 per cent transparency in the food supply chain journey.
Two Hands is a digital marketplace using blockchain technology to directly connect high-end restaurants in Shanghai with Australian primary producers.
Using the blockchain technology and smart tags, the company essentially eliminates any middlemen between Aussie producers and restaurant owners.
At the moment, Two Hands' lobster fisherman are in the Port Macquarie and Apollo Bay region, however the company absolutely wants to expand to South Australia.
SA Northern Zone Rock Lobster Fishermen's Association executive officer Kyri Toumazos said SA fishers would welcome the new system.
"To some degree we are behind when it comes to product traceability and have a long way to go," Mr Toumazas said. "Any time the consumer knows their product come from a sustainable fishery then we have a win."
He said the coronavirus pandemic had caused huge disruption for the industry, but demand had picked up and boats were back fishing off KI now that the northern zone season had been extended out to October 31.
Perhaps the Two Hands system could help get more product on limited air freight available, he said.
Two Hands says currently what happens in selling southern rock lobster to China is a complex supply chain process that means the lobsters are physically handled 10 or more times, including going through the infamous China wet markets.
This process adds stress to the animals, reduces their weight and increases their mortality rates, as chemicals are added to tanks, unsanitary conditions, wrong temperature in tank waters, transported in unrefrigerated trucks.
It is also a process whereby the middlemen have all the power - the fishers of KI and all other locations are price takers.
The middlemen simply hold the lobsters in tanks until they get the price they want from the restaurants, which of course means the fish are not particularly fresh when they are delivered to their final destination. Two Hands says there is also a great deal of food fraud that occurs with these middlemen - passing off meat of one animal for another.
CREDIT: Stan Gorton
Word count: 425
