IT has long been an easy form of ridicule to label Adelaide as nothing more than a big country town.
These days, that isn’t a sledge but a badge of honour.
As Sydney and Melbourne have filled to bursting, lumbered with crushing property prices and a huge bill for infrastructure that still fails to keep pace with growth, sleepy old Adelaide has established itself not as a place to tease but envy. The assertion that a low-growth state such as South Australia would benefit from an influx of skilled migration makes perfect theoretical sense.
On paper, it is an easy argument to win, yet there are three key obstacles to making the case. They go to quality of life, job opportunities and social cohesion.
These are deep-seated anxieties, not always rational ones but heartfelt. As such, it is no exaggeration to say that Steven Marshall approaches his second year as Premier trying to win the toughest policy argument of his political life.
It is tough because South Australians are passionately of the view that we like little old Adelaide just the way it is. We have no desire to end up like those poor sardines in Melbourne and Sydney, jammed into small houses with whopping mortgages, spending half the day in the car or on the train.
As requested by Prime Minister Scott Morrison, Steven Marshall has kickstarted his push for SA to receive a greater share of the skilled migrant intake. In doing so, he has argued the nation is divided into two camps – those cities that simply can’t take any more people, and those that are desperate for even the smallest influx of humanity.
“We have a two-speed arrangement, where you have some states and cities where they don’t want any more migrants because their infrastructure has not kept up with their population growth and they want to slow the increase,” Steven Marshall said. “However, there are other parts of the country that want to grow its population to deal with some of the significant skills constraints that are holding those states, like South Australia, back.” If he is going to win this argument, there are three things Steven Marshall must do.
The first is the easiest: To reassure us there is no threat to social cohesion. There is an enduring but uninformed view among many that SA is about to be hit by an influx of talentless and listless people from the world’s most undesirable trouble spots and that our crime rate and welfare bill will rise correspondingly.
The opposite is true. The focus is 100 per cent on skilled migrants, meaning we will only be taking people who have the capacity to fill gaps in the Australian labour market.
We are not talking about the refugee program. All these migrants will hail from countries with the requisite educational and training infrastructure to afford them a talent that is of benefit to SA.
The second challenge goes to jobs. People ask why would we import workers when so many Australians, particularly young Australians, remain unemployed.
On this, the point the Premier makes is that we are not bringing in people to compete against Australians for jobs but to fill gaps in those industries where there are currently not enough Australians to satisfy employer demand. This of itself will benefit Australian workers, because it will mean that projects that would otherwise not get off the ground will be up and running.
The industries the Premier identified as needing extra workers are machine learning, defence, space, cyber technology, blockchain, agtech and the creative industries.
These are the industries of the future, and if skilled migration can make these industries feasible faster than would otherwise be the case, the net benefit to all of us should be obvious.
The toughest part of the argument goes to the third point around quality of life and infrastructure.
The most complained-about features of life in Adelaide go to the ever-present roadworks and the encroach-ment of medium-density housing into what was once quarter-acre block suburbia.
It is irrelevant that the pressures we face are laughably small compared with Sydney and Melbourne.
What matters is that Adelaideans – especially those who have spent little or no time interstate – believe things are now busier and more crowded than they used to be.
To combat those fears, Mr Marshall is at pains to stress we are not talking about dumping this entire influx of humanity in and around the CBD but spreading these workers around the state based on industry need.
He has made a solid start in trying to win over a sceptical public, with one key error that he may yet rectify.
It is a mistake not to specify exactly how many skilled migrants he has in mind. This debate can only be won with full transparency, which a population target would provide.
Indeed, even by guessing as to what such a target might be, it makes the argument seem more winnable. If SA were to receive its share of permanent migrants based on its national population share of about 7 per cent, about 11,200 migrants would arrive in SA each year. That is only 200 more people than the state’s total population growth for last year, adjusted for interstate migration and natural increases.
The final challenge for Steven Marshall is facing an Opposition that will take every chance to fire a shot across his bows.
Peter Malinauskas is a paid-up advocate of population growth, and said as much in a speech to the Property Council last year. On radio yesterday though, he did a good job of sounding like an opponent, saying there was no way you could go down this path if you were shutting SA Service Centres or cancelling bus routes.
Clearly, the idea that a major state-building idea should be shelved on account of the axing of Sunday’s dawn bus service to Maslin Beach is laughable but in the bid to attack the Government over its cuts, logic need not enter into things.
This is an argument I hope the Premier wins.
I am just not sure if he can.
DAVID.PENBERTHY@NEWS.COM.AUTWITTER: @PENBO
CREDIT: DAVID PENBERTHY
Word count: 1027
