Some are familiar faces, having previously worked at Hills schools, while others have relocated from other council areas to take on the top job.
We’ve interviewed each of the new principals to find out a little more about them, including their passion for education and the local community.
Here’s what they had to say.
CASSANDRA ACKLAND – WOODSIDE PRIMARY
A Hills local through and through, Woodside Primary’s new school principal has a long-established reputation as one of the region’s top educators.
Cassandra “Cassie” Ackland served as the principal at Birdwood Primary for the past four years and as a deputy principal at Mount Barker Primary for seven years prior to that.
She’s also taught Reception to Year 7 at a number of schools around the state.
“My vision for education is for every child to access high quality education with excellent teachers and that they achieve their absolute potential,” she said.
“I would like to see all families working alongside staff supporting students to be the best version of themselves possible.”
Having lived locally for over 17 years, 14 of which she’s spent working in the Hills, Ms Ackland said she already felt very much a part of the wider community.
“The Woodside Community has been very welcoming already,” she said.
Outside of work, Ms Ackland enjoys working with her two young horses, having an occasional ride, and spending time with family and friends.
SYBILA FORD - BASKET RANGE PRIMARY
Having served as the Wellbeing Leader at Crafers Primary School for the past two years, Sybila Ford is no stranger to the Hills lifestyle.
It was there that she developed a “whole school approach to wellbeing”, including a focus on child protection strategies and social and emotional learning.
Ms Ford also previously worked at Norwood Primary School, where she facilitated STEM classes for student support.
“As a principal, student wellbeing and learning improvement are fundamental to our work with students,” she said.
“Building strong foundations that incorporate critical and creative thinking skills, personal and social capabilities, literacy, numeracy and STEM proficiencies are important in developing students that can respond to the challenges and careers of the future.”
Ms Ford said Basket Range Primary students would this year learn more about the importance of community involvement.
“As part of our reconciliation action plan we are commencing a reconciliation garden that will bring together members of the school community and create greater cultural awareness.
“Developing student skills in social enterprise and community outreach will also allow for greater community connections to be formed and this coupled with a renewed focus on wellbeing is an important direction for our school.
“I am also looking forward to working collaboratively with our governing council, staff, students and wider service professionals to build a cohesive community that embraces our current offering of both Mainstream and Steiner approaches to education.”
Outside of school, Ms Ford enjoys spending time outdoors with her three children, including camping, gardening and creative forms of visual arts.
HELEN DUNLOP - BIRDWOOD PRIMARY
First-time principal Helen Dunlop has spent the past 13 years at Keithcot Farm Primary School in Wynn Vale, where she worked as a co-ordinator and assistant principal.
She is originally from the United Kingdom but migrated to Australia 15 years ago.
Ms Dunlop said her passion and vision for education was to support students to take risks in their learning.
She also wants to foster greater problem-solving skills help her students become better versions of themselves.
“I believe all students should have a voice where they can express their thoughts and ideas and be able to reflect on their own learning.”
As a new member of the community, Ms Dunlop said she was eager to learn more about the Hills lifestyle.
“I enjoy watching sport and intend to come out at weekends and support the local teams where Birdwood students play”.
“We have Birdwood Farm Day coming up in May and this will be an excellent opportunity to meet the wider Birdwood community.
“Outside of school I have two daughters, one who has just started her first year in teaching and one who is in her third year of teaching at Uni SA.
“We also love the river and love to spend the weekends in summer at our shack.”
HAZEL ROBERTSON - ECHUNGA PRIMARY
After emigrating from Scotland in 2007, Hazel Robertson spent 10 years at Craigburn Primary school teaching within their Year 6/7 unit.
There she took on her first leadership position, in 2017, after completing her lead Teacher National Certification.
In 2019, Ms Robertson won the Deputy Principal position at Happy Valley Primary and was acting Principal in 2020.
“I come to Echunga Primary as principal, excited about the opportunities and possibilities that come working within a small community school,” she said.
“I believe that all young people should feel empowered and energised within their learning, enabling them to be lifelong learners.
“Alongside our Department’s vision for a world class education system, we want learning growth for every child, in every class, in every school and preschool.”
Ms Robertson said her initial focus at Echunga Primary would be to integrate at the school and to become “heavily involved” with the local community.
“I am looking forward to getting to know all of our families and students,” she said.
Outside of school, Ms Robertson enjoys spending time with her husband and her two children.
“We all love walking our three dogs along our local beach, especially at sunset,” she said.
“I try to keep reasonably fit by attending KX pilates sessions as well as the occasional early morning jog.:
NGARI BOEHM - HAHNDORF PRIMARY
There’s nothing like new beginnings for Hahndorf Primary’s new school principal Ngari Boehm who lost her family home to the Cudlee Creek bushfires.
Like most who lost everything, she has risen from the ashes to take on a new job and outlook on life.
Boehm has previously served as school principal at Mylor Primary and Upper Sturt Primary School, where she worked for the past 18 months.
“I believe every child has the right to access an education worth having,” she said.
“Staying abreast of the latest education research and being responsive to our changing world are critical skills needed to ensure our students success.”
Ms Boehm said she looked forward to working with varied organisations to help support and promote the town as a premium tourism destination.
“I am also excited by the possibilities of having our students work together with local business to enact real world learning opportunities that are authentic and beneficial to all involved,” she said.
Outside of work, Ms Boehm said she was focused on learning new skills.
“After losing our home in the Cudlee Creek fires, I have enjoyed learning new skills in propagation and horticulture in an attempt to revegetate our property.
“Gardening has become good therapy and a beautiful way to bring our family together.”
WENDY SILVESTRI - MACCLESFIELD PRIMARY
An educator for over 25 years, Wendy Silvestri is well equipped to lead Macclesfield Primary into a new era.
She spent the past six years at Hahndorf Primary and Preschool, where she served as acting principal since 2019.
She said her vision for education was to create inquisitive students who question why and seek answers.
“I have a passion for maths and love watching students manipulate numbers and become problem solvers who love the challenge of maths and aren’t scared of trying,” she said.
“There is also nothing better than sitting with students and sharing the enjoyment of a good book.”
Outside of school, Ms Silvestri said she was eager to get to know the Macclesfield community.
“I am keen to be involved with the local community and attending special events in Macclesfield and also coming and occasionally watching some of the students play sport,” she said.
“My favourite hobbies outside of school is going with my daughters to watch the (Adelaide) Crows play (in the AFL). “I also enjoy doing jigsaw puzzles, especially Disney themed ones and reading.”
JASLYN HOCKING - MEADOWS PRIMARY
Meadows Primary School principal Jaslyn Hocking is a newcomer to the Adelaide Hills.
She most recently served as the principal of Lameroo Regional Community School — a “fabulous experience”, both professionally and personally.
“The time has come, for us as a family, to follow our dreams and make the move to the fabulous Adelaide Hills after many years of living in the Mallee town of Karoonda,” she said.
“I am thrilled to be the principal of Meadows from 2021 and beyond.
“I am a passionate educator who believes that success is created through everyone working together towards a common goal.
“My hope is for everyone to work together to form a clear shared vision of student improvement through the implementation of a targeted Site Improvement Plan, focused around improved literacy, numeracy and wellbeing outcomes.”
Outside of work, Ms Hocking enjoys spending time running after her children and entertaining friends and family.
“We are all excited to start the next chapter of the very busy Hocking book,” she said.
NATHAN SANDERS - MYLOR PRIMARY
Having recently served as the assistant principal at Littlehampton Primary School, Nathan Sanders is ready to lead.
As the new Mylor Primary School principal, Mr Sanders sid he hoped to instil a strong sense of belonging among his students - a place where they feel challenged, engaged, supported and safe
“I love my job because I get to witness children learning and achieving every day,” he said.
Outside of school, Mr Sanders enjoys spending time with family and gardening.
“I have also joined the Mylor Citizens Friendship Club and look forward to attending the book launch outlining the history of Mylor Primary in a few weeks,” he said.
BRODIE TAPLIN - NORTON SUMMIT PRIMARY
Norton Summit Primary School principal Brodie Taplin is ready to begin the latest chapter in her life as an educator.
Her most recent role was as Senior Leader in Learning Improvement across the Clare Valley and Mid North region, supporting a variety of schools with learning design, student engagement and achievement.
“I loved the opportunity to work with a range of small and large schools in the learning design space and how we can best engage students in being informed, resourceful and powerful learners,” she said.
“I have a real passion for education to be thought provoking, fun, engaging and relative to kids and their lives, and really appreciate teachers and leaders who provide these opportunities for kids.”
Outside of school hours, Ms Taplin said she enjoyed being a part of the community in as many ways as possible, but especially sport.
“Outside of school, I enjoy keeping active and spending time with my children Leo and Matilda riding bikes, walking our dog, and swimming,” she said.
“I am really looking forward to the year ahead as a part of the Norton Summit Primary School community.”
KAREN POST - SPRINGTON PRIMARY
2021 marks a tree change for Springton Primary’s new school principal Karen Post.
The educator has relocated from Mawson Lakes School where she had been an assistant principal for five years.
Ms Post said her vision for students was for them to realise that they had “the ability to be a great generation”.
She said she hoped each student would leave primary school as respectful, compassionate, innovative and open-minded critical thinkers.
“This year I plan to start up playgroup again as it has not happened for the last few years,” she said.
“It will be a lovely way to get to know more of the community.”
Outside of school, Ms Post said she enjoyed spending time with family and friends and going for walks.
ADAM BLAKELY - UPPER STURT PRIMARY
Taking over as principal of Upper Sturt Primary School is a “proud moment” for father of two Adam Blakely.
He has been an eductor for the past 21 years and most recently served as deputy principal at Hahndorf Primary.
Prior to that, Ms Blakely was the assistant principal at Aldinga Beach B-7 School for four years.
“I am incredibly proud to be the principal of Upper Sturt Primary School,” he said.
“It is both a privilege and a responsibility of which I am incredibly grateful for.
“I am looking forward to building on the strengths of ‘Bush School’ and showcasing the benefits of using the natural environment, nature play and student centred learning to develop every child academically, emotionally, physically and socially.”
Outside of school hours, Mr Blakely said he was happiest when spending time with wife Kelli and their two children, Ella and Eddie.
“I love watching them play and explore their world and the joy that comes from New Learning and experiences,” he said.
“I also love my sport - both playing and watching.
“I (attempt to) play cricket during the summer and enjoy coaching football in the winter.
“I look forward to South Adelaide winning the 2021 SANFL premiership and Essendon being somewhat competitive.”
Crafers Primary School also welcomed Chantelle Welfare as its new principal this year.
Ms Welfare did not wish to be interviewed.
lydia.kellner@news.com.au
Word count: 2064
