FOR some time, South Australia has been a population laggard and plagued by a brain drain.
The consequences were outlined in a report by Deloitte Access Economics, released this week.
SA’s economy is on track for steady growth but its older population, coupled with a brain drain, threatens to keep a lid on long-term prospects, it says.
“A slower growing population, an older population – that combination leaves SA with bigger challenges from ageing,” says respected economist Chris Richardson.
This is a direct contrast to the state’s rapid industrialisation, spearheaded by long-serving premier Sir Thomas Playford, during whose reign the population increased from about 590,000 to more than one million.
Generations later, Premier Steven Marshall has made increasing the population a major priority.
The alternative is years of stagnation and a gradual decline in living standards.
Already, the state’s influence on the national stage has waned as declining numbers of people force an electoral redistribution and the loss of another federal seat.
Mr Marshall is today sending to Prime Minister Scott Morrison a pitch for SA to get a greater percentage of migrants, tailored visa programs focused on regional areas and jobs of the future, along with specialised incentives for international students.
Bolstering his argument, Mr Marshall is citing skills shortages in critical areas such as machine learning, defence, space, agricultural technology, blockchain and creative industries.
If the state’s children are to have the opportunity to secure jobs here, these sectors must be expanded.
This requires an influx of people, which for some might be uncomfortable. But waves of migration over many years have enriched our society. Our state is not bursting at the seams, as some argue Sydney and Melbourne are.
We must not accept the status quo and force many of the next generation to leave in search of jobs.Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Matt Deighton, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 320
