THOMAS Foods International has consumer trends and demands in mind when considering the latest technologies, some world-leading, in its Murray Bridge abattoir rebuild.
"Getting through that fire was one of our biggest challenges, but it also presented an opportunity we would never have gotten if we hadn't gone through what we did," TFI chief executive officer Darren Thomas said.
Speaking at an Agribusiness Australia lunch in Adelaide on Friday, Mr Thomas gave an insight into what they believed the modern customer wanted in food retail and how that would affect the way they rebuilt their processing facility.
"Life in manufacturing is getting harder and more competitive," he said.
"Gone are the days of processing meat, putting it in a box and getting it out to markets as quick as possible.
"That model just doesn't work today."
Mr Thomas said globally, customers wanted product traceability.
"It (traceability) is not just a marketing tool anymore, it's a requirement," he said.
"You need to be able to tell people, particularly the emerging younger generation, what happens in the manufacturing process. And it's not just Asian customers, this is a worldwide push."
Mr Thomas said this encouraged the company to become the first in the world to use the IBM Food Trust platform.
In March, IBM announced Australia's largest, family-owned meat processor (TFI) and largest independent grocery retailer Drakes Supermarket would pilot the blockchain-based food ecosystem solution.
The platform traces the entire lifecycle of a food product, from region to plate, and updates the record in real-time.
"We can now trace meat right back to its origin, through the use of blockchain technology," Mr Thomas said.
Its not the only partnership TFI and Drakes work together on, with the supermarket also the sole stockists of Thomas Farms Kitchen Recipe Bags - a ready-to-cook meal kit featuring fresh meat.
TFK also provides a home delivery, fresh food service, which was recently added to the UberEats platform.
"We are the first company in the world to do fresh home-cooked meat packs with UberEats, all through a touch on your phone," Mr Thomas said.
"This is what our customers are demanding."
Mr Thomas also talked about hi-tech purchasing models dominating the retail sector, used by leading global tech companies Alibaba and Amazon.
"Amazon Go is retail in a very different format - virtual carts and no checkouts," he said.
"A modern processing plant needs to plan for this and we will be making a significant investment in technology at the new plant to cater for this."
Early last month, TFI announced it would be rebuilding its Murray Bridge abattoir at a greenfield site, eight kilometres from the previous site on Mannum Road.
The build is expected to cost several hundred million dollars and create about 2000 jobs when fully operational.
CREDIT: Alisha Fogden
Word count: 466
