When the Olyroos beat Uzbekistan last month to seal a spot at Tokyo 2020, Joe Champness was in a Los Angeles recording studio keeping tabs on the game on his iPad, fully content with the choices he's made.
Champness hit pause on his A-League career with the Newcastle Jets this season to focus on his burgeoning hip-hop career. The 22-year-old winger - aka JOWIC - was also part of Graham Arnold's Australian under-23s team, and knew he'd be giving up an Olympics appearance if they were to seal qualification.
At the time, not many expected it would actually happen. With Arnold also considering bringing some of his Olyroos to the Copa America, Champness may have actually given up two once-in-a-lifetime experiences. But the way he sees it, he's living a different one right now.
"I was really happy for them and I'm wishing them a really good lead-up and preparation to the Olympics. I knew this was a possibility and definitely no regrets," Champness told this column. "When I made the decision to come over here, I didn't know anyone. It was based off intuition and a real gut feeling that I just couldn't ignore.
"Now I find myself right under the Hollywood sign in this massive home studio that has turned out some big records, and doing business, surrounded by these great people who've done it and believe that I can do it."
Champness has just released his latest track, My Plan, which touches on the fork in the road he confronted six months ago. A collaboration with the same executive producers who have previously worked with artists such as Ariana Grande, Chris Brown and Meek Mill, he's hopeful it will be his breakout record.
"It's definitely influenced by my situation ... being hungry enough to push through any trial," he said. "I'm really excited for people to hear what I've been up to in this record and judge for themselves whether it's good enough."
Champness remains contractually tied to the Jets, but hasn't yet spoken with new coach Carl Robinson. He continues to train daily, although he revealed he turned down an offer to train with the Los Angeles Galaxy to ensure his focus was 100 per cent on his music.
Mariners thrown a lifeline
Central Coast are on track to be branded with their fourth wooden spoon in six years after slumping to bottom of the table following their 2-0 loss to Adelaide last week, putting them at a legal risk of having their licence revoked on the grounds of poor performances. Minimum performance measures in A-League participation agreements with FFA suggest a club can be "relegated" for finishing bottom three years in a row, or four times out of six seasons.
But A-League boss Greg O'Rourke told The Hairdryer the competition's new management won't be looking to invoke its power to remove the Mariners should they finish last again.
"We have no intention to use ladder position to determine the licence," he said. "What we are committed to do is work with clubs on the bottom of the ladder to take new initiatives to improve their competitiveness."
Wanderers lend a hand
Western Sydney continue to do their bit to assist bushfire victims. An under-13s rep team from the Far South Coast association - every member having been impacted in some way by the bushfires - will be hosted by the A-League club this weekend.
They'll get a tour of Bankwest Stadium tonight before the Wanderers' clash with Adelaide United, play some small-sided games on the field at half-time, and will also be trained by the club's academy coaches for a session tomorrow morning at their Blacktown headquarters. Football NSW has also taken care of their accommodation, free of charge.
Glory in good crypto-company
It's not often Perth Glory can say they are in the same company of Barcelona and Juventus. In a week where the A-League club created headlines with its proposed takeover by blockchain trading firm, London Football Exchange, Barcelona announced its partnership with a cryptocurrency company. This week, the Catalan club signed a deal with a company called Chiliz to unveil a Barca Fan Token blockchain currency for its supporters to use online.
  CREDIT: Vince Rugari and Dominic Bossi
Word count: 705
