TWO of the state’s best known produce companies are the first in the country to trial a new blockchain platform which tracks the life-cycle of a food product from paddock to plate.
Drakes Supermarkets and Thomas Foods International have signed up to global tech giant IBM’s Food Trust platform, which allows retailers, suppliers and growers to share food origin details, processing data and shipping information on a decentralised blockchain network. The data is shared across the supply chain, allowing participants to view detailed information about an individual product as it moves through the supply chain and across various organisations.
Drakes and Thomas Foods have spent the past three months testing the platform, tracing the origin of a piece of steak back to one of four individual farms.
Thomas Foods global retail sales manager Simon Tamke said the added level of transparency and verifiability reinforced consumer confidence in the provenance of his company’s products.
“By maintaining the individual data relating to each product instead of moving to data about grouped products, we are achieving a greater understanding of how each food item is moving through the supply chain,” he said.
Detailed data shared on the platform allows retailers to prove the provenance and history of an individual product, and in cases of product recalls, helps to quickly identify the level of risk linked to an individual product item.
IBM Australia and New Zealand head of blockchain Rupert Colchester said blockchain was a potentially “game-changing” technology for food traceability. “Drakes and Thomas Foods have demonstrated how different players in a single supply chain can securely share data and key events, bridging organisational boundaries for the good of both consumers and the benefit of their own business processes,” he said.
Drakes fresh foods general manager Tim Cartwright said IBM Food Trust had helped to reduce the time to identify the origin of a product “from days to just seconds”.Mr Tamke, Mr Cartwright and Mr Colchester will all speak at today’s ADC Global Blockchain Summit, which kicked off at the Adelaide Convention Centre yesterday.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 346
