Assets limit for single pensioner To qualify for the age pension for a single person, what is the amount you are allowed in assets? Do you include the value of one’s car? – B. G. (West Lakes) Since July 1, 2018, a single person can earn $172 a fortnight (or the equivalent of $2,064 a year) before having the full age pension entitlement reduced.
The income test does not include the value of a vehicle, which is considered to be an asset in a category which also includes items such as real estate, life interests, investments, superannuation streams, gifts, cryptocurrencies and household contents.
The total value of a single person’s assets is allowed to reach $258,500 for homeowners and $465,500 for non-homeowners before their full age pension entitlement is reduced.
These thresholds will be increased from July 1 this year.
I keep reading stories mentioning “blockchain” on the finance pages. What does blockchain mean, and what does it do? – I.S. (Stirling) The most basic definition of “blockchain” is a shared, digitised ledger that cannot be changed once a transaction has been recorded and verified.
All parties to the transaction, as well as a significant number of third parties, maintain a copy of the ledger (i.e. the blockchain), which means that it would be practically impossible to amend every copy of the ledger globally to fake a transaction.
Originally, blockchain technology was used to support digital currencies such as Bitcoin.
Bitcoin’s success has triggered the establishment of thousands of new cryptocurrencies.
However, blockchain technology is capable of a lot more than just cryptocurrency creation, and may support things as transactions that require personal identification, peer review, elections and other types of democratic decision-making and audit trails.
Blockchain is used widely in the agriculture and mining industries, as it can trace products securely and accurately through the supply chain.
Where to write ■ Questions should be addressed to What's Your Problem? The Advertiser, GPO Box 339, Adelaide, 5001, or email to problems@adv.newsltd.com.au. Please include name and address, not necessarily for publication.■ Need more information? Contact the State Library of SA inquiry service on 82077250/7252 or country (freecall) 1800182013.WWW home page: http://www.slsa.sa.gov.au/goto/askus Please note that answers published are not necessarily supplied by the State Library.
Word count: 374
