David Travers and Jeff Grosset from the Clare Valley Wine and Grape Association last Monday night won the Premier's Blockchain Innovation Challenge in Adelaide.
The pair won $50,000 to develop their innovative idea which combines emerging QR code technology embedded in the wine bottle's screwcap but also linked to a consumer-friendly blockchain ledger, to confirm the wine's authenticity.
Mr Travers confirmed they had lodged a provisional patent of their idea and said the $50,000 prize would be used to finalise a proof of concept.
He said blockchain, the underlying technology behind cryptocurrencies, was still a little-known concept.
It not only had the potential to guarantee wine bottle security, but could deliver future savings in the wine logistics and create completely new levels of consumer insights.
Mr Grosset, who played a leading role in the introduction of screwcap some 20 years ago, said their idea could be potentially worth $1 billion in Australian wine sales.
"We've taken on the challenge to ensure that people can continue to rely on the provenance and authenticity of Australian wine," he said.
Mr Grosset said it was "massive" for the pair to have won the Innovation challenge.
A relatively new idea for the pair, it had only been kicking around in Mr Grosset's head for a few months and has quickly taken off into something more.
Mr Grosset said that this new technology had the potential to be an even bigger innovation for the wine industry when compared to the screwcap.
"I think this could overshadow that if we get it right," he said.
The pair pitched their idea in a shark-tank like competition as part of the ADC Blockchain Challenge conference on Monday afternoon.
The SA Premier Steven Marshall, who is promoting the creation of a digital economy in the state, was among those watching on in the audience.
One of the judges was conference co-chair Joe Schoendorf, a Silicon Valley venture capitalist and a former senior executive at Apple and HP.
Word count: 328
