SOUTHSTART will return to Adelaide in November with the technology and start-up conference part of a week-long, multi-venue program focused on entrepreneurialism.
Early-bird tickets for the conference, which will showcase more than 100 founders, investors and ecosystem leaders, are now available.
SouthStart will be held at the Adelaide Convention Centre on November 21-22, with several other events happening elsewhere as part of Global Entrepreneurs Week.
The week will start with a TechStars StartupWeekend, in collaboration with UniSA’s Innovation, Collaboration and Commercialisation Centre, followed by a two-day workshop in partnership with Flinders’ New Venture Institute.
Event director Craig Swann said there would be industry dinners along Peel and Leigh streets, in the CBD, activations at SA’s flagship innovation precinct, Lot Fourteen, and networking parties.
“SouthStart is not a conference; it is a convergence of humans, impact and technology, exploring the intersection of the exponential technologies Australia is world-leading in, and the people and ideas that drive them,’’ Mr Swann said.
“The entrepreneurial path is a hard and often lonely road. SouthStart provides a unique experience for people to come together offline, connect as humans and acquire the networks, skills and knowledge to tackle the problems that will affect billions of people.” Last year’s event attracted big names such as Tobi Pearce from Adelaide’s Sweat, Canva co-founder Cameron Adams, and Lewis Horne, chief executive of Swedish electric car manufacturer Uniti.
Mr Swann said the speakers at this year’s event would be announced in coming weeks.
The program will include keynote speeches, workshops, masterclasses, panels and summits across industries including artificial intelligence, space, creative industries, agtech and blockchain.
“SouthStart will also seek to attract stronger interstate and overseas investment interest into SA companies, partnering with Innovation Bay to deliver a national investor showcase attached to the main event,’’ Mr Swann said.
The State Government is supporting the event with a $350,000 grant through the Research, Commercialisation and Start-up Fund. Minister for Skills and Innovation David Pisoni said it was a good fit for the Government’s entrepreneurship agenda.
“SouthStart is a fantastic opportunity for local entrepreneurs and start-ups to learn from world-leading business and innovation leaders about their journeys and the global trends that will be vital for businesses to thrive in the digital age,’’ he said. Early-bird tickets are available for $249 until September 24 through event ticketing partner Humanitix, which is a not-for-profit backed by Atlassian Foundation and Google.org.
They will donate the profits from booking fees to charity.DETAILS: SEE WWW.SOUTHSTART.CO FOR EVENTS
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND BUSINESS EDITOR
Word count: 417
