Thirsty dairy companies have begun lining up to potentially buy milk from any farmers tempted to test the industry's first open market selling platform, the Milk Exchange.
The national digital milk market, launched this week, is not unlike electronic livestock marketplace, AuctionsPlus, or similar online grain trading facilities.
It has been billed as a game changer for an industry where dairy farmers are frequently frustrated by a lack of true market price transparency and are locked into secret contracts committing their production to specific processors.
With national milk production volumes seriously depleted by drought, the Milk Exchange initiative will allow sellers and raw milk buyers in all states to join an open trade, or at least get a broader picture of demand and price indicators for any spare supplies on offer.
Sellers could be farmers with un-contracted production, or processors with surplus milk to offload.
The platform will also offer more flexible buying options for buyers - some of whom have already registered.
In particular, smaller processors with specific delivery or quality requirements, or those buying milk via major dairy firms, are expected to go direct to producers if supplies are on offer.
Australian Dairy Farmers, has welcomed the prospect of more price transparency for milk suppliers, as was recommended by last year's Australian Competition and Consumer Commission report on the dairy market.
"We haven't fully analysed all that the Milk Exchange might deliver, but we definitely support any initiative providing greater market options to dairy farmers," said ADF chief executive officer, David Inall.
"This is a good chance to develop more market insight.
"People in different areas of the supply chain have differing ideas about what's needed, but it seems it's the right time for something like the Milk Exchange to emerge from the pretty foggy times our industry's experienced."
Melbourne-based milk services company, Milk2Market, is behind the online platform, which it also described as a step closer to creating a truly transparent, digital supply chain for milk buyers and milk suppliers.
In March Milk2Market began publishing a milk price calculator, offering simplified comparisons on processors' up-to-date prices.
The Milk Exchange has gone to the next stage by creating a more integrated digital supply chain, which it intends to enhance with blockchain technology and smart contacts.
"Anything creating a more equitable, transparent market is a critical building block to ensuring a more sustainable, future-fit industry," said Milk2Market's commercial development, general manager, Richard Lange.
"It's putting farmers firmly back in the driver's seat."
CREDIT: Andrew Marshall
Word count: 416
