KPMG BYTB
Family-owned businesses, which hold $4.3 trillion of Australia’s total wealth, are increasingly looking to invest in emerging entrepreneurs and start-ups as they seek to diversify.
Robyn Langsford, head of family businesses and private clients for KPMG Australia, says there is recognition among second and third generation family members of a need to innovate and pivot the family business to ensure continuity and preserve the legacy built by the founder.
“It is clear that having the ability to move quickly and adapt is vital to keep these businesses going,” says Langsford. “Family businesses have become a seeding ground for innovation.”
Today family-run organisations account for 67 per cent of all Australian businesses and provide 55 per cent of private sector employment, making them critical to the country’s economic growth.
‘Entrepreneurship will play an important role in rebuilding business and family wealth’
What is more, a recent KPMG family business survey in conjunction with the University of Adelaide found that being entrepreneurial is now more important than ever if businesses are to survive the fallout from the outbreak of COVID-19.
“All family businesses have been challenged to adjust their business models and respond to changing customer expectations,” according to the KPMG report. “For many, entrepreneurship will play an important role in rebuilding business and family wealth.”
The report found that a key challenge for many organisations is preserving the founder’s entrepreneurial mindset across generations, concluding that with every new generation, there is a risk that family members are more likely to become custodians of existing operations rather than creators of new wealth.
Langsford says that more and more of her clients at KPMG are looking to break that pattern with Generation X family business leaders in particular being more innovative and proactive when it comes to starting new business lines or making new investments compared to their Baby Boomer counterparts.
The KPMG executive says that others are starting to tap their youngest family members for ideas and diversity of thought, particularly those belonging to Generation Z, the world’s biggest consumer group. It is a key reason many are also willing to financially back the budding entrepreneurs among their children.
As a result, KPMG found that family businesses today are actively providing venture capital for new technology developments across multiple sectors from finance to manufacturing, property and agriculture.
‘Family businesses are a fantastic repository for innovation and are a place for entrepreneurship to thrive’
“There is a lot of activity in the emerging entrepreneur space which spells out a fertile environment for investing,” Langsford said. “In my experience, it is very much business as usual on the investment front from family offices despite the pandemic. I haven’t seen a reticence to invest.”
This growing willingness to back entrepreneurs and start-ups is demonstrated by families offices being willing to allocate anywhere from between 5 to 25 per cent of their portfolio to the space, depending on the particular family.
Langsford says the growing risk appetite among wealthy owners has not been lost on the professional investment community either, including venture capital funds which regularly approach her team to help connect with a family office or family business.
Family-backed capital is more likely to have a longer investment horizon than traditional private equity firms or VC funds, making them a popular source of funding for start-ups.
“They aren’t looking for a quick return,” Langsford explains. “They tend to go to greater lengths to support the business versus a private equity firm which may operate in a different environment and could cut the investment off earlier.
“Family businesses are a fantastic repository for innovation and are a place for entrepreneurship to thrive,” she adds.
According to the STEP Project Global Consortium 2019 survey, family businesses are more likely to emphasise proactiveness, innovativeness, and autonomy over risk-taking and competitive aggressiveness found in other types of enterprise.
It also found that business in the Asia Pacific had even higher levels of entrepreneurial orientation than most other geographical regions.
Despite family entrepreneurialism being shown to help businesses outlive non-family run companies by a factor of two or three, Langsford says there can exist a general misconception that family businesses stifle innovation or are too inward looking.
“In reality, family involvement can be a powerful asset that other businesses don’t have,” she says. “With the right family mindset, it can be the ideal place for innovation to thrive and flourish because of the unique framework that having a family behind the business provides.
“There is a wonderful power in shared purpose, aligned values and risk appetite and plenty of capital, all working towards a common goal.”
KPMG Brand reveal
This content was produced in association with KPMG. Read our policy on commercial content here.
Word count: 761
