AN Adelaide business that wants to help accelerate the recovery of patients with neural injuries has secured a Federal Government grant to help commercialise its software and conduct clinical trials.
RehabSwift won a $145,000 grant from the Accelerating Commercialisation’s April round of funding, which will support 19 businesses nationally with $8 million in funds.
This program is the largest early-stage funder in SA, having put about $30 million into more than 60 projects in the last five years.
RehabSwift is founded by Dr Sam Darvishi.
RehabSwift’s research has identified that each person has their own timing pattern for motor relearning.
The technology incorporates the individuals’ timing patterns into neuro-feedback training for recovery of hand movement after stroke.
The underpinning software is a combination of neuroscience, machine learning and robotics developed over years of research Dr Darvishi and colleagues during his PhD studies at the University of Adelaide and postdoctoral research in Tubingen, Germany.
The primary focus of RehabSwift is on stroke patients but could potentially address other deficits such as cerebral palsy, spinal cord injury and traumatic brain injury.
The grant will be used to further develop its prototype and conduct clinical trials on 15 stroke survivors.
There were three other South Australian businesses that secured substantial grants.
G&T Technology, which trades as Vinotrust, will get $150,000. The business founded by Jeffrey Grosset and David Travers has developed an innovative digital screw cap and blockchain service for the wine industry.
The technology is aimed at helping reduce fraud in the wine supply chain and reduce counterfeiting. A successful trial was conducted in the Clare Valley during this year’s vintage.
Kilic Engineering secured $478,000 for its highly mobile stockpile recovery system for the grain industry, which will make collection of grain from stockpiles faster, simpler and safer. The grant will be used to trial prototypes and establish a presence in the US.MyVenue received a grant of about $533,000. Founder Tim Stollznow has developed a new stadium and arena product for Australia and the US, allowing venue operators to serve patrons faster and more efficiently.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 347
