IN the coming days, there’s every chance I’ll be sandwiched between groups of women dancing around their handbags – ever so slightly out of time – to ’80s pop hits.
It’ll probably be the highlight of my year.
Yes, it might be more productive of an evening to figure out how blockchain works or learn Spanish but instead, I’m going to see pop sensations of decades past Bananarama, Tiffany ... and Amber (I’m still trying to figure out who exactly she is).
Tiffany, despite being officially anointed an international celebrity via her inclusion in last year’s cast of I’m A Celebrity, Get Me Out Of Here!, has been relegated to support act, while headliners Bananarama are down a singer, and now performing as a twosome with original members Sara Dallin and Keren Woodward (Fun fact: if you google “Bananarama members”, Siobhan Fahey, who isn’t performing on this tour, is credited with “screaming” for the band).
It’s an each way bet as to whether Bananarama will relive the hedonism of their heyday – which helped inspire the champagne-fuelled antics on TV’s Absolutely Fabulous – but there’s little doubt punters will be expecting a nostalgia-fest of their biggest hits Venus, Love In The First Degree and I Heard A Rumour.
Is it cool to love tunes, such as Bananarama’s, churned out by ’80s hit factory Stock Aitken Waterman? Does it even matter that their factory-like approach to creativity was once derided by high-minded critics?
The potent recent examples of big screen musicals Bohemian Rhapsody and The Greatest Showman, both panned critically but loved by audiences, prove that being pilloried by cultural gatekeepers isn’t always the last word. Both films’ soundtracks have been monster hits, too.
It’s been 31 years since Bananarama released their Greatest Hits Collection, but there’s something about great pop that’s ageless, even if their original fans are not. Audiences, whether fuelled by nostalgia, irony, or even a younger contingent discovering their music for the first time, are increasingly seeing fit to shamelessly embrace the music they like – critics be damned.
It’s something I started to realise a decade ago, while watching ’80s Norwegian band a-ha.
The venue was London’s Roundhouse, an eclectic space that was just as likely to play host to more “cool” acts; the kind that would have critics’ heads nodding in assent. Only weeks later I would go there to see some electronic noodling from Krautrock legend Holger Czukay. It was an interesting gig, but honestly, listening to a-ha’s frontman Morten Harket belt out Take On Me was the more memorable, and fun, night.
Even as I found myself surrounded by women drunkenly dancing around aforementioned handbags and reaching terrifying falsettos while screaming the lyrics “I’ll be gone in a daaaaaay”, I knew the correct response. Dispense with all judgement, and join the joy of the moment.
It’s a lesson I’ll be taking to the Bananarama gig: there’s only one sensible course of action: down a buck’s fizz, fling any and all handbags to the floor, and dance like it’s 1986 all over again.
VICTORIA HANNAFORD IS A SENIOR WRITER FOR RENDEZVIEW
CREDIT: Victoria Hannaford
Word count: 521
