Here are just some of the region’s locals giving it a go after opening up a new business.
1. Antihaste
After experiencing his own mental health challenges Stephen Ott, 29, has launched a clothing brand that serves as more than just a fashion statement.
Alongside his wife Ana, 31, the couple recently started their new business Antihaste selling a range of shirts, hoodies and caps.
Designed and printed in Australia the co-founders said all products are created to the highest quality and ethical standards.
For more information click here.
2. Nemel and Co
It’s been a stressful 12 months for many as the world has battled pandemics, social isolation and mental health.
Now two Toowoomba residents have started a business to make life a little bit brighter.
When friends Mel Nossiter and Neecy Curtis entered the first Covid lockdown last year, the pair began looking for a creative outlet to de-stress.
Discovering a new-found love for resin art and DIY jewellery, the duo began thinking about how others could benefit from the calming activity but might be struggling to source the materials.
Recently launching new small business Nemel and Co, the pair’s start-up specialises in resin jewellery kits.
For more information click here.
3. Dress Circle Collection
It’s an experience that’s all too familiar for many of us – falling in love with a dress and buying it online for a special occasion, only to receive it days before the event and find it’s not what was expected.
After experiencing their fair share of online shopping fails, fashion lovers Louise Hamilton and Veronique Anderson decided to start their own side business Dress Circle Collection.
The seven-week-old venture allows customers to book an appointment, try on and rent high-quality, designer clothing without the hefty price tag.
For more information click here.
4. Natural Narratives
Nothing has the power to brighten up someone’s day quite like a fresh bouquet of flowers.
And Toowoomba local Maree Ault hopes to do just that through her new business Natural Narratives.
The 22-year-old who is studying to be a florist at Flowers to Impress is set to finish her course at the end of the year.
Offering customers a range of unique, fun and creative styles, the small business owner sells bouquets and arrangements in different shapes, sizes and vessels.
For more information click here.
5. Willowvale Cooking School
He’s worked at many world-class restaurants, earned a michelin star and has been praised by Jamie Oliver but now one very successful chef is starting a cooking school in Toowoomba.
Originally from France, Bruno Loubet has worked in some of the best restaurants in London from La Tante Claire with Pierre Koffmann and the Manoir aux Quat’Saisons with Raymond Blanc.
Earning his michelin star while working as head chef for the Four Seasons, the professional chef went on to open his own successful restaurants including the Grain Store – one of London’s first flexitarian restaurants.
Now after a selling their historic Gold Coast Hinterland estate and moving to the garden city, Mr Loubet and his wife Catherine are opening Willow Vale Cooking School.
Offering a variety of cooking classes for the Toowoomba region to enjoy, guests will learn how to cook French, Moroccan or Vietnamese cuisine as well as Flexitarian dishes and pastries to name a few.
For more information click here.
6. Three Sisters Bridal
It’s a moment that happens only once for most brides and one that the owner of a new Toowoomba bridal store hopes to make extra special.
After taking over a pre-existing bridal store in Adelaide Lizzi Meyer has been working towards opening a brand new store in her hometown of Toowoomba.
And now the concept is well underway.
The new business Three Sisters Bridal will be separate to Ms Meyer’s Adelaide store and sells whimsical gowns, shoes and veils for local brides-to-be.
Catering for all different shapes and sizes the store will be stocking Australian and New Zealand brands only with fun and elegant styles.
For more information click here.
7. The Shed Coffee Drive Thru
A new coffee hotspot is in town, and the owner said Toowoomba residents could expect a unique and convenient experience.
The Shed Coffee Drive Thru serves lunch and snacks and allows customers to purchase fresh produce and pantry items for dinner.
Owner Ted Ellison said in a unique twist, staff members would come and take orders from and deliver the food to the customer’s car window so they didn’t need to leave their vehicle.
Partnering with The Paddock Darling Downs, the newly constructed space is located near The Paddock Butcher Shop, offering a one-stop-shop for customers.
For more information click here.
8. Hope Honey
Toowoomba’s hive for start-up businesses is buzzing and you could say one sweet new venture is the ‘bees knees.’
With a passion for agriculture for as long as they can remember Kristina and Tony Duff have had a dream to harvest their own raw honey since the pair first began dating.
Now husband and wife, the couple have made their ideas a reality and recently launched their new Toowoomba business Hope Honey.
After meeting a beekeeper at a party years ago, Tony was fascinated by the concept and soon began sharing his new-found passion for bees and honey with Kristina.
Since these humble beginnings the couple have been caring for their apiary Hope Honey for many years and now want to share its benefits with the community.
The couple said by sharing their honey journey, they hope to showcase the role bees have in pollination and food security for the planet.
For more information click here.
9. The Finch
Ever since Toowoomba cafe The Finch announced it would welcome diners into a second space, the anticipation has been high across the region.
And now the wait is over.
The Finch co-owners Dan and Edwina Farquhar said since opening the doors to their new Margaret St venue on Tuesday they had received a positive response from customers.
And it’s no surprise after the growing success of the local cafe since it first opened in 2015.
Formerly serving as the home of Weis Backdoor and most recently Charred, the warm and inviting venue has undergone a major transformation.
For more information click here.
10. Soap Box Co
Practising self-care is a powerful tool when your heart needs healing and after experiencing her own tragedy, one small business owner hopes to help others going through a tough time.
When Claire Shum, 23, first began making her own bath and shower products, it started out as a fun hobby.
But when she and her husband suffered the kind of the heart break that no parent should ever have to experience, their lives were turned upside down.
Devastatingly the couple lost their baby girl Abigail Grace at just nine days old due to a heart condition.
Claire’s dream to create a small business quickly evaporated as she began facing what was undoubtedly the most difficult time of her life.
So when an opportunity came along for the couple and their two-year-old son to relocate to Toowoomba late last year, they decided to go for it.
And while Claire’s wounds will never truly heal, she has now relaunched her business The Soap Box Co and hopes her products will help others who may be going through a tough time.
Handmade with love, Claire sells a range of bath and shower products from bath bombs and bubble bars to shower steamers, whipped soap and sugar scrubs.
The small business owner said while she hopes to expand and collaborate with other business in the future, she is currently a one-woman show.
For more information click here.
11. Trinity Rose and Friends
After attending a Dream Board session by Ten Thousand Dreams it inspired Christine Keenan to open her own small business Trinity Rose and Friends.
The creative space gives local makers an opportunity to sell their wares, share skills through DIY workshops and where the community can enjoy some craft activities too.
The store currently stocks candles, diffusers, sewn items, chopping boards, earrings and handmade goods.
For more information click here.
12. TE Plant Co
While the Covid-19 lockdown was a challenging time full of uncertainty for many people, school teacher Taylah Gill and teacher’s aide Erin Neill took the opportunity to turn their interests into a thriving business.
Creating unique market stall business TE Plant Co, the friends began experimenting with different planting techniques including lightweight expanded clay aggregate.
The concept also known as LECA replaces traditional soil in potplants.
Now the pair travel to markets throughout the Darling Downs to sell their range of products.
For more information click here.
13. Community Access Care
A dedication to helping others and change of career has led to one new disability support service in Toowoomba.
Teaching in classrooms in Logan and Bundaberg, Adam Thompson decided to follow a new path after finding his passion for support work.
After recently relocating to Toowoomba and with the blessing of owner Julie McCracken, Mr Thompson launched a Community Access Care team servicing the Toowoomba region.
He said the work was very rewarding and if he can help participants to live a good and happy life then he knows he’s done his job.
For more information click here.
14. Little Pistachio
It all started as a little market stall but in just two years successful business Little Pistachio has evolved into a fully-established business with a loyal family.
Going from strength to strength it wasn’t long until owner Sacha Von Blanckensee had every weekend booked out selling products and catering for events.
The local baker said the success comes from doing what she loves.
For more information click here.
15. Darling Fresh Smoke Haus
It’s heating up in the kitchen for a local business owner who has launched a new range of smoky tastings.
Throughout their careers, local food scientists Jeff and Karen Schultheiss have assisted producers from across the state to achieve their goals in the food industry.
But now the pair have launched their own venture – Darling Fresh Smoke Haus, specialising in natural, smoked meats.
And while the concept is new the food connoisseur’s passion for great taste and flavour is not.
Mr Schultheiss said he HAD always been interested in smoking foods which led him to develop the innovative and natural technique.
Cooked using beechwood chips to create light smoke, natural spices and mellow and sweet flavours, the smoked meats range features beef brisket, pulled pork and spicy jerk wings among others.
Working alongside Toowoomba-based chef Ross Clark to create recipes, the pair have also catered to special dietary requirements with gluten-free options.
But it’s not just meat-eaters that will have reason to rejoice with mushroom and plant-based alternatives also available.
Quick and convenient the products come sliced, pulled and in sealed packaging, allowing locals to have their smoked meats of choice ready and reheated in 10 minutes.
For more information click here.
Word count: 1724
