A POLICE raid on a northern suburbs home has left them red-faced and with a $1000 damage bill after officers broke down the door and cut the lock of a property they wrongly thought was a drug house.
The only items found in the Smithfield Plains house was cryptocurrency mining equipment, pictured.
The angry owner is now demanding answers and is considering legal action as he goes about repairing his home.
Acting on information from the public, police forced their way into the Smithfield Plains home to search for a possible grow room on Monday.
Instead, officers stumbled across an elaborate cryptocurrency mining computer set-up that requires a ventilation system. Cryptocurrency is digital currency that can be traded like conventional money.
In cryptomining, specialised computers search for and authorise crypto currency transactions by breaking complex mathematical equations to update what’s known as the blockchain, earning the miner small amounts of cryptocurrency.
Owner Rob Butvila claims he arrived home to find the “property unlocked” with “gates, doors and fence panels removed and broken”.
Mr Butvila filmed his reaction as he entered the house.
Uploaded to Facebook and YouTube, the video has been watched and shared thousands of times.
“(Police) used brutal and destructive force, kicking in doors … to find cryptocurrency mining computers where they expected to find a marijuana grow room,” he wrote. Mr Butvila told The Advertiser, police had become suspicious when they saw solar panels, security cameras and a ventilation fan in the window of the house.
But he said the house, which he is in the process of renovating, looks the same as many others in the neighbourhood. “The fan was to cool the cryptocurrency computer and the person coming in at night was me because I was doing the place up,” he said.
“To make things worse they left the place wide open and a hard drive is now missing and the security camera cable has been cut. It would be at least a $1000 damage.” An SA Police spokeswoman said no offences were detected during the search. Mr Butvila said he would be submitting quotes to the police for the damage and was considering legal action.GO TO ADVERTISER.COM.AU FOR MORE
CREDIT: BEN HARVY; MITCH MOTT
Word count: 371
