PREMIER Steven Marshall will deliver the keynote address on behalf of Australia to a US defence conference attended by the bosses of global companies, as part of a 10-day investment mission.
With the Federal Government in caretaker mode pending an election in just over a fortnight’s time, Mr Marshall, pictured, has been elevated to represent the nation at the United States Australia Dialogue on Defence Industries. It is an offshoot of the broader G’Day USA trade event and gala, which Mr Marshall attended in January. Speaking to The Advertiser yesterday, he said the address would spruik Australia’s capability in defence and space industries but have a pointed focus on SA’s unique appeal.
“You’ve got all of the major US and Australian defence prime (contractor companies) basically going to that,” Mr Marshall said. “Because the Federal Government is in caretaker mode, I’m essentially the senior Australian politician. We’re working with the Federal Government and the bureaucracy on the speech … and they’re allowing us to put a lot of SA content in.” Mr Marshall said the combination of SA’s massive defence program at Osborne and the emerging space and start-up businesses hub at Lot Fourteen in the CBD meant the state held big appeal and capability for private investors. He said ensuring that they were aware of the potential was key to creating new deals and jobs.
“We’ve got some very good relationships already, but these businesses are very large organisations,” Mr Marshall said. “You might have a really good connection with their machine learning people but there’s another multi-billion dollar division on cyber or blockchain or aerospace that still needs to be nurtured.” Mr Marshall’s tour will also include a brief pit stop in Hong Kong. He will be joined by two staff and one Defence SA official for the investment trip.
He will also attend the Sea Air Space event, the biggest maritime expo in the US, as SA gears up to lead Australia’s $90 billion Navy build-up.“We need to ensure that everything taking place at Lot Fourteen is being showcased on a global scale, to attract investment from major companies, create more jobs and drive growth,” Mr Marshall said.
CREDIT: DANIEL WILLS STATE POLITICAL EDITOR
Word count: 368
