Overcoming challenges posed by coronavirus will stand students in good stead. Lauren Ahwan reports
STUDENTS who forge ahead with their learning, despite the disruption caused by COVID-19, will be far more attractive to employers once the pandemic passes.
The Federal Government has pledged every Year 12 student will end this year with an Australian Tertiary Admission Rank, while most tertiary providers are transitioning to online courses.
Associate Professor Jill Willis, from a university technology education faculty, says students who adapt to the learning challenges ahead will find their proven employability skills in high demand.
“In years to come people will look at you in awe when you say ‘I was a 2020 graduate’,’’ she says. “Students who have been able to persevere and continue their learning – under these extraordinary circumstances – will certainly be celebrated and acknowledged.
“They will show all those 21st Century skills, like collaboration, resilience, creative thinking – things that were often just words but are now the reality of everyday survival – that will help you once you apply for work, or to go to university.’’ Willis advises students to record the skills they gain while navigating their learning, such as the ability to think creatively, collaborate and use technology to organise a virtual peer study group, to make them easier to recall for prospective employers.
She says students should also remember remote learning does not mean learning in isolation and to contact teachers for help if they are struggling.
IBM Australia corporate citizenship manager Jade Moffatt says those that remain proactive amid the coronavirus crisis by learning new skills will be highly valued by future employers.
The technology giant recently announced a range of online programs and courses designed to upskill people for jobs of the future would be available free, sparking a rush of student registrations.
In just the first month after coronavirus was declared a pandemic, worldwide interest in the Open P-TECH program, designed to teach digital skills such as cyber security, blockchain and artificial intelligence, increased sevenfold, Moffatt says.
“It’s not just about having the technical skills,” she says. “Equally important is your interpersonal skills.
“For many employers, being able to see that you have been very proactive in this time and can demonstrate that you’ve been upskilling means you will be very well regarded.’’ Taj Lee, 17, is completing Year 12 and is now also looking to learn new coding languages amid the coronavirus lockdown.“This is a great opportunity to display some proactivity and learn new skills, not just for self-development but also to potentially impress employers in the future when the situation improves,’’ she says.
CREDIT: Lauren Ahwan
Word count: 440
