Many teens never consider anything but university when they leave school. But as DAVID MILLS reports, growing numbers of uni graduates wish they had chosen a vocational course or gone straight into the workforce
THE dissatisfaction many Australian university graduates feel in regard to their tertiary education has been laid bare in a new report, with more than one in four saying they should have opted for vocational training.
The survey of 1000 Australians by education company Pearson, part of a global research project involving 11,000 learners, showed that 42 per cent of respondents who had degrees said their university education did not prepare them for their career.
If they had to make the choice again, 27 per cent of survey respondents who were graduates said they would opt for trade or vocational training instead of university.
Another 10 per cent said they would go straight to work after leaving high school, bypassing tertiary education altogether.
Fifty-eight per cent of Australian respondents ag-reed with the statement that universities were not teaching the right skills for today’s job market.
The South Australian Government is conducting a review of vocational education in schools, aiming to change the image of VET (vocational education and training) as a second-best or last resort option.
The Government says most of the fastest-growing job areas require vocational rather than degree qualifications, and that it is more important than ever to raise the status of technical qualifications to meet the demands of defence and other emerging industries.
It points to VET graduates having “very strong” job outcomes and higher average starting salaries than uni grads, and apprentices reporting the highest levels of wellbeing compared with any other post-school pathway. But perception of VET is just one of the barriers to realising its potential.
A Business SA submission to the review said fewer than one in every 20 students doing VET at school wanted to pursue a career related to their course, showing a huge disconnect between training, career outcomes, and industry needs.
The Pearson survey findings “point to the level of value that graduates think they’re getting from university,” Paul Wappett, chief executive of the Australian Institute of Business, said.
“In the past, a uni degree was a ticket to materially greater earnings than if you hadn’t undertaken a degree,” he said.
“It’s not the differentiator it once was.” Mr Wappett said there was a “legitimate criticism” that Australian universities were not teaching enough topical subjects.
But it was also the case that many big companies had wound back their graduate intake programs, which had previously enabled university leavers to adapt their learning to real-life situations.
“The (higher education) sector can do more to be much more contemporary to ensure that the degree a student earns equips them to be successful in their careers,” Mr Wappett said.
Curriculums should be updated regularly, he said, citing blockchain in finance and the use of big data in marketing as two topics in which industry practice was fast outstripping what was being taught in many university courses.
Pearson Asia Pacific managing director David Barnett told The Advertiser that while universities “are here to stay”, the report “underlined the need for the sector to innovate”. “Like many of our Western markets in the study, Australian respondents demonstrated an openness to alternative pathways to learning – vocational or technical training is often believed to be a better path than a traditional four-year degree,” he said.
“This sentiment is even higher among younger populations like Gen-Z and Millennials, who are beginning to feel that a formal education may not be as important as it once was.” Pearson was working with several Australian universities including Monash, Griffith and Adelaide to offer shorter, more intensive learning modules, Mr Barnett said.
“Students appreciate the way the model works,” he said.
“People want more bite size chunks of content.” The rise of so-called “micro-credentialling” and “stackable degrees” was a way in which universities were providing more flexible and workplace-specific training, and there was room for more expansion in that area, he said.
The report comes as Employment Minister Michaelia Cash announced a $1.5 billion Skilling Australians Fund to encourage young people to consider trades rather than just progressing from school into university.
“Young people, and their parents, need to see that … blue-collar jobs come with great wages,” Ms Cash, inset, said. “A university degree is not superior to a VET pathway.
“The Federal Government is encouraging high-school students and their parents to consider the options available to them.
“University isn’t the only option and we want to make sure young (people) explore opportunities and realise their potential.” Census data from 2016 showed almost a quarter (24 per cent) of youths and adults in Australia had completed a Bachelor Degree or above, up from 18 per cent in 2006.And 56 per cent of Australians aged 15 years and up now hold a post-school qualification, up from 46 per cent in 2006.
CREDIT: DAVID MILLS
Word count: 827
