Space journeys enriched life on Earth in profound ways
Since Neil Armstrong took one small step for a man and one giant leap for mankind 50 years ago, there are two answers to the question: what did we get from the moon landings?
Nothing and everything.
There were no great discoveries in the 382kg of moon rocks brought back to Earth by six Apollo missions. No new life, no new elements, no gold or silver, no diamonds from the sky; nothing we would value except, we found out later, maybe some water, deep down, which might help future space tourists.
Yet nothing on Earth today remains untouched by the extraordinary technological developments that spun off last century’s space race. How we live, how we communicate, the tools we use, the food we eat and the way we stay alive have all changed since, and in some ways because of, the Apollo program.
What the world achieved from the moon landing is a glass half-full or glass half-empty question. The answer depends on how it is framed. Is it about the actual landing on July 20 (July 21, Australian time), 1969, or is it about the whole program that covered 13 years, cost $220 billion in today’s dollars, and employed 400,000 at its peak?
In one sense, the moon program provided a moment as significant as any in the history of mankind. Throwing off our earthly shackles, we saw for the first time our planet hanging in space, a blue opal marble against the blackness of infinity, and it changed the way we think about ourselves. This new perspective highlighted our capacity to explore, discover and understand our place in the universe while showing our vulnerable smallness, our fragility and — so far — our environmental exclusivity among billions of stars and planets. Yet in another sense, it changed nothing. Since man set foot on the moon, wars have persisted in places such as Vietnam, Rwanda, Bosnia, Afghanistan, Iraq, Iran, Syria and so on. Poverty has persisted; hunger and homelessness have not been beaten, even by societies with the sophistication of the US.
Everyone who was alive then remembers where they were when men landed on the moon. Most Australians alive today were young at the time and many recall their school classes being suspended so they could watch grainy and often indecipherable images on small black-and-white television sets.
I was in a much more privileged position — seated before a giant cinema screen in an auditorium at the Mission Control Centre in Houston, Texas. I was one of an international press contingent of 4000, working out of the press centre at the Johnson Space Centre on the outskirts of Houston, reporting for the Sydney Daily Mirror and the Adelaide News.
Inside mission control, teams of technicians wearing the NASA uniform of short-sleeved white shirts and thin black ties sat at rows of soft green desks bristling with television screens, flashing buttons and microphones. At their centre was the capsule communicator (CapCom), a fully trained astronaut who spoke the shorthand of space.
Abbreviations were the argot of the mission: Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin travelled in the LM (lunar module) on its DOI (descent orbit injection) towards their history-making EVA (extra-vehicular activity), or moon walk. Our entire focus was on the flight. We were aware of complaints about the cost of the Apollo program and its blindness to the problems of poverty and inequality on Earth, but we were not distracted from our job of reporting on the minute-by-minute progress of the flight.
Everything about Apollo 11 was contained in a 400-page flight manual, specifying events across 195 hours, from countdown to splashdown.
The story was foretold in this manual and one by one, over eight days, we ticked off the key moments, all the time wondering what would happen if things went wrong. (We had to wait until Apollo 13 for that, when astronaut Jack Swigert told CapCom Jack Lousma, “Houston, we’ve had a problem here.”) We lived through the longest 10 minutes of our lives as Armstrong and Aldrin descended to the moon surface, dodging rocks and craters and landing six miles (9.6km) from the anticipated touchdown ­location with just 16 seconds of fuel left. “The Eagle has landed,” Armstrong said from the Sea of Tranquillity and we breathed again.
According to the flight manual, the astronauts were scheduled to rest for six hours after their landing. But natural human anticipation and earthly political propaganda possibilities came ­together to prompt a change.
The landing took place shortly after 4pm local time on the US east coast. An earlier EVA would coincide with US television prime time — a perfect opportunity to showcase America’s technological superiority to its people and the world.
We rushed to the auditorium for the moon walk and cheered and whooped along with the rest of the world (except China’s then 800 million people) as Armstrong stepped on to the surface with his garbled message of “one small step for (a) man; one giant leap for mankind”.
Our picture from the moon, via Honeysuckle Creek outside Canberra, was projected on to a large screen, but that didn’t make it any clearer. The graininess was merely enlarged, but we watched in awe as the astronauts kangaroo-hopped around the moon in its one-sixth gravity, saluted the US flag, and spoke to president Richard Nixon in the White House. It was a propaganda triumph, an extraordinary technical achievement and a significant marker on the course of human history.
After 17 hours on the moon, we again held our breath as the frail crew compartment of the landing module, with Armstrong and ­Aldrin and about 22kg of rocks and soil aboard, blasted off to a rendezvous with astronaut Michael Collins in the orbiting command module. Then the intrepid trio executed a perfect TEI (trans-earth injection) to set course for home, a splashdown in the Pacific, and years of often awkward celebrity.
In all, 382kg of rocks from six sites came back to Earth and, remarkably, 285kg remains sealed and untouched today. The American space agency NASA recently announced it would soon make more rocks available for study, using techniques unknown a half-century ago.
Of particular interest to scientists are volcanic rocks collected by the Apollo 17 crew that contain beads of glasslike substance thrown up from the once-molten core of the moon. These may lead to discoveries or deductions about the origin of the universe, but so far there appears to be no discernible value in the rocks. The moon does not appear to be a future mine site of earthly economic interest although some scientists still hold to the idea, floated in 1969, that the moon could become a space waystation to other planets.
If water, discovered near the moon’s poles in 2008, can be extracted it could be used to make oxygen and hydrogen fuel for rockets and take advantage of the moon’s one-sixth gravity as a launch pad for deep space probes.
Many questions about the meaning of the moon landings and where they will lead us remain as valid today as they were 50 years ago. Today, we are a lot more accepting — blase, perhaps — about science and technological capabilities, than we were in 1969.
Just as the first heart transplant in 1967 had stripped that organ of its emotional meanings — it is, after all, just a pump — the moon landing robbed romantics of their emotional attachment to the silvery orb of the night sky. It was, after all, just rock.
I kept a copy of The New York Times from July 21, 1969. It is truly a first draft of history, engrossing not only for its second-by-second, word-by-word account of the landing and moon walk, but also for its reflections on the deeper meaning of the event. The newspaper gathered the thoughts of scientific, literary, religious, political and economic leaders of the time, and today their predictions appear variously prescient or astray, simple or unfathomable, cynical or hopelessly ambitious.
Pope Paul VI exclaimed: “Honour, greetings and blessings to you, conquerors of the moon, pale lamp of our nights and our dreams. Bring to her with your living presence the voice of the spirit, a hymn to God, our creator and our ­father.” The Dalai Lama hailed the landing as enabling us to “visualise Earth people journeying to faraway planets, opening up communications and relations with beings out in space. But the most wondrous event would be if man could relinquish all the stains and defilements of the untamed mind and progress toward achieving real mental peace and satisfaction.” Charles Lindbergh, the first man to fly across the Atlantic, was a little more specific. “Along with this development of space, which is really a flowering of civilisation towards the stars, we must protect the surface of the Earth,” he said. “That’s even more important. Our environment on the surface is where man lives.” Pablo Picasso, the Spanish artist, had another view: “It means nothing to me,” he told the Times. “I have no opinion about it and I don’t care.” But care, bitterness and seething resentment came from civic leaders in the powder-keg southern US states fighting against segregation, poverty, hunger and homelessness. Charles Evers, the mayor of Fayette, Mississippi, said: “The billions of dollars being spent on this moon program means that it will be even longer before America begins to keep her promises to the poor. America needs to look at the Earth, not space. Before one more dollar is spent on outer space we must make sure that not one child here on Earth goes to a dinner table with no food on it.” Jesse Jackson, then an emerging radical leader, was withering in his assessment. “How can this nation swell and stagger with technological pride when it has a spiritual will so crippled; when it is so weak, so wicked, so blinded and misdirected in its priorities?
“While we can send men to the moon, or deadly missiles to Moscow or towards Mao, we cannot get foodstuffs across town to the starving folks in the teeming ­ghettos. While our astrophysicists can figure out the formulas that make the amazing trajectories and landings possible, we can’t seem to get nutritionists and physicians to the shanties and shacks of Appalachia. Thus, I bid us, temper our shouts of exultation as man breaks the fetters of gravity while being unable to forge the links of brotherhood.” Psychologist Kenneth Clark noted that man’s great achievements never came without a cost. The Great Wall of China cost thousands of lives, the Egyptian pyramids were built by slaves and the Taj Mahal was a thing of beauty that “blossomed from a surrounding dungheap of human squalor”, he said. But he hoped the moon conquest “may be an omen that we are on the threshold of returning to the unfinished business on Earth — that the power of human intelligence can be mobilised to address ultimate acts of human compassion”.
Certainly, in the past half-century that power of human intelligence has captured, converted, shaped and moulded in myriad ways technologies developed for the moon landing. Very few aspects of our lives have been untouched by the moon program. We can go far beyond items such as non-stick Teflon and tethering velcro, both developed for the space program, to see the impact it had on life on Earth.
Membranes developed to treat astronauts’ urine and return it to drinkable water are used in today’s kidney dialysis; snap-frozen foods came from the astronauts’ kitchen; flame-resistant clothing for race car drivers and firefighters came from the lightweight insulation ­required on capsules and moon- landing modules; cordless power tools were developed for spacewalking mechanics and a breast cancer early detection device was adapted from a digital sensor ­designed to detect minute amounts of infra-red energy. The list is endless.
But nowhere was the impact stronger than in the field of computing. When the Apollo program was in its early design stages in 1959, computers filled rooms. Necessity being the mother of invention, it was imperative that the size and weight of computing be ­reduced. This necessity led to the development of silicon chips and integrated circuits and follows in a direct line to today’s supercomputers and quantum mechanics.
Today’s global financial systems, from blockchain to credit cards, could not exist without the leaps of technology prompted by the space program. The same applies to communications. In 1960, the concept of a radio or TV device worn on the wrist existed only in Dick Tracy comics. Today, Apple obliges with a fashion statement added. The integrated circuits required for Apollo have morphed into the micro-electronics that connected the world and gave us pocket calculators, home computers, mobile phones, iPads and other devices connected at first through the sluggish internet of the 80s, then the 90s world wide web, and now the videostreaming, social media networks of today.
We see the impact everywhere. Could we live without the GPS system that once could identify a place on Earth to within a 2m radius and can now narrow it down to 10cm? Simply, Apollo, as a central element of the space program changed the way we live.
And it continues. Apollo made America cleverer and in doing so has inspired the world to follow. We can trace the spark back to the launch of the first satellite, the Soviet Sputnik in 1957. Then president Dwight Eisenhower rushed through congress a National Defence Education Act that poured massive funds into the US education system to strengthen the ranks of physicists and scientists.
These graduates were the backbone of the Apollo program, launched in 1961 by president John F. Kennedy with his promise to “land a man on the moon and return him safely to Earth”.
Their spectacular triumphs inspired a new generation. Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon, who became the world’s richest man, was five years old when Armstrong stepped on to the moon. His Blue Origin company is now developing rockets for travel to Mars.
Elon Musk, who was born shortly before the Apollo program ended with the Apollo 17 flight, has poured billions into Space X, which reuses its rockets for multiple launches and also plans a Mars mission. China, the nation that refused to let its people hear the words “The Eagle has landed” recently landed on the far side of the moon and proposes to build a radio telescope there, shielded from noisy man-made radio waves emanating from Earth. It may unlock the secrets of the Big Bang and the formation of the universe, answering the eternal question: Where did we come from?That would indeed be a giant leap for mankind, sparked by one small step a half-century ago.
CREDIT: MARK DAY
Word count: 2464
