Media release distributed by Medianet.

Historic Adelaide Images Auctioned in Australia's Most Significant Photographic Collection
The Rose Stereograph Company Collection: one of Australia's most significant photographic collections dating back to 1880, comprising more than 100,000 items is being auctioned featuring local iconic photos of Adelaide.
The collection features moments captured in time featuring original images of King William Street, Rundle Street, St. Xaviers Cathedral, and even Parliament House, along with many others. All images were uncovered in the spare bedroom of a home in Victoria.
"There are original glass negatives in this collection that capture the very first moments of not only local Australian but World history and some that may even change the course of history," said Mr. Lee Hames, Chief Operations Officer for Lloyds Auctions. "We believe this to be a World first, to offer these tangible original glass plates which rival any modern photographic resolution", he continued.
Noteworthy photographs include The Landing At ANZAC (Gallipoli 1915), Ned And Dan Kelly's Armour (taken at trial in 1880), The Duke & Duchess Of York And Daughter Princess Elizabeth Alexandra Mary, Phar Lap Winning The 'Melbourne Cup' 1930, Egyptian Pyramids And Sphinx, Franco British Expedition and many more.
The Rose Stereograph Company was founded in 1880 by George Rose and Herbert Cutts, in the early 20th Century. The pair formed a lifetime working partnership and strong personal friendship. Assisted by George's two sons, Herbert George and Walter, and later Herbert's son, Neil Cutts, the Rose Stereograph Company continued its operations for more than 140 years; and remains an incorporated Australian Company to this day.
The company was initially built on stereographs, but as cinema took over and stereographs fell out of fashion, The Rose Stereograph Company developed Australia's first commercially viable photographic postcard business. Specialising in postcards of iconic historical moments and significant landmarks, The Rose Stereograph Company became a staple of the Australian travel industry.
A statement from Stephen and Jeffrey Cutts, the current custodians of the collection, said "It is with great sadness that we say goodbye to a collection that spans five generations and 140 years. We understand that for these historically important pieces to rest with one family is to deny others the pleasure of their custodianship. It is for this reason that we have entrusted you as the new custodian of our treasured item, ".
"This has to be one of the most important photographic collections in Australia if not the world and that's why we have taken considerable measures and invested heavily in state-of-the-art technology in order to honour the owners of one of the most significant photographic collections in Australian history," said Mr Lee Hames, Chief Operations Office for Lloyds Auctions.
In a World first, Lloyds Auctions mint NFT's to offer blockchain proof of ownership on arguably the most significant photographic collection in our Nation's history. For the very first time, customers can bid for ownership on both the Lloyds Auctions platform and in cryptocurrency on leading NFT marketplaces for rare digital collectibles. Winning bidders will receive ownership of both the minted NFT, along with a tangible one-of-one original glass plate negative.
If you are looking to browse the entire collection and own a piece of significant history then head to https://www.lloydsauctions.com.au/photo
If you are looking to browse the historic photos of Adelaide then click here.
Media Contact:Kirstie MinifiePublic Relationspr@lloydsauctions.com.au0458 240 469




https://www.medianet.com.au/releases/release-details.aspx/?id=952782SOURCE: Lloyds Auctioneers and Valuers

Word count: 565
