Technology and eco-friendly are no longer mutually exclusive as homeowners get the best of both worlds There’s so many reasons to consider future proofing your home. Aside from feeling like you’re in one of the Back to the Future movies, thinking ahead to how we’ll be living in the future is a great way to protect your investment – and your lifestyle. The tricky part is knowing what is truly going to be a game changer and what is just a passing, but perhaps expensive, tech fad. If you’re truly thinking about the future, you will also need to consider the sustainability of your home, from the products you choose to build with to designing your house to take advantage of passive solar principles so that it’s around for many years to come.
1 WE LOVE THE IDEA OF BEING ENVIRONMENTALLY-FRIENDLY BUT WE ALSO WANT A HOME THAT’S FUTURISTIC. IS THAT POSSIBLE?
Gone are the days when being environmentally friendly meant sitting around the last beeswax candle in a rammed earth house while deciding how to use the last of the rainwater. While all those approaches are still valid, if that’s what floats your boat, these days, technology is leading the way when it comes to sustainable living. Smart home automation can control everything from what lights go on and when, to regulating the aircon before you get up or get home, making your home energy efficient while delivering you the most comfort when you need it. You can make changes and monitor consumption via your phone, allowing you to pinpoint the appliance that is consuming the most energy. Principal architect Clinton Cole from CplusC Architectural Workshop says home automation still tends to be a bit of an afterthought, whether people are interested in sustainability or not.
“I have clients who walk into our office and tell me that they don’t want automated curtains or flyscreens and then they throw them in at the end anyway,” he says. “But five years ago, PV cells (for solar panels) were still on the optional list for most clients.”
2 CAN WE FEEL CONNECTED TO THE ENVIRONMENT WHILE ALSO LIVING IN A ‘FUTURE HOUSE’?
When we talk about smart home technology, we often focus on virtual assistant technology, like Google Home and Amazon Echo, that use voice commands to control things like your choice of music or to turn the lights on and off. Home security apps have also become popular in recent times, while others have been seduced by products like the Peloton bike, which bring virtual exercise instructors into your home. But smart tech can also be used for sensor control to monitor watering your vegetable patch, to retract awnings or close windows when a cooling breeze becomes a strong wind. However, Clinton says integrating the technology to make it more user friendly is still a little way off.
“When you are getting stand-alone bits of hardware and you are trying to manage everything, it becomes quite complicated,” he says. “The individual manufacturers have their own separate apps and they’re not really using the same language. If you get a sparky who knows everything inside out and uses Wi-Fi technology, that’s helpful because it’s not DIY friendly.”
3 WE’RE CONSIDERING A MAJOR RENOVATION AND WE WANT TO FUTURE PROOF THE HOUSE. WHAT’S NEXT? In terms of technology, there’s a few things that are already becoming standard. Once they are set up, smart home specialists offer a range of systems that allow you to control everything from lighting and sound systems to security and aircon. Shop around for the one that best suits your needs, allowing your systems ad appliances to ‘talk’ to each other. Some things, though, are a no-brainer. Earlier this year, the CSIRO reported that Australia has the highest uptake of solar in the world, with more than 30 per cent of households installing rooftop panels. Most solar packages now have the option of battery storage and increasingly, electric vehicle chargers, which continue to gain ground. You can monitor how much energy your panels are generating via an app on your phone. Good, passive solar design is also the way of the future. Architectural project manager at CplusC Architectural Workshop, Hayden Co’burn says virtual reality (VR) technology is increasingly playing a part in that, allowing clients to ‘walk through’ their design before a single brick has been laid.
CREDIT: with Robyn Willis
Word count: 734
