A NEW $450m, 28-storey health and medical research hub will be developed on North Tce, towering over historic Trinity Church.
The site, dubbed Trinity City, will be the “bridge” between Adelaide’s existing $3.8bn BioMed City precinct – home to SAHMRI, UniSA and University of Adelaide – and the Royal Adelaide Hospital, its developers say.
The centre will be constructed on land adjoining the church – the state’s oldest – at 88 North Tce in the CBD.
The project, which has the “full support” of Trinity Church, will include a major restoration of the church and two other local heritage buildings.
The development was originally planned to be 15 storeys high but will now be 13 storeys higher and 60,000sq m – making it one of the largest buildings in the state.
Developed by 1835 Capital and Marlborough Capital, the site will include 173 electric vehicle carparks and a childcare centre.
1835 Capital managing director Jason Di Iulio said his firm was in talks with potential tenants for the 41,000sq m of office space that would be built, with the first tenants expected to be secured by the first quarter of next year.
“We’re expecting global AI (artificial intelligence)-driven health corporations looking to collaborate with the state and anyone else within the biomedical precinct, and also wanting to collaborate with the infrastructure at Lot Fourteen,” he said.
“We want to expand that and make it the medical Lot Fourteen of South Australia, which means jobs and future recurring income for the state.” The developers expect to start construction towards the end of next year. Mr Di Iulio said a 200-person auditorium planned for the building would hold educational talks and TED talks.
Trade and Investment Minister Nick Champion said health systems were rapidly accelerating towards a digital future involving genomics and AI.
“We are working with the largest pharmaceutical and digital health companies in the world to undertake research and cutting-edge product development in our state,” he said. Paul Harrington, from Trinity Church, said the project would “enhance our ability to continue our mission for decades and generations to come”.
CREDIT: DIXIE SULDA GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 354
