will.king@news.com.au PO Box 339, Adelaide, 5001
1. LATTE ON THE RUN TOKYO Olympian IZZI BATT-DOYLE is heading for the Commonwealth Games but with fellow professional runner, physiotherapist RILEY COCKS and business partner BRYN NICHOLLS has just opened The Run House coffee shop at 38 Charles St, Norwood. The well-qualified crew started a running and coaching group, RunAsOne, during the pandemic which quickly grew to a point they needed a base and, with coffee stops a big part of their training and social lives, figured they might as well combine a HQ, coffee shop and an outlet for sports apparel from sponsors. You don’t have to be an athlete to pop by for breakfast or a takeaway caffeine fix, though you may end up inspired for at least a jog. While Izzi runs in Birmingham and Riley is on hand to support her, The Run House will open Tuesday, Friday and weekends 7am until noon, but there are plans to expand.
2. RED FINGERS THIS is an odd one. BEC of Frewville was disheartened to come home and find a thief had dug up one of her lovely plants in a pot by the garage door. But weirdly, they only took one of the two flowering plants. It had been neatly dug out so does not appear to have been an animal digging it out. Was it someone needing a gift in a hurry? Someone who needed just one to complete a set? Aliens? Whatever, it was a selfish act that left Bec upset. Good communities are built on people doing kind acts like giving each other responsibly sourced flowers, not being jerks and stealing plants.
3. FLIGHTS FIASCO I LOVE Darwin but would not risk going there for a holiday just now after hearing THERESE KENNY’S plight. On July 15, Jetstar cancelled her flight six hours prior to departure with no alternate flight to Adelaide until late the following week. “No flight with Qantas until 20th July unless we pay $5k each one way to Adelaide!! Even if we diverted via Cairns, Sydney or Melbourne no availability in the next few days with any airline unless we fork out $4k+ each,” Therese lamented. She bit the bullet and took the bus – an epic two-day, two-night Greyhound coach trip down the centre with short breaks to stretch the legs in places such as Katherine, Mataranka and Alice Springs. If you are planning a holiday just about anywhere that requires a flight you might want to factor in being stuck at the destination if return flights are cancelled.
4. CORDIAL GREETINGS INFLATION is biting — VICTOR HIBOVESKY from Ardrossan says he has been a regular buyer of Diet Rite fruit cocktail cordial for a long time and says it was priced at $3 in recent years. A few months ago it jumped to $3.25. “Last week when I went to my local Drakes supermarket in Ardrossan, I nearly fell over from shock — same product is now $4.80,” he reports.
5. TEED OFF SINGLE-use plastic items such as straws and cutlery are now on the forbidden list, making KEVIN ALFORD wonder about the future of plastic golf tees.
6, FLAGGING INTEREST WITH Greens leader ADAM BANDT effectively banning the Australian flag from his press conferences, it was interesting to see Treasurer JIM CHALMERS this week fronting TV cameras with the Aboriginal flag in the centre behind him and national flag and Torres Strait Islander flags on either sides. The Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet’s website states the Australian flag “should not be flown in a position inferior to any other flag or ensign.” It says: “If one flagpole is higher than other poles, the Australian national flag should be flown on that flagpole. For example, when displaying the Australian national flag, the Australian Aboriginal flag and the Torres Strait Islander Flag on a flag stand where the centre flagpole is highest, the Australian national flag should be placed in the centre.” However, Mr Chalmers was following correct protocol, as it also states if there is a line of flagpoles the same height, the national flag should be flown at the far left. It gives the example: “If the Australian national flag was being flown with a state flag, the Australian Aboriginal flag and a local government flag, the Australian national flag would be flown on the far left (the position of honour), followed by the state flag, the Australian Aboriginal flag and the local government flag.”
WALK ON TURNS out those wrist-worn fitness trackers do motivate wearers to exercise more and lose weight. Researchers lead by UniSA PhD candidate TY FERGUSON reviewed almost 400 studies involving 164,000 people using the devices to monitor their physical activity. Their findings published in Lancet Digital Health showed they encouraged wearers to walk up to 40 minutes more each day resulting in an average 1kg weight loss over five months. Ty says there is some scepticism about their effectiveness, accuracy, and whether they fuel obsessive behaviours and eating disorders, but the evidence is overwhelmingly positive and underlines the value of low-cost interventions to tackle a growing epidemic of health conditions linked to a lack of exercise.
CREDIT: Will King
Word count: 865
