Whether it’s popping bottles in film clips or being photographed at boozy parties and nightclub appearances, alcohol has long been intertwined with fame – but that’s all beginning to change. An increasing number of celebrities are choosing sobriety over wild nights out – and they’re happy to tell everyone about it. So what’s behind this sudden cultural shift?
Celebrities have long been associated with party-hard lifestyles, so why are so many now choosing to live alcohol-free?
In decades past, A-listers made headlines for downing one too many drinks at an afterparty. In 2022, they make headlines for going sober, with some famous faces, including Jennifer Lopez, Blake Lively, Bella Hadid and Sam Smith, choosing to ditch booze in the name of wellness and their improved mental health.
According to Jonathon Moran, The Daily Telegraph’s chief entertainment writer, this recent sober shift among celebs is a welcome – but not unexpected – change. “Celebrities have realised that if they look after themselves, they’re also looking after their career,” Moran tells Body+Soul. “Lopez looks incredible for 52, but that’s not by mistake. She looks after herself and people respect that. In the past, you weren’t cool if you didn’t fit into that party lifestyle, but we’ve seen so many people be chewed up and spat out because they’ve lived to excess. It’s not a shameful thing to look after yourself.” Dominique Robert-Hendren, head of clinical innovation and digital health at alcohol support service Hello Sunday Morning, agrees and adds that society’s interest in mindfulness and meditation has also played a part in the sober surge. “People want to find inner calmness and peace,” she explains. “There’s a realisation that drinking and going to boozy parties doesn’t actually serve them all that well.” While Lysn psychologist Nancy Sokarno admits there’s been a noticeable increase in the number of sober celebrities, she wonders if the trend is really all that new. “In the past, we were limited to seeing what celebrities did based on paparazzi shots, so of course we only really saw the booze-filled parties,” she points out. “Nowadays, celebs can communicate for themselves via social media, but it does feel like it’s a growing trend.”
How are celebrities taking advantage of the sober trend?
Their preference for sobriety may be genuine, but there’s no doubt that celebrities – and the rest of the “sobercurious” crowd – are cashing in on the movement. “There is big money to be made in all of this,” notes Moran. “Wellness is a booming business. If you buy into Lopez, you’re not just buying into ‘Jenny From The Block’. You’re buying into a lifestyle.” Although Robert-Hendren agrees the sober movement provides celebrities with a “big business opportunity,” she doesn’t see it as a bad thing. “Hadid has her own line of non-alcoholic drinks, and I think [the desire] to fill that gap in the market is born out of celebrities wanting to embrace the whole idea of being healthy,” she tells Body+Soul.
Hadid (co-founder of beverage brand Kin Euphorics) isn’t the only celebrity to join the burgeoning market of alcohol alternatives. At the end of last year, Lively announced the launch of Betty Buzz, a line of natural, non-alcoholic sparkling mixers, and in January, Katy Perry (who goes through phases of not drinking) unveiled her new bubbly adaptogenic apéritifs brand, De Soi.
Could the sober lifestyle trend backflip? And should sobriety ever be considered a “trend”?
“It’s hard to say categorically, but I don’t think so,” asserts Robert-Hendren. “We have so much data available now that shows the impact alcohol has on our body, physically and mentally, and I think that’s why people are making healthier choices.” While Robert-Hendren believes sobriety will continue to become the norm, she notes the stigma attached to people who do drink will intensify. Sokarno agrees, adding: “For some, sobriety is a difficult way of life. Calling it a wellness trend can risk making light of the reality, especially for those who identify as alcoholic or are struggling with alcohol consumption.” According to Moran, the sober shift is refreshing, but he admits it doesn’t come without risk. “If you say you’ll never do something, people expect you to never do it again. Because we hold celebrities in high regard, that puts them in a very difficult position,” he cautions. “We all make mistakes, so we need to treat people with a bit more kindness.
Jessica Simpson talks about what it’s like being sober for four years, and counting, at body+soul.com.au
HOW TO SOCIALISE WITHOUT LIQUID COURAGE Dominique Robert-Hendren, head of clinical innovation and digital health at alcohol support service Hello Sunday Morning, shares her tips for having fun without alcohol
- PLAN AHEAD Prepare responses if asked why you’re not drinking. For example: “I’m on a break from drinking”, “I’ve decided to make health my priority this month” or “I’ve got an early appointment tomorrow.” - STAY PRESENT At an event, notice all the other people who aren’t drinking. Savour the experience of being clear minded. Introduce yourself to new people and engage.
- REFLECT The next day, reflect on your experience and remind yourself of the benefits of not drinking. This will help strengthen your resolve the next time you’re at an event.
CREDIT: STORY JAYMIE HOOPER
Word count: 876
