HEALTH UNCONSCIOUS MUNCHING IS MAKING US OBESE. HERE’S HOW TO FIX IT Unconsciously eating in a fog is increasingly recognised as a major contributor to the obesity epidemic in Australia.
Nutrition Australia CEO Lucinda Hancock says the pandemic has added to what was already a major factor in unhealthy eating and the significant overweight and obesity problem.
“The importance of mindful eating is greater than ever after Covid where a lot of people changed their eating patterns,’’ Hancock says.
“We need to be focusing more on mindful eating and that is paying attention to what, when and why you’re eating. It’s being able to understand signs of hunger and craving.” The advice comes as digital health company Noom released survey results finding 40 per cent of Australians have never taken notice of their eating habits.
Of the 2000 people surveyed, 60 per cent say they’re easily influenced by others when it comes to food so if someone they’re with is getting a takeaway, they will go along with it.
The survey found 28 per cent of Australians practise “fog eating” at least three nights a week and 63 per cent do it while binge watching their favourite shows.
Noom was able to categorise eating behavioural types into four types. Fuel eaters are the healthiest because they eat clean, nutritious food and avoid processed food 80 per cent of the time. They’re also more likely (36 per cent) to exercise daily.
Noom psychology chief Andreas Michaelides says fog eaters eat out of boredom and aren’t necessarily hungry while Storm eaters allow themselves to get too hungry or eat as an emotional reaction.
Fun eaters favour foods with no nutritional value that would be seen by Fuel eaters as an occasional treat.
“Understanding the four types of eating habits can help paint a clearer perspective on how you think about and consume food,” Michaelides says.
``We all experience these different eating types at different periods of time and it’s likely you mainly experience a mix of two or three eating types most frequently.’’ AFFECTING OUR HEALTH Music teacher Alana Randall, 31, says fog eating was severely affecting her health a few years ago.
Several hospital visits finally forced her, with the help of medical supervision, to realise her diet was causing harm to her body.
“There’s never been a time when I was a bad eater but a doctor asked me to keep a food diary to help identify the triggers to the extreme stomach pain and vomiting that was happening too often,” Randall says.
“It was a process of elimination and we discovered that, by taking away gluten and dairy, my symptoms went away too. It was hard at first but I got used to it and can see that it’s changed my life.
“There are no hospital trips any more and I’m living life to the full. “I was just a bit too relaxed with my eating and wasn’t paying enough attention.” The journey from fog to fuel, where she is now more deliberate in her food choices, has allowed her to live a healthy, active life.
THINK ABOUT IT Deakin University senior lecturer in behavioural nutrition Dr Georgie Russell says there’s a diverse cluster of thoughts and behaviours around eating.
“If you want to change your diet, you must understand what is influencing your current diet and what needs to change which is where eating behaviour comes in,” Russell says.
“That’s how you think about food, your choices around food. It’s whether you find food rewarding, whether you respond to food cues such as smells and social cues such as being a group where people are eating certain foods and then you do too. You may benefit from thinking about which environments you put yourself in.” Russell, who works for Deakin’s Institute for Physical Activity and Nutrition, says people can eat for emotional reasons whether that’s sadness, anger, happiness, or stress.
“Eating’s often not connected with hunger,” she says.
“There are different levels of awareness of hunger. Some people are not only less aware of sensations inside their bodies, they’re not aware of what’s happening in their bodies in the middle of a meal, so they feel full but keep eating.”
Help prevent your cravings ● Delay. The next time you have a craving, set your phone alarm for a 15-minute delay. Then ask if you’re still hungry.
● Distraction. Go for a walk or call a friend or engage in an activity that distracts your brain from the craving.
● Disable. Certain functions on your phone such as food delivery apps can be disabled so you don’t order food the minute you feel like it.
● Avoidance. People or places trigger you to make unhelpful food choices so avoid those social settings. Source: Nutrition Australia
CREDIT: CATHERINE LAMBERT
Word count: 800
