WELLBEING Urgent care clinics and cancer centres will receive billions in funding in Jim Chalmers’ first budget, but doctors will probably be disappointed by Labor’s call to not touch Medicare rebates.
GPs had asked for a modest 10 per cent lift in the Medicare ­rebate, with the sector’s viability is under threat after almost a decade of frozen rebates.
The Royal Australian College of GPs also wanted a new Medicare item for 60 minute consultations to allow doctors to be recompensed for providing complex care, but this was not agreed to by the Albanese government.
Despite touting the budget as the “beginning of the process of strengthening Medicare”, there is little to ­immediately ease the bulk billing crisis.
Labor has not spent more on hospitals than had been budgeted for by the Coalition, and has refused to bend to state government demands to increase its share to 50 per cent and scrap the cap on increases to commonwealth funding.
The Treasurer has chosen instead to direct big money – $787.1m – towards easing the cost of living for consumers, slashing the cost of medicines so that the maximum co-payment for general scripts of $42.50 will drop to $30 from January 1.
A GP grants program that had already been partly budgeted for by the previous government is the centrepiece of Labor’s commitment to general practice. Almost $230m over two years will support general practices, including Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Services, to invest in training, equipment and minor capital works to enhance digital health capability, upgrade infection prevention and control arrangements, and help practices achieve or maintain accreditation.
The government will deliver improved infrastructure, including new and expanded indigenous health clinics in locations with high and growing Aboriginal populations ($164.3m). The package will include a new Health Workers Traineeship Program ($54.3m), led by the National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (NACCHO), which will train up to 500 First Nations health workers.
There is a strong focus on Indigenous health in the budget, with funding to target chronic diseases disproportionally affecting Aboriginal people, including rheumatic fever. Renal dialysis services will be upgraded at 30 sites at a cost of $45m, providing for up to 30 four-chair dialysis units. Birthing on country services are also set to get $$22.5m.
The $750m Labor promised during the election to strengthen Medicare is in a contingency fund and will begin to be spent from mid-2023, informed by the outcome of a six-month taskforce chaired by federal Health Minister Mark Butler and made up of doctors and health experts.
Rural health is a winner in this budget, with $143.3m being invested over four years to boost workforce, rural medical training and innovative models of care.
Labor’s 50 urgent care clinics will cost $235m over four years and the commonwealth will chip in $375m for the Queensland Cancer Centre and $77m to the Bragg Comprehensive Cancer Centre in Adelaide. The mental health sector will be disappointed, with no money budgeted to continue the entitlement to 20 Medicare-funded sessions a year with a psychologist, and a $490m plan for mental health clinics not adopted.
CREDIT: NATASHA ROBINSON; HEALTH EDITOR
Word count: 520
