They are the women who have helped lead their communities, from Gympie through to Bundaberg, through another year of the pandemic, snap lockdowns, vaccinations, masks and public debate.
We are committed to increasing the visibility of women’s leadership in our community, and there is no end to the number of incredible regional women to celebrate.
They are CEOs, doctors, volunteers, principals, farmers, influences and everything else in between. Here they are, in no particular order, the Wide Bay’s 100 Women of Influence of 2021:
SABRINA WALSH
Gympie Hospital sits under the Sunshine Coast Hospital and Health Board of which Ms Sabrina Walsh is Chair. Sabrina has more than 30 years’ experience in consulting and senior executive roles in the health industry. She began her career in health as a clinical psychologist before moving into health policy, health service management and leading major digital transformation initiatives in health.
She recently led the transformation of technology services and the digitisation of one of the largest health services in NSW. Previous roles include: Chief Information Officer roles in Queensland and NSW; chief executive roles for public sector health services in Queensland; and executive leadership roles in mental health, aged and disability services. As Director for Mental Health in the Northern Territory, she led territory-wide policy development, strategic planning, resource allocation and evaluation of mental health services.
AUNTY LILLIAN BURKE
Aboriginal Elder Aunty Lillian Burke, of the Butchulla language group and with connections to the Kabi Kabi people of the Gympie region, is a Senior Fellow of the University of the Sunshine Coast, and a prominent educator on not only the past injustices committed against indigenous peoples, but positive social change for future generations.
She was among the top four nominees for Queensland‘s Senior Australian of the Year in 2019, and she was described as a tireless and inspirational champion of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people. She succeeded in her dream to have a monument erected in the heart of Gympie to honour all the known and unknown Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander service men and women.
Her university Fellowship further recognises her work encouraging young Aboriginal people to take on a university education. She has participated in 100 boards, committees and consultancy groups. She is president of Cooloola Aboriginal Services and Gympie State High School adopted elder and mentor, and takes a leading role Gympie‘s annual NAIDOC celebrations, Sorry Day and other significant events.
She has helped Aboriginal rangers on Fraser Island develop a cultural heritage database, part of her work with the island‘s indigenous Advisory Committee. She is an Elder of the Butchulla language group and has connections to the Kabi Kabi people of Gympie region.
DEANNE MITCHELL
The Director of Nursing/Facility Manager for Gympie Hospital is Deanne Mitchell.
JANELLE REID
Janelle Reid is Assistant Regional Director, North Coast Region Department of Education. She is Janelle is married with two children. She has been an educator for more than 35 years, having worked in secondary schools, primary schools, TAFE education and the early childhood sector. Janelle is now in her seventh year as an Assistant Regional Director with the North Coast Region Department of Education. She is passionate to support the success of every student, and values the quality associations she enjoys with school leaders in the region and across the state.
Janelle’s career highlights have included leading a local school as Principal, schools in her area being recognised for two Department of Education Showcase Awards for Excellence for their work in English and maths, a local teacher being recognised through Showcase Award for Teacher of the year, and the privilege of having the One Mile School Hall named in her honour. She aspires to leave a legacy of making a difference to the lives of children, her work colleagues, family and friends.
PAULA ROWLANDS
Paula Rowlands is perhaps the region’s longest serving wildlife warrior, and president of the Anarra Wildlife Rescue Gympie. The Australian Native Animals Rescue and Rehabilitation Association (ANARRA) group was formed in the early 1990s in response to the growing need for rescuers and carers for injured, orphaned and sick wildlife in the Gympie and Wide Bay region.
The Rowlands have established a wildlife refuge at 288 Greendale Rd, Glastonbury, a 40ha property adjacent to the Glastonbury State Forest. ANARRA has rescued about 3000 animals.
DOLLY JENSEN
Gympie Regional councillor Dolly Jensen is a passionate Theebine resident, former bank employee, union rep and long term Gympie advocate. She was elected by Division 2 voters of the Gympie region in 2020, the council seat previously occupied by Mayor Glen Hartwig.
Outspoken and courageous, Dolly is not afraid to take on her critics or call it as she sees it.
“I have stood my ground and negotiated against some very powerful bank executives to get a fair go. I will fight equally as hard for a fair go for our communities of Division two.”
ALISON JENSEN
Singer, songwriter and musician, Alison Jensen is a graduate of the Academy of Country Music an Academy X. She has worked with the likes of Lyn Bowtell, Catherine Britt, Kevin Bennett, Sara Storer and Troy Cassar-Daley.
Gympie musician Alison Jensen has been nominated for yet another award, the ICMA’s Patti McKinnon Encouragement Award, given to a young, rising artist in the Australian or New Zealand Country Music Industry.
Miss Jensen won the people’s choice at the Rise Up Showcase at Winton’s Way Out West Festival, and was nominated for the ICMA’s Patti McKinnon Encouragement Award, given to a young, rising artist in the Australian or New Zealand Country Music Industry.
JESS MILNE
Gympie Regional councillor Jess Milne was elected at the 2020 local government elections in Division 1 of the region, which includes all of the Cooloola Coast.
She holds the portfolio of waste, waste water and regulatory services with the council and, according to her register of interests on the council website, is the secretary/president of the Tin Can Bay Chamber of Commerce and Tourism, president/secretary of the Cooloola Coast Youth Activity Project Inc, president/centre manager of the Cooloola Coast Little Athletics and secretary of the Cooloola Coast Heritage and Historical Society.
FIONA KEABLE
Gympie born Fiona Keable created the Real Body Movement in 2017 with her husband Matt, which now has a tribe of 185. The Gympie born fitness industry success has presented on numerous occasions to the Functional Training Institute Game Changer community – a coaching program for coaches Australia wide on nutrition coaching and client care.
She and Matt won Game Changers of the Year for the Functional Training Institute Game Changer Program Nationwide – now international. Fiona has coached clients in USA live Animal Flow, and is Animal Flow Instructor. Together with her eldest daughter she runs Harness Your Potential Workshops to teach people how to uncover their values and set and achieve goals.
CARLEY O’DONNELL
Carley O‘Donnell has created a free women’s circle – Yvonne’s Circle – which meets on the last Sunday of every month. Creating a safe space for women and also allowing local women to share their passions or small businesses.
Carley is a co-ordinator at the Gympie Region Volunteer Centre, trains in Olympic weightlifting and is a coach at Stay True Health and Fitness
“My biggest goal is to help build a community that is inclusive to all and to inspire others to believe in themselves and to feel empowered.”
ALANA SCOTT
Alana Scott has been the principal at the Gympie West State School since January 2020. She has been a teacher for 35 years, and has taught in PNG, throughout NSW, Townsville and Mount Isa in Queensland.
What she loves most about her job is “the amazing and diverse range of opportunities teaching has allowed me and the people I have meet along the way especially in the Gympie area which has now become home”.
One of her greatest achievements was being chosen to attend an international education conference at Disneyworld in Florida. She was the only Australian teacher in the room of more than 3500 participants.
JEN NINI
Jen Nini is the editor in chief of Eco Warrior Princess, which has almost 12,000 Facebook followers. In 2021 she established an organic flower farm and is documenting her journey on Insta and YouTube.
MELISSA BOULLY
Melissa is the devoted mother of two teenage boys and owner of Gympie Saddleworld and Country Clothing.
Agriculture and horses have always been a huge part of her life and combined with a corporate career and small business over the years. Melissa is passionate about the community and helping as many people as possible reach their full potential and she sponsors local clubs and helps promote events as much as she can through the store.
“I want to continue to build awareness of the importance of agriculture and the benefits and enjoyment of horse sports. My horse career has been very broad across many disciplines, nowadays I have Australian stock horses for exactly the reason the Stock Horse Society promotes them as the Breed for Every Need.
“While my time is invested as a sponsor and rider at many events these days, I have also volunteered on many committees over the years. Creating additional local employment opportunities is also something I am proud of including taking on three school based traineeships this year.
“We are a team of 100 per cent women at Gympie Saddleworld. I hope I can help inspire and empower other women in the region to pursue their dreams and aspirations wherever it may lead them whether it be in agriculture, in business or in the saddle.”
KATE MAYNE
Kate, 40-ish, runs Piggy in the Middle with her husband, his cousin and wife on a 105ha property at Kilkivan, offering chemical-free and pasture-raised food for their customers.
“I grew up on a cattle property in central Queensland. I learnt from early age what hard work was and also how important love and kindness is. I became an early childhood teacher and then a mum (best and most challenging role) while supporting my husband in our contract harvesting business. I have three fantastic teenagers who I’m especially proud of. We moved to this area six years ago and with an amazing team we started our farm and small business, Piggy in the Middle, where we produce and sell ethical, pasture raised, chemical free meat and eggs direct to families and restaurants. My family is my biggest achievement. My goals are to find work/life balance and grow old surrounded by family.”
TANYA HAYDEN
Mary Valley College principal Tanya Hayden has run the P-10 school in Imbil of about 150 students since April 2019. She has a Masters in Education and has been teaching for more than 30 years across Secondary and Primary contexts as teacher, Head of Department Performing Arts, Deputy Principal and now Principal – Ferny Grove SHS, Ayr SHS, Morayfield SHS, Deception Bay SHS, Beerwah SHS, Beerwah SS, Moreton Downs SS and now MVSC.
She has also taught in England, Toronto Canada and Hong Kong. What she loves about MVSC is being involved with both primary and secondary students and school programs.
“It’s the best of both worlds. I also love the fact that MVSC is a community school and we are actively involved in community events and get fantastic support from our P & C and the wider community.”
JORDI ELYSE
Jordi Elyse, almost 21, is an advocate for young women who identify as having a disability. She created a social group called Tea Leaf Social where she creates monthly events for women between the ages of 17-35 who identify as having a disability. Jordi describes herself as having a healthy obsession for animals and a love and passion for helping people achieve their goals.
Her personal goal is to be independent and live on her own but her greatest goal in life is to be an advocate for others who identify as having a disability and to help them navigate their way through the NDIS to ensure planners and providers are properly informed. Out of 750 nominees, Jordi was placed in the top three for the Queensland Training Awards for hospitality.
JELLINA WHITE
Career banker Jellina is owner manager of the Gympie Bank of Queensland. It was in 1987 that Ms White commenced her banking career at the BOQ Gympie (where she was born and raised). In a male dominated industry she worked hard to climb the corporate ladder, working in numerous branches throughout the state until she became the only female Regional Manager in Australia, travelling throughout, NSW, Victoria and the ACT, working closely with new BOQ franchisees.
During her time with Corporate BOQ, Ms White was awarded the Managing Directors Award, Branch of the Year and Branch Manager of the Year.
With a young family and many years of Australia-wide franchise coaching under her belt she took the opportunity to return to her home town of Gympie in 2009, and convert the local BOQ branch from a Corporate branch to a franchise. Jellina is on the board of the Franchise Advisory Council for BOQ.
A massive believer of giving back to the community that supports her and her business, the chance to provide significant support to local clubs is considered a career highlight similar to the many executive awards given during her corporate career.
Ms White has also been awarded Gympie Women in Business awards of Top Gun Woman of Excellence, Employer of the Year and Business of The Year.
As the major sponsor for the Gympie Junior Rugby League and Junior Development Program for the past 11 years she has seen many improvements as a direct result of the monies she has contributed, and has helped support and raise funds for Little Haven Palliative Care, Valleys Cricket Club, Gympie Hockey, Bush to Beach Lions Project and Gympie Quota.
She also gives her time freely to talk to local primary and high school students regarding budgeting and banking.
EMILY LARKIN
Emily Larkin has created a Facebook page connecting 1.2k women in Gympie encouraging events and friendships/support for women across the Gympie region. Emily moved to Gympie in Jan 2020 and found the distance from her Sunshine Coast friends too much.
“I didn’t know many people in Gympie so thought I’d create a group for women to connect and make new friends. I’ve personally made some great friends from the group, and no many others have as well. We run events – coffee, dinner, walking group, movies etc and have women from all ages and walks of life.”
Emily is a manager in aged care. Her background is in Human Resources and law.
“Before that I founded a successful online florist on the coast and sold it after four years, one of those achievements was reaching 10,000 individual sales within three years.”
Emily also volunteers for the Gympie Girl Guides. She started as an adult leader and is now the district manager.
ANGELA TREICHEL
Angie Treichel works at AJT Legal, and is helping to pave the way to normalise compassion in her approach to business and at the same time as practising as a strong and trustworthy legal professional. She was admitted as a Solicitor in 2012 and launched AJT Legal two and a half years ago. She practices mainly in the areas of property law and estate planning and estate administration, where her passions lie.
Career highlights include being the first Queensland Solicitor to complete an electronic property transaction via PEXA in 2015. She is passionate about embracing technology and exploring ways to make legal processes easier for people. Her career goals include growing her team and continuing to service her clients while maintaining small firm charm and good old fashioned customer service.
“I am so grateful to live and work in such a supportive community, with an amazing group of women in business around me that continue to inspire and encourage each other.”
DR RASHIDA MALEK
Dr Malek has been a GP at Excelsior Medical Centre since 2011. Dr Malek likes to see patients from a variety of areas including paediatrics, geriatrics, adolescent population, men’s and women’s health.
Being an Obstetrician Gynaecologist, she has special interest in girls/women of all ages and related issues. She is a Supervisor and Medical Educator with James Cook University, Townsville, involved in training/mentoring future GPs.
DONNA GRIFFIN
Donna has been an occupational therapist for 20 years, working mostly with veterans. Donna is the ultimate quiet achiever and deserves recognition for her contribution to work in some of the most challenging paid and unpaid roles across our region. Donna’s work/advocacy saw a national pay rise of about 27% for OTs working with veterans.
Donna has also used her OT skills in a voluntary capacity with the local Access Advisory Committee over those years, to improve equitable access for all members of the community. For the past five years, she has been a supervisor for junior OTs and for OTs who have qualified in other countries and have chosen to come to Australia to live and work.
She has combined her interest in health and wellbeing, with her passion for motorbike riding, by becoming part of the Queensland leadership team of the Black Dog Ride. The Black Dog Ride is a national charity motorcycle ride, aimed at increasing awareness of depression and suicide prevention; and decreasing the stigma which is associated with mental ill-health. Donna always tries to tread gently in her world.
SHELLEY STRACHAN
Gympie Times editor Shelley Strachan recently became News Corp’s Wide Bay Editor, overseeing news teams and setting the news agenda in Gympie, Maryborough, Hervey Bay and Bundaberg.
As editor of The Gympie Times for the past five years, she oversaw its successful migration to digital and its continued growth in terms of audience, subscriptions and reach, with 36,000 people reading The Gympie Times online each week and more than 23,500 followers on Facebook, and is focused now on her goal of increasing and improving the local news coverage by The Gympie Times, Bundaberg News Mail and Fraser Coast Chronicle in their communities.
A mother of four and passionate advocate for her home patch, Shelley has earned multiple PANPA Community News Brand of the Year awards, and the coveted News Corp Achievements in Regional Journalism award.
SHARON O’BRIEN
The lifelong Gympie resident has been a key force through Little Haven Palliative Care and the region‘s Salvation Army, two organisations on a big roll over the past few years. She has been a huge influence in the life of husband and Wide Bay Federal MP Llew O‘Brien; he frequently credits her support to helping him through hard times and challenges.
Sharon has been on Little Haven‘s board for years and has helped the popular service gain significant and crucial funding from the Federal Government. She also played a role in the growth of the Salvation Army‘s Red Shield appeal, helping transform it from a door knock appeal to a successful breakfast fundraiser.
And these latest successes are but the tip of the influential iceberg. Mrs O‘Brien became involved in politics and the future of the region when the ill-fated Traveston dam was announced and played an integral role in State MP Tony Perrett winning the Gympie state seat in 2015, serving as his campaign manager
RUTH MODIN
Cooloola Coast businesswoman and pioneer Ruth Modin is the accepted “unofficial mayor of Rainbow Beach”. She has been a leading voice for the town and the Rainbow Beach business community since the 1980s, when she moved to the region with late husband Milton from Alberta, Canada.
It was in Milton‘s memory that Mrs Modin orchestrated one of the family’s best and most famous achievements, the enduring Rainbow Beach Family Fishing Classic – an event that typically draws hundreds of entrants and thousands of onlookers to the coast. Sadly the event has fallen foul of Covid again this year.
Mrs Modin was awarded the first ever life membership of the Rainbow Beach Commerce and Tourism Association for her outstanding work as committee president between 1986 and 1996.
ROSIE FITZGERALD
Kilkivan daughter and businesswoman Rosie Fitzgerald is pulling no stops in her quest to develop ageing-in-place services and facilities to one of the region‘s largest rural districts. As president of the Kilkivan & District Community Care Association, Ms Fitzgerald persuaded Landline to do an emotional piece on the plight of the elderly in Kilkivan who face being forced to move many kilometres from their homes.
Ms Fitzgerald owns an accommodation business, and some of her guests have later assisted the local care cause. The organisation she spearheads has recently purchased a community bus which is expected to start providing transport services later this month.
KYM BOYTER
In the words of Gympie Regional Mayor Glen Hartwig, you would not find a more passionate person than Kim Boyter in the Goomeri community.
The tireless volunteer and vocal community advocate is the driving force behind the Goomeri Pumpkin Festival, which draws almost 20,000 people each year and which has won it and Kym multiple awards.
SHARNA ROWLEY
Mother of two, wife and poultry fanatic. There’s a lot more to Gympie Regional Council’s Marketing and Communications Manager; Sharna Rowley. Sharna started her career in tourism before making the move to media. There she spent 22 years working with many iconic organisations such as the 10 Network. While she described this time as exciting and challenging she wanted to explore her passion for community service-based roles.
After accepting a job in Victoria, Sharna had the opportunity to directly work with community. During this time, she helped run soup kitchens, worked in suicide support, child services, refugee services and collaborated with mental health organisations like Headspace.
In July 2017, Sharna moved to Queensland and accepted her position as Manager of Marketing and Communications at Gympie Regional Council. Having the background and passion for community, working for council felt like the right fit. Sharna states that her favourite thing about her role is the opportunity to serve and better the community. ‘If I’m going to work hard, it’s got to be somewhere I feel good about. Somewhere that makes the community a better place’. Sharna’s advice is to grab every opportunity; ‘grab a hold of it and learn, if you stop learning you’re in trouble.’
CAITLYN SHADBOLT
While Covid restrictions continue to be cruel to performers, it is hard to keep Gympie‘s famous songbird down. Caitlyn Shadbolt, who still calls Gympie home amid her rising success, used her creative energy during lockdown to produce Edge of the Earth, and her second album Stages.
The 26-year-old shot to fame as a teen when she came fifth on reality TV Show the X-Factor in 2014, which led to an ABC/Universal Music Australia record deal the next year.
Two of her singles Maps Out The Window and Shoot Out The Lights hit number one on the Country iTunes chart, Airplay chart and CMC Video Charts.
She has been nominated for several Golden Guitars and won the CMC New Oz Artist of the Year. Her reach is far and broad with the pop princess featuring in numerous news and music articles and amassing 56,000 followers on Facebook and almost 33,000 on Instagram who she keeps entertained weekly
RENITA HENRY-MAY
Foodie Mumma Ren Renita Henry-May is an amazing teacher at Kilkivan State School, a mother and a successful blogger.
The creative and passionate businesswoman is the brains behind Foodie Mumma Ren -a blogging brand based on recipes and a love of food with an associated website and strong Facebook following of more than 17,600 people from all over the world. Foodie Mumma Ren was a finalist for the national 2020 AusMumpreneur Awards in the Author and People‘s Choice Leadership categories.
JODY ALLEN AND NIC MILLARD
Jody Allen and Nic Millard of Stay at Home Mum have been named as finalists for the 2021 AusMumpreneur Awards and are Women of Influence in the Gympie region.
Jody Allen and Nic Millard of Stay at Home Mum have been named as finalists for the 2021 AusMumpreneur Awards and are Women of Influence in the Gympie region.
Jody is the well known founder and chief editor of parenting website Stay at Home Mum, which she and her husband Brendan run from their home at Pie Creek.
The website brings in some serious subscriber numbers, clicking more than 5 million users during the height of Covid lockdown and spawning a social media empire embraced by mums around the country with almost 538,000 Facebook followers. Jody connects with thousands of women sharing her money saving and frugal lifestyle tips. She has launched four books (and counting) with Penguin Publishing with the 2017’s “The $50 Weekly Shop” becoming a bestseller. Today Stay At Home Mum is one of Australia’s biggest online mother’s networks.
COLLEEN MILLER
Colleen Miller is not only the face of Gympie Netball, she has been a powerful force in growing the sport in this region and took a tilt at a council seat at the 2020 local government election.
She continues to steer a strong Gympie netball community through the hazards of a pandemic and snap lockdowns.
THELMA REISENLEITER
Passion to volunteer at an event that her children were competing in soon turned into a lifelong commitment for Gympie and District Eisteddfod president Thelma Reisenleiter, who somehow, with the help of her dedicated band of volunteers, managed to overcome the hurdles of Covid and snap lockdowns to stage a Gympie District Eisteddfod in 2021.
Mrs Reisenleiter has been at the helm of the Gympie eisteddfod for decades, where hundreds of young performers compete, shine and grow.
JANET PERSAL
Fifteen years ago Fraser Coast business legend Warren Persal raised an eyebrow when his daughter Janet showed a keen interest in his hotels.
The Persal and Co. company had expanded from its thriving power transmission base to include hotel and equipment hire investments at home but Mr Persal had always insisted that his three children went out in the world “to work it out for yourself” before joining the family businesses.
Janet became a schoolteacher but took a keen interest in the two hotels remodelled by Persal and Co., the Beach House in Hervey Bay and the Carriers Arms in Maryborough. In true Persal style she learnt the business from the bottom up and now oversees the businesses on the home front while brother Brian manages the power line construction arm.
Her journey to become a widely respected, popular and successful business leader on the Fraser Coast has not been easy. She was shattered by the sudden death of her loved father and mentor in 2017 and worked tirelessly to meet the challenges of the Covid-19 epidemic.
She was able to draw on lessons learned early in life when she lived in caravans with mother Raelene and her brothers to be near their father as he battled through rugged country to take power to remote mine sites and settlements.
Hard work, honesty and a determination to get the job done were embedded into the family’s life.
Janet’s influence and respect also comes from embodying the Persal style of combining a tough, astute streak with compassion. Individuals have been quietly helped to cross bridges in hard times. The brands of the two hotels and equipment hire inspired loyalty through sponsorship of causes that made the Fraser Coast community a better place.
STEPH MULHERON
Hervey Bay mum and social media identity Steph Mulheron was a champion of the hit reality television show My Kitchen Rules in 2013.
Since then Steph and her husband Dan have opened wildly successful Fraser Coast businesses and still run Eat.
After a gruelling battle with IVF, they welcomed their daughter Emmy.
Along the way, Steph shared her inspirational story, giving other women facing fertility struggles a voice.
The couple now stars in their own television show, Travel and Eat with Dan and Steph.
The aim is to take viewers on an international food journey, while visiting regional areas across Queensland.
They have more than 108,000 followers on Facebook.
CECILIA HYNES
Celie is a Tinana Hockey Club stalwart, but decades before she helped start and develop the club, which will celebrate 50 years next month, she was a young rookie in North Queensland.
Her hockey journey started as a 16-year-old in Mt Isa, before a move to Ayr courtesy of her father‘s employment in the rail industry saw Celie start her first team.
“Then I came here and got involved very, very, very, much,” Celie said.
In 2018, she was named the Fraser Coast’s Sportsperson of the Year at 100 years-of-age.
The award recognised her long-term love for hockey, both for her beloved Tinana and the Maryborough District Hockey Association.
That involvement started with a knock on the door.
“Fifty years ago, a gentleman came to the door and said ‘I believe you have a lot of daughters, I want to start a hockey team’,” Celie recalled.
“That chap bowed out that year and I took over.
“I worked hard. I used to go around from house-to- house to get players.”
KAREN BOULTON
Karen Boulton hopes to one day represent the Heritage City as a government Minister.
The aspiring politician and Youth Ambassador for Maryborough spoke candidly of her experience overcoming disabilities and personal setbacks when she received the Young Citizen of the Year award at the weekend.
In 2019, she was named the Fraser Coast’s Young Citizen of the Year.
Queensland Youth parliament Member for Maryborough Karen Boulton will continue her work to have young people‘s voices heard by state politicians.
Queensland Youth parliament Member for Maryborough Karen Boulton will continue her work to have young people‘s voices heard by state politicians.
With the political experience under her belt, Karen said she hoped to establish a youth support centre in the Fraser Coast with the help of the region‘s local, state and federal members.
She made headlines last year after representing the Maryborough region at the Queensland Youth parliament, where she spoke on the introduction of cannabis.
KATHRYN CAMPBELL
Kathy Campbell, a board member of Wide Bay Hospital and Health Service, is an experienced non-executive director.
Her directorships include Brisbane North Primary Health Network and Uniting AgeWell.
Kathy also served five years on the boards of UnitingCare Queensland and the Gladstone Area Water Board prior to moving to Canada.
Kathy held executive roles in the health sector, including with public and private providers, consulting
firms and vendors. She currently runs her own boutique digital health consulting firm.
She is a qualified accountant, a Fellow of the Australian Institute of Company Directors, a Fellow of the Australasian Institute of Digital Health and inaugural Chair of their Precision Health Community of Practice.
Kathy has also completed Leadership Strategies for Information Technology in Health Care at Harvard University.
NANCY BATES
Best known as the former editor of the Fraser Coast Chronicle, she was the driving force behind the region‘s namesake and some of its greatest legacies.
In 1996 she was Queensland Telstra Businesswoman of the Year and in 2015, she was named Fraser Coast Citizen of the Year.
Using “her skills as an author to promote the city”, Ms Bates published a book about Maryborough‘s Mary Anne, the first steam train to be built in Queensland – a replica can often be seen running joy rides through Queen’s Park – and is patron of the Proud Marys, a group which promotes Maryborough as the birthplace of Mary Poppins author P.L. Travers.
The group hosts the Mary Poppins Literacy Awards which, as a result of Ms Bates‘ promotion, attracts entrants from across the state.
The crowd heard that through Ms Bates‘ efforts, $60,000 was raised in six weeks to have the Mary Poppins statue built in Richmond St. She was also recognised for her current efforts in having a fitting memorial of Maryborough war hero Duncan Chapman, the first Anzac shore at Gallipoli, built in time for the Anzac Centenary celebrations.
Ms Bates said Australia and Maryborough had been “very good” to her and thanked her family for ”putting up with an awful lot”, acknowledging that once she had a project in mind, she did ”tend to go a little overboard”.
She also encouraged the community to love their region, take the time to see and explore it, contribute to it and “never forget to have fun while you are doing it”.
KASEY HANNANT
Kacey’s career has been with the Department of Education for 20 years, having experience in roles such as administration officer, executive services officer, payroll services officer, senior finance officer and OneSchool regional liaison officer.
She is currently a business manager at Urangan State High School as well as the State Vice President for the School Business Managers Association of Queensland as well about being on the Hervey Bay Chamber of Commerce committee.
Kacey likes to ask for forgiveness rather than permission and likes to cut as much red tape as possible.
Her speciality is streamlining processes and creating wicked checklists.
She also loves to coach, support and mentor other school business managers throughout the state.
XANTHE O’CONNOR
In 2020, Xanthe O’Connor achieved her ultimate goal with the creation of the Hearts and Hands Signing Choir.
It’s an all-inclusive, all abilities choir that welcomes people from all walks of life and has provided a sense of community among the group.
She recently won the Individual Achievement Award for Autism Queensland’s “Creative Future” Awards, this has also seen her efforts recognised in the media.
She is an inspiration to her peers and the broader community for her enthusiasm and “go get it” attitude.
She confidently welcomes everyone to choir every Monday night, marks the role and participates in all choir decisions.
Xanthe’s role with the choir is entirely of a volunteer capacity.
She recently graduated Hervey Bay Special School as 2020 School Captain.
During her last year of education Xanthe was able to manage a full school schedule, intensive speech therapy and choir rehearsals and performances.
Xanthe is also a committee member of Special Needs Fraser Coast.
This year she was named the Young Cultural Award winner at the annual Fraser Coast Australia Day Awards.
HEATHER JEPPESON
For more than 40 years Heather Jeppeson has been a driving force in organising entertainment for the community.
Heather is the ultimate quiet achiever in this field, never in the limelight, just making it happen and raising thousands of dollars for those in need.
Heather is the epitome of a true organiser- she has a vision and proceeds to organise singers, bands, raffles, catering and venues, selects the appropriate charity for the benefits and then gets on with it.
She is a great leader and fantastic role model for the younger generation.
For the past six years Eureka Country Music Group has been her base and during this period thousands of dollars have been raised by her efforts.
DEBORAH CARROLL
Deborah, the chief executive of Wide Bay Hospital and Health Service, has worked in the public health sector for almost 40 years and has held leadership roles across a number of health facilities throughout Queensland.
She has undertaken significant postgraduate studies, including a Masters of Health Administration and Information Systems, and a Graduate Certificate in Health Service Planning.
Deborah completed her general nurse training in 1981 at Mackay Base Hospital, where she was acknowl­edged both for outstanding theoretical knowledge and nursing care.
She later gained a Bachelor of Health science (Nursing) with Distinction from Central Queensland University in 1995, a Graduate Diploma in Emergency Nursing and endorsement as a Rural and Isolated Practice registered nurse.
Deborah joined WBHHS in 2006, as Executive Director of Nursing and Midwifery Services. She was appointed Chief Operating Officer in 2014, a role that was renamed Executive Director of Acute Hospital and Community Services in 2018.
In 2008, Deborah was awarded a Queensland Health Australia Day Award for exceptional leadership and re­storing community confidence, and again in 2014 for her exceptional leadership during the 2013 floods.
In 2018, she was part of the team recognised at the WBHHS Excellence Awards for the highly successful Procurement Optimisation Project, and in 2020 she has played a leading role in the organisation’s response to Covid pandemic.
DANIELLE ASKEW
Danielle harnessed the power of a good joke and turned it into a beam of positivity for more than a million people.
Last year when the state went into lockdown during the COVID-19 pandemic, Danielle donned a costume, created a Facebook page called ‘Bin Isolation Outing’ and posted a photo of herself taking out her garbage dressed as Elsa from Frozen.
Soon, hundreds of thousands of others from across the world were posting similar photos, using the page as a way to connect while they were socially isolated.
She brought together a global community united by fear of Covid-19 but a need for reducing the social isolation attached.
Since creating the page Danielle has spent thousands of hours moderating the page.
She put Hervey Bay in the global spotlight as the page exploded, gaining national and international media attention.
On the page people discussed visiting the region after finding out about it through the page.
GAIL GAULD
Gail Gauld has given 25 years of exceptional service to the Brooweena community.
In May 1995, Gail was elected secretary of the Woocoo Historical Society, a position she held for the next 25 years.
For a period she held the treasurer’s position when there was no-one else to take on the role and is now president of the Society.
Many times the Woocoo Historical Society has struggled to fill positions on its committee but the tenacity and sacrifice of Gail has kept the organisation running.
She has done the work associated with other positions in the Society when the person was unable to fulfil their duties.
Gail was the secretary of the Teebar Management Committee and Teebar Hall caretaker for nine years.
On November 15, 2020, she was awarded the prestigious Centenary Medal by the Royal Historical Society of Queensland for contributing exceptionally to the history and heritage of Queensland, the same day she was awarded Life Membership of the Woocoo Historical Society.
All this organising is done without a mobile phone or computer, with Gail writing everything in her neat longhand or beautiful printing, including meeting minutes, invitations, thank yous, funding applications, and drafts for publications.
CARMEL MURDOCH
From dressing up as Mary Poppins, the Merry Widow or Mary Heritage, Carmel has taken on a number of roles to promote the region.
Along with her efforts to dress up and promote the town, Carmel is also a member of the Proud Marys, the Maryborough Zonta Club and the local historical society and supports many other local causes.
Her roles as Marys have brought her a lot of joy and community recognition and she has earned legendary status in the local community.
In 2013, Mrs Murdoch was named Fraser Coast Citizen of the Year by the council, an accolade she said left her “tickled Pink”.
After announcing her retirement this year, the council is looking for someone new to take on the role.
Hers will certainly be big shoes to fill.
PEITA BATES
Since starting her career just four years ago, Maryborough High School teacher Peita Bates has developed and delivered a variety of programs covering grades five through to 12 including a ‘Coding as a Language’ curriculum, a specialist Coding Academy, a ‘Robocademy’ extra-curricular program and an outreach program to local primary schools delivering coding and technology activities.
Peita has achieved outstanding levels of success for herself, students, school and community by understanding student needs and community expectations. She has the ability to build rapport with students in a way that works for them.
Her work have been recognised by organisations such as Women In Technology and EduTech, highlighting the outstanding work of regional schools and communities and obtaining sponsorships/partnerships for major events.
Peita’s strategies have successfully drawn in students, kept them engaged and motivated to achieve.
Peita continues to conduct significant research into new technologies to ensure the information being delivered to students is of the highest quality.
FIONA SEWELL
Fiona has more than 30 years’ experience in nursing, more than 15 of which has been spent in senior leadership roles.
She completed her nursing training at Maryborough Base Hospital in 1990 before gaining further experience in other Queensland public and private healthcare facilities.
Fiona moved back to the Wide Bay region in 1994, joining Bundaberg Hospital as a registered nurse. Since then her career trajectory has carried her swiftly through a diverse range of senior nursing roles at both clinical and managerial levels.
In 2019, Fiona led the trial of Ready Every Day Nursing, an innovative approach to the provision of everyday nursing excellence, through a model that combined daily nursing standard evaluation with tailored growth and development support. The outcomes have demonstrated significant and ongoing improvement in nursing standards.
Fiona has also been instrumental in providing leadership and direction throughout WBHHS’s response to COVID-19. As the Operations Officer in the response, she led the Operations Management Team, developing and implementing vital stewardship in Infection Control and Personal Protective Equipment, along with providing leadership and support to all COVID-19 portfolio holders.
TANYA STEVENSON
Currently the chief executive officer of the Hervey Bay Neighbourhood Centre, Tanya is renowned for her compassion for the community and ability to deliver on projects.
Tanya has an undergraduate in Psychology and a Masters in Education.
She was named Young Business Person of the year in 2012 on the Fraser Coast and Young Alumni of the year for USQ in 2013.
Tanya has led the strategic expansion of the HBNC to include the implementation of the Fraser Coast Community Social Plan and the development of the Neighbourhood Hive and Urangan Wellness Centre as well as their first social enterprise The Wandering Teapot.
Tanya is a long-term community member of the Fraser Coast and has worked in the community sector for over 20 years.
SANDRA HOLEBROOK
With more than 20 years of commercial business experience, Hervey Bay Chamber of Commerce president Sandra Holebrook has acquired a wide-reaching portfolio of skills and experience forged from holding financial, operational, and general management and director roles in a diverse range of sectors including retail, distribution, wholesaling, and manufacturing.
Sandra is passionate about using her unique skills in developing, supporting, and assisting Hervey Bay‘s business community to flourish.
JILL PERRY
Jill Perry is a pioneer of the Hervey Bay whale watching industry.
For 30 years, she and her husband Brian nurtured an industry that would end up giving employment to hundreds of people across the region.
The industry they helped build is now worth an estimated $90 million per year to the region’s economy.
The Perrys retired in 2017, selling their business to their friend, John Peaker.
Brian sadly passed away in July last year. Jill continues to make a valuable contribution to the region’s tourism board and was a key player in getting Hervey Bay officially recognised as the whale watching capital of the world.
KARLA STEEN
Hervey Bay’s Karla Steen, board member at Wide Bay Hospital and Health Centre, is a communications and marketing strategist and social program developer with extensive experience within media, community and economic development organisations, government agencies and industry groups.
As a former journalist, Karla worked across radio and television outlets in north Queensland including ABC Radio and Channel 10. She then served as a Queensland government ministerial media Adviser across various portfolios such as Emergency Services, Child Safety and Communities.
In recent years, Karla developed a number of regional programs aimed at supporting women in areas of under-representation within STEM, small business, mining and sport.
Karla co-founded the award-winning IAM (Inspiring an Active Mackay) program which was named the winner of the ‘Inclusion’ category for the Queensland Government’s ‘Start Playing, Stay Playing award for Excellence’ in 2018.
She now works with the Hervey Bay Neighbourhood Centre to deliver programs aimed at addressing social isolation and improving mental health outcomes as part of the COVID-19 recovery and is a Committee Member of both the WBHHS Board Audit & Risk Committee and Safety & Quality Committee.
As a cancer survivor, Karla is a passionate advocate for regional and rural health service delivery.
Karla previously served on the Mackay Hospital and Health Service Board and recently completed research into regional participation on government boards.
APRIL SPADINA
Her works adorn the streetscapes of Maryborough, admired by locals and visitors alike.
A charcoal artist based in the beautiful Fraser Coast in Queensland, April Spadina has been a productive artist and creative for most of her life, studying art at James Cook University and playing with many mediums until she fell totally in love with charcoal.
April developed her own loose style, recognisable by her animals with enchanting eyes and playful images of giraffes and primates, along with any animal that pulls her heart strings.
Having sold many pieces both nationally and internationally, April has had a number of exhibitions and continues to be heavily involved in community arts projects and local street art.
AUNTY FRANCES GALA
Galangoor Duwalami Primary Healthcare has been providing for our community since 2008.
But while the first clinic officially opened then, the ambitious dream took seed long before that.
It was the drive of Aunty Frances Gala and Aunty Coralie Ober, and their deep concerns for the Indigenous communities of Hervey Bay and Maryborough that marked the beginning of an incredible journey as far back as 2002.
“This has been the dream, the strategy of the Korrawinga Aboriginal Corporation for 30 years but we had a great many other things to get going like housing, jobs and the resurrection of language and culture,” they said.
Galangoor Duwalami is now the second largest Aboriginal Medical Service in Queensland with nearly 50 staff.
KIM CARTER
Kim Carter, principal of Carter Cooper Realty, is an industry professional who has been achieving record results in the Hervey Bay property market for more than 20 years.
In addition to this Kim has a hands-on approach in ensuring that the Hervey Bay real estate market is represented strongly on a state and national level.
Kim currently holds the position of the Zone Chair for the Real Estate Institute of Queensland and is an executive committee member for the Fraser Coast Property Industry Association.
Kim is a trustworthy and highly educated agent and with the support of a team of administrators, experienced assistants and marketing professionals ensures she offers superior service like no other.
Kim’s approach is hands on, offering expert advice through the entire sales process to go above and beyond to achieve outstanding results for their clients.
As a licensed real estate agent armed with superior market knowledge.
BARB HOVARD
She’s served as the mayor of Maryborough and worked tirelessly for her region.
So it was no surprise when, after years of volunteer work and local government service as mayor and then a councillor, Maryborough‘s Barbara Hovard was awarded an Order of Australia Medal.
“Volunteering has been part of my life since I was a schoolgirl,” she said.
Ms Hovard has volunteered for the Community Access Bus, Maryborough and Wide Bay Burnett Historical Society, Cancer Council and Rotary International, along with many others.
She also served as the deputy chair of the Wide Bay Hospital and Health Service.
Ms Hovard plans to spend the rest of her life in the heritage city.
LINDA HARRIS
The former Tiaro mayor has been a tireless advocate for her community.
But even after dedicating years of her life to public service, Linda continues to advocate for Tiaro and fight for the best for the township.
With the town set to be bypassed in coming years, Linda, has been part of the team making sure Tiaro will continue to thrive through the changes.
She is part of the Community Working Group helping to produce a plan to reinvent the town in a post-bypass world, with the goal of ensuring no businesses will have to close.
ANNE MADDERN
A woman with a huge passion for Maryborough, Anne Maddern has served the city both as a member of the State Government and on the council.
She was elected to the council in 2016 after serving as State Member for Maryborough from 2012 to 2015.
During her time as councillor, Anne was committed to making the outlying parts of the region felt included.
“When I was elected I realised a lot of the smaller communities felt isolated and as though they were not a part of the region,” she said.
“My goal was to make sure they were included and make a connection between them and their council.
“They have most of the same issues as the general population like roads, rates, garbage and water.
“There is still work to do and I am very happy with the progress and I would like to see it continue on.”
When she made the decision to retire, Anne said
she was proud of setting up the small communities advisory groups which meet quarterly and provide training and information sessions.
VERONICA BIRD
The chair of the Butchulla Aboriginal Corporation, Veronica Bird, has been among those who have fought for native title rights for decades.
The organisation has celebrated big wins in recent times, including the opening of an interpretative centre on Fraser Island, to which is had lent its knowledge and culture, and the renaming of Fraser Island to its traditional name, K’gari.
Veronica has been a strong leader for the indigenous community and spoke about the recent achievements after the island was renamed.
The return of the traditional name was the culmination of a drawn-out fight on the part of Traditional Owners.
“(This has been) a long-time call from Butchulla Elders, many of whom were present,” she said.
“Some of them, unfortunately, did not to see this come to fruition like so many of our battles, because it‘s such a long journey.”
JOYCE CHORNY
For years, Joyce Chorny was the driving force behind Hervey Bay Community Centre.
Now retired, Joyce poured her heart and soul into it for 20 years.
In 2000, it became obvious the small spaces that housed the centre were not big enough.
Joyce dreamt of a big new purpose-built centre.
Over the ensuing decade, she campaigned tirelessly through fundraising and lobbying to bring the new centre to fruition.
The centre provides a range of services to the community and is part of Joyce’s lasting legacy.
JADE WELLINGS
Motherhood was the inspiration behind Jade Wellings’ council candidacy last year.
The mother of three secured Division Five with 60.36 per cent of the vote and was the only woman to be elected.
Jade’s resume includes a business degree and significant management experience in real estate, fitness and a network of worker’s and holiday accommodation, and says that “regardless of gender it is an absolute honour to be representing my community and I am humbled by the support I received during the election”.
She is however, acutely aware of the position she finds herself in.
“I feel a responsibility to women, and in particular young women, to be a good leader, a strong voice and to demonstrate that you can be a good mother and also do meaningful work at the same time,” she said.
FIONA FOLEY
Butchulla author and artist Fiona Foley recently won the Queensland Premier’s Literary award for her book, Biting the Clouds.
The book explores the use of opium to coerce labour from indigenous people at the turn of the 20th century, told in dialogue between Foley’s art and text.
The prize recognises “an outstanding work, by an Australian writer, focused on documenting, discussing or highlighting a uniquely Queensland story.”
The book is an extension of Foley’s doctorate – awarded in 2018 – which she said was part of “a lifelong search” to find out what happened to the Badtjala people of Fraser Island.
Biting the Clouds examines the effects on Badtjala people of the ideology and actions of Archibald Meston, Protector of the Aborigines from 1898 to 1903, and the Anglican Church that ran the missions on which they were sequestered, coupled with the use of opium as a means of “payment” for indigenous labour.
CARLIE WALKER
Fraser Coast Chronicle senior reporter Carlie Walker is part of the furniture here.
She‘s based in Granville on the banks of the Mary River.
Her passion topics include social issues reporting including on the Cashless Debit Card, youth suicide, Butchulla history and Fraser Island’s dingoes.
Carlie is known for the care and empathy she shows when people let her into their lives to tell their stories and she‘s broken some of the biggest stories in the Chronicle’s recent history.
JESSICA GREWAL
News Corp Australia’s Wide Bay News Director Jessica Grewal was a Hervey Bay High girl, who was lucky enough to score a full cadetship back when regional newsrooms still offered accredited four-year on-the-ground training stints without requiring you to ever step foot in a university lecture theatre.
A bustling newsroom led by the legendary Nancy Bates was an enviable training ground for budding journos.
Wise sub-editors weren’t afraid to tell you when something didn’t cut it but were also there to help guide you through confronting crimes and car accidents, including one where a former classmate had been killed, and a series on the ice epidemic in local high schools which resulted in a Clarion Award for Queensland Young Journalist of the Year.
Like most young reporters she had her eyes set on the city and, in 2011, she was selected to launch APN‘s Sydney Newsdesk, reporting on the court cases and political debates which were shaping the regions where the company had NSW titles from Coffs Harbour to the Queensland border.
Among these were articles which scored nominations in the Kennedy Awards for NSW Court Reporter of the Year, Most Outstanding indigenous Affairs Reporting and Young Journalist of the Year.
She went on to become the Business & Regional Affairs Reporter for the Australian – a role which took her around Queensland covering everything from the collapse of Clive Palmer’s Queensland Nickel in Townsville to the search for the elusive night parrot on a cattle station in the outback.
Jessica returned to the Fraser Coast Chronicle as deputy editor then took the reigns as editor in early 2019.
She was recently promoted to the role of Wide Bay News Director, overseeing the Fraser Coast Chronicle, Gympie Times and Bundaberg NewsMail alongside Wide Bay Editor Shelley Strachan.
BROOKE FLOOD
The officer in charge at Hervey Bay‘s police station believes major changes in the service have helped validate women’s presence within the force.
Speaking to the Fraser Coast Chronicle on International Women’s Day 2020 Senior Sergeant Brooke Flood said she believed she would not have been able to secure the role she has now when starting her career 20 years ago.
“During my career I have often been the only woman stationed at a particular watch-house, but a lot has changed in that time. We are all equal now,” Sen-Sgt Flood told the Chronicle.
She said the appointment of Katarina Carroll as Queensland Police Commissioner was proof women could climb to any position within the ranks.
Sen-Sgt Flood has worked as an officer in charge for about eight years in total at several stations. “Being a police officer is good, honest work,” she said.
She encouraged young women who enjoyed assisting their communities to consider joining the service.
“The job is something you can do and really make a difference,” Sen-Sgt Flood said.
The Bay‘s top cop said the public often preferred to deal with female officers.
“This is especially the case with domestic violence and sexual abuse cases where the victims are generally women,” she said.
TARA BRADBURY
Tara arrived on the real estate scene in 2002 and went on build a BDM empire, touring Australia and New Zealand as a motivational speaker on rent roll growth.
In 2019 she set up Active Agents on the Fraser Coast and is a key member of the Fraser Coast Property Industry Association which advocates on behalf of the property sector and has a seat at the table in important decisions which shape the future of the Fraser Coast.
She’s taken out a number of titles at awards ceremonies over the years and in 2019 was named in the Elite Agent’s Top 50 Industry Influencers.
She and husband Shane live in Hervey Bay with daughters Isabelle and Sienna.
INSPECTOR ANNE VOLGER
Anne was sworn into the Queensland Police Service (QPS) in December 1994 and performed general duties in and around Brisbane until 1998 when she transferred to State Crime Operations Command.
While in this position she served in various squads including Task Force Argos, Major Fraud Investigation Group and South East Asian Task Force. In 2002 she transferred to the Hendra Criminal Investigation Branch (CIB) where she attained her Detective’s appointment.
In 2007, Anne was appointed Detective Sergeant at Pine Rivers CIB and in 2012 she was appointed the Officer in Charge of the North Brisbane CIB South managing major investigations including homicides, armed robberies, sexual offences and property crime.
In 2017, Anne was promoted to commissioned rank as Detective Inspector, Mount Isa District. She was the first female Inspector appointed to Mount Isa District.
In 2020, she transferred to Bundaberg as the Bundaberg Patrol Group Inspector covering Eidsvold, Mount Perry, Monto, Gin Gin, South Kolan, Childers, Bargara and Bundaberg
Anne draws on her strong values, leadership and teambuilding skills, acquired throughout her life, to manage this geographically challenging policing environment.
She has been formally recognised through presentation of a Queensland Police Exemplary Conduct Medal – Investigations, for her service to the QPS.
Anne continues to be an advocate for serving police and youth pursuing sporting excellence.
She is a current board member of the Play for a Cure Foundation raising money for cancer research.
PETA JAMIESON
Wide Bay Hospital and Health Service Board Chair Peta Jamieson
Growing up in the Wide Bay as part of a well-known farming family, Peta, after gaining extensive experience in Queensland State Government, Brisbane City Council, Local Government Association of Queensland (LGAQ), and consultancies, returned to Bundaberg with her young family with a desire to give back to the community for the future.
During her early years, Peta completed bachelor and postgraduate qualifications and is a Graduate Australian Institute of Company Directors.
Peta is a strong advocate for the Bundaberg and Wide Bay Burnett region delivering a range of economic development, leadership and advocacy services for the public and private sectors.
Peta has also featured in a number of local campaigns to encourage businesses and professionals to move to Bundaberg.
In 2016, Peta was appointed Chair of the Wide Bay Hospital and Health Board and is the longest serving, having been appointed by three different Health Ministers.
Peta is also a Director for the Gladstone Ports Corporation (GPC) and a member of its Governance and People Committee and Finance, Audit and Risk Committee.
Peta has also been a Director of the YMCA and a local arts organisation, and is on the Wide Bay Burnett LifeFlight Advisory Committee.
In her spare time, Peta enjoys working on her family’s farm and enjoying all there is on offer in the Bundaberg region with her family and friends.
KATHERINE REID
Bundaberg Tourism CEO Katherine Reid has lead the operations of Bundaberg Tourism, the lead destination marketing and management organisation for the Bundaberg region, since October 2015.
A passionate advocate for collaborative partnerships across sectors to build a connected Team Bundaberg.
Since being in the region Katherine has curated a vibrant, hardworking team that supports the tourism industry, delivers visitor services and markets the destination to key target markets.
The focus for Katherine has been to not only develop a future-focused, sustainable tourism industry in the Bundaberg region, but also how the visitor economy can nurture and support the broader community for long-term benefits.
She also represents the QLD Regional tourism network as a Director on the Queensland Tourism Industry Council Board.
MAY MITCHELL
Representing Division 9 and holding the Health, Compliance and Enforcement portfolio, May Mitchell has lived in Bundaberg since 1994.
May’s extensive Local Government experience commenced in 1982 including, up until her recent election, as a senior revenue officer at Bundaberg Regional Council.
As an elected member, her goal is to serve the entire community as a proactive representative with a passion to improve the lifestyle and liveability of the Bundaberg Region.
Cycling and outdoor fitness are some of May’s leisure pursuits and, in addition to having previously held a number of positions with local community organisations, she regularly volunteers her time at the Bundaberg and District Neighbourhood Centre supporting the Literacy Matters classes.
TANYA MCLOUGHLIN
Bundaberg Regional Council Councillor Tanya McLoughlin is a first term Bundaberg Regional Councillor for Division 6, who currently holds the Waste and Recycling Portfolio.
She is also the past president of Zonta Club of Bundaberg.
Prior to serving on council, Tanya was a small-business owner and an active community member, volunteering in various organisations.
The most remarkable part of Tanya’s story is how she first moved to Burnett Heads 15 years ago as a single mother with little more than a suitcase.
Tanya has achieved what she has through hard work, a positive approach and willingness to help the community.
She hopes her story can inspire others to give back to their community and pursue their goals in life.
TRACEY MCPHEE
Bundaberg Regional Council Councillor Tracey McPhee is well-known as the owner operator of local award-winning cafe, Alowishus Delicious.
She has lived in Bundaberg all her life and is now, with her husband Michael, raising her family here.
Through a strong belief in the future of the Bundaberg Region and the value of small business, both as a community service and as a vehicle for job creation, Alowishus has expanded to four locations in recent years.
This expansion has resulted in recognition, including Chamber of Commerce Business of the Year, Country Wide Business of the Year and Australia Day Community Spirit Award.
Tracey has built her reputation on hard work, leadership and community focus. As a passionate community minded business woman, Tracey has been involved in employment programs, high school mentoring and buy local campaign #lovebundy and in her personal time she serves on the St Joseph’s Catholic primary school board and volunteers her time at local organisations and charities.
As a councillor Tracey aims to represent the Bundaberg Region and Division 4 by focusing on prosperity for both business and residents.
She has a special interest in reducing youth unemployment by fostering relationships between students and industry, providing career pathways and increasing employability of students on graduation.
Inspired by her late father, Steve Ward, who was awarded a Rotary Paul Harris Fellowship for his dedication to community service, Tracey proudly carries the family commitment to the local community.
TEENA MAMMINO
The Founder of Mammino Gourmet Ice Cream (with her late grandmother’s ice cream recipe) Teena Mammino also was the co-owner of Mammino Gourmet Ice Cream.
Having built the business from an idea she sold it after 21 years, in late 2017, after her husband Anthony passed away.
She has since retired and volunteers her time to her director’s role, but that’s not all.
She is Chairman of Childers Chamber of Commerce & Deputy Chair of Bundaberg Tourism, and on the Childers Hospital Auxiliary board.
Teena has also been a Qualified Justice of the Peace for more than 30 years.
Her biggest pride and joy are her three children and six grandchildren.
Teena’s passion is mentoring small business and culinary tourism.
She said by volunteering her time she was able to pass on skills she acquired over her many years in business while building the iconic brand of Mammino Gourmet Ice Cream.
CHERN’EE SUTTON
Chern’ee Sutton is a proud Kalkadoon woman and Aboriginal artist originally from Mount Isa who is passionate about her culture and history and wants to share that with the rest of the world through her art.
Her unique style combines two worlds of traditional Aboriginal heritage with a modern contemporary twist which has caught the eyes of collectors around the world, including Royalty and on the 2018 Commonwealth Games mascot Borobi.
Chern’ee has her artwork hanging in The Royal Collection in Buckingham Palace, Queensland Parliament House, Queensland State Library and has exhibited her artworks in London, Tokyo, Singapore, Hong Kong, Melbourne and Sydney.
Chern’ee’s artworks have been commissioned by The Queensland Government, Tennis Australia, The National Rugby League, The Royal Australian Mint, Dreamworld Theme Park, The 2018 Commonwealth Games, Rainforestation, The Australian Defence Force, Northrop Grumman, The Australian Department of Veteran Affairs and The Australian Public Service Commission to name a few.
Due to Chern’ee’s passion for reconciliation and equality she has received numerous accolades including National NAIDOC Youth of The Year, Australia Day Awards for 2013 and 2014, Queensland Pride of Australia Award, Local NAIDOC Awards including Artist of the Year and has been an Australia Day Ambassador for the past 6 years.
Chern’ee has designed the NRL’s indigenous All Stars Jerseys for four years the most recent being 2021 and has just launched a new circulating and uncirculated indigenous Military Service $2 coin which she designed and features her artwork in partnership with The Australian Defence Force and The Royal Australian Mint.
EDWINA ROWAN
Edwina Rowan volunteers her time to and is the President of the Edon Place Domestic and Family Violence Centre in Bundaberg, having also been a board member for a number of years.
Edon Place provides services to families and individuals who have been affected by domestic and family violence with short-term crisis accommodation and support, crisis counselling, emergency relief assistance, court assistance, community training and education, outreach service, parenting programs, children’s support and safety upgrades program.
Edwina is a strong advocate for the Men’s Behavioural Change Program, which commenced operation by Edon Place in the Bundaberg region in 2018.
In 2018 she was awarded the Queensland Police Community service Award for her work with Edon Place.
Bundaberg Police Inspector Pat Swindells highlighted the great work undertaken by the service, including providing court support for men and women experiencing violence.
In 2019 Edwina was awarded the Queensland Law Society Agnes McWhinney Award for her outstanding contribution to the legal profession and the community.
Edwina is a partner of Charltons lawyers and primarily practises in the areas of criminal law, domestic violence, family law matters and traffic matters.
CARLY CLARK
Carly Clark and her husband own Splitters Farm, 160 acre (24ha) property located in Sharon, 10 minutes north of Bundaberg.
In four short years Carly’s vision of turning a dump into an animal sanctuary has come to fruition and, through hard work and determination, is now home to nearly 400 rescue animals and counting.
During the first wave of Covid lockdowns in March 2020, Carly put Bundaberg on everyone’s bucket list by taking the farm tours online through daily Facebook Live events engaging a homeschooling audience of mum’s and dads across the nation.
Off the back of Covid, Splitters Farm is now a thriving agribusiness, farm stay and tranquil bush retreat that is home to native Australian wildlife including platypus and over 150 species of birdlife.
Known first for her love of animals, Carly also has 22 years marketing experience with a diverse career background in radio, tourism, and events. Prior to relocating to Bundaberg nearly a decade ago, Carly was based in Sydney as the Marketing and Live Events Manager for Australia’s most successful export, The Wiggles.
Carly’s passion has created a unique rural camping and farm stay destination that is a fantastic location to use as a base to explore the Bundaberg region and Southern Great Barrier Reef.
SUELLEN CUSACK-GREENSILL
“Wife, mother, friend but a musician at heart”.
Well-known Bundaberg performer and identity, Suellen Cusack-Greensill has an impressive musical career and voice to match.
While having performed on Broadway, at the Opera House and other global venues, this ABC recording artist, the Moncrieff – Home of Gladys and Donald Smith – is a second home for Ms Cusack-Greensill.
She has a Bachelor of Music at the Queensland Conservatorium of Music and was previously a director of the board at Creative Regions.
Ms Cusack-Greensill was also the Recipient of the Australia Day Cultural Award.
She performs locally to help fundraise for charities, churches and other community organisations and enjoys creating professional shows that support and create income for other local people within the arts including lighting, sounds, stage crew, venues, and catering.
You can watch her on stage at the Caledonian Pipe Band at the Moncrieff Theatre in October, and Merry and Bright presented by Bundaberg Regional Council at the Bundaberg Botanic Gardens in December.
SUE TASKER
Sue Tasker was one of the founders of Angels Community Group in 2015 after losing a loved one in a car accident and being made redundant from her job of nearly 20 years.
“Myself and a friend decided to start Angels to make a difference in peoples lives,” she said.
“We could never imagine it growing to where it is now.
“I have been lucky to have the support of my three children and a group of wonderful people around me who has seen us through some rough times.
“However, every time we give someone a bit of a helping hand with food, clothes or furniture the struggles have definitely been worth it.”
CHERYL BARRETT
Cheryl Barrett was appointed CEO of Southern Cross Support Services in 2017; her leadership has seen the organisation grow to 1150 employees delivering services nationally and receiving several regional awards.
Ms Barrett feels privileged to be leading an organisation that has such an inspiring mission – to create a sense of purpose, belonging and security.
With a passion to support her community and a background in housing and homelessness she joined the Board of Directors of Regional Housing Limited in 2016.
Having extensive experience as an executive leader, business owner and Councillor, Cheryl now focuses on coaching future leaders as a Chartered Manager and Fellow of IML.
TANYA O’SHEA
Currently the Managing Director of IMPACT Community Services, during her 20-year tenure Tanya O’Shea has challenged the status quo, advocated for her region’s most vulnerable and has not been afraid to roll up her sleeves and get the job done when the going got tough (especially when IMPACT went underwater during the 2013 floods; Tanya was the first on the scene and instantly went into survival mode to have the organisation back up and running within a 24 hour period).
Dedicated to improving lives by providing support, training and employment opportunities, under Tanya’s leadership, IMPACT has also developed and grown two social enterprises – established to be mutually beneficial by creating jobs and injecting significant value back into the local economy.
She has also created empowered teams who have innovation in their DNA, designing and deploying a broad spectrum of programs to bolster the region’s health and disability service offerings.
Holding numerous past and present director and committee positions across the Wide Bay/Burnett region – from The Catholic Parish of Bundaberg, through to the Institute of Managers and Leaders Advisory Committee, Surf Life Saving Queensland, Shalom College Board, the Regional Development Australia WBB committee, and the CQU Postgraduate Reference Committee, Tanya demonstrates on a daily basis her ongoing commitment to the social, economic and community sector.
AINSLEY GATLEY
Ainsley Gatley started her business Event Networx 14 years ago and it has grown from strength to strength each year.
Her vision was to have a business that allowed her to combine family and work life and to allow her the flexibility to enjoy both worlds.
Over the years she has been involved with numerous community events from the Wide Bay Australia International Air Show, Ring Road Run and Crush Festival to more recent events such as Agrotrend, Ability Ball, Business Excellence Awards and conferences.
Ainsley is passionate about the Bundaberg Region and the community and loves to be able to help where she can.
She has a professional approach but has an ability to adapt to suit the organisations and businesses that she works for.
Her commitment to local and bringing benefits to the region is why she loves events.
CLAIRE FINTER
Claire first started working as an optometrist in Bundaberg in 2009 and has spent the past 7 years working alongside ophthalmologist, Dr Jai Panchapakesan.
Her role as a clinical optometrist is to provide expert eye care for all of their patients.
“I care for our patients pre and post operatively as well as managing chronic ocular disease and providing emergency care for urgent patients,” she said.
“ I love my work as it gives me an opportunity daily to help and care for others.
“I honestly believe if you can make a difference in the life of even one person each day you are taking a step in creating a world of good.”
She is studying to attain her private pilot’s licence with the goal of providing further eye care to more remote and regional communities.
And she is no stranger to the spotlight having been involved in music within the community both at the Anglican Church, Bundaberg Sinfonietta and Playhouse Theatre; where she was cast as Mary Poppins and Glinda in Wicked.
Claire shares a passion for sport, particularly competing in swimming and touch football events
She said one of her biggest achievements was swimming from Great Keppel to Yeppoon (her hometown) raising over $20,000 for research into dementia and Alzheimer’s disease.
ZOE YOUNG
After relocating from Western Australia in 2015, Zoe is still in awe of the amazing produce grown in the Bundaberg region, and loves showcasing local flavours in her award-winning brews.
Along with her partner, Zoe owns and runs Ohana Winery and Cheeky Tiki Cider in Bundaberg East, producing roughly 60,000 litres of hand crafted apple cider every year and is one of the states largest craft cider producers.
Zoe’s is incredibly passionate about and proud of what she creates, and loves sharing that with visitors to the cider house.
SASHA JOB
Sasha Job is a physiotherapist with over 12 years clinical experience, currently working as a lecturer at CQUniversity.
Sasha has been recognised for her commitment to her students and our community, and has received a number of rewards acknowledging her outstanding contributions to learning and teaching as well as social innovation.
She has a special interest in physical activity and accessibility, which has inspired her research higher degree thesis “Universal Beach Accessibility Hub (U‐BEACH): A pathway to increase physical activity participation, health, and wellbeing for people with disability”.
As part of this project, Sasha has advocated to secure a commitment to improved beach access for people with disability throughout our region, and Australia.
Sasha is also a proud mum of two boys and frequently volunteers throughout Bundaberg at community and sporting events, schools and community organisations.
TRISH MEARS
Trish is Community Engagement Adviser at Bundaberg Regional Council and sits on a number of boards and committees, including being Co-Chair of the Bundaberg Relay for Life committee, President of Moore Park Beach Arts Inc and Secretary of the Playhouse Theatre.
Trish’s career has been in communications, marketing and management, having been the long-time manager of both local radio station networks in Bundaberg, as well as setting up the Communications Department at Bundaberg Regional Council in 2008.
She also assists many and varied organisations with fundraising and being the Master of Ceremony for events.
Trish has been a celebrant for eight years, officiating at weddings, vow renewals, naming ceremonies and funerals around the region.
LEANNE BAKER
Leanne Baker offers online organisation courses and planners to help reduce the overwhelm and to create space for what matters most.
She works alongside a number of organisations to support domestic violence survivors and foster children among others.
To date over $70,000 has been donated to help those in need.
Her community consists of people in varying seasons of life and that’s exactly what makes it extra special. Come as you are and take the next best small step in the right direction.
CYNTHIA HOOGSTRATEN
Celebrating life, learning and giving back to the community is Cynthia Hoogstraten’s philosophy.
“Whether it is through teaching drumming to promote social engagement or sand art and labyrinths for wellbeing, I am always finding ways to make the most out of each day and connecting with people,” she said.
“As a marriage celebrant, I am keen to guide couples in creating meaningful memories and assisting families with funerals and memorials. Studying dementia has also opened doors to helping others on that difficult journey.
“I have updated my JP qualifications, and I am looking forward to being of assistance.”
SHARYN BANKS
Sharyn Banks is the founder of Red Collar Rescue and has created a team of people devoting their time to ensuring the safety of the regions unwanted dogs.
Red Collar Rescue Inc was established in 2009 and became a registered organisation in late 2010 with the primary aim of providing temporary refuge and eventually new homes for abandoned, abused, unwanted and death row dogs.
“Since 2009-10 we have been able to re-home over 3200 dogs that would have otherwise been euthanised,” the site reads.
“As we live onsite, we are available seven days a week by appointment, 365 days a year to talk to prospective adopters and welcome visitors.
“We endeavour to spend as much time as possible with our dogs, this allows us to get a better idea of their nature and how they interact with other animals and each other.”
NICOLE PANUCCIO
After stepping away from her role as a nurse unit manager and into private practice Nicole Panuccio said as a registered nurse her mission was “to create a symmetry of health and beauty from the inside out, and inspire others to do the same”.
“The way I do this is through various cosmetic injectable treatments and intravenous vitamin therapy,” she said.
“From Wednesday to Saturday I am the Cosmetic Nurse Injector at SILK Laser Clinics where we provide an array of cosmetic injectables, laser hair removal, skin treatments and skin care products.
“Every Tuesday I dedicate the day to delivering intravenous vitamin therapy for IV Drip Co, located within Bargara Beach Holistic Health Centre.
“I also do after hours and home visits for those who can’t make it down to the clinic.”
Nicole said she’s grateful to work along side an extensive network of GP’s, surgeons, nurse’s, nurse practitioners, naturopaths, and life coaches.
“I have completed my graduate diploma in Cosmetic Nursing and am also a Neurolimbic Conditioning Coach, treating my patients from a more holistic point of view helps me understand their needs at a deeper level and when refer patients on those within my network where needed,” she said.
MERISSA CRAFT
A local businesswoman and heart of Childers’ Paragon Theatre, Merissa Craft purchased the theatre from her grandparents and began restoration efforts in 2007.
The theatre, which is a 1920s, state heritage listed entertainment and vintage cinema, was reopened in 2014 as a cinema and entertainment venue and has since added an espresso bar to its repertoire.
BREE GRIMA
With over five and a half years’ experience of Executive leadership with BFVG and ten years in the Not-for-Profit sector Bree Grima brings strong industry connections to her role as Managing Director and Chief Advocate for the horticulture industry in the Wide Bay Burnett.
Born in Bundaberg and the youngest of six children in a local farming family Bree understands first-hand the value of hard work and resilience.
Driven in her work ethic by the Cooperative values of passion, leadership, accountability, transparency, and respect Bree is honoured to work with a diverse and passionate team of Directors and staff.
With a Bachelor of science (hons), Bachelor of Environmental science and a Bachelor of Photography Bree is committed to higher education and strives to deliver the best version of herself every day.
Bree believes healthy minds and bodies build productive workplaces and has previously competed as a professional bodybuilder.
The ability to focus and plan which her sport has taught her has translated to a work ethic that allows her to multitask, lead a dynamic team and create effective change for industry.
Bree holds representative positions with the Queensland Horticulture Council, Regional Development Australia Wide Bay Burnett, Regional Business HQ, SunWater Irrigators Advisory Committee and the Coastal Burnett Groundwater Management Advisory Committee and connects regularly with Regional Councils and Local, State and Federal Members of Government on issues relevant to Agribusinesses in the Region.
EMMA ZIELKE
Bundaberg’s Emma Zielke has not only been influential locally but a figurehead sport, particular AFL.
She was the first captain of the Brisbane Lions AFLW team, and their AFLW Premiership Captain and among a myriad of other awards, she will remain a major part of the sports future as the QAFLW Best and Fairest Award has been named the Emma Zielke Medal.
RACHAEL SARRA
Rachael Sarra is a multidisciplinary artist, designer and businesswoman.
“As a contemporary mixed raced, First Nations artist from Goreng Goreng Country, Rachael uses art as a powerful tool and outlet to explore themes she often grapples with while her work is often the resolution of such themes and conflict within herself,” her website reads.
“Rachael’s work often challenges and explores the themes of societies perception of what Aboriginal art and identity is.
“Rachael graduated with a Bachelor of Visual Communication Design from the Queensland College of Art in Brisbane and is a dynamic creative with the ability to challenge narratives that are often in place to perpetuate colonial harm.”
Earlier this year the NewsMail reported on how Rachael had teamed up with Matrix to deliver a limited edition hair care range.
Rachael has worked with a multitude of clients both nationally and internationally including Tourism Australia, Kmart, Matrix, Lush Australia and UK, The Mills Foundation and Australia Post.
LORRAINE PYEFINCH
Lorraine is a co-founder and director of Best Practice Software, according to the company’s website, she “guides strategic and operational decision making, ensuring our team meets regulatory and statutory obligations, while fostering key business and government relationships”.
“Her esteemed career includes successes as a registered nurse, business founder, councillor and regional mayor,” it reads.
Best Practice Software is a leader in the development, marketing and support of quality medical software products for Australasian medical practice.
TRACEY SERGIACOMI
Having just passed an incredible milestone of 10 years on-air, Hitz939’s top rated breakfast show announcer, Tracey Sergiacomi, has been a tireless and dedicated advocate for the Bundaberg community.
Her continuous efforts to engage with the many day to day issues that face the people of Bundaberg, and her ability to help make people smile each morning, Trace, as her many fans call her, is one of the best ambassadors Bundaberg could ever ask for.
Whether it is driving charitable initiatives like Hitz Helping Hands, acting as Quiz Master at the annual Battle of the Schools events, or supporting the various needs of those in our community, Trace has secured her place as a true local icon and cheerleader of all things Bundaberg.
REV JENNIFER LYNN
A reverend at Bargara and Burnett Heads Uniting Church, Jennifer Lynn said her role as a Minister here was quite community focused.
“I founded SurfChurch Bargara, a short monthly church service on Nielson Beach which is focused towards people coming along to a casual, “out in nature”, contemporary service,” she said.
“From SurfChurch I founded SurfChurch Stoked – a free community based program for children aged 5-12 years, which offers free surfing lessons, environmental interaction, awareness and sustainability, and which encourages community thinking and positive living.
“Stoked boasts many community volunteers from within the local surfing fraternity.”
She has plans to offer the Stoked program more broadly, to sectors such as remote and rural communities; women’s support groups; and groups which support women and children in crisis.
This dream is on the fast-track since Stoked received a grant earlier this year from the Gambling Community Benefit Fund.
She has alsorecently accepted the position of the volunteer Chaplain for The Bundaberg Surf Life Saving Club and conducts paddle-out services focused upon various life events, such as ashes scattering; and celebrations.
“I do not charge a fee as I view this as part of being a part of the community,” she said.
“I also work with our local Labyrinth ladies when possible, offering labyrinth walks and blessings at the community labyrinth we installed at the church, as well as public labyrinths,” she said.
“And in general I support on a very regular level, a large number of people within our local community through counselling, mentoring and general wellbeing support.
“I enjoy working with local business owners and community groups where possible to form a strong network of friendship and support as I believe this is imperative for a healthy vibrant community.”
ANNIE ATTARD
Currently a Director on the board of Canegrowers, Bundaberg Fruit and Vegetable and Bundaberg Sugar Services, Annie Attard is dedicated to the agricultural sector.
She is also involved in Women in Sugar as Vice President.
And that’s not all.
Annie is a mother of five children, she has two grandchildren and she’s an active member of Across the Waves Softball Club as a player and assistant coach.
TANYA HOWARD
Dedicated to supporting the interests of local farmers Tanya Howard is the Bundaberg Canegrowers executive officer.
In the past, Tanya has been outspoken about matters like reef science behind political decisions.
Canegrowers mission is to provide representation, leadership and services and promote unity in the interest of growers.
JANELLE GERRY
Ms Gerry is a businesswoman with growing success in the region’s tourism and agricultural industry.
As outlined on the Macadamias Australia website, Janelle supports the establishment of the family and business governance framework, to develop the next generation of Steinhardt business leaders.
“As Director of Corporate Services, Janelle oversees finance, legal, human resources and compliance and is passionate about community and industry,” it reads.
“Janelle’s husband, Andrew, and their son, Luke, manage FarmFresh Fine Foods, a vegetable processing plant.”
ELEESHA QUINN
Interior enthusiast and mum of three, Eleesha Quinn is the founder and content creator for @the.quinn.girls, a locally grown Instagram business known for showcasing the latest in fashion, home styling, lifestyle and travel, while sharing the highs and lows of motherhood.
She has graced the cover of Mama Disrupt Magazine, featured in national television and news articles and travelled the world with her family in partnership with some iconic global brands.
Eleesha has designed and launched a range of furniture, journals and clothing in collaboration with some of her favourite brands but insists her biggest accomplishment is connecting, celebrating, inspiring and being inspired by her community.
The Quinn Girls’ page has 209K followers.
Word count: 13876
