Susan O’Neill, chief executive of the Southern Adelaide Local Health Network (SALHN) – covering Flinders Medical Centre, Noarlunga Hospital and the Repat precinct – resigned abruptly in May and left on June 30.
Her place has been filled on an interim basis by chief operating officer David Morris, and at the time of Ms O’Neill’s resignation SALHN board chairman Mark Butcher said a recruitment process would begin “immediately”.
However, he has told staff Mr Morris starts a new job on August 30 developing virtual and digitally enhanced healthcare services
“This is a high priority strategy for SA Health and will involve extensive consultation with Department of Health and Wellbeing, Department of Treasury and Finance, Department of Premier and Cabinet, Local Health Networks, SA Ambulance Service and other relevant stakeholders,” Mr Butcher said.
As a result, chief financial officer Wayne Gadd will become the acting chief executive on a 12-month contract.
While officials believe there is a strong talent pool in South Australia they want to wait until borders are open to conduct a search for a new chief.
“I advise that due to a range of unexpected circumstances, including Covid-19 travel restrictions, the board has been unable to expedite the appointment of a new CEO at this stage,” Mr Butcher said.
“As a result, Wayne Gadd will take on the role of acting CEO commencing, Monday, August 30, and will hold this role for 12 months.
“Wayne’s extensive leadership in executive positions at SALHN and across SA Health will be a significant asset in fulfilling the role over the coming period.
“Recruitment for a more permanent CEO will recommence in early 2022.”
Sarah Woon will continue in the role of acting chief operating officer and John O’Connor will join SALHN as acting chief finance officer.
With three people now acting in the most senior roles in SALHN for immediate future, Mr Butcher said he was certain staff would give Mr Gadd and the executive team ongoing support during the long interim period.
“We are working in uncertain times with increasing demand for our services and with the threat of Covid-19 ever present,” he said.
“I express my appreciation for all that you do to ensure your own safety, the safety of your colleagues and patients while providing ongoing quality care,” he said.
The changes follow a string of high-profile resignations from SA Health including most recently David Place as chief executive of the SA Ambulance Service.
Opposition health spokesman Chris Picton said the government’s search for a replacement was “in complete disarray.”
“Flinders Medical Centre is experiencing record ramping on a daily basis and yet the government can’t find someone to lead the hospital,” he said.
“The vacancy has been there since the start of May and is now set to be vacant for over a year, so blaming Covid is a complete cop out.
“Staff morale is at an all time low, patient care is suffering and now the finance director is going to have to run the show because they can’t find anyone else.
“It was warned when Sue O’Neill decided to leave that it would be very difficult to replace her and now that’s sadly come true.”
Word count: 511
