Former global managing director for IBM Health Dr Terry Sweeney will join a panel of experts at 10.30am on Wednesday to discuss solutions for our stressed health system, in the latest Fearless Conversation brought to you by Flinders University and The Advertiser. You can watch the debate live here.
Dr Sweeney is heading up the $200 million Digital Health CRC innovation centre, based at the MIT Living Lab at Lot Fourteen. The venue also hosts a new commercialisation hub – Digital Hive – which aims to invest in new and emerging technologies and support start-ups.
“In addition to solving problems, there’s a real opportunity to create a digital economy in health – the two things aren’t mutually exclusive,” Dr Sweeney said. “I think it’s important to have two sides of the coin – you can solve a problem like ramping with digital tools but at the same time do it in a way that creates an industry out of digital health.”
The Digital Health CRC will also focus on driving better clinical outcomes, giving patients more agency in treatment options.
“When we think about other industries like retail, you shop online for a new pair of jeans and it’s a fantastic experience,” Dr Sweeney said. “We don’t really have that in healthcare: we are trying to use technology to improve the patient as a consumer, to make it easier and a more pleasurable experience for individuals to interact with the healthcare system.”
Digital health will be just one of the topics on the agenda for this week’s second Flinders University’s Fearless Conversations.
The 13-week campaign, in partnership with The Advertiser, is bringing together leading South Australian voices in roundtable discussions about the big issues facing our state.
It is hoped the campaign will encourage people to share their thoughts, opinions and ideas on key growth areas, and embrace a fearless approach in creating solutions that will drive South Australia forward, both now and into the future. Dr Sweeney will join other prominent SA medical and innovation voices – careapp founder and CEO Allison Nikula, orthopaedic surgeon Dr Matthew Liptak and Flinders University Professor of Digital Health Systems Trish Williams – in Wednesday’s 45-minute event, hosted by The Advertiser senior journalist Brad Crouch.
The panel will discuss ­challenges such as automation versus jobs, privacy, cybersecurity, ethics, opportunities in a Covid world and vaccination manufacture.
Streamed live on advertiser.com.au every Wednesday from 10.30am, the series encourages the community to join the debate about our state’s future.
People can submit their own questions to put forward to any of the weekly panels through advertiser.com.au or on Twitter via #fearlessconversations.
Future-proofing SA’s defence sector, skills shortages and the rise of China were be on the agenda in this week’s Fearless Conversations debate.
Word count: 447
