DIGITAL technology is the right prescription for solving some of the world’s most pressing health challenges, while also creating jobs and attracting global talent to South Australia, a digital health expert says.
Former global managing director for IBM Health, Dr Terry Sweeney, is heading up the $200m Digital Health CRC innovation centre, based at the MIT Living Lab at Lot Fourteen.
The venue also hosts a new commercialisation hub – Digital Hive – which aims to invest in new and emerging technologies and support start-ups.
“In addition to solving problems, there’s a real opportunity to create a digital economy in health – the two things aren’t mutually exclusive,” Dr Sweeney said.
“It’s important to have two sides of the coin – you can solve a problem like (ambulance) ramping with digital tools but at the same time do it in a way that creates an industry out of digital health.” The Digital Health CRC is aimed at better clinical outcomes and giving patients more treatment options.
“When we think about other industries, like retail, you shop online for a new pair of jeans and it’s a fantastic experience,” Dr Sweeney said.
“We don’t really have that in healthcare; we are trying to use technology to improve the patient as a consumer, to make it easier and a more pleasurable experience for individuals to interact with the healthcare system.” Digital health will be just one of the topics on the agenda for this week’s third Flinders University’s Fearless Conversations. The 13-week campaign, in partnership with The Advertiser, is bringing together leading South Australian voices in roundtable discussions about the big issues facing our state.
It is hoped the campaign will encourage people to share their thoughts and ideas, and embrace a fearless approach to create solutions.
Dr Sweeney will join people who are prominent in medicine and innovation: CareApp founder Allison Nikula and Flinders University Professor of Digital Health Systems Trish Williams for Wednesday’s 45-minute event, hosted by The Advertiser senior journalist Brad Crouch.
The panel will discuss ­challenges such as automation versus jobs, privacy, cybersecurity, ethics, opportunities in a Covid world and vaccination manufacture.
Streamed live on advertiser.com.au every Wednesday from 10.30am, the series encourages the community to join the debate about SA’s future.
You can submit questions through advertiser.com.au or on Twitter via #fearlessconversations.
The Advertiser #FEARLESSCONVERSATIONS Flinders University VIDEO: Watch the Fearless Conversation on Defence at advertiser.com.au/ fearless-conversations IN SPONSORSHIP WITH Flinders University
CREDIT: LYNN CAMERON
Word count: 409
