THE arrival of Betr into Australia’s ultra-competitive $6.4bn wagering market is here.
The newly formed bookmaker will launch on Wednesday ahead of next weekend’s coveted The Everest and Caulfield Cup meetings.
Betr, headed up by wagering mogul Matt Tripp and chief executive Andrew Menz, is backed by an ownership group including News Corp Australia and Las Vegas-based Tekkorp Capital and is powered by Betmakers Technology Group. In the countdown to Wednesday’s highly anticipated launch, Betr chief executive Andrew Menz said the start-up entered the always evolving market with ambitious objectives.
“We make no secret that our ambition is to grow market share rapidly in what’s an extremely competitive market,” Mr Menz said. “And we’ll achieve that by putting the customer at the forefront of everything we do with the offering of compelling products and competitive odds.
“The brand we are building is one that stands for the punter. Racing is an industry but at heart it’s a sport and we want to celebrate the broader racing community and the great stories it generates.” To celebrate the launch of Betr, Menz revealed the start-up would provide a special Melbourne Cup promotion for new customers.
“We will be offering $101 about every runner in the Cup right through until Victoria Derby day,” Menz said.
“It will be capped at $10 but what better way to announce your arrival into the market than by offering such a great promotion on our most famous race.
“And for the business it’s really symbolic that we are launching the week of The Everest which has really resonated with the under-35 sports fan that enjoys a punt and a good time. To be in front of that younger, more dynamic and forward thinking audience is really important to the brand we are building at Betr.” News Corp Australia has a long heritage supplying form, tips, analysis and advertising platforms for the wagering industry and millions of Australians.
Its minority (33 per cent) investment in Betr is seen as the next extension within the wagering category. The investment is similar to other News Corp ventures including Punters, Racenet, HiPages, Visual Domain and others which run adjacent to its core business.
CREDIT: ADAM DOBBIN
Word count: 365
