The Adelaide-based research centre is also on the hunt for more volunteers to support the company’s growing pipeline.
CMAX, which specialises in early-phase and first-time-in-human trials, has initiated around 50 trials this year.
Three have looked at treatment options for COVID-19, including a nasal spray and a novel antiviral treatment.
CMAX chief executive Jane Kelly said the company’s growth was likely to result in an 80 per cent increase in revenue this financial year, and an increase in the company’s 200-strong workforce.
It is also increasing the size of its clinical trial unit by adding 11 beds to the unit’s current 55-bed capacity.
“COVID 19 had presented us with some unique opportunities with Australia now internationally recognised as an ideal location for early phase studies,” she said.
“We now have the ability to take on more clinical programs and to cement our position as one of the leaders in early phase research in Australia.
“We are planning further expansion by mid-2021 to accommodate our growing workforce and the need for more clinical space.
“Attracting more volunteers to take part in the growing clinical trial space is also a priority with participation rates fluctuating during COVID.”
CMAX employs around 200 staff from its base in the North Terrace health and biomedical precinct, with staff numbers almost doubling in the last three years.
The company will soon launch a new service - Fusion Clinical Research - allowing health professionals to provide clinical trials in a GP clinic setting.
A dedicated team from CMAX will connect pharmaceutical, biotech, digital health and clinical research organisations to GPs and patients who are keen to take part in clinical trial research in a GP clinic.
“Traditionally we’ve conducted clinical trials in our CMAX facility on behalf of pharmaceutical companies,” Ms Kelly said.
“This unique service will transform the clinical trial process by allowing the trials to be undertaken in a known and trusted GP-clinic environment, which can increase access to new medical therapies.”
Word count: 314
