New mums today can walk out of hospital just a few hours after giving birth – compared with days in generations gone by. With SA’s proposed Women’s and Children’s Hospital already criticised for being too small, BRAD CROUCH examines how big our health facilities need to be and if we’re getting it right.
AS debate rages over whether the planned new Women’s and Children’s Hospital will have enough beds for current, let alone future, demand, new data shows the time spent in hospital for common conditions continues to fall.
The stay for births has plummeted from a week or so in generations past, and continues to fall in recent years.
In the decade to 2020, the average length of stay for vaginal deliveries at the WCH fell from 3.38 days to 2.23 days; for caesarean sections it went from 6.63 days to 4.51.
This mirrors massive strides in healthcare which has resulted in falling lengths of stays for a variety of health problems.
For example, in 1975-76, the average stay for stroke/cerebrovascular accidents was 34.8 days. By 2015-16, it was 10.9 days.
Advances in surgical techniques, development of “keyhole” surgery, new generations of drugs, new technology, breakthroughs in understanding and preventing diseases, improvements in post-operative care and rehabilitation, public health campaigns, health care in the home and other changes have cut the need for many long hospital stays.
In a matter of decades, hospital care has moved from long-term stays in dormitory-style wards to shorter stays with the prospect of private rooms, or day procedures with no overnight stay required.
This was a point the former Labor government made amid the public debate over whether the new $2.4bn Royal Adelaide Hospital would be big enough to cope with future population growth – and why 100 of its 800 beds are day beds.
Similar discussions are now unfolding about the new WCH, with some clinicians warning it will be too small.
Its final design – and cost – are yet to be released.
In the meantime, health care continues to evolve, including the push towards “hospital at home” services and medical advancements to minimise time needed to be spent in an acute, expensive, hospital setting.
In some cases, these advances have also increased the length of stay, because people did not die.
For example, the improved survival rate of very preterm babies means neonatal wards may be full of tiny newborns needing time to gain strength.
Hospital stays at the WCH are forecast to continue to decline in many specialty areas, including a projected reduction in average length of stay for paediatric surgical patients from 1.78 days in 2018-19 to 1.75 in 2031-32, freeing up beds.
Officials stress that length of stay is just one of many metrics the new WCH project team is using to determine the size of the new hospital.
Other factors include population demographics, historical activity analysis and clinical services planning for statewide women’s and children’s health services, as well as the feedback from clinicians and the public.
SA Health chief medical officer Mike Cusack said the medical advances leading to reduced recovery time in hospital had been dramatic.
“No patient wants to stay in hospital a day longer than they need to, and as clinicians we do our best to ensure all patients are safely discharged as soon as they can be,” Dr Cusack said.
“Over the time I’ve been working in medicine, new treatments and technologies have resulted in significant improvements for patients, including shorter hospital stays and better health outcomes overall. Even over the last decade, hospital stays have decreased as a result of better technology, treatment and care options. While we’re striving to further improve the health system, we have nonetheless seen dramatic changes over the years.” He said continued advances, such as developments in digital health and new technologies, would “allow us to provide ever better care for South Australians”.
Health and Wellbeing Minister Stephen Wade said shorter hospital stays were a win for patients and busy medical staff.
“The time spent in hospital for a range of reasons has reduced dramatically over recent decades and that is projected to decrease further in future years,” Mr Wade said.
“We know that, for many people, hospitals are not the best place for them to be, unless they are acutely unwell.
“As time goes on, clinical practice improvements are enabling patients to be treated out of hospitals or to be safely discharged sooner, so they can continue their recovery at home.
“It also means beds are opening up sooner for other patients in need.” He said the state government’s investment in out-of-hospital programs, such as My Home Hospital and Priority Care Centres, which were giving people hospital-level care at home or urgent care in a GP clinic, were important.
“We are working to improve South Australia’s health services to ease pressure on our emergency departments and help patients get home sooner,” he said.
Government and SA Health officials noted planning for the new WCH was also taking into account where babies were being born and providing care closer to families’ homes.
That was why they were focused on Lyell McEwin Hospital and Flinders Medical Centre as key baby delivery hospitals, with the new WCH the flagship for complex cases.
However, the state opposition warned planning for the new WCH indicated it would not be big enough for future demand.
Opposition health spokesman Chris Picton said there was deep concern among clinicians about the size of the new hospital.
“Leaked documents show doctors across the hospital, from infectious disease, to emergency, to neonatal are alarmed the government’s proposals would be insufficient for patient care,” Mr Picton said.
“Steven Marshall must ensure clinicians are listened to and we don’t end up with a hospital with fewer beds and insufficient services as warned by doctors.
“Stephen Wade has admitted the current plans include 25 fewer overnight beds. “With the hospital already in crisis we can’t build a new hospital with less capacity for our sickest kids.” Mr Picton also criticised the construction timeline.
“Steven Marshall originally promised it would be open in 2024; now we don’t even know when construction is going to start,” he said.
“There is no cost, there is no start date, there are no finalised plans – and now clinicians are raising their concerns with the direction of this project.” Like the new Royal Adelaide Hospital, the new Women’s and Children’s Hospital will be a once-in-a-century chance to get it right.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 1082
