The pause in Big Australia due to migration outflows has shifted attention from easing urban congestion to addressing regional pressures due to disruptive forces unleashed by the health crisis and climate change.
IA chief executive Romilly Madew said COVID-19 “has had a significant impact on the way Australians use critical infrastructure”.
“We have seen changing work patterns, a pause on Net Overseas Migration, and a 200 per cent increase in people moving from capital areas to regional areas,” Ms Madew said.
“We are at a crossroads between addressing existing infrastructure gaps and prioritising investments that will secure our future prosperity, with abundant opportunities to deliver infrastructure that responds to community needs.”
IA has identified as a high priority enabling digital health services for regional and remote areas and improving telecommunication speeds.
As a result of the pandemic, more than 3.2 million regional and remote Australians had accessed telehealth services by last November.
IA said a lack of competition to provide transmission to some regional centres with lower populations had contributed to a growing “digital divide” between cities and the bush.
IA’s chief of infrastructure prioritisation Robin Jackson told The Australian “communities with better digital connectivity benefit from improved access to education, healthcare and other economic opportunities like tourism”.
“Improved coverage can benefit regional and remote businesses with access to new markets, business support services and technologies,” he said.
“Primary producers can also use digital agricultural practices to improve productivity and remain globally competitive with other producers. It also supports economic participation among isolated communities”.
But the National Farmers’ Federation, which this week launched a regionalisation agenda, said the IA priority list “proved that the way projects were assessed and prioritised was broken”.
NFF President Fiona Simson said if the IA proposals are what the Morrison government “means when it says it‘s committed to regional Australia than it smacks of rhetoric rather real action.”
“There is something drastically wrong with this process when Western Sydney alone is identified for more than $7 billion of new high priority infrastructure projects and regional Australia is almost completely ignored,” Ms Simson said.
“Regional Australia needs transformational infrastructure, just like the Western Sydney Airport development, to finally capture all the benefits and economic potential of our regional communities and economies.
As well, Mr Jackson said “the need for solutions to nationally significant water related problems and opportunities not only remain across the country but have continued to grow”.
He pointed to five new water initiatives on IA’s to-do list, covering both urban and regional areas, and the modification of four existing ones. The new water proposals are for Greater Sydney, Southwest Melbourne, Bowen Basin, Barossa Valley and Northern SA.
More broadly, there are new high-priority initiatives for social housing in NSW, road maintenance in South Australia, level crossing in Southeast Queensland and enabling infrastructure for developing the gas industry in the NT’s Beetaloo Sub-Basin.
As well, nominates the development of gateways to support exports, including the Western Sydney Freight Line and Intermodal, rail access to Melbourne’s Webb Dock, more capacity for Port of Burnie and Hobart Port precinct and common user infrastructure at NT’s Middle Arm Precinct.
IA has identified five new priority projects, including the Parkes Bypass (NSW), an upgrade to the Newell Highway that connects Brisbane and Melbourne; road upgrades in western Sydney, Perth and Bunbury; and an upgrade to the Commonwealth Ave Bridge over Lake Burley Griffin in Canberra.
The list of six “high priority” projects have not changed since an update last August, and include Sydney’s M12 Motorway, City & Southwest Metro, and Western Sydney Airport; Melbourne’s M80 Ring Road and North East Link; and Brisbane Metro.
The intellectual case for the latest shift is rooted in a landmark IA report in December that identified five megatrends that would shape infrastructure needs in the post-pandemic world: digitisation, localisation, decentralisation, service innovation and adaptability.
IA’s catalogue is viewed as a living document, that is modified as projects move into construction or the nation’s needs are judged to have changed. This year 44 new proposals for consideration by Australian governments have been added to the list.
IA classifies “projects” as advanced proposals with a fully developed business case that has been positively assessed by its board, while “initiatives” are proposals determined to have the potential to address a nationally significant problem or opportunity that require further work.
Word count: 702
