The loss — a 136.9 per cent turnaround on the previous corresponding period — included Estia’s $11.7m contribution to the class action settlement and a $796,000 impairment.
Excluding these costs, the group reported an underlying profit of $3.8m. Revenue meanwhile firmed 2 per cent to $322.5m.
Chief executive Ian Thorley said Victoria’s second COVID-19 outbreak, which resulted in the deaths of 36 Estia residents “tested the sector in a way never previously experienced”.
“Our absolute priority throughout the COVID-19 pandemic has been the health, safety and wellbeing of our residents and employees and we had no hesitation in committing whatever was required to that priority,” Mr Thorley said.
“Supported by strong governance, depth of management and our financial capacity, we committed more than $20m in additional costs across our workforce, infection prevention and Control, PPE, cleaning, waste disposal, and staff and family welfare support”.
By last July, so severe were the COVID-19 outbreaks across Estia’s homes, that the company risked having its commonwealth funding revoked after it was served a “notice to agree” from the Aged Care Quality and Safety Commission.
“Eleven of our homes experienced outbreaks and notwithstanding the fact that we adopted the same rapid response plan at each (home), the COVID-19 outbreaks in Ardeer, Keilor, Keysborough and Heidelberg West homes resulted in the deaths of 36 residents. This caused a great sense of loss and sadness for residents, their families and our employees,” Mr Thorley said last November.
Earlier this month Estia settled a shareholder class action for $37.8m relating to market disclosures made between August 2015 and October 2018.
The disclosures related to Estia saying it was “on track” with the integration of Kennedy Health Care, which it bought in late 2015.
Shares soared to $7.33 following the Kennedy acquisition before plummeting 45 per cent after it downgraded earnings guidance in 2017.
Estia contributed $11.7m of the class action settlement, which was without an admission liability, while the remainder of the cost was “fully insured”.
“Estia’s board determined that the agreement to settle the shareholder class action was a commercial decision made in the best interests of the company and its shareholders,” Estia’s board said.
Outside Victoria, 42 of Estia’s homes recorded an occupancy rate of 93.5 per cent in the six months to December 31. Meanwhile, occupancy rates for 27 homes in Victoria were 85.1 per cent, falling to 82.5 per cent in mid-October. Spot occupancy improved to 87.8 per cent as of February 19 this year.
The company’s shares closed 2.5 per cent higher at $2.08 on Tuesday compared with a 0.9 per cent gain across the broader share market.
“Estia’s first-half result was impacted by the pandemic, asset sales and the recently disclosed class action expense. While the bottom line result reflected these items we were encouraged to see the operational results, including revenue and wage costs, were largely as we expected,” Ord Minnett analysts said.
“We continue to see the outlook for Estia and the rest of the sector as contingent upon the Government’s response to the impending royal commission final report.”
Estia will not pay an interim dividend versus a payout of 5.4c a share, fully franked, for the same period last year.
Word count: 516
