Ms Frances Adamson For eminent service to public administration through the advancement of Australia's diplomatic, trade and cultural interests, particularly with the People's Republic of China and the Indo-Pacific region, to innovative foreign policy development and high level program delivery, and as the 36th Governor appointed in South Australia.
The Most Reverend Dr Phillip John Aspinall Qld For eminent service to the Anglican Church of Australia, to the development of ecumenical relationships and professional standards, and through commitment to social justice and welfare.
Ms Barbara Avalon Baker New Town Tas For eminent service to the people of Tasmania through leading contributions to the law, to the judiciary and to the administration of justice, particularly in the area of family law, to professional legal organisations, and as a mentor and role model for young women, and as the 29th Governor appointed in Tasmania.
Emeritus Professor Kurt Lambeck AO Hughes ACT For eminent service to science, particularly to geophysics and geodesy, through research roles at the national and international level, to professional scientific organisations, and to education.
Mr David Graeme McAllister AM Melbourne Vic For eminent service to the performing arts, particularly to ballet both nationally and internationally, to artistic directorship and dance education, and as a mentor.
Officer (AO), General Division
Professor Philip Geoffrey Alston New York USA For distinguished service to the law, particularly in the area of international human rights, and to legal education.
Mr Philip John Bacon AM Fortitude Valley Qld For distinguished service to the arts, to social and cultural organisations, and through support for young artists.
Professor Peter Mark Bartold AM Beaumont SA For distinguished service to dentistry, to periodontal research and education, and to professional dental organisations.
Professor Adrian Bauman NSW For distinguished service to public health, to the prevention of chronic disease, and to tertiary education.
The Honourable Patricia Anne Bergin SC Cammeray NSW For distinguished service to the law, and to the judiciary, to legal administration, and as a mentor and advisor.
Emeritus Professor Colin William Binns Jindalee WA For distinguished service to medical research, to tertiary education, to public health policy and human nutrition.
Mr Russell Stewart Boyd Cremorne NSW For distinguished service to the visual arts as a cinematographer of Australian feature films and television productions.
Mr Gerard Patrick Bradley Taringa Qld For distinguished service to public administration, to economic policy, and to the community of Queensland.
Ms Suzi Carp Hawthorn Vic For distinguished service to medical research, to children, and to the community through leadership roles.
Dr Bridget Mary Carty NSW For distinguished service to people who are deaf or hard of hearing, to education and research, and to the community.
Dr Patrick Toby Hewlett Coates College Park SA For distinguished service to renal medicine, to professional medical organisations, and to tertiary education.
Mr Everald Ernest Compton AM Aspley Qld For distinguished service to the aged welfare sector through advocacy and advisory roles, to the Uniting Church in Australia, and to the community.
Ms Peta-Louise Mary Credlin East Melbourne Vic For distinguished service to parliament and politics, to policy development, and to the executive function of government.
Mr Neale Francis Daniher AM Vic For distinguished service to people with Motor Neurone Disease and their families through advocacy, public education and fundraising initiatives.
Professor Stephen Misha Davis AM Toorak Vic For distinguished service to medical education, to stroke research, and to the management of cerebrovascular disease.
Ms Erika Elizabeth Feller Vic For distinguished service to the international community, to the recognition and protection of human rights, and to refugee law.
Professor Susan Fletcher Bayswater WA For distinguished service to medical research, to neurological science, and to the treatment and support of those with Muscular Dystrophy.
Dr Ian Richard Freckelton QC Northcote Vic For distinguished service to the law, and to the legal profession, across fields including health, medicine and technology.
Professor Paul Philip Glasziou Qld For distinguished service to medical education and standards, and to evidence-based medical research.
The Honourable Michael Patrick Grant Darwin NT For distinguished service to the law, and to the judiciary, particularly as Chief Justice of the Northern Territory.
Dr Vanessa Ann Guthrie WA For distinguished service to the minerals and resources sector, and as a role model for women in business.
Mr Warwick Donald Hemsley WA For distinguished service to the arts, to the community, and to the residential development sector.
Dr Michael Henderson Church Point NSW For distinguished service to motor vehicle and motorsport safety, and to the prevention of road trauma.
Mr Ian William Hicks AM Toorak Vic For distinguished service to the community through philanthropic support for the arts, education and social welfare bodies.
Professor Donald William Howie SA For distinguished service to medicine in the field of orthopaedics, and to professional medical organisations.
Mrs Kay Elizabeth Hull AM Wagga Wagga NSW For distinguished service to rural and regional communities through health, skills development, and agricultural organisations.
Mr Peter Alexander Ivany AM Point Piper NSW For distinguished service to the community as a supporter of sporting, arts, film, not-for-profit, and natural science organisations.
Mr Cameron James Kerr NSW For distinguished service to wildlife conservation, to animal science education, and to zoological associations.
Ms Janine Anne Kirk AM Vic For distinguished service to the community through leadership and advisory roles in not-for-profit organisations.
Dr Evans Lagudah Ngunnawal ACT For distinguished service to agriculture and food science as a researcher in the area of wheat genetics.
Professor Jane Alexandra McAdam Roseville NSW For distinguished service to international refugee law, particularly to climate change and the displacement of people.
Clinical Professor Michael John McDaniel NSW For distinguished service to Indigenous tertiary education, to the advancement of social cohesion through reconciliation, to the performing arts, and to the community.
Professor Geoffrey Lionel Metz AM Melbourne Vic For distinguished service to medicine, to medical education both nationally and internationally, and to professional medical organisations.
Ms Christine Nixon APM Vic For distinguished service to law enforcement, to women in policing, and to tertiary education.
Professor Leonard George Notaras AM Darwin NT For distinguished service to medical administration in the Northern Territory, and to professional organisations.
Emeritus Professor Robert Baden Offord Ocean Shores NSW For distinguished service to tertiary education in the field of human rights, social justice, and cultural diversity.
Dr Ann Margaret O'Neill WA For distinguished service to the community through support for people affected by family and domestic violence.
Dr Suzanne Mary Packer AM Lyons ACT For distinguished service to children through roles in health, welfare and protection initiatives.
Emeritus Professor Lester John Peters AM Toorak Vic For distinguished service to medicine, particularly to radiation oncology, and to professional medical groups.
Clinical Professor Carol Anne Pollock Manly NSW For distinguished service to medical research, education and science, to nephrology, and to clinical practice and governance.
Dr Stephen Rich Rintoul AAM Tas For distinguished service to climate science through oceanographic and Antarctic research and policy development.
Mr Paul Salteri AM Sydney NSW For distinguished service to the community through philanthropic support for a range of organisations, and to business.
Professor Richard Anthony Scolyer NSW For distinguished service to medicine, particularly in the field of melanoma and skin cancer, and to national and international professional organisations.
Mr Kenneth John Smith Vic For distinguished service to public administration, and to public sector leadership and education.
Mr Douglas Norman Snedden Neutral Bay NSW For distinguished service to the community through social welfare, health, and cultural institutions.
Emeritus Professor Alan Osbourne Trounson Ashburton Vic For distinguished service to medical science, and to in vitro fertilisation and stem cell technologies.
Mr Ian Richard Trust Kununurra WA For distinguished service to the Indigenous community, to economic and social development, and to emerging first nations leaders.
Professor Anne Frances Twomey NSW For distinguished service to the law, to legal education, and to public education on constitutional matters.
Emeritus Professor James Stanislaus Williams AM Holder ACT For distinguished service to the physical sciences, to tertiary education, and to professional scientific organisations.
Professor Stephen Donald Wilton WA For distinguished service to medical research, to neurological science, and to the treatment of Muscular Dystrophy.
Member (AM), General Division
Dr Richard Abbott Dulwich SA For significant service to medicine, and to leukaemia research.
Mr Soheil Abedian Qld For significant service to the community, and to the property development sector.
Emeritus Professor Jaynie Louise Anderson Parkville Vic For significant service to tertiary education, particularly to art history in Australia.
Dr John T Andrews Vic For significant service to nuclear medicine, and to professional societies.
Professor Philip Edmund Aylward Unley Park SA For significant service to medicine, and to community health administration.
Dr Brian Keith Babington Yarralumla ACT For significant service to children through safety and well-being initiatives.
Dr Ian Charles Baldwin Diamond Creek Vic For significant service to critical care nursing, and to medical research.
Professor Kylie Ball Vic For significant service to physical activity and nutrition education.
Professor James Gerard Barber Parkville Vic For significant service to tertiary education administration, and to youth.
Associate Professor Lennie Barblett WA For significant service to tertiary education, and to early childhood teaching.
Ms Narelle Joyce Barker Eastwood NSW For significant service to education, and to the community.
Dr Gavin John Becker Brighton Vic For significant service to medicine, to nephrology, and to professional societies.
Dr John Leslie Bennett Randwick NSW For significant service to education, to mathematics, and to curriculum standards.
Professor Michael Heywood Bennett South Coogee NSW For significant service to medical education, and to hyperbaric medicine.
Mr Noel Anthony Beven Campania Tas For significant service to horticulture, to agriculture, and to rural youth.
The Honourable Mark Alexander Birrell Canterbury Vic For significant service to the infrastructure sector, and to business.
Mr Howard Michael Blake Sandy Bay Tas For significant service to accounting, and to the public sector.
Dr Soren Blau Vic For significant service to forensic medicine, and to scientific organisations.
Mr Andrew Wayne Blode Toorak Vic For significant service to children as an advocate for protection policy standards.
Dr Lissant Mary Bolton For significant service to the museums sector, and to anthropology.
Mr Simon George Bouda Waverley NSW For significant service to the television and print media, and to the community.
Mr Brian James Boulton Carindale Qld For significant service to the law, and to the judiciary, particularly to District Courts.
Mr John Bowe Vic For significant service to motorsport as a touring car driver.
Ms Mieke Brandon Qld For significant service to dispute resolution and mediation.
Ms Anne Bremner Moonee Ponds Vic For significant service to people who are deaf or hard of hearing through sporting associations.
Emeritus Professor John Barnard Bremner Balgownie NSW For significant service to tertiary education, and to biomolecular science.
Mr Michael Ronald Brennan Campbell ACT For significant service to the law, and to community organisations.
Professor Margaret Susan Brock SA For significant service to tertiary education, and to Indigenous history.
Professor Kevin John Brophy Brunswick Vic For significant service to tertiary education, and to creative writing.
Ms Shayne Ann Brown Double Bay NSW For significant service to medicine through orthoptic associations.
Ms Rosalind Elaine Butler SA For significant service to women, to vocational education, and to gender equity.
Mr Marcus Canning WA For significant service to the arts, and to the community of Perth.
Ms Susan Gail Carr Melbourne Vic For significant service to interior design, to education, and to women in business.
Ms Elizabeth Jane Carrigan Kangaroo Point Qld For significant service to community health, notably to pain management.
Ms Loretta Carroll Mudgegonga Vic For significant service to the livestock industry, and to the community.
Mr Peter Carroll NSW For significant service to the performing arts as an actor.
Mr Joseph Carrozzi Clifton Gardens NSW For significant service to business, and to the community through multicultural and not-for-profit organisations.
Dr Annette Elizabeth Carruthers Dudley NSW For significant service to community health, and to people with Multiple Sclerosis.
Emeritus Professor David John Carter Paddington Qld For significant service to tertiary education, and to cultural and literary studies.
Mr Gregory Thomas Chamberlin Paddington Qld For significant service to the print media through editorial roles.
Professor Judith Lynne Charlton Vic For significant service to road safety and injury prevention research.
Ms Kerry Anne Chikarovski Millers Point NSW For significant service to the Parliament of NSW, and to the community.
Mr Roland Desmond Chin Leanyer NT For significant service to the community of the Northern Territory.
Mr Lee Christofis Fitzroy Vic For significant service to the performing arts, particularly to dance.
Clinical Professor Flavia Cicuttini Hawthorn Vic For significant service to medicine, and to musculoskeletal disease research.
Dr Leon Wakefield Clark Empire Bay NSW For significant service to medical administration, and to healthcare delivery.
Ms Elizabeth Ann Clarke Terang Vic For significant service to harness racing in Victoria, and to the community.
Emeritus Professor Deborah Joy Clayton Yeppoon Qld For significant service to tertiary education, and to international study programs.
Associate Professor Lynette Elsie Clearihan Southbank Vic For significant service to medicine, and to medical education.
Mr Anthony John Cochrane Southport Qld For significant service to sports administration, and to entertainment production.
Mrs Joanna Collins SA For significant service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Richard Thomas Collins SA For significant service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Professor John Connell Bronte NSW For significant service to tertiary education, particularly to the geosciences.
Dr John Edward Coolican North Sydney NSW For significant service to dentistry in the field of orthodontics, and to rugby union.
Ms Kate Copeland Qld For significant service to health infrastructure planning and management.
Ms Stephanie Copus Campbell Campbell ACT For significant service to aid and development initiatives in Papua New Guinea.
Mr Colin Cornish Malvern East Vic For significant service to the performing arts, to music, and to youth.
Mr Philip John Cornish Vic For significant service to the telecommunications sector, and to the community.
Mrs Elizabeth Ann Cousins Melbourne Vic For significant service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Ian Scott Cox SA For significant service to people who are homeless, and to the community.
Professor Lawrence Edward Cram Forrest ACT For significant service to tertiary education, and to astronomy and astrophysics.
Mr Julian Hillary Cribb Franklin ACT For significant service to science communication.
Dr Elizabeth Anne Crock Brunswick Vic For significant service to nursing, particularly to people living with HIV/AIDS.
Mr John Roger Crosby West Lakes SA For significant service to agribusiness, and to the farming sector.
Emeritus Professor Ann Curthoys Glebe NSW For significant service to tertiary education, to social history, and to research.
Dr Allan Lindsay Curtis Rosewhite Vic For significant service to environmental management education and research.
Dr John Christopher Daley South Yarra Vic For significant service to public policy development, and to the community.
The Honourable Cheryl May Davenport WA For significant service to the Parliament of Western Australia, and to the community.
Professor Christopher Bernard Del Mar Robina Qld For significant service to tertiary education, to health and medical research, and to professional bodies.
Professor Amalia Di Iorio Vic For significant service to tertiary education, to skills development, and to women.
Mr Ronald Frank Donnellan Kirwan Qld For significant service to children, to cycling, and to the community of Townsville.
Mr Roger Thomas Dooley Ashgrove Qld For significant service to community health, to psychology, and to professional societies.
Dr Trevor Dowdell Golden Beach Qld For significant service to artistic gymnastics through a range of roles.
Mrs Rose Downer Vic For significant service to the visual and performing arts as a patron and supporter.
Dr David Durrheim Green Point Reserve NSW For significant service to public health medicine, and to international health.
Ms Katherine Louise Eastman NSW For significant service to the law, to human rights, and to professional organisations.
Ms Harriet Claire Elvin Forrest ACT For significant service to arts administration in the Australian Capital Territory and to the community.
Ms Angela Emslie Melbourne Vic For significant service to the finance and superannuation sectors, and to suicide prevention.
Mr Robert Henry Estcourt Wollstonecraft NSW For significant service to the financial management sector.
Dr Bronwyn Joy Evans Paddington NSW For significant service to engineering, to standards, and to medical technology.
Dr Kenneth William Evans Sorrento WA For significant service to education, to independent schools, and to public administration.
Ms Judi Farr NSW For significant service to the performing arts as an actor.
Mr Matthew James Fehon Hunters Hill NSW For significant service to the community through a range of roles.
Dr Jennifer Fitzgerald Vic For significant service to people with disability through leadership and advocacy roles.
Mr Rodney Milton Fitzroy Melbourne Vic For significant service to healthcare, to racing, and to the commercial real estate sector.
Mr Rodney Thomas Forrester Maroochydore Qld For significant service to the community of the Sunshine Coast.
Ms Nancy Suzanne Fox Kirribilli NSW For significant service to the financial and banking sector, and to women in business.
Emeritus Professor Susan Evelyn Fraser Mosman NSW For significant service to tertiary education, and to health and medical organisations.
Mrs Marion Fulker Salter Point WA For significant service to urban planning and infrastructure development.
Ms Anne Maree Gardiner South Melbourne Vic For significant service to lifesaving organisations through a range of roles.
Mr Michael Arthur Gay South Yarra Vic For significant service to industrial relations, and to international labour organisations.
Mr William Gibbins Vermont Vic For significant service to horse racing, and to people with disability.
Mr David Ian Gibbs St Kilda Vic For significant service to the community, and to the chartered accounting profession.
Mr Brian John Gilbertson Thorngate SA For significant service to festivals and events in South Australia, to opera, and to voice education.
Dr Peter Nicholas Gilchrist Unley Park SA For significant service to psychiatry, particularly to people with weight disorders.
Rabbi Yaakov Glasman St Kilda East Vic For significant service to Judaism and interfaith dialogue, to rabbinical bodies, and to the community.
Mrs Louise Mary Gourlay OAM Vic For significant service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Ian Leslie Gray Vic For significant service to the law, and to Indigenous justice.
Mr Robert John Gregory Valley View SA For significant service to the community of South Australia.
Professor Gilles Guillemin NSW For significant service to science education, to Motor Neurone Disease research, and to sport.
Dr Jane Lavinia Halliday Vic For significant service to medicine, and to reproductive epidemiology.
Mr Robert James Hamilton Mosman NSW For significant service to the property development sector, and to urban renewal.
Judge Felicity Pia Hampel Melbourne Vic For significant service to the judiciary, to legal organisations, and to women.
Ms Helen Hardcastle Cottesloe WA For significant service to corporate governance and leadership organisations.
Mr John Robert Hardie Leura NSW For significant service to science education, and to professional societies.
Dr Elizabeth Harris North Ryde NSW For significant service to equity in healthcare, to research, and to social work.
Professor Narelle Lorraine Haworth Indooroopilly Qld For significant service to the road transport industry, and to accident research.
Mrs Jill Margaret Healey Vic For significant service to education through leadership and advisory roles.
Mr Brendan Matthew Heenan Alice Springs NT For significant service to the tourism industry in central Australia.
Mr Christopher Hemsworth NSW For significant service to the performing arts, and to charitable organisations.
Emeritus Professor Beryl Lilian Hesketh NSW For significant service to STEM education, and to organisational psychology.
Mr James Hewish Chipping Norton NSW For significant service to short track speed skating through a range of roles.
Mr George Maurice Hoad Killabakh NSW For significant service to the residential horticulture industry, and to the community.
Mr Kevin John Holtom Watermans Bay WA For significant service to open water swimming, and to professional organisations.
Mr Robert Malcolm Hook Lake Wendouree Vic For significant service to the community of Ballarat.
Professor Rosemary Sylvia Horne Carlton North Vic For significant service to paediatric medicine, and to infant mortality prevention.
Mr Rob Justin Hulls Strathmore Vic For significant service to the people and Parliament of Victoria, and to the law.
Mr Peter George Irwin Waratah NSW For significant service to tertiary education, to geography, and to the community of Newcastle.
Professor Claire Louise Jackson Qld For significant service to primary health reform, and to general practice medicine.
Dr John Samuel Jell Coorparoo Qld For significant service to environmental science education, and to geological societies.
Ms Wendy Johnson SA For significant service to secondary education in South Australia.
Dr Belinda (Bidda) Sumner Jones Braidwood NSW For significant service to animal welfare science and advocacy.
Mr David Fletcher Jones Mosman NSW For significant service to the museums and galleries sector, and to the community.
Dr Nigel Ronald Jones North Adelaide SA For significant service to neurosurgical medicine, and to medical societies.
Mr Charles Justin Prahran Vic For significant service to the museums sector, to arts administration, and to architecture.
Mr Epaminondas Katsalidis Vic For significant service to architecture, and to sustainable construction innovations.
Mr Timothy John Keeler Boonah Qld For significant service to the community through a range of roles, and to education.
Mr Charlie King OAM NT For significant service to the Indigenous community of the Northern Territory.
Dr Geoffrey Macdonald Knight Melbourne Vic For significant service to professional dental associations, and to the community.
Professor Sabina Margaret Knight Mount Isa Qld For significant service to rural and remote health, nursing and education.
Mr John George Kotzas South Brisbane Qld For significant service to the performing arts as an administrator and artistic director.
Mr Wayne Noel Kratzmann New Farm Qld For significant service to the visual and performing arts, and to education.
Ms Letitia Lancaster Leichhardt NSW For significant service to oncology nursing, and to professional societies.
The Reverend Dr Cecilie Marion Lander Aspley Qld For significant service to neurological medicine, and to the Anglican Church of Australia.
The Reverend Dr Mervyn Meredith Lander Aspley Qld For significant service to paediatric medicine, and to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Ms Anna Oi Chan Lao Denistone NSW For significant service to badminton, and to the multicultural community.
Mr Harvey Douglas Lister Hamilton Qld For significant service to the arts, tourism, sport, and to the venue management and events industries.
Dr Andrew Brantley Lu OAM Shenton Park WA For significant service to the visual and performing arts, to the law, and to legal education.
Dr Heather Gwen Mack Toorak Vic For significant service to ophthalmology, particularly to professional colleges.
Professor Alan Mackay-Sim Qld For significant service to tertiary education, and to biomedical science.
The Reverend John Warrenne Maddern RFD Fulham Gardens SA For significant service to the Uniting Church in Australia, and to the community.
Emeritus Professor Toni Magdalena Makkai Wallaroo NSW For significant service to tertiary education, and to public administration.
Professor Neil Bressay Manson Springrange NSW For significant service to tertiary education, particularly to physics.
The Late Mrs Loisette Matilda Marsh Cottesloe WA For significant service to marine science and zoology.
Professor Frank Louis Mastaglia Claremont WA For significant service to neuromuscular disease, and to professional associations.
Ms Helen Maxwell-Wright Armadale Vic For significant service to child welfare, to diabetes research, and to the community.
Ms Maree Anne McCabe Vic For significant service to people living with Alzheimer's and Dementia, and to the aged care sector.
Ms Fiona McCormack Vic For significant service to victims of crime, and to the prevention of family violence.
Ms Christine Frances McLoughlin NSW For significant service to business, to the not-for-profit sector, and to women.
Associate Professor Faye Beverley McMillan Coolamon NSW For significant service to Indigenous mental health, and to tertiary education.
Mr Peter Godfrey McMullin Melbourne Vic For significant service to business, to the law, and to the community.
Dr Timothy Francis McNamara St Kilda Vic For significant service to tertiary education, and to applied linguistics.
Mr Peter Andrea McPhee Nunawading Vic For significant service to the community through a range of organisations.
Dr Erica McWilliam Grange Qld For significant service to education, and to pedagogy and gender equity.
Mr Anthony Peter Melville Birchgrove NSW For significant service to corporate and government communications.
Dr Jane Melville Reservoir Vic For significant service to herpetological research, and to the museums sector.
Dr Bryan Christopher Mendelson Toorak Vic For significant service to aesthetic plastic surgery, and to medical societies.
Ms Ann Elizabeth Miller Hawthorn Vic For significant service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Mark Justin Miller NSW For significant service to visual and performing arts administration.
Ms Kathryn Ann Mitchell Murrumbeena Vic For significant service to urban planning, and to professional associations.
Ms Lolita Veronica Mohyla SA For significant service to architecture, and to construction law.
Mr Scott Norman Monaghan Mylneford NSW For significant service to Indigenous health, and to medical research.
The Honourable Murray Scott Montgomery Albany WA For significant service to the Parliament of Western Australia, and to the community.
Mrs Robyn Barbara Moore Sandford Tas For significant service to charitable organisations, and to the performing arts.
Mr Danny William Murphy South Perth WA For significant service to urban development, and to the community.
Dr Keith Louis Mutimer Brighton Vic For significant service to plastic surgery, and to the international community.
Professor Debra Faye Nestel Barwon Heads Vic For significant service to medical education through simulated teaching methods.
Dr Patrice Newell Gundy NSW For significant service to the environment, and to sustainable farming practices.
Mr Thuat Van Nguyen OAM Padstow NSW For significant service to the multicultural community of NSW, and to youth.
Ms Vivienne Nguyen Vic For significant service to the multicultural community of Victoria.
Ms Julie Oberin Vic For significant service to women and children experiencing family violence.
His Honour Kerry John O'Brien Qld For significant service to the law, and to the judiciary in Queensland.
Dr Barry Stephen O'Loughlin Clayfield Qld For significant service to medicine, and to medical administration.
Mrs Janette Mary Owen South Guildford WA For significant service to the Indigenous community through dental health initiatives.
Mr Andrew Papadopoulos Earlwood NSW For significant service to motorsport, and to driver safety and education.
Ms Shelley Jane Penn Williamstown Vic For significant service to architecture and design in the public realm, and to professional institutes.
Mr Larry Clifton Perkins Cowangie Vic For significant service to motorsport as a touring car driver and team owner.
Mr Anthony John Phillips Craigburn Farm SA For significant service to optometry, and to professional optical societies.
Mr Craig Phillips Maroubra NSW For significant service to high profile sporting organisations through executive roles.
The Honourable David James Porter Tas For significant service to the law, and to the judiciary, in Tasmania.
Ms Leah Maree Purcell NSW For significant service to the performing arts, to First Nations youth and culture, and to women.
Mrs Mavis Randle Charlestown NSW For significant service to hockey, and to the community.
Ms Jan Rice Mount Waverley Vic For significant service to nursing, to wound care, and to education.
Professor Robyn Lesley Richmond Darling Point NSW For significant service to tertiary medical education, and to public health.
Mr Christopher Michael Rigby Annandale NSW For significant service to health and aged care organisations.
Emeritus Professor Ian Douglas Riley Bawley Point NSW For significant service to tertiary medical education, notably to tropical health.
Mr John Charles Risby Merewether Heights NSW For significant service to the steelmaking industry, and to the community of Newcastle.
Mrs Vivienne Ritchie Vic For significant service to the Anglican Church of Australia, and to the community.
Mrs Vicki Joan Roach Longueville NSW For significant service to neuroscience nursing, and to professional federations.
Mrs Pamela Jean Robinson OAM Vic For significant service to conservation and the environment, and to the community.
Professor Ute Roessner Vic For significant service to tertiary education, particularly to the biosciences.
Ms Glenyys Dorothy Romanes Brunswick Vic For significant service to the Parliament of Victoria, and to the community.
Ms Coral Ross Hawthorn East Vic For significant service to local government, and to gender equality.
Ms Elana Rubin Elwood Vic For significant service to corporate governance, and to the community.
Dr Elizabeth Anne Rushen East Melbourne Vic For significant service to community history and heritage preservation.
Dr Sarah Anne Ryan Watson ACT For significant service to the environment, to education, and to the community.
Mr Colin Saltmere Qld For significant service to the Indigenous communities of North West Queensland.
Emeritus Professor Barbara Jean Santich SA For significant service to tertiary education, to gastronomy, food culture and history.
Mrs Elizabeth Anne Scarce Malvern SA For significant service to the community of South Australia through a range of roles.
Mr Clive Ian Scott Fitzroy Vic For significant service to the hotel accommodation industry, and to the arts.
The Late Mr Raymond Walter Scott Suttontown SA For significant service to the road transport industry, and to the community.
Dr Helen Scott-Orr PSM Potts Point NSW For significant service to public administration, to biosecurity, and to veterinary science.
Mr Gregory Peter Shand NSW For significant service to the Jewish community, and to charitable initiatives.
Clinical Associate Professor Gary Fred Sholler Rose Bay NSW For significant service to paediatric medicine, and to tertiary medical education.
Ms Julie Shuttleworth WA For significant service to the minerals and mining sector.
Mr Vallence Gary Simonds Melbourne Vic For significant service to the building and construction industry, and to charitable initiatives.
Mr Graeme William Sinclair Ringwood Vic For significant service to accountancy, to business, and to the not-for-profit sector.
Mr Craig John Smith-Gander Cottesloe WA For significant service to surf lifesaving, to transport logistics, and to the community.
Mr Trent John Smyth South Yarra Vic For significant service to international relations, to motorsport, and to business.
Dr Gillian Ann Sparkes Vic For significant service to environmental sustainability, and to public administration.
Dr Victor Roy Squires Kensington Park SA For significant service to the environment, notably to the ecology of rangelands.
Dr Charles John Steadman Gold Coast Qld For significant service to tertiary medical education, and to gastroenterology.
The Honourable Sydney James Stirling Leanyer NT For significant service to the Legislative Assembly of the Northern Territory, and to the community.
Mr Thomas Bernard Stodulka Landsborough Qld For significant service to the law, and to mediation and dispute resolution.
Dr Julie Claudia Stone Vic For significant service to child mental health, and to psychiatry.
Mr Ricky Stuart ACT For significant service to rugby league, and to the community.
Mr Karim Sumar West Pennant Hills NSW For significant service to the Ismaili community, and to the convenience retail industry.
Ms Ricci Edith Swart Vic For significant service to the media and film industries, and to the community.
Mr Robert William Talbott OAM Beverly Hills NSW For significant service to the community through a range of roles.
Dr Albert Ee San Tan Wembley WA For significant service to tertiary dental education, and to periodontics.
Professor Tele Tan WA For significant service to information and communication technology, and to people on the autism spectrum.
Mr Colin Tate NSW For significant service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Professor Helena Teede Vic For significant service to medical education and research, to endocrinology, and to women's health.
Mr James Frederick Thane Annandale NSW For significant service to the performing arts as a theatrical producer and advisor.
Mr Anthony Charles Thomas Malvern East Vic For significant service to education, particularly to children with special needs.
Professor Emeritus Doreen Anne Thomas Camberwell Vic For significant service to tertiary engineering education and research, and to women.
Dr Geoffrey Laughton Thompson Nightcliff NT For significant service to sports medicine, and to Paralympic athletes.
Emeritus Professor James Toouli Hove SA For significant service to tertiary medical education, notably to gastroenterology.
Dr Neil Clifford Turner Watermans Bay WA For significant service to agricultural and environmental science, and to education.
Dr Linette Veitch Westleigh NSW For significant service to nurse education, and to international health programs.
Ms Charlotte Vidor NSW For significant service to the multicultural community, to tourism, and to urban planning.
Professor Beverley Janine Vollenhoven Hawthorn East Vic For significant service to tertiary medical education, to obstetrics and gynaecology.
Ms Amanda (Mandy) Joy Walker Vic For significant service to film as a cinematographer, and to professional societies.
Ms Joan Warhurst Reid ACT For significant service to education, and to research and curriculum development.
Mr Barry John Watchorn Canterbury Vic For significant service to the superannuation sector through a range of roles.
Mrs Maxine Joy Weber Mount Barker SA For significant service to children, particularly to infant mortality prevention.
Dr Tracy Gillian Westerman WA For significant service to the Indigenous community in mental health and suicide prevention.
Mrs Rhonda Joyce Weston Middle Ridge Qld For significant service to aged persons' education, and to the community of Toowoomba.
Dr Betsy Williams Arno Bay SA For significant service to international health, and to medicine as a general practitioner.
Ms Gina Williams Bassendean WA For significant service to the performing arts, to Indigenous music, and to media.
Dr George Wilson Deakin ACT For significant service to wildlife conservation, to veterinary science, and to the community.
Ms Susan Dorothy Woodward Northcote Vic For significant service to the not-for-profit sector, to fundraising, and to the law.
Associate Professor Edwina Jane Wright Eltham Vic For significant service to medicine and research, notably for people living with HIV/AIDS.
Mr Jeremy Maughan Wright Pyrmont NSW For significant service to the not-for-profit sector, and to the performing arts.
Mr Robert David Yallop Hall ACT For significant service to international humanitarian aid organisations.
Dr Judith Nancy Yates NSW For significant service to housing and economic research, and to education.
Mr Keith Robert Yates Kings Park SA For significant service to the minerals and mining sector, and to the community.
Professor Peter Shane Yu ACT For significant service to the community, particularly to Indigenous cultural and political organisations.
Ms Leanne Zalapa Randwick NSW For significant service to the Prince of Wales hospital foundation, and to health education.
Dr Richard Maxwell Zuber Gladesville NSW For significant service to veterinary science, to professional colleges, and to education.
Medal (OAM), General Division
Mr Barry Lewis Abley Newtown Vic For service to the community of Geelong.
Mrs Margaret Adams Brunswick Vic For service to the community of Boroondara.
The Late Mr Nicholas Andrew Agocs Bedford WA For service to the multicultural community of Western Australia.
Ms Maria Alexiadis Vic For service to karate.
Dr Frank Peter Alford Croydon Vic For service to endocrinology.
Associate Professor Kevin Patrick Alford Port Macquarie NSW For service to medicine as a cardiologist.
Mr Roger Blair Allan ACT For service to primary education, and to disability sports.
Dr Susie Janet Allanson Vic For service to community health as a psychologist.
Mrs Adele Marion Allen Vic For service to the community through the church.
Mrs Belinda Helen Allen East Lindfield NSW For service to youth through Girl Guides.
Mr George Amarandos Carindale Qld For service to the Greek community of Queensland.
Dr Antoinette Catherine Anazodo NSW For service to medical research.
Mrs Julia Jane Armstrong Jaspers Brush NSW For service to the performing arts through theatre support roles.
Mrs Prudence Margaret Armstrong NSW For service to the community of Moss Vale.
Ms Janice Edyth Armstrong-Conn South Yarra Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Ms Carmel Arthur Vic For service to the law.
Clinical Professor Eugene Athan Geelong Vic For service to infectious diseases medicine.
Mrs Wendy Anne Baarda Yuendumu NT For service to the Indigenous community of Yuendumu.
Mrs Cornelia Babbage Arundel Qld For service to the multicultural community of the Gold Coast.
Mr Hadyn Dennis Bailey Swan Hill Vic For service to the community of North West Victoria.
Mr Ian Humprey Bailey Broadview SA For service to people with disability through sport.
Dr Louise Baker Cowra NSW For service to rural and remote medicine.
Associate Professor Ramesh Balasubramaniam WA For service to dentistry.
Dr Peter John Baquie Southbank Vic For service to sports medicine.
Mr Les Barclay Weston ACT For service to swimming.
Mrs Shirley Lillian Bare Mulgrave Vic For service to community health.
Mrs Marie Margaret Barns Bicton WA For service to music.
Mrs Wendy Joan Barrett Lockleys SA For service to music.
Mrs Jennifer Wendy Barry Gladstone Qld For service to the community of Gladstone.
Mr Adrian Robert Bartak Caulfield North Vic For service to music.
Mrs Lorraine Helen Bartel Moree NSW For service to the community of Moree.
Mr Christopher William Bastian Nairne SA For service to youth.
Ms Barbara Bates Lapstone NSW For service to children.
The Reverend Colin Richard Baxter Newcastle NSW For service to the Uniting Church in Australia, and to the community.
The Late Mrs Ethel Emily Baxter Narrabundah ACT For service to the Indigenous community of Queanbeyan.
Mr Kevin George Beeck Bayonet Head WA For service to local government, and to the community of Albany.
Dr Diane Robin Bell ACT For service to literature.
Mrs Jean Isabel Bennett Cook ACT For service to the community of Canberra.
Wing Commander Peter John Bennetts (Retd) Urunga NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Manyang Berberi Vic For service to the South Sudanese community of Victoria.
Mr Mark Beretta NSW For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Thelma May Bevilaqua For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Petras Bielskis Glenside SA For service to the Lithuanian community of South Australia.
Ms Monika Biernacki Ingleside NSW For service to animal welfare.
Mr Jonathan Biggins Balmain NSW For service to the performing arts through theatre.
Mrs Sarnia Ann Birch Mount Martha Vic For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Catherine Anne Birkett Mooroopna Vic For service to the community of the Goulburn Valley.
Mr Kenneth John Birkett Mooroopna Vic For service to the community of the Goulburn Valley.
Ms Angela Jane Bishop NSW For service to entertainment journalism.
Mrs Regula Christine Black Black Rock Vic For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Jill Blackman Tooraweenah NSW For service to the community of Gilgandra.
The Reverend Dr Merryl Lois Blair Glen Iris Vic For service to ecumenical and interfaith organisations.
Mrs Ruth Ann Blanch Armidale NSW For service to the community of Armidale.
Mr Richard Kent Bligh Toowoomba Qld For service to the community of the Darling Downs.
Mr Beny Aterdit Bol Qld For service to youth.
Mrs Carol Bonamy McLeans Ridges NSW For service to the community of the Lismore region.
Mr Lawrence Frederick Bond Wollongong NSW For service to surf lifesaving.
Mrs Stephanie Bortkevitch Lambton NSW For service to netball.
Mr Henry Granger Boston Nedlands WA For service to the arts.
Mrs Nancy Clare Boyling Wingham NSW For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mr Dawson Stanley Bradford Popanyinning WA For service to the livestock industry.
Dr James Bradley Marrickville NSW For service to literature as a writer.
Mrs Ann Brett West End Qld For service to the Royal Life Saving Society.
Ms Lily Brett For service to literature as a writer.
Mrs Nada Brissenden South Coogee NSW For service to music.
Dr Rosemary Helen Brooks North Adelaide SA For service to tertiary education.
Mr Ken Broomhead Wangaratta Vic For service to the aviation industry.
Mx Jacki Joantares Brown Vic For service to people with disability.
Mr Michael Brown Manly NSW For service to rugby union.
Sr Deirdre Patrice Browne Hawthorn Vic For service to the community as a religious sister, and through music, education and the liturgical arts.
Mr Greg Allan Bruce Qld For service to local government, and to the community of Townsville.
Mrs Jennifer Florence Brukner Vic For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Dr Betsy Buchanan WA For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mrs Yen Bui Ashburton Vic For service to the Vietnamese community of Victoria.
Mr Donald Raymond Burge Hawthorn SA For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Tony William Burns Darwin NT For service to people with disability.
Mrs Margaret Bush SA For service to the community through animal clubs.
Mr Mark Anthony Byatt Wodonga Vic For service to local government, to regional development, and to the community of Hume.
Dr Geoffrey Charles Byrne Bayonet Head WA For service to paediatric endocrinology.
Mr Colin Anthony Cala Osborne Park WA For service to local government, and to the community of South Perth.
The Late Mr John Robert Caldon Waverton NSW For service to business through media content distribution.
Mrs Barbara Mary Callaghan Cowra NSW For service to music.
Mrs Prudence Marilyn Campbell Birregurra Vic For service to the community of Birregurra.
Ms Susan Campbell Mount Waverley Vic For service to youth through Guides.
Mr Alan Jack Carter Jewells NSW For service to children with disability, and to the community.
Ms Felicity Jane Carter Coomba Park NSW For service to the community of the Great Lakes region.
Mr Stephen Michael Cartwright Roseville NSW For service to business administration.
Mr Derrick Casey West Lakes SA For service to tertiary education.
Lieutenant Colonel Stephen Garnet Chamarette (Retd) Coolbinia WA For service to veterans.
The Late Miss Mary Julie Chandler Vic For service to the community of Red Cliffs.
Mrs Kaye Noelene Chapman Orange NSW For service to the community of Cowra.
Mrs Roberta Mary Chapman East Victoria Park WA For service to primary education.
Mr Reginald James Chard Villawood NSW For service to military history, and to veterans.
Mrs Heather Rose Chester Kingsley WA For service to environmental conservation.
Dr Anthony Chun Ming Cheung Baulkham Hills NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Colin Chirgwin Vic For service to youth.
Mrs Heather Christensen Beenleigh Qld For service to the community of Beenleigh.
Ms Karen Christensen Wandong Vic For service to the community of Wandong.
Mr William Ewart Church Yarrawonga Vic For service to the community of Yarrawonga.
Mr Giuseppe Rocco Cinanni Booragoon WA For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Kenneth Gary Clark Elanora Qld For service to surf lifesaving, and to the community.
Mr Arthur Coghlan Qld For service to the performing arts as a magician and escapologist.
Mr Dean Joel Cohen Caulfield South Vic For service to people with disability, and to the Jewish community.
The Reverend Dr James Anthony Collins NSW For service to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Mr Charles Graham Colman Brunswick Vic For service to music.
Mr Thomas Robin Conboy Mount Gambier SA For service to the community of Mount Gambier.
The Late Mr Allan Stuart Connolly NSW For service to cricket.
Mrs Judith Mary Connors Qld For service to the creative arts, particularly as a tatter and lace maker.
Mr Geoff Coombes Frenchs Forest NSW For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Ms Anne Martin Cooper Stanmore NSW For service to osteopathy.
Mrs Jan Elizabeth Cooper Wembley WA For service to Australian rules football.
Mr Stephen Julian Cordell Darling Point NSW For service to the Jewish community.
Dr Craig Cormick ACT For service to science, and to the community.
Dr Hugh James Cornell Vic For service to biochemical research, and to tertiary education.
Mr Graham George Corney Enoggera Qld For service to education governance.
Mr Barry David Costa South Penrith NSW For service to rugby league.
Dr Costas Costa Hurlstone Park NSW For service to medicine as a general practitioner.
Mr Lindsay Charles Cox Pascoe Vale South Vic For service to community history.
Mr Peter John Cox Mawson ACT For service to rugby league.
Mr Richard John Cox Tyabb Vic For service to the community of the Mornington Peninsula.
Mrs Virginia Hunter Cox Wauchope NSW For service to librarianship.
The Late Ms Judith Lorraine Crabtree SA For service to primary education.
Mr Andrew Hugh Craig Red Hill Qld For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Jeffrey James Cree AFSM Davidson NSW For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mrs Elizabeth Ann Creek Fullarton SA For service to the beef cattle industry.
Mrs Jeanette Lydia Crew Deniliquin NSW For service to Indigenous culture, and to conservation.
Mr Trevor James Cross Qld For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Wendy Cross Qld For service to the community through charitable organisations.
The Late Ms Vera Crvenkovic NSW For service to the Croatian community.
Mrs Nerida Cullen Goulburn NSW For service to the community of Goulburn.
Mr Alan Erskine Cummins Gordonvale Qld For service to caving.
Ms Pamela Elizabeth Cupper Dimboola Vic For service to education, and to the preservation of military history.
Mrs Jennifer Margaret Curnow Gilles Plains SA For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Kevin John Curran Victor Harbor SA For service to Australian rules football.
Mr John Handel Cutler NSW For service to the fashion industry.
Mr David Joseph Czerkies Pemulwuy NSW For service to the community through St John Ambulance.
Mrs Denise Marilyn Davies Thornleigh NSW For service to youth through Scouts.
Mrs Patricia Margaret Daw Williamstown Vic For service to badminton.
Mr Gary Francis Dawson Hurlstone Park NSW For service to Balkan and Hungarian folk arts.
Dr Teresa De Fazio Moonee Ponds Vic For service to tertiary education.
Mr Peter Charles de Rauch Hawthorn East Vic For service to community health, and to Australian rules football.
Mr Fouad Deiri Redfern NSW For service to the Lebanese community of Australia.
Dr Stephen Anthony Della-Fiorentina Mittagong NSW For service to oncology.
Mr Christopher Stanley Dempsey Manning Point NSW For service to cricket.
Ms Julie Ann Dempsey Vic For service to community mental health.
Mrs Betty Merle Denning Pittsworth Qld For service to the community of Pittsworth.
The Late Mr Matthew William Deveson NSW For service to the community of Narooma.
Mr Kenneth Richard Dickson Cleveland Qld For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Dr Amanda Jane Dines Paddington Qld For service to medicine.
Mrs Margaret Lynne Docking Bullioh Vic For service to the international community through health programs.
Mr Reginald Dodd Marree SA For service to the Indigenous community of Marree.
Mr William Joseph Doherty Bunyip Vic For service to Australian rules football.
Mrs Leonie Jane Donovan Wahroonga NSW For service to community history.
Mr John de Cruz Douglas Sandringham Vic For service to veterans.
Mrs Sandra Rose Doumany Sanctuary Cove Qld For service to the community of the Gold Coast.
Pastor Dale Dowler Nambour Qld For service to the community of the Sunshine Coast.
Mr Ian Francis Doyle Beulah Park SA For service to journalism, and to the community.
Mr Steven Michael Drinkwater Chuwar Qld For service to dog agility sports.
Dr Jan Dudley Kingsford NSW For service to obstetrics and gynaecology.
Mr Evan Duke Avenell Heights Qld For service to the community of Bundaberg.
Mr Trevor Harold Duniam Boat Harbour Tas For service to the community of Wynyard.
Mr Mark Wayne Durdin Narre Warren Vic For service to people who are deaf or hard of hearing.
Ms Katherine Susan Eccles Mosman NSW For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr Ian Roland Eckersley Harvey WA For service to primary industry.
Mr Brian Stewart Edward APM Geelong Vic For service to the community of Geelong.
The Late Mr Pierce David Edwards Middle Ridge Qld For service to the communities of Quilpie and South West Queensland.
Mr Gary Edwin Qld For service to golf.
Mr Adrian Francis Elder Bridgetown WA For service to the community of Bridgetown.
Mr Colin James Elliott Gilead NSW For service to the community of Campbelltown.
Mr William Edwin Ellis Gymea NSW For service to harness racing.
The Late Mr Donald Phillip Ellison Ballina NSW For service to horticulture.
Mr Belal Elmowy Punchbowl NSW For service to taekwondo, and to the community.
Mr Philip Leslie Emery Ocean Grove Vic For service to the community of Greater Geelong.
Mx Misty Farquhar WA For service to the LGBTQI community.
Mr Denis William Farrar NSW For service to the law.
Lieutenant Commander Leo Francis Farrelly (Retd) Kaleen ACT For service to youth, and to the community.
Mr Joseph Vincent Farrugia Gisborne Vic For service to the superannuation sector.
Mr Philip Morris Feinstein Rose Bay NSW For service to refugees.
The Late Mr Ronald Douglas Fenton Werribee Vic For service to the community through mental health advocacy roles.
Mr Kevin Fergusson Henley Beach SA For service to triathlon.
Mr Robert John Finn Victor Harbour SA For service to the community of Goolwa.
Mr John Andrew Ford Port Adelaide SA For service to the community of Port Adelaide.
Mrs Kerrie Ann Ford Holbrook NSW For service to community history.
Ms Lynda Ford Yarraville Vic For service to the multicultural community of Victoria.
Mr William Munro Ford Ashburton Vic For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Ms Abigail Margaret Forsyth Clifton Hill Vic For service to sustainable design.
Dr Scott Comber Fortey Avoca Beach NSW For service to medicine as an anaesthetist.
Mr Vincenzo Foti Elizabeth Hills NSW For service to the pyrotechnic industry, and to the community.
Mrs Vanessa A Fowler Ipswich Qld For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Rodney Alleric Fraser Norwood Tas For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Ms Susan Joy Fraser Richmond Vic For service to financial planning and counselling.
Dr Clifford Brodie Frith Malanda Qld For service to conservation and the environment.
Dr Dawn Whyatt Frith Malanda Qld For service to conservation and the environment.
Mrs Malaemie Patricia Fruean Minto NSW For service to the Pacific communities of NSW.
Mrs Lyn Fuller Googong NSW For service to music.
Ms Fiona Gardner Eaglehawk Vic For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Clinical Professor Peter Colin Gates Barwon Heads Vic For service to neurology.
Mr Edgar James Gaunt Cobbitty NSW For service to the communities of Camden and Cobbitty.
Mr Brian Kevin Gee Narara NSW For service to surf lifesaving, and to junior rugby league.
Mr John Gibson Wynyard Tas For service to the community of North West Tasmania.
Ms Emma Harriet Gierschick Edithvale Vic For service to the community, and to reflexology.
Mr Neville James Gilbertson Mount Gambier SA For service to the community of Mount Gambier.
Mrs Francoise Andree Gilroy Warriewood NSW For service to the community of North Sydney.
Mrs Joan Elizabeth Glen Vic For service to music.
Mrs Katrina Gliddon Newport Vic For service to the international community of Cambodia.
Mr Richard Roy Gloede Waikiki WA For service to Australian rules football.
Ms Rebecca Anne Goddard Vic For service to Australian rules football, and to women in sport.
Dr Stacy Kellan Goergen Port Melbourne Vic For service to radiology.
Mrs Christine Joan Goodfellow Brooklyn Park SA For service to veterans and their families.
Mr David Goodrich Castlecrag NSW For service to the community, and to the defence sector.
Dr Brian Richard Gordon Gooseberry Hill WA For service to the community through a range of roles.
Ms Penelope Ruth Gordon Ashgrove Qld For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Dr Peter Rob Gordon Yarra Glen Vic For service to disaster recovery as a psychologist.
Ms Elizabeth Ann Gosper Richmond Vic For service to people with disability through sport.
Ms Clare Grant NSW For service to the performing arts through administrative roles.
Mrs Norma Helen Grant NT For service to education.
Dr Peter Treacy Grant Fitzroy North Vic For service to gynaecological oncology.
Associate Professor Kathleen Mary Gray Vic For service to medicine through digital health education.
Mrs Oriel Green WA For service to the Indigenous community of Western Australia.
Professor Brin Felix Grenyer NSW For service to psychology.
Mr Dick Martin Guit Virginia NT For service to the building and construction industry.
Mr Allan John Guthrie Busselton WA For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Andrew Frank Guy Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Russell Martin Haines Ringwood Vic For service to community history.
The Reverend Pam Halbert Margaret River WA For service to the Anglican Church of Australia, and to the community of Western Australia.
Mr Allen Thomas Hall Wandong Vic For service to the community of Wandong.
Mr Graeme Lloyd Hall Adelaide SA For service to the community of Marion.
Ms Deborah Halpern Vic For service to the arts.
Mrs Pieternella Wilhelmina Haly Rosewood Qld For service to the community of Rosewood.
Mr Paul William Hammat Keilor Vic For service to the community through pastoral care.
Mr Brian Edward Hanley Strathmore Heights Vic For service to secondary education.
Mr Bashar Hanna Fairfield NSW For service to multiculturalism and refugee support in Western Sydney.
Dr David Linley Hare Vic For service to cardiology.
Mrs Margaret Edwina Hargans Bathurst NSW For service to the community of Bathurst.
Mrs Sandra May Haring Broken Hill NSW For service to the community of Broken Hill.
Mr David Russell Harris Vic For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Deborah Mary Harrison Somerton Park SA For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr John Richard Harry Vic For service to the community, to rowing, and to the legal profession.
Mr Lincoln John Hart Fairlight NSW For service to the tourism industry.
Dr Anthony S Hasham Campsie NSW For service to business, and to the Australian-Lebanese community.
Mr Medy Hassan Red Hill Qld For service to the building and construction industry.
Mrs Elizabeth Mary Hawthorne Toorak Vic For service to the international community of East Zambia.
Mrs Patricia Mary Hawthorne Saint Lucia Qld For service to the community of St Lucia.
Mr Bryan Kenneth Hearn McLaren Vale SA For service to the community of South Australia, and to football.
Miss Diane Claire Heaton Marrickville NSW For service to dance.
Mr Owen Leigh Hegarty Vic For service to the minerals and mining sector.
Mrs Leanne Heywood Peak Hill NSW For service to business through a range of organisations.
Mr Matthew Thomas Hickey Brisbane Qld For service to music, and to the law.
Mrs Joplin Higgins Scone NSW For service to the law.
Mrs Rita Hillier Wavell Heights Qld For service to the community through the Anglican Church of Australia.
Mrs Betty Pamela Hislop Mandurah WA For service to darts.
Mr Michael MacPherson Hocking Sandy Bay Tas For service to sailing.
Mr John Clelland Hocknull Yeerongpilly Qld For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mrs Rosavilla Hoffmann Mosman NSW For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Dr David Hobson Hooke Buln Buln East Vic For service to nephrology, and to aviation medicine.
Mr Alistair Geoffrey Horne Vermont South Vic For service to youth through Scouts.
Mrs Ngatuaine Hosking Clayton Vic For service to the multicultural community of Victoria.
Sister Adele Howard Vic For service to the Catholic Church of Australia, and to the community.
Ms Christine Anne Howe Epping NSW For service to secondary education.
Ms Keran Elizabeth Howe Williamstown Vic For service to people with disability.
Mr Robert Howe Avoca Beach NSW For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr George Hurley Gymea NSW For service to the community of the Sutherland Shire, and to football.
Mr Graeme Norval Hyde Elliminyt Vic For service to conservation, particularly through aviculture.
Mr Anthony John Irvine Port Lincoln SA For service to local government, and to the communities of the Eyre Peninsula.
Mr Barry Leonard Irving Rye Vic For service to the community of Rosebud-Rye.
Mr Phillip Isaacs Leura NSW For service to the community through a range of roles.
Professor Felice Jacka Vic For service to nutritional psychiatry research.
Mr Ronald Edwin Jackson Cessnock NSW For service to the community of Cessnock.
Mr John Jesse James Lane Cove NSW For service to rowing.
Mr Alexander Robert Johnson Heatherton Vic For service to golf, and to the community.
Mrs Barbara Joyce Johnson Naracoorte SA For service to the community of Naracoorte.
Mr Sam Craig Johnson Port Augusta SA For service to local government, and to the community.
Miss Susan Dianne Johnson Tarragindi Qld For service to the community, and to tenpin bowling.
Mr Nathan Johnston Helensburgh NSW For service to people with disability through sport.
Mr Pete Leslie Johnston Newcomb Vic For service to veterans.
Mrs Janet Lesley Jones Anglesea Vic For service to surf lifesaving, and to the community.
Mr Oscar Edwin Joppich Tanunda SA For service to the Lutheran church, and to the community.
Mr Alan William Joyce Point Lonsdale Vic For service to surf lifesaving, and to the community.
Ms Janet Jukes Fitzroy Vic For service to the community through LGBTIQ advocacy and social welfare organisations.
Associate Professor Sarah Jane Kelly Lota Qld For service to tertiary education, and to sports administration.
Mr Richard Edward Kenny Qld For service to rifle and pistol shooting, and to veterans.
Mr Graham Barry Kent East Devonport Tas For service to the community of Devonport, and to yachting.
Mr Edward Kerr Lindfield NSW For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mr Richard Ian Kew Darwin NT For service to business, and the community.
Dr Edith Khangure Nedlands WA For service to community history.
Mrs Lynne Killeen Werribee Vic For service to the Indigenous community, and to women.
Mr Peter John Kilmurray Bar Beach NSW For service to surf lifesaving.
Ms Alison Kincaid Albury NSW For service to nursing.
Mrs Hazel Monica King Berry NSW For service to horticulture, and to community history.
Mr Jeffrey Langdon King Duncraig WA For service to conservation.
Ms Rosanne Phyllis (Rosie) King Vic For service to sports administration.
Mr Roy Kirkby Highgate SA For service to korfball.
Mr Kevin John Kleemann Lobethal SA For service to the community of the Adelaide Hills.
Mr Cornelis Gerardus Klep Boronia Vic For service to youth through Scouts.
Mr Nevil Parish Knell Point Cook Vic For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Victor Gregory Knowles Mudgeeraba Qld For service to music, and to the community of Mudgeeraba.
Dr Igor Konstantinov Parkville Vic For service to medicine as a cardiothoracic surgeon.
Mr Harold George Kratz NSW For service to rowing.
The Late Mr Ricardo Erwin Krauskopf Hawthorn Vic For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Eduvard Krncevic Port Melbourne Vic For service to football.
Dr Santosh Kumar Doncaster Vic For service to the Indian community of Victoria.
Mr Brian John Ladd NSW For service to the public art galleries sector.
Mrs Janet Patricia Lambert Vacy NSW For service to the community of Vacy.
Mrs Sandra Dawn Lambkin Tintinhull NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Dr John Scott Langrehr Leabrook SA For service to tertiary education.
Mr Lawrence O'Hara Larmer Strathmore Vic For service to the community through a range of roles.
Dr Andrew Denis Lawrence Essendon Vic For service to the chiropractic profession.
Mr Glenn Lazarus Qld For service to rugby league.
Mrs Jennifer Duggan Leaper East Melbourne Vic For service to aged welfare.
Dr Richard John Leaper East Melbourne Vic For service to aged welfare.
Mr John William Elliott Leddy Qld For service to the community, and to engineering.
Mr John Albert Lee Bilambil Heights NSW For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Alexander McGown Lennox WA For service to veterans and their families.
Dr Alexander Douglas Levendel Paddington NSW For service to cardiology and nuclear medicine.
Dr Susan Patricia Lever Erskineville NSW For service to literature.
Dr Felicity-Ann Lewis Glengowrie SA For service to local government, and to the community of Marion.
Mrs Jacqueline Vanessa Liddiard WA For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Ronald Keith Lindenberg Toowoomba Qld For service to rugby league.
Dr Rimas Liubinas Alfredton Vic For service to medicine as a general practitioner.
Dr Robert Hugh Llewellyn-Jones NSW For service to psychiatry, and to children with developmental disability.
Mr Adam Ka-Ho Lo Qld For service to mental health, and to the multicultural community of Queensland.
Mrs Judith Ann Loffel Tamworth NSW For service to country music.
Mr Michael Long NT For service to Australian rules football, and to the Indigenous community.
The Late Mr William Rainsford Loughnan Paradise Point Qld For service to agriculture, and to the law.
Mr Ronald Louis Yokine WA For service to the financial sector, and to the community.
Mr Richard Geoffrey Love Davistown NSW For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Graham Frederick Lovell Epping NSW For service to the community of Epping.
Mr Keith Mayfield Lovelock Curramulka SA For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Martin Stephen Lowe Taylors Hill Vic For service to veterans.
Mr Paul Francis Lucas Hyde Park Qld For service to primary education.
Mr Harry Lynas Burpengary Qld For service to community history.
Mr Kevin John Lynch Soldiers Point NSW For service to the community of Newcastle.
Mrs Robyn Margaret MacIntosh Mosman NSW For service to the community of Sydney.
Mr Gordon Donald Mackenzie Cremorne NSW For service to tertiary education.
Ms Helen Madden Collingwood Vic For service to the performing arts as an artistic director and creative producer.
Professor Dianna Josephine Magliano St Kilda West Vic For service to epidemiology, and to tertiary education.
Ms Frances Ann Maguire NSW For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Patrick Joseph Maher Cremorne NSW For service to people with disability.
Ms Marie Theresa Mahon Maroochydore Qld For service to dance as a teacher.
Mr Christopher Gerard Mahony NSW For service to rugby league.
Mr Graham Maifredi Euramo Qld For service to white water rafting.
Mrs Estelle Flora Malseed Hawthorn Vic For service to community health.
Mr Alan Philip James Manly NSW For service to tertiary education.
Ms Felicity Marlowe Templestowe Lower Vic For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Izydor Marmur Vic For service to the Jewish community.
Mr Charles Henry Martin Kilsyth Vic For service to community history.
Mr Marko Peter Martinovich Maylands WA For service to public administration.
Dr Anthony Linton Marxsen Black Rock Vic For service to engineering.
Mr Thomas Bernard Massam WA For service to the real estate industry.
Mr Leslie George Mather Hoppers Crossing Vic For service to community health.
Mr Bruno Francois Maurel Putney NSW For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr John Frederick Mccaffrey Wollongbar NSW For service to people with disability.
Ms Dorothy Kate McConkey Geraldton WA For service to youth, particularly to road safety and drug awareness education.
Ms Julia McConnel Moruya NSW For service to parachuting.
Mr Alistair James McCooke Ocean Grove Vic For service to surf lifesaving.
Mr Terrence Hugh McCosker Yeppoon Qld For service to primary industry.
Mr Tom Mccullough Mount Martha Vic For service to the galleries sector.
Captain Edgar James McDermott (Retd) Deviot Tas For service to veterans.
Ms Peggy Janeen Mcdonald Fitzroy Falls NSW For service to conservation and the environment.
The Late Mr Darcy James McFadden Goonellabah NSW For service to the community of Lismore.
Ms Mary McGowan Brighton East Vic For service to nursing, and to the community through charitable initiatives.
Ms Florence Lesley McGurgan Parkdale Vic For service to local government, and to the community.
Ms Susan Kim McHattie Newcastle NSW For service to people living with Acquired Brain Injury, and their families.
Mrs Mairi Margaret Mcintosh Black Rock Vic For service to veterans, and to the community.
Ms Margaret Jane McIntyre Port Macquarie NSW For service to community health.
Mrs Rosanne Elizabeth McKeand Taroona Tas For service to the community through art programs.
Mr Ross McKenzie Rye Vic For service to cricket, and to the community of Rye.
Mr John Scott Mcleod Hamilton NSW For service to the community of Newcastle.
Dr Margaret Frances Mcleod Chewton Vic For service to conservation and the environment.
Ms Pamela Mcpherson Liverpool NSW For service to netball.
Mr Russell Devenish Meares Pymble NSW For service to mineral exploration.
Mrs Kym Meers Exeter SA For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr John William Melrose Batlow NSW For service to the community of Batlow.
Mr John Menzel Berri SA For service to horticulture.
The Late Mr Raymond Harold Mepham Inverell NSW For service to conservation and the environment.
The Late Mr David Mercer St Ives NSW For service to golf.
Mr Peter Thomas Meurer Mosman NSW For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mr Frederick Bernhard Miegel Alice Springs NT For service to nursing.
Ms Josephine Millard Burnley Vic For service to rowing.
Ms Amanda Miller Malvern Vic For service to the community through the philanthropic and impact investing sectors.
Ms Dannielle Miller NSW For service to education, to women, and to youth.
Mrs Desley Joan Miller St Lucia Qld For service to education, and to community mental health.
The Reverend Gayl Katrina Mills Deakin ACT For service to chaplaincy, and to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Mr Brenley McMillan Milsom Palm Beach Qld For service to the community of the Gold Coast.
Ms Roxanne Marsha Missingham Kambah ACT For service to the library and information sciences.
Mrs Elaine Myfanwy Mitchell Ceres Vic For service to the performing arts.
Mr Kevin Charles Mitchell Glen Waverley Vic For service to Australian rules football.
Ms Lauren Stephanie Mitchell WA For service to gymnastics.
Mrs Jennifer Grace Monaghan Kings Langley NSW For service to the community of Kings Langley.
Mrs Alison Elizabeth Monk Tas For service to hockey.
Mrs Kathleen Joyce Monley Templestowe Lower Vic For service to the community through a range of roles.
Major Margaret Ann More RFD (Retd) Richmond Vic For service to veterans.
Brother Stephen Joseph Morelli NSW For service to the Indigenous community of the Mid-North Coast of NSW.
Mrs Susan Beaufort Morgan Toorak Vic For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Miss Bernadette Ann Mottram RFD Marrickville NSW For service to nursing, and to veterans.
Mrs Joan Moylan NSW For service to the community through the Catholic Church of Australia.
Mr John Michael Mula Nailsworth SA For service to Catholic education.
Mrs Annette Elizabeth Mundt Beenleigh Qld For service to the community of Beenleigh.
Mrs Cynthia Munro Currumbin Qld For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Lindsay Edmund Murdoch Coconut Grove NT For service to journalism.
Ms Susan Veronica Murray Balmain NSW For service to the community, particularly to breast cancer research and suicide prevention.
Ms Diane Lesley Nailon Windermere Tas For service to early childhood education.
Dr Gerard Michael Naughtin Carnegie Vic For service to people with disability.
Mrs Carolyn Naunton Sedgwick Vic For service to youth through the Girls' Brigade.
Mrs Beryl Anne Neilsen Beaconsfield Qld For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Mary Anne Neilsen Red Hill ACT For service to the community as a church organist.
Mr Lance Robert Netherway Horsham Vic For service to the community of Wimmera Mallee.
Dr Michael Newman Bellevue Hill NSW For service to ophthalmology.
Mr Phong Thaddeus Aloysius Nguyen Vic For service to the Vietnamese community.
Ms Susan Elizabeth Nicholls Gulgong NSW For service to the community of Gulgong.
Mr Lorin James Nicholson Mansfield Qld For service to people who are blind or have low vision.
Mr Daniel Nicolas Strathfield NSW For service to business and commerce, and to the Lebanese community.
Mr Salim Nicolas Strathfield NSW For service to business and commerce, and to the Lebanese community.
Mr David Niven Ormond Vic For service to the law, and to consumer affairs.
Dr Michael Nixon Coconut Grove NT For service to rural and remote medicine.
Mrs Beverley Carmel Noonan Parkville Vic For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Ms Catherine Elizabeth Norman Mount Eliza Vic For service to aged welfare.
Mrs Norma Joan Notley Ryde NSW For service to youth through Scouts.
Ms Casey Michelle Nunn ASM Craigieburn Vic For service to the community of Craigieburn.
Mrs Judith Christine O'Brien Kiama Downs NSW For service to the community of Kiama.
Ms Megan O'Connell Vic For service to secondary education.
Mrs Karen Melita O'Neill Winston Hills NSW For service to people with disability.
Ms Laura O'Reilly Frenchs Forest NSW For service to people with disability.
Dr David Peter O'Rourke Garran ACT For service to medicine, and to the international community of West Timor.
Mr Robert Thomas Orr Geeveston Tas For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr James Ostroburski St Kilda East Vic For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mr Arthur David Owen Tocumwal NSW For service to cricket.
Mr Richard James Owen East Melbourne Vic For service to business.
Mr Nak-Yoon Paik Croydon Park NSW For service to veterans.
Mr Ewan Norman Palmer Emu Park Qld For service to the community of Rockhampton, and to rugby union.
Mr Arthur Papadimitriou Ormond Vic For service to the galleries sector.
Mrs Madeline Parish Woolgoolga NSW For service to the community of Coffs Harbour.
Mrs Catherine Parsons ACT For service to choral music.
Mrs Dianne Pascoe Charlestown NSW For service to netball.
Mrs Carol Ann Paterson Texas Qld For service to horse sports.
Mrs Dianne Joyce Paterson Springvale South Vic For service to youth through Guides, and to the community.
Mrs Helen Patsikatheodorou Mickleham Vic For service to the community of Hume.
Mr John Patterson Flemington Vic For service to horse racing.
Mrs Julie Ann Paul Doreen Vic For service to community health.
Dr John David Paull Lanena Tas For service to medicine, and to history.
Mrs Margaret Dawn Peacock Vic For service to the community of Frankston.
Mrs Karen Ann Pearce Warrandyte Vic For service to sport administration.
Mrs Marie-Louise Pearson Nakara NT For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Paul John Penno Eaglehawk Vic For service to veterans, and to the community of Bendigo.
Mrs Bella Perry Halls Head WA For service to the community of Mandurah.
Mr John David Perry Halls Head WA For service to the community of Mandurah.
Dr Astrid Perry-Indermaur Carlton NSW For service to the community through migrant and women's organisations.
Ms Erin Phillips SA For service to Australian rules football, and to basketball.
Mr Godfrey Phillips Caringbah NSW For service to hockey.
Mrs Janet Pike Winston Hills NSW For service to people with disability.
Reverend James David Pilmer PSM Camberwell Vic For service to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Dr Mark Pitney Blakehurst NSW For service to cardiology.
Mrs Joan Berenice Playford Kersbrook SA For service to the community of Kersbrook.
Mr Linsey Pollak Qld For service to the performing arts, and to music.
Mr Dug Pomeroy Vic For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mr Roger William Poole Armadale Vic For service to architecture, and to the community.
Ms Robyn Lee Porter ACT For service to science, and the community.
Miss Therese Margaret Post NSW For service to the community of Uralla.
Mr Horace David Poussard St Kilda East Vic For service to conservation and the environment.
Ms Jillian Prior Carlton Vic For service to the law.
Mr James Sidney Pulsford Morayfield Qld For service to conservation and the environment.
Mrs Donna Rae-Szalinski Wallington Vic For service to cycling.
Mr David Garth Rankin New York USA For service to the visual arts.
Mrs Kay Lynette Rankin Berwick Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Patricia Ann Ratsch Kingston SA For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Dr Hyam Barry Rawicki Vic For service to medicine as a rehabilitation specialist.
Ms Marea Christine Reading Rodd Point NSW For service to nursing.
Mrs Kathleen Mary Rehe Doncaster East Vic For service to tennis.
Ms Julie Kevall Reilly Hawthorn East Vic For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Kim Margaret Rhodes Tenterfield NSW For service to the community of Tenterfield.
Mr James Archibald Rice Monash ACT For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Ray Rice East Lindfield NSW For service to bicycling.
Ms Brenda Coralie Richards St Kilda Vic For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Dominic Charles Richards Cabarita Beach NSW For service to architecture, and to the community.
Ms Coralie Anne Richmond Bullaburra NSW For service to the community of the Blue Mountains.
Mr David Rickards Eastwood NSW For service to the not-for-profit sector, and to the environment.
Mrs Lynne Ridge NSW For service to industrial relations, and to the trade union sector.
Mrs Sylvia May Ridgway Koo Wee Rup Vic For service to the community of Koo Wee Rup.
Mr Roger Alan Riley Oatley NSW For service to rugby league.
Mr Michael Toufic Rizk Greenacre NSW For service to business and commerce, and to the Lebanese community.
Mr Michael Douglas Robertson Ermington NSW For service to the community as a foster carer, and to transport safety.
Dr Kaye Frances Roberts-Thomson Hawthorn SA For service to dentistry, and to the community.
Dr Laurence Roddick Bar Beach NSW For service to paediatric medicine.
Mr Victor Charles Rodwell Mornington Vic For service to the community of Hastings and Western Port.
Mr William Edward Roper Mentone Vic For service to amateur radio.
Mr Bevan Roy Routledge Murgon Qld For service to the community, and to sport.
Emeritus Professor James Baber Rowe Armidale NSW For service to science as a researcher and educator.
Dr David Francis Rowlands Main Beach Qld For service to medicine in general practice.
Mr Peter Harry Rubin Tumbi Umbi NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Gregory Ian Russell Everton Hills Qld For service to veterans.
The Late Mr Paul Douglas Russell Tolga Qld For service to the community of the Atherton Tableland.
Mr Leonard Andrew Ryan Kenmore Hills Qld For service to the community as a church organist.
The Late Mr Robert John Ryan Edgeworth NSW For service to athletics.
Ms Sonya Ryan SA For service to children as a cyber safety campaigner and advocate.
Mr Noel Desmond Saal Top Camp Qld For service to the community of South East Queensland.
Mr Amir Salem Chatswood NSW For service to the Egyptian community of Australia.
Mrs Pauline Mary Samson Tas For service to swimming.
Mr Ian Hunter Sandell Beaumaris Vic For service to youth through Scouts.
Mrs Wendy Margaret Sanders Beachmere Qld For service to cycling.
Ms Liberty Sanger Northcote Vic For service to the law, and to the community.
Mr Graham Biron Sauvage Baldivis WA For service to the aged care sector, and to the community.
Mrs Denise Hurley Schellbach Spring Hill Qld For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Dr Michael Roland Schultz St Peters SA For service to medicine as a surgeon.
Mr George Arthur Scott Wonthaggi Vic For service to the community of Wonthaggi.
Mrs Joan Lillian Scott Wonthaggi Vic For service to the community of Wonthaggi.
Mr Mark Anthony Scully CSM Mayfield East NSW For service to youth.
Mrs Pauline Beryl Sedivka Kingston Tas For service to music as a performer and mentor.
Dr Selvanayagam Selvendra Taylors Lakes Vic For service to multicultural organisations, and to medicine.
Mr Peter Clement Semmler QC Bellevue Hill NSW For service to the law.
Ms Helen Jean Shardey Caulfield North Vic For service to the Jewish community of Victoria.
Mr David Henry Shaw Port Melbourne Vic For service to the community health, and to Australian rules football.
Mrs Joanne Patricia Sheehan-Paterson Vic For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Ms Alison Jane Sherry Paddington Qld For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Ms Ruan Sims NSW For service to rugby league.
Mr Adrian Joseph Skurnik Rose Bay NSW For service to the Jewish community.
Mr Robert David Slater Killarney Heights NSW For service to football.
Mrs Elaine Mary Smith Narre Warren South Vic For service to refugees.
Mr Patrick Hugh Smith Sorrento Vic For service to the print media as a journalist.
Mrs Shirley Ann Smith Minyip Vic For service to the community of the Wimmera region.
Mr Matt Smolcic Elderslie NSW For service to aged welfare.
Dr Wendy Smyth Qld For service to nursing.
Mr Roxley Carl Snare Wynyard Tas For service to the community of Wynyard.
Mr David John Sollom Winston Hills NSW For service to rowing.
Mrs Cecilia Ellen Sounness Mount Barker WA For service to the community of Mount Barker.
Professor Melissa Caroline Southey Kew Vic For service to epidemiology and precision medicine.
Mrs Lesley Violet Sowell NSW For service to the community of the South Coast.
Ms Kaye Speed Vic For service to people who are blind or have low vision.
Mr Stephen Basil Spence Renwick NSW For service to veterans.
Mrs Vivian Mary Spilva Mulwala NSW For service to the community of Yarrawonga-Mulwala.
Mrs Faye Spiteri Melbourne Vic For service to the community through social change organisations.
Mrs Jackie Stamford Roseville Chase NSW For service to people with disability.
Mr John Francis Stanhope Healesville Vic For service to the community of Healesville.
Mrs Norma Stead Kiama NSW For service to tennis, and to the community of Kiama.
Ms Kobe Steele Bundall Qld For service to conservation and the environment.
Mrs Elizabeth Ann Stephenson Qld For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Lynette Elizabeth Stephenson Pakenham Vic For service to the community of Pakenham.
Mr Joseph Peter Stevens Toorak Gardens SA For service to athletics.
Mr Lloyd John Stevens Woodcroft SA For service to the Vietnamese community of South Australia.
Mr Jeffrey Stewart Drysdale Vic For service to the community of Drysdale.
Mr Lee Harvey Stockley North Bondi NSW For service to veterans.
Mrs Kathryn Louise Stokes Cottesloe WA For service to the minerals and mining sector, and to the community.
Mrs Shirley Joyce Stonestreet Dubbo NSW For service to the community of Dubbo.
Professor Glenn Reginald Summerhayes Otago New Zealand For service to tertiary education, and to history.
Mr Harold James Summers Cowes Vic For service to athletics.
Mrs Jill Swann Rostrevor SA For service to the galleries sector.
Mr Michael John Sweeney Hawthorn Vic For service to the community, and to the law.
Mrs Janet Patricia Synot Newtown Vic For service to the arts, to the community, and to badminton.
Ms Belinda Susan Tallis Manly NSW For service to the community through the not-for-profit sector.
Mrs Lesley Eleanor Tan Vic For service to audiology.
Ms Jennifer Dingena Tarrant Curtin ACT For service to the hair industry, and to humanitarian initiatives.
Mrs Helen Florence Tartellin Idalia Qld For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mr David John Taylor West Pennant Hills NSW For service to veterans.
Mrs Joan Osma Taylor Melbourne Vic For service to secondary education, and the community.
Ms Raylee Annette Taylor Helensvale Qld For service to community health.
Mr Alan Thomas Main Beach Qld For service to horse racing.
Mr David Norman Thomas Robe SA For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Robert John Thompson North Haven SA For service to surf lifesaving.
Ms Shantelle Joan Thompson Mildura Vic For service to the Indigenous community of Victoria.
Mr Edward Alan Thornburrow Bolwarra Heights NSW For service to the restaurant and catering industry.
Mr James Tilley NSW For service to seniors.
Dr Michele Toner Joondanna WA For service to community health.
Dr Albert George Graber Tonga NT For service to medicine through a range of roles.
Ms Marjolein Towler WA For service to women in business.
Ms Thanh-Kham Tran-Dang Vic For service to the Vietnamese community of Victoria.
Mr Frank Ronald Tudball Elanora Qld For service to tennis.
Ms Anne Therese Tudor Black Hill Vic For service to people living with Dementia and their supporters.
Mr Brian Turner Katoomba NSW For service to the veterans.
Miss Margaret Joan Turner Beaconsfield Vic For service to youth through Scouts.
Mrs Marion June Uebergang Oxley Vic For service to tennis.
Mrs Deborah Joan Upstill Mt Waverley Vic For service to the community of Monash.
Ms Pamela Judith Usher Chirnside Park Vic For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Dr John James van Bockxmeer WA For service to medicine, and to the community.
Mr John Vander Veeken Hawthorndene SA For service to football.
Mrs Pamela Marilyn Vardy Eltham Vic For service to horticulture, and to radio media.
Dr Philip Henry Vardy Wooloowin Qld For service to sailing.
The Honourable Rosemary Varty Seville Vic For service to the community, and to lawn bowls.
Ms Dindy Belinda Vaughan Croydon Vic For service to the arts.
Mr John Christian Vaughan Castlecrag NSW For service to vexillography and history preservation.
Mr Paul Kenneth Vear Wantirna Vic For service to squash.
Dr John Edward Veron Beatrice Qld For service to marine research.
Mrs Margaret Beryl Vincent Avondale NSW For service to community health.
Mr Barry Noel Vining Dolans Bay NSW For service to rugby league.
Mr Gino Anthony Vumbaca Maroubra NSW For service to public health, and to the justice system.
Mr Max Wald Port Melbourne Vic For service to the Jewish community.
Mr Anthony Louis Walker Portland NSW For service to veterans.
Mr Clive John Walker Myrtleford Vic For service to the community of Myrtleford.
Ms Mary Catherine Walker NSW For service to the law.
Mr Anthony Waller Coogee NSW For service to surf lifesaving, and to the community.
Mr Brendan Enda Walsh Lindfield NSW For service to radio.
Ms Alice Mary Walters Currumbin Waters Qld For service to the community through choral music.
Ms Hannah Louise Wandel Queanbeyan NSW For service to women's affairs, and the community.
Mr Geoffrey Wark Blackwood SA For service to Morris dancing.
Mrs Gwenyth Doreen Warmington Yass NSW For service to the community of Yass.
Mr Brian Norman Warren Goulburn NSW For service to veterans.
Mrs Allison Dawn Waterhouse Deakin ACT For service to community history.
Ms Julie Deirdre Watts Mount Martha Vic For service to literature as a publisher.
Ms Angela Jane Weeks Port Willunga SA For service to people with disability.
Dr Miriam Weisz Caulfield North Vic For service to community health.
Mr Robert Paul Wellington Malvern East Vic For service to science education.
Mr Brendan Cyrus Welsh Mosman NSW For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Jeanette Kaye Welsh Talarm NSW For service to the community of Macksville.
Mr Allan Leslie West Waikiki WA For service to veterans.
Ms Catherine Madeleine West NSW For service to the medical research community.
Mr Raymond Leslie Weston Grovedale Vic For service to youth, and to emergency response organisations.
Mr Brett Peter Weymark Camperdown NSW For service to the performing arts through music.
Mr Douglas Bruce Whan Barwon Heads Vic For service to the community through the church.
Mrs Claire Agnes White Yaapeet Vic For service to the community of Yaapeet.
Mr Martin Charles White Sandstone Point Qld For service to the community of Bribie Island.
Mr Timothy John White Daglish WA For service to music.
Mrs Margaret Isabell Whittaker Burleigh Waters Qld For service to the community of the Gold Coast.
Mr Alan Wiggins Mona Vale NSW For service to hockey.
Mr John Charles Wightwick Maidstone Vic For service to youth through Scouts.
Mr James Edward Wilcox Longford Tas For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Allan Barrington Williams Engadine NSW For service to the community of the Sutherland Shire.
Mrs Brenda Elizabeth Williams NSW For service to netball.
Mr John Suthern Williams Cooma NSW For service to the merino wool industry.
Ms Rosslyn Joy Williams Holder ACT For service to community health.
Mr Walter George Williams Narrabeen NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Dr Richard Lyall Willing Hindmarsh Tiers SA For service to conservation and the environment.
Miss Lyla Isabelle Wills Batchelor NT For service to primary education, and to the community.
Mr Robinson George Wilson Toukley NSW For service to veterans.
Mrs Gwen Margaret Winsor NSW For service to netball.
Mr Brian Wise Murrumbeena Vic For service to the broadcast media, particularly to radio.
Dr Eric Woehler Hobart Tas For service to bird ecology.
Clinical Professor Alan Michael Wolff Horsham Vic For service to medicine.
Mr Lawrence Raymond Woodman Malvern East Vic For service to sport coaching and development.
Mrs Jacqueline Sandra Wright Doncaster East Vic For service to international health.
Mr Brett Yeats Yarralumla ACT For service to the community of the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr Gregory Ross Young Karrinyup WA For service to veterans.
Mr Malcolm David Young Double Bay NSW For service to the community of Double Bay.
Ms Margaret Young NSW For service to early childhood education.
Mr Morri Young NSW For service to the community through a range of roles.
The Late Dr Valerie Constance Yule Vic For service to psychology as a clinician and author.
Mrs Margaret Joan Zell Tooraweenah NSW For service to the community of Tooraweenah.
Dr Karen Joy Zwi Neutral Bay NSW For service to paediatric medicine.
Officer (AO) Military Division
Australian Army
Major General Adam George Findlay AM For distinguished service and exceptional leadership as Special Operations Commander Australia, Commander Special Operations Joint Task Force - Iraq, and Commander of the 7th Brigade.
Member (AM) Military Division
Royal Australian Navy
Commodore Timothy Alan Brown RAN For exceptional service to the Royal Australian Navy, principally in leading submarine capability development.
Rear Admiral Jennifer Ruth Firman RAN For exceptional performance of duty in the field of military medicine.
Rear Admiral Mark Davenport Hill CSC For exceptional service as the Commander Joint Task Force 633 on Operation Accordion from June 2019 to January 2020.
Brigadier Douglas Watson Laidlaw CSC For exceptional service as the Commander 4th Brigade and Commander Joint Task Force 646 during Operation BUSHFIRE ASSIST 2019-2020.
Lieutenant Colonel Peta Mantel For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in the fields of medical intelligence, health leadership, and epidemiology and disease surveillance.
Brigadier David John Thomae For exceptional service as Adjutant General - Army, Commander 11 Brigade and Commander Joint Task Group 629.3.
Royal Australian Air Force
Air Vice-Marshal Alan Gregory Clements CSC For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in delivering the 2013 Force Structure Review, and in international engagement as Head of the Australian Defence Staff, Washington.
Warrant Officer Scott Anthony Doring For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in air surveillance operations and personnel capability development.
Group Captain Edward Allan Eather For exceptional performance of duty to the Australian Defence Force in legal services.
Air Commodore Damien Raymond Keddie For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in combat aircraft acquisition and sustainment, and organisational capability development.
Warrant Officer Ricki Paul Kiely For exceptional service in combat aircraft sustainment, Defence Aviation Safety Regulations development and implementation, and maintenance management in the Royal Australian Air Force.
Group Captain Martin Norman Nussio For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in capability acquisition and sustainment.
Air Commodore Dianne Marie Turton For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in the field of intelligence.
Group Captain Paul James Willmot CSC For exceptional service in aviation workforce sustainment for the Australian Defence Force.
Medal (OAM) Military Division
Royal Australian Navy
Warrant Officer Wayde Clifford Bilsborow For meritorious performance of duty as a Navy representative within the Air Warfare Destroyer Program.
Commander Roslyn Rose Connor RAN For meritorious performance of duty in the field of Navy leadership and cultural development.
Commander Griffyd Bryan Eldridge RAN For meritorious service in the field of Navy Marine Engineering.
Commander Paul Anthony Fothergill RAN For meritorious performance of duty in the recognition of service for current and ex-serving members, as the Director Navy Honours and Awards.
Commander Paul Colin Hornsby RAN For meritorious performance of duty in the field of robotic and autonomous systems.
Chief Petty Officer L For meritorious performance of duty in the field of Navy Clearance Diving.
Warrant Officer Shannon-Lee Samuel Power For meritorious performance of duty in the field of Navy and Joint Military Policing.
Australian Army
Major A For meritorious service in the development of frameworks for the management of sensitive, joint interagency capabilities over a period spanning more than two decades.
Warrant Officer Class One Andrew Jay Beaman For meritorious devotion to duty as the Artificer Sergeant Major of the 1st Brigade, 3rd Brigade and 1st Armoured Regiment.
Major David Andrew Devine For meritorious performance of duty in advancing the Australian Defence Force's Electronic Warfare, Signals Intelligence, Cyberspace and Advanced Capabilities.
Major Russell Wayne Hamsey For meritorious performance of duty in advancing the Australian Defence Force's unmanned aerial systems capabilities.
Warrant Officer Class One Virginia Lee Ann Morris For meritorious performance of duty as the Regimental Sergeant Major of 2nd General Health Battalion and 7th Combat Service Support Battalion.
Major Anthony John Said For meritorious service as the Operations Officer and Executive Officer of 2nd/17th Battalion, the Royal NSW Regiment, and as Brigade Major 5th Brigade.
Colonel James Graham Waddell For meritorious performance of duty as Director of Operations and Security Law and as Director of Army Legal Services for the Australian Defence Force.
Warrant Officer Class One Adrian Dennis Wilson For meritorious performance as the Regimental Sergeant Major of the 1st Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment, 2/30 Training Group Malaysia, 41st Royal NSW Regiment and as the Wing Sergeant Major Tactics Wing at the School of Infantry.
Colonel Susan Kaye Winter CSC For meritorious service as a specialist anaesthetist and intensivist on multiple overseas deployments and specialist medical advisor to the 2nd General Health Battalion, 3rd Health Support Battalion and Army Health Services.
Royal Australian Air Force
Warrant Officer Russell Leonard Beck CSC For meritorious service in aviation maintenance and safety reform for the Royal Australian Air Force.
Squadron Leader Scott Gregory Van Ginkel For meritorious performance of duty in pilot training development and implementation for the Australian Defence Force.
Member (AM) Honorary Division
Mrs Carol Berg Mosman NSW For significant service to mental health, to social justice, and to the arts.
Ms Karen Lorraine Lindley Arcadia NSW For significant service to social welfare initiatives, and to the jewellery industry.
Medal (OAM) Honorary
Mrs Joy Violet Campbell-Stephen Killarney Heights NSW For service to the community of North Sydney.
Mr Colin Frost VIC For service to electrical engineering.
Dr Peter Jeffrey Harris Williamstown VIC For service to maritime heritage preservation.
Mrs Jennifer Myfanwy Thompson Batemans Bay NSW For service to the community of Batemans Bay.
Mr Paul Watmough VIC For service to swimming.
Public Service Medal (PSM)
Federal
Ms Jessica Isla Ballinger Deagon Qld For outstanding public service through social support services for Indigenous and vulnerable people in Queensland.
Mr Shane Andrew Bennett Narrabundah ACT For outstanding public service to the development of social security policies, particularly to the design of the government's economic support payments during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Dr Sarah Jane Benson Pearce ACT For outstanding public service through driving innovation and forensic science capability for the Australian Federal Police.
Ms Elisabeth Mae Bowes Kingston ACT For outstanding public service to international trade policy, particularly as Head of the Tobacco Plain Packaging Taskforce.
Mr James Buttigieg Kingston ACT For outstanding public service to consular and crisis management, and enabling complex arrangements for the repatriation of Australians abroad during COVID-19.
Mr Shane Patrick Carmody Yarralumla ACT For outstanding public service to modernising air safety regulations and drone pilot licencing.
Ms Chris Faulkner Vic For outstanding public service to complex development of policy in support of Australians with a disability during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mrs Belinda Jane Fraser Fraser ACT For outstanding public service to fostering collaborative arrangements for securing ventilators for the Australian government National Medical Stockpile in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mr Paul John Grigson Torrens ACT For outstanding public service through driving resolutions to complex issues and the government's response and recovery during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ms Anna (Anastasia) Harmer Torrens ACT For outstanding public service to law reform, and through leading the Office of the Royal Commission into Natural Disaster Arrangements.
Mr Matthew Frederick Hay Kellyville NSW For outstanding public service in the application of contemporary online services, core technology platforms, and complex IT systems for the Australian Taxation Office.
Ms Rachel Jasmine Jolly ACT For outstanding public service through innovative policy development and implementation supporting Pacific Islander workers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mr Peter Leonard Masterson Kiama NSW For outstanding public service through leading engagement with local business communities, linking them to government and Industry business grants and support programs.
Ms Alison Jayne McMillan Essendon Vic For outstanding public service to driving the government's national health response priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic, particularly to infection prevention measures.
Mr Niko Milic NSW For outstanding public service through the development of communications protocols in aged care facilities during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ms Debbie Mitchell Amaroo ACT For outstanding public service to the implementation of government policy and the delivery of streamlined Job Seeker service to support Australians.
Mr James Matthew O'Halloran Box Hill Vic For outstanding public service to superannuation reforms, and to the implementation of infrastructure to enable the government's economic support measures to Australians during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Ms Ann Elizabeth Redmond Curtin ACT For outstanding public service in program design, particularly through the support of the regional aviation industry as part of the COVID Aviation Response Task Force.
Mr Michael Ryan Fisher ACT For outstanding public service to policy and program development to ensure a supply of an agricultural workforce during COVID-19.
Ms Rebecca Lee Skinner Griffith ACT Outstanding public service in national security policy, intelligence, business transformation and service delivery.
Ms Celia Street Cook ACT For outstanding public service through driving the government's national health response priorities during the COVID-19 pandemic.
NSW
Ms Leanne Barnes OAM Merimbula NSW For outstanding public service to local government.
Dr Michelle Alna Cretikos NSW For outstanding public service to community health.
Ms Joanne Louise Edwards Epping NSW For outstanding public service to community health.
Mr Jason Scott Elderhurst Paddington NSW For outstanding public service to building services.
Mrs Karen Anne Jones Bateau Bay NSW For outstanding public service to education.
Dr Jeremy Montgomery McAnulty Westleigh NSW For outstanding public service to infectious diseases monitoring and environmental health.
Dr Christine Enid Selvey Waverton NSW For outstanding public service to infectious disease reporting and public health.
Ms Patrisha L van Tussenbroek NSW For outstanding public service to emergency planning and response in the education sector.
Victoria
Ms Rebecca (Beck) Angel Airport West Vic For outstanding public service to Victoria Police.
Ms Jenny Atta Vic For outstanding public service to strategic social policy reform and delivery.
Mr Denis William Flett Tatura Vic For outstanding public service to water management.
Mr Fernando Ianni Coburg Vic For outstanding public service to secondary education.
Ms Merrin Mason Brunswick East Vic For outstanding public service to law reform.
Dr Mark Norman Vic For outstanding public service to conservation and biodiversity management.
Mr Christopher David Reidy Newport Vic For outstanding public service to community celebrations.
Ms Linda Joan Weatherson Kew Vic For outstanding public service to social welfare initiatives.
Queensland
Mr Gregg Buyers Annerley Qld For outstanding public service to infrastructure projects.
Mr James Huggett Windsor Qld For outstanding public service to maritime safety.
Associate Professor Anthony Charles Lamont Qld For outstanding public service to paediatric radiology.
Dr Deborough Anne Macbeth Tamborine Mountain Qld For outstanding public service to community health.
Ms Annette Maree Scott East Toowoomba Qld For outstanding public service to community health
Western Australia
Ms Kirsten Jade Chivers Leeming WA Outstanding public service through roles with State Solicitor's Office.
Ms Nicki Godecke WA For outstanding public service to Western Australia through a range of roles.
Ms Kaylene Patricia Gulich Canning Vale WA For outstanding public service to Western Australia through a range of roles.
South Australia
Mr Scott Brenton Loechel Adelaide SA For outstanding public service to local government emergency coordination and assistance.
Ms Maxine Susan McSherry Kingscote SA For outstanding public service to the community of Kangaroo Island, and to education.
Professor Nicola Jane Spurrier Adelaide SA For outstanding public service to community health.
Australian Police Medal (APM)
Federal
Sergeant Gregory James Corin
Detective Superintendent Gail McClure
NSW
Superintendent Julie Catherine Boon
Detective Inspector Glen Murray Browne
Superintendent Rashelle Fiona Conroy
Detective Superintendent Paul James Devaney BM
Superintendent David Richard Driver
Superintendent Kylie Maree Endemi
Chief Inspector Gregory John Flood
Detective Chief Inspector Neil Anthony Hallinan
Chief Inspector Sean Patrick McDermott
Detective Superintendent Craig Neil Middleton
Detective Chief Inspector Paul Joseph Simpkins
Victoria
Senior Sergeant Greg Jason Dean
Superintendent Jenelle Fuller
Senior Sergeant Mark Douglas Hesse
Inspector Christopher Thomas Major
Detective Senior Sergeant Janet Ruth Mitchell
Superintendent Paul Gerard O'Halloran
Superintendent Peter Hans Seiz Port Melbourne Vic
Senior Sergeant Alfred David Watson
Queensland
Senior Sergeant Sean Kennet Baxendell
Detective Senior Sergeant Margaret Maureen Cassidy
Detective Senior Sergeant Daren Andrew Edwards
Chief Superintendent Brian Rex Huxley
Detective Senior Sergeant Jillian McCarthy
Detective Senior Sergeant Grant Douglas Ralston
Sergeant Megan Elizabeth Ward
Western Australia
Commander Allan Robert Adams
Detective Senior Sergeant Joseph Domenic Marrapodi
Detective Inspector Leo Ricciardi
Senior Constable Deslea Patricia Sloan
South Australia
Senior Sergeant Christopher Drew Holland
Senior Sergeant First Class Sharon Lynne Walker-Roberts
Senior Sergeant First Class Gregory Raymond Williams
Tasmania
Assistant Commissioner Adrian Paul Bodnar
Northern Territory
Superintendent Lauren Jane Hill
Fire Service Medal (AFSM)
NSW
Mr Leslie Carr Cootamundra NSW
Mr Noel David Cullane OAM Canowindra NSW
Mr Peter Gregory Dunn Walcha NSW
Ms Michelle Engelsman West Wollongong NSW
Mr Jeff Terrence Gould NSW
Mr Neville Denzil Lawrence OAM Newcastle NSW
Ms Carolyn Nancy Noon Kingswood NSW
Mr David Alan Peters NSW
Mr Geoffrey Peter Ryan Rockley NSW
Mr Paul Sweeney Narellan NSW
Mr Murray Vernon West Sackville NSW
Victoria
Mr Peter David Baker Grovedale Vic
Mr Garry David Cook Wangaratta Vic
Mr Brian William Petrie Gembrook Vic
Ms Kelly Marie Rash Traralgon Vic
Mrs Lesley Gay Read Seymour Vic
Mr Simon John Scharf Bell Post Hill Vic
Mr Alen Slijepcevic Hampton Vic
Mr Peter John Solly ASM Vic
Mr Stephen Michael Walls Campbells Creek Vic
Mr Steven John Watts St Helena Vic
Queensland
Mr Bradley Andrew Commens Robina Qld
Western Australia
Mr Andrew John Thompson WA
Australian Capital Territory
Mr Paul Robert Flynn Evatt ACT
Northern Territory
Mr Matthew Roger Wilson NT
Ambulance Service Medal (ASM)
NSW
Mr Peter James Cribbs Shell Cove NSW
Ms Simmone Louise Locke Terrey Hills NSW
Ms Michelle Rose Shiel Bligh Park NSW
Queensland
Ms Sandra Michelle Cowley Capalaba Qld
Mr Denis James O'Keefe Kingscliff NSW
Mr Peter Edward Solomon Glen Aplin Qld
South Australian
Mr Michael Klaus Bohrnsen Mt Barker SA
Australian Capital Territory
Mr Joel Edwin Powell ACT
Emergency Services Medal (ESM)
NSW
Mr Michael Raymond Boadle Orient Point NSW
Mr Peter George Kaye AM Ashfield NSW
Ms Heather Maree Stuart Unanderra NSW
Mr Christopher Warren Kiama NSW
Mr Anthony Paul Younglove Gosford NSW
Victoria
Ms Dinah Leeanne Boswell Albert Park Vic
Mrs Kimberley Ann Gee Newborough Vic
Queensland
Mr Brian John Cox CSC Mitchelton Qld
Australian Capital Territory
Mr James George Montgomery Macgregor ACT
Northern Territory
Mr David John Hawkes Palmerston NT
Corrections Medal (ACM)
NSW
Ms Sarah Elizabeth Howard
Mr Kenneth Hanipale Pese
Ms Louise Maree Smith
Victoria
Mr Brian Patrick Smith
Ms Elizabeth Ann Swales
Queensland
Ms Evie Georgas
Mr Larry John Guilfoyle
Ms Lucy Rockett
South Australia
Mr Mark Ronald Humphrys
Australian Capital Territory
Mr Steven Allen Morey
Commendation for Gallantry
Australian Army
Corporal Mitchell Jon Howden For acts of gallantry in action while a Section Commander in the Quick Reaction Force Platoon, Task Group Taji X, Iraq on 11 March 2020.
Bar to the Distinguished Service Medal (DSM and Bar)
Australian Army
Lieutenant Colonel S For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as a Task Group Commander on Operation OKRA from December 2019 to July 2020.
Distinguished Service Medal (DSM)
Australian Army
Colonel Nicholas James Foxall AM For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as Commander Task Group Taji X in the period November 2019 to March 2020.
Commendation for Distinguished Service
Australian Army
Corporal B For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as a Team Commander.
Lieutenant Colonel Meegan Bernadette Olding For distinguished performance of duties in warlike conditions as the Acting Chief Strategy and Plans Division, Coalition Joint Plans in the Combined Joint Task Force Headquarters of Operation Inherent Resolve during the period November 2019 to September 2020.
Captain P For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as a platoon commander.
Lieutenant Colonel Anna Reinhardt For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Senior Human Resources Advisor to the Ministry of Interior Affairs while force assigned to Operation HIGHROAD from 24th November 2018 to 8th September 2019, in Kabul, Afghanistan.
Bar to the Conspicuous Service Cross (CSC and Bar)
Royal Australian Navy
Commander Phillipa Hay CSC RAN For outstanding achievement in the field of Maritime Planning and Operational Command.
Captain Phillip Andrew Henry CSC RAN For outstanding achievement as Director Navy Recruiting Retention and Transition.
Conspicuous Service Cross (CSC)
Royal Australian Navy
Commander Gavin Ashley Milkins RAN For outstanding achievement as the Medical Head of Department and Senior Health Officer, HMAS Adelaide.
Lieutenant Commander Ashleigh Beth Payne RAN For outstanding achievement as Commanding Officer HMAS Bathurst.
Commander Moses Raudino RAN For outstanding achievement in the field of Navy training.
Commander Chloe Ryan RAN For outstanding achievement as a Navy Medical Officer during the national response to the coronavirus pandemic emergency.
Chief Petty Officer Benjamin Ashley Smith For outstanding achievement during the introduction into service of the Hobart Class Destroyers.
Commander Eloise Adele Twine RAN For outstanding achievement in the field of electronic warfare capability development.
Commander Darren White RAN For outstanding achievement in the application of exceptional skills, judgment and leadership as Commanding Officer HMAS Sheean, on operations from December 2017 to December 2019.
Australian Army
Colonel Justin John Alexander For outstanding devotion to duty in provision of education services at the Australian Defence Force Academy.
Lieutenant Colonel Daniel Lawrence Anderson For outstanding achievement in the application of exceptional skills, judgment and dedication as the Commanding Officer of the 1st Signal Regiment.
Lieutenant Colonel Stuart James Baldwinson For outstanding devotion to duty as the Commanding Officer/Chief Instructor of the Army School of Health.
Lieutenant Colonel Gregory Richard Brown NSC For outstanding achievement as the Officer-In-Charge of the Health Certification Team of the 3rd Health Support Battalion.
Lieutenant Colonel Gregory John Colton DSM For outstanding achievement as Staff Officer Grade One Professional Military Education - Army.
Brigadier Michael Edward Garraway AM For outstanding achievement in the application of exceptional skills, judgment and dedication as the Commander of Joint Task Force 1110, Operation BUSH FIRES ASSIST 2019-2020 and as Commander of Joint Task Group 629.1, Operation COVID-19 ASSIST.
Colonel Michael Joseph Hose For outstanding achievement in satellite communications development for Australia and the Australian Defence Force.
Colonel James Guthrie Hunter For outstanding achievement as the inaugural Director Force Structure Plan Directorate, orchestrating the delivery of the first quadrennial Defence capability assessment process.
Colonel James Alan Matchett For outstanding achievement in assuring the continual generation of Australian Defence Force capability through ab-initio recruitment.
Brigadier Christopher John Mills AM For outstanding achievement as the Director General Force Options and Plans through the application of exceptional skill, judgment and dedication in the planning and delivery of the 2020 Defence Force Structure Plan.
Lieutenant Colonel Robyn Kristine O'Donnell For outstanding achievement as the Chief Legal Officer, Army Headquarters.
Lieutenant Colonel Ross William Thomas For outstanding devotion to duty as the Staff Officer Grade One - Program Sustainment in Logistics Branch, Army Headquarters.
Brigadier Robert John Watson For outstanding achievement in the development and implementation of a Joint defensive cyberspace operations capability for the Australian Defence Force.
Royal Australian Air Force
Flight Sergeant Sean Alan Bell CSM For outstanding achievement in F-35A Joint Strike Fighter hardware systems fleet management; and in the establishment and development of mission data products.
Squadron Leader Paul Frederick Bowes For outstanding achievement in air-to-surface combat support integration training at Number 4 Squadron for the Royal Australian Air Force.
Group Captain Edwin Jamie Boyd For outstanding achievement in organisational reform and aviation training capability sustainment for the Australian Defence Force.
Squadron Leader Steven Henry Brady For outstanding achievement in establishing the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter mission data development capability for the Australian Defence Force.
Wing Commander Timothy Cantrill For outstanding achievement in military aircraft type certification as Engineering Manager of Project Air 8000 Phase 2 acquiring the C 27J Spartan transport aircraft.
Flight Sergeant Jenny Leigh Dillon CSM For outstanding devotion to duty in medical administration for the Australian Defence Force.
Squadron Leader Michael Jeffrey Dorman For outstanding devotion to duty to the Australian Defence Force in aviation risk management in complex operating environments.
Wing Commander Robert Michael Gill For outstanding achievement in knowledge systems development, operations planning, and improved allied interoperability for Headquarters Joint Operations Command.
Flight Lieutenant Simon John Hall For outstanding achievement in support of complex historic honours and awards research and outcomes, and administration of Royal Australian Air Force honours and decorations.
Flight Lieutenant Aaron James Hardman For outstanding achievement in aerospace engineering, project management, and electronic warfare capability development for the Australian Defence Force.
Group Captain Paul Howard Jarvis For outstanding achievement in Air Combat and Airborne Electronic Attack capability development for the Australian Defence Force
Air Commodore David John Paddison For outstanding devotion to duty in combat capability development for the Australian Defence Force.
Wing Commander Collette Kristin Richards For outstanding devotion to duty in aviation medicine capability development and delivery for the Royal Australian Air Force.
Air Commodore Benjamin John Sleeman DSM For outstanding achievement in non-warlike operations whilst deployed as Director Combined Air and Space Operations Centre, United States Air Force Central Command.
Flight Lieutenant Andrew Luke Willersdorf For outstanding achievement in capability development of the C-27J Spartan at Number 35 Squadron for the Royal Australian Air Force.
Conspicuous Service Medal (CSM)
Royal Australian Navy
Lieutenant Commander Peter Edward Chapman RAN For meritorious achievement in the field of Maritime Logistics Officer Workgroup Management.
Lieutenant Commander Sarah Maree Eddes RAN For meritorious achievement as the Regional Manager of the Royal Australian Navy Fleet Support Unit North.
Chief Petty Officer Matthew Alan Graham For meritorious achievement in the application of exceptional skills and judgment as the Senior Technical Officer of HMAS Yarra.
Chief Petty Officer Kerrin James Lyon For meritorious devotion to duty as the Fleet Medical Submariner within Sea Training Unit - Submarines.
Commander Nicole Helen Mann RAN For outstanding achievement as the Deputy Director of the Navy People Career Management Agency.
Commander Dylan William Phillips RAN For outstanding achievement as the Commanding Officer of HMAS Toowoomba on Operation MANITOU from April to June 2020.
Leading Seaman Brendan Michael Robinson For meritorious achievement in the field of Signals Intelligence engineering support.
Lieutenant Jacqueline Rushford RAN For meritorious achievement as the Navigating Officer of HMA Ships Glenelg and Childers.
Lieutenant Commander Trevor Francis Teale RAN For meritorious devotion to duty as the Officer in Charge of the Submarine Support Group.
Australian Army
Warrant Officer Class Two B For meritorious devotion to duty as a Physical Training Instructor and Human Performance Optimisation Program leader within Special Operations Command.
Warrant Officer Class One Peter Wayne Brine For meritorious achievement in movements support for Australian Defence Force operations, humanitarian assistance and disaster relief activities, and the Asia-Pacific Economic Forum.
Lance Corporal Michael Alan Coulson For meritorious devotion to duty as the Australian Defence Force Liaison Officer to the National Heavy Vehicle Regulator.
Warrant Officer Class Two Karle Clyde Engstrom For meritorious devotion to duty as the as the Squadron Sergeant Major of C Squadron, 2nd Cavalry Regiment from 2018 to 2020.
Corporal Pierce Jordan Halliday For meritorious achievement as the Landing Craft Maintenance Section Commander at 35 Water Transport Squadron, 10th Force Support Battalion.
Warrant Officer Class Two Leigh Gary Hedger For meritorious achievement as the Regimental Technical Adjutant of the 3rd Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment, and Mechanised Warrant Officer of the 6th Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment.
Colonel Robert Barton Lording For meritorious devotion to duty as Deputy Commander and Acting Commander 8th Brigade (Training) during the period January 2018 to December 2019.
Major Benjamin Ian McCaskill For meritorious devotion to duty as the Staff Officer Grade Two Force Modernisation, Headquarters Forces Command and through the introduction into service of Project LAND 121 into Forces Command.
Sergeant Jarrad Robert Mildrum For meritorious devotion to duty as the Electronic Countermeasures Sergeant within the Land Countermeasures Reprogramming Cell at Army Headquarters.
Lance Corporal N For meritorious devotion to duty in the Special Air Service Regiment, Special Operations Command.
Private Warwick Edward Naggs For meritorious achievement as Acting Troop Leader Surveillance Troop, 2nd/14th Light Horse Regiment (Queensland Mounted Infantry).
Major Michael Anthony Sipple For meritorious achievement as Officer Commanding and Senior Project Engineer at 19th Chief Engineer Works.
Lieutenant Colonel Adam Wayne Sparkes For meritorious achievement as Staff Officer Grade One Land Intelligence, Systems and Integration Branch, Army Headquarters.
Major Carolyn Jean Wood For meritorious achievement in the application of authentic leadership as Officer Commanding, Specialist and Command Support Wing, Army School of Ordnance, and collaborative management through uncertainty during the 2020 Victorian bushfire crisis.
Royal Australian Air Force
Squadron Leader Dianne Beverley Bell For meritorious achievement in international engagement for the Royal Australian Air Force.
Group Captain Paul Anthony Bowler For meritorious achievement in operational planning and execution for the Australian Defence Force.
Wing Commander Damien Walter Fairhurst For meritorious achievement as the Commander of Task Unit 630.1 on Operation ACCORDION from October 2019 to June 2020.
Flight Sergeant Lorraine Isabel Morley For devotion to duty in training administration and development in the Air Warfare Centre for the Royal Australian Air Force.
CREDIT:
Word count: 18099
