BUSINESS SA is partnering with the Digital Health Cooperative Research Centre in a new program aimed at supporting start-ups as they emerge from the Covid-19 pandemic.
As part of the initiative, 10 start-ups operating in the digital health sector will be offered free access to Business SA’s business accelerator program.
The 12-month program covers a range of business growth topics including how to attract and retain customers, brand-building and the importance of leadership and culture.
Business SA chief executive Martin Haese said while there were many bright ideas being developed by the state’s tech entrepreneurs, many found it difficult to navigate important decisions, particularly during the uncertainty of Covid-19.
“We see this a lot across the whole business community where South Australians with unique ideas that can’t get to the next level,” he said.
“This can happen for many reasons, like start-ups hoping to improve productivity, attract investors, commercialise prod­ucts, or work with the research sector to develop their innovative ideas.” Last year, the centre, which is headed up by digital health entrepreneur and thought leader Dr Terry Sweeney, launched a national centre for innovation at Lot Fourteen.
He said the centre was well positioned to help boost the state’s digital health ecosystem.
“There are some exciting innovations coming out of the SA digital health sector right now,” Dr Sweeney said.
“Projects include using real-time data for personalised healthcare, predictive analytics for aged-care decision-making, and consumer-driven apps like the CareApp that give a window into care for families and their loved ones.” CareApp founder and chief executive Allison Nikula is the first local entrepreneur selected to participate in the Business SA program.
She said that it would address many of the challenges often faced by early-stage businesses.
“It can be an absolute minefield establishing your business at the pace of the digital health sector, and I encourage the start-up and scale-up community to take up this opportunity to support growth and success,” she said.
“In addition to being able to access coaching, growth consulting and advice, including workplace relations, the opportunity to be able to connect with like-minded peers will be an invaluable outcome from this program.” Business SA and the Digital Health Cooperative Research Centre are calling for expressions of interest in the free business accelerator program, via email at info@dhcrc.com.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 386
