ARTS and cultural industries have paid a heavy price during the Covid-19 pandemic, with postponements, cancellations and audiences hesitant to commit to ticket sales.
This has led to severe impacts on staff wellbeing and a crippling economic burden. Live Performance Australia says about $24bn and 79,000 jobs were lost in 2020.
As the Festival State, South Australia relies heavily on the success of festivals, which contribute more than $100m to the economy each year.
While we all want to wish Covid away, the international experience tells us the state will have significant outbreaks in coming months as we open up. Warning signs have been sounded in Melbourne, where a party celebrating the Melbourne Cup returned dozens of cases. Overseas, superspreader events are placing enormous pressure on governments.
Some experts warn we will continue to see outbreaks for up to four years, with the most high-risk settings being events such as festivals. A music event in the Netherlands attended by 20,000 people led to 1000 cases alone. Given the importance of SA’s festival season, the state government and organisers will need to be more diligent than ever before to ensure safety.
Acting retrospectively after an outbreak is risky. Organisers need to move beyond backward-looking audits and look to technology that can help them identify risks before they happen. It is imperative to use accessible data on where risks occur, with clear detail and action to alleviate them.
Too often through the pandemic we have been forced to use a heavy-handed approach to slam the gate the shut after the Covid horse has bolted. Such measures during the festival season would lead to event closures, causing community disappointment and financial devastation for organisers. The solution to saving our festival season is a digital one that alerts organisers to high-risk areas, with updated advice in real time. Outdated and static Covid-safe plans will not be enough.
Throughout Covid we have seen high-risk industries forced to operate on difficult-to-follow protocols that change so rapidly that they are often out of date by the time they are implemented.
This is a recipe for disaster.
There are available today digital Covid-safe-planning-and-risk-management systems that are in use across the world. SA’s festivals are too important to not ensure that we have used every measure to protect both the events and attendees. We need to make sure our festival season is not disrupted. Let’s implement technology-led approaches that will maintain SA’s crown as the Festival State. DIGITAL-HEALTH PLATFORM ENERGESSE CHIEF EXECUTIVE AVNESH RATNANESAN IS A PANDEMIC-­MANAGEMENT EXPERT
CREDIT: AVNESH RATNANESAN
Word count: 423
