FLINDERS University has joined forces with technology giant Cisco to launch a new industry and research collaboration centre at the Tonsley Innovation District.
Known as Innovation Central Adelaide, the hi-tech space is co-located in the university’s Digital Transformation Laboratory, and enables students and businesses to explore emerging technologies in advanced manufacturing.
It is part of a network of Innovation Central centres across Sydney, Perth and Brisbane.
Flinders University pro-vice chancellor of research innovation John Spoehr said the new centre would unlock a “treasure chest of technology” for local businesses, while also providing real-world learning opportunities for students.
“We have companies champing at the bit to do better, but they lack capacity,” he said.
“Innovation Central Adelaide gives them that capacity, supporting them to apply cutting edge design processes, rapid prototyping, simulation, and hi-tech visualisation technologies that would otherwise be beyond their reach.
“In addition, companies will be able to use Innovation Central Adelaide to experiment with a range of robotics and automation technologies.” Cisco Australia and New Zealand vice-president Ben Dawson said that as part of the new partnership with Flinders, the university had joined the National Industry Innovation Network (NIIN) – a Cisco-led industry and university alliance aimed at solving industry challenges through the adoption of technology solutions.
The NIIN is co-funded through Cisco’s Country Digital Acceleration (CDA) program – a $61m investment to accelerate Australia’s digital capabilities in industries of national significance.
“This world-class co-innovation commitment furthers our collaborative approach to innovative teaching and learning, and opens the door for world-leading research,” Mr Dawson said.
“The National Industry Innovation Network is an alliance working on nationally significant projects including securing critical infrastructure, connected education, net zero and sustainability, digital health, and hybrid work, to ­realise digital opportunities that can benefit the whole country.” The new collaboration centre at Tonsley was officially launched last week.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 310
