IT is hard, while in the midst of a pandemic, to look to the future and to what our health might be like once this is all behind us. But it is wise to do so.
We now know many who contract Covid-19 can experience effects that can linger for months – and possibly longer – after a person has been cleared.
This is because of a syndrome known as “long Covid”. It is believed to affect up to one in 10. Think extreme tiredness and fatigue and brain fog, where forming clear thoughts is difficult. Think shortness of breath and lack of physical endurance. Think depression.
What do we know about how we can reduce the risk of long Covid? The Covid-19 vaccines available in Australia are highly effective at reducing the risk of severe illness and death.
Widespread vaccination rates against Covid-19 also reduce the risk of community transmission, meaning a decline in the number of people who are infected. The more transmissible nature of the Delta variant means there is now greater risk of more people becoming infected.
It is outbreaks of this Delta strain that the population in Victoria, NSW and the ACT is trying so hard to now suppress.
The key is getting vaccinated – if you are eligible and haven’t yet done so – and following the public health orders in place.
We are learning more all the time about Covid-19 and its variants. It is important we get our information from credible sources and from those with expertise in preventing illness and death from this disease – not from scaremongers spread­ing misinformation.
I encourage you to seek information from credible sources such as your GP and the Health Department website.
Long Covid is one of the long-term consequences of this pandemic, which may persist well into the future. But there are other consequences that are not all bad.
The pandemic has had a transformative impact on the way health and medical services are delivered in Australia.
For instance, the uptake of telehealth and other digital health initiatives have been rapid and positive. There is also no doubt people now knows a lot more about epidemiology, virology and vaccines.
There are going to be serious health challenges in the future. The need for mental-health services has been exacerbated by job losses, business closures and quarantine measures. So, please do not put off appointments with GPs about new health concerns.
And please keep appointments for preventive interventions such as cancer screening.
It’s understandable, given the disruption Covid-19 has caused, that people are focused on the virus. But this should not be at the expense of continuing health treatments. PROFESSOR MICHAEL KIDD IS FEDERAL DEPUTY CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER
CREDIT: MICHAEL KIDD
Word count: 456
