BENEFITS OF IN-CARE TECHNOLOGY The Aged Care Industry Information Technology Council (ACIITC) is inviting residential aged care service employees to take part in a national survey investigating the use of technology in residential aged care facilities. Run in partnership with the Australian Digital Health Agency (ADHA), the survey aims to identify the types of clinical software used in residential aged care facilities across the country – and its ensuing benefits. The ACIITC’s 2020 report, Capabilities in Aged & Community Care Readiness: An Evaluation of Innovation & Technology, identified the most widely used clinical governance systems (other than financial management) are e-learning software, customer relationship management systems, clinical governance systems, planning and budget software, risk management software and asset management systems. The ACIITC will also use findings from focus groups involving national survey providers, general practitioners, and technology experts, to compile its report.
RATE INCREASE SUPPORT A “clear majority” of Australians support the compulsory super contribution rate following its legislated path from 9.5 per cent to 12 per cent by July 2025, according to a new study by the Australian National University. Amid a sometimes acrimonious debate about whether workers should be forced to set aside more of their pay for retirement amid historically weak wages growth, the ANU survey, conducted in January, found 55 per cent of respondents were in favour. A further 20 per cent said the rate should be lifted even higher than 12 per cent, matched by the number who believed it should stay at its current level of 9.5 per cent. Fewer than 5 per cent of those surveyed believed the rate should be lowered or abolished entirely. The study also found Australians were increasingly anxious about having enough money in retirement, with nearly six in 10 worried they would not be able to live comfortably when they stopped work. But more than 70 per cent of those who had already finished work said they definitely or probably had enough money to live comfortably for their retirement. – Patrick Commins
VACCINE STRATEGY The Australian Government has launched a new COVID-19 vaccination strategy for residential aged care staff. The four-pathway plan aims to help ensure workers can access a vaccine as quickly and safely as possible. In line with the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation recommendations, aged care staff aged 50 years and over will receive the AstraZeneca vaccine and those under the age of 50 will be offered the Pfizer vaccine. The second option is a progressive rollout occurring in state and territory vaccination clinics for both age groups. The third option involves dedicated pop-up vaccination clinics for residential aged care and disability workers under the age of 50. The fourth option, available for both age groups, is on-site vaccination clinics at residential aged care facilities where provides opt to conduct their own vaccinations. The health department has also developed a factsheet and infographic to support residential aged care workers to understand how they can receive a vaccination. – Glenda Korporaal
Word count: 497
