Where can I holiday with my cat?
Please tell me why so many places say “pet friendly” when all they mean is dog friendly. I have a cat who travels well (I always pack a litter box and her own scratching post), but whenever I go to book a motel, we get turned away.
With two cats of my own, I feel your pain and we’re far from alone. Surveys show almost a third of Australians have feline fur babies. The problem, of course, is that many of these aren’t exactly well-trained (cats have a tendency to overlook the scratching post and shred the furniture, and male cats can spray, causing a stomach-churning odour that’s difficult to remove). It isn’t just about bad manners on the road either – cat allergies among humans are more common than allergies to dogs (around one in five of us suffer from a pet allergy), and a cat’s licking and shedding can make a stay for subsequent guests close to intolerable. It’s potential bad press a hotel just doesn’t need.
The good news is cat-friendly hotels and motels do exist, but you will need to do a little research before you head off and always be sure to call to double-check first.
Pet Friendly Accommodation (pet-friendlyaccommodation.com.au) has a list of cat-friendly places to drop anchor (and kitty litter) for the night, and elsewhere standout options for puss include Quarterdecks Retreat in Hervey Bay, Queensland, Yondah Beach House, Point Yorke, SA, and Sydney’s The Langham. I’ve also enjoyed success booking cat-friendly places through both Airbnb and Stayz. Be sure to check out the fantastic podcast (and website) Catexplorer, which details places to stay and fun things to do with your feline.
Antarctica sailings for 2022 seem to be cheaper than ever and I’m keen to take advantage of the sales, but I’m concerned my kids might be a little too young. Is Antarctica a suitable destination for children aged 11 and eight?
From an educational point of view, I want to scream, “Yes, absolutely!” straight off the bat, but a more honest answer is the ever-murky (and searingly frustrating), “Well, that depends.” Getting to Antarctica is hardly straightforward. You’ll need to fly to Ushuaia, Argentina (a trip that involves a minimum of three flights, one way), before undertaking a two-day sail through Drake Passage where swells regularly exceed 10m. Meds will help, but you will need to consider how well your kids will cope with seasickness and, in some cases, the fear of watching large waves wash over the ship. Remember, too, that while there is always a doctor on board each ship, there is no hospital in Antarctica.
Environment aside, you will also need to choose your cruise operator carefully. Expedition ships to the white continent aren’t Carnival-style ships with their family-friendly entertainment, swimming pools and kids’ clubs. All the action happens during landings and on board you can expect lectures, daily recaps and in-house movies; the rest of the entertainment will be up to you.
Each operator has a different minimum age requirement: Aurora Expeditions recommends kids are eight years of age, minimum, Ponant has a minimum age requirement of six, while Hurtigruten requests kids are at least five. Of these cruise lines, Hurtigruten (particularly Amundsen and Nansen) is most suitable for young families, offering an explorers club where kids can work on projects in the Science Centre (temporarily stopped due to the pandemic). These two ships also have a pool, two hot tubs and an eatery heavy on the burgers and tacos.
HEALTH PASS New research conducted by Skyscanner and OnePoll found more than half (57 per cent) of the 1000 Aussies polled said they would be happy to carry a Covid-19 health pass in order to travel internationally. The digital health profile would also include information on testing results and vaccinations.
NEED HELP? Doc Holiday is still on duty during the Covid-19 crisis. Send your questions to docholiday@news.com.au or keep up with Doc at escape.com.au/doc-holiday Personal replies are unfortunately not possible
CREDIT: Dilvin Yasa
Word count: 674
