SAVVY ESCAPE New-look deals, tips and inspiration for savvy travellers with Mercedes Maguire
International flights with Qantas are set to resume from mid-November, but what will flying overseas look like in the age of Covid?
Airport and in-flight experiences are changing and we’ll need to plan for plenty of new procedures. Here’s your top five pre-flight checklist to think about now.
Savvy tip 1 Health proof: Australians heading overseas will have to be fully vaxxed and probably show proof of a negative Covid test. Josh Clements of Sydney Airport says some international destinations require proof of a recent negative Covid test on arrival and rapid Covid tests will be available at Sydney Airport, but he advises travellers to know the rules beforehand. Having the IATA Travel Pass, a digital health pass, will help travellers verify Covid test results and vaccination status with health officials and airline staff here and overseas. Emirates is rolling out the pass on all routes.
Savvy tip 2 Home quarantine: While travel without quarantine is the ultimate goal, it’s likely Australians returning home from overseas will have to complete a period of quarantine at home. “We’ve been working closely with the federal and NSW governments on how we can safely transition to home quarantine, which is an important stepping stone in restarting international passenger services,” says Qantas Group CEO Alan Joyce.
Savvy tip 3 Airport and in-flight experience: Social distancing, hand sanitisation and mask-wearing will be enforced. Qantas and Virgin Australia encourage passengers to check in online or on their apps; passengers will self-scan passes to board planes; and cashless purchases will be compulsory.
Savvy tip 4 Airfares: We’ll likely see price hikes in peak periods, says Finder’s Angus Kidman. “Return Christmas flights to London with Qantas are peaking at around $3600 in economy this year,” he says. If you hunt around you can find deals. For example, economy fares with Virgin Australia to Fiji are selling for $228 one-way. Savvy tip 5 Passports: Check your passport isn’t due to expire – some countries require that they’re valid for at least six months beyond your planned stay.
Aussie swaps SCOOP THE POOL It’s easy to see why the To-Sua Ocean Trench off the south coast of Samoa’s main island of Upolo is considered one of the most beautiful ocean pools. But we’re spoilt for choice in Australia. The Fairy Bower Sea Pool between Manly Beach and Shelly Beach on Sydney’s northern beaches may be small, but it makes up for it with the glistenng ocean views.
$5495 STEAL OR DEAL Look forward to a European cruise in 2023 and save up to $500 a person when you book the 15-day European Gems river cruise from $5495 a person twin share, including return airfares. Enjoy the best of Europe cruising through the Rhine, Main and Danube rivers. Offer valid for travel from March to September 2023. ph 1300 300 036, travelmarvel.com.au
ESCAPE HOT LISTS Amazing gardens 1 LE JARDIN SECRET, MOROCCO After being stuck at home in Australia for so long and having explored every inch of the country that we can – from the local park to our state botanic gardens – we can’t wait to travel to the world’s great gardens. First on the list is Le Jardin Secret in Marrakech, Morocco. Its origins date back more than 400 years, and it was resurrected in the 19th century and opened to the public in 2016. It’s divided into exotic and Islamic sections. The latter has a four-part layout that echoes a metaphor of heaven according to the Quran. It would be plain rude not to sit and contemplate with a traditional cup of mint tea in hand. And just being able to say Le Jardin Secret elicits a certain je ne sais quoi, non? Scan the code to discover more beautiful gardens around the world.
CREDIT: Mercedes Maguire
Word count: 644
