SMARThacks TELEHEALTH IS A GREAT REMEDY BUT NOT ALWAYS THE BEST CURE HEALTH GETTING diagnosed with a telehealth consultation is proving more popular than ever in this pandemic era.
About a quarter of all Medicare Benefits Schedule (MBS) consultations were provided via telehealth between March 2020 and March 2021.
“Technology has provided opportunities to improve the way our health system operates and generally improve access to healthcare,” explains Bondi-based Dr Amandeep Hansra, with many patients now given the option to consult with their doctor via telephone or videoconference.
So what are some of the pros and cons of taking your trip to the GP online?
PROS Shorter wait times In the 2019-2020 financial year, the Australian Bureau of Statistics reported that the proportion of people waiting longer than they felt acceptable for a GP appointment was 18.7 per cent.
“As a patient, I felt the frustration that we all feel when we have to go to the doctor – having to make appointments weeks (sometimes months) in advance, taking time off work, sitting in a waiting room only to be seen by a doctor for less than 10 minutes to get a rescript of medication I’ve been taking for years,” says Romain Bonjean, co founder of online telehealth platform, Rosemary Health.
With some online telehealth platforms requiring no appointments, patients can take as little as five minutes to complete an online assessment, which is then sent through to a GP.
Within 24 hours, the patient is contacted with a suitable treatment plan, minus the hassle of visiting a GP in person.
More affordable Although telehealth rates are charged differently from GP to GP, there are often incentives for those who may need financial assistance.
Initially during the pandemic, telehealth was mandated bulk billed but that has been removed so there will be different costs depending on the clinics for telehealth, according to says Royal Australian College of General Practitioners president, Dr Karen Price.
“Particularly for vulnerable patients, most GPs will be providing a service for them that is very reasonable and probably more aligned with Medicare rebates,” she says.
More support for rural Australians Telehealth has opened up healthcare to many people who may struggle to access healthcare, says Dr Price.
The Australian Institute of Health and Welfare reports that Australians living in rural and remote areas also reported to have shorter lives, higher levels of disease and injury and poorer access to and use of health services, compared with people living in metropolitan areas.
“I know from drug and alcohol GPs, they’ve said they have patients coming down from 300km away,” Price says. “(With telehealth), someone in rural and remote (areas) can access a specialist GP in a highly niche area of drug and alcohol management.
“So that’s been really important particularly with mental health and with hard to reach populations and vulnerable populations.”
CONS Tech issues “The Covid-19 pandemic forced rapid uptake of telehealth and has seen other innovations such as electronic prescriptions evolve and increased awareness of why Electronic Medical Records (EMRs) such as My Health Record are important,” says Australian Medical Council education development and projects manager Dr Julie Gustavs.
However, with such a rapid transition to telehealth services accelerated by Covid-19, GPs are still experiencing some teething issues.
“There’s some concern around whether or not we have sped the technology ahead of the patient’s ability to respond to it,” Price says.
“It’s not for everybody.”
Weakened relationship between doctor and patient: “Telehealth is not a substitution for face-to-face care – full stop,” Price says. “You can’t just have a dial-a-doc relationship. You need to have a place that you call your GP, that’s really important.” Although many GPs have made the transition to digital health consultants, trying to manage a new patient by telehealth can be challenging.
“We don’t want to see telehealth used as a non-continuous or fragmented way of accessing healthcare,” Price says. “Having a face-to-face with your GP is vital.”
Dialling up Covid-19 Should you use a telehealth platform if you think you have Covid? “Telehealth is a great option for people who have Covid-type symptoms as you can talk on the phone or via video etc. from the safety of your own home,” Dr Karen Price says.
“This really underscores again why telehealth services are so vital.” The Australian Government also advises that if you are sick and think you have symptoms of Covid-19, to seek medical advice and get tested, but call ahead of time to book an appointment. The National Coronavirus Helpline is also available for advice for those who think they may have symptoms: 1800 020 080.
CREDIT: Chyna Hayden
Word count: 773
