Doing what you love is an important factor in remaining engaged in older life, writes JAMIE SEIDEL Life. Be in it. But life has its ups and downs. So being “in it” isn’t always easy. Which is why Flinders University Associate Professor Kate Laver, of the College of Medicine and Public Health, says you must do whatever it is you want to do, to the best of your abilities. “Retirement can free up time to pursue things you’ve never had a chance to before,” she says. “But then we find we can’t do all the sorts of activities we used to any more.” If not addressed, the risk is isolation and depression. But there are several tricks to getting off the couch. First and foremost is matching the things you used to love doing with what you can do now. “Perhaps you can’t surf any more,” Dr Laver says. “But you can walk on the beach. Golfers? You can set up putting courses in the yard. There’s potential in every setting to match past interests with current capacity.” Others might need a bit of an incentive. For some, the commitment of completing a project is a crucial motivator. Combine that with some life-honed skills and you may find yourself helping a nearby community group. “Even if you join a club and never end up going, that just means you’ve not yet found the right motivator,” Dr Laver says. “It’s about connecting people. Engaging in activities. Finding a purpose.” A MODEL RETIREMENT It’s said that idle hands are the devil’s workshop. “My hands keep me in my workshop and out of that other one,” 71-year-old modeller Jim Warren says. “I’ve always been handy. I went to a boys’ technical school. So plastics, metalwork and woodwork are my thing.” After decades of skilled work, including 20 years in the navy, Warren was left out on a limb – faced with nothing to keep his hands, or his mind, engaged. Then he saw a radio-controlled model of a ship he had served on, the HMAS Vampire. “I’d only ever dabbled with model-making as a kid,” he says. “Then I went on to work in the navy, then had another 20 years elsewhere.” Redundancy gave him cause to revisit his childhood hobby. Familiar tools inspired confidence. A new project evoked a sense of challenge. He’s now the SA representative for the international Task Force 72 Scale Model Ship Association. Monthly get-togethers allow modellers to share tricks of the trade. Regular outings put their handiwork to the test – and on display. “You’ll find people from all walks of life here,” he says. “It’s just a hobby, nothing else. It’s something we like to do in our spare time and an excuse to get out.” But, mostly, it’s the satisfaction of building something new. “They’re built for pleasure," Warren says. “Everyone takes their own time. You can’t put a price on that.” SWITCHED-ON SENIORS Not everyone is an extrovert. So socialising with strangers may be a hurdle you’d rather not jump. But there’s always family. And a lifetime’s worth of friends. Even though they may be scattered to the four points of the compass, those ties still bind. And our online world can keep them close. “It’s a myth that older people don’t engage with technology,” Flinders University digital health researcher Dr Lua Perimal-Lewis says. “The difference is they like to be taught, not to have to teach themselves.” And older Australians have plenty of motivation to connect with technology. They know they need to keep mentally agile, and they yearn to stay in touch. “A lot of 55s and above are already online,” Dr Perimal-Lewis says. “COVID-19 has really brought that trend forward.” But grandchildren can present a challenge. “On the phone, it’s ‘Yes, no, OK grandma, bye’. But it’s not that they don’t want to engage: it’s that we haven’t found the right conversations to have,” she says. And that’s where the digital realm can help. Not-for-profit aged care provider ACH Group recently ran a six-week video game challenge, the Stay in the Game initiative, which introduced 300 residents to video gaming as another way to create social connections in their lives. One participant even bought a second-hand virtual reality headset and used it to introduce her grandchildren to the technology, as well as to travel “virtually” during the pandemic. Grandchildren were often the motivator. But the idea of online activities soon spread. “Gaming can certainly bring people together,” participant Garry Hartney says. “While playing video games, you can engage in friendly competition. “I also find that participants and those watching on discuss tactics for each game, so there’s always lots of banter and chat happening.”
CREDIT: JAMIE SEIDEL
Word count: 787
