SMARTliving EASY DRIVING CARMAKERS ROLL OUT SMART APPS, HIGH-END TECH AND GREEN MEASURES TO KEEP DRIVERS SAFE, COMFORTABLE AND SUSTAINABLE Technology to make cars safer, more convenient and fun improves every year. While many features debut in exclusive — and expensive — range-topping models before trickling down to more affordable vehicles, mainstream models don’t miss out on much today. Here are five types of emerging tech making life easier in affordable cars.
MOBILE APPS Luxury brands such as BMW and Tesla were the first to make digital keys a reality. Now the tech has moved to more accessible makers such as Ford, which has “FordPass” connectivity on a handful of its latest models, including the Puma, Fiesta and Ranger. It combines a smartphone app with a modem in the car allowing you to lock and unlock the vehicle remotely. You can also use it to locate the car, pre-warm the cabin, book in a service or perform a quick digital health check.
Mini offers a similar service on its latest models, and Hyundai customers with AutoLink have access to connected services.
ENTERTAINMENT Separating people from their smartphones is almost impossible, so mobile connectivity is a point of focus for carmakers.
Apple CarPlay and Android Auto are standard in almost every new car, allowing access to a suite of apps normally found on phones. Mapping, music, podcasts and voice-to-text messaging are available, but you can’t browse social media or stream video.
Normally connected to the car with a USB cable, smartphone mirroring is increasingly wireless in new models such as the affordable Kia Rio hatch. Wireless charging is also handy to have, and customers should look for it in their next car. And multi-connection Bluetooth allows passengers to play DJ while the driver stays connected to take hands-free calls. The push to make cars more like smartphones extends to key controls.
New models such as the Honda Odyssey follow the lead of luxury brands by replacing physical airconditioning controls with glass touchscreens. The next trend is for capacitive-touch buttons that replace physical plastic buttons for volume or cruise control on steering wheels.
DRIVER INFORMATION Many models now have digital dashboards in place of conventional gauges for speed, fuel level and engine temperature. Digital dashboards can display handy information such as the current speed limit, directions and album art. New cars already require passenger seatbelt sensors that tell if folks in the back aren’t belted in. Jeep will go one better with next-gen cars featuring a rear seat monitoring camera in the roof. Drivers and front passengers can check on passengers in the second and third row, tapping on the main central touchscreen to zoom in on any seat. Night-vision technology allows the camera to work in the dark, giving parents peace of mind when the back seat is a bit too quiet on long trips.
SAFETY Increasingly strict testing requirements are making cars safer. The Toyota Yaris hatch became the first mainstream car to offer a centre airbag between the driver and passenger in 2020, preventing injuries when occupants bump into each other during a serious crash. Mercedes-Benz will introduce airbags on the back of its front seats to protect rear occupants in this year’s S-Class sedan, and Honda is almost ready to roll out wraparound airbags that catch and cushion front passengers better than existing designs.
Carmakers are working even harder on tech to prevent crashes. New tests implemented by the ANCAP safety body examine the effectiveness of lane-keeping assistance features, making cars more likely to keep you from wandering into the wrong lane. Auto emergency braking capable of sensing a front-on collision is standard in almost all new cars, and many newly-launched models go beyond the road ahead to watch side-streets for cars that might pull out. Reverse auto braking is on models such as the latest Mazda3, which use sensors to look for people or obstacles behind and apply the brakes. Mitsubishi’s ultrasonic misacceleration mitigation system tries to prevent minor accidents by stopping the car from accelerating harshly when there are objects within four metres of the vehicle.
SUSTAINABILITY Makers are also working to make cars more sustainable. Mazda is replacing some plastic interior elements with sustainably sourced cork in the new MX-30, a hybrid and electric hatch that joins a broad range of new green machines. Ford will bring its first hybrid to market in an updated Escape compact SUV, joining new Hyundai Tucson and Mitsubishi Outlander hybrids on sale in 2021. Hyundai’s Ioniq 5 shapes up as an affordable alternative to the likes of Tesla, while Nissan is trialling breakthrough technology that can feed energy from its Leaf electric hatchback into the power grid, allowing owners to keep their lights on in a blackout.
CREDIT: David McCowen
Word count: 792
