AN Adelaide sports drink start-up is targeting America’s 30 million Strava users as it prepares to launch into the potentially lucrative US market.
PREPD recently completed a US Strava challenge during the country’s marathon season, to boost the brand’s profile and gather market intelligence ahead of an expansion next year.
Close to 152,000 participants signed up to the challenge which set a target of completing eight hours of exercise over a four-week period.
PREPD chief executive Andrew Perry said that with the market insights gathered from the challenge, and with the help of a recent one-for-one state government grant of $138,400, the company was ready for its US expansion.
“Something like 16.3 million people saw our product or had impressions on the Strava channels – in terms of getting in front of that many eyeballs it’s hard to do without using a global platform like Strava,” he said.
“The most interesting engagement and purchases we got out of the US from the Strava challenge was from California, New York and Texas.
“It clearly articulates the markets we want to chase – we can target California, land in there and then expand through New York and Texas after that.
“Roughly 40 million people live in California and they certainly sit well above the national average in terms of activity levels, so we know it’s a great market for us.” PREPD will initially launch in the US via an e-commerce offering, but it is also in talks with sports dietitians who could open doors to elite athletes and professional sporting organisations.
The product is a two-step hydration enhancer consumed 6-12 hours before, and then after exertion, and is designed to boost the absorption of electrolyte drinks or water.
Since launching in 2018, it has been used by elite cricketers, AFL teams, professional cyclists and A-League soccer teams. Last AFL season seven clubs used the product, while four more are trialling it as part of their pre-season training. Yale University in the US is also trialling PREPD for its sports program.
Olympic hurdler Michelle Jenneke, who has more than 550,000 Instagram followers, has been brought in as a global brand ambassador, while Adelaide runners Riley Cocks and Izzi Batt-Doyle are also ambassadors.
Mr Perry said the company would look to raise at least $750,000 via an equity crowd-funding campaign early in the new year to support its US expansion, Depending on its success, the company would consider hosting a Strava challenge in Europe during next year’s Tour de France.
“We’ve been in touch with the Collegiate and Professional Sports Dietitians Association in the US, and part of the funding from the state government will go towards building a partnership with the sports dietitians to allow our brand to grow out through professional teams and sports,” Mr Perry said.
“Of the 330 million people that live in the US, 23 per cent of them sit above the average physical activity guidelines for the US, which is 150 to 300 minutes of moderate to intense exercise per week.
“If 1 per cent of those were using PREPD twice a week it gives us a near on $400m-a-year turnover business and that’s why we see the US as such an amazing market.” Locally in Australia, PREPD is sold online and is stocked in specialty retailers across the country. It recently hit the shelves of several OTR, Romeo’s and Chapley Foodland stores across South Australia.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 571
