Interstate travel plans could be dealt a fresh blow by a shortage of rapid antigen tests, with pharmacists warning states and territories to urgently secure supplies and foot the bill for the kits amid unprecedented demand.
South Australia scrapped its PCR testing requirement for inbound travellers on Sunday and Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk confirmed yesterday her state's plan to move to rapid antigen testing for interstate travellers from Saturday as queues at COVID-19 testing sites and result turnaround times blew out.
Pharmacy Guild president Professor Trent Twomey said a week ago that pharmacies around the country had ample supply of the self-testing kits, but demand exploded ahead of Christmas. As more states drop PCR testing requirements for travel, demand for testing kits will continue to grow.
"Right now we're down to dozens and we might have none today," Professor Twomey said yesterday. "I cannot guarantee that we will be able to meet the demand, which means I cannot guarantee that people will be able to travel."
Pharmacies were under the most pressure in areas with outbreaks, including Greater Sydney and Melbourne, he said.
Supermarket giant Woolworths' digital health and wellness business HealthyLife.com.au had posted more than 100,000 rapid antigen tests across the eastern states since November, HealthyLife's general manager of commercial and partnerships, Martine Cooper, said.
"Demand for rapid antigen tests more than doubled in the lead-up to Christmas," she said.
"We are doing everything we can to keep up with the unprecedented demand," a Woolworths spokeswoman said.
Professor Twomey said it was sensible for state and territory governments to allow the use of rapid antigen tests rather than PCR tests for travel. But those jurisdictions should provide the tests.
"If the state governments who were responsible for these travel restrictions don't secure supply before they make these decisions, we will have people who aren't allowed to travel because they can't get a test."
People hoping to travel interstate have faced hours-long COVID-19 testing queues and been forced to wait days for results as states grapple with the largest coronavirus outbreaks experienced in the country to date.
Opposition health spokesman Mark Butler said he had heard many stories of people being unable to access rapid tests at their local pharmacy because the shelves were empty. "These testing arrangements are clearly the Commonwealth government's responsibility and they should have predicted that over the course of the summer we would need a very big increase in supply of rapid tests," he said.
"We need a federal government to put in place a rapid testing regime that ensures that working families and small businesses, in particular, have affordable, easy access to this testing option."
Coles and Woolworths said they had supplies coming within weeks.
CREDIT: Rachel Clun
Word count: 454
