Created by former AFL mates James Begley and Matthew Pavlich, Pickstar - an SA start-up which aims to make it easy to access celebrities for various engagements at the click of a button - is going from strength to strength
Put it down to his Aussie Rules background, but Pickstar chief executive officer James Begley’s team focus is clear.
The former St Kilda and Crows AFL player joined forces with mate and one-time Fremantle skipper Matthew Pavlich to set up the Pickstar Group in 2017; keen to help customers looking for a celebrity guest speaker or brand ambassador to be able to secure someone more easily.
By making the Adelaide-designed software behind the easyto-use website open to other organisations to streamline their own engagements, the South Australian start-up has gone from strength to strength, recently inking a “game-changing” deal with the NFL in the US.
The NFL partnership will allow the world’s richest sporting league to make use of Pickstar’s innovative VLAST talent activation software to co-ordinate commercial deals for more than 22,000 retired and current gridiron stars.
Begley – a former Sturt Football Club junior who played a combined 61 AFL games with the Saints and Adelaide – credits Pickstar’s team-first ethos for its rapid development.
“It feels like we’re on a rocket ship,” he says. “We were worried about Covid ... but we responded remarkably well and the team were, to this day, the biggest source of energy and motivation for me.
“In terms of technical expertise, it’s a non-negotiable that people who are working here now have to be problem-solvers of the highest degree. I have great admiration for my team because they just have an amazing capacity to find ways around issues.” The talent activation business presently has a staff of more than 30; with about 20 working from its Adelaide base overlooking Rundle Mall. Begley expects the team to grow by another 30 per cent this year, assuming the right people are available.
“We can’t get the talent quick enough at the moment,” he says. “We’ve employed five people in the last two to three months here in Adelaide and we’d be looking to do the same again. The problem is not that we don’t have jobs, the problem is we’re struggling to get the right talent at the moment.” After coming up with the basic celebrity matchmaking idea in 2011, Begley brought Pavlich – a one-time state junior colleague – on board, building on the experiences they had in their playing days, when co-ordinating a footballer’s appearance at various functions could be somewhat hit and miss.
Begley says the pair were passionate about “solving the problem” of aligning identities keen to do more corporate work with a marketplace happy to host them.
Pickstar’s other arm is its “public-facing marketplace”, which anyone can log on to and choose from thousands of sports stars, celebrities and personalities – such as comedian Dave Hughes, swimmer Cate Campbell, Crows premiership skipper Mark Bickley and foodie Dorinda Hafner – to make a personal appearance, attend a virtual meeting, send a video shout-out or act as guest speaker or brand ambassador.
Interested people can simply enter their budget and brief to allow the stars to align and communicate directly through Pickstar’s easy-to-use online platform.
DEFENCE & HI-TECH SPECIAL REPORT FUTURE INDUSTRIES JOBS OF TODAY
Word count: 555
