Are rapid lateral flow coronavirus tests going to be introduced for domestic flights? With the recent Covid-19 outbreaks, I’m nervous about getting on a plane and I’m sure I’m not alone.
Great question! While I would agree the introduction of rapid lateral flow tests as an extra pre-flight security measure would be invaluable, it seems things are unlikely to change soon. According to the Department of Health, one of the major reasons we’re not following the path of our European mates who have introduced these rapid tests at every turn is because in Australia reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) remains the gold standard diagnostic test for Covid. This is the standard test we all queue up for whenever we’re under the weather or have been exposed to an outbreak.
There’s no doubt rapid lateral flow tests have advantages. Similar to a home pregnancy test (but you’re swabbing your tonsils and inside your nose), they give results in 15-30 minutes and seem just the thing for those who aren’t displaying the classic symptoms of coronavirus. Their biggest issue? They are less sensitive than PCR tests, meaning more false negative Covid results are likely to slip through the cracks, says Professor Deborah Williamson, Director of Clinical Microbiology at the Doherty Institute.
“Work has been done overseas to look at whether increasing the frequency of testing might offset that loss in sensitivity, but, as it stands, these tests shouldn’t be used as a one-off,” she says. “That isn’t to say we shouldn’t be assessing the use of these tests as an extra measure.” Although there has been talk of the recent development of rapid PCR testing which can return a Covid result in two to three hours, we’re yet to hear when or if this will be made available to aid mobility over state borders. In the meantime, travellers will have to rely on the infection prevention and control mitigation strategies implemented by airlines (protocols developed in close consultation with the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee). Having a read through the Domestic Passenger Journey Protocol at infrastructure.gov.au might help alleviate some of your concerns.
I’ve been invited on a shark-diving trip to Port Lincoln in South Australia. Since it’s a caged dive, I’m not afraid of jumping in, but I’m less confident about whether diving with sharks is ethical. Is it?
I wish I could give you a direct yes or no answer, but whether you choose to go or not depends on your own moral compass. You see, in one corner we know shark cage diving (or the luring or provision of sharks for tourism) affects the behaviour and movement of great whites and other sharks. We also know chumming (the act of baiting sharks with fish parts, blood and bone) makes sharks more aggressive, with many industry insiders believing the practice helps to form an unfortunate link between humans and food in a shark’s mind.
That said, the argument to support shark-dive tourism is equally compelling. A 2018 study carried out by Flinders and Southern Cross universities found that those who went on a shark cage dive reported a positive shift in how they felt about sharks. Once sharks are viewed along the lines of dolphins and whales, this could lead to an increased support in conservation efforts.
My advice? If you’re keen to go on the trip, consider booking with a tour operator that doesn’t bait the sharks. Adventure Bay Charters, for example, relies on the vocal stylings of Bon Scott and Brian Johnson to capture the attention of our finned friends. It seems like so many Australians, they just can’t resist a solid Acca Dacca session.
NEED HELP?
Doc Holiday is still on duty during the Covid-19 crisis. Send your questions to docholiday@news.com.au or keep up with Doc at escape.com.au/doc-holiday Personal replies are unfortunately not possible
TRAVEL UPDATES
QATAR TOPS LIST We might not have stepped on any in the past 18 months but the world’s best airlines for 2021 have been named by AirlineRatings.com, with Qatar Airways coming in at number one. Air New Zealand, Singapore Airlines, Qantas and Emirates round out the top five, all airlines in the top 20 achieving a seven-star safety rating.
CRUISE RETURNS Holland America Line and Princess Cruises have returned to service. The former kicked off its Alaska season with Nieuw Amsterdam on July 24, and the latter followed with Majestic Princess a day later. Each line will operate 10 cruises sailing out of Seattle through until September.
DIGITAL HEALTH PASS Qantas will work with the International Air Transport Association to roll out the IATA Travel Pass when international flights resume. It will verify passengers’ Covid test results and vaccination information and check their health information against a specific flight as well as entry requirements for the destination.
NEW VOYAGES Oceania Cruises has introduced 16 new Europe and Tahiti voyages for early 2022 on the refreshed Regatta and all-new Nautica. Nautica’s Europe voyages (April to June) call in at classic destinations, while Regatta reprises her Tahiti itineraries along with three new Papeete roundtrip cruises in February.
CREDIT: Dilvin Yasa
Word count: 849
