With start-up accelerators like Stone & Chalk providing fertile platforms for growth, there’s never been a better time to establish a tech-centric business in SA Words david goldsmith Switched-on Adelaide teenager Will Bishop is loving life on the ground floor of South Australia’s hi-tech future at Lot Fourteen. The 18-year-old app developer took up a residency in the Stone & Chalk start-up hub last October, before securing a position with independent Canadian-based tech firm User Camp several months later. Stone & Chalk is powered by FIXE, the Futures Industries eXchange for Entrepreneurship, which aims to make South Australia a national leader in this field.
The former Glenunga International High School student has already produced a number of apps which between them have been downloaded almost 775,000 times. Among them are Nano, released for Reddit in April 2018, and Twitter app Chirp, for the Apple Watch, which followed shortly after. “Chirp and Nano have been more successful than I could have ever dreamed, Chirp especially,” Bishop says.
After considering studying computer science at Flinders University – a lack of the correct maths prerequisites ruling out The University of Adelaide as an immediate option – the Glen Osmond teen decided work was a better choice.
“I was on Twitter one night and saw a job listing for a company in Canada wanting someone with experience in something that had come out about six months earlier, which I had,” he says. “So I applied and interviewed for them. They were already familiar with Chirp and seemed to like me ... and I’ve been working for them since January – and loving it.” With the option of working remotely, being based in Adelaide is no impediment to wider success in the technological sphere. “SA is unique in that, unlike the Silicon Valley, we’re rather humble and quiet,” Bishop says. “Instead of shouting from the rooftops about how great we are, we’d rather succeed quietly – potentially to our global detriment.
“However with Lot Fourteen, a lot of this is changing and SA is being positioned to be taken seriously on a global stage. As our entrepreneurial industry grows, the government is helping a lot of small businesses succeed.” With start-up accelerators like Stone and Chalk providing fertile platforms for growth, there’s never been a better time to establish a tech-centric business in SA. “While my business is all online, and can theoretically be done from anywhere, if in future I wish to expand, the talent pool is ever-growing,” Bishop says. “I always felt like the real opportunities were only in California and anything in SA – or Australia for that matter – would pale in comparison. While SA still has a way to go in catching up to Silicon Valley, we’re well on our way – and it’s very exciting to be on the ground floor.”
Some of the brightest minds are collecting at South Australia’s exciting new innovation precinct in the heart of Adelaide’s CBD Words jenniffer hullick William Abbott, DTEX Systems graduate counter insider-threat intelligence engineer After a year of working at DTEX Systems in the heart of Adelaide’s Lot Fourteen innovation precinct, young mathematician and bright spark William Abbott, 21, is in his element. He found his full-time role with DTEX after taking up an internship with the cyber intelligence company in his final year of advanced mathematical sciences at The University of Adelaide. “I always thought I was OK at maths, which helps,” Abbott says. “When I got to university, I decided to just do what I liked and see where it ended. Cyber security was probably one of the last places I thought I would go.” At DTEX he found many ways to apply mathematical theory to real-world problems, helping customers detect insider cyber security threats and manage large company computer networks through behaviour profiling. He can also bounce his ideas off other bright minds working across the precinct. “It’s a good ecosystem of sharing where, if we have lunch, we can sit down and talk and be open about ideas. It fosters a lot of creativity,” he says.
Alex Priest, Inovor Technologies aerospace engineer Alex Priest believed he would have to leave South Australia, and even Australia, to find a career in aerospace engineering. “I didn’t think it was going to be a possibility but now it very much is, it’s pretty awesome,” he says.
Priest, 25, began working for space technology company Inovor Technologies, based at Lot Fourteen, about two and a half years ago, after impressing CEO Dr Matthew Tetlow during an honours project at The University of Adelaide. “At school, aerospace engineering was one of the things I saw I could do,” he says. “I picked that quite early and just stuck with it.” At Inovor, he gets to do mechanical designs for satellites, mission design and systems engineering. He is also using simple ground-based cameras to monitor large satellites in very distant orbits, 36,000km above the Earth. “When I first started, there were only about 10 people working here – they mentored me and helped me a lot,” Priest says. “But, over the last year and a half, we’ve really expanded and we are up to 40 people now.” Lot Fourteen is proving a perfect environment for his work. “We get to interact and work on different projects with people – we’ve been working with Neumann Space, who are next door to us, and there’s Myriota,” he adds. “Having more people to work off, all in the same space together, is quite unique and exciting.”
Madison O’Brien, Teamgage customer success analyst After four months with work culture specialists Teamgage, Madison O’Brien, 22, is convinced the Stone & Chalk start-up hub environment at Lot Fourteen is the right place for her. “Start-ups are a dynamic, fast-evolving environment in which to work,” she says of the Lot Fourteen-based business powered by FIXE, the Future Industries eXchange for Entrepreneurship.
O’Brien, who studied a Bachelor of Business specialising in HR management at Flinders University, is an analyst who helps assemble feedback from customers’ employees. “I get to help thousands of employees make sure their voices are heard about how they are feeling, particularly as a result of COVID-19,” she says. By applying artificial intelligence programs to the feedback, O’Brien can present insights learned and key strategies to help clients improve their organisations. O’Brien, who is also studying for a Graduate Diploma in Psychology, focused on HR after discovering that people, on average, spend 90,000 hours at work during their lifetime. “That’s a lot of time,” she says. “Part of choosing HR was to have an influence on that, to make a difference to the way people experience work – wanting people to wake up and jump out of bed because they enjoy going to work.” She finds Lot Fourteen an inspiring place to work. “It is, at its core, a community of like-minded individuals, people who want to see a change in the world,” she says. “We chose … to do something we believe in. It’s great because people here are the most talented in their fields.”
CREDIT: david goldsmith; jenniffer hullick
Word count: 1185
