IT was a massive year of change in Australian politics – though not as dramatic as Labor would have hoped.
Scott Morrison and the Coalition defied the odds to secure a “miracle” election win, retaining government for a third term.
But one in every six seats in the House of Representatives changed hands. Political giants including Tony Abbott, Julie Bishop, Christopher Pyne, Wayne Swan and Jenny Macklin bowed out as a swath of new faces entered Parliament.
Labor faced a gruelling year of soul-searching after its shock election defeat. Bill Shorten stepped down as Opposition leader, making way for Anthony Albanese and a new Labor frontbench.
And the balance of power has crystallised into the hands of five powerbrokers in the Senate, boosting the influence of Centre Alliance’s two senators Stirling Griff and Rex Patrick, One Nation’s two senators and Tasmania’s Jacqui Lambie.
As a new decade dawns, both sides of politics will be hoping the leadership spills and instability of the past 10 years is behind them. Here’s how South Australia’s federal politicians performed in 2019.
SIMON BIRMINGHAM, LIBERAL, SENATE A+ As the Liberals’ campaign spokesman, Senator Birmingham did more heavy lifting in the public eye than anyone else. He retained the prestigious trade portfolio, locked down a major free-trade deal with Indonesia and has progressed early talks for a post-Brexit deal with the UK.
With the retirement of Christopher Pyne, Senator Birmingham has become the most senior Liberal in SA. But a good 2019 could soon be marred by a bad one in 2020 if a lucrative submarine maintenance moves to WA.
REX PATRICK, CENTRE ALLIANCE, SENATE A+ The Centre Alliance Senator has lived up to his moniker of “Inspector Rex” – given to him by ex-boss Nick Xenophon – by using Freedom of Information requests and Senate Estimates to shine a light on the future of the Collins Class submarine contract in SA.
On one hand, Senator Patrick secured goodwill by helping the Government to get its flagship tax-cut policy through the Senate. But his persistent criticism of the Government’s handling of other issues, including the Murray-Darling Basin, China relations, whistleblowers and asylum seekers has shown he is not afraid to play bad cop too.
AMANDA RISHWORTH, LIBERAL, KINGSTON A Despite being touted as a future Cabinet minister in a Shorten-led government, Ms Rishworth moved on from the election loss quicker than any other Labor MP in SA. She rolled up her sleeves and focused on her passion – early education – shining a light on the disastrous rollout of a childcare policy that has been dubbed the Federal Government’s latest RoboDebt.
TONY PASIN, LIBERAL, BARKER A The Barker MP was hand-picked by Scott Morrison to head a parliamentary committee investigating the needs of rural and regional economies. It was a huge tick of approval for the conservative MP, who was previously typecast as a factional player.
When the Riverland was hit by a freak hailstorm in November, Mr Pasin secured $14.6 million in federal funding for netting for crop growers. He is also understood to have played a behind-the-scenes role in helping to strike a deal to get SA’s desalination plant up and running.
NICOLLE FLINT, LIBERAL, BOOTHBY A Has secured a more senior role with the Liberals since winning back her seat with a bigger margin at the election, becoming a Whip marshalling MPs for votes in the House of Representatives. She continued to shine a light on endometriosis. Before the election, the Liberals made a $10 million commitment to address the disease, including $1 million for the University of Adelaide’s Robinson Research Institute to develop a digital health platform.
SARAH HANSON-YOUNG, GREENS, SENATE A- The Greens’ environment spokeswoman had a strong swing toward her at the election even as much of the country turned to the Right. The SA Senator was a consistent voice in key debates about climate change, mining, extinction and, importantly for SA, the River Murray and drilling in the Great Australian Bight. She also earned kudos for her handling of a defamation case in which former NSW senator David Leyonhjelm will be forced to pay her $120,000 plus interest after a judge ruled he defamed her in a series of interviews last year.
ANNE RUSTON, LIBERAL, SENATE B+ Was promoted to Cabinet, after the election, as Minister for Families and Social Services and set about announcing well-received changes to deeming rates. She was also vocal in urging institutions to join a national redress scheme for victims of sexual abuse. But the senator has also made some gaffes, including a suggestion that increasing Newstart would benefit drug dealers and pubs.
MARK BUTLER, LABOR, HINDMARSH B- Has had to wear some responsibility for Labor’s election loss as its spokesman for climate change and energy.
The party’s inability to put a price on its bold climate-change policy become a distinct problem for Labor and particularly Shorten, who was consistently asked about the cost.
Despite this, he has retained his portfolio and he has landed significant political blows on federal Energy Minister Angus Taylor over carbon emissions and a letter-doctoring scandal that saw the minister apologise “unreservedly” to Sydney’s lord mayor after relying on falsified figures to launch a public attack on her council’s climate record.
DON FARRELL, LABOR, SENATE B- The SA factional powerbroker stepped aside as the party’s deputy leader in the Senate after the May defeat to make way for Kristina Keneally.
It cost SA a powerful voice on the leadership team but prevented a messy power struggle for the party, attracting Albanese’s goodwill.
STIRLING GRIFF, CENTRE ALLIANCE, SENATE B- The man seen by many political insiders as the unofficial leader of Centre Alliance continued his modus operandi of getting on with pet projects without much fanfare. He was instrumental in initiating a world-first inquiry into the impact “digital platforms” are having on our community and economy.
Now, Google and Facebook will have to get your permission to collect IP addresses or location data under major plans to enhance privacy protections. And the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission will receive $27 million to set up a unit to keep the tech titans in line.
ROWAN RAMSEY, LIBERAL, GREY B- Has retained his role as Government Whip, which he has used to get in the ear of ministers about issues impacting South Australia.
Representing the largest electorate in the state, Mr Ramsey has pushed hard to helped secure wins in regional road infrastructure. But, despite persistent efforts, he has failed to push any meaningful reform to deliver more doctors to the bush.
ALEX ANTIC, LIBERAL, SENATE C The former Adelaide City councillor is the SA politician most likely to fill Cory Bernardi’s shoes.
The conservative senator has already shown he is unafraid to speak his mind by raising concerns about the SA Liberals-supported state sex-work Bill and arguing nuclear technology should be considered as a viable and lucrative component of the South Australian economy.
REBEKHA SHARKIE, CENTRE ALLIANCE, MAYO C A strong focus on grassroots issues saw the Centre Alliance MP gain a tighter grip on the once Liberal heartland seat of Mayo.
But how Ms Sharkie will deliver for the electorate during her second term without being a crossbencher with the balance of power has already diminished her influence. A strong focus on hyper-local has also lowered her profile.
PENNY WONG, LABOR, SENATE C Speculation was rife Senator Wong would quit politics after the May election loss.
It cannot be overlooked that she was a high profile member of a Shorten-led Opposition that lost the election in a result that very few saw coming.
As Opposition foreign affairs spokeswoman, Senator Wong has spent the better part of 2019 focused on global issues.
MARIELLE SMITH, LABOR, SENATE C While most SA MPs were staying mum on what policies should stay or go after the election, new Labor Senator Smith used her maiden speech to call on her party to retain its three-year-old preschool policy.
ALEX GALLACHER, LABOR, SENATE C The veteran Labor senator has been outspoken since the election on what his party needs to do to win back traditional voters.
But he otherwise continues to be defined by a lack of influence in Canberra.
STEVE GEORGANAS, LABOR, ADELAIDE C Has big shoes to fill after moving to, and winning, the seat of Adelaide previously held by former Labor minister Kate Ellis. He caused some internal rumblings this year after swapping factions but has barely been seen or heard of since the election.
JAMES STEVENS, LIBERAL, STURT C Mr Stevens made himself known to those in the Canberra bubble early by using his maiden speech to accuse the ABC and rival political parties of trying to undermine the Murray-Darling Basin Plan.
But he has been quiet since, as bickering between the Basin states intensified.
DAVID FAWCETT, LIBERAL, SENATE C- Overlooked for a Cabinet position, much of the year Senator Fawcett has been dogged by speculation that he will retire. Has been a hard worker in the Senate, chairing the Environment and Communications committee and the Joint Standing Committee on Foreign Affairs, Defence and Trade.
NICK CHAMPION, LABOR, SPENCE D+ Once regarded as minister material, Mr Champion was overlooked for an Opposition front-bench role by new Labor leader Albanese. His diminishing influence in his own party raises questions about what he can deliver for his working-class electorate.
CORY BERNARDI, AUSTRALIAN CONSERVATIVES, SENATE D+ Left Parliament on December 3, ending a 13-year political career. He spent much of his time in the lead-up to the election focused on raising the profile of his party in the eastern states.
But the party tanked at the election, failing to wrest the conservative vote from One Nation and Clive Palmer’s United Australia Party and was wound up post-election.
TONY ZAPPIA, LABOR, MAKIN DThe Labor backbencher is a good grassroots politician but continues to be defined by his lack of clout in the nation’s capital.
CREDIT: MATT SMITH CLAIRE BICKERS JADE GAILBERGER
Word count: 1655
