Apps are replacing aspirin as older South Australians are taking command of their health through technological advancements. As empowering as this bold new frontier is, it’s not a silver bullet but is to be used in conjunction with health care professionals, writes TOM BOWDEN The saying goes that an apple a day keeps the doctor away – but older South Australians are finding the opposite is sometimes the case.
With health monitoring technology usage more widespread than ever, SA retirees – through their Apple, Android and other devices – are connecting with their health care professional like never before and taking greater ownership of their health.
Dr Victoria Wade of the University of Adelaide says more and more older people are becoming tech savvy, and that this trend shows no sign of slowing down. “Instead of doctors telling patients, ‘Take two aspirin and call me in the morning’, it’s now, ‘Take two apps and text me in the morning’,” Dr Wade says. “I think the Baby Boomer generation is a lot more conscious of their health as a result of technology.” Aside from feeling younger, older South Australians are using technology – particularly wearable devices like Fitbits and smart watches – to live an active lifestyle so they can avoid having to move into an aged care facility. “A lot of older people are completely determined to stay at home as long as possible – they’re not at all interested in moving to aged care or even retirement villages; they just want to stay home,” Dr Wade says. “We know that it’s way cheaper to have someone supported in their own home than in a nursing home. Given the ageing population, I think that’s the way to go.” From heart rate and blood pressure monitors to step counters and sleep analysers, Dr Wade says digital health technologies are beneficial but should be used in consultation with health care professionals if being used to monitor a serious condition.
“Yes there is a lot more digital health happening, but it only works really well in an integrated system,” she says. “There’s a lot you can do yourself through monitoring but, if someone’s got a serious and chronic condition then digital health works best when it’s really well-co-ordinated with your health care provider.” Health technology has certainly come a long way in the past decade.
And Dr Wade should know. Ten years ago she helped set up the Royal District Nursing Service’s Virtual Hospital Unit, allowing nurses to prompt and observe patients taking their medications in their own home via the internet, eliminating the need for a nurse visit and allowing the RDNS to offer a more efficient service.
The VHU has since improved the lives of more than 1100 South Australians. South Aussies like Campbelltown’s Patricia Healy, an 86-year-old diabetic who has been using the VHU for the past two years, engaging with RDNS nurses each week on her tablet.
“I am old-fashioned and would have never imagined talking to my nurse on a screen,” Healy says. “RDNS installed my tablet and wireless broadband and now observe me taking my medications. The best part is that it keeps my family and me happy. They no longer stress about my health because they know I have support.” The service also provides a vital social outlet for those who may experience social isolation, Dr Wade says.
“You certainly can have a social interaction over video communication – it feels strange initially but within a short period of time it’s like the screen falls away and you feel like you arethere with the person,” she says.
CREDIT: TOM BOWDEN
Word count: 605
