One in nine women in their early 40s have endometriosis, a painful condition that can lead to bleeding, inflammation and scarring.
According to the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare, 7 per cent of women aged 25 to 29 and 11 per cent of women aged 40 to 44 have endometriosis.
The rate of diagnosis by age 25 to 29 has increased, according to an analysis by the University of Queensland, which may reflect greater awareness and reporting. Still, there is an average of seven years between onset of symptoms and diagnosis — and no known cure.
“Endometriosis has been under-recognised in both the social and medical communities — many people do not know what it is, and doctors find it challenging to treat and manage patients who present with symptoms,” UQ researcher Ingrid Rowlands says.
“This low level of understanding has contributed to a lack of knowledge and research into the condition itself.” In 2016-17, about 34,000 hospitalisations in Australia were related to endometriosis, 95 per cent of which involved at least one procedure.
While only one measure of the impact of endometriosis, the economic cost of the condition in Australia is at least $7.4bn a year.
That was the figure Ernst & Young came up with in a report for EndoActive, which highlighted how women with endometriosis use, on average, 60 per cent of their sick leave to deal with chronic pain.
“Australia must improve its standards of health data collection for endo,” EndoActive co-founder Sylvia Freedman says.
“A huge part of the problem is that the stigma connected with period pain and gynaecological disorders means that many women are ashamed to admit having endo for fear of discrimination.
“Another reason is that endo is often undiagnosed, meaning that statistics on prevalence and reasons for loss of productivity and sick leave are underestimated.” A national action plan was released last year, and the University of Adelaide’s Robinson Research Institute has been awarded funding to build a digital health platform for endometriosis research and support.
Certain cancers affect only women and the knowledge base is improving every year.
Cancer Australia recently released new web-based information on more than 30 endometrial cancer risk factors, showing one in three cases could potentially be prevented.
“Many of the factors that increase risk of endometrial cancer are things women cannot change, but the good news is there are things we can do to reduce our cancer risk,” Cancer Australia chief executive Dorothy Keefe says.
“This new evidence shows us that around one-third of all endometrial cancers are potentially preventable. We do know a healthy lifestyle has health benefits for everybody and can modify our risk for cancer and a range of chronic diseases.” Cancer Council Australia also has highlighted how young women who aren’t vaccinated against HPV are also less likely to participate in cervical screening. Researcher Megan Smith says that’s “a much scarier prospect because it leaves them particularly vulnerable to cervical cancer”.
With all the benefits arising from menopausal hormone therapy comes an increased risk of breast cancer.
That was confirmed by an international study, published last month in The Lancet medical journal, which Australian experts say will be part of the conversation between doctors and patients.
Susan Davis, the Melbourne-based president of the International Menopause Society, says there is a similar risk of breast cancer from obesity as from MHT and notes the paper was based on outdated treatment practices.
“The authors report that young post-menopausal women who use MHT have an increase in breast cancer risk compared with young post-menopausal non-users,” Davis says.“But what they fail to highlight is that, for young women, MHT restores their breast cancer risk to approximately what it would have been if they had not gone through an early menopause. This is extremely important as menopause before the age of 45 is associated with a greater risk of premature death from all causes and premature death from cardiovascular disease, as well as substantially greater risk of osteoporosis and fragility fracture in later life.”
CREDIT: SEAN PARNELL; HEALTH MATTERS
Word count: 675
