SOUTH AUSTRALIA IS ENTERING THE RECOVERY PHASE AFTER BATTLING CORONAVIRUS AND BUSHFIRES THIS YEAR. FUTURE ADLAIDE HAS BROUGH TOGETHER EXPERTS IN INFASTRUCTURE TO DISCUSS HOW WE BUILD A BRIGHT NEW WORLDT HE second Future Adelaide discussion panel – held thanks to advertiser.com.au in partnership with the SA Government – focuses on what government and business can do in the realm of infrastructure to get our state back on track post COVID-19. Reporter Kara Jung is joined by three expert panellists – Dianne Dixon, state project lead for innovation Precinct Lot Fourteen; Daniel Gannon, SA executive director of the Property Council Australia; and Jeremy Conway, chief executive of Infrastructure SA KJ:Welcome to the second of our Future Adelaide discussion panels. Jeremy, how important are infrastructure projects in getting our state moving again?
JC: Vitally important, both from generating economic activity and jobs to help us recover, but also to make sure we’re positioning SA to be stronger, more resilient, more vibrant, and really speak to the positivity of what lays ahead of South Australia.
KJ: What do you think are the key projects that we need to get going?
DD: Obviously I’m always going to be slightly biased towards Lot Fourteen. I think that for SA there’s a real need to prioritise the areas that are going to focus on building our business capability, getting the workforce back into play. And not just focused around jobs, but focused around the infrastructure that’s going to deliver on that. Looking at how you actually utilise specific precincts to focus on the industries – at Lot Fourteen it’s around space, defence, artificial intelligence, and technologies. So, what are the ways that we can work smarter? We’ve all learnt a lot about digital technologies and telecommunications during COVID. Going forward, it’s how we can actually focus on the use of those applications – 5G, for example, having a cohesive telecommunications digital plan. That’s where 5G, at somewhere like Lot Fourteen, will provide the opportunity for businesses to use that to grow themselves, but also put us on the world stage in terms of how we’re using the next wave of new technologies to be globally competitive.
KJ: Jeremy, do you agree with that?
JC: Yes. Digital infrastructure is going to be critically important for SA to make sure we can capture those opportunities. Precincts, such as Lot Fourteen, as well as Tonsley, Tech Park in Adelaide, they will be real drivers of economic activity. The demands for data are growing at something like 20-30 per cent a year, so the need for the digital infrastructure to support that is fundamentally important. When you talk about digital connectivity, though, it’s also important to recognise that, in the regions, there’s a need to try and improve the connectivity. That’s not only to give them the opportunity to capture some of these economic opportunities, but there’s also a social equity issue there. Through this COVID environment, the uptake of telehealth and those sort of more innovative service delivery models has been important, so it’s really important that regional SA has that digital structure for those new business models, service delivery models, online learning.
KJ: Where are we with that digital infrastructure? How quickly can we fast-track that kind of project?
JC: We have some really good examples. Things like the GigCity project within Adelaide, connecting the innovation precinct, has been rolled out to Mount Gambier and Whyalla as well. Education has a contract with Telstra around what’s called the SWiFT project where 514 schools in SA have been connected to high-speed fibre broadband. But there are gaps there, and we’re going through a process, in the COVID recovery team, trying to identify the gaps and the most efficient way to harness that.
KJ: We’ve lost Daniel Gannon due to a technical issue but we’re trying to get him back. Meanwhile, has the effect of the pandemic resulted in any existing projects needing to be put on the backburner or altered in scope?
DD: In relation to Lot Fourteen, it was a good opportunity to reassess. We’ve been able to bring forward one key project, the Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre, our centrepiece within Lot Fourteen. We’ve accelerated the delivery of that to hopefully start construction early next year, about a year ahead of schedule. It’s been an opportunity to look at things in a different way; look at how we can deliver them more innovatively and bring them to market a bit quicker, and also support the contractors.
JC: The Government has a pretty expansive capital works program, it’s about $12.9 billion over the next four years. I think it’s important hat governments continue to invest through this time. It’s important to give confidence to the industry. The world’s changing pretty fast, so we need to look at what are the priority projects to go forward. Infrastructure SA is a big advocate of ramping up some of the asset maintenance investment across the government portfolio, a very quick and efficient way to get work into the market across the state.
KJ: Are job-creating projects the priority when it comes to infrastructure or are there other drivers in this recovery?
DD: The key one for everybody is around the economy and that drives everyone’s lifestyles and the ability to facilitate other pieces of infrastructure. For places like Lot Fourteen, that’s the value of them, in terms of trying to create neighbourhood. So, yes, it is about creating the jobs, but it’s also about creating the environments that are going to be addressing some of those social, community, wellbeing and health requirements. It would (also) be valid looking at things like our international education market; reviewing how we approach that. Lot Fourteen will have the international centre for food hospitality and tourism, which will start construction in the next year. That will be in place where we can then take real advantage of the ability of SA to provide that safe environment for education and promoting itself back on to that stage. There’s also how we look at our cultural offerings, which then link into tourism and national visitation. All of them involve that job creation.
JC: Jobs are obviously key in ensuring we have that economic activity, but the COVID epidemic has not only created economic issues to manage. There’s also going to be some social and community wellbeing issues we need to work through, particularly in the social infrastructure space, not only to create the activity in jobs, but also leave a legacy that helps support the community. I think another important aspect is leveraging how well we’ve done through the COVID pandemic, and to position Adelaide globally, as a safe, good place to visit, do business, study. So positioning Adelaide and making sure it’s as attractive and as vibrant as possible is going to be important for our economic future.
KJ: How do you think the general public is feeling? A lot of people have lost their jobs, a lot have had jobs put on hold, but there is a sense that we’re hitting that road to recovery?
DD: Within Lot Fourteen, the start up hub, the Stone & Chalk are operating; I would say it’s probably about 70 per cent returned. You can feel the vibrancy. People I think are ready now for that face-to-face interaction – of generating the value of people-to-people interaction which is so critical, I think, both at a community level but also at an economic and a vibrancy level.
JC: I think we’re seeing people really starting to look forward to coming out of the restrictions. The fact that we’ve opened up the regions for regional tourism, I think, has been really positive.
KJ: With projects that we’re looking to fast-track, how do we move fast while still ensuring a push to use local suppliers, workforce and talent?
JC: So far, in the construction space, our supply chains have held up pretty well. A lot of the smaller medium-scale projects are something the South Australian industry and market’s really quite capable of delivering in our state. Some of the larger-scale projects and some of the more technical-specific engineering skills require different skills being imported. There’s been a bit of a slowdown in the private sector investment, but the industry has coped quite well and has capability to take on more. The important thing, when you try to fast-track work, is infrastructure projects are often complicated and risky so you’ve got to plan and understand and address those risks. The important thing in the short-term is to keep activity going.
KJ: How reliant is our state on federal funding and private sector investment to rebuild?
DD: From a Lot Fourteen perspective, government obviously plays a very key role. Without having government stepping up and making a commitment, you’re unable to unlock that significant private sector investment. At Lot Fourteen, we are at the stage of being able to leverage the work that’s been done. So things like the Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre, which is going to be a significant build in the centre and delivered through the private component of the market, but also the International Centre for Food Hospitality and Tourism Studies. Then the next wave, which will come after that with the demand that we’re already generating through tenants. It goes back to governments having that strategic intent around their industry sectors – so defence, space, cyber, the application of technologies in the creative industries – and how do you pull all those together.
KJ: Di, has that private investment slowed down at all due to COVID? DD: No. Interestingly, we haven’t seen that slow down for the specific Lot Fourteen projects.
JC: My view is, there’s still a lot of capital out in the markets at the moment, but they’re probably little bit more circumspect and a little more risk-averse. So the projects that do have a good business communication forum, a well-planned, demonstrated demand behind them, the capital markets are still looking for opportunities to invest. There’s opportunities available in SA to try and attract investment.
KJ: How can we strengthen our health infrastructure to make us better equipped to deal with future potential pandemics, or other challenges?
JC: I think SA’s obviously done an incredible job in terms of managing the health issues around COVID. One of the things it has demonstrated is the important role around Telehealth and using that sort of digital-enabled technology to be able to serve the needs of the population in a good way. I think we’ve very rapidly invested and strengthened some of those systems to enable that. That’s something that’s been clearly identified for an area that’s going to need continued investment and make sure that we can provide those services out in the regions. The digital health aspect is going to be fundamentally important in any future pandemics or health crises to enable us to respond to it in a quick and efficient and safe way.
DD: I think the innovation hub ecosystem that SA has is a valuable and unique component of our state’s infrastructure in itself. It’s lent itself to how we deal with pandemics and has driven a much more closer relationship – for those who are significantly involved in each of those precincts – getting together to talk about how we can link those hubs. In particular, most recently, ourselves at Lot Fourteen and BioMed City and Tonsley. I think the infrastructure that we have in place is starting to be used a lot more creatively in terms of looking at problems, and addressing them.
KJ: SA has released its 20-year infrastructure plan. Could you expand on some key initiatives and what they mean for everyday South Australians?
JC: It’s important to recognise that it’s a 20-year strategy, a long-term document. Some of the key themes are the importance we place on digital infrastructure. So rolling it out to make sure everyone across SA has those opportunities, how we can be more prepared to embrace new technologies. It’s also important to understand how Adelaide, as a city, needs to function over the next 20 years. I think people probably now are starting to recognise there’s more and more congestion. We’re very keen to see a more free-flowing road network. Once the north-south corridor is completed, you’ll be able to travel 80km without a single traffic light in the way. We have incredibly low patronage on public transport in Adelaide, and so it’s important to see that play a greater role so there’s better connectivity between some of these economic precincts, reduces congestion and leads to a more vibrant, liveable city. Beyond that, one thing we recognise is just how fundamentally important water is for everything we do in SA. A part of that is efficiency in terms of how we manage our water resources for human consumption but also the economic use, so finding opportunities for our wine-growing regions to have more secure water supplies, advocating for a clear, consistent and equitable national approach to the Murray KJ: I think we might have Daniel Gannon back. Going back to an earlier question, how important are infrastructure projects to get our state moving again?
DG: Putting to one side the digital infrastructure, construction plays a really important role in SA’s economy, mainly because it’s a massive jobs multiplier. The property sector in this state is the biggest private sector employer, there’s almost 170,000 people employed both directly and indirectly. There’s more than a million people with superannuation funds directly connected to major property assets in SA. One in five salaries come from property and construction. That sets the scene for the role construction can play in the next 12 months, but also the next five years. We have an incredible opportunity to embrace the construction development story. When you look back in five years’ time, we should have seen a skyline filled with cranes, hard hats, steel caps, high-vis vests, that transformed the CBD, but also transformed the suburbs with the Federal Government’s housing construction grants.
KJ: Jeremy, are we doing enough in terms of construction?
JC: I think the Government has a fairly full book for the forward program. Part of its initial response was the billion-dollar stimulus package. But the reality is how long the recovery from COVID will be is unknown. I think the Government needs to keep a close eye on these sorts of things, and needs to be able to respond quickly. When you look at construction activity, it’s one of the quick and efficient levers that government can pull to support the economy. At the moment, I think it’s a bit of a watching brief to see what happens and making sure we’re working as efficiently as possible to pump out those projects already in the pipeline to increase some of that activity.
KJ: What projects specifically do you think we need to prioritise? DG: I think there’s a great difference between social infrastructure and then the harder stuff like road and rail, the civil infrastructure. For everyone $1 million invested in social infrastructure – so think health, education, recreational centres, commercial activities – there are 12 jobs created. Take a look at the Riverbank precinct, for example, a productive piece of social infrastructure that would attract and draw people, investment activity. I think the State government needs to really embrace social infrastructure. There’s an immense opportunity for SA to project a brand of health, safety, resilience; draw people and investment into SA.
KJ: What are we doing to boost our population, i.e. to get people to come here, but also to stop our young people from leaving South Australia and giving them the opportunities to excel in this state?
DD: This is not a unique problem to SA. It’s really about having to have an eye on what’s required in terms of the skill-base and working, particularly with universities, but keeping it real in terms of what industry is going to require. Things like space, cyber and defence. SA is on the front foot of that and has a real opportunity to step up and take ownership of those niche components that it has the expertise in. It’s getting that combination right so we are an attractive and exciting place for people to want to understand how they can get involved in these industries. You can’t underestimate the value of having that on-the-ground geographic clustering of academics, researchers, start-ups, innovators, to come together to solve problems. That’s where the entrepreneurship actually occurs and the commercialisation of ideas, which then enables companies to grow.
KJ: Is SA in a better position now than before COVID in that pursuit? DD: I think we definitely have different challenges. I mean, we all know what’s going on in the education sector and, as I said, it actually opened up opportunities for a lot of our tenants at Lot Fourteen. I think it’s definitely changed and we’ve got to reset our priorities. We know we’re globally competitive, we know we’ve got the skill-base here. We need to support them, retain them, but also grow them.
KJ: What do you see as the single most important thing to do to make SA resilient in the future, and how can everyday South Australians play a role?
DG: The Commonwealth has put $25,000 worth of housing stimulus on the table. The State government is currently looking at how it might contribute and kick into a scheme like that. If you do have a renovation in the pipeline, if you are considering building a new home, there’s never been a better time to build a house in SA. Also, for the State Government, they’ve really got to double down on deciding what our new brand is moving forward, and we are pitching South Australia as an investment destination to investors abroad and interstate. Health, safety, resilience.
DD: SA has its particular strengths and every state is now focusing on the same thing. How does it become more resilient, how does it stake its claim in the international market. For me, it’s about sticking very true to some of the strategic intents already in place with a lot of things like our Growth State plan, our focus on our key industries; but it’s then finding the niches within those to actually then build the hard infrastructure that’s required to support them, but it’s that soft infrastructure and the curation and programming of those.
JC: It’s really important that we look at the South Australian brand and how we can position ourselves globally, play to what our strengths are but also look at the diversity and complexity in our economy. From an infrastructure point of view, to the resilience, I think this is where the digital infrastructure’s really key. It’s really important that’s continued to be invested in as the demands of data and infrastructure grow. We have many great opportunities to really take SA forward coming out of COVID, and I think all South Australians should look to that and take some confidence out of that and continue to invest in their own state.
KJ: Thank you all for joining us today.
The final live forum is on Friday at 10am on Facebook - The Advertiser THE second Future Adelaide discussion panel – held thanks to advertiser.com.au in partnership with the SA Government – focuses on what government and business can do in the realm of infrastructure to get our state back on track post COVID-19. Reporter Kara Jung is joined by three expert panellists – Dianne Dixon, state project lead for innovation Precinct Lot Fourteen; Daniel Gannon, SA executive director of the Property Council Australia; and Jeremy Conway, chief executive of Infrastructure SA Watch the full discussion now at futureADL.com.au
CREDIT: Kara Jung
Word count: 3295
