The ACT has effectively closed its border to half of the country, as Sydney's COVID-19 outbreak continues to spread interstate.
Non-ACT residents who have been in South Australia are no longer permitted to travel to Canberra unless they receive an exemption.
Meanwhile, Canberrans who are returning home from that state must get tested for COVID-19 & comply with a stay-at-home order until the end of Tuesday, July 27.
ACT stay-at-home orders now apply to areas that cover about half of Australia's population, including Victoria & locked down areas of New South Wales.
The affected parts of NSW include the Greater Sydney, Central Coast, Blue Mountains & Wollongong regions, as well as the Orange, Blayney & Cabonne council areas in the state's central west.
The decision to expand the ACT's stay-at-home orders was made after the South Australia government confirmed that the highly contagious Delta variant of COVID-19 had reached Adelaide, sending that state into lockdown.
The extension of stay-at-home orders also came just hours before NSW Health named an exposure site in Goulburn.
A positive COVID-19 case visited the Shell Coles Express — which is right next to the Big Merino — during a 10-minute window last Friday.
ACT Health Minister Rachel Stephen-Smith said that, given the worsening situation across the country, Canberrans should put off unnecessary travel.
"If it is urgent, if it is important, if it's for something like a funeral or a really important work activity that can't be avoided, of course people can continue to do that in accordance with the public health directions that are in place in the ACT & the other jurisdictions," she said.
"However, if you're just travelling for leisure, we would really, really discourage that at this time.
"The more everybody can stay put across the country, the more likely the public health officials where these outbreaks are will be able to get this under control, will be able to see those numbers coming down and will be able to get us back to a point, across the country, of zero community transmissions, which is where we want to be."
People aged in their 30s can now register for Pfizer
Canberrans aged 30 to 39 can register their interest for a Pfizer vaccine from today.
The Pfizer shot is still only available to Canberrans aged 40 to 59, though younger people have been able to receive the AstraZeneca vaccine from a GP.
But Ms Stephen-Smith said people in the younger age group could now register for a booking through the MyDHR (My Digital Health Record) website, & expect to be vaccinated later in the year.
The minister said technical problems experienced during earlier phases of the rollout had since been fixed.
"The good news is that our officials have worked with Services Australia to update the Medicare card details of everyone who was already in our system," she said.
As a result, Canberrans who had previously used the public health system should be able to log in without needing to phone ACT Health.
"When we're ready to open an appointment to that group, we'll actually be able to push out a text message to people who have registered," Ms Stephen-Smith said.
Pfizer vaccinations are likely to begin for this younger group next month if the Commonwealth's supply of the drug is on track.
Almost 1,400 people in Canberra under restrictions
ACT health authorities are monitoring almost 1,400 people in Canberra who have been ordered to confine themselves.
Of those, 810 are under a stay-at-home order & 656 are in quarantine.
Those numbers include about a dozen Australian government officials, who began quarantine at the Australian National University campus last night.
ACT health authorities will manage the quarantine for the returning officials but have called on the federal government to establish a fit-for-purpose facility for overseas arrivals.
The stay-at-home orders allow people to leave their premises for a limited number of reasons, including to:
* undertake essential work if they cannot work at home
* shop for essential supplies
* receive medical care or look after vulnerable people
* exercise for up to one hour a day
* feed animals
People aged 12 years or older who are subject to these orders must also wear a mask while they are outdoors unless they are exercising vigorously.
The stricter quarantine rules — which do not allow people to leave their home — apply to people returning from overseas, such as diplomats, or to people who visited a COVID-19 exposure site during a time it was likely to pose an infection risk.
ACT Health has listed hundreds of these locations across Australia & is updating them regularly.
More than a year has passed since the ACT last recorded a case of COVID-19 that was locally transmitted.
[Zendesk COVID form embed]
Word count: 796
