READER STORY Mile End's Dr Tamara Agnew, from Flinders University’s Digital Health Research Centre, shares her research into Fitbits and mobile apps, and how digital technology can positively influence our health, as part of Messenger Community News Meet the Researcher series.
What made you decide to work in the research field?
I want to help everyone access quality preventive health care. There’s a lot of people who cannot attend clinics, and the only way to help them is by conducting quality research.
What is your current research about?
I’m examining how everyday technologies like Fitbits, mobile apps and digital media can impact people’s health.
One study explores how digital media can increase incidental stair use in the workplace, using infra-red beams placed on all entrances and stairs, to stream live digital feedback to building users.
Along with promoting health messages, we anticipate increased stair use. Another study is trialling an app for older people living at home with early stages of cognitive decline, and we’ve found the participants willing to learn how to use devices that improve their prognosis.
We are also looking at technology to support people caring full-time for their loved ones with advanced dementia.
Our newest study aims to identify training that best helps people to cope in this caring role, so we can develop online resources that provide personalised support and networking opportunities for full time, non-professional carers.
How will it benefit the wider community?
The scope of digital health ranges from the innovative delivery of healthcare, therefore improving the health of communities, to offering individual digital health solutions. I’m excited by the potential of digital health research across all areas.
What has been your proudest moment as a researcher?
I walked across the stage wearing my doctoral gowns, in front of my father, who sadly passed away not too long after. I am so glad that he was able to witness this moment.
What has been your most challenging moment as a researcher?
It’s juggling motherhood and research commitments, especially when my youngest daughter was born, halfway through data collection for my PhD.
What does a normal day look like for you?
Attending meetings, writing or editing articles, conducting peer review of articles for international journals, administration, more meetings, emails, and finally going home to do some work on my side business.
If there is one piece of advice you could impart on future researchers and university students, what would it be?
I failed my HSC and lost all faith in myself and my abilities. I let that influence my life for many years, but after the birth of my first child, I decided to go to university.
While raising her, I earned a first class honours degree, and the following year I was accepted with a full scholarship to undertake my PhD. So, have faith in yourself.
You are never too old. And if you are completing your final year at school, know that you have many more options ahead of you.Keep going, and don’t give up.
Word count: 504
