ADVICE
SOUTH Australia has become a global leader in its coronavirus response. Our world-class health workers, pathology unit and contract-tracers have been the driving force in our fight against COVID-19.
But technology has a role to play, and there are two innovations that can help keep you safe from your pocket.
COVIDSafe is a new Australia-wide app that can help slow the spread of the virus by speeding up our contact-tracing process. The app traces its users and will notify you if you have been in contact with another user who tests positive for coronavirus. This means we can alert you if you may have been exposed to the virus much more quickly, helping to keep you, your family and community safe from further spread. It will also play a part in adjusting COVID-19 restrictions, so we can get back to our day-to-day lives as soon as possible.
The app can only trace and inform those who have downloaded it, so the more of us who connect to COVIDSafe, the quicker health authorities can find the virus.
I want to see South Australians continue to lead the way in our response to the pandemic, and I urge you all to install the app today. You can rest assured the app is completely safe for you and your family to use. It will never track your location and it has been developed to ensure your information and privacy is strictly protected.
COVIDSafe is not the first digital tool we have adopted. Last week, SA Pathology launched a new digital health service that allows South Australians to access their COVID-19 test results sooner.
Since its launch, the service has delivered over 2300 results. Importantly, as 99 per cent of patients return negative results, it is giving families early peace of mind that they are not infected and are able to stop self-isolating.
As testing for the virus continues, I encourage anyone attending a COVID-19 clinic to opt in for the new, efficient service.
You can download COVIDSafe from your usual app store.Dr Michael Cusack is Deputy Chief Public Health Officer
CREDIT: MICHAEL CUSACK
Word count: 352
