SOUTH Australia is well on its way to becoming the start-up and innovation capital of the country, the state’s chief entrepreneur says, but bringing in more venture capital and other investors remain key priorities.
Speaking at a Fearless Conversations forum on innovation and enterprise, hosted by The Advertiser and Flinders University yesterday, Andrew Nunn said a lack of funding options for local start-ups was limiting their ability to grow.
“We need to think about how we align more capital into the system – where we drop some more money in and where we help get businesses going,” he said. “I think fundamentally we need some patient risk capital – we need people to put money into advancing start-ups and not expecting an immediate return straight away, but accepting that the nature of start-ups is that they take a while to get going and, once they get going, they fly.
“It’s a different investment model but we need to get more mature as a state and as a nation about investing.” Mr Nunn, who chairs the Entrepreneurship Advisory Board (EAB), said a subcommittee had been established to investigate ways to get more investors into the system.
“Part of the work we’re doing at the EAB is looking at how we get some seed money – I think government has a role in supporting some of that but I don’t think government has a role in funding every business to scale – it’s about finding that balance,” he said.
“I’m hoping out of this subcommittee that’s looking at capital injection for the ecosystem that we come out with an outcome where we work with government to develop a way of bringing in a lot more venture money and a lot more private money into the ecosystem to support all these businesses.” Mr Nunn was joined on the forum panel by MyBudget founding director Tammy Barton, Taboo Period Products co-founder Eloise Hall and Professor Melissa de Zwart, a specialist in digital technology, security and governance at Flinders University’s Jeff Bleich Centre.
Ms Hall and business partner Isobel Marshall raised $56,000 via a crowdfunding campaign in 2018 to get their social enterprise off the ground, with the aim of eradicating “period poverty” and ensuring all women and girls had access to pads and tampons.
Ongoing revenue from the sale of period products would continue to support Taboo’s social cause but Ms Hall said there was a role for both the private and public sectors in supporting social enterprises.
“We’re having constant conversations with government and industry leaders to nut out why and how we can support social enterprise better,” she said. Extended coverage of the Fearless Conversation on innovation and enterprise will feature in the Sunday Mail on October 24.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 460
