THE $1.5 billion online My Health Record is at risk of ­becoming a white elephant, with only 1.5 per cent of ­patients accessing it.
The record, created for any Australian who did not actively opt out last January, is also being shunned by doctors.
The Australian Digital Health Agency (ADHA) reports there are 1.6 billion medical documents on the records, including blood test, scan results and medical histories. But around half the records are empty shells — only 12.5 million of the 22.6 million records have any documents in them.
To be useful, My Health Record needs a shared health summary uploaded by a GP which outlines a patient’s key health conditions, but less than one in 10 records include this.
In the past year, just 356,530 Australians — only 1.5 per cent of people who had a record after the opt-out period ended — accessed it, the ADHA told a Senate estimates committee.
Fewer than 8 per cent of specialists are registered to use the record, and the government admitted to a Senate estimates committee that it had no way of knowing whether GPs or hospital emergency departments used it during patient consultations.
The Federal Government claimed the record would save $14.6 billion by cutting the number of duplicate tests being ordered because doctors could view previous results.
There are nearly 90 million GP consults per year, but in the past nine months GPs have viewed documents on the My Health Record only 200,000 times a month.
Even Royal Australian College of General Practitioners president Dr Harry Nespolon admits he does not use it.
He has uploaded some patient health summaries, but has only once ever checked a patient’s record as part of a consultation — and that was just to see how it worked.
GPs were not using the record during patient consultations because it was “not a complete record of a person’s health”, he said.
“Its weakness is (that) it’s voluntary for GPs to put stuff up on the record, not all radiologists and pathology companies put stuff up, and not all hospitals are putting up discharge summaries,” he said. “At the moment it is easier to get information from the primary source by ringing (them).”Deidre Mackechnie, co-chair of the Australian Patient Advocacy Alliance representing 15 million patients with a chronic illness, said the record had enormous potential “but to say it hasn’t been rolled out well is an understatement”.
CREDIT: SUE DUNLEVY
Word count: 407
