THE Federal Government says the $2 billion My Health Record will save your life in an emergency but there are major problems with that claim – ambulance paramedics can’t access the record.
Paramedics are often the first responders in a medical crisis and information on the My Health Record about a person’s medical conditions and medications could be crucial in determining how to treat them in an emergency.
However, News Corp has contacted ambulance services in every state only to be told they can’t access the My Health Record.
The Australian Digital Health Agency (ADHA), which runs the record, confirmed to that more than six years after the record was launched, access by ambulance paramedics is “not activated yet”.
Worse still, one in four of the nation’s hospitals and health services aren’t connected to the system so they can’t use it when a patient comes in an emergency.
A day after the State Government announced it was overhauling the controversial EPAS electronic system, President of the Australasian College of Emergency Medicine Dr Simon Judkins, pictured, said IT systems in many public hospitals were so poor doctors in emergency departments could not access the records.
“No, it’s not widely used,” Dr Judkins said. “Some emergency departments have My Health Records but it hasn’t been widely advertised and if you log on and there is no information on it you are less likely to use it,” he said.
The ADHA’s own website also reveals that one in four of the nation’s public hospitals and health services aren’t able to view the My Health Record The problems punch a hole in the claim the record will help save lives, independent MP and former Australian Medical Association president Professor Kerryn Phelps said. “If the record is to have the potential to save lives in an emergency paramedics are the ones who go out to emergencies,” she said.
“I don’t think we have any proof at all that it will save your life,” she said. “All this is further evidence of why I’m calling for a 12 month delay in the roll out,” she said.
Every Australian will have a My Health Record automatically created for them from tomorrow unless they opt out by midnight tonight. The record will reveal if a patient has a mental illness, a sexually transmitted disease, had an abortion or is impotent.
Privacy experts have raised major concerns it could be vulnerable to hacking. Already there have been 88 data breaches involving the record and more than one million Australians have opted out. In response, Health Minister Greg Hunt has been promoting the controversial record as being about “saving lives and protecting lives”.MY HEALTH ON THE RECORD – Should you choose to opt in or out? The case for and against [ ISSUES: PAGE 21 ]
CREDIT: SUE DUNLEVY
Word count: 470
