hibernation   DON’T USE COVID AS EXCUSE  TO AVOID US, URGE DENTISTS   DENTAL HEALTH From social distancing to unstructured days, the pandemic has led to a deterioration of dental health as people cut costs and tuck into sugary treats at home.
Since lockdown, the number of adults with untreated and potentially painful tooth decay has increased from 25 per cent to more than 32 per cent, according to the Australian Dental Association’s (ADA) annual Oral Health Tracker.
It also found less than half of adults had visited a dentist in the past 12 months and only 53 per cent were brushing their teeth twice a day.
While stark white walls, glaring lights and steel instruments can turn people into quivering heaps, many dental practices are determined to remain open and provide their essential service during lockdown.
The ADA has made a series of recommendations, including advising patients to wear a face mask when they come in, having them wait outside or in their car until the dentist is ready to see them and placing hand sanitiser throughout the office.
Dentists are wearing protective equipment, switching to laser instruments and taking other steps to reassure patients it’s safe to get back in the chair.
Dr Rachel Mascord is among many dentists seeing fewer patients so they have more time to disinfect rooms between visits.
She says dental procedures are challenging because many involve the use of high-pressure sprays of water and air that could disperse virus-containing aerosols from a patient into the treatment room.
“I use a thin rubber sheet when treating teeth to reduce risk of creating aerosol,” she says. “We wear gowns, shoe and hair covers and face-shields to protect ourselves and screen our patients to determine if they have been exposed to the virus.” Dr Mascord says maintaining good dental hygiene is crucial during lockdown. “Reduce sugar in all of its forms — fruit, lollies and acidic drinks are the obvious culprits,” she says. “Stock up on healthy snacks like raw vegetables, nuts and hummus, and drink water and herbal teas like peppermint when the days are cold.” Many young Australians with excruciating tooth pain have tried to treat themselves with over-the-counter remedies, via friends’ advice or watching YouTube.
Bronwen Fielding-Trips, 26, used an emery board to file down the bumps on her teeth. “Spending money on expensive dentist visits just wasn’t a priority of mine,” she says. “I even purchased a cheap teeth whitening kit on eBay to attempt at-home whitening. I realise damaging the enamel of my teeth is not worth it. And I was lucky to not have permanent damage.” For those worried about oral health, there is now access to digital health services such as :DSmile Care which gives free advice from qualified dentists.
“It’s important to remember that poor dental health is almost entirely preventable,” :DSmile Care founder Dr Joseph Badr says. “Research shows two visits to the dentist a year is enough to prevent tooth decay, and that attending to dental problems early will prevent more painful and costly issues in the long term.” ADA spokesperson Dr Mikaela Chinotti says for this year’s Dental Health Week (which runs this week): “We’re asking Australians to make their oral health a priority even during the pandemic. This includes visiting the dentist, becoming sugar savvy by understanding ways to reduce free sugar intake or making a conscious effort to brush using fluoride toothpaste twice a day in a bid to reverse the negative trends.”
How to care for your teeth Keep dental health a priority.
Brush at least twice a day after breakfast and before bed, with a fluoride toothpaste. Spit out the excess toothpaste but don’t rinse your mouth with water to let the toothpaste remain on your teeth.
Drink as much fluoridated tap water as possible, especially after alcohol, soft or sports drinks.
Don’t smoke, it damages gums and teeth, and greatly increases the chances of oral cancer. Also, smoking stains teeth and causes them to be discoloured and contributes to bad breath.
Eat a balanced diet of nutritious foods, especially those rich in calcium and low in acids and sugars.
Floss and rinse every day as it’s important to clean between your teeth — flossing helps keep gums healthy and prevents dental decay.
Have regular check-ups which help prevent more serious problems. Remember to see your dentist if you have any questions or concerns. *The Australian Dental Association
CREDIT: PATRICK TADROS
Word count: 739
