A new facility in Adelaide for professional services firm PwC Australia will grow its workforce to 2000 over the next five years.
Professional services firm PwC Australia will create 2000 jobs at a new Skilled Service Hub in Adelaide.
Premier Steven Marshall opened the new facility on Thursday which is planned to expand from an initial workforce of about 300 to 2000 over the next five years.
Mr Marshall said it was another example of South Australia being a beacon for major companies to set up shop.
“With a strong focus on digital and technology roles across cyber security, cloud, analytics, integrated infrastructure and more, the expansion of PwC Australia also strengthens our state’s position as a hub for digital health innovation and as a world leader within the hi-tech sector," the premier said.
PwC managing partner Jamie Briggs said the new centre was part of the company's digital transformation strategy designed to meet the rising demand for skills in cyber, cloud and assurance services.
“The South Australian government also has a strong focus on cybersecurity as an area of economic growth, making Adelaide the new destination for innovation," he said.
“It’s the city Australians want to work in, whether they live in or out of state, and is opening new and different prospects for resourcing and helping to build Australia’s workforce of the future.”
PwC Australia is part of a network of firms located in nearly 160 countries around the world, employing more than 295,000 people.
The Property Council of Australia said the PwC's expansion was further good news for the state economy in what remained challenging times.
“Adelaide continues to attract future-proofed industries including artificial intelligence, cyber security and data analytics, with tech-titans like Amazon, Google and Salesforce flocking to our city," the council's SA Executive Director Daniel Gannon said.
“Notwithstanding the challenges presented by COVID, South Australia’s economy has not only fared well it has excelled."


CREDIT: Tim Dornin
Word count: 322
