Health authorities say South Australia has recorded no new coronavirus cases for the second day in a row, despite a dramatic uptick in testing since an expanded regime was announced on Wednesday.
There are now 81 active cases while seven people remain in hospital, with one patient in the ICU of the Royal Adelaide Hospital in a critical condition.
No cases were reported on Saturday.
Health authorities have now called for more South Australians in the 21-to-30-year-old age group to present for testing, so they can identify any asymptomatic carriers of the virus.
'Underrepresentation' of young people being tested
SA Health Deputy Chief Public Health Officer Mike Cusack said more than 5,000 COVID-19 tests had been completed over the past two days during a testing blitz across the state.
"If you cast your minds back a few weeks, we were getting 30 cases a day," Dr Cusack said.
"With the restrictions, especially with the border restrictions, we really have managed to get control of it.
"But in the coming weeks, we will get a true sense of it."
Dr Cusack said despite the increased number of tests, health authorities would like to see more young people presenting for testing.
"Whilst we have seen a very good turnout in terms of public responding & getting themselves tested, there is an underrepresentation of people between the ages of 21 & 30," he said.
"We really do need to get a sense of how many people in the community may have an infection, particularly if there are any signs of asymptomatic infection.
"I would very much encourage anyone between those ages, from 21 to 30, who has symptoms of sore throat, cough, or a temperature; they should get themselves tested."
He also said there was "tight planning" for the return of 880 stranded Australians being repatriated back to South Australia from overseas over the next two days.
"On a daily basis, there will be check-ins to see if there's any change," he said.
"If they're symptomatic with COVID-19, we will address those needs."
One flight with 440 passengers on board will travel from Chennai, in India, through Jakarta & Denpasar, in Indonesia, & arrive in Adelaide tomorrow morning.
Another flight — also carrying 440 passengers — will travel from Mumbai, in India, pass through Jakarta & Denpasar & arrive at 8:00am on Tuesday.
Health Minister Stephen Wade said he expected some restrictions would ease over the next few weeks & one of the first would be elective surgeries.
He said border controls would be eased a lot later.
"The border control will not be the first wave of restrictions eased. We're going to be very cautious as we ease back on these restrictions," he said.
But he said two days of negative results should not trigger complacency in South Australians.
SA Pathology launches new digital health service
SA Pathology clinical services executive director Dr Tom Dodd said that the new digital health service was an efficient & safe way for patients to receive their negative test results.
"We are performing in excess of 7,000 tests per week, & on average, 98.7 per cent are negative results," he said.
"The service is simple to use with patients registering their details through an SMS. A text message is sent to alert them to when a negative test result has become available online."
The SA Pathology COVID-19 Digital Health Service — developed by Adelaide technology company Personify Care — will initially be available at all metropolitan testing clinics & eight regional clinics, with plans to expand the roll-out across the state in the coming weeks.
Health Minister Stephen Wade said the service would streamline the process of delivering negative test results for COVID-19 through a secure online platform that can be accessed from home.
"As a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, there has been a surge in calls to SA Pathology from patients needing their COVID-19 test results, which has caused some delays," he said.
"Almost 99 per cent of South Australians have returned negative tests.
"It is important that patients get early peace of mind & are able to stop self-isolating."
Word count: 686
