GLOBAL technology firm Cognizant is eyeing a move into the Entrepreneur and ­Innovation Centre to be built at Lot Fourteen as it ramps up a local recruitment drive.
The company has taken on more than 50 employees since the launch of its new delivery centre in Adelaide just under a year ago and plans to increase that number to 250 by the middle of next year.
Cognizant Australia and New Zealand chief executive Jane Livesey was in Adelaide last week to launch the firm’s new headquarters in the Santos building on Flinders St.
She said it was looking to recruit local talent, as well as bring in people from interstate, overseas and other industries to boost its local workforce amid the skills shortages facing the industry.
“In terms of digital skills Australia had an existing problem pre-pandemic,” she said.
“We have often relied on international markets to bring in technology capability for Australian organisations and government.
“This is really part of why we are so passionate about bringing to life a centre like this, because it’s not only about delivering projects for our ­clients but giving people the ­opportunity to both build their technical skills and apply those skills.
“The demand for digital talent here is going to outweigh supply, so in parallel to building new talent we’ll also be supplementing that with ­experience, skills and capability.
“We have plumbers and chefs and people who have worked in aged care so really a range of different skills.
“At the end of the day, we’re solving business problems with technology so the technology skills are part of it, but we also need to tap into creative skills, problem-solving skills, and so many of our trainees come with ­invaluable experience.” Cognizant’s delivery centre is focused on helping clients in fields including software, ­artificial intelligence, machine learning, cloud computing and data analytics.
In the longer term the firm plans to increase its Adelaide team to 1600 staff by 2026, and expects a third to be employed from the local talent pool, a third from interstate and a third from overseas.
The company has a graduate program and also offers traineeships. Alex Fry joined as a trainee earlier this year after working for more than 20 years as a chef.
He said the Covid-19 disruptions made him reassess his career ­ambitions. “The pandemic hurt hospitality a fair bit but on the plus side it gave people the opportunity to start thinking about other careers and finding ­another direction,” he said.
“Finding something which challenged me more mentally, was going to give me more ­opportunities, more direction, more growth – it seemed like a really good idea and the timing was pretty much perfect.
“Working in a team environment, and certainly in an IT environment, it’s all brand new for me.” Cognizant is currently in talks about a future move into the $400m Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre (EIC) at Lot Fourteen, which is due to open in 2024.
Ms Livesey said the move would bring it closer to partner organisations and also to other technology services providers. Cognizant is among a number of major tech and consulting firms that have announced big commitments to Adelaide in the past couple of years, ­including Accenture, Deloitte, PwC and MTX Group.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 546
