Training is leading the list of workers’ job requests, writes Lauren Ahwan AUSSIE workers would prefer their employers provide opportunities for training rather than access to more annual leave or perks such as a company car.
Research by recruiter Hays reveals 57 per cent of Australian workers want access to training, making it the most sought-after employee benefit.
More than 20 days’ annual leave is the second most-preferred benefit, valued by 55 per cent of workers.
Other benefits sought by workers include ongoing learning and development (53 per cent), mental and physical health and wellbeing programs (38 per cent) and formal career paths (38 per cent).
A third of workers want a company car, car allowance or onsite parking or a budget for home office set-up and supplies, the research shows.
WHY TRAINING IS IMPORTANT Dave Burrows, strategic workforce planning director at Faethm by Pearson, says workers believe training will strengthen their career opportunities amid increasing automation and changing models of work.
“With workforces becoming increasingly diverse – with many now opting for remote, hybrid and mobile ways of working – workers are wanting to future proof their careers with ongoing learning and development opportunities,” Burrows explains.
“As workers continue to be met with the challenge of automation and augmentation, training enables employees to upskill, re-skill and adapt to meet the changing needs of the industries they work in.” Paradoxically, a more educated workforce means ongoing training is required to ensure workers remain competitive, Burrows says.
“Ultimately, training provides opportunities for continuous development, both professionally and personally, and adds longevity to people’s careers,” he says.
“Other workplace perks like more annual leave or a company car can, in some instances, convince an employee to join an organisation but very rarely will it convince them to stick it out for the long run.” IMPACTS OF COVID Hays managing director Nick Deligiannis says many workers feel career progression stalled during the pandemic and are now focused on training and upskilling to get their career plans back on track.
“During the pandemic, many organisations accelerated digital transformations,” he says.
“Today, there’s a growing appreciation that change is rapid and frequent and regular learning is required to keep skills relevant and (workers) employable.” He says workers are keen to improve their technical, soft and digital skills to meet future workforce needs.
Common areas for digital upskilling include data analytics, cyber security, the Microsoft Office suite, CRM software, and remote collaboration applications and a range of popular business, accounting, legal and office software.
“We’re not only referring to technology jobs – although reskilling into tech can open up strong job opportunities,’’ Deligiannis says. “Every job requires some level of digital literacy and regular upskilling in response to technological change.’’
CREDIT: Lauren Ahwan
Word count: 457
