The fourth round of the Great State Voucher program will launch in late May, Premier Steven Marshall announced on Monday.
To be used through the winter season, the vouchers will provide $50 off participating accommodation providers in regional South Australia and suburban Adelaide, and $100 off hotels in the CBD and North Adelaide.
“The timing of the next round of accommodation vouchers couldn’t be better,” Mr Marshall said.
“April is a busy time with Easter, school holidays and the Anzac Day long weekend – and we’re keeping that momentum going through the winter months.”
The announcement comes after the third round of the program, which provided up to $200 off tours and experiences, launched last week via a randomised electronic ballot.
Mr Marshall said a total of 100,034 people, including more than 4500 from interstate, registered for the ballot over three days. About 50,000 people were successful and bookings for the experiences vouchers start on Tuesday.
“There are now around 50,000 vouchers out there, ready to be used to book tours and experiences from (Tuesday),” Mr Marshall said.
“That’s tens of thousands of South Australian trips that otherwise wouldn’t have been taken.”
Mr Marshall said authorities were still deciding if round four would be a ballot system or if people needed to scramble online as soon as it launched like rounds one and two.
SA Tourism Commission chief executive Rodney Harrex said he was working with hoteliers to design midweek specials that incentivise Sunday to Thursday bookings in the CBD.
“At the end of the day, we want people out exploring regions or heading into the city, spending money in hotels and restaurants, having a night or two away – it all drives the state’s visitor economy and keeps people in jobs,” he said.
Saturday nights will be excluded from the voucher system, just like previous rounds.
The State Government pointed to figures provided by global hospitality data analytics firm STR, which showed accommodation occupancy in regional SA hit 69 per cent last month – the second highest level on record.
The figures also showed CBD hotels hit an average occupancy level of 72 per cent last month – the highest monthly average since the pandemic began.
Mr Marshall announced the fourth round at Hotel Indigo Adelaide Markets, which opened on March 1.
General manager Thomas Zinn said the previous round of accommodation vouchers was crucial for the hotel’s opening phase.
“Heading into the traditionally quieter winter months, the travel industry in South Australia is doing it particularly tough,” he said.
“We hope that the next round of vouchers for the accommodation industry is going to support us throughout this difficult time of the year.”
Cage diving with Great White sharks at Port Lincoln, South Australia. Courtesy: Dive This Australia
gabriel.polychronis@news.com.au
Word count: 442
