Australian ministers for Defence and Foreign Affairs, Peter Dutton and Marise Payne, signed a classified Statement of Intent on Strategic Capabilities Cooperation and Implementation with their US counterparts during last month’s AUSMIN talks in Washington DC.
The two governments say it “will further strengthen capability outcomes, deepen our Alliance, and strengthen our co-operation to meet emerging challenges, and support regional stability.”
The obvious candidates for closer bilateral R&D co-operation include space, hypersonic flight, quantum science, the development of guided weapons and the vast field of autonomous and robotic systems.
But Defence Industry Minister Melissa Price won’t be rushed into announcing new projects, she told The Australian, despite having the national Science and Technology portfolios added to her ministerial responsibilities.
“Clearly, it’s very early days in the AUKUS agreement,” she says.
“But we will of course explore in great detail all opportunities to work hand-in-hand with the US and UK on research and development.
“The prospect of Defence and innovative Australian small and medium businesses working closely with those producing the most cutting-edge capability in the world in the US and UK is one that excites me greatly.
“With the addition of Science and Technology to my ministerial portfolio responsibilities, I will have a strong focus on defence industry and other industries where there may be sovereignty gaps.”
The US defence R&D model, with early user involvement, significant investment in disruptive, defence-focused R&D and a willingness to back local companies by acquiring their smart products is something Australia can learn from, say industry sources here.
But working with the US already provides opportunities for Australian industry, says managing director for defence delivery of BAE Systems Australia, Andrew Gresham.
“We’ve … collaborated on HiFiRE which is a well-known hypersonics program based on more than 15 years of collaboration with the US,” he told The Australian. This “game-changing” collaboration, he says, has focused on scramjets, rocket motors, sensors and advanced manufacturing materials.
Autonomy is another area where Gresham believes Australia can grow its collaboration with the US, “because this is an area where BAE Systems Australia is a world leader in the development of autonomous systems”.
However, “we don’t need to reinvent the wheel,” says former Australian air attache in Washington, Terry van Haren. The Newcastle-based chief executive of US space company LeoLabs Inc advises, “we’d do better to collaborate than compete”.
To be a good research and industrial partner of the US, Australian firms should be prepared to set up a US subsidiary or work with a US company who can assist with market access, he believes.
“It’s too early to tell the impact on Australian industry of the AUKUS agreement,” says Horden Wiltshire, chief executive of Adelaide-based SME Acacia Systems whose leading-edge data analytics software is aboard Collins-class submarines and in the UK’s Astute-class submarine Concept Laboratory (CONLAB).
But, he adds, “there is currently no effective mechanism to deliver leading-edge Australian technology to US submarines”.
The US and Australian governments collaborate on the BYG-1 combat system and Mk48 CBASS torpedo for both countries’ submarines, but it can be extraordinarily difficult for local companies to get local technology on to a US submarine.
“We are hopeful that the new partnership will allow Australian technology to be provided to US submarines,” Wiltshire tells The Australian.
“This will require the government to be proactive in the negotiations so that we don’t end up with a continuation of the one-way flow of technology from the US as is the case today.”
Acacia has applauded the government’s focus on sovereignty since the launch of the Defence Industrial Capability Plan in 2018, says Wiltshire, who told The Australian he expects this to be reflected in the details of any future partnering agreements.
Australian industry and research players contacted by The Australian pointed repeatedly to the US’s onerous International Traffic in Arms Regulations (ITAR), administered by the US State Department, as a major barrier to better collaboration.
Notwithstanding Australia’s recently enhanced status as an acknowledged part of the US National Technology and Industrial Base, the ITAR regimen makes collaboration and technology sharing with US partners very difficult, say Australian researchers.
Word count: 661
