With over 110 Australian local government areas affected by the disaster dubbed Black Summer, census data has been instrumental in the recovery effort. This spans from the initial clean-up, to identifying the most vulnerable communities, and policy decisions around future risk reduction.
“The disaster was so overwhelming in its scale, we needed an authoritative central source to go to for data that would be consistent across states and territories,” says Christine Atyeo, National Bushfire Recovery Agency (NBRA) acting director of data analytics. “We couldn’t do much of our work without the census. Everyone has different sets of conditions in their life. We can’t help you if we don’t know you’re there.”
The clean-up
In the early days of the recovery effort, the NBRA used demographic data to provide briefing packs to first responders. “The military and other first responders were being sent off to places as varied as Kangaroo Island, Clarence Valley, the Shoalhaven, East Gippsland - really hard-hit areas,” Atyeo says. “It gave them an understanding of the environment they were going into, the age profile, unemployment profile, socio-economic status and possible vulnerabilities. We had an in-depth analysis of non-English speaking populations, and people with a disability.”
The practical implications ranged from knowing what types of dwellings had been damaged, to what medium would be best for communicating information. “Things like, if it’s a more elderly community, we’ll use radio more, rather than Facebook or Twitter to reach out,” says Atyeo.
Pandemic hits
As bushfire headlines made way for news of the Covid-19 pandemic, recovery efforts faced an extra layer of difficulty. The pandemic’s contribution to supply-chain issues for building materials, workforce shortages and economic struggles was another blow for communities that, in recent years, have struggled with drought, then floods and, more recently in NSW, a mouse plague.
“Covid threw them for a six,” Atyeo says. “So many bushfire-affected areas are also high tourism areas. The fires had a huge impact on tourism, followed quickly by Covid.”
Building resilience
Understanding which communities are most vulnerable to the impacts of natural disasters is another key information piece that has come from the Census. It was one of the key data sources used to inform The Disaster Resilience Index, a nationwide tool developed by the Bushfire & Natural Hazards Cooperative Research Centre.
The index found that 16 per cent of Australians - or about 3.8 million people - have a low capacity for disaster resilience. “This isn’t about individual resilience, it’s about the social, economic and institutional factors that sit around communities and influence their disaster resilience,” explains Dr Melissa Parsons, who led the development of the Index.
Areas deemed to have a high capacity for disaster resilience - mostly the big metropolitan cities - are concentrated into less than half a per cent of Australia’s land area. “This is not where we have our bushfires and floods,” Dr Parsons says.
“Areas with barriers such as economic capital, lack of access to services, rental and employment instability and lack of access to savings and insurance, are likely to have a much longer recovery time.”
Future-proofing
Data that identifies the most at-risk communities can also help policymakers bolster against future disasters. “Every dollar invested in risk reduction can save up to $15 invested in the aftermath,” Dr Parsons says. “The Index allows you to help in that planning. An example is access to telecommunications. Improving mobile and internet access can have a really big impact on disaster resilience.”
Recovery is a complex process that reaches well beyond physical rebuilding. In the recent Beyond Bushfires report on the 2009 Black Saturday bushfires, only 44 per cent of respondents felt their community had fully, or mostly recovered. “Recovery goes through evolutions, from providing better places of shelter in the event of another disaster, to cycling trails and sculpture walks to encourage tourism back into an area, and supporting new industries like beekeeping, oyster farming and forestry,” Atyeo says. “You can never really draw a line in the sand and say ‘this community has recovered’.”
The next Census will be held on August 10. You can complete your Census here.
Word count: 670
