Lot Fourteen tenants putting SA on the business map
MYVENUE Although created pre-coronavirus, myvenue’s technology fits perfectly in a post-pandemic world. The company offers point of sale (POS) and mobile commerce solutions that allow patrons at events to pre-order food and beverages through the myvenue app, which is then delivered to their seating area. Already in use in stadia and arenas in North America, the technology is gaining strong ground in South Australia, where it was used at this year’s Summer Sounds Music Festival.
“We’re now working with Adelaide Oval on ways to help them reduce congestion around bars and kiosks,” myvenue CEO Tim Stollznow says.
Interest from the commercial world means myvenue is currently seeking five new employees to join the team at Lot Fourteen.
“Lot Fourteen is an incubator for young people to get together,” Stollznow says. “It’s about common learning, jobs for South Australians and revenue for South Australia.”
AUSTRALIAN CYBER COLLABORATION CENTRE Things have been busy at the A3C over the past few months. Since opening its doors in July 2020, the not-for-profit enterprise has welcomed 29 member organisations, including Optus, Telstra, BAE Systems and Lockheed Martin, with more in the pipeline.
The A3C has four missions: to offer full-spectrum cyber courses to increase the supply of skilled workers; assist in launching new cyber products and services to global markets; build cyber awareness and resilience in Australian businesses; and solve real-world cyber challenges through collaboration.
That collaboration has also led to the development of an Insider Threat CoE, alongside US-based Mitre Corporation, fellow Lot Fourteen tenants DTEX and Splunk, the Department of Defence and others. The organisation will soon be just the second in Australia to offer the Information Security Registered Assessors Program training to individuals.
A3C’s success has led to an expansion of its presence at Lot Fourteen, where it will soon accommodate an additional 75-80 hotseats. “The innovation and collaboration is fantastic for us,” A3C CEO Kim Scott says. “You see a lot of companies chatting to each other, which wouldn’t happen if we weren’t all colocated at Lot Fourteen.”
MIT BIGDATA LIVING LAB The Massachussett’s Institute of Technology’s bigdata Living Lab is bringing MIT’s world-leading secure data analysis expertise to South Australia. The research initiative, based at Lot Fourteen, is a collaboration between MIT, the South Australian Government, BankSA, Optus and mobile telephone data analytics specialist DSpark.
Working with MIT bigdata Living Lab will: • protect the community’s private data through world-leading tools, methodologies and data governance • define the right question to ask of the data to give government insights that lead to better decision making and improved socioeconomic outcomes; and • unlock greater insight by helping government to securely access multiple big data sets across government and industry without compromising privacy “We identified Adelaide early on as the prime location for a Living Lab in Australia and the broader region due to its leadership in data analytics and machine learning,” says MIT Professor of Media, Arts and Sciences, Professor Alex “Sandy” Pentland. “We’re happy to be here.”
CRYOCLOCK As a young man, Professor Andre Luiten had a dream of building the world’s best clock. Twenty-five years later, the professor, his team at Cryoclock and significant investors including BAE Systems have created just that. Today, his ultra-precision sapphire clock is helping to keep Australia safe, integrated into the Jindalee over-the-horizon radar system which can identify threats with pinpoint accuracy before they can reach our shores.
Prof Luiten, who also directs research at The University of Adelaide, is now turning his attention to the area of sensing. “The technology can support many industries, including mining, agriculture or food and wine applications,” he says For Prof Luiten, being based at Lot Fourteen helps transform his research into commercial opportunity.
“Universities are more about research, whereas working in a commercial entity has really changed the mentality of the team,” he says.
“Also, the ability to work collaboratively with other hi-tech businesses like Sitael and Inovor in the same building is terrific. We can put forward joint proposals which gives us critical mass.”
MYRIOTA Using a constellation of satellites in lowEarth orbit, Myriota provides wireless data connectivity to support industries like agriculture, the environment, defence, energy and utilities, maritime, mining and resources.
“These are industries that are becoming increasingly digitised so, whether it’s production or operations, they need to obtain data for efficiency, to manage risks and their production in terms of day-to-day operations,” says Dr Alex Grant, co-founder and CEO of Myriota.
“In urban areas you might obtain that data from the cellular network or wi-fi, but for companies with operations outside the city’s reaches, getting that connectivity becomes difficult.” Headquartered at Lot Fourteen, the company has attracted more than $50 million from private investment since it was founded in 2015, and now also employs staff in Sydney, Canberra, Melbourne and Ontario, Canada.
“We’re happy we can grow the number of hi-tech jobs here in Adelaide,” Dr Grant says. “Lot Fourteen is a unique development opportunity – it’s a massive innovation precinct on a global scale.” The success of Lot Fourteen in attracting companies such as the Australian Space Agency is another drawcard. “It shows the vibrancy and the benefit of a precinct that it can attract agencies like the ASA to Adelaide,” Dr Grant says. “It’s a really great environment.”
For a full list of Lot Fourteen tenants visit lotfourteen.com.au/directory
LOT FOURTEEN ADL. FUTURE ADELAIDE SPECIAL REPORT
Word count: 904
