Tech giant brings cloud technology to Lot Fourteen
GLOBAL tech giant Google will set up an Adelaide base at Lot Fourteen as a hub for a Cloud Public Sector team working with South Australian health and medical researchers.
The third global technology services firm to commit to Adelaide in seven months, Google’s Adelaide hub also will be a training and event venue for its customers and partners.
Neither job numbers nor the hub’s opening date were specified by Google or the State Government.
But Premier Steven Marshall hailed Google’s decision to forge a Lot Fourteen base as “a great accomplishment”.
“This is now the third global company to choose South Australia as its home, creating thousands of jobs in the hi-tech, digital, space and defence industries,” he said. “South Australia has world-leading capabilities in AI, data analytics and cyber security that make us globally interesting and provides digital tech companies with an opportunity to come together to partner on projects that can literally change the world we live in.” Technology giant Amazon in February opened an Adelaide office at Lot Fourteen, announcing plans to create 50 jobs in SA by 2024. In September last year, global technology and services giant Accenture revealed it would set up an Adelaide hub, with a plan to create 2000 local jobs.
Google is expected to focus on health research and technology, including collaboration with the SA Health and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI). The government has been working with Google Cloud to “showcase SA’s health ecosystem”, including SAHMRI and SA Health.
Google also has examined how the Lot Fourteen-based Australian Institute of Machine Learning and MIT Living Lab are collaborating with health and medical industries.
Google Cloud public sector director in Australia and New Zealand Michael Grantham said SA’s health capabilities were closely aligned with Google Cloud’s strategic priorities. “We look forward to working with the government, other technology partners at Lot Fourteen, and businesses to support South Australia’s economy,” he said. Cloud computing involves delivery of on-demand services including storage and processing power over the internet.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 345
