STEVEN MARSHALL: Building an innovation ecosystem attracts local and global tech businesses
South Australia has long had a reputation for fantastic wine and premium produce, and a proud manufacturing history, but over the past few years there’s been a noticeable groundswell around technology and future industries, particularly in the hi-tech sector.
Nowhere is that more evident than at Lot Fourteen – one of the most exciting innovation precincts in the nation. At the site of the former Royal Adelaide Hospital, we’re creating a global precinct focused on innovation, entrepreneurship, research, education, culture and tourism.
With a strong technology focus, Lot Fourteen is already home to more than 1200 people, 48 businesses and 58 startups – providing an exciting environment for global companies, startups and organisations from the hi-tech, cyber security, space, defence and creative industries. This is set to increase to 1800 people by the end of 2022.
You only have to look at the roll call of companies that have decided to set up in Adelaide in recent times to see South Australia’s tech credentials on display – whether it’s Google Cloud, Accenture, MTX, LVX, Amazon Web Services or MIT. The tech world is sitting up and taking notice of Adelaide, South Australia.
South Australia has world-leading capabilities in artificial intelligence (AI), data analytics and cyber security that make it globally interesting, and provides digital tech companies with an opportunity to come together to partner on projects that can literally change the world in which we live.
We are building a world-class innovation ecosystem that is underpinned by a competitive business environment that gets the fundamentals right for all businesses.
The state government has been working closely with the likes of Google Cloud to showcase South Australia’s health ecosystem – which includes the South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute (SAHMRI), SA Health, SA NT DataLink – and how the Australian Institute for Machine Learning and MIT bigdata Living Lab are collaborating within the health and medical industries.
We are also the home of the space industry in Australia, with the Australian Space Agency already located at Lot Fourteen, complementing private sector innovation. South Australia is already home to space companies like Fleet Space – which recently launched its sixth nanosatellite, Centauri 4, aboard SpaceX Falcon9 – and Airspeeder, which has already had its first successful unpiloted test flight of its electric “flying” race car, the Alauda Mk3, in South Australia.
Growing this technology-focused ecosystem means our best and brightest no longer have to look interstate and abroad for jobs in the hi-tech sector; now, fulfilling careers in technology are available for young people right here.
And that’s showing up in a statistic we’re pretty happy about: the net interstate migration. When we came to government, many South Australians were choosing to not stay here. They were finding their careers in Sydney, Melbourne, Hong Kong and London – people in their thousands were leaving the state.
We set ourselves a goal that within our first term we wanted to get that figure back to neutral. Pleasingly, we were able to do that within our first two years, before the onset of the global Covid-19 pandemic.
Now, we have a positive migration to South Australia for the first time in 30 years.
This is something every SA employer should celebrate, every parent and grandparent should celebrate and, overall, something that the whole state should celebrate. Our young people are now showing real confidence in South Australia.
The jobs of the future are no longer only in the eastern states; they are right here in South Australia. We have the best lifestyle in the world, and now we have the best hi-tech careers.
This is in no small part due to the technology and innovation ecosystem that is being created in the state.
As a government we will always support the growth of the traditional sectors of the South Australian economy: mining, agriculture, manufacturing, construction, tourism and international education. These sectors have long been the backbone of our economy. But our ambition is to go beyond that, to the defence, space, cyber security, machine-learning, renewable energy and creative industries – all of which have technology at their heart. These are the sectors where we have a competitive and comparative advantage. They are also the sectors that have huge potential to create jobs, and that’s why South Australia has such a strong focus on these future industries, which will drive employment for decades to come.
It’s no accident that Adelaide was recently named Australia’s most livable city, and the third most livable in the world. There are more South Australians employed now than at any other time in our state’s history – and much of this employment growth is being driven by technology-focused industries.
Digital technologies, including AI, are potentially worth $315bn to the Australian economy by 2028, according to consultancy firm AlphaBeta. PwC forecasts that AI could be worth $22.17 trillion to the global economy by 2030.
To participate, Australia needs up to 161,000 new AI specialists by the end of the decade.
South Australia plans to be at the forefront of this job and economic wave, by growing its AI brains trust and amplifying research and commercial outcomes through the unique ecosystem it has created in Adelaide. South Australia is open for business and the entire state is getting behind this technological push, which is growing our global reputation as one of the most attractive places in the world to live and work, as well as invest.
From flying cars to AI, nanosatellites and cyber security, the best and brightest brains are right here in South Australia, with a pipeline of work that will continue to power these sectors into the future. Steven Marshall is the Premier of South Australia
CREDIT: STEVEN MARSHALL
Word count: 964
