Buoyed by a relatively lucrative broadcast deal, Kestelman – a member of The List – Australia’s Richest 250 – is breaking even on basketball after sinking about $50m into the league since gaining control in 2015 when the NBL was struggling to survive.
In a wide-ranging interview, Kestelman reveals he is preparing to launch a search for new investment into the league, potentially by a formal process next year, to capitalise on the NBL’s growth and commercial opportunities in Australia and overseas.
Kestelman has also fielded inquiries from prospective investors in four cities around Australia to establish new NBL teams, and says he is targeting Canberra if local and federal governments are prepared to revamp the ageing AIS Arena as part of deal that would see him emerge with management rights as he has successfully done with the new Tasmania JackJumpers team in Hobart.
“I went to Canberra and … I don’t understand how a city of 500,000 does not have a modern 5000 capacity venue,” Kestelman says. “What we have done in Tasmania could be a blueprint for Canberra. There have been meetings but we need the federal government to deal with the [territory] government on it.”
The serial entrepreneur is also scouring the market for acquisitions for his Brand Collective roll-up of fashion and footwear labels that is now turning over more than $600m annually, and is set to launch more than $600m worth of property projects later this year.
While he now oversees a collection of businesses that he says has about $1.5bn worth of annual revenue via his investment arm LK Group, Kestelman is best known as the owner of the NBL that now turns over about $40m annually.
“I think it’s a really interesting moment in time for us. When I took over we had no broadcaster, no sponsors and generally the sport was a big trouble. I’m proud to say we are profitable for the first time now. We have good broadcast partners in ESPN, Foxtel and Kayo. The NBL has really arrived in my mind.”
While Kestelman owns the league, the 10 teams are owned individually — though Kestelman maintains control of the Tasmanian team as it plays its first season. He says he will launch a process to sell the JackJumpers to investors next year.
The NBL has attracted corporate names such as Tesla chair Robyn Denholm at the Sydney Kings and Vicinity Centres chief executive Grant Kelley at the Adelaide 36ers.
But the clubs still lose millions of dollars collectively each year, and are likely to push Kestelman for more of a say in the running of the league in the years to come.
However Kestelman says the value of the club licences “are going through the roof”, giving the owners capital appreciation at least.”
“[A value of] $35m is just normal now. We think we’re the second best league in the world behind the NBA [National Basketball Association in the US], where the teams can be worth $3bn. So we’re 1 per cent of that now. I think there’s no limit to where we can go.”
Kestelman says he is fielding investor interest in the league and that he does “want to explore getting strategic partners, such as people who can help the league grow domestically and overseas [such as] media companies, people with good connections around the world through to the NBA.”
He wants to finalise any plans to look for investors later this year and conduct the search “early to mid next year”.
As for what the NBL is potentially worth, Kestelman points to the $400m valuation for soccer’s A-League, achieved after a funding injection by private equity firm Silver Lake late last year, though the clubs own that league.
“I would be disappointed if we are worth less. The markets will determine what we are worth. But consider that we are profitable and have a strong upside, unlike the A-League, and I feel we are just beginning.”
But he does want to increase the number of teams, revealing he would like a club in Canberra and that a second team in Sydney makes sense and potentially a third in Melbourne.
“Canberra could be Hobart 2.0,” Kestelman says. “The AIS Arena is as old the DEC [Derwent Entertainment Centre] and that got refurbished and is good as new now. The government spent $60m on it rather than a $200m new stadium. Now we manage it and it is going to operate 120 days a year for all sorts of events. But the NBL licence was the catalyst for that.”
Kestelman’s LK Group also has development rights for land around the DEC and Kestelman will put in a revamped planning proposal for a $100m project including retail and commercial assets later this year.
Meanwhile, Kestelman is also looking for bolt-on acquisitions for his retail assets via the fashion PAS Group and footwear focused Brand Collective, both of which have brands such as Review, Black Pepper, SuperDry, Mossimo and Clarks. He says the group, which now has about $600m annual revenue, is looking for more targets.
“Our goal is to be aggressive, growing organically and also we’re looking for acquisitions in the fashion space. The industry needs a shake-up, and we can be disrupter by being more customer centric, being better at loyalty programs, data analytics and so on.
Kestelman’s LK Group also owns technology and outsourcing companies and is a major property developer, having built the $800m Capitol Grand in Melbourne’s South Yarra.
While he admits to concerns about the cost of building materials, Kestelman will soon launch a 230-unit apartment project worth $230m near Melbourne’s Crown Casino and a $300m, 350-apartment project in Sydney’s Rouse Hill. He looks to begin construction at both late this year.
“The market is stable but the biggest issue at the moment is cost, and the supply chain is broken. So it can be a scary time to start projects and you see builders going under. Right now it is difficult, but we hope in the next six months it has stabilised a bit.”
Word count: 988
