PROPERTY developers want the next state government to transform Adelaide into the innovation capital of Australia.
In its election policy manifesto, the Property Council has detailed 16 policies it believes will help South Australia successfully emerge from the pandemic.
They include establishing a taskforce to encourage large companies to relocate to Adelaide, promoting Adelaide as “the place to be” and connecting buildings to high-speed internet.
Executive director Daniel Gannon said the state’s economy had excelled, despite the challenges posed by Covid.
“Adelaide has been recognised as Australia’s most liveable city but throughout the pandemic we’ve also seen a new culture around remote work, combined with a booming technology sector,” he said.
“Given these circumstances, Adelaide’s value proposition as an attractive destination to live, work, invest and play has become more pronounced.” Mr Gannon said globally there were various cities engaging in a “war for talent to attract human capital in order to rebound out of pandemic-stunted economies”.
“SA is no different,” Mr Gannon said.
“Adelaide’s transition from Boom Town to Zoom Town is already under way. “We are seeing Australians selling up in cities like Sydney and Melbourne, relocate to Adelaide, retain their eastern seaboard jobs and clients and take up office space in the CBD.” Mr Gannon said Adelaide needed to continue to attract “future-proofed industries”, including artificial intelligence, cyber security and data analytics.
“We have tech-titans like Amazon, Google and Salesforce flocking to our city,” he said.
“We need to drive greater connectivity into global markets with direct flights to Adelaide to build a pipeline of human capital, innovation and investment that will bring digital nomads to Adelaide.” He said Adelaide should capitalise on workers and their families who were relocating to regions to suit their lifestyle and improve their quality of life.
“Others are increasingly choosing to embrace a location-independent, tech-enabled lifestyle that allows them to travel and work remotely,” he said.
“Adelaide has a lot to offer and a lot to gain from this exchange. “This pandemic has triggered a rethink of people’s preferences and our economy can be a direct beneficiary.”
PROPERTY COUNCIL WISH LIST ■ Taskforce to attract big company headquarters ■ Campaign promoting Adelaide as the “place to be” ■ Increased commercial high speed internet connections ■ Greater support for SA companies to expand overseas ■ Higher education partnerships with private sector ■ More international direct flights into Adelaide ■ Improved public transport connections to CBD ■ Development fund to refurbish heritage buildings ■ Less red tape to fast-track planning approvals
CREDIT: COLIN JAMES
Word count: 422
