PROFESSIONAL services firm Deloitte wants to recruit up to 500 new staff for its Adelaide-based Centre for Innovation and Technology, to be announced today.
The international firm will base its first Australian innovation hub in Adelaide, to take advantage of the state’s ecosystem of defence, space, and other technology companies, managing partner Adelaide Hendri Mentz said.
The centre will partner with research teams from South Australia’s universities, Deloitte said, with a focus on areas such as artificial intelligence, data analytics and cyber.
“Supporting the firm’s 9600 professionals across the country, it will then deploy these solutions, and others, in the delivery of large-scale technology transfor-mation projects for Deloitte clients,’’ the firm said.
“In addition, we will be able to deploy market leading technology solutions to support our audit clients allowing us to improve efficiency and quality.’’ Mr Mentz, pictured, said the firm would be looking for more space in the CBD to house its new workers, which would take its local headcount from about 300 to about 800.
Deloitte separately announced recently it would hire about 60 new staff in Adelaide to grow its consulting practice.
Adelaide was selected as the site for the new hub for a number of reasons. “It’s because of the focus on technology and innovation in Adelaide,’’ Mr Mentz said.
“You’ve got that focal point of Lot Fourteen here. You are conglomerating skills and resources from different organisations. All of that is focused on technology, it’s focused on innovation. That ecosystem (including the defence and space sectors) is really attractive.
“This will be the first of these innovation centres in Australia.” The local team would tap into Deloitte’s global network.
“It’s not one-dimensional,” Mr Mentz said. “We have to bring together different skill sets to be able to meet the needs of our clients and that’s where the innovation component comes in. We don’t think that the services we deliver now is necessarily going to be future-fit so we’ll need that innovation component in everything we do.” The company would be recruiting widely, right down to the school-leaver level and graduates and was keen to attract former defence force personnel and people with Indigenous backgrounds.
Premier Steven Marshall said the hub fitted with SA’s defence and technology focus.
“It highlights our economic growth in sectors underpinned by technology and innovation, such as defence, space, healthcare and the public sector”, he said.
Several other large tech and services firms have been drawn to Adelaide, including MTX and Accenture. Deloitte said it had not received government financial support for the hub. Editorial: page 22
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 431
