Camp in your backyard
The Deep Creek, Mount Crawford and Kuitpo Forest campsites might be on the banned list this weekend, but you can still pitch a tent on the grass outside your home.
Make the most of your brazier, fire pit or barbecue, grab some marshmallows from the supermarket and you’re all set for a weekend out of the house.
Go for a walk
Explore the world within a 2.5km radius of your house. If you’re near a large park you’ll be the envy of all your mates, but if not, you might still discover a hidden gem of a playground, a pocket park or an interesting twitten just around the corner. Just think – by the end of lockdown, you’ll know your whole neighbourhood like the back of your hand! Download an app such as All Trails or Avenza to find trails nearby that you never knew existed. We’re allowed to exercise for up to 90 minutes solo or with a member of our own household. It’s now super easy to check whether you’re within 2.5km of home using our exercise bubble tool.
Take a trip down memory lane
Many of us have thousands of photos sitting on a digital system somewhere that never make it to our walls, mantelpieces or photo albums. Fire up the computer and put together a photo book or order a canvas print online. There are countless companies to choose from, including Officeworks, Snapfish and Vistaprint, and you can have your work delivered to your door.
Paint a work of art
Even if you don’t fancy yourself as a particularly talented artist, you can still create a work of art to hang in your loungeroom (or perhaps give away to someone you don’t like). Paint Plot and Paint by Numbers kits guide you to create an artwork by matching colours with numbered sections. You can even upload your own photo to turn into a canvas.
Forget that month in Italy or cruising around the Greek Islands, we've found the best ways to plan that European holiday right here in your own backyard.
Embrace a new exercise regimen
Go for a run in your neighbourhood or download an exercise app so you can work off all of those extra snacks you’ll be eating because you’re bored and dangerously close to the pantry. No doubt online exercise gurus like Kayla Itsines have benefited from the huge number of people stuck at home during the pandemic, but she must be doing something right to have built up a business worth $400 million. Not ready to subscribe? You can dip your toe into online workout tutorials with free pump videos on YouTube. If you don’t have dumbbells, pick up a couple of water bottles and you’re all set.
Get messy in the kitchen
Now’s the time to try some of those dishes you never have time to experiment with. Pull out a cookbook or google the ingredients you’ve got at home to come up with ideas that might not even require a trip to the supermarket. Check out Taste.com.au for recipes and inspiration.
Get back in touch
How often do we tell ourselves we should give a relative a call or write to a friend over the other side of the world? Time always seems to get in the way. But during lockdown, there’s no excuse – there’s only so much time you can spend rearranging your sock drawer, like Nicola Spurrier’s husband.
Go out for dinner – in your lounge room
Zoom and Houseparty dinner parties and drinks took off as a new way to socialise in 2020, substituting for face-to-face group gatherings. On the plus side, you can wear your track pants and slippers. If you want to fool your friends into thinking you know how to cook, get takeaway from one of your local restaurants – they’re still allowed to cook for you and they’ll be grateful for your support.
Learn a new skill
Wouldn’t it be cool to sign like those Auslan interpreters on Nicola Spurrier and Steven Marshall’s press conferences? Or learn how to do a handstand, master the lotus or downward facing dog yoga poses or knit a woollen scarf? Now you can thanks to a bit of excess time and the wealth of information on the interweb.
Plan your next holiday
OK, so your plans for the weekend are cactus and who knows where we’ll be (Covid-wise) in the next couple of weeks. But that’s no reason to lose all hope for future travels. Get out your travel books and atlases and map out an itinerary for your next week off. Dream big and plan your overseas jetsetting for once we’re all vaccinated, or start local and map out the next South Australian national park you could explore on a camping trip with the kids.
Go for a ride
Dust off the deadly treadly and mix up your exercise regimen with a trip to the local park, closest beach (within 2.5km of course) or to the supermarket to pick up supplies. Just don’t fraternise with anyone when you get there and come straight home within 90 minutes.
Get handy
If you’ve had a few jobs on your rainy day list, now’s the time to tick them off. What better time to paint a room, fix a drippy tap or plaster the cracks in your walls than a cold, wet weekend when most other much more fun activities are off the table?
Start an online course
From marketing to zoo keeping and languages to musical instrument-playing, there are hundreds of courses available online. Begin expanding your horizons from in front of your computer screen.
Exercise your green thumb
Plant some seedlings, pull out those pesky weeds or pot up some new indoor plants. Get into the gardening scene and start up your own vegie patch. Not only will your own produce taste better but you can reduce the number of times you need to brave the hoards of people lined up at Woolies and Coles to fight over the last bunches of spinach and bags of oranges (even though the shops will be open tomorrow, and every other day).
Take care of yourself
If, as Rudyard Kipling says, “you can keep your head when all about you are losing theirs”, maybe it’s because you’ve discovered mindfulness or meditation. If you’ve never tried it, a stressful outbreak of the Delta Covid variant could be the perfect time to start. Luckily, there is a wealth of information online to help get you on your way. Try Headspace, Calm or Relax.
michelle.etheridge@news.com.au
Word count: 1066
