CROWS veteran David Mackay has escaped suspension for his contentious collision with St Kilda’s Hunter Clark on Saturday night.
In one of the most anticipated cases this century, the tribunal found the 32-year-old Crow not guilty of rough conduct for the incident, which occurred during the second quarter of the St Kilda-Adelaide game in Cairns and broke the Saint’s jaw in multiple places.
The jury of David Neitz, Paul Williams and Richard Loveridge ultimately decided it was not unreasonable for the Adelaide midfielder to contest the ball the way he did or make contact as he had.
They deemed both players got to the contest “at virtually the same time and both were seeking to collect the ball”.
Speaking after the two-hour hearing and 50 minutes of jury deliberations, Mackay said he was relieved at the outcome.
“All week my thoughts have centred around Hunter and his wellbeing so I’m really glad to see his recovery process has started well,” said the 239-game Crow, who reached out to the Saint after the game.
CONTINUED PAGE 92 Mackay cleared of wrongdoing as Crows win ‘case of the century’ FROM BACK PAGE “It was never my intention to cause any harm, I was only just trying to win the ball.” Mackay said fronting the tribunal would not change the way he played the game but he supported the AFL’s charter of wanting to protect players’ heads and necks. Adelaide’s legal counsel, Andrew Culshaw, used a biomechanics expert, a data analytics program and a lesson in Olympic history as part of the Crows’ defence.
The club’s primary arguments were Mackay went for a 50-50 ball, used a “good technique” taught to footballers from a young age and that his action was not a bump. Culshaw said the injury to Clark was unfortunate but it came from a “pure football collision”. He pointed to Mackay getting to the footy just 0.04 seconds later than the Saint as proof the ball was in dispute and it was a reasonable way to attack the contest. Culshaw put that into context by saying there had only been one 100m men’s Olympic final since 1980 to be decided by under that margin, so AFL QC Jeff Gleeson’s suggestion that Mackay was never going to get to the ball was “garbage”.
“This was a 50-50 ball,” Culshaw said. “There is nothing unreasonable about a player going hell for leather at a 50-50 ball.” The AFL had been seeking a minimum three-game ban for an incident that was initially ungraded but later sent directly to the tribunal by executive general manager of football Steve Hocking to be argued under “careless conduct, high impact and severe impact”. Culshaw conceded the TV broadcast angle looked “ugly” for Mackay, saying when he initially watched it himself he thought he would be suspended for the incident. But the Crows’ representative said the better view was a reverse one, which showed Mackay’s head position was such that he did not take his eyes off the ball. It supported Mackay’s earlier evidence when, as the first of Adelaide’s three witnesses, he said his eyes remained focused on the footy before the contact, even when he saw Clark in his peripheral vision. Mackay said his technique at the point of impact was what he had used in his 15 years of playing in the AFL and he did not want to put himself in position for a potential head or neck injury. He said he could have stopped to tackle, but “at no stage did I have that belief I couldn’t get to the ball first which is why I made the decision I did”. Adelaide’s third witness, biomechanics expert, Dr Robert Crowther, supported Mackay’s view that he only became airborne once he collided with Clark.
HAVE YOUR SAY DID THE TRIBUNAL GET IT RIGHT? advertiser.com.au
CREDIT: MATT TURNER
Word count: 643
