The 25 new occupations that are providing increasing opportunities. Cara Jenkin reports SOLAR installers, fundraisers, nurse liaisons and data scientists are some of the emerging occupations that have provided significant new job opportunities in the past decade.
The National Skills Commission has identified 22 emerging occupations across six categories – digital deepening, data analytics, emerging business practices, regulatory, health, and sustainability engineering and trades.
Another three occupations are included under the category “refreshed”, as the name stays the same but the role has changed.
Many occupations may require the base skills for existing roles but the work is so different that workers require new or additional qualifications to be employed.
The commission’s report, Emerging occupations: How new skills are changing Australian jobs, states it is not an exhaustive list of emerging occupations but the new roles that have been frequently advertised in the past five years.
About half of the roles are associated with technology advances and environmental issues that have come to the fore in the past decade.
The rise of various renewable energy sources, for example, was requiring many traditional workers, such as electricians, to upskill to construct the infrastructure.
The number of renewable energy projects has particularly increased in the past five years, with the Australian Bureau of Statistics reporting the amount of solar energy produced has doubled, and wind energy has grown by 50 per cent, in the five years to 2018-19.
ABS Centre for Environment and Satellite Accounts director Jonathon Khoo says wind energy was found to supply more power than hydro energy for the first time on record.
“Solar energy saw record growth in 2018-19, with large-scale solar projects coming online,” he says.
Solar installer was listed as an emerging occupation under sustainability engineering and trades, along with wind turbine technician.
Mark Morphett, 33, lead electrician at Instyle Solar, has been installing solar for the past seven years and says the industry is picking up.
“The environmental benefit of solar was a huge factor in my decision to enter the industry,” he says.
In the digital deepening category, digital marketing specialists, social media specialists and user experience analysts are the emerging occupations.
IBISWorld reports digital advertising agencies are one of five employment hot spots in coming years, particularly because of the rise of online shopping.
Senior industry analyst Suzy Oo says the attachment to smartphones, tablets and other devices is creating jobs in mobile advertising and social media marketing and management.
Data analysts, data scientists, data engineers, data architects and pricing analysts occupations are emerging in the data analytics field. FOR THE FULL LIST OF JOBS VISIT NATIONALSKILLSCOMMISSION.GOV.AU
CREDIT: Cara Jenkin
Word count: 438
