Better and faster crop variety recommendations are on the way for farmers across the nation. The Grains Research and Development Corporation (GRDC) is involved in a major international collaborative investment, which is set to assist Australian grain growers.
The $5.39 million five-year INVITA (Innovations in Variety Testing in Australia) investment aims to deliver improved predictors of variety performance, quicker access to trial data for growers, better monitoring of trial quality and variety responses to environmental stresses, which aims to produce greater grower profitability.
GRDC senior manager enabling technologies, Tom Giles, says INVITA will add value to the GRDC's flagship National Variety Trials (NVT) program by further enhancing the quality and timeliness of NVT varietal performance data.
"Knowing the likely performance of varieties under various environmental conditions will provide growers with more confidence in their crop variety decision making," he said.
"The NVT program is a huge logistical undertaking - it is the one of the largest co-ordinated field trial networks of its kind in the world. The INVITA investment adds value to historical NVT data and introduces new technologies and analysis methods to ensure that the NVT program remains at the forefront of variety testing."
Mr Giles said the GRDC investment was being undertaken in partnership with laboratories in Europe where there had been significant investment in the systematic development of remote sensing, imaging technology and data analytics to monitor and predict crop performance through the Horizon 2020 Innovations in Plant Variety Testing in Europe (INVITE) program.
"The Australian initiative is leveraging advances being made within the INVITE program. We are utilising cutting-edge technologies, techniques and capabilities from across the globe to give Australian grain growers the most dynamic, informative, timely and robust data so they can select with confidence the most appropriate varieties for their farming systems and unique environmental conditions," he said.
The research was led by the University of Queensland's Professor Scott Chapman, who has long-standing ties with a key INVITE partner, Wageningen University, the Netherlands. CSIRO was the other major collaborator.
Professor Chapman said INVITA embraced the use of drones, satellite images and paddock-based sensors and cameras, with experts in statistics, simulation modelling, machine learning, crop physiology/phenotyping and satellite imaging involved.
"The crop monitoring technology will focus on capturing data on environmental conditions in addition to crop growth, yield and health characteristics," he said. "That will aid us in developing analytical tools capable of predicting crop performance in ways that account for impacts from environmental variables within trials - moving the science closer to being able to extend predictions to farms."
CREDIT:
Word count: 426
