The federal government has injected $58.5 million into the country's response to African Swine Fever.
Australian Pork Limited has welcomed the investment in Australia's biosecurity system, which includes the Ongoing Frontline Resourcing to Embed the Benefits of the Short-term African Swine Fever Investment.
The investment builds on the $66.6m ASF Response Package, which funded increased frontline resources, including screening technology, testing and targeted compliance operations.
Australian Pork Limited says the announcement is an acknowledgement of the catastrophic threat on Australia's doorstep, and further fortifies Australia's defence from this increasing threat.
APL chief executive Margo Andrae welcomed the biosecurity measures, which includes strengthened partnerships with industry, companies, importers and the community.
"Investment in frontline resources and people, and modernising Information and Communications Technology systems, and data analytics will provide comfort to Australia's farmers, who are working hard to protect their farms from dangerous, virulent diseases," Ms Andrae said. "The transfer of diseases like ASF and Foot and Mouth Disease would devastate the industry, close exports markets and damage our industry's future - worth $5.2 billion and employing 36,000 people across the economy.
"The on-the-ground resources to better manage the risk of pests and diseases entering Australia, and investment and the application of modern technology to better detect and respond to these threats, will form another part of Australia's biosecurity armoury.
"This wholistic approach to biosecurity, alongside the work of the agricultural industry and the Biosecurity Futures group, will protect the pork industry and minimise risks to Australia."
APL has worked closely with the Department of Agriculture, Animal Health Australia and other industry partners on ASF preparedness for more than two years.
The industry has renewed biosecurity efforts on farms and is working to protect Australia from the threat of feral pigs.
ASF does not directly affect public health or food safety, but is highly infectious and terminal for pigs, posing a significant threat on the entire industry.
CREDIT:
Word count: 317
