$5m to tap potential of future employees
THE country’s frontline defence against cyber attacks, foreign spies and ransomware could be fought by a group of highly trained autistic Australians after the launch of a $5m project.
As many as 1000 autistic people will be assessed and trained in areas including cybersecurity and data analysis as part of Project Possible from training organisation With-YouWithMe, with the results closely watched by Australia’s Defence Department.
Autistic entrepreneur Rhett Ellis, who retired at age 24 and joined the project as an adviser, said it could also tackle a dangerous “skills shortage of 16,600 cyber workers by 2026” and shore up Australia’s defences.
WithYouWithMe co-founder Luke Rix said the organisation launched the project after hearing testimony at the Senate Select Committee on autism. He said it became clear neurodiverse people were often well suited to cybersecurity roles, but faced recruitment and training hurdles.
“If you look at the employment opportunities, there are lots of roles and everyone is talking about these skills gaps,” he said. “There’s also a need to get autistic candidates into work and off the NDIS.” Mr Ellis said employing autistic people for cyber security roles had already proven successful overseas.
“Autistic people can be better at the job, but they won’t get employed because they can’t shake your hand or get nervous in an interview,” he said. “Why don’t we address this instead of waiting 50 years? Other countries are already doing it.” WithYouWithMe’s Project Possible has trained 25 neurodiverse candidates so far and is actively recruiting more.
Its first graduate, Ben Moylan, said he was nervous about tackling the data analytics course, but found it well paced and accessible for autistic people.
“I went in believing I wouldn’t be able to grasp the topic but I’m fairly confident in it now,” he said. “My confidence in my employability nearly doubled.”
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 314
