STUDENTS enrolling at UniSA are now able to earn academic credits for select degrees by completing LinkedIn professional development courses.
In a partnership between the university and the social media platform, credits will be available in a raft of undergraduate degrees, such as Information Technology, Software Engineering, Data Analytics, Business, Digital Media and Communication.
UniSA vice-chancellor David Lloyd said the partnership, announced on Thursday, had been brokered over several years.
“This partnership melds all the elements of education and learning – text and context – with accreditation to validate outcomes,” Professor Lloyd said.
“It blends what is a massive source of global learning – LinkedIn Learning – with UniSA’s know-how and standing to provide a new framework for credit acquisition for learners and a pathway to higher qualifications.” The credit, which can count toward one UniSA course, will only apply to certain degrees and disciplines.
For example, a student completing a LinkedIn Learning module in digital marketing would be able to use that towards a bachelor’s degree in digital media or in communication or in any of the business degrees.
A LinkedIn data analyst course or in network administration could be used towards a UniSA degree in information technology or in software engineering.
New students and those already enrolled at UniSA will be able to use the credit system.
LinkedIn senior director Adam Gregory said creating alternative routes to help people build skills was crucial in adapting to change.
“As the world becomes increasingly digitised, continuous skills development takes on a whole new level of importance,” Mr Gregory said.
“We know this path to education will be a huge benefit to many.” LinkedIn Learning has established similar partnerships around the world. UniSA will be the launch partner for the accreditation system for Australia and the Asia-Pacific region. Adelaide University has a partnership with LinkedIn Learning which gives students access to the modules to complement their university studies.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 321
