Thebarton Senior College, a specialist senior secondary school that provides opportunities for students to complete their SACE in a broad range of courses and nationally accredited vocational training certificates, has more than 110 SACE subjects to achieve educational goals in a flexible and supportive learning environment.
The college has part-time as well as full-time study options, and students doing Year 12 subjects can choose to attend day or twilight classes, giving them flexibility with their timetable.
The college is also a registered training organisation, offering vocational education and training (VET) certificates in a range of industry areas, including barista, business, construction, community services, early childhood education, engineering, entrepreneurship, information technology and screen and media. These courses prepare students with the knowledge, skills and abilities employers are looking for.
They have also created a highly popular Special Interest Academy, which is a unique program that enables students to complete SACE and/or VET qualifications at the same time as pursuing their own passions and interests, be they entrepreneurial, dancing, sporting or performing arts.
Students are supported to complete the SACE compulsory subjects and achieve extra SACE credits that recognise their individual interests and pursuits, and may also select from a broad range of curriculum offerings, depending on their training and course commitments. A SACE program and timetable is developed that is individual to each student and supports them to achieve their career goals.
The brand new Applied Engineering Program is set to launch in 2022 and has been developed with input from industry partners to prepare students for engineering careers with both university and apprenticeship pathways.
Automation and big data analytics are transforming the manufacturing industry and it’s now driven by digitisation, incorporates emerging technologies and spans the energy, space, transport, infrastructure, defence, defence manufacturing and other allied engineering industries.
The Applied Engineering program prepares students for these emerging Industry 4.0 pathways.
The college is a unique and supportive place to study. Year 11 student Jack says “the best things about studying at TSC is the flexibility of classes and teachers, the amount of help that is available from staff, as well as the friendly environment that all of the students help create for each other”.
Fellow student Georgina says studying at Thebarton is “truly a breath of fresh air”. “For the first time in my life, I no longer feel as though I am a fish swimming against the current. The teachers, wellbeing team and leadership at Thebarton have supported me in finding my own way down the river.
“Staff and students appreciate what makes us unique, thereby allowing people’s individualism to shine through.” Thebarton Senior College Phone: 08 159 3100 Website: TSC.SA.EDU.AU
Word count: 443
