JOBS Tech-savvy workers are boosting their pay by as much as 21 per cent, with the average Australian gaining $7700 a year by having digital skills.
Research by RMIT Online and Deloitte Access Economics analysed the salaries on job ads that did and did not explicitly request digital skills, uncovering an average difference of 9 per cent – or $7700 a year.
The gap was lowest for professional roles (3 per cent) but especially high for technician and trades roles (21 per cent) and community and personal service roles (19 per cent).
RMIT Online chief executive Helen Souness says the smaller digital premium among professionals suggests digital literacy is now considered a core capability in those fields, whereas a tradesperson with digital skills has a very clear advantage.
She says the digital transformation accelerated by the Covid pandemic has made these skills more important .
“Even small shops have become e-commerce stores,” Souness says. “Everyone is needing those skills to become more efficient and accelerate growth coming out of lockdowns. We keep using the term ‘the future of work’ but it’s right now.” The Ready Set Upskill report reveals 9 per cent of employers believe general digital literacy will be the most important skill for workers in the next five years – behind only leadership (13 per cent) and critical thinking and problem solving (10 per cent). Another 7 per cent of employers say data science and analytics (for example, Google Data Studio, R, Excel) will be most important.
Souness has heard stories of university graduates struggling to differentiate themselves from other grads then doing a short course in data analytics and landing themselves a good job.
But even just being confident with Microsoft Office or productivity tools is helpful.
Analysis of job ads in 2021 shows these were the third most frequently requested skills by employers, behind customer service and project managemen t.
Melbourne fertility nurse Marita Voller was recently promoted to associate nurse unit manager at the hospital where she works, and says her digital skills to compile rosters, spreadsheets and run reports played a large part .
“IT skills are not something you think about when you sign up to study nursing. “Medications and everything is via programs, not written prescriptions. There is no more paperwork, it’s iPads, which is very different to the way nursing used to be.”
CREDIT: MELANIE BURGESS
Word count: 396
