SMARTliving CAREERS STEM JOBS ARE ABOUT CONNECTING PEOPLE – HERE’S THE EXPERT GUIDE GO TECH for career longevity. That’s the message for women considering options in the science, technology, engineering and maths field with it offering more opportunities to be creative and help people than they previously may have realised.
The federal government’s Youth in STEM Research report shows twice as many male students (41 per cent) as female students (20 per cent) aspired to a STEM-related career, when asked what type of career they want in future.
In 2019, women comprised 27 per cent of the people working in STEM qualified industries.
February 11 is UNESCO’s International Day of Women and Girls in Science to recognise the critical role they play in science and technology. It also aims to encourage females to pursue science, technology, engineering and mathematics careers, as diversity brings fresh perspectives, talent and creativity.
In Australia, however, SEEK research reveals 53 per cent of females have never considered a role in the STEM sector. While being interested in other fields was the top reason why it was not pursued, the other reasons holding females back were not being good with numbers, not knowing how to get into those fields, and a feeling that the sectors were too male-dominated.
SEEK Technology managing director Lisa Tobin says technology, for example, was not “rocket science” in most cases, and instead involves applying learning and logic.
She says a “deep fascination of people”, “insatiable curiosity” and “a passion and interest in how people behave and change” are key qualities for success.
“If these things interest you … there’s a vast array of roles and opportunities,” she says. “I think sometimes, especially in Australian society, there isn’t much support for young females that it’s cool and good to do.
“I fell into a technology role. What’s really more important is why I never fell out, why I stayed and persisted.” Tobin says when she started in STEM 30 years ago, she enrolled in a science degree, and a typical career option was scientific research. She transferred to a classical studies degree, with such subjects as history and literature, which she says has been incredibly beneficial as it involves understanding “how and why people think”.
Yianna Paris, 30, loves how she can be creative in her graduate role as an associate developer.
“I don’t think technology is about computers, it’s about people, and my design background gave me that human aspect,” she says.
“I don’t just code or design a program but design processes to help people connect with each other.” The artist was encouraged by a mentor to pursue a bachelor of digital design in media, after which she studied a bachelor of computer science. Now she encourages children aged seven to 15 to consider technology careers. She says technology is an integral part of today’s society, continually evolving.
The federal government has launched the Future You initiative to inspire girls to see themselves in STEM jobs. Its Women in STEM ambassador Professor Lisa Harvey-Smith says STEM subjects are not just for scientists and engineers – “they are for everyone’. “Future You shows young people just how exciting, vibrant and rewarding a STEM skilled career can be.” Visit womeninstem.org.au/futureyou
What’s it all about then? Answers to the key questions WHAT IS STEM?
STEM stands for science, technology, engineering and maths. Science subjects range from chemistry and environmental studies, to health science and sociology. Technology subjects range from computer science and cyber security to software development and data analytics. Engineering includes mechanical, civil, electrical, and mining specialties. Maths can involve studying statistics, but also data science.
IS UNI NECESSARY?
No. Many careers can be qualified with a vocational education and training qualification. A Certificate III in Laboratory Skills, Certificate IV in Cyber Security or Diploma of Engineering (Technical) are all vocational qualifications.
WHAT’S IN IT FOR WOMEN?
ACS Australia (formerly the Australian Computer Society) reports an extra 156,000 technology workers will be needed by 2025 to keep pace with demand, and for Australia to be a world leader, an extra 388,000 tech workers will be needed. Reskilling in technology also can offer a wage premium of about $10,348 a year.
FIND OUT MORE Visit the website careerswithstem.com.au to learn about jobs, do quizzes, and read about women succeeding in STEM careers.
CREDIT: Cara Jenkin
Word count: 723
