Shot in the dark Scott Morrison called a press conference on Wednesday, with a viral catch – only fully vaccinated members of the press gallery would be allowed in … a curious condition of entry, given the embattled “not a race” rollout and lack of vaccine passport. Moreover, how many baby-faced members of the media – some of whom are still ineligible for a shot – were scheduled to attend?Canberra Bubble™ bureaus were informed that Morrison, who is currently completing two weeks of lockdown in The Lodge, couldn’t appear virtually because of “health advice” from chief medical officer Paul Kelly. Huh? Chaos ensued and the Prime Minister’s office backed down. Borrowing some water from the Murray Darling, a new caveat was issued. “It is the preference of the CMO for media attending to be vaccinated, however outlets can choose to send one person if that is not yet an option,” the PMO said, adding that masks were mandatory and journalists must check in with The Lodge’s QR code. “The health advice notes the risk is further mitigated for those in contact with the PM if they are fully vaccinated.” How is the PM allowed to hold a face-to-face press conf during home quarantine? He was granted an exemption from ACT Health on Monday, after a stay-at-home stint in his Sydney Harbour residence, Kirribilli House. As an “essential worker”, Morrison can commute to his office in Parliament House, provided he takes a daily Covid test. “The chief medical officer has advised it is his preference that press conferences by the Prime Minister take place at The Lodge when possible for the two-week period since he arrived in Canberra,” the PMO said. “This is to minimise the number of sites visited in case of an exposure.” Fun fact – the Teflon Territory’s last locally acquired case was a household contact on June 10, 2020, and it’s never had a confirmed case of community transmission.
Jabs and jab nots Sorry seems to be the hardest word forMorrison. Just like Josh Frydenberg and “recession” or The Fonz and “wrong”. The PM refused four times to wrap his lips around an apology for the vaccine “nightmare” while on Melbourne’s KIIS FM.
Jase Hawkins: “We have this thing on the team here ... when someone stuffs up, it’s all about accountability. Say sorry. You admit the problem, and we move on ... I’ve never heard the word, ‘sorry’. ‘Guys you know what, sorry we did screw it up, but we’re getting it right now.’ ” PM: “We’ve had problems and we’ve dealt with them and that’s what I do every single day. I mean, yes, the government is accountable for this and now I’m accountable for this ...” Hawkins: “Can you just, you know what, can you say ‘Sorry Jase’? I would feel so much better and then I feel like I can move on.” PM: “But what we’re doing is fixing the problems and getting on with it and that’s what we have to do ...” Hawkins: “Scott, I’d even take a ‘My bad Jase’. Just a ‘My bad, Jase, we’re moving on’.” PM: “We’re moving to the problems, getting on with it ...” Hawkins: “Ahhh, you can’t do it.
(A minute later) I’ve got one for you – what does this spell? S.O. R. R. Y?” PM: “Well, I mean you will know across the ditch ...” Hawkins: “He’s ignoring me.” Obviously, it’s a trick question. It spells ATAGI. (Boom-tish.) Palmer karma Strewth’s curiosity was sparked when a summons landed in our inbox. “Please join Clive Palmer, chairman of Clive Palmer’s United Australia Party, for lunch and a major announcement regarding the upcoming federal election,” it read. The mining magnate’s candidate unveiling on August 27 is being held at the Hyatt Canberra, and is strictly “invite only”. Presumably so they know how many anti-vaxxer pamphlets to print. Which one of Clive’s controversial friends will get the nod – Craig Kelly, Israel Folau, Brian Burston or his former candidate and wife Anna Palmer? Remarkably, this wasn’t the most colourful piece of mail we received on Wednesday. That honour went to Bob Katter. “The Brisbane Olympics decision will blow Queensland’s economy to smithereens. Mr Katter will speak to media in the carpark of ACME Fireworks as he explains how this decision will plunge the state into further debt.” And yes, the stunt king brought along his own comically large TNT dynamite detonator, which set off some fire and smoke special effects.
Peel better soon Rockhamption radio is quite the rollercoaster. Michael Bailey informed his 4RO listeners: “Jim Chalmers has just walked in, he’s got a banana in hand, so he’s going to be energised! It’s breakfast I know, I know, it just never ends.” Head to mistletoe Deck the halls with boughs of holly – Parliament House is celebrating Christmas in July. Executive chef David Learmonth is offering a two ($45), three ($50) or five ($60) course menu of “traditional Christmas fare” at the Queen’s Terrace Cafe this Thursday and Friday. “It might be cold outside but this warming lunch menu is sure to spread the yuletide joy,” APH advises. With a minimum temperature of -4C overnight, diners may need a sleigh to get through the snow. The menu includes Game Farm spatchcock, Murray cod croquettes, turkey stroganoff pot pie and Yorkshire pudding. But wait, there’s myraah! Dessert options include a Grand Marnier sunrise lime souffle, spiced Australian chocolate molten cake or egg nog brulee. Not dear enough? There’s a $165 truffle degustation on Friday.
Honestly speaking Croweaters are about to become more insufferable than ever. After being named the third-most liveable city in the world last month, it turns out Adelaide may also be the third-most truthful. German data analytics group Twinner named the City of Churches as the most sincere in Australia on its 2021 Honesty Index. (They obviously haven’t heard of Snowtown.) The list ranks 75 cities based on the reviews of car dealerships, corruption, crime and more. Zurich and Tokyo took out first and second; Brisbane came 10th; Auckland 17th; and Sydney 35th. Melbourne finished 48th, which we can all agree makes sense. The three least honest cities? Las Vegas, Rome and Madrid.
Dude where’s my car?
Strewth is currently seeking suggestions for the 2021 version of “you couldn’t run a chook raffle in a pub”. Here’s an idea to get the ball rolling: “You couldn’t build a carpark with a slush fund”. Send your suggestions to ... strewth@theaustralian.com.au
CREDIT: ALICE WORKMAN
Word count: 1081
