The foot traffic through Bunnings has not fallen off at all.
Blow-up Santas, outdoor furniture and plants have been jumping off the shelves. Even the sausage sizzle is back.
Bunnings boss Mike Schneider says he’s got the best job in corporate Australia and he now wants to build a tradie business as big as the DIY Bunnings.
He says from the way customers have been shopping, it’s clear that this year people are planning Christmas at home. After all, home is a pretty safe place to be.
“People want to have their close friends and family at home,” Schneider says. “Health officials are saying, as best you can, spend as much of that time outside, with things like barbecues and outdoor settings that get you out of the dining room onto the back lawn.”
Additionally, says Schneider, the weather forecast for Christmas to New Year reflects a classic Aussie summer. Being outdoors is not too hard.
Despite the daily jump in Covid numbers this week, the No.1 Bunnings man says people are still pretty comfortable wandering into shops. “The mask wearing, the fact that you are driving your own car to the shop, ­people see that as less risk than perhaps sitting in a restaurant for a few hours of indoor setting.”
Bunnings boasts what Schneider calls a uniquely built environment. Stores are almost “open air indoors” and yards for nurseries and bigger materials have free-flowing fresh air and high ceilings. On Thursday, NSW mandated masks indoors, joining Victoria and Queensland, but many customers have been donning them anyway.
The new product finder app helps shoppers get in and out of the store faster, and the barbecue outside has contactless payment.
“Doing that last-minute shopping ahead of Christmas, I’d expect you’ll see a barbecue if it is one of the bigger stores you’re shopping in,” Schneider says.
Not to say that 2021 has been easy. At the height of Covid, the Wesfarmers-owned Bunnings had to wrangle 13 or 14 different settings of how stores operated. Except for Victoria, hardware and home improvement retailing was classed as essential, but when Delta surged in western Sydney LGAs, the directive came to shut down in those councils. Schneider chose to close all stores across Sydney.
“In other markets where a local store was closed, customers would move about because they would still want the products we were selling, so we made the decision to close for about 10 days and purely trade online,” Schneider says.
Behind the scenes, the Bunnings team worked to convince governments of the pivotal role the ubiquitous retailer plays in domestic production. “Being open meant suppliers like Dulux or PPG that manufacture paint or Seasol, that manufactures the fertiliser for your garden, or the hundreds of small businesses that are providing plants to us have the confidence to continue to stay open and keep their own manufacturing going,” Schneider says.
When stores were closed to DIY customers, they remained open for tradies. “Even in Victoria we were allowed to be open for the trade customer and then the DIY customer could come up to the store and we’d pop their product in their boot in our contactless drive and collect model. We saw huge volumes go through that,” he says.
The Bunnings brand is pitched squarely at community level. During the pandemic, Bunnings car parks became mobile vaccination hubs.
“We had well over 140,000 people vaccinated at a Bunnings site, including somewhere where you could get a jab and a snag at the same time, very much the case in Queensland and WA,” Schneider says. “So the fact that people see Bunnings as a genuine part of the community gave many people the confidence to say, ‘you know what? I should get vaccinated’.”
Within stores, the pandemic challenge has been inventory management. As early as April last year, Schneider noticed elevated demand for home improvement products. Bunnings made a sizeable bet on inventory investment even if it meant product being held at third-party sites. “We asked our suppliers to go the extra mile for us in having the confidence to bring more product into the country and that has paid dividends,” he says.
However, access to structural timber is still difficult. A run on construction and home renovation has put timber supply under pressure for 12 months, pressure that Schneider sees continuing.
When timber product is available internationally, a lack of shipping containers has prompted Bunnings to think laterally.
“We have just brought a ship down from PNG with well over 100 containers worth of Merbau decking,” Schneider says. “Instead of containers, it was an open-air ship which was different but what it meant was you could problem solve for the lack of containers in that part of the world.”
Bunnings had its own approach on last mile logistics too, deliberately partnering with smaller delivery companies like ANC (Bunnings is its largest client) for what Schneider says is better service for customers. “We have avoided some of the challenges we know other retailers have faced with some of the bigger names in last mile logistics.”
To keep pace with online orders, Bunnings has a pilot site at North Laverton in Melbourne for rapid fulfilment to take pressure off stores. It’s all about getting product to customers safely and quickly. Solvents, chemicals and big and bulky products don’t easily fit into last mile logistics, which has made click-and-collect and drive-and-collect more popular.
However, there are no plans for any major new distribution centre. Over almost 30 years, Bunnings has hewn its own property development and leasing capability and Schneider is in no hurry to enter the toppy market for DC property.
“The team are out there having a really good look and also trying to understand what the cycle looks like. Supply is quite tight and demand is quite high which is good if you are a landlord,” he says. “Those conditions probably won’t remain as intense as they are now and as we think about evolving our network, that will undoubtedly create opportunities.”
For years now Bunnings, along with Officeworks, has been the standout growth engine for Wesfarmers. Schneider’s growth principles are straightforward: grow the market and your ability to participate in that market; and second, outperform the market.
The next play is on the tradie side of the business, where Schneider has ambitious plans to roll out 75 Took Kit Depot specialty stores across the nation. So far four stores have opened in Western Australia. “We have had a great decade of really building trade credibility with trade customers through our PowerPass account program and our 2019 acquisition of Adelaide Tools is morphing into Tool Kit Depot,” he says. Another bolt-on acquisition, Beaumont Tiles, creates a new bond with building customers.
“Our aspiration on the trade side is to have a business that is as big as our consumer business without actually slowing up on growth on the consumer side,” Schneider says.
In the last two years, the number of Bunnings staff have jumped from 45,000 to 55,000. Data analytics and a rethink on floor space is refreshing familiar product cat­egories and pointing to new ones.
A Bunnings man for 14 years and managing director for almost six, Schneider’s ambition to make the tradie business as big as the DIY business is grand. Competition for the tradie dollar has picked up with Metcash-controlled Total Tools, Sydney Tools and Trade Tools in Brisbane all hungry for business. It is also unclear how long the pandemic boom in home improvement will last.
Schneider sees the Bunnings brand of long trading hours, the trade reps on hand and local access to stores as the right foundation to build up and out.
“People are curious as to which store you work in. They don’t see a big business, they see the store they shop at in the local community and the things that store does for its local community. If you’ve got that sort of brand recognition it’s hard not to be proud of it. I’m part of the Wesfarmers leadership team with fantastic access to capital to do the things we want to do.”
Word count: 1323
