Grains researchers and agronomists in South Australia and Victoria are this year being offered statistical skills training support, thanks to the Grains Research and Development Corporation's Statistics for the Australian Grains Industry (SAGI) program.
Workshops to upgrade the research statistical skills of industry practitioners will be held in Adelaide and Clare throughout the year, and Birchip and Horsham in April.
The practical, interactive workshops are designed to foster widespread adoption of efficient and consistent statistical methods in agronomic research and practice to ultimately better inform growers' decision making.
The GRDC launched phase three of its SAGI initiative in 2017, involving the creation of four nodes to deliver high quality statistical science to underpin the scientific rigour of hundreds of research investments.
The SAGI-3 investment over five years is essential in supporting rapid advances in crop varieties, agronomic knowledge and farming practices - contributing to enduring profitability for Australian grain growers.
SAGI South is led by the University of Adelaide, with co-investment from the University and the South Australian Research and Development Institute, a division of Primary Industries and Regions SA, and is based at the Biometry Hub at the University's Waite campus, led by Dr Olena Kravchuk.
In addition to providing statistical support to almost 40 research projects, SAGI South is presenting a capacity building program for statistical and data analytics skills in the region.
The program is aimed at researchers, consultants and agronomists and includes four modules, according to SAGI South team member Sharon Nielsen, who manages the training program.
"We can now offer four modules to our training participants: the first is an introduction to 'R' which is a leading and open-source data analytics and statistical software which gives participants a common language for design, analysis and reporting; the second is an introduction to design of agronomy trials; the third is an introduction to analysis of agronomy trials; and we are now offering a concluding module which is an introduction to report writing with R," Ms Nielsen said.
"Each module is one day long, with the exception of the introduction to analysis of agronomy trials module which is delivered over two days - modules can be taken sequentially one by one on separate occasions over the calendar year or all together over a five-day session.
"Having researchers and agronomists skilled in using R software enables a quick dissemination of tailored and benchmark statistical procedures for design, data analysis and reporting in the region, improving the transparency and the quality of research and extension."
Ms Nielsen said the program was designed so participants could learn to handle their data, conduct analysis of standard agronomy trials and present a quality report document.
Participants who completed all four modules are invited to participate in question and answer webinars conducted monthly by Ms Nielsen to help researchers and agronomists put learning into the context of their trials.
Adelaide workshops are on February 4-8, June 3-7, September 30-October 4, and November 4-8, with Clare workshops from August 12-16.
For personnel working on GRDC research investments there is no charge to undertake the training, and workshop positions permitting, non-GRDC-supported parties can also attend for a cost-recovery level fee.
Find out more Biometry Hub information at https://sciences.adelaide.edu.au/agriculture-food-wine/research/agricultural-science#biometry-hub
Word count: 532
