THE world’s leading university in computer science, the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, is renowned for its peerless list of achievements.
Its scientists and graduates have been responsible for world-changing inventions, including the first video game, email, technicolor and developing the standards for web browsers.
For that alone, it is hugely significant that this institution is forging a base at Lot Fourteen, the old Royal Adelaide Hospital site, on North Tce.
The Living Lab to be developed at Lot Fourteen encapsulates the challenges and opportunities for South Australia. This is a major opportunity. MIT Living Labs has been established in New York, Beijing and Istanbul.
Now, Adelaide will join them, with the aim of analysing data to determine the most effective ways for the state to drive economic and sustainable population gr­ow­th. This means the world’s foremost institution in this field is lending its intellectual and technological muscle to studying challenges that have preoccupied this state since colonial times.
The driest state in the driest continent, SA has lacked the natural resources to sustain a large population, particularly in the Far North.
The industrialisation of the Playford era unleashed population growth but, for some time, the state has been grappling with the hunt for new industries to drive prosperity and attract people.
With this in mind, it is heartening that MIT’s Professor Alex “Sandy” Pentland said Adelaide was identified as a prime location “due to its leadership in data analytics and machine learning”.
A collaboration between government and industry, which worked so effectively during the Playford era, also is a linchpin of this move.
BankSA and Optus Business will lend valuable support and important private sector expertise.
The hi-tech vision for Lot Fourteen is starting to come together and, if realised, can only benefit our state.Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Matt Deighton, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 313
