DESPITE appearances, Australia and the world are enjoying the most politically stable and safest period in human history.
But not safe enough. And if the last 5000 years is anything to go by, we need to be prepared for a variety of ills. Like most advanced nations, this preparedness comes from a well-equipped defence force, a strong defence industrial base and advanced research capabilities within our universities.
These relatively stable times happen to coincide with an unprecedented time in Australia’s defence procurement history. As a rule of thumb, defence assets – planes, tanks and ships – have a life span of about 40 years. We are now about two “asset cycles” from World War II; one cycle from Vietnam, and (hopefully coming to the end of) two decades of high operational tempo fighting wars in the Middle East. This confluence of events has resulted in a perfect storm of defence acquisition for the Australian Defence Force.
Almost every major platform within the ADF is being replaced or upgraded this decade; the F-35 Joint Strike Fighter, P-8 Maritime Patrol Aircraft and advanced remotely piloted aircraft for the Royal Australian Air Force; Air Warfare Destroyers, offshore patrol vessels, frigates and submarines for the Royal Australian Navy; new Combat Reconnaissance and Infantry Fighting Vehicles and upgraded tanks and new rifles for the army; plus a rapidly growing and potent cyber-warfare capability.
There is an old axiom in defence circles that we prepare for the last war we fought, not the next one. Of course, the “next one” is difficult to predict, so preparing for the last one is better than nothing. This task is made all the more difficult when preparing an ADF traditionally structured for conventional warfare for asymmetric, non-conventional warfare, as has been the case for the past 20 years.
The national strategic approach for defence capability starts with the Defence White Paper (often described as preparing us for the adversary we wish we had, rather than the adversary we do have). It defines a strategy aligned with capability and resources to deliver a future force that is more capable, agile and potent and ready to respond to future challenges.
This strategic direction is provided very much by the Federal Government, and we currently enjoy a level of bipartisanship with regard to an “aim” of 2 per cent of GDP allocated to defence. However, much of the capability to support the federal strategy is very much state based. South Australia is well placed to support the national defence endeavour with skills and capabilities developed over many decades. We have a large and growing ADF presence, mainly air force and army units based at RAAF Edinburgh. Industrially, eight of the top 10 defence companies in the world have a presence in SA, with hundreds of local companies in their supply chains.
And SA boasts a long and deep history in defence research, dating back to the establishment of Port Wakefield and Woomera weapons test ranges and the raising of the Weapons Research Establishment prior to World War II. This research has been closely supported by local researchers, including the University of South Australia. Defence and defence research are in our state’s DNA.
To deliver this mission as a nation, we need Defence, industry and academia to work together.
The Department of Defence needs to define and communicate its requirements and needs. The scientific arm of Defence, the Defence Science and Technology Group, plays an important role here in delivering valued scientific advice and innovative solutions for Defence and national security.
Industry’s role in this triumvirate is to deliver “capability to the war fighter” by developing products and platforms locally, or transferring these capabilities via one of the many overseas parent companies. Industry effort is typically directed closer to more mature products or prototypes to enable more immediate sales opportunities While industry invests in research and development, most of the deeper research is conducted within academia, whose role is to conduct research in conjunction with Defence and industry to ensure we retain one of the best equipped defence forces in the world. Academic effort is generally targeted at an earlier stage of technological or product development.
The current defence acquisition boom includes $100 billion in shipbuilding and related projects. Approximately half of it is being invested in South Australia, mainly driven by the $50 billion Future Submarine project, where Naval Group will construct 12 Attack Class Submarines. There is also the $35 billion Hunter Class Anti-Submarine Warfare Frigate project to be constructed by BAE Systems, based on its Type 26 Frigate.
These projects are truly generational. The last of the 12 submarines will be commissioned in around 2055. To put that in context, a naval officer would typically take command of a submarine about the age of 35, so the commander of the last submarine will be born next year!
At the University of South Australia, we conduct research in close collaboration with both defence industry and DST Group. This includes redesigning the internal spaces on submarines to reduce fatigue and improve crew efficiency and effectiveness; working with DST Group on advanced sensors and autonomous systems; and in cyber security, artificial intelligence and data analytics to support defence projects.
These three sectors work together well in an ecosystem to define, develop, produce and deliver capability to the war fighter to give Australia the combat edge.
So, while we live in the safest period ever, it is not a time to be complacent about national security, preparedness or sovereign industrial capability. And Defence, industry and academia need to work collaboratively to ensure these safe times endure.MATT OPIE IS A FORMER ARMY OFFICER, DEFENCE INDUSTRY EXECUTIVE AND CURRENTLY DIRECTOR OF DEFENCE AND SPACE AT THE UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
CREDIT: MATT OPIE
Word count: 958
