The state government has committed to providing $75,000 for a Digital Biosecurity Platform to help protect SA's vineyards.
The new platform will utilise a number of technology platforms including cloud, geospatial data, big data analytics and remote monitoring, and it is expected to be in operation by next year.
Led by Vinehealth Australia, the development of the platform will provide real-time data on SA vineyards to enhance responses to devastating diseases and pests, such as phylloxera.
Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development Tim Whetstone announced the funding at Penola and he said the adoption of an AgTech approach to biosecurity through this platform would provide the wine and grape sector with advanced technology to meet serious biosecurity threats.
"The Marshall Liberal Government sees this project as a key opportunity for the wine industry to adopt rapidly evolving technology in the fight against incursion threats," he said.
"The new platform will establish SA grape growers as global leaders in biosecurity and propel our wine and grape industries into next generation technology in this area.
"SA is in the enviable position of being phylloxera free and this status enables us to maintain some of the oldest vines in the world."
Vinehealth Australia Chief Executive Officer Inca Pearce said the development of the new platform would replace the existing Vineyard Register, providing greater ability to protect South Australia's vineyards from pests and diseases.
"Increased global trade and tourism, agricultural expansion and intensification and changing consumer expectations are increasing our biosecurity exposure," she said.
"By enhancing the Vineyard Register with contemporary technology, we can better support all parts of biosecurity management, including preparedness, prevention, response, surveillance and recovery."
To further strengthen SA's phylloxera free status, the state government has also partnered with Vinehealth Australia to fund nine new biosecurity signs at key border locations highlighting the strict quarantine requirements associated with the entry of phylloxera risk items into the state such as vineyard machinery, equipment, soil and grapes.
Travellers or companies caught breaking the rules when crossing the border or entering the state's wine regions face fines of up to $100,000.
Member for MacKillop Nick McBride said that the biosecurity signs sent an important message to those travelling through the region.
"South Australia is one of the few places in the world that is free from the grape destroying pest phylloxera," he said.
"Phylloxera presents a huge risk to our local wine industry and it's crucial that we remain vigilant in implementing the highest quarantine measures at the border and in our vineyards.
"I welcome the increased signage, particularly in the electorate of MacKillop, as it sends a strong message."
The new signs have been installed at Dukes Highway, Bordertown, Wimmera Highway, Hynam, Edenhope Road, Wrattonbully, Casterton-Penola Road, Penola, Glenelg Highway, Mount Gambier, Princes Highway, Mount Gambier, Glenelg River Road, Mount Gambier, Sturt Highway, Yamba, and Mallee Highway, Pinnaroo.
Word count: 476
