AN Adelaide company that specialises in digital visualisations of significant infrastructure projects is one of the new tenants to call Adelaide’s CBD hotspot Lot Fourteen home.
Convergen, set up in 2009 by Anton Andreacchio, has worked on more than 200 major local projects, including the North Tce tram extension, O-Bahn City Access, Darlington Upgrade and OZ Minerals‘ Prominent Hill and Carrapateena mine developments.
Mr Andreacchio, an early supporter of the vision for Lot Fourteen, said the move was exciting for a lot of reasons.
“We love the vision for the site, and really wanted to contribute from a creative industries perspective, but what we’ve found is it’s not just about the future, it’s about the now.” He said the move would continue to help Convergen push the boundaries of best practice and use new technology to challenge what’s possible, including interactive virtual reality for major infrastructure works.
“We are working across a range of industries to explore the new worlds of virtual reality and the value it can bring,” Mr Andreacchio said.
“The technology is happening, the hard part is understanding where it fits and how to use it to bring value, rather than getting caught up in the gimmick.” Other creative businesses he is involved with — Jumpgate Virtual Reality and Artisan Post Group, a film, video and television post production and effects company — will also have a presence on site.
Mr Andreacchio’s 24 employees join other new arrivals, Presagen and its 10 staff and 10 others from the Defence Teaming Centre.
Lot Fourteen now has 250 workers across: CONVERGEN, Artisan Post, Jumpgate VR; CHAMONIX Group – digital consulting business Chamonix, IT consultancy cevo, augmented and virtual reality business Cortex Interactive, big data company Expose, and cyber security company SecMatters; CORE Energy & Resources, an energy advisory firm; DAITUM, a data analytics business; DEFENCE Landing Pad, a support organisation for international companies setting up in SA; INOVOR Technologies, a space technology developer; MYRIOTA, a low cost satellite connectivity business, and; OFFICE of the South Australian Chief Entrepreneur Jim Whalley. Premier Steven Marshall expects 1000 employees on site by the end of the year. Other proposals for the site so far include the University of Adelaide’s proposed $150 million National Centre of Excellence in Machine Learning; a $6 million Mission Control Centre and a $6 million Space Discovery Centre; the Australian Space Agency; a ‘retail street’; a national Aboriginal art gallery, a tourism centre and the FIXE co-working hub.Renewal SA acting chief Mark Devine said Lot Fourteen is the “epicentre of SA’s hi-tech future industries”.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 430
