MILITARY veterans can take up a new free, intensive Flinders University program that will prepare them for university study, with the expectation many will pursue second careers in defence-related industries.
Universities and TAFE SA are all introducing new short courses and degrees designed to entice mature-aged students to re-skill and take advantage of the thousands of defence jobs in the pipeline.
Flinders’ four-week Military Academic Pathway Program, starting on November 4, will help veterans make the transition to tertiary study academically and socially.
“Young veterans are more likely to seek careers in the defence sector as professional graduates, considering they’ve already worked in the sector in a different capacity,” pro vice-chancellor Deborah West said.
The program is open to current and former military personnel of all ages and will cover academic writing and research, critical reading, statistics, and online learning tools, plus campus tours and introductions to support services and mentoring. There is no cap on places.
It can lead into dozens of degrees, including science and business, with the opportunity to transfer to others later.
The program was made possible by a $157,000 federal Supporting Younger Veterans grant, ensuring all students who are veterans can access post-traumatic stress disorder, mental health, and drug and alcohol support.
Unis and TAFE SA pointed to multiple entry pathways, recognition of prior learning and work experience, and growing offerings of short courses as giving easy access to reskilling for defence work.
Prof West said Flinders worked with industry to provide “specific retraining” in defence-related manufacturing, project planning, supply chains, procurement, and business, legal and HR management.
TAFE SA chief executive David Coltman, pictured, said the defence industry would need experienced workers with updated digital and cyber skills, pointing to new diplomas focused on computer-aided design, data analytics and “smart factories”. “(We are) increasing the number of options and pathways available to retrain,” he said.
“We are expanding our targeted short courses, micro credentials, apprenticeships and traineeships and full general courses that relate to defence pathways.” Worker-friendly delivery of courses in blocks was among the ways TAFE made it easier for employed people to upskill while still in the workforce, he said. Similarly, UniSA said almost half of its students were people returning to study after being in the workforce, and highlighted its “fully online programs, designed with the needs of working people and career changers in mind” as a convenient way of upskilling.
Adelaide University pointed to its new Bachelor of Technology (Defence) launching next year.
“The defence industry specifically asked (us) to create a new qualification that sits between a trade technician and a professional engineer,” vice-chancellor Pascale Quester said.“As part of the program, students will commence their security clearance process, offering a fast-track for graduates to start their defence industry careers sooner.”
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 467
