MILK REGULATING NEEDED FEDERAL Agriculture Minister Bridget McKenzie has been reported saying regulating the dairy industry would hurt our farmers, but it’s actually the lack of regulation that has led to decline of the dairy industry in Australia.
All over the developed world, the dairy industry faces the bargaining power imbalance between small family-operated dairy farms and larger and financially stronger milk processors.
Countries with thriving dairy export industries are heavily regulated. For example, California, the largest dairy state in the largest exporter of dairy products in the world, is heavily regulated.
Its industry has a floor price for milk based on the end use, so there is a different floor price for fresh milk, milk that will be used for cheese, or skimmed milk powder.
New Zealand’s largest export is dairy, and it is heavily regulated, with a floor price set for milk every six months.
Now, the minister knows all about the regulation of milk in the world but she persists with the fiction that no one wants a base price for milk, by milk region, that reflects the cost of production.
Last week, the Protecting Australian Dairy Bill 2019, was considered by the Senate.
My private Senator’s Bill was narrowly lost in a vote of 30 for and 31 against, and now The Nationals are under pressure to explain why they did not support the Bill.
That is also a question I would like answered.
The minister cannot explain to anyone how a floor price that reflects the cost of production will send dairy farmers to the wall, when, in fact, they are already being forced out of business by supermarkets and foreign owned milk processes happy to profit from dairy farmers being paid less than the cost of production.
Senator PAULINE HANSON, One Nation National Leader
CRITICIAL MINERALS TIE-UP FINALISED AUSTRALIA and the United States have formalised their partnership on developing both nations’ critical mineral assets, with a project agreement signed by Geoscience Australia and the United States Geological Survey (USGS).
The signing paves the way for both nations to work more closely on understanding each country’s geological resource potential for critical minerals, including rare earth elements, and developing a pathway to supply arrangements.
It is the beginning of a strong new partnership which would benefit both nations.
This is a partnership that will deliver opportunity and security to both nations.
Growing global demand for critical minerals means there is huge scope for Australia to develop secure and stable supply chains to meet the growing demand for critical minerals in key economies such as the US.
The US has a need for critical minerals and Australia’s abundant supplies makes us a reliable and secure international supplier of a wide range of those, including rare earth elements.
The signing follows a wealth of work by the Liberal National Government to grow our potential in the critical minerals market, following the announcement of our critical mineral partnership with the US in early 2018.
Almost 12 months ago Geoscience Australia and the USGS signed a wide-ranging Letter of Intent to formalise our collaboration on critical minerals.
Our Critical Minerals Strategy was released earlier this year to coordinate activities across government, promote investment and deliver the necessary infrastructure to bring new critical minerals projects into production.
Just last month we released our Critical Minerals Supply Chain in the United States report, which reinforces the importance of Australia continuing to attract investment in high-value activities such as processing and manufacturing.
“Our partnership with the US also supports the goals of our National Resources Statement.
The new agreement focuses on joint critical mineral potential mapping and quantitative mineral assessments, determining geological controls on critical mineral distribution, and developing data analytics capability to understand supply and demand scenarios for developing the critical minerals pipeline.
The knowledge gained from this collaboration will: ● Improve both countries’ understanding of their geological resource potential for critical minerals, including rare earth elements, and contribute to a robust evidence base for global supply potential; ● Better identify and close critical minerals knowledge gaps in Australia’s critical minerals understanding; ● Help Australia understand future trends and match resource potential to international demand; ● Fast track innovation in the critical minerals sector, including development of online decision support tools with full data and decision process transparency.
Critical minerals are essential for the production of high-tech, aerospace, defence, renewable energy, agricultural, automotive and telecommunications technologies, and are found in everyday items such as lithium-ion batteries which power laptops and smartphones.
MATT CANAVAN, Minister for Resources and Northern Australia.
RED CROSS FOR BUSHFIRE VICTIMS CONTINUES AFTER more than two weeks of unprecedented bushfires Red Cross continues to help thousands of people caught up in the disasters across Australia.
Red Cross has supported people in 41 evacuation centres across three states, registered well over 5400 people and made more than 800 welfare calls to older Australians affected by heat. The fires have so far claimed six lives, destroyed 631 homes, and burnt more than 1.5 million hectares.
After more than two weeks of relentless bushfires as well as heatwaves across Australia, we’re hearing stories of people coming to terms with the tragic loss of life and homes, while many others have been on high alert for days and weeks with dangerous weather conditions.
More than 190 trained Red Cross emergency services personnel have been responding at more than 40 locations, providing psychological first aid, personal support, and information.
We work together with local authorities, agencies and communities providing initial support, and we’re on hand throughout the recovery stages.
Our work will extend beyond the current response to the bushfires, and we’re now mapping how we will work to support communities in their long road to recovery.
Red Cross supports people as we’re needed: whether that’s help prepare, a safe place to take shelter, psychological first aid, information and practical support, through the months, and even years it can take to recover.” If people are in an affected area they can contact the Red Cross’s Register.Find.Reunite service register.redcross.org.au to let people know they are OK.
Similarly if people are unable to contact a loved one in the affected areas they can register there.
In South Australia, we’ve made around 800 phone calls to check on elderly or isolated people during this week’s heatwave.
We also supported people who evacuated their homes after the Yorktown fire. In New South Wales, we supported people in 31 evacuation centres, nine of which remain open.
We’re also helping at the Public Information and Inquiry Centre in Sydney and pop-up Disaster Welfare Assistance Points at affected areas across the state.
In Queensland, our teams supported 741 people across eight evacuation centres. We’re now offering information and support at three recovery hubs and calling people affected by the fires to check on their wellbeing.ANDREW COGHLAN, Head of Emergencies for Australian Red Cross
Word count: 1143
