Rooftop solar panels on some ­estimates accounted for 17 per cent of Victoria’s peak demand and 30 per cent of South Australia’s in Wednesday’s heatwave, underlining the growing importance of solar panels.
Coca-Cola Amatil will add to the mix, installing 5200 panels covering 8516sq m on the roof of its Sydney Eastern Creek distribution centre.
The move is part of the expansion of the rooftop solar program it started last year, which will see 10,000 panels installed across its manufacturing sites at Eastern Creek, Richlands in Queensland and Kewdale in WA.
Amatil is committed to tapping at least 60 per cent of its energy needs from renewable and low-carbon sources by 2020 and is now at 56 per cent. It is also involved in the Murra Warra Wind Farm project near Horsham, Victoria along with Telstra, ANZ and the University of Melbourne.
The point is that households and companies are taking control of their own power supply, which is why Origin’s Frank Calabria is stepping up data analytics to keep control of supply.
He told The Australian that “more than 2.2 million ­households now have rooftop solar, and 21 per cent of our electricity is generated from wind and solar”.
Amatil’s Peter West figures the Eastern Creek panels will be enough to power 400 homes and 63,000 LED street lights for a year.
Alinta’s Jeff Dimery noted: “We have a big battery at our Newman power station that is capable of running its own grid, and we’ve started building a solar farm that will power up to 100 per cent of Fortescue’s local daytime energy needs when it’s completed.” Energy Australia’s Catherine Tanna said: “All the pieces of the puzzle are there. We see a system based on wind and solar power, supported by residential and commercial battery storage, demand response, intelligent energy management systems, waste-to-energy projects and pumped hydro, backed-up by gas-fired generation.
“The question is how we put the pieces together to create a new reliable and cleaner energy system for Australia — and do it at least cost.” She, like the rest of corporate Australia, wonders when the politicians will be ready with a decision on national policy. This year, she said, her company “made a submission on one regulatory change or another about every three days”.
While the politicians have more inquiries, the rest of the country is getting on with business, but at some point some co-ordination is needed.
Issues with mergers The Australian Competition & Consumer Commission has raised concerns in the last half of the year, with 12 different deals attracting statements of issues where competition issues have emerged.
This compares with just four SOIs issued last financial year, when some 25 deals were publicly investigated. Already this financial year the ACCC has looked at 26 deals, so the number of deals has increased and more are in already concentrated sectors.
On Thursday alone two proposed mergers — Bauer’s $40m acquisition of Pacific Magazines and the takeover of Juno by pharmaceutical company iNova — were placed on watch, with final decisions on both delayed until April next year.
Statements of issue are imposed where the ACCC has some concerns with the merger and wants to test the issue further. It is a clear sign a deal may be blocked, even though 98 per cent of all takeovers are eventually cleared.
Sometimes this is because a deal is pulled when the ACCC flashes the warning signal with a statement of issues. This happened recently with the Assa Abloy acquisition of Seal Doors.
The iNova case centres on phentermine-based weight loss drugs, an area dominated in this market by the Singapore-based company, which has around 70 per cent market share.
Juno developed a rival drug so iNova did what most big companies try to do: simply take out the competitor.
German-based Bauer Media’s deal to buy Pacific Magazines from Seven West Media was expected to win clearance, because the magazine market is shrinking against online competitors.
Bauer sells Woman’s Day and the Australian Women’s Weekly, and Pacific Magazines their rival, New Idea. The ACCC has decided women’s magazines is one market and the deal would effectively combine the two players.
The debate will centre on what is the relevant market, with the media players arguing for a wider definition.
Inevitably the big platforms Google and Facebook come into play but importantly they are not content creators, just aggregators.
This explains the ACCC concerns because the deal will reduce the number of content creators.
A statement of issues does not necessarily mean the deal will be blocked but it does mean more work is needed from the lawyers.
The increase in statements of issue is attributed to an increase in the number of mergers and given the nature of Australian industry, more are happening in concentrated sectors.
Cosy advice deals ASIC is on the warpath, as shown by the $9.2m fine Westpac was ordered to pay for 22 breaches of the Corporation Act over dodgy financial advice from banned adviser Sudhir Sinha.
ASIC was hoping for a $20m fine but the saga highlights what has gone wrong with the banks and the law.
Problems with his advice were first found by an internal investigation in 2010 but he stayed working at the bank until 2014 and in fact received several commendations along the way.
In 2014 he was dismissed and in 2015, five years after concerns were first raised, Westpac reported the matter to ASIC.
Federal Court judge Justice Michael Wigney said in his ruling: “The relationship between Westpac and Mr Sinha was structured so that Mr Sinha was able to share in the commissions and fees earned or derived when, as a result of his advice or recommendations, clients signed up for financial products in which Westpac or associated companies had an interest.
“As will be seen, that rather cosy arrangement turned out to be fruitful for both Mr Sinha and Westpac, but not always for their clients.
“It may readily be inferred that Westpac’s compliance systems and practices were less than rigorously applied, at least in Mr Sinha’s case”.
Petrol retail Chevron’s surprise return to the Australian petrol retail market, through the acquisition of Puma, comes four years after it sold its half share of Caltex for $4.6bn.
Inevitably the deal was linked to Canadian retailer Couche-Tard’s $8.6bn bid for Caltex but ACCC boss Rod Sims would baulk at any combination of Puma and Caltex.
The Canadians who entered the fuel market back in 2012 through the $US3.6bn ($5.2bn) purchase of Statoil are somewhat bemused at Couche-Tard’s attempt to paint their interest in Caltex at being focused just on the retail assets.
They do own fuel and infrastructure assets elsewhere and Alain Bouchard’s crew are capable of working out what assets are included in Caltex.
That explains why they are pushing for more extensive due diligence than a simple management presentation in return for a confidentiality and standstill agreement.Talks between the two sides are continuing and despite Caltex’s claims to the contrary any deal just on the talks should be reported to the market.
CREDIT: John Durie
Word count: 1183
