PART 2 OF 7
26 Richard White $3.08 billion Last year: $3.30 billion 65. Sydney. Technology Chief executive, WiseTech Global White has had to weather a storm at his global logistics software firm WiseTech Global, the one-time market darling that has come under attack by short seller J Capital. Beijing-based J Capital accused Wisetech, which White founded in 1994 before a successful ASX float in 2016, of using accounting trickery to inflate growth and overstate profits. The attacks hit the company’s share price but White has vehemently denied the allegations, while pressing ahead with making bolt-on acquisitions of customs and logistics firms around the world.
White’s wealth is based mostly on his majority stake in Wisetech, though he also owns part of private audio and lighting company Jands and once repaired instruments for bands such as AC/DC and The Angels.
Read more page 40
27 Maurice Alter & family $2.85 billion Last year: $2.61 billion 94. Melbourne. Property Founder, Pacific Group The Alter family empire is now in the hands of Sam Alter, who oversees a business that has made a big fortune from shopping centres and other property investments over more than five decades. Pacific Group’s assets include half of the Werribee Plaza and Epping Plaza centres in Melbourne; the other half was sold for about $1 billion in 2018. Alter started Pacific in 1979 after migrating from Poland in the 1950s and then embarking on a string of property projects in Melbourne. Pacific also has a mezzanine and debt-funding division, and an investment arm, Albany Capital, which primarily invests in healthcare companies in the US.
28 Morry Fraid & family 29 Zac Fried & family $2.74 billion combined Last year: $2.32 billion 68 and 47. Melbourne. Retail, property Executive chairman and executive deputy chairman Spotlight Group Fraid and Fried have the bulk of their fortune tied to their Spotlight retail business, including the properties that house many of the company’s outlets. But the pair also emerged with a 10 per cent stake in Home Consortium, the shopping outlet business that emerged with many of the assets of the failed Masters hardware chain and repurposed them into convenience centres. Fried has joined the board of Home Consortium, a rare foray into the public spotlight. He is the nephew of Fraid, who moved to Australia as a child with his late brother Morry Fried. The different spellings are due to a mistake by an immigration officer. The duo also owns the Anaconda and Mountain Design retail chains, and in March moved to buy department store Harris Scarfe.
30 Chris Wallin $2.66 billion Last year: $2.18 billion 67. Brisbane. Mining Managing director, QCoal Wallin made a rare wrong move late last year when a $90 million rescue bid for Queensland coalminer Bounty Mining failed and administrators were appointed just before Christmas. Otherwise, profits kept flowing in for his private QCoal during a bumper 2019.
QCoal assets include the $1.7 billion Byerwen coal mine and the Drake open-cut hard coking and thermal coal mine. Two of Wallin’s private companies combined for net profits of almost $200 million in 2019 and account for the bulk of his wealth. Wallin started QCoal after a career in the Queensland Mining Department as chief geologist.
31 David Teoh 32 Vicky Teoh $2.61 billion combined Last year: $2.53 billion 64 and 63. Sydney. Telecommunications Executive chairman and shareholder, TPG Telecom David Teoh has long been one of the more elusive members of Australia’s wealthy elite, but made a rare foray into the spotlight during a Melbourne court appearance last September.
He gave evidence in the Federal Court regarding a potential merger between his TPG Telecom and Vodafone Hutchison, which the court allowed in February. The court stint also provided an insight into the inner workings at TPG, which Teoh started as Total Peripherals Group in 1996 after he and wife Vicky emigrated to Australia from Malaysia in 1996. It has since become one of the country’s biggest internet service providers and has made a string of acquisitions as Teoh has built a large telco. He and his wife have most of their wealth tied to TPG stock, though they also own commercial property.
33 Solomon Lew $2.51 billion Last year: $2.03 billion 73. Melbourne. Retail, property Chairman, Premier Investments Lew has defied the retail gloom with his Premier Investments, which owns brands such as the children’s stationery and accessories brand Smiggle, Peter Alexander, Dotti and Just Jeans.
Premier has had a good year on the ASX, though another one of Lew’s investments, in department store Myer, has struggled. Lew has described Myer as an “absolute disgrace” and has a long history with the business, having been removed from the then Coles Myer board in 2002. He also owns hotels and commercial property in the US, and splits his time between Australia, Los Angeles and the Mediterranean.
34 Greg Goodman & family $2.49 billion Last year: $2.29 billion 57. Sydney. Property Group chief executive. Goodman Group Goodman has transformed his Goodman Group from a small concern founded in the mid-1980s with a handful of assets into a global industrial property powerhouse. Goodman Group last year surpassed Scentre Group in value to become Australia’s largest real estate investment trust.
Goodman’s stake accounts for a large amount of his wealth, though his family traces its fortune back to the founder of the Goodman Fielder food empire, Sir Patrick Goodman. The family also has residential property, agriculture and technology investments.
35 Marc Besen $2.44 billion Last year: $2.51 billion 96. Melbourne. Property Chairman, TarraWarra Besen is still on the hunt for property investments, having emerged as a backer of the Home Consortium business that listed on the ASX last October. Home Consortium bought old Masters hardware stores to convert into convenience centres, which Besen inspected before becoming a shareholder. The bulk of his wealth is linked to commercial property, including the Highpoint Shopping Centre, which he sold for $680 million in 2017, and he also ran the Sussan clothing chain before it was taken over by eldest daughter Naomi Milgrom.
Besen also owns the TarraWarra winery and art museum in Victoria’s Yarra Valley
35 John van Lieshout $2.40 billion Last year: $1.62 billion 73. Brisbane. Property Owner, Unison Projects Van Lieshout’s wealth is derived from the retail chain Super Amart, which he started in 1970 and sold to private equity firm Ironbridge Capital for about $500 million in 2006. One of 13 children who arrived in Australia from Holland in 1960, van Lieshout kept ownership of many of the freehold stores of Super Amart after the deal. This has underpinned his mostly property-related assets, which include residential and commercial developer Unison and JVL Investment Group, owner and manager of about $1 billion worth of retail, industrial and commercial assets.
37 Prudence Macleod $2.33 billion 61. London. Investment Macleod is the eldest daughter of News Corp executive chairman Rupert Murdoch. An Australian citizen, she derives her wealth mostly from her portion of the $US12 billion the Murdoch family received from the $US71 million deal for Disney to merge with 21st Century Fox, finalised in late March last year. Macleod, who also has property holdings, is married to Alisdair Macleod, a former News Corp executive who now runs venture capital firm Macdoch Ventures.
38 Gerry Harvey $2.32 billion Last year: $1.58 billion 80. Sydney. Retail Executive chairman, Harvey Norman The irrepressible Harvey has enjoyed a rise in wealth tied to the share price increase of his Harvey Norman retail group, which has found success expanding into countries such as Croatia and Slovenia. Harvey started the chain, which he now runs with his wife Katie Page, in 1982 with the late Ian Norman after the pair had previously sold the Norman Ross business.
Harvey started in business as a vacuum cleaner salesman and remains a bricks and mortar retail optimist. He also owns the Magic Millions horse auction business and has extensive agricultural interests. Harvey was forced to sell about 300 cattle in January when his horse studs in NSW were hit by bushfires
39 Michael Hodgson $2.30 billion 80. Perth. Property Hodgson is a prolific buyer of Perth property, owning dozens of warehouses and industrial land on which Bunnings and other outlets sit. Property records indicate he has amassed more than 60 sites across the city, held under several corporate vehicles, and he also has residential subdivision holdings. Hodgson, who also owns a mansion in upmarket Mosman Park, made his move into Perth property after running a wool-buying business that was hit hard by policy changes in the early 1990s.
40 Tony Perich & family $2.29 billion Last year: $1.59 billion 79. Sydney. Property Managing director, Greenfield Development Company The Perich family fortune may have started in the dairy sector but their extensive property holdings now underpin their wealth. Much of it is tied to land around Sydney’s south-west, where the family and business partner Arnold Vitocco have built the huge Narellan Town Centre shopping mall, the largest family-owned mall in the country. Their Greenfields Developments is also developing apartments and housing lots on what was once the Oran Park raceway. Perich’s Croatian immigrant parents started a dairy farm with 25 cows in 1951. Leppington Pastoral now has more than 15,000 cows. Read more page 30
41 Andrew Greensill 42 Lex Greensill 43 Peter Greensill $2.25 billion combined Last year: $1.52 billion 43 and 38. London and Bundaberg Financial services, agriculture Chief executive and director, Greensill Capital The Greensill brothers own the majority of one of the more innovative companies in the global financial sector, Greensill Capital. The business is now valued at about $5.8 billion after a fundraising round led by Japanese conglomerate Softbank last year. Greensill makes its money by “reverse factoring” – acquiring invoices and trade receivables from suppliers to customers and packaging them up into short-dated bonds to sell to investors such as banks and superannuation funds. Lex Greensill heads the business, while brothers Andrew and Peter work at the 2000ha family sugarcane farm in Queensland, where they also grow sweet potato and watermelons. Greensill appointed Julie Bishop to its advisory board in January.
He has also announced plans to launch an app offering Australian workers the ability to be paid daily by their employers
44 Nick Politis $2.11 billion Last year: $1.52 billion 78. Sydney. Retail, property Owner, WFM Motors Politis is celebrating another big year in rugby league, with his beloved Sydney Roosters winning the 2019 NRL grand final. He is chairman of the club and renowned as one of the most powerful operators in the sport.
While rugby league takes up much of his time, the Politis fortune stems from his huge car dealership assets. Politis has a big stake in the ASX-listed AP Eagers car retail business, but also has a large portfolio of privately held dealerships around the country as well as commercial property assets. He also owns the land underpinning his car retail assets.
45 Angela Bennett $2.07 billion Last year: $1.91 billion 74. Perth. Mining, investment Owner, AMB Capital Partners 53 Bob Ell $1.88 billion Last year: $1.86 billion 75. Sydney. Property Executive chairman, Leda Holdings Ell’s property holdings across the Gold Coast and northern NSW have enough land for at least 10,000 housing lots, part of a business empire that also spans commercial and industrial properties in Sydney and shopping centres in Queensland and the ACT. Ell founded Leda Holdings in 1976 and has since been involved with the investment in or development of more than $3.5 billion worth of property deals.
55 Paul Salteri & family $1.85 billion Last year: $1.84 billion 72. Sydney. Investment Chairman, Olbia Salteri’s investments include a stake in the Sydney Harbour Tunnel, as well as various property, infrastructure and private equity assets via the family Olbia investment vehicle.
Paul Salteri is the son of Carlo Salteri, who founded services company Transfield with the Belgiorno-Nettis family in 1956. Transfield split in 1997, with the Salteris taking the defence contracting business to Tenix. That division was later sold to BAE Systems for $775 million and the remainder of the business to Downer EDI for $300 million. Salteri had been topping up former rugby union star Israel Folau’s salary until 2018, when Folau posted comments about gays going to hell on his instagram account.
56 Russell Withers & family $1.850 billion Last year: $2.09 billion 73. Melbourne. Retail Owner, 7-Eleven Holdings Profits are surging at the country’s largest convenience store group, 7-Eleven, which has been owned by Withers and his family since the chain was introduced to Australia in 1977.
Annual revenue for the business exceeds $3.4 billion and pre-tax profits are more than $100 million. Withers and the family of his late sister Beverley Barlow own the group, which is recovering from a wages scandal in 2015 when its extensive underpayment of staff was exposed.
Withers also owns the local Starbucks chain, though the popular US coffee business is yet to achieve a profit in Australia. He sold $70 million worth of 7-Eleven petrol and retail stores last October.
57 Giuseppe Casella 58 John Casella 59 Marcello Casella $1.77 billion combined Last year: $1.69 billion 61. 59 and 69. Griffith, NSW. Wine Directors, former director, Casella Family Brands Fifty years ago last year, Filippo and Maria Casella built a winery in Yenda, NSW. Today, Casella Family Brands is Australia’s biggest family-owned wine company, having achieved huge success with the Yellowtail brand which has proved particularly popular in the US.
The business, now owned by the three sons and headed by managing director John Casella, owns more than 6100ha of vineyards producing 40 varieties. It made a $45 million pre-tax profit in 2019 from $473 million revenue.
60 Terry Snow & family $1.75 billion Last year: $1.51 billion 76. Canberra. Property Executive chairman, Capital Property Group Snow’s wealth is underpinned by his ownership of the Canberra Airport, around which he has developed an office park, hotel and other property assets with a book value exceeding $2 billion. A long-time property developer, Snow traces his family history back to the national capital’s earliest days. He is also one of the city’s biggest philanthropists, but was most recently in the news during the bushfire crisis in January. Fire threatened his 2000ha equestrian centre at Bawley Point on the NSW South Coast but mitigation efforts by his staff saved both the precinct and the nearby township.
61 Nigel Austin $1.75 billion Last year: $1.77 billion 49. Geelong. Retail Founder, Cotton On Group Austin is the name behind a group that has grown into Australia’s second-largest private retailer. It began 32 years ago when he started selling denim jackets out of the boot of his Ford Bronco in Geelong. Four years later, Austin opened his first store in East Geelong and Cotton On now has more than $2 billion annual revenue across 1500 stores in 18 countries. The group also owns accessories and footwear brand Rubi, stationery chain Typo and youth fashion business Factorie.
Austin owns the horseracing and breeding business Rosemount Stud.
Bennett’s fortune is topped up every year via the royalties flowing from Wright Prospecting, the mining business formed by her late father and one-time business partner of Lang Hancock, Peter Wright. Bennett shared in $172 million in dividends from the business last year, and has ploughed much of her proceeds over the past decade into her investment company AMB Capital Partners. AMB has assets in property, financial services, energy and resources. It sold its 25 per cent stake in active credit manager Coolabah Capital for up to $34.1 million last December.
46 Bruce Mathieson $2.00 billion Last year: $1.18 billion 76. Gold Coast. Property, gambling Director, ALH Group Mathieson has pulled off his biggest deal yet, which could see him emerge with $2 billion in cash and assets from the merger of pubs and poker machines business ALH and the Endeavour liquor chain. The deal, with Woolworths, will be finalised this year and means the supermarkets giant will exit its controversial link to poker machines, of which Mathieson is a long-time owner. He will emerge with 14.6 per cent of the new Endeavour Group, which is likely to be listed on the ASX later this year. Mathieson’s colourful career has seen him emerge from the tough streets of Port Melbourne, where he would procure cigarettes and other goods from ships and on-sell them for profit, to owning and selling more than 900 pubs in almost 50 years. ALH emerged as a joint venture between him and Woolworths after a chance meeting with ex-Woolies boss Roger Corbett at the 2000 Sydney Olympics.
Mathieson also has extensive land holdings in and around Melbourne and on the Gold Coast.
47 Khalil Shahin 48 Samer Shahin 49 Yasser Shahin $1.98 billion combined Last year: $1.84 billion 55, 51 and 43. Adelaide. Retail Joint owners, Peregrine Corporation The Shahin brothers own one of Australia’s quiet retail success stories, South Australia’s Peregrine Corporation. Peregrine operates the OTR (On The Run) service station business, which has more than 4000 employees, though last year it faced accusations it had underpaid some staff. The business was established by the late Fred Shahin in 1984 when he purchased a small BP service station in Woodville Park, South Australia. It now includes the Reliable Petroleum distribution business, tobacco products brand Smokemart, The Bend Motorsport Park, and a string of commercial properties in Adelaide.
50 Jack Gance $1.95 billion Last year: $1.46 billion 73. Melbourne. Retail, property Chairman, My Chemist Group The market is readying for what could be one of the bigger ASX floats late this year: the rumoured listing of the immensely successful Chemist Warehouse group. Gance and business partner Mario Verrocci have built a retail behemoth, piling their outlets with vitamins, perfumes, and rows and rows of other products to complement the pharmacy service. The rumoured float could value the business, started in Melbourne’s northern suburbs in 1973, at more than $3 billion.
They also built the Le Specs, Le Tan and Australis brands. Chemist Warehouse operates under the My Chemist Retail Group, which has annual revenue of more than $5 billion.
51 Gordon Fu 52 Jack Lin $1.95 billion combined Last year: $1.70 billion 75 and 51. Brisbane. Property.
Owners, YFG Shopping Centres and Trondage Enterprises Fu and son-in-law Lin have quietly amassed a shopping centre portfolio worth more than $2.5 billion, before debt, across south-east Queensland, making them the owners of one of the biggest privately held portfolios in Australia.
It includes Australia Fair on the Gold Coast and Brisbane’s Toowong Village. The son of a street vendor, Fu is said to speak little English, having arrived in Australia from Taiwan in 1992.
53 Bob Ell $1.88 billion Last year: $1.86 billion 75. Sydney. Property Executive chairman, Leda Holdings Ell’s property holdings across the Gold Coast and northern NSW have enough land for at least 10,000 housing lots, part of a business empire that also spans commercial and industrial properties in Sydney and shopping centres in Queensland and the ACT. Ell founded Leda Holdings in 1976 and has since been involved with the investment in or development of more than $3.5 billion worth of property deals.
54 Brett Blundy $1.86 billion Last year: $1.42 billion 60. The Bahamas. Retail, agriculture Executive director, BBRC Worldwide Blundy is one of Australia’s most successful retailers, and also one of the biggest cattle landholders. Most of his wealth is found in retail investments, which range from stakes in ASX-listed companies such as jewellery chain Lovisa and the privately held lingerie brand Honey Birdette. Blundy also owns 2.4 million hectares of cattle stations across the Northern Territory and a stake in the listed Aventus Retail Property Fund, and has put $150 million into the private equity arm of his private business. He started in 1980 with a single record store in Melbourne’s Packenham that became the basis of the Sanity music chain.
55 Paul Salteri & family $1.85 billion Last year: $1.84 billion 72. Sydney. Investment Chairman, Olbia Salteri’s investments include a stake in the Sydney Harbour Tunnel, as well as various property, infrastructure and private equity assets via the family Olbia investment vehicle.
Paul Salteri is the son of Carlo Salteri, who founded services company Transfield with the Belgiorno-Nettis family in 1956. Transfield split in 1997, with the Salteris taking the defence contracting business to Tenix. That division was later sold to BAE Systems for $775 million and the remainder of the business to Downer EDI for $300 million. Salteri had been topping up former rugby union star Israel Folau’s salary until 2018, when Folau posted comments about gays going to hell on his instagram account.
56 Russell Withers & family $1.850 billion Last year: $2.09 billion 73. Melbourne. Retail Owner, 7-Eleven Holdings Profits are surging at the country’s largest convenience store group, 7-Eleven, which has been owned by Withers and his family since the chain was introduced to Australia in 1977.
Annual revenue for the business exceeds $3.4 billion and pre-tax profits are more than $100 million. Withers and the family of his late sister Beverley Barlow own the group, which is recovering from a wages scandal in 2015 when its extensive underpayment of staff was exposed.
Withers also owns the local Starbucks chain, though the popular US coffee business is yet to achieve a profit in Australia. He sold $70 million worth of 7-Eleven petrol and retail stores last October.
57 Giuseppe Casella 58 John Casella 59 Marcello Casella $1.77 billion combined Last year: $1.69 billion 61. 59 and 69. Griffith, NSW. Wine Directors, former director, Casella Family Brands Fifty years ago last year, Filippo and Maria Casella built a winery in Yenda, NSW. Today, Casella Family Brands is Australia’s biggest family-owned wine company, having achieved huge success with the Yellowtail brand which has proved particularly popular in the US.
The business, now owned by the three sons and headed by managing director John Casella, owns more than 6100ha of vineyards producing 40 varieties. It made a $45 million pre-tax profit in 2019 from $473 million revenue.
60 Terry Snow & family $1.75 billion Last year: $1.51 billion 76. Canberra. Property Executive chairman, Capital Property Group Snow’s wealth is underpinned by his ownership of the Canberra Airport, around which he has developed an office park, hotel and other property assets with a book value exceeding $2 billion. A long-time property developer, Snow traces his family history back to the national capital’s earliest days. He is also one of the city’s biggest philanthropists, but was most recently in the news during the bushfire crisis in January. Fire threatened his 2000ha equestrian centre at Bawley Point on the NSW South Coast but mitigation efforts by his staff saved both the precinct and the nearby township.
61 Nigel Austin $1.75 billion Last year: $1.77 billion 49. Geelong. Retail Founder, Cotton On Group Austin is the name behind a group that has grown into Australia’s second-largest private retailer. It began 32 years ago when he started selling denim jackets out of the boot of his Ford Bronco in Geelong. Four years later, Austin opened his first store in East Geelong and Cotton On now has more than $2 billion annual revenue across 1500 stores in 18 countries. The group also owns accessories and footwear brand Rubi, stationery chain Typo and youth fashion business Factorie.
Austin owns the horseracing and breeding business Rosemount Stud.
62 Ye Lipei $1.67 billion Last year: $1.57 billion 75. Shanghai. China. Property Director, Shanghai Tianchen Ye Lipei emigrated to Australia in 1979 after working as a maths teacher in China in the Chinese Red Army. He took Australian citizenship a year later, working as a trader in the food processing industry and in the textile sector. He later invested in Shenzhen property, and then developed offices, apartment blocks and golf course estates in the Guangdong and Jiangsu provinces, and in Shanghai. His wealth is mainly found in his Chinese-listed Shanghai Tianchin property development business.
63 Maha Sinnathamby $1.67 billion Last year: $1.66 billion 80. Brisbane. Property Chairman, Springfield City Group Sinnathamby is seeking some help to finish his $88 billion dream, the country’s largest privately developed city, Greater Springfield.
He and business partner Bob Sharpless bought what was scrubland about 26km south of Brisbane for $7.84 million in 1985. The pair had relocated to Queensland from Perth, where Sinnathamby had settled after moving from Malaysia, and ran Murdoch Constructions.
That business collapsed but the pair have found huge success at Springfield, where there are already 43,000 residents with housing estates, commercial blocks, schools, shopping centres and other facilities. Sinnathamby has appointed Moelis Australia to find a suitable investment partner to finish the rest of the project, which is now only about 25 per cent complete, over the next three decades. Read more, page 46
64 Hamish Douglass $1.66 billion Last year: $786 million 51. Sydney. Financial services Chairman, Magellan Financial Group Douglass enters the billionaire ranks for the first time, thanks to the surging share price of his funds management business Magellan, which he co-founded with fellow billionaire and major shareholder Chris Mackay.
Douglass is now chairman of the business, which outperformed all its peers over the past 10 years in investing in international equities. While he is a big believer in the Chinese consumer, and has bought stocks such as Starbucks and McDonald’s as a result, Douglass has cautioned that last year’s market run will be hard to repeat. He and Mackay formed Magellan in 2006 after previously working at Deutsche Bank and an earlier stint together at Schroders Australia.
65 Jonathan Munz & family $1.59 billion Last year: $1.24 billion 58. Melbourne. Investment Former chairman, Reliance Worldwide Corporation The Munz family is quietly investing the proceeds of the sale of their stake in plumbing business Reliance Worldwide Corporation, which they exited in February last year. Munz had been chairman of the business, floating it on the ASX in 2016 and then selling his remaining stakes in two transactions in two years to make $1.7 billion in total. The family wealth originates in industrial firms under the GSA banner in the 1980s, including whitegoods component makers. Munz has spent $100 million on the 40ha Pine Cliff horseracing, breeding and training facility on Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula.
66 Chris Mackay $1.57 billion Last year: $735 million 57. Sydney. Financial services Managing director and portfolio manager, MFF Capital Mackay, a lawyer who became an investment banker in 1998, founded Magellan with Hamish Douglass in 2006 after running UBS Australasia as chief executive. While he maintains his large stake in Magellan – whose surging share price is the main reason for his elevation to billionaire status for the first time this year – Mackay has run offshoot MFF Capital Investments since 2013. MFF holds global stocks such as Visa and Mastercard, and made a $173 million profit in the six months to December 31.
67 Mario Verrocchi $1.56 billion Last year: $1.47 billion 62. Melbourne. Retail, property Chief executive, My Chemist Retail Group Verrocchi is closing in on 50 years since starting what is now Australia’s largest chemist chain in Melbourne’s northern suburbs. He and business partner Jack Gance established what is now the My Chemist Group, including the huge Chemist Warehouse business, in 1973. The group also has online business ePharmacy, and he and Gance have extensive property holdings. The duo backed the Home Consortium group that bought old Masters hardware stores to convert into convenience centres, many of which now feature Chemist Warehouse outlets, and listed on the ASX last year. Verrocchi and Gance are said to have plans to float Chemist Warehouse in a deal valuing the company at more than $3 billion.
68 Peter Gunn $1.54 billion Last year: $1.26 billion 77. Melbourne. Investment Executive chairman, PGA Group Gunn has quietly built a business portfolio that includes considerable commercial property, transport and logistics interests, and local and international equities held by his PGA Group.
Gunn was once a interstate line haul truck driver, later starting the road transport business CUBICO. That and other businesses were sold to Mayne Nickless in 2000, though Gunn still owns transport firms such as FBT-Transwest.
69 Alex Waislitz $1.50 billion Last year: $1.46 billion 62. Melbourne. Investment Founder, chief executive, Thorney Investment Group Billionaire investor Waislitz is now also a media magnate, having put in $30 million of his own money to help business partner Antony Catalano take control of the Australian Media Group.
The pair bought the business, which includes rural newspapers The Canberra Times and The Newcastle Herald, from Nine Entertainment last July, though Waislitz has most of his fortune tied to stockmarket holdings. His private Thorney Investment Group is one of the country’s bigger holders of small cap stocks, and also manages two listed investment companies. One, Thorney Technologies, has found success with public and private tech investments in Australia and overseas. Waislitz also has property holdings in the US and eventually wants to base a large portion of his assets there
70 Raymond Barro 71 Rhonda Barro $1.50 billion combined Last year: $916 million 65 and 58. Melbourne. Construction Managing director and executive director, Barro Group While the Barro siblings own the biggest stake in their family cement and quarry business Barro Group, Raymond Barro also took on another notable role last year with his appointment as chairman of ASX-listed building products supplier Adelaide Brighton.
The Barro family owns 43 per cent of AdBri, having built up its stake over many years, but it has now attracted the attention of the competition regulator. The ACCC launched a probe in October into whether the stake was influencing competition between the companies in Melbourne’s concrete market but later found there to be no hampering. The late David Barro founded Proto Concrete in 1946.
72 Bill Roche 73 Imelda Roche $1.48 billion combined Last year: $536 million 84 and 85. Sydney. Pharmaceuticals, property Founders, Nutrimetics Australia and owners of Roche Group Bill and Imelda Roche’s wealth is underpinned by the sale of their Nutrimetics business to US giant Sara Lee in 2007. But a revaluation of the extensive property holdings they have built up since the deal accounts for the rise in their estimated wealth this year. Their Roche Group has large residential projects in Queensland, including the Calypso Bay waterfront development and the adjoining 300ha Cameron Bay project.
74 Leonie Baldock 75 Alexandra Burt $1.48 billion combined Last year: $1.26 billion 48 and 46. Perth. Mining, wine Directors, VOC Group. Owner, Voyager Estate Sisters Baldock and Burt have shared in the hundreds of millions of dollars in annual royalties that flow from Wright Prospecting, the investment company formed by their late grandfather Peter Wright. The one-time business partner of Lang Hancock, Gina Rinehart’s late father, Wright had helped peg tenements throughout Western Australia’s Pilbara upon which Rio Tinto has since developed large mines. Royalties from those flow to Wright Prospecting, jointly owned by Baldock and Burt’s VOC Group and their aunt, Angela Bennett. Burt also owns and runs the Voyager Winery estate, bought by her late father Michael Wright in 1991.
76 Shaun Bonett $1.44 billion Last year: $1.17 billion 49. Sydney. Property Managing director, Precision Group Bonett celebrated 25 years in business last year for his property developer Precision Group, which has a collection of shopping centres and commercial buildings around Australia. Bonett has been refurbishing some malls, including the Port Adelaide Plaza and Shore City in New Zealand, to make them more relevant to modern consumers, putting in childcare centres and utilising more data analytics. He also owns 55 per cent of digital e-giftcard business Prezzee, which has launched in the UK and US, and shares in listed analytics firm Skyfii and Litigation Lending Services.
77 Sam Tarascio $1.43 billion Last year: $1.38 billion 75. Melbourne. Property Chairman, Salta Properties Tarascio arrived in Melbourne from Italy aged five, and he and his parents lived with two other families in suburban Werribee. After working in sales for the German pharmaceutical company Hoechst, he convinced them to allow him to build them a modern warehouse.
It was the start of Tarascio’s property career, with his Salta Properties celebrating 50 years in business last December. The group owns and manages commercial property around Melbourne, including the Victoria Gardens shopping centre and dozens of industrial blocks in and around Mulgrave. Tarascio says there’s another 10 years of development to come around Victoria Gardens in Richmond, while his Salta Capital arm invests in shares, hotels andtechnology firms. Read more, page 20
Word count: 5409
