THE fixed capacity of Adelaide Botanic High and more “professional families” in the eastern suburbs choosing public schools are among reasons for the controversial city high school rezoning, State Government modelling shows.
After multiple requests from The Advertiser, the Government has released summaries of the Education Department’s capacity analysis, done late last year and including independent reviews by Deloitte and the Office for Data Analytics.
Inner western suburbs parents were enraged last week by the announcement they would be cut from the shared zone for Adelaide High and Adelaide Botanic High.
The Opposition has argued the Government failed to plan for its move of Year 7 into high schools in 2022, and delivered all the pain of the rezoning in Labor seats. The Government claims Labor failed to prepare for a looming demographic crunch when in power.
The modelling shows that without the rezoning and excluding the introduction of Year 7s, Adelaide High would be 161 students over its current 1450-student capacity by 2022, and 368 over by 2025 – the year Adelaide Botanic would hit its ceiling of 1250.
With Year 7s factored in but no zone change, Botanic would be full by 2022, with an overflow of 99 students that year who would have to go to Adelaide High. The annual overflow would rise to 249 students by 2025, by which time Adelaide High would need a huge capacity of 2455.
The Government says that would be too big, too expensive and might be impossible without encroaching on more of the parklands. If the rezoning had cut families in the wealthy inner north and east, they would have likely been redirected to Roma Mitchell Secondary or Norwood Morialta High. The figures show more than a third of the extra capacity to be built at Roma Mitchell – 179 of 500 places – is for growth other than Year 7s.
And the documents say Norwood Morialta’s consolidation on to one campus at Magill means that campus already has to grow by more than 1000 students by 2022, including 300 Year 7 places. By contrast, the inner southwest schools that families have been rezoned to – Springbank, Underdale and Plympton – are each 300 or more students below capacity.
Population pressure is most acute in far northern and southern suburbs – traditional public schooling strongholds – and inner suburbs, especially the east, where “professional families are increasingly choosing public schools”.
As a result, public schools absorbed 93 per cent of growth in primary school children from 2011 to 2016. And fewer public primary students are going on to private high schools.
“This analysis clearly demonstrates the extreme enrolment pressures placed on many of our government schools,” said Education Minister John Gardner.
PAGES 16-17: A-GRADE SCHOOLSPAGE 22: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 463
