51 Ye Lipei $1.57 billion 74. Shanghai, China. Property Director, Shanghai Tianchen Ye Lipei's wealth is underpinned by a 25 per cent stake in the Shanghai-listed property developer Shanghai Tianchin, while his Australian citizenship stems from a decade-long stint in Australia that started in 1979. He worked in the Australian textile industry, after a stint in the Chinese Red Army as a maths teacher.
He returned to China in 1989 to a subsequent career in property, including building the giant Zhongsheng Commercial Centre in Shanghai.
52 Andrew Buckeridge 53 Sam Buckeridge $1.54 billion combined 56 and 53. Perth. Construction Directors, BGC Andrew and Sam Buckeridge have placed the huge Perth construction and property conglomerate BGC on the market, with an expected sale price of about $2 billion. BGC, which stands for Buckeridge Group of Companies, was started by their colourful late father, Len. The group is one of Australia's largest privately owned companies but has been under a cloud since Len's death in 2014. There has been a dispute about how the wealth he left should be distributed, resulting in the decision last year to sell the business, of which Sam and Andrew are directors. BGC has annual revenue of more than $3 billion and about 3500 employees. The family has also sold other assets, including Perth's Westin Hotel for about $200 million last October.
54 Lex Greensill 55 Peter Greensill $1.52 billion combined 42 and 37. London and Bundaberg Financial services, agriculture Chief executive and director, Greensill Capital The Greensill brothers derive much of their wealth from their stake in the London-based supply-chain finance company Greensill, of which Alexander "Lex" Greensill is chief executive. He founded the business in 2011 and it is now worth more than $2 billion after receiving a $US250 million investment from the private equity company General Atlantic last July. Back in Queensland, Peter Greensill runs the Greensill Family Group, established by their grandfather Roy in 1947 and later inherited by their father Lloyd. The farming business encompasses more than 2000ha across Queensland's Wide Bay region. Lex moved to the UK in 2001, undertaking an MBA and developing supply chain businesses at investment banks Morgan Stanley and Citi, before establishing his own business.
56 Nick Politis $1.52 billion 77. Sydney. Retail. Property Owner, WFM Motors Politis has made his fortune selling cars, but he is best known for his role as chairman of NRL premiers the Sydney Roosters. He has long been one of the most powerful and influential people in rugby league, a relationship that goes back to 1975 when his business City Ford first sponsored the Roosters. His WFM Motors has made him a billionaire in recent years, with Politis owning the land on which dozens of his dealerships sit.
He also has a large stake in the ASX-listed AP Eagers car dealership business, and even a small shareholding in the listed Brisbane Broncos, a rival of his beloved Roosters. Politis has also diversified some of his portfolio into commercial property, including assets in the Sydney CBD.
57 Terry Snow & family $1.51 billion 75. Canberra. Property Executive chairman, Capital Property Group The Snow family traces its Canberra history back to 1926, when ER Snow opened the then fledgling capital's first general store.
His grandson Terry is today the city's only billionaire, but his and his family's influence over Canberra is immense. Snow studied accounting in Melbourne but returned to Canberra and sold real estate, the first move of a career in property. He sold his Capital Property Trust in 1996 and two years later bought Canberra Airport from the federal government for $65 million in one of the country's shrewdest property deals. Snow has since spent $500 million revamping the terminal and, more cannily, building an entire business park comprising office buildings, a hotel, and retail and other commercial space on previously vacant sheep paddocks. The airport's balance sheet now has about $2.29 billion in net assets. Snow's foundation has given away $22 million to various Canberra causes and he has spent $100 million on the Willanga Park equestrian centre on the NSW south coast.
58 Mario Verrocchi $1.47 billion 61. Melbourne. Retail, property Chief executive, My Chemist Retail Group Verrocchi and business partner Jack Gance are the team behind the huge Chemist Warehouse chain, which has 300 stores around the country and plans an expansion into China and the US.
The business, which operates under the My Chemist Retail Group, has annual revenue of more than $5 billion. Verrocchi and Gance run the business from the northern Melbourne suburb of Preston, near where they bought their first chemist in 1973. They made their first fortune with the Le Tan, Le Specs and Australis brands, before rapidly expanding their chemist business over the past two decades.
59 Alex Waislitz $1.46 billion 61. Melbourne. Investment Founder and chief executive, Thorney Investment Group Waislitz last year celebrated the 25th anniversary of his private investment group Thorney, born out of a stint working for the late Richard Pratt at the cardboard box and recycling giant Visy. Waislitz had worked in the corporate and financial division of Visy and began dating Pratt's daughter Heloise.
The pair would later marry (they are now separated), and when Waislitz wanted to strike out on his own in the markets he used the gift of a $1.15 million parcel of Amcor shares from grandmother-in-law Paula Pratt as the basis of what is now an investment portfolio worth more than $1 billion. Thorney has extensive holdings in many small and mid-cap ASX-listed companies, as well as property holdings in Australia and the US. Waislitz, who has an apartment in New York's upper west side, has plans to hold 50 per cent of his assets there within about five years. He is on the board of the AFL club Collingwood.
60 Jack Gance $1.46 billion 72. Melbourne. Retail, property Chairman, My Chemist Retail Group Gance and his business partner Mario Verrocchi have built one of Australia's biggest retail success stories, the seemingly ubiquitous Chemist Warehouse chain of stores. The duo oversee a group that has more than 300 stores nationwide, and is planning expansion into China, the US and Singapore after a successful move into New Zealand. Gance says the business now has annual revenue of more than $5 billion, with same-store growth averaging just under 10 per cent each year. The group also has an online business, ePharmacy, which Gance says is growing faster than the bricks and mortar stores, and a joint venture in China with Alibaba's Tmall Global. He and Verrocchi started the business in Melbourne's northern suburbs in 1973, and are also part of the $725 million Home Consortium that bought dozens of Masters outlets with plans to convert them into mixed-retail space.
61 Brett Blundy $1.42 billion 59. The Bahamas. Retail, agriculture Executive director, BB Retail Capital Blundy's dealmaking prowess ranges from making $96.5 million worth of securities from the internalisation of the management of the Aventus Property Group last October, to a previous legal battle with Ian Malouf that saw the Dial-a-Dump founder buy out Blundy's stake in the business for about $100 million.
But most of Blundy's wealth is held in retail assets via his BB Retail Capital, which has stakes in ASX-listed companies such as jewellery chain Lovisa and homewares group Adairs, and owns retail properties. Blundy also reaped $500 million from the sale of Bras n Things in February 2018. BBRC also is one of Australia's biggest landholders, owning about 2.5 million hectares of cattle-grazing land across northern Australia.
62 Sam Tarascio $1.38 billion 74. Melbourne. Property Chairman, Salta Properties Tarascio was a sales representative for the German pharmaceutical company Hoechst in Melbourne who would get his start in the property sector by building a warehouse for the business in the 1960s. He had immigrated to Australia from Italy in the 1950s and went on to build a company that now owns a large portfolio of property across Melbourne. Salta Properties' assets include shopping malls, markets, warehouses and distribution centres, as well as apartment projects. Salta is now run by Sam Tarascio junior and includes Salta Capital. That division invests in shares, hotels, and other property companies and technology firms.
63 Chau Chak Wing $1.32 billion 65. Guangzhou, China. Property, investment Chairman, Kingold Group Chau has extensive property and media investments in Australia but most of his wealth is found in the China-based Kingold Group.
Kingold has property, hospitality, education and banking assets, and is one of the larger real estate developers in the Guangdong state.
He is also well known for his Australian political connections, having been a large donor to the Labor and Liberal parties, and for donating $20 million to the University of Technology Sydney for the building of its Frank Gehry-designed business school.
64 Alan Rydge $1.32 billion 66. Sydney. Investment Chairman, Event Hospitality & Entertainment Rydge is the name behind famous brands such as the Rydges chain of hotels and Greater Union cinemas, both of which operate under the umbrella of the ASX-listed Event Hospitality & Entertainment. Rydge has been the chairman and major shareholder in EH&E and Carlton Investments since inheriting the role from his late father, Norman Rydge, in 1980. Carlton is one of the older listed investment companies on the ASX and holds mostly blue-chip stocks.
EH&E also owns the Thredbo ski village and Altura and QT hotel brands, but Rydge has also signalled a move into property with the development of buildings it owns on Sydney's mark George Street.
65 Paul Little $1.32 billion 71. Melbourne. Investment, property Chairman, Little Group Little has been diversifying his wealth mostly into property since leaving the chief executive job at logistics company Toll Holdings at the end of 2011. He had built Toll into a large company after taking the helm in 1986, and kept his shareholding before the group was sold to Japan Post for $6.5 billion in 2015. By then he had established Little Group, which included a property development company that built apartments and residential projects and which he sold out of last December. He is now concentrating on the Little Real Estate group, aviation and transport concerns, and a residential subdivision north-east of Perth.
Little has spent $100 million building a VIP terminal at Melbourne Airport, and runs a ferry route between Melbourne and the Bellarine Peninsula. With his wife, Jane Hansen, he has made substantial donations to the University of Melbourne.
Read more page 43
66 Michael Heine & family $1.30 billion 69. Melbourne. Financial services Joint managing director, Netwealth Heine's Netwealth has been one of the better ASX floats in recent years, almost doubling in value since its November 2017 listing. The financial planning platform company has been one of the beneficiaries of the reputational damage suffered by the big banks in the wake of the Hayne royal commission. Heine and his son Matt are joint managing directors of the business, while Heine's brother Leslie is also a substantial shareholder. Netwealth was established in 1999, before which the family had made money in property, radio stations and investment. It traces its business success to a steel-making company the late Walter Heine started in Australia after fleeing Nazi Germany. Netwealth now has more than $19 billion in funds under management.
67 Peter Gunn $1.26 billion 76. Melbourne. Investment Executive chairman, PGA Group Gunn's fortune is now mainly tied to commercial property and transport and logistics investments, including office buildings in the Melbourne and Brisbane CBDs, and the Rocke Brothers storage and container handling business. His PGA Group also owns a shopping centre at Hope Island on the Gold Coast, and has land banks on Melbourne's fringes and in rural Victoria.
Gunn's career goes back to 1969, when he started the road transport business CUBICO.
That and a collection of logistics businesses were sold to Mayne Nickless in 2000.
68 Leonie Baldock 69 Alexandra Burt $1.26 billion combined 47 and 45. Perth. Mining, wine Directors, VOC Group Baldock and Burt are the daughters of the late Michael Wright and derive their wealth from iron ore royalties and incomes that flow as a result of a deal struck by his late father, Peter Wright, with Lang Hancock. The elder Wright and Hancock, the late father of billionaire Gina Rinehart, pegged vast swaths of iron ore tenements in Western Australia's Pilbara in the 1960s. Rio Tinto has since developed large iron ore mines and pays the families royalties from annual production. Baldock's and Burt's share flows from Wright Prospecting, which their private VOC Group jointly owns with billionaire and aunt Angela Bennett.
Wright Prospecting this year lodged dozens of financial accounts with the corporate regulator for the first time, revealing that Wright Prospecting paid $1 billion in dividends to its owners in the past decade. Burt also owns the Voyager Winery estate near Perth, established by her late father.
70 Charlotte Vidor 71 Ervin Vidor $1.25 billion combined 84 and 86. Sydney. Property Co-founders, Toga Group The billionaire husband and wife team behind hotel brands such as Adina, Vibe, Medina and Travelodge own an estimated $700 million worth of property at least. That underpins their wealth, though the hotel-management joint venture their Toga Group has with Singaporean group Far East Hospitality, TFE Hotels, is also profitable. Two entities that file the accounts to the corporate regulator made combined pre-tax profits of about $35 million in 2018. Charlotte and Ervin founded Toga in 1963 after arriving in Australia from Poland and Hungary respectively, hitting on the successful strategy of offering apartment-style rooms for business and leisure travellers. TFE has 73 hotels in five countries and 30 in its development pipeline.
72 Judith Neilson $1.25 billion Sydney. Investment Director, White Rabbit Gallery Neilson's fortune mostly derives from her shareholding in the ASX-listed fund manager Platinum Asset Management, established by her ex-husband and fellow billionaire Kerr Neilson.
She was once a director of the firm with no management role, and maintains her shareholding.
Nielson pledged $100 million last year to fund a new institute for journalism in Sydney, the Judith Nielson Institute for Journalism and Ideas. It will offer grants for story writing, education and public events. She has spent a similar amount on property, particularly in Sydney's Chippendale, where she established the White Rabbit Gallery, which has one of the world's biggest collections of contemporary Chinese art.
73 Jonathan Munz & family $1.24 billion 57. Melbourne. Manufacturing Former chairman, Reliance Worldwide Corporation The bulk of the Munz family wealth is from the ASX-listed plumbing products business Reliance Worldwide Corporation, which Munz sold out of in late February. The family acquired Reliance in 1986 and gradually built it into a global player with extensive interests in the US and the UK.
But Munz sold the family's last shares for $367 million, meaning it has made $1.7 billion from the 2016 ASX float, a large share sale in 2017 and then the final disposal this year. Munz is also a significant breeder and owner of racehorses in Victoria.
74 Paul Lederer & family $1.23 billion 72. Sydney. Manufacturing, property Founder. Lederer Group Lederer's fortune goes back to the sale of the Primo Smallgoods business in two tranches, the second of which was a $1.45 billion deal with Brazilian firm JBS in 2015. That deal came four years after private equity company Affinity Partners snapped up a majority stake in a $740 million transaction. Lederer has since poured his proceeds into commercial property and other investments, including buying up a collection of assets to establish Real Diary Australia. The business has annual revenue of more than $400 million, and Lederer has also bought hospitality product maker Tomkin Australia. He is perhaps best known as chairman of the A-League club Western Sydney Wanderers.
Read more page 34
75 Sam Chong $1.22 billion 76. Brisbane Founder, Jellinbah Resources Chong has quietly become one of the country's coal barons as well as one of its biggest taxpayers. He is the founder and co-owner of Jellinbah Group, which owns majority stakes in coal mines in Queensland's Bowen Basin. He shares ownership of the company and its assets with subsidiaries of the Japanese group Marubeni and global mining giant Anglo-American. Thanks to renewed demand for coking coal from Chinese steel manufacturers, Jellinbah had a bumper 2018, making $629 million in pre-tax profit and paying $275 million in tax. Chong moved to Australia from Malaysia in 1972, working as an underground ventilation engineer at the Rosebery mine in Tasmania. He later moved to Queensland Coal Mining Management, which became Jellinbah.
Chong also owns Felicity Hotel Group, which is run by his son Paul, and owns the Four Points by Sheraton Hotel in Brisbane.
It is also building the nearby $325 million Mary Lane mixed-use project.
76 John Kahlbetzer $1.20 billion 88. Buenos Aires. Agriculture Founder, Twynam Agricultural Group and LIAG Group Kahlbetzer has long been one of Australia's biggest landowners, and at one stage 40 years ago was even talked about as being the country's richest person. His Twynam Agricultural Group was established in the early 1970s and owned by holdings in NSW in particular, but sold down three of its Lachlan River frontage properties last year to end its days as an owner of a large agricultural portfolio. Kahlbetzer now spends much of his time in Argentina, where he formed the LIAG Group in 1982, though his children have a range of property, technology and rural investments in Australia. LIAG's holdings range from cotton, maize, wheat and soybean crops to Bradford and Brangus bulls.
77 Kerr Neilson $1.19 billion 69. Sydney. Financial services Investment analyst, Platinum Asset Management Platinum Asset Management has about $24 billion in funds under management, mostly invested in global equities. Neilson founded the firm in 2004 and floated it on the ASX in 2007, but the company's shares fell after he announced in February last year he was stepping down as chief executive.
Platinum shares fell again in January when the firm said it would post a loss in the first half of the 2019 financial year after unsuccessfully concentrating on Chinese and Asian stocks. But Neilson maintains his billionaire status, he and ex-wife Judith Neilson owning about 53 per cent of Platinum's stock between them. Neilson is still an executive director and investment analyst at the firm.
78 Bruce Mathieson $1.18 billion 75. Gold Coast. Property, gambling Director, ALH Group Mathieson appears to be on the brink of a split with Woolworths regarding its ALH Group pubs and poker machines business, born out of a chance meeting at the Sydney Olympics in 2000. Mathieson, then already a large hotel owner, met the then Woolworths chief executive Roger Corbett. The pair hit it off and Woolworths then went into business with the formation of ALH. But the current Woolworths management is keen to move away from the controversies of poker machines ownership, with Mathieson set to emerge at the helm of a spun-out company. His other investments include Gold Coast property, a stake in the listed Mayne Pharma along with Corbett, and large swathes of land on the outskirts of Melbourne's north. Mathieson bought his first hotel in 1975.
Read more page 26
79 Shaun Bonett $1.17 billion 48. Sydney. Property Managing director, Precision Group Bonett's wealth is found in a portfolio of shopping malls and commercial property assets held by his Precision Group. Originally from Adelaide, he oversees from his Sydney base an empire that includes the Metro Chatswood Centre in the city's north and the White Horse Hotel in inner-city Surry Hills. But he still has a collection of assets in Adelaide, where he is spending $45 million to redevelop what will become Port Adelaide Plaza. Bonett had also diversified his wealth into other investments, including the ASX-listed data analytics firm Skyfii, Litigation Lending Services and Prezzee, the largest eGift card provider in Australia.
80 Gretel Packer $1.15 billion 52. Sydney. Investment Chair, Packer Family Foundation Packer is the elder sister of James Packer and a billionaire in her own right after the at-times controversial split of the family assets in 2015, a decade after the death of their father Kerry.
Gretel and her brother fell out over the split, though they insist they are now on better terms.
The settlement was negotiated on her behalf by Sydney fund manager Will Vicars, and included shares in Crown Resorts and the US real estate technology firm Zillow. Gretel also controls the family's Ellerston Leisure luxury rural estate in NSW. She is best known as a philanthropist, chairing the Packer Foundation, and is a board member of the Art Gallery of NSW and the Sydney Theatre Company.
81 Theo Karedis & family $1.15 billion 83. Sydney. Property Co-founder, Arkadia Property Services Karedis owns 13 large bulky goods retail centres and smaller shopping centres around Australia, which underpin his wealth. He made his first fortune from the sale of the Theo's chain of bottle shops in 2002 to Coles. He and his family also own hotels along the eastern seaboard, including the Sofitel Noosa Pacific Resort and the Novotel Sydney Manly Pacific. The family's Arkadia investment company has a luxury yacht, Infinity Pacific, on its books. It shares ownership of the boat with the Laundy family.
82 John Richards & family $1.13 billion 57. Brisbane. Waste management Managing director, JJ Richards & Family Richards is the managing director of the successful JJ Richards waste management business, ownership of which he shares with several family members. The business is one of the largest privately held waste management companies in Australia and traces its roots back to Richards' grandfather, Joe Richards. He founded the company in 1932, building his own motorised garbage truck to give him an advantage over the horses and carts then being used by his competitors. The company made a net profit of $41 million from $750 million revenue in 2018 and owns shares in the ASX-listed Cleanaway.
83 Robert Millner & family $1.13 billion 68. Sydney. Investment Chairman, Washington HSoul Pattinson Millner and his family have had control of ASX-listed investment company Washington H Soul Pattinson since the 1880s, when it started with a single chemist in the Sydney CBD. The business now has a portfolio of at least 50 listed stocks as well as unlisted mining and financial services assets. WHSP's share price hit a 12-year high last year. The business also has a property portfolio and is part of a complex cross-ownership structure that includes stakes in the listed Brickworks. Millner is also chairman of that company, coalminer New Hope and another LIC in BKI Investments.
84 Sandy Oatley & family $1.13 billion 67. Sydney. Property, wine Chairman. Hamilton Island Enterprises Oatley and his siblings inherited their wealth from their late father, Bob Oatley, whose name once again adorns the family's Robert Oatley Vineyards business. But the family's wealth originates in the Rosemont Estate winery Bob founded in 1969 and sold to Treasury Wine Estates for $1.4 billion in 2001. By then he had spent plenty of money on his sailing pursuits, including winning several Sydney to Hobart yacht races, and the Hamilton Island luxury tourism resort for which he paid about $200 million in 2003. Sandy Oatley had to oversee expensive and costly repairs to the island after a 2017 cyclone, and the family is estimated to have sunk $600 million into the island over time. But it is a profitable entity, recording a $51 million profit before tax and significant items in 2018.
85 Jamuna Gurung 86 Shesh Ghale $1.10 billion combined 57 and 61. Melbourne. Education, property Co-founders, Melbourne Institute of Technology Ghale and his wife Gurung are pioneers in the Australian private education sector, growing the Melbourne Institute of Technology into an institution with 2500 students. MIT was started after the pair moved to Australia from Nepal in the mid-1990s, when they decided to open their own private college after another college Ghale was working at closed its doors. MIT recorded its most profitable year in 2018 but the couple have long parlayed their fortune into commercial property in the Melbourne CBD and one building that houses MIT students in Sydney. MIT's Melbourne campus is in the historic Argus building that the couple refurbished for $60 million, though their most ambitious project is a $500 million luxury hotel and office project near the Queen Victoria Markets. They are building a Sheraton Hotel in Kathmandu for about $100 million.
Read more page 42
87 Chris Thomas $1.10 billion 69. Adelaide. Agriculture Founder, Thomas Foods International Thomas Foods International is Australia's largest 100 per cent family-owned meat processor, employing more than 3000 people around the country. The group, founded by Thomas in 1988, processes about 120,000 sheep, goats and lambs and 5000 cattle each week.
It has three meat-processing plants, two in its home state of South Australia and another in NSW, and owns a meat distribution business based in Shanghai. The business is overseen by Thomas's son, Darren, who runs a conglomerate with annual revenue of more than $2 billion.
88 Raphael Geminder $1.08 billion 59. Melbourne. Manufacturing Chairman, Pact Group Holdings It has been tough times for Geminder in the past year in terms of his plastic packaging group Pact Group Holdings, which has struggled to meet market expectations and has seen its share price fall. But Geminder has surprised many by launching a takeover attempt for The Reject Shop, a struggling retail chain. The bulk of his wealth is found in his shares in Pact, which he floated on the ASX in 2013. Known as "Ruffy", Geminder also has extensive private investments in the food sector, including in Cobs Popcorn, Susan Day Cakes and Big Sister Food.
89 Justin Hemmes & family $1.05 billion 46. Sydney. Property Chief executive, Merivale Hemmes is a billionaire thanks to his strategy of buying big Sydney properties to house his burgeoning entertainment and hotel sites.
His company Merivale now has 89 properties around Sydney, including a large site in the CBD on which he plans a multi-storey development valued at more than $1.5 billion.
He is understood to have paid more than $80 million for the site adjacent to Ivy, his existing nightclub, restaurant and bar precinct, and is mulling plans for an office tower and hotel as part of a major overhaul of the area.
Hemmes is the son of the late fashion retailer John Hemmes and his wife Merivale, who established the legendary House of Merivale in the 1960s. The family has been buying properties for decades, gradually building its wealth. In late 2017 Hemmes went on a pub-buying spree, paying $74 million for three hotels in Sydney. He has also bought property on the NSW south coast.
Read more page 20
90 Con Makris & family $1.03 billion 76. Gold Coast. Property Chairman. Makris Group Makris arrived in Australia from Greece in 1963, aged 16 and penniless, having left school at 12 to work for a seamstress. He started working in a foundry, opened a fish and chip shop in Adelaide and several chicken shops, then started buying up the properties that housed his shops. That strategy continued as Makris bought bigger and bigger commercial assets, eventually coming to own a string of shopping centres in Adelaide after establishing Makris Group in 1982. In recent years he has relocated to the Gold Coast, where he has acquired property that includes the Marina Mirage and The Oracle buildings.
91 Brian Flannery $1.02 billion 67. Sydney. Mining Managing director, White Energy Flannery made his first fortune from the sale of Felix Resources to Yanzhou Coal in 2009, from which he made about $530 million. He has since had a range of resources and property investments, the latter including the KTQ Developments business owned with wife Peggy.
KTQ manages hotels and resorts and builds apartment projects. But Flannery's best deal may be the NSW coal-fired power station Vales Point, which he owns with Trevor St Baker. They paid $1 million to the state government for the asset three years ago, as well as taking on its liabilities. With coal demand once again surging, the asset has been valued at about $700 million. Flannery has considered selling his share to St Baker, though they have yet to strike a deal. He also runs the small ASX-listed White Energy.
92 Huang Bingwen & family $1.02 billion 65. Shantou, China. Manufacturing Founder, Shantou Dongfeng Printing Co Bingwen's wealth is derived mostly from his own and his family's shares in the Hong Kong-listed Shantou Dongfeng Printing, which makes paper products for the tobacco and other industries such as wine and cosmetics. He and his two sons have Australian citizenship, and he paid $60 million for Altona, a mansion in Sydney's Point Piper, in 2016. A year later he paid $21.5 million for the Buckley's Bar site in the Bennelong building at Circular Quay.
93 Chris Morris $1.02 million 71. Melbourne. Property, investment Executive chairman, Morris Group Morris has much of his fortune tied to his shares in the ASX-listed Computershare, of which he is the founder and a director. He established the share and information registry company four decades ago, building it into a global giant. He still has a big shareholding but now devotes more time to his private interests, which include a range of pubs and hotels and a diverse range of tourism assets across far north Queensland.
Morris owns the Townsville Casino, the Daintree Eco Lodge, the Orpheus Island Resort and the Nautilus Aviation group to transport guests. Morris's Colonial Leisure Group owns pubs and entertainment facilities such the Portsea Pub on Victoria's Mornington Peninsula and the Colonial Brewing Co at Margaret River, Western Australia. He has launched Reefers Keepers, a fund that donates to projects and organisations to protect the Great Barrier Reef.
94 Spiros Alysandratos $1.02 billion 80. Melbourne. Travel Chief executive, Consolidated Travel The travel industry may be the basis of Alysandratos's wealth but the publicity-shy billionaire also has extensive property investments. He owns at least 11 commercial buildings in and around Melbourne's CBD, mostly on Bourke and Swanston streets. While he also has as large stake in the ASX-listed Helloworld Travel, the main source of his wealth is his Consolidated Travel. It reportedly has $1.3 billion-plus in revenue annually, providing technology and ticketing services for travel agents and major airlines, and travel insurance products. Alysandratos migrated to Australia from the Greek island of Kefalonia in 1959.
95 Bob Ingham $1.01 billion 87. Sydney. Investment Founding benefactor, Ingham Institute Ingham and his late brother Jack inherited a small chicken enterprise in 1960 and built it into a huge operation, eventually selling it to private equity firm TPG for about $880 million in 2015.
The brothers were also big names in horse racing, growing what would become the successful Woodlands Stud from a broodmare named Valiant Rose left by their late father.
They sold the racing business for about $500 million to Sheikh Mohammed of Dubai in 2008, who made it the basis of his Godolphin Australia racing concern. Ingham now lives quietly in Sydney but the family name lives on through the Ingham Institute for Applied Medical Research.
96 Manny Stul & family $1.01 billion 69. Melbourne. Manufacturing Chairman, Moose Toys Profits are down from the heady highs of the last couple of years for Stul's Moose Toys, but by just about any measure the Melbourne-based company is a startling success. The two Moose entities that lodge financial reports with the corporate regulator made combined pre-tax profits of $55 million in 2018, and paid him and his family about $32 million in dividends. Stul has built Moose into one of the world's most successful toymakers, boasting hugely popular brands such as Shopkins - the world's biggest selling toy in 2015 - and Little Live Pets. Moose is now partnering with the creator of the popular Fortnite online game to produce figurines. But Stul, who bought Moose when it was a small business turning over $4 million annually in 2000, nearly lost the business in 2007 when its successful Bindeez beads product was found to contact a chemical related to date-rape drug GHB. Forty million Bindeez kits were recalled around the world, and after tense negotiations with creditors and the promise to pay them back, Stul was able to stave off collapse. He went on to be named Ernst & Young World Entrepreneur of the Year in 2016.
UNDER $1 BILLION 97 Ralph Sarich $978 million 80. Perth. Investment Chairman, Cape Bouvard Investments The inventor of the orbital engine's wealth is found mostly in commercial property in Perth and Brisbane, and residential subdivision projects in Western Australia. His private Cape Bouvard Investments has investments in technology ventures, including a project to commercialise large-scale battery technology in electric vehicles, while Sarbuild specialises in commercial and industrial building projects.
Sarich has given away about $85 million to charity over his career, including about $76 million to medical research causes.
98 Tim Roberts $962 million 48. Perth. Investment Chairman, Avwest Roberts is the scion of the late billionaire John Roberts, who made the family fortune from the construction giant Multiplex. The company was sold to Canadian company Brookfield in 2007, with Roberts and his brother Andrew sharing the bulk of the family's $1.2 billion proceeds.
Roberts keeps a low profile but has an investment portfolio that includes Avwest, an aviation services company based at Perth Airport, and hedge fund manager Warburton Group. He made headlines last year when he launched a damages claim against Canadian luxury jet manufacturer Bombardier, alleging he was owed tens of millions for brokering aircraft sales.
99 Geoff Harris $940 million 67. Melbourne. Investment Co-founder, Flight Centre Harris maintains his large stake in the travel agency business Flight Centre he co-founded with Graham Turner and Bill Harris, but now devotes most of his time to other investments and social causes. He owns the Melbourne real estate that houses the social entreprise STREAT, which pays Harris a peppercorn rent of $5 a year.
STREAT provides young homeless people with life skills, training and work experience, and operates a cafe, catering services and a bakery business. Harris negotiated land tax relief from the Victorian government and believes the strategy can serve as a model for other wealthy supporters of social enterprises. He backs other housing and homeless support causes, and has invested in the live property auction app Gavl and the Mexican food chain Fonda.
100 Richard Smith $917 million 78. Melbourne. Food services Executive chairman, PFD Food ServicesIt is 60 years since Smith joined PFD as a salesman and driver at the food processing firm's Morwell branch in rural Victoria. He gradually moved up the ranks of the business, which began in 1864 as a fresh fish merchant in Melbourne, and by 1970 was general manager of the entire group. Five years later he joined with the Liberman family to buy PFD and in 1988 he bought the Libermans out to own the entire group. PFD is now one of the biggest private companies in Australia, turning over about $1.6 billion annually, and has more than 2500 employees and 600 trucks distributing frozen, dry and ready-to-eat foods around the country.
Word count: 5855
