ADELAIDE Lightning has netted multiple “data scouts” deployed by illegal offshore bookmakers, seeking to take advantage of live streaming delays at their home games this season.
Basketball Australia has confirmed the “data scouts”, deployed by illegal offshore bookmakers and also known as “courtsiders”, are targeting NBL and WNBL matches in every state.
The Advertiser has established that the crackdown has already netted 16 evictions. The WNBL has been most affected, with matches often played at venues ill-equipped to identify rogue operators.
The live streaming of matches, which results in up to 15-second delays, also plays into the hands of gamblers.
There is no suggestion, however, that any Australian basketball matches have been compromised by the data scouts or their employers.
The Advertiser can reveal the Lightning busted people undertaking the practice – fuelled by illegal offshore companies – at two of their games at Titanium Security Arena this season.
On the first occasion, three people were identified and removed from the stadium, while on the second, two people were caught out.
But only one was removed on the second occasion, as the other individual put away their phones and just watched the game.
CONTINUED PAGE 47 Lightning busts offshore gambling rings cashing in courtside FROM BACK PAGE A source confirmed most, if not all, of those sprung this season were Asian students, who in some cases have been duped into thinking courtsiding was an accepted practice.
In one circumstance in Adelaide, the individual busted said they were working for a company in China. While not illegal, data scouting is a breach of the general ticketing terms and conditions.
Adelaide Lightning general manager Mandy Spear said it was surprising to find out how much courtsiding occurred.
“It’s been a problem in other codes, we were quite surprised,” Spear told The Advertiser yesterday.
“We caught five ... it’s quite disappointing that people are profiting off Australian sport overseas and using the delay in broadcasting and stats broadcasting.” There were no data scouts spotted at the Lightning’s last home game, against the Southside Flyers on Sunday, following their crackdown.
Spear said it was encouraging that the crackdown appeared to have warned any courtsiders away.
“I think we have sent a message,” Spear said.
The Adelaide 36ers said they were aware of the practice but had not had any issues at the Entertainment Centre.
Basketball Australia’s head of women in basketball Lauren Jackson endorsed the court-siding crackdown.
“This is a side of sport I never really knew existed until I got into administration,” retired Opals legend Jackson said. “Now, how prevalent it actually is, it is mind-boggling “We have got to be really vigilant in the way we put our sport on show and our stance towards this.
“The first six rounds (of the WNBL), I’m pretty sure there’s not too many games that have gone by where they haven’t been escorted out of venues.” Courtsiders basically feed point-by-point commentary to underground gambling syndicates in real-time to get an edge on market fluctuations.
“That 15 seconds buffer could potentially be a very worthwhile pay-off,” Jackson said. “I think it’s something that’s probably across all sports, but we definitely have got Basketball Australia on to it, clubs know who they are (and) what they look like.” It comes after Cricket Australia revealed last month that more money is wagered on a Women’s Big Bash League fixture than any given NRL or AFL match, with 90 per cent of the interest from the subcontinent markets, including crime gangs that set up illegal betting rings.
Basketball Australia introduced a courtsiding policy last year and it remains “hyper-vigilant”.
The sport’s integrity unit provides all NBL and WNBL teams with targeted education on identifying rogue data scouts and weekly eviction updates.The NBL is officially partnered with a data analytics company, which relays play-by-play information to authorised and licensed bookmakers.
CREDIT: SIMEON THOMAS-WILSON GILBERT GARDINER
Word count: 646
