Led by retail consultant and former Mainstreet SA chairman David West, the start-up project is aimed at reducing the number of vacant shops by promoting individual precincts within the CBD and North Adelaide, and taking a more coordinated approach to developing an effective retail mix.
Mr West, who spent ten years working at Westfield and six years with Rundle Mall, said the development of a diverse and vibrant business mix in the city would be crucial to its post-pandemic recovery.
“During my years in the shopping centre and mainstreet industry I have seen opportunities missed because of the lack of coordination with various functions that affect the development of the business mix in mainstreets and the city centre,” he said.
“Successful shopping centres have a structured and coordinated leasing process that delivers a centre mix that meets the needs of customers.
“In the city, with multiple landlords, multiple leasing agencies and a mix of streets, laneways and centre options, the development of a sustainable business mix can be a significant challenge.
“This new pro-active city business attraction program will aim to build a collaborative approach that competes effectively with the suburbs and lifts the profile of opportunities in the city.”
Recent figures from JLL revealed the number of vacant shops in the CBD had increased in the wake of COVID-19, while vacancies along suburban high streets were trending downward.
According to the research, vacancies on Rundle Street had risen from 6.3 per cent prior to the crisis to 11.7 per cent in recent weeks, while in the city’s west end one in seven shopfronts were vacant along Hindley Street, up from 8.6 per cent.
Known as Retail Adelaide City, Mr West’s new venture includes a membership-based website that promotes vacant retail spaces in the city, and connects potential tenants with leasing agents.
It divides the CBD and North Adelaide into five precincts to underline and promote the distinct character and retail mix within each area.
The website provides resources for new businesses in the city, and offers ongoing support to ensure they remain sustainable.
Maras Group, Econ Property Group and Evans + Ayers have already signed up as members.
“The program is based on attracting new businesses by promoting the strength of the CBD and its unique precincts, mainstreets and new developments, matching them to professional leasing agents and property owners, and then helping them to grow and be successful,” Mr West said.
“The objective is to present the city centre and North Adelaide as the leading shopping, dining and entertainment destination in South Australia, and the first preference for a business to consider.”
Word count: 421
