A MOTORCYCLE graphic designer, an electrical solutions company and an aquarium parts supplier are among this year’s fastest growing SA companies by turnover.
They are among the local operators that ranked from 14 to four on the Fast Movers SA 2020 list, joining the 25-15 ranked businesses on the list revealed by The Advertiser yesterday. The annual Fast Movers SA program, led by BDO, has been running since 2005, identifying 25 growth businesses across different sectors through metropolitan and regional SA each year.
“BDO is very proud to once again support Fast Movers in the 15th year of the program,” BDO SA managing partner Rudy Pieck said.
“We are equally proud today to present places 14th to fourth in the 2020 Top 25 and continue our celebration of South Australia’s fastest growing businesses.” The program is open to public or private companies with a registered head office in SA and a minimum turnover of $200,000 a year in the past three financial years.
“Particularly at the moment, celebrating success stories and getting behind each and every one of our local businesses is so important,” Mr Pieck said. “Congratulations to all finalists!” 14: SKDA SK Designs Australia, or SKDA, makes customised graphics and accessories for motorcycles, mostly for the global dirt-bike market. Founded by Sam Morton in 2010, it has five full-time employees and an average turnover growth rate of 60 per cent.
While COVID-19 failed to dent sales, which are all online, Mr Morton has spent his time in lockdown researching and assessing the company’s position, down to each individual dollar. That has paid off, with the business now seeing sales well above projections for the current period.
13: YATES ELECTRICAL Established in 2008 by Mark Yates, Yates Electrical Services is an electrical, solar and high voltage solutions contractor based in the Riverland.
The company, which has six employees, has provided more than 1000 homes and businesses with solar energy installations and has also been involved in major high-voltage projects across Australia, including wind-farm construction, substation construction, control wiring and high-voltage installations. It clocked an average turnover growth of 73 per cent. COVID-19 required the business to make several adjustments to its day-to-day operations. But in many respects, renewable energy development continues to be considered an essential service. Even so, the industry has experienced a downturn in projects, which has definitely affected Yates Electrical.
12: AQUARIUM SPARE PARTS Jake Broadstock’s 2012-born Edwardstown-based retail business Aquarium Spare Parts today claims to have Australia’s largest range of aquarium products.
With more than 4000 products to choose from, the business caters to beginners and professional fish keepers, growing its turnover by 85 per cent on average.
Driven by a community of customers, Mr Broadstock created the “in-stock guarantee” for his business in the midst of the virus lockdown, allowing up to $100 of products to be held for each person at its warehouse for a potential purchase any time within the next 90 days.
11: EXPOSÉ DATA Co-founder Kelly Drewett’s 2017-established business Exposé Data has grown to become the largest SA-owned data and analytics consulting firm employing 22 staff. The business, with an average turnover growth of 86 per cent, provides enterprise business intelligence and data analytics consulting and delivery services to businesses.
10: AFL SERVICES The abrasive blasting and painting company founded in 2004 by Lindsay Scragg uses technology and innovative solutions to help customers, including within the defence industry.
With 60 employees and a turnover growth on average of 90 per cent, the business has successfully diversified into commercial and civil markets. Through the virus lockdown crisis, the business expanded its workforce by bringing forward projects and accelerating maintenance tasks.
9: NUAGO The Eastwood-headquartered business, which employs 33 staff, is focused on cloud strategy, networking and security, along with managed services.
Set up in 2016, the company, with a focus on cloud, networking, cyber security and mobility, has an average turnover growth of 92 per cent. Agility is the key to keeping up with its rapid growth. One of Nuago’s key values is Kai-zen or continuous improvement.
8: AHLG The Hills gardening business set up in 2015 by Jarrad Tait and Luke Timmins provides high-end garden maintenance services, tree services and landscaping to a range of residential and commercial clients. With 19 full-time staff and a 127 per cent turnover growth on average, the business credits quality employees as key to its success.
7: IOTICS Since 2016, IoTics has helped businesses by implementing technology and electrical automation systems into process plants and industrial machinery to help save time and money. The business employs eight staff and has grown turnover by 158 per cent on average.
6: FIRETAIL Firetail provides services predominantly to the oil and gas exploration sector. The 2016-established business owned by Mike Wayne provides a range of services from flow-testing oil and gas wells, through to installing electronics underground nationally. It has 29 employees and average turnover growth of 165 per cent.
5: SEED TERMINATOR Seed Terminator is a simple combine harvester attachment that destroys weed seeds before they become weeds. They aim to provide the best technology to as many farmers as possible, as soon as possible, as economically as possible. Seed terminator helps reduce chem-ical use, increase yields and improve profitability. The bus-iness, set up in 2016 by Dr Nick Berry and Mark Ashenden, has 10 employees and is growing on average by 180 per cent in terms of turnover.
4: SUSTAINABLE SAVINGS Energy-savings company Sustainable Savings designs and implements efficiency and demand management solutions. The business, co-founded by Matthew Curnow and Davide Ross in 2015, has nine staff and a turnover growth of 189 per cent. Having the right core people, good systems and processes in place has been critical to its growth.
Top three Fast Movers SA to be revealed on Friday FAST MOVERS 2020: adelaidenow.com.au/topics/fast-movers-sa
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 975
