PART 3 OF 7
78 Paul Little $1.38 billion Last year: $1.32 billion 72. Melbourne. Investment, property Chairman, Little Group Little made his fortune from the transport and logistics business Toll Holdings but has now diversified into property interests through his Little Group of companies. The business owns the Little Real Estate group, which has agencies mostly in Melbourne, Sydney and Brisbane, and developer Little Projects. Little has also spent $100 building the Melbourne Jet Base, a VIP terminal at Melbourne Airport, and owns a ferry service. He and wife Jane Hansen have extensive philanthropic interests, including the University of Melbourne, where they have made substantial donations. He was appointed chairman of the Australian Grand Prix last year.
That business collapsed but the pair have found huge success at Springfield, where there are already 43,000 residents with housing estates, commercial blocks, schools, shopping centres and other facilities. Sinnathamby has appointed Moelis Australia to find a suitable investment partner to finish the rest of the project, which is now only about 25 per cent complete, over the next three decades. Read more, page 46 64 Hamish Douglass $1.66 billion Last year: $786 million 51. Sydney. Financial services Chairman, Magellan Financial Group Douglass enters the billionaire ranks for the first time, thanks to the surging share price of his funds management business Magellan, which he co-founded with fellow billionaire and major shareholder Chris Mackay.
Douglass is now chairman of the business, which outperformed all its peers over the past 10 years in investing in international equities. While he is a big believer in the Chinese consumer, and has bought stocks such as Starbucks and McDonald’s as a result, Douglass has cautioned that last year’s market run will be hard to repeat. He and Mackay formed Magellan in 2006 after previously working at Deutsche Bank and an earlier stint together at Schroders Australia.
65 Jonathan Munz & family $1.59 billion Last year: $1.24 billion 58. Melbourne. Investment Former chairman, Reliance Worldwide Corporation The Munz family is quietly investing the proceeds of the sale of their stake in plumbing business Reliance Worldwide Corporation, which they exited in February last year. Munz had been chairman of the business, floating it on the ASX in 2016 and then selling his remaining stakes in two transactions in two years to make $1.7 billion in total. The family wealth originates in industrial firms under the GSA banner in the 1980s, including whitegoods component makers. Munz has spent $100 million on the 40ha Pine Cliff horseracing, breeding and training facility on Victoria’s Mornington Peninsula.
66 Chris Mackay $1.57 billion Last year: $735 million 57. Sydney. Financial services Managing director and portfolio manager, MFF Capital Mackay, a lawyer who became an investment banker in 1998, founded Magellan with Hamish Douglass in 2006 after running UBS Australasia as chief executive. While he maintains his large stake in Magellan – whose surging share price is the main reason for his elevation to billionaire status for the first time this year – Mackay has run offshoot MFF Capital Investments since 2013. MFF holds global stocks such as Visa and Mastercard, and made a $173 million profit in the six months to December 31.
67 Mario Verrocchi $1.56 billion Last year: $1.47 billion 62. Melbourne. Retail, property Chief executive, My Chemist Retail Group Verrocchi is closing in on 50 years since starting what is now Australia’s largest chemist chain in Melbourne’s northern suburbs. He and business partner Jack Gance established what is now the My Chemist Group, including the huge Chemist Warehouse business, in 1973. The group also has online business ePharmacy, and he and Gance have extensive property holdings. The duo backed the Home Consortium group that bought old Masters hardware stores to convert into convenience centres, many of which now feature Chemist Warehouse outlets, and listed on the ASX last year. Verrocchi and Gance are said to have plans to float Chemist Warehouse in a deal valuing the company at more than $3 billion.
68 Peter Gunn $1.54 billion Last year: $1.26 billion 77. Melbourne. Investment Executive chairman, PGA Group Gunn has quietly built a business portfolio that includes considerable commercial property, transport and logistics interests, and local and international equities held by his PGA Group.
Gunn was once a interstate line haul truck driver, later starting the road transport business CUBICO. That and other businesses were sold to Mayne Nickless in 2000, though Gunn still owns transport firms such as FBT-Transwest.
69 Alex Waislitz $1.50 billion Last year: $1.46 billion 62. Melbourne. Investment Founder, chief executive, Thorney Investment Group Billionaire investor Waislitz is now also a media magnate, having put in $30 million of his own money to help business partner Antony Catalano take control of the Australian Media Group.
The pair bought the business, which includes rural newspapers The Canberra Times and The Newcastle Herald, from Nine Entertainment last July, though Waislitz has most of his fortune tied to stockmarket holdings. His private Thorney Investment Group is one of the country’s bigger holders of small cap stocks, and also manages two listed investment companies. One, Thorney Technologies, has found success with public and private tech investments in Australia and overseas. Waislitz also has property holdings in the US and eventually wants to base a large portion of his assets there.
70 Raymond Barro 71 Rhonda Barro $1.50 billion combined Last year: $916 million 65 and 58. Melbourne. Construction Managing director and executive director, Barro Group While the Barro siblings own the biggest stake in their family cement and quarry business Barro Group, Raymond Barro also took on another notable role last year with his appointment as chairman of ASX-listed building products supplier Adelaide Brighton.
The Barro family owns 43 per cent of AdBri, having built up its stake over many years, but it has now attracted the attention of the competition regulator. The ACCC launched a probe in October into whether the stake was influencing competition between the companies in Melbourne’s concrete market but later found there to be no hampering. The late David Barro founded Proto Concrete in 1946.
72 Bill Roche 73 Imelda Roche $1.48 billion combined Last year: $536 million 84 and 85. Sydney. Pharmaceuticals, property Founders, Nutrimetics Australia and owners of Roche Group Bill and Imelda Roche’s wealth is underpinned by the sale of their Nutrimetics business to US giant Sara Lee in 2007. But a revaluation of the extensive property holdings they have built up since the deal accounts for the rise in their estimated wealth this year. Their Roche Group has large residential projects in Queensland, including the Calypso Bay waterfront development and the adjoining 300ha Cameron Bay project.
74 Leonie Baldock 75 Alexandra Burt $1.48 billion combined Last year: $1.26 billion 48 and 46. Perth. Mining, wine Directors, VOC Group. Owner, Voyager Estate Sisters Baldock and Burt have shared in the hundreds of millions of dollars in annual royalties that flow from Wright Prospecting, the investment company formed by their late grandfather Peter Wright. The one-time business partner of Lang Hancock, Gina Rinehart’s late father, Wright had helped peg tenements throughout Western Australia’s Pilbara upon which Rio Tinto has since developed large mines. Royalties from those flow to Wright Prospecting, jointly owned by Baldock and Burt’s VOC Group and their aunt, Angela Bennett. Burt also owns and runs the Voyager Winery estate, bought by her late father Michael Wright in 1991.
76 Shaun Bonett $1.44 billion Last year: $1.17 billion 49. Sydney. Property Managing director, Precision Group Bonett celebrated 25 years in business last year for his property developer Precision Group, which has a collection of shopping centres and commercial buildings around Australia. Bonett has been refurbishing some malls, including the Port Adelaide Plaza and Shore City in New Zealand, to make them more relevant to modern consumers, putting in childcare centres and utilising more data analytics. He also owns 55 per cent of digital e-giftcard business Prezzee, which has launched in the UK and US, and shares in listed analytics firm Skyfii and Litigation Lending Services.
77 Sam Tarascio $1.43 billion Last year: $1.38 billion 75. Melbourne. Property Chairman, Salta Properties Tarascio arrived in Melbourne from Italy aged five, and he and his parents lived with two other families in suburban Werribee. After working in sales for the German pharmaceutical company Hoechst, he convinced them to allow him to build them a modern warehouse.
It was the start of Tarascio’s property career, with his Salta Properties celebrating 50 years in business last December. The group owns and manages commercial property around Melbourne, including the Victoria Gardens shopping centre and dozens of industrial blocks in and around Mulgrave. Tarascio says there’s another 10 years of development to come around Victoria Gardens in Richmond, while his Salta Capital arm invests in shares, hotels and technology firms. Read more, page 20 79 Charlotte Vidor 80 Ervin Vidor $1.36 billion combined Last year: $1.25 billion 85 and 87. Sydney. Property.
Ervin and Charlotte Vidor control a business with 11,000 hotel rooms in Australia, New Zealand and Europe, under brands such as Adina and Medina Apartment Hotels, Vibe, Travelodge and Rendezvous. The husbandand-wife team started their Toga hotel business in 1963 and for a time Ervin also ran an accounting firm, having started making shoe tips after he arrived in Australia from Europe.
At one stage the company, then called Progress Development, was listed and almost went out of business due to the credit crunch of the early 1970s. But with the help of the bank it survived and is now one of Australia’s biggest privately owned hotel groups, and includes a joint venture with Singapore company Far East Hospitality.
81 Cliff Obrecht 82 Melanie Perkins $1.32 billion combined 34 and 32. Sydney. Technology Founders, Canva A seventh round of investor funding has catapulted 32-year-old Perkins and her fiancee Cliff Obrecht into the billionaire ranks. Their online graphic design platform Canva is valued at $4.7 billion after a $125 million injection last October increased the private company’s valuation by more than $1 billion following a $70 million raising in May. Canva has now raised about $333 million since it was founded in 2014 and worldwide has more than 20 million users, who take graphic elements for use on such things as posters, websites, slides and greeting cards. Perkins created Canva after finding difficulty navigating graphic design software.
Read more page 16
83 Judith Neilson $1.32 billion Last year: $1.25 billion 73. Sydney. Investment Director, White Rabbit Gallery Neilson’s wealth is linked to her shareholding in fund manager Platinum Asset Management, established by her former husband Kerr Neilson, though in recent times she has made her own mark in both the art and media sectors. She owns the White Rabbit Gallery in Sydney’s Chippendale, which holds a large Chinese contemporary art collection, and last year announced the establishment of the $100 million Judith Neilson Institute of Journalism and Ideas, which funds quality journalism projects.
84 Michael Heine & family $1.32 billion Last year: $1.30 billion 70. Melbourne. Financial services Joint managing director, Netwealth Heine has packed plenty into a diverse career, which started in his late father’s Walter’s trading business and included bartering commodities behind the Iron Curtain during the Cold War.
Heine Bros traded steel for BHP, imported instant coffee and traded dozens of products, even Chinese water fleas used as fish food in Europe. Heine made and lost fortunes buying and selling radio stations and commercial property, before establishing the wealth management platform Netwealth in 1999.
The business, which Heine runs with his son Matt, has been a success, listing on the ASX in 2017. It now has almost $30 billion funds under management and advice, benefiting from wealth managers shifting away from big banks after the Hayne royal commission.
85 Paul Lederer & family $1.31 billion Last year: $1.23 billion 73. Sydney. Manufacturing, property Founder, Lederer Group Lederer has stayed in food manufacturing following a short-lived retirement after the sale of the Prime Smallgoods business over two deals that culminated in a $1.45 billion transaction with Brazilian firm JBS in 2015. He built up Primo with his late uncle Andrew, but now has assets such as hospitality product maker Tomkin Australia and Real Dairy Australia. He is also the chairman of A-League soccer club Western Sydney Wanderers, helping to fund a $20 million junior training academy at Blacktown
86 Tim Roberts $1.29 billion Last year: $962 million 49. Perth. Investment Chairman, AVWest Roberts has pursued a range of investments since he and his family made more than $1.2 billion from the sale a decade ago of their Multiplex construction business, founded by his late father John. One venture has been a profitable investment in the crayfish industry, gleaned from years of buying crayfish licences, which has helped boost his valuation this year. He also made more than $172 million buying 50 aircraft and manufacturing “slots” on the production line of corporate jet maker Bombardier between 2009 and 2014 via his AVWest aviation business.
Roberts bought an $8.5 million home in Perth’s Cottesloe last September.
87 John Kahlbetzer & family $1.28 billion Last year: $1.20 billion 89. Buenos Aires, Argentina. Agriculture, investment Founder, Twynam and LIAG Group Kahlbetzer and his family have transitioned from being one of Australia’s biggest landowners to increasingly focusing on renewable energy and sustainable food investments. Kahlbetzer moved to Australia from Germany in 1954, and after importing and exporting steel, founded the Twynam agricultural group in 1969 with a 100ha hobby farm near Picton, NSW. Twynam grew for more than 20 years, becoming the country’s biggest agricultural producer, with considerable wool, cotton, cattle and water assets. Kahlbetzer has since sold many of his rural assets but still has the LIAG group in Argentina, where he overseas cotton, maize, wheat and other crops.
Twynam and investment group BridgeLane have invested in environmentally friendly textile, energy, food and solar companies, and also has property and pastoral holdings.
88 Alan Rydge $1.28 billion Last year: $1.32 billion 67. Sydney. Investment.
Chairman, Event Hospitality & Entertainment Rydge has been chairman of what is now Event Hospitality & Entertainment and Carlton Investments since inheriting the roles from his late father Norman in 1980. His wealth is mostly tied to shares in both companies, which are listed on the ASX. EH&E owns brands such as Event Cinemas, the Rydges hotel chain and the Thredbo Alpine Resort, while Carlton Investments is a long-running listed investment company that mostly invests in blue-chip stocks.
89 Gretel Packer $1.27 billion Last year: $1.15 billion 53. Sydney. Investment Chair, Packer Family Foundation Packer, the elder sister of James Packer, concentrates more on philanthropy, though she is a billionaire in her own right. Gretel Packer controls the family’s Ellerston Leisure luxury estate and chairs the Packer Family Foundation, which joined with the Crown Resorts Foundation to donate $5 million to bushfire relief efforts in January. Her share of the family fortune is the result of a settlement with her brother in 2015, a decade after the death of their father Kerry.
90,91 Shesh Ghale Jamuna Gurung $1.26 billion combined Last year: $1.10 billion 58 and 62. Melbourne. Education, property Co-founders, Melbourne Institute of Technology Gurung and Ghale own an extremely successful private education business, the Melbourne Institute of Technology. MIT last year made an $18 million net profit from $72 million revenue, and offers business, accounting, marketing, IT and engineering qualifications.
Like other education institutions, it is likely to be hit in 2020 by a drop in student numbers due to the coronavirus, but the husband and wife team have for years had their wealth underpinned by commercial property holdings. They own several Melbourne CBD buildings, including the formerly dilapidated Argus Building they transformed for $60 million. Their next venture is a hotel and commercial office project adjacent to the Victoria Markets on the CBD fringe. Gurung and Ghale, who moved to Australia from Nepal in the mid-1990s, are building the luxury five-star Sheraton Kathmandu and also own hotels in Europe.
92 Theo Karedis & family $1.24 billion Last year: $1.15 billion 84. Sydney. Property Co-founder, Arkadia Property Services The Karedis family owns and manages 11 large-format and neighbourhood shopping centres in Australia’s eastern states as part of a property portfolio that also includes three large hotels. Karedis made his initial fortune from the sale of the Theo’s chain of bottle shops to Coles in 2002.
93 Manny Stul & family $1.23 billion Last year: $1.01 billion 70. Melbourne. Manufacturing.
Chairman, Moose Toys Stul has built a global toy powerhouse from Melbourne’s south-eastern suburbs, with his Moose Toys the name behind such hit brands as Shopkins, Kindi Kids and Little Live Pets.
The business has another success on its hands, having been named the global toy partner for the popular Australian children’s series Bluey.
Stul bought Moose in 2000 following the sale of the giftware business Skansen that he had founded after growing up as a refugee in Western Australia. Moose was a small, struggling outfit when Stul and his family bought in, but it grew quickly before almost collapsing in 2007 when its Bindeez beads were found to contain a chemical related to the date rape drug GHB. Stul paid back all his creditors after a huge toy recall put his business at risk.
94 Sandy Oatley & family $1.23 billion Last year: $1.13 billion 68. Sydney. Property, wine Chairman, Hamilton Island Enterprises The Oatley family wealth derives from one of Australia’s most famous tourism assets, Hamilton Island off the coast of Queensland.
The family, then under its late patriarch Bob Oatley, Sandy’s father, paid about $200 million for the island in 2003 and have spent about $500 million on it, including on costly repairs after a 2017 cyclone, but it makes $50 million in pre-tax profits annually. The family wealth originated in the Rosemount Winery founded by Bob Oatley in 1969 and sold to Treasury Wine Estates for $1.4 billion in 2001. The Oatley name is now back in wine under the Robert Oatley Vineyards business, which they also own.
95 Andrew Buckeridge 96 Sam Buckeridge $1.22 billion combined Last year: $1.54 billion 57 and 54. Perth. Construction Non-executive directors, BGC The sons of the late Len Buckeridge stepped back from day-to-day management roles at the Perth building materials and construction giant last year, as BCG Group management continued preparing the business for a break-up or sale.
Some BCG assets, including hotels, have been sold in recent years as part of a strategy to end a dispute about how the family’s wealth is to be dispersed. Len Buckeridge died in 2014, having built a business that has annual revenue of more than $2 billion.
97 Justin Hemmes & family $1.21 billion Last year: $1.05 billion 47. Sydney. Property Chief executive, Merivale Hemmes has been one of the most prolific acquirers of pubs and hotels in recent years, and now has more than 80 venues and brands operating under his Merivale group. The son of the late fashion retailer John Hemmes and his wife Merivale, he stands to benefit from the recent decision to relax Sydney’s late-night liquor laws. He owns and operates several of the city’s most prominent venues, including Ivy and Establishment. Though Ivy has been a huge success since it opened in 2007, Hemmes has bigger plans. He has bought adjacent properties and will eventually undertake a radical $1.5 billion knockdown and rebuild of the entire precinct. Hemmes’ parents started the House of Merivale in the 1960s, when they also began buying Sydney CBD properties.
98 Kerr Neilson $1.21 billion Last year: $1.19 billion 70. Sydney. Financial services Investment analyst and founder, Platinum Asset Management Neilson downplays his role at the international equities manager Platinum Asset Management, which he started with the backing of George Soros in 1994 after leaving Bankers Trust, saying he is “just an analyst now, one of the guys”. But that belies his role as one of the leading lights in Australia’s funds management sector over several decades. He floated Platinum on the ASX in 2007 and it now has about $24 billion under management.
And while Neilson indeed has an analyst role after stepping down as chief executive in 2018, he still has a large shareholding.
99 John Richards & family $1.18 billion Last year: $1.13 billion 58. Brisbane. Waste management Managing director, JJ Richards & Sons Richards heads the family business JJ Richards, which was established in 1932 and is now the largest privately owned waste management company in Australia. The company has a fleet of more than 1800 garbage trucks and vehicles, and employs 2200 people. It was established by Richards’ late grandfather Joseph Richards in 1932, who started collecting kerbside rubbish in the Murwillumbah shire. The group now collects rubbish for 63 local governments in Australia and New Zealand, as well as commercial hazardous, liquid and other waste.
It made a $64 million net profit in 2019 from $713 million revenue.
100 Huang Bingwen & family $1.16 billion Last year: $1.02 billion 66. Shantou, China. Manufacturing Founder, Shantou Dongfeng Printing Co Huang and his two sons have Australian citizenship and have extensive property assets in Sydney, including the mansion Altona in Point Piper, bought for $60 million in 2016. The family sold the Buckley’s Bar site at Circular Quay for $25.1 million in December. Most of Huang’s wealth is held in shares in Shantou Dongfeng Printing, the Hong Kong-listed maker of paper products for the tobacco industry and customers in the wine and cosmetics sectors.
101 Robert Millner & Family $1.14 billion Last year: $1.13 billion 68. Sydney. Investment Chairman, Washington HSoul Pattinson Millner’s Washington H Soul Pattinson has long been one of the best-performing investment companies on the ASX, holding stakes in Brickworks, BKI Investments and the coal miner New Hope. Millner and his family control the businesses via a cross-ownership structure, and WHSP also has shares in dozens of listed stocks, property and unlisted mining and financial services assets. The business traces its origins back to the 1880s, to a single chemist shop in the Sydney CBD. Millner says his secret is to have always had cash to buy cheap or undervalued assets, with one particular success being a large stake in David Teoh’s TPG Telecom, which he has held since 2008.
102 John Hancock 103 Bianca Rinehart 104 Ginia Rinehart 105 Hope Welker $1.12 billion each (revised) Last year: $4.50 billion (as Bianca Rinehart) Shareholders, Hancock Prospecting The wealth of each of Gina Rinehart’s children is attributed to them this year via the 23.45 per cent shareholding in the private mining giant Hancock Prospecting. Legal action has been ongoing over the shareholding, held by the Margaret Hancock Trust and shared equally by the four children. Bianca Rinehart is the trustee.
106 Nechama Werdiger & family $1.10 billion Last year: $893 million 84. Melbourne. Property Owner, Juilliard Corporation Smith’s daughter Kerry is now chief executive, while son Lindsay is a director and oversees other family ventures. Another daughter, Sharon Landy, oversees PFD’s philanthropic arm.
109 Andrew Budzinski $1.07 billion 44. Limassol, Cyprus. Financial services Founder and chief executive, International Capital Markets Budzinski is at the forefront of the huge increase in the foreign exchange and contracts for difference trading sector, of which his International Capital Markets is one of the biggest brokers in Australia. Budzinkski founded IC Markets in Sydney in 2007, after working at CFD broker CMC Markets and then co-founding another broking firm called First Prudential Markets. IC Markets has recorded huge profits in recent years and has become one of Australia’s biggest privately owned taxpayers. The company recorded a net profit of $167 million from revenue of $303 million in 2018, according to documents lodged with the corporate regulator.
110 Con Makris & family $1.07 billion Last year: $1.03 billion 77. Gold Coast. Property Chairman, Makris Group Markris traces his business career back to a fish and chip shop and then several chicken shops he opened in Adelaide after arriving from Greece at the age of 16. He kept buying the property that housed his shops and gradually did bigger deals, eventually amassing a collection of Adelaide shopping centres. They form the basis of his Makris Group, which now has its headquarters on the Gold Coast. The group has in recent years spent $150 million refurbishing its South Australian retail assets and another $200 million buying commercial properties in the eastern states.
111 Brian Flannery $1.06 billion Last year: $1.02 billion 68. Sydney. Mining, investment Managing director, White Energy Flannery made his fortune from the sale of Felix Resources to Yanzhou Coal in 2009, from which he reaped about $530 million. He has ploughed that into a diverse range of listed shares, including at least 25 companies in which he features among the top 20 shareholders. His best deal recently has been joining with Trevor St Baker to buy the Vales Point power station in NSW in 2016 for a token $1 million. It is now worth about $700 million and is immensely profitable. Flannery also has extensive property interests, including the KTQ Developments business owned with his wife Peggy, which manages hotels and resorts and builds apartments. The duo also own the $100 million 115 Sam Chong $1.03 billion Last year: $1.22 billion 77. Brisbane. Mining, property Founder, Jellinbah Group It has been another big year for Chong’s coalmining group Jellinbah, which has two big mines in Queensland’s Bowen Basin. It is now one of the country’s biggest private taxpayers, as profits roll in from coal exports. The family has also been drilling for coal near the existing mines operated by Jellinbah, which Chong owns with Japan’s Murubeni Coal and multinational Anglo American. He also holds Brisbane commercial property assets, with his Felicity Hotel Group opening the Westin last year and developing 184 luxury apartments above the $325 million project.
116 Ralph Sarich $1.02 billion Last year: $978 million 81. Perth. Investment Chairman, Cape Bouvard Investments Sarich is one of the most successful property developers in the country, though he is best known for inventing the orbital engine in 1972.
That made him the winner on the ABC show The Inventors, though it is property in which he has made his fortune. His Cape Bouvard Investments owns prime office blocks in Perth, where it has also built some apartment projects, and 300ha of beachside subdivisions in Western Australia and on the east coast. Sarich has made $85 million worth of donations since 1985.
117 Chris Morris $1.00 billion Last year: $1.02 billion 72. Melbourne. Property, investment Executive chairman, Morris Group Morris owns a $300 million tourism portfolio in Northern Queensland, including the Townsville Casino and luxury Orpheus Island resort south of Hinchinbrook Island. While he also has a portfolio of pubs and hotels in Victoria, NSW and Western Australia, the basis of his wealth is his stake in share and information registry company Computershare, which he formed in 1978 and floated on the ASX in 1994. He remains a major shareholder but is now a non-executive director, focusing more on his private Morris Group.
His extensive philanthropic interests include Reef Keepers, which donates to causes and organisations to protect the Great Barrier Reef.
under $1 billion 118 Peter Scanlon & family $959 million Last year: $840 million 75. Melbourne. Investment Chairman, Taverners Group Scanlon has made his fortune from a career in business and extensive property and investments holdings, but now devotes much of his time to migrant causes. His Scanlon Foundation has spent more than $12 million on activities and research to encourage multiculturalism. Scanlon was a top executive in John Elliott’s Elders IXL in the 1980s and made $377 million from the sale of stevedoring business Patrick Corporation to Toll Holdings in 2006. He has stakes in ASX-listed companies such as Qube and the Australian Unity Office Fund, and his Hume Partners and Taverners Group also has Melbourne property investments.
119 Mark Creasy $941 million Last year: $791 million 75. Perth. Mining Owner, Yandal Investments Creasy has spent more than 55 years prospecting for the next big mining discovery, a passion he is still pursuing despite threats to shrink his empire due to ever-increasing government red tape. He arrived in Australia in 1964 and worked in a Queensland coal mine, having graduated from the British Royal School of Mines. He has discovered dozens and dozens of mining assets, and is a large holder of exploration land in Western Australia. Creasy’s big deals include making $630 million from the sale of the Nova-Bollinger project in 2012 and he has stakes in more than 30 ASX-listed mining stocks.
120 Patrick Grove $932 million Last year: $841 million 44. Kuala Lumpur. Entertainment Co-founder, iFlix There have been some challenging times for Grove, the one-time accountant turned online entrepreneur who is building the pan-Asian streaming business iFlix. He began his business career at Arthur Andersen in Sydney before starting a string of ASX-listed online companies, including iProperty, which was sold to REA Group for $751 million in 2015. IFlix has rapidly increased in popularity and has raised $US220 million from investors across several funding rounds. But it recorded a paper loss of $US159.74 million last year and co-founder Mark Britt stepped down as chief executive in December.
121 Raphael Geminder $928 million Last year: $1.08 billion 60. Melbourne. Manufacturing Chairman, Pact Group Holdings “Ruffy” Geminder’s wealth falls this year in line with the share price of his ASX-listed manufacturing business Pact Group, which has been hit by a spate of profit downgrades in the past two years. Pact is selling its contract manufacturing division in an effort to concentrate on its core packaging businesses.
Elements of Byron Resort and Spa, north of Byron Bay, where Flannery has spent $4 million building the first solar-power heritage diesel train to take guests into town. He remains CEO of White Energy, which is developing a technology it claims will produce cleaner and more efficient coal.
112 Bob Ingham & family $1.04 billion Last year: $1.01 billion 88. Sydney. Investment Ingham is enjoying a quiet retirement following a career making a big mark in both the chicken and horseracing industries. He and his late brother Jack inherited a small chicken business in 1960 and built it into a huge operation, selling it to private equity firm TPG in 2015 for about $880 million. The Ingham brand name lives with the ASX-listed Inghams Group. The brothers were also notable racehorse breeders and owners, selling their Woodlands Stud to Dubai’s Sheikh Mohammed for $500 million in 2008. Ingham’s daughter Debbie Kepitis remains a prominent racing identity, best known as a part-owner of the champion horse Winx.
113 Reg Rowe $1.04 billion Last year: $870 million 75. Brisbane. Retail, property Founder, Super Retail Group Rowe’s wealth is primarily found in the business he and wife Hazel founded in 1972, which they initially ran as a mail-order business from their Queensland home. Rowe floated what became the Super Cheap Auto chain on the ASX in 2004, instantly earning him about $200m. He has retained his shareholding in what is now Super Retail Group and a non-executive director role. Rowe also owns half of Excel Development Group, which has property projects in Queensland and the north of NSW. He also owns several properties on which Super Cheap outlets have been built.
114 Spiros Alysandratos $1.03 billion Last year: $1.02 billion 81. Melbourne. Travel Chief executive, Consolidated Travel Alysandratos has amassed a considerable collection of Melbourne CBD properties, bought with the money he has made from his business Consolidated Travel, which he founded in 1967.
Consolidated Travel provides wholesale ticketing and technology support for airlines and travel agents, and travel insurance products.
Alysandratos also has a large stake in the ASX-listed Helloworld Travel group and last April paid $15.5m for a historic four-storey building in Melbourne’s Bourke Street.
The Werdiger family has quietly become one of the bigger holders of Melbourne commercial property, after completing a deal to take full control of three major buildings in the city’s CBD. The deal, completed last July, saw the family emerge as full owners of two office towers on Collins Street and the large mixed-use St James complex, which also has retail space. Nechema is the patriarch of the family, which traces its business history back to the late holocaust survivor Nathan Werdiger, who moved to Australia in 1949 and ploughed his earnings from the textile industry into property.
107 Arthur Laundy & family $1.10 billion Last year: $833 million 77. Sydney. Property Principal, Laundy Hotels Laundy has described pubs as the “heart of a community” and they are an asset class for which he clearly still has a lot of affection.
The family business started with his late father Arthur Senior has in recent times been on a buying spree. Laundy Hotels last year spent more than $60 million buying three pubs – the Bank Hotel in Maitland, NSW; Wolloomooloo’s Bells Hotel; and The Oxford Hotel in Sydney’s Drummoyne. That brings the number of pubs in the Laundy portfolio to almost 70. The group also opened a new $45 million hotel and brewery last year at Marsden Park in Sydney’s west.
108 Richard Smith $1.08 billion Last year: $917 million 79. Melbourne. Food Services Executive chairman, PFD Food Services Smith is the one-time salesman and driver who rose to run, and then own, a company that is a quiet giant in its sector. PFD Food Services is Australia’s largest privately owned food service network, employing more than 3000 staff across 70 sites. Smith started at the PFD branch in Morwell, Victoria, in 1959. He was promoted to head office in Melbourne almost a decade later and in 1975 took control of the business with the Liberman family. He bought them out in 1988.
Smith’s daughter Kerry is now chief executive, while son Lindsay is a director and oversees other family ventures. Another daughter, SharonLandy, oversees PFD’s philanthropic arm.
Word count: 5639
