Growing shift to put meat on naughty list
MORE South Australians than ever are planning a meat-free Christmas spread, including traditional plant-based roast and vegetables, as local supermarkets report a ten-fold increase in sales of vegan products.
A national survey of online searches has found 66 per cent more South Australians sought “vegan Christmas’’ recipes in the past two years compared to 2017.
The survey, conducted by data-analytics provider SEMrush, coincides with reports from Adelaide’s vegan community that more access to a greater range of good-quality vegan substitutes means products are flying off the shelf, particularly at the Pasadena and Frewville Foodland stores.
“There has never been a better time to go vegan or try it out,” said Stirling mum-of-two Louise Pfeiffer.
She and husband Phil Crawford decided to go vegetarian in 2011 and will share a festive vegan feast with their sons, Sebastian, 9, and Orlando, 6.
The family’s entirely plant-based diet is motivated by animal rights, environmentalism and health. Ms Pfeiffer said the range and ease of access to vegan products, restaurants, cafes and online resources had been “phenomenal” in recent years.
Coles this Christmas launched its own vegan roast, and Woolworths has added a “very vegan Christmas” section to its festive online grocery menu.
Foodland managing director Con Sciacca said vegan products – which included sausages, pies and pasties, burgers and beauty items – had increased ten-fold in the past three years.
“There is a significant increase in products coming into the market to meet vegan demand,” he said.
Mr Sciacca said that although the customer base for vegan products was small, it was growing.
Vegan Festival Adelaide director Lea McBride said growing interest in a vegan lifestyle was mirrored by the event’s rising popularity, from 1200 people in 2007 to a record-breaking 15,000 this year.
“Peace begins on the plate, and in this festive season of peace, love and compassion, eating vegan seems the right thing to do,” she said.
PAGE 64: SANTA PHOTO FAILS
Pfeiffer-Crawford Xmas menu * Vegan cheese platter * Hazelnut and cranberry roast with gravy (vegan substitute is mix of herbs, spices, grains and potatoes for meat) * Whole roast cauliflower with salsa verde * Roast potatoes and pumpkin * Peas * Kale and cranberry salad * Cherries * Hazelnut chocolate mud cake (vegan substitutes of canola oil instead of butter, and a combination of baking soda and vinegar instead of eggs) * Apple spiced bundt cake (vegan substitutes of apple cider vinegar and baking soda for eggs, with apple sauce which acts as a binder. Canolaoil used instead of butter)
CREDIT: REBECCA DIGIROLAMO
Word count: 433
