Vocational education is providing paths to tech careers of the future, Lauren Ahwan discovers
UNIVERSITY is not the only pathway to an IT career, with traineeships providing students with the practical skills needed to meet current and future workforce needs.
St Patrick’s Technical College STEM faculty manager Bradley Sheridan says IT traineeships lead to a range of information and communications technology careers, particularly within growth areas of defence, ship building and cyber security.
“IT traineeships are essential for today’s environment, to make sure we are investing in our young people and equipping them with the skills and knowledge to meet the workforce needs of industry and jobs of the future,’’ Sheridan says.
“When our students obtain traineeships, they continue to learn the valuable and practical skills required in the industry, within a real work environment and mentored by professionals who have a wealth of knowledge.’’ St Patrick’s, which has signed up almost 1000 apprentices and trainees with host employers in its 11-year history, has introduced a Certificate III in Information, Digital Media and Technology.
The new vocational education and training (VET) qualification exposes students to a range of IT areas, including technical support, network administration, web technologies, software applications and digital media technologies.
Sheridan says that throughout the program, students learn a variety of different programming languages, including HTML, Python and C, and then apply those languages to concepts like data analytics, cyber security and robotics.
Already, three students who completed the qualification have secured traineeships, working with the likes of Datacom, Calibre One and Calvert Technologies.
College principal Danny Deptula says the traineeships mark the start of a promising future within IT.
“We know an apprenticeship or traineeship can lead to a very rewarding and successful career, both financially and professionally, and often leads to greater endeavours,’’ he says. “This is because VET is developed by industry for the future needs of industry, and so students are exposed to real-life contextual learning and, hence, well prepared for the real world of work.
“Students with a VET qualification are in high demand and highly regarded by employers.” St Patrick’s graduate Cameron Grimmond, who is completing his traineeship through MEGT, hosted by Calibre One, says the high level of practical learning is unmatched by the IT offerings at university.
“Traineeships provide on-the-job experience and insight on what it is like in an IT-related environment,’’ he says. “(This) means that I can continue todevelopmyknowledgeofinformationtechnologyandgraspabetter understanding of it while workingunderthewingofanemployer.“These are things that you just wouldn’t be able to experience while being at university.’’
CREDIT: Lauren Ahwan
Word count: 425
