A LACK of pay rises is holding back economic growth as families continue to tighten the purse strings with Reserve Bank governor Philip Lowe, pictured, warning revised statistics show household consumption is lower than realised.
“Household consumption accounts for almost 60 per cent of total spending, so what happens on this front is important,” Mr Lowe said.
Speaking to the parliamentary committee on economics yesterday, Mr Lowe said “protracted” low growth in household incomes had coupled with a fall in house prices to further dent confidence and had caused people to spend less.
Updated national accounts data showed that growth in household disposable income was running at less than half its usual level, Mr Lowe said. “Since 2016 aggregate household disposable income has grown at an average rate of around 2.75 per cent a year. This is down from an average of 6 per cent over the preceding decade,” he said.
“It is plausible that households have responded to this extended period of weaker income growth by progressively downgrading their spending plans. For many people, it has become harder to see the lower growth in incomes as just a short-term development, that can be looked through.” However, there was some light ahead, Mr Lowe said with wages starting to rise in most industries and states at a quicker pace than last year.
“Faster income growth will support household spending,” he said. The downturn in the housing market, however, was also impacting spending, with fewer property sales reducing the usual spending spree associated with moving to a new home. In addition, Mr Lowe, said the lower house prices “make people feel less wealthy, so they spend less”.
“We do, though, need to keep things in perspective. The adjustments in the Sydney and Melbourne housing markets are occurring at a time of low unemployment, low interest rates and strong population growth.
“This adjustment in the housing market is not expected to derail the economy. It will put our housing markets on more sustainable footings and allow more people to purchase their own home. So there is a positive side, too.” Mr Lowe also repeated earlier commentary that the Reserve board did not see a strong case for any change to the cash interest rate and confirmed any future move could now, equally be, up or down.
“The unemployment rate is forecast to decline further and inflation to increase, although only gradually. If we do make this progress, it remains the case that higher interest rates will be appropriate at some point.
“But it is also possible that the economy is softer than we expect and that progress towards our goals is limited.
“If there were to be a sustained increase in the unemployment rate and a lack of further progress towards the inflation objective, lower interest rates might be appropriate at some point. External risks to the Australian economy were from international politics and trade, including trade and technology tensions between China and the US, Brexit, the rise of populism and the strains in some western European countries.
The slowdown in the Chinese economy also had the potential to have a wide ranging impact.
The International Monetary Fund also gave Australia’s banking system a clean bill of health but said further improvements were needed including a $20 billion “financial crisis” levy and increased regulatory supervision through better data analytics.– THE AUSTRALIAN
CREDIT: KARINA BARRYMORE
Word count: 563
