AS Facebook moves to stamp out misinformation and potentially harmful content about the coronavirus, SA Health is warning people to only seek information from reputable sources.
The social-media site will begin removing posts that include false claims or conspiracy theories about the virus, now a World Health Organisation-declared global emergency.
Posts that discourage people from getting medical treatment, or make dangerous claims about cures will be removed. Facebook will also block or restrict hashtags used to spread misinformation on Instagram, as #coronavirus, #china, #virus, #wuhan and #corona became the top trending words.
SA Health’s chief public health officer, Associate Professor Nicola Spurrier, called for calm and pointed people to a new coronavirus information line or government websites.
“Any misinformation provided about coronavirus, or any other virus, can cause unnecessary anxiety and we advise people to always seek information from reputable sources,” Prof Spurrier said.
“Public health officials and infectious disease experts are meeting across Australia (daily) to review new information and update public messages ... on government web-sites and ... social media.” Since the outbreak began, wild theories have circulated online. Former boxing star Anthony Mundine only yesterday claimed the virus is a “ploy” to introduce a “mass vaccine”.
Other conspiracy theories include that the virus was created in a lab, it was planned for population control and that vaccines already exist.
Olga Andrienko, head of global marketing at data-analytics company SEMrush, said fear of the unknown had made people turn to social media to voice their concerns.
“It’s fairly common these days for misinformation to be spread via social media during a crisis and this was seen during Australia’s bushfire emergency recently too,” he said.
“The lack of news coming out of China and the statements from the Australian authorities calling for calm are driving both online search and social media chatter.” The company said the top questions people are searching are: is the coronavirus deadly? What is it? What are the symptoms? and, is it contagious?
Twitter users who search for information on the virus will be given a link to the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention website.
Of the 22,195 Instagram posts about the virus from January 14-28, “coronavirus” was referred to 24,000 times, while “China” and “virus” were each cited 13,600 times.FOR INFORMATION ON CORONAVIRUS, CALL THE CORONAVIRUS HEALTH INFORMATION LINE ON 1800 020 080
CREDIT: ERIN JONES
Word count: 394
