Formed in late 2019 to spearhead Naval Group’s research and technology investments, and to separate its other commercial interests from the Adelaide-based future submarine project, Naval Group Pacific was heralded at the time as a symbol of the benefits of the multi-decade French-Australian strategic partnership.
But chief technology officer Margaret Law is the first to admit 2020 was a frustrating time to be a start-up.
“Absolutely, COVID slowed the whole thing down,” she tells The Australian.
“Part of the original rationale for Naval Group Pacific was that having dedicated people on the ground would increase our ability to react to opportunities.
“Zoom is a very staid and difficult way of connecting with researchers, so we used the time wisely and focused on creating a local technical strategy, which highlights the research priorities we believe are worth championing, building and fostering.”
Law, a 13-year veteran of the Australian Submarine Corporation (now ASC) with a PhD in physics, says Naval Group Pacific’s R&D will focus on three thematic areas: the international digital shipyard, sailor and smart ship teaming, and co-ordinating autonomous systems for strategic effect.
“For the international digital shipyard, we want all Naval Group shipyards to be able to learn from each other, to call on expertise distributed across the world to address problems in any location at a point in time,” she says.
“We also have a project with Flinders University to examine the applications of exoskeletons to reduce the stress and strains on manufacturing workers’ bodies, helping them remain on task while also reducing the injury rate. It is going really well.”
The intersection of humans, autonomous systems and artificial intelligence – called “sailor and smart ship teaming” – is being pursued through the Crossing International Research Laboratory, a major collaboration between Naval Group Pacific, Centre national de la recherche scientifique or CNRS (the French equivalent of the CSIRO), University of Adelaide, University of South Australia, Flinders University and French university IMT Atlantique, which was formally opened by SA Premier Steven Marshall in February.
“The kind of projects we hope to stand up in this space, for example, is how to supplement and support fatigued sailors,” says Law.
“How can autonomous systems and AI help us to present information to them that they can process in safe and effective ways? How can a system let an operator know they’re fatiguing? It goes to the question of trusted autonomy, and ensuring we are using these remarkable technologies to make things better, not just different.”
The third and most recent research priority for the group is autonomous systems: “Not their design or manufacture,” Law hastens to add, “but really looking and technological approaches and methods to co-ordinate the use of multiple autonomous assets on, above, and below the water for strategic effect.”
“It is a very new area for us, and we are just in the process of standing up projects in this area.”
While Naval Group Pacific has just four projects under way, and the same number in the pipeline, Law argues that it isn’t necessarily the size, quantity or dollar value of the projects that represent their wholistic value.
“I think it’s very much early days for us, but I will measure our success when I see the outputs of our research making a difference. It might be our technology deployed aboard a surface ship, a sailor or officer using our algorithms, or supporting our manufacturing workforce in such a way that we haven’t worn them out in 10 years,” she says.
“It’s not the accountants’ view of the world. But defence is one of those areas where niche innovations can create significant enhancements in capability; that’s our goal.”
That said, proprietary advantage remains the driving motive behind Naval Group Pacific’s activities (“We are not Santa,” admits Law). But the company’s attractions for researchers looking to commercialise their work and overcome the perennial limitations of Australia’s small domestic market, are obvious.
“We provide a route to the international market,” says Law. “We have many, many needs in our organisation where technologies can take root and grow.”
More importantly for the Australian economy, Naval Group Pacific’s strategy of identifying pockets of research excellence, reaching collaboration and co-investment agreements with university partners (“Some more complicated than others,” says Law), and fostering PhD students in relevant disciplines is precisely the kind of foreign investment defence economists say deliver the greatest net benefits to the economy. Conversely, experts have expressed significant doubt about whether the premium being paid to build the future submarines locally – despite the recently finalised agreement on 60 per cent local content – will result in the benefits originally claimed.
Law, who attends a weekly French language class to help her bridge the linguistic and cultural divide, says Naval Group Pacific will be a bigger organisation in years to come with more technical personnel and – she hopes – many more research partners.
“I am an optimist, and I see enormous capabilities all around this country. I think sometimes as Australians we don’t necessarily value what we have and what we can do. Sometimes it takes someone on the outside looking in and saying, ‘this is actually quite cool, we can do something with that’.”
Word count: 846
