SA-BASED technology software business Consilium says its latest local acquisition will help it gain a “wholistic” edge in the agribusiness sector.
Consilium Technology has acquired local company Measurement Engineering Australia and its software, Green Brain for an undisclosed price.
MEA, founded in 1984 by Dr Andrew Skinner, has designed and built hardware and software products to support farm monitoring and irrigation decisions.
Its Green Brain software allows growers to access data that has, among other things, helped them reduce water costs and improve their crop. Major national avocado, citrus, almonds and grape growers are among Green Brain’s customers.
Green Brain integrates well with Consilium’s GAIA web application, which uses high resolution satellite images and advanced machine learning to provide the wine industry real-time mapping and vineyard insights.
It aims to identify and map every vineyard in Australia, annually. GAIA was awarded a $1m Accelerating Commercialisation grant by the Federal Government in 2018.
“The combination of Green Brain and GAIA will help agribusinesses get a wholistic view of their farms,” Consilium Technology chief executive Seth Thuraisingham said.
“The coming together provides significant more insights because we now have on-ground and above ground (satellite) information at scale,” Mr Thuraisingham said.
“We see significant synergies with integrating the capabilities of these products to unlock new value for the agriculture sector.” Together, the business now has “hundreds of subscriptions” across GreenBrain and GAIA.
Consilium Technology was founded in 2013, and today employs 60 staff. Besides agritech, it has also developed hi-tech software solutions for the defence and mining industries.
The company, which specialises in modelling and simulation, data analytics, mixed reality, human sciences and machine learning, employs computer programmers, scientists, engineers and analysts. The business now has more than 20 active defence contracts and has secured more than 10 mining and energy contracts in the past 12 months. Its defence product, a gaming simulation-based offering called Infinite Studio, has been developed in partnership with the Australian Department of Defence Science and Technology. For miners, it has MAIT that uses exploration data to enable machine learning-based decisions.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 346
