Workers are boosting their skills during the COVID-19 pandemic. Melanie Burgess reports WORKERS are using downtime during the COVID-19 pandemic to focus on their career and learn new skills.
Whether the result of unemployment, underemployment or the inability to pursue their usual hobbies, many people have found themselves with a few extra hours in their week.
An exclusive survey of 1025 Australians by Dynata reveals about one in five have used downtime to gain new skills – 11 per cent re-skilled for their current career and 7 per cent for a new career.
While most of this group (50 per cent) did so through short online courses, about a third enrolled in TAFE or university and one in 10 pursued a trade qualification or ticket.
Human resources provider The Adecco Group chief executive Rafael Moyano says now is a good time for learning.
“With the pandemic driving unemployment to a 19-year high, and Australia entering its first recession in 29 years, upskilling and reskilling are key to staying ahead for many workers,” he says.
“We know that skill acquisition itself is a key motivator to people when considering their next career move and this is also crucial for those aiming to deliver more value within their existing roles.
“Digital skill shortages are among the biggest problems for many of our clients, especially as every four years people lose 30 per cent of their technical skills due to the environment changing so rapidly.” Danni Patterson, 31, whose university job in international education ended due to COVID-19, is studying a Graduate Certificate of Data Analytics. “Now is a perfect time to be upskilling,” she says. “It gives you something to focus on through tough times.” Younger people in particular are embracing the opportunity to learn. A survey of 2000 Australians by tech company DocuSign finds 67 per cent of Generation Z respondents (aged 18 to 24) are using this period to gain new skills.
This compares to 57 per cent of Generation Y (aged 25-39), 44 per cent of Generation X (aged 40-54) and 37 per cent cent of baby boomers (aged 55-64). Digio business analyst Nina Zivkovic has used her downtime to become an AWS Certified Cloud Practitioner.
Her role had been temporarily reduced to a four-day week during the COVID-19 shutdowns, so she put her spare day to good use.
“I had not done formal studies for a while either, not since my chartered accountancy (about 10 years ago), so this was an opportunity to jump back in,” she says.
Meanwhile, Indigenous Australian-owned Goanna Solutions is collaborating with Amazon Web Services to launch AWS re/Start in Australia – a free, 12-week, virtual program that prepares unemployed and underemployed people for careers in cloud computing, and connects them to potential employers. The first cohort began in June and more will start during the year.
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 477
