Leading independent, end-to-end IT services company DXC Technology is building on its Australia-wide successes by providing new pathways in the Territory.
It has brought its proven model to the Territory with regional head Steve Lindsay at the helm in charge of showcasing its best-in-class cloud, mobility, security services, application development and modernisation, IT services, workplace, big data analytics and business process services across a range of industries, such as banking, telecommunications, insurance, government and education.
DXC Technology managing director Seelan Nayagam says the company is passionate about the future of education in science, technology, engineering and math (STEM).
That passion flows to developing future industry leaders.
As an example he points to DXC’s partnership with the University of South Australia and the SA State Government.
“We have co-authored a four-year ICT degree that includes paid placements in DXC,” he explained.
“Additionally, our partnership with Tasmanian Technical and Further Education (TasTAFE) was designed to build a pathway for students to gain real-world experience.
“We see that working in the Territory.
“As part of the TAFE course, students complete a work placement program at a DXC Service Desk COE (Centre of Excellence) and train to the standards of a global IT outsourcing company.” DXC is proud of its graduate program and excited by the thought of now giving young Territorians a chance to be a part of it.
It takes pride in being the leader in integrating mission-critical systems and operations with innovative digital solutions to produce better business outcomes.
“Our Graduate Program is designed for talented, passionate graduates who are looking to join an agile world leader and are ready to deliver the best solutions to transform businesses in the new digital world through the power of technology,” Mr Nayagam said.
“We believe every graduate is unique and our aim is to help them build a solid foundation in your professional career, apply your learnings, and discover new possibilities.” The DXC Graduate Program is a 12-month program.
CREDIT: GARY SHIPWAY
Word count: 330
