So when her name popped up as chair of a lesser-known digital games company in Adelaide, it naturally sparked intrigue.
It’s one of “those weird ­moments where you actually aim high and get what you want”, Mighty Kingdom chief executive Phil Mayes tells Margin Call.
Ahead of plans to join the public boards, the private business tapped talent hunter MitchelLake’s managing director, Michael Solomon, to find the ideal chair.
The search started and ended at Guthrie’s virtual meeting with Mayes and Mighty’s chief operating officer, Tony Lawrence, both men said to have left the call “beaming”.
“We thought that was as good as it could get with her being well prepared and actually challenging us on lifting our goals. We were pretty surprised,” Mayes said.
“Her time at ABC is probably the most public and visible but she has what is incredibly hard to find in Australia — a mix of entertainment and technology experience through her roles with Google and others.”
Mayes was also impressed with how she allayed their fears about the increased scrutiny and demands on accountability.
“She said if I can manage to get through Senate Estimates, I can get you through shareholder meetings,” he said.
No doubt the senator Sarah Hanson-Young-chaired grilling over political interference in the broadcaster and circumstances surrounding her dismissal are singed into the former media lawyer’s memory.
This foray into gaming isn’t the first role for Guthrie post-ABC and the unfair dismissal claim that followed. She’s also signed on as director of performance technology outfit Catapult and Perth-based adtech start-up Hoppr.
Nothing if not diverse, how very ABC.
Covid fever pitch
Punters wanting a slice of the ­action from Australia’s hottest coronavirus success story — ­Ellume — might not have long to wait, with the Brissie-based biotech outfit working towards a sharemarket float by June 30 next year.
Ellume, led by emergency doctor Sean Parsons, has just received Federal Drug Administration approval for what is the world’s first rapid, at-home COVID-19 test.
Ellume is on track to produce 100,000 tests a day from next month and more than 250,000 tests a day by March next year.
The company, which is chaired by former coal entrepreneur and marina operator Paul Darrouzet, who is also an investor in Ellume, plans to manufacture and deliver more than 20 million COVID-19 tests in the first half of 2021.
So an Ellume IPO is one likely to attract interest.
In the last financial year, the company made a $17m net loss, which followed a $10.3m loss the year before.
All this prompted Darrouzet and his fellow directors to warn in the 2020 accounts that there was a “material uncertainty” that Ellume could continue as a going concern, before hopefully adding that the group’s prospects meant execs were confident enough to prepare the financials on a “going concern” basis.
Now that the FDA’s given Ellume’s COVID test the tick, that optimism seems justified, with boutique investment house PAC Partners advising on how a float should proceed.
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has backed Ellume with money in support of local manufacturing, but Parsons was quick to point out to Fran Kelly on RN on Wednesday morning that the Feds had been less than helpful.
The US government has helped too, injecting $US30m ($40.4m) into Ellume to accelerate the production of the tests.
At the end of August, the company issued $US10m in convertible notes to German science company Qiagen, which was on top of the $US15m convertible note issue to the group in November 2018.
That first note is repayable about this time next year or could see the international giant emerge with a major stake in the Queensland enterprise.
BHP shuffles deck
BHP has shuffled the spinners in its global comms deck, with VP of corporate communications James Agar winning a promotion to become the global mining giant’s chief buyer of paperclips, and perhaps the odd oil platform.
From January Agar, a familiar voice (and presumably face, pre-COVID) to the analyst community, will become BHP’s global head of procurement.
He replaces Sundeep Singh, who moves sideways as a result, to become BHP’s group business services officer — and no, Margin Call has no idea what that entails and, on current evidence, suspects most of BHP doesn’t either.
The shift confirms that Agar remains on track for a far more senior role at BHP, moving the 18-year BHP veteran back into a hands-on management role in charge of the company’s $10bn-plus procurement budget.
Agar started in 2002 as an accountant, and has served in its marketing teams before shifting to an investor relations role.
While Singh will remain with BHP, and at the same level, Margin Call suggests the latest shuffle might cause nervousness the next time the mining giant nominates a keynote speaker for Melbourne’s iMarc mining conference, which is rapidly becoming a bit of a plague on the heads of the nominee.
Last year, BHP went to great pains to profile chief transformation officer Jonathan Price, only to see the well-regarded executive depart the company in December, shortly after Mike Henry ascended to the top job at the miner.
Diane Jurgens, chief technology officer and another former keynote speaker for BHP at iMarc, departed in the same reshuffle.
A telling-off for Rex
Regional airline operator Rex is quickly learning if it wants to take on the big guns, it needs to lift its governance game.
Just hours after receiving final high-capacity approval from aviation regulator CASA for its soon-to-be-launched capital city flights between Melbourne and Sydney on Wednesday, another regulator delivered a separate knock to its expansion plans.
ASIC, under the stewardship of acting chair Karen Chester, told off the Lim Kim Hai-led group for it being the last to know of the airline’s foray into the domestic market in May, two days after deputy chairman John Sharp had told the media.
In a line reminiscent of many a parent’s lecture, ASIC noted the ability of companies to use a reduced-disclosure was a privilege (not a right) and imposed stricter disclosure requirements on any future capital raisings for the next 12 months.
Shares in the airline were promptly halted, at $2.03 apiece, pending its response to the penalty — including whether it will push for any appeal before the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.
Regardless, the move is probably just a hiccup as the $207m company sets its sights on rivalling heavyweight Qantas, and the now-privately held but reinvigorated Virgin under Jayne Hrdlicka’s watch, on key capital city routes.
Rex has already secured the backing of Asian private equity heavyweight PAG, and its chairman and chief Weijian Shan, formerly of TPG and JPMorgan.
The Asian group has pledged $150m in support of the domestic venture, with potential to hold almost half the airline’s equity on full conversion of its $1.50 notes.
Shan’s had a busy year, deploying a rumoured $2bn across PAG’s private equity division this year, but he has still had time to bash out his second book, Money Games, an insight into his deal (then with David Bonderman and Richard Blum’s Newbridge Capital) to rescue the Seoul-headquartered Korea First Bank.
The book is billed as “a riveting tale of one of the most successful buyout deals ever” and, while the investment in Rex may pale in comparison, Shan’s successful track record of buyouts may suggest there’s more to come.
Michelle Guthrie’s gaming gig
Ellume at fever pitch
BHP boost for James Agar
A telling-off for Rex
Word count: 1193
