Cricket Australia's national centre has revamped its approach and will have a more collegiate relationship with states and territories to avoid the "massive angst" that has endured between the parties.
As part of the fallout from the Longstaff report last year, it became clear state and territory cricket associations were angry that they had little say in the development of their next generation of talent.
The frustration grew because most states now boast elite programs and facilities of their own, including Cricket Victoria's revamped Junction Oval premises and NSW Cricket's plans for a new state-of-the-art facility in western Sydney.
Drew Ginn, the former Olympic rowing champion and now Cricket Australia's new high-performance chief, said "there was definitely friction" between states and the national cricket centre but there had already been change in the past year.
This meant a more cutting edge approach for the academy in Brisbane, leaving states and territories to provide their own training and development programs.
"The program has already changed in the last 12 months. It used to be that you would send your best talent up there [to Brisbane] for a long period of time," Ginn said.
"Coaches, domestically, have pushed back a little bit on that. One, because they feel they are now in a good place with their coaching staff to do it, so the states have been well resourced.
"So, for me, it's like why would we double down and do the same things? The NCC with [head coach] Troy Cooley will focus on producing world-class programs and they are short term, they are specialist programs, they are bringing states in with their players, they are pre-tour camps.
"But there are a heap of things we can do up there that others can't. We have the winter involvement that works really well, we have the data analytics area, in particular."
The NCC, particularly when it was based in Adelaide, has been a success but, like all development programs, it hasn't suited all players. Shane Warne and David Warner were famously booted out of the academy but graduates have included Adam Gilchrist, Michael Clarke, Jason Gillespie, Justin Langer, Brett Lee, Glenn McGrath, Ricky Ponting, Steve Smith, Mitchell Starc and Josh Hazlewood.
Amid recent overlap, players had also grown frustrated with the system, with some concerned about the layers of advice they were receiving. However, as Ginn states, all elite young players still want to be involved in the CA program.
"If we can turn the volume down, of voices around the player, and just make it really clear ... my thing is, coach development is essential in this country," he said.
"We should work together as coaches and high performance leaders but ensure the channel to the player is kept a fair bit cleaner and simpler and if a state can do the development work, what are we providing?
"The [tours] of India we are providing - a tour the states can't do but that might be a player we are looking to for the future, four or five years down the track, that we want to start having Indian tour experiences that when we go and do a series there, we are ready to go."
CREDIT: Jon Pierik
Word count: 536
