RETAIL
THE Australian grocery industry is on the cusp of its most competitive era “ever” as more players forge into the market, Coles managing director Steven Cain says.
And consumers are rapidly changing their behaviour and expectations as technology and alternative offerings up-end traditional shopping habits, the grocer says.
But Coles can prosper amid the disruption and grow sustainably for a second century, in part by being “customer obsessed” and becoming Australia’s most trusted retailer, Mr Cain says.
Unveiling his blueprint for growth at the nation’s second biggest supermarket chain yesterday, he said the industry was poised for an era marked by fierce competition.
“I do see the next five years in the grocery sector as the most competitive that we will ever see,” Mr Cain said.
The existing grocers in the Australian market were improving their offerings, new players were “coming to town”, and consumers — with changing demands and an increasing range of options — were “fragmenting” into groups, he said.
That meant “there is quite a challenge out there to maintain market share and grow profitability”.
Mr Cain said Coles would target $1 billion in cumulative cost savings over the next four years, and would not hesitate to close any unprofitable stores.
He was speaking at the first “investor day” hosted by the grocer since he took the reins last September.
His strategic update comes as German retail titan Schwarz Group prepares to launch Kaufland — a chain of big-box “hypermarkets” — in Australia later this year.
There is widespread speculation Schwarz will then introduce in this market sister grocer Lidl, a chain of discount supermarkets that generally have far less space than Kaufland stores.
Bryan Raymond, an analyst at investment bank Citi, has noted Lidl has historically followed Kaufland into each new market “after around five years”.
Mr Cain said that among measures to position Coles for a new era, the grocer would: TAILOR product ranges in each outlet according to local demographics, setting aside up to 40 per cent of floorspace for targeted products; OFFER simplified ranges focused on “essential items” for value-focused customers and more “foodie-oriented and convenience products” in stores where there was demand for premium offerings; DOUBLE its range of products online as part of its previously announced partnership with British online grocery specialist Ocado; RATCHET up its focus on house-label products to become an “own-brand powerhouse”, while focusing heavily on healthy products to position the chain as a “destination for health”; TAKE steps to become “Australia’s most sustainable supermarket”; and, MAKE better use of transaction data from the Flybuys loyalty program to “build a full picture of customer needs”.
The expectations and behaviours of customers were changing “faster than ever”, Mr Cain told investors.
“We will make extensive use of data analytics and artificial intelligence to ensure we are anticipating and fulfilling customer needs as they continue to evolve — we want Coles to be a truly customer-obsessed retailer.” Coles, which has been trading for 105 years, plans to make better use of technology and automation, and Mr Cain said he expected “further reductions in manual operations” throughout stores and the supply chain.
His comments come after Coles last week announced 450 roles would be cut from its head office in Melbourne.
The assault on the Australian market by Kaufland owner Schwarz follows the dramatic growth here of fellow German retailer Aldi, while US heavyweight Costco also has a toehold. Earlier this year, the Victorian government gave Kaufland planning permission for three stores in Melbourne, allowing the company to bypass usual council approval processes.
Kaufland is building a distribution centre in Melbourne’s north, and the South Australian government in April approved a Kaufland store for Adelaide.
Coles was previously owned outright by retail and industrials conglomerate Wesfarmers, but spun off into a separately listed company last year. Wesfarmes still has a 15 per cent stake in the group. Coles shares rallied 3.5 per cent yesterday, to $13.21.peter.taylor@news.com.au
CREDIT: PETER TAYLOR; ELI GREENBLAT
Word count: 662
