Shaw is in the final stages of putting together a women’s cycling team with an aim to be racing next year if everything goes to plan.
The 36-year-old, who currently runs Shaw Cycles in Ballarat won the 2010 Scody Cup in the national road series.
He also competed at the 2016 Tour Down Under.
One night last week, while watching the Tour De Femme (women’s Tour de France) with a bottle of wine, he decided to see if there was interest for people to fund a cycle team.
“The crowd funding aspect, which is more notably what it is called now, has always been something I’ve wondered why it doesn’t work better when you have so many people sitting on the coach wondering how can I get involved,” Shaw said.
“I think crowd funding is a way that allows a person to know they’ve directly assisted an athlete or a team.
“I just thought I’d go to Twitter and I’d ask my cycling fans, and followers that I do have, and their followers who share my content, whether they thought it was possible and how many would be interested (in it).”
Shaw was overwhelmed with responses as cycling fans and those involved on his Twitter page said yes.
Now he’s just a few steps from making it a reality after just one week of effort.
He’s almost raised $200,000 in initial funding, aiming to get to $400,000 overall to fund the team for a season in continental racing.
“We sit here $200,000 short of what we need but we have the components and the materials, and the clothing,” Shaw revealed.
“The core is there we just need to build the frame (for it) to stand up against.”
Shaw said one of the main reasons for doing it was the decline in Australian domestic teams and the lack of opportunities for riders.
It is going to get worse before it gets better.
“In the national road series we have 18 men and 14 women‘s (teams) and, of those, three teams do mens and women‘s programs,” Shaw said.
“As of next year four men’s teams and three women’s teams will not continue.
“It is a large percentage and they are all in the top 10 teams in the series.
“We are not losing the bottom tier of the series we are losing the top tier.
“So most of the riders are not going to have a ride.
“We’re really diminishing our capabilities to a) have access to talent and b) give them opportunities.”
Shaw said this new project would provide a platform for those talented riders, not yet recognised by Pro Tour teams, to get a crack.
He, alongside some others in cycling, who will be named in due course as part of the project, are currently looking for those in the 17-22 age bracket to join the program.
The team will have 12 female riders in the first team who fit those requirements.
Those successful would be getting opportunities to race without receiving a wage. However they would have almost everything provided to them to race in some of the biggest events in the world.
A Europe training program for a few months has also been planned.
“We’re trying to be the A-League of FIFA and hopefully these players will progress to the Premier League,” Shaw said.
“We want to win Australian titles and give them the best chance to do so, which will be in our local town of Ballarat next year.
“Our desire, if given the opportunity, would be to ride in the Tour Down Under in Adelaide as well.
“If we achieved a financial capability we’d be able to purchase a continental license and be on the start line in Adelaide.
“We’re just looking to drive capabilities and opportunities for the riders.”
Shaw was confident the riders involved would be future stars on the international stage, capable of winning medals at Commonwealth and Olympic Games.
All he needs now is more funding to make the project hit the ground running next year.
“I’m sure there (are) people out there with the money (to help),” Shaw said.
“Hopefully there is someone willing to support us and we can take the last step of announcing a name of the team.”
“It would be an exciting adventure.”
If you want to help Pat Shaw you can contact him on 0438860219.
Word count: 694
