NEUTROG Australia has raised more than $3m from new investors in what is understood to be the largest equity crowd-funding raise in Australia so far this year.
The Kanmantoo-based company, which raised the funds from 794 investors, with use the money to build a new laboratory and visitor centre.
The company, which makes products including Gogo Juice and Rocket Fuel, was founded in 1988 and is majority-owned by managing director Angus Irwin. It is profitable, and turned over $17m in FY21, having grown at a compound annual rate of 14 per cent over the past for years.
Mr Irwin said that while previous to the fundraising the company was regularly approached by potential investors such as private equity firms, the crowd-funding approach aligned with his and the company’s values.
“It was imperative to me that if I was going to invite investors into the business for our next phase of growth, those people needed to really understand who Neutrog are and be genuinely engaged in the ethos of our business – not just the bottom line,” Mr Irwin said.
Mr Irwin said Neutrog was very much a research-driven organisation, which would underpin its growth into the future.
“The strategic direction and growth of Neutrog has become increasingly evident through our commitment to R&D,” he said.
“Research and trials in our onsite laboratory and in the field, with R&D partners Elders, have well and truly demonstrated the capacity of products such as our soon-to-be-released advanced biological product POPUL8, to achieve outstanding outcomes in commercial applications.
“This has obviously become even more relevant with the mounting pressure on global fertiliser supply.” Nick Motteram, from equity crowd-funding company OnMarket, said Neutrog was a unique proposition in the crowd-funding space which was normally populated by businesses early in their journey. “The best part is that Neutrog undertook a crowd-funding offer for the right reasons – to allow their clients and supporters to become part of their business and their success,’’ Mr Motteram said.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 332
