IT is the final frontier of an epic mountain rivalry but Ford racing legend Dick Johnson is holding no sympathy for Holden before its final appearance at the Bathurst 1000 this weekend.
Holden will leave the Supercars series at the end of the year before the switch to Gen3 cars and the introduction of the Chevrolet Camaro.
Johnson said he would not lose any sleep over the fact Holden was headed for the exit after decades of fierce battles with Ford on and off the track.
“Absolutely not,” he said. “There are blue and red people out there everywhere and although it’s a shame to see the Australian part of it (Holden) disappear ... no, not at all.
“The thing about the Blue Oval is that it’s on every single car they ever made, except the Mustang. But the thing is, the Mustang is known to be a Ford. It’s iconic, it’s their flagship.
“General Motors, well, sure it’s a GM, but they name their vehicles Chevrolet, Pontiac, Holden and whatever. With Ford, it’s always been Ford.
“For us to go from the Falcon to the Mustang was an easy transition. But for Holden to go to a Chevrolet, even though they are the same company, I think that’s a big difference.” Johnson will become the first man to drive the Gen3 Mustang around Bathurst in a ­special unveiling at Mount Panorama on Thursday.
“My team and I have been racing Fords for more than 40 years,’’ he said. “We are very proud representatives of, and ambassadors for, the Blue Oval.
“We have been working ­extremely hard on making this car the best it can possibly be over the last couple of years, and to be the first person in the world to drive it after all of that work is fantastic.
“Any chance to drive around Mount Panorama is incredible, but to do it in Ford’s latest race car is an opportunity I simply couldn’t pass up.
“I can’t wait to drive the Mustang and see the fans across the top of the Mountain. It’s going to be very special.” The peoples’ champion will then create history with his DJR team when it takes the chequered flag for a record 1000th time.
That the historic bow will come on the famous Mount Panorama stage is fitting and deserved for a man and team that have helped shape the Australian motorsport landscape for the better part of half a century.
As a driver who often led races from the front, Johnson prefers to look forward rather than in the rearview mirror but with the Great Race looming and a record race tally in sight, he allowed himself time to reflect after crowd funding helped get him back on track following his famous 1980 Bathurst rock incident.
“It just shows the longevity of something that started off in a very weird way but ended up becoming a career which was always a dream but certainly never planned,” the 77-year-old said. “It was always a day-to-day operation. If it worked, fine, but if it didn’t, well, I would have to find a way to make it work.
“I stuck my neck out and fortunately it worked.” Johnson’s fledgling racing years began behind the wheel of a Holden FJ but he has become synonymous with Ford’s famous blue badge.
When his home-built Ford XD Falcon famously hit a rock while leading Bathurst in 1980, Edsel Ford and the Australian public came to the rescue to ensure his dream stayed alive. That watershed moment marked Johnson as a lifelong Ford fanatic and it’s in the brand’s Mustang that he hopes the team’s fifth Bathurst 1000 title will arrive on Sunday.
CREDIT: CALLUM DICK
Word count: 619
