SARAH Gun is a South Australian on a mission: to empower others, one woman at a time; and to reduce landfill, one house at a time.
I met Sarah 20 years ago, when she was finding funky ways to dress up and theme big event spaces through her business, GOGO events. She still does that – but these days GOGO events is a social enterprise with the primary goal of transforming the lives of marginalised women by providing them with a pathway to safe, meaningful employment.
More than 100 South Australians with complex barriers to work (from childhood trauma and homelessness to domestic violence and prolonged isolation) have been supported into the workforce in the past decade.
Those women have gone on to become everything from bank workers and bus drivers to university students.
Lovely! But what’s all that got to do with reducing landfill? Earlier this year, Sarah decided to clear out all the stock (think table decorations, bunting, chair covers and the like) accumulated by GOGO events over 20-odd years, by reducing 20 warehouse storage bays to zero.
What started as 800 cubic metres of stuff (equivalent to around two 10-tonne trucks) eventually became just ONE tiny shopping bag of rubbish in the garbage bin.
Everything was upcycled or recycled: circus theming, for example, went to the Clown Doctors at the WCH; and fabric went to the disability employment sewing service, In Stitches, in the Adelaide Hills.
That process evolved into another clever social enterprise idea. Why not create a business that helps elderly people downsize their homes, while also helping the environment? And so, UP by GOGO was born.
The UP team will help people move their treasured possessions from one home to the next. Anything no longer wanted or needed will be gifted, rehomed or recycled, with the aim of achieving as close to zero waste as possible.
“I want the process of moving home to be a loving one for people like my Auntie Patsy,” Sarah says.
“After pets, many elderly people worry most about their plants, so we’ll have the plants temporarily housed with community gardens while the move takes place. Everything that’s precious will be taken care of.” Homeowners will pay a fee for the UP service, to cover wages and administration, with profits returned to the GOGO Foundation to fund their work with vulnerable women. This idea tickles my pickle for four key reasons: 1) It has huge potential to reduce isolation, fear and stress for those elderly people without close relatives to help them downsize.
2) It will provide uplifting work for marginalised women, lifting up whole families.
3) It will boost stock for charity stores and fund vital charity programs at a time of rising cost of living pressures for families and increasing social issues such as homelessness.
4) It will stop so much clothing going to landfill. (Australians dump some 6000kg of clothing and textiles into landfill every 10 minutes, according to a report commissioned in 2021 for the Australian Fashion Council.) UP by GOGO is trialling four home moves in November. The homes are lined up, and they’re now crowd-funding to pay wages, collect data and manage the process ahead of a possible national rollout next year.
lainie.anderson@news.com.au Follow Lainie@anderson_lainie
CREDIT: Lainie Anderson
Word count: 545
