A HILLS fertiliser company is involved in one almighty stink with the Environment Protection Authority and residents over the “unbearable” stench of its rotting chicken manure piles.
The EPA has fined Neutrog for failing to produce a “satisfactory odour environment improvement plan”.
But the company blames the foul odour on the expansion of a wastewater treatment plant 2.5km away.
It is refusing to pay the $1092 fine issued on June 23 and has threatened legal action, it said in a statement to the media.
The company also pulled out of a community meeting, just days before it was scheduled to be held.
However, the EPA has “received no correspondence indicating that Neutrog is intending to commence legal proceedings against the EPA”.
But it’s not just the EPA that has taken umbrage at Neutrog’s operations. For more than 20 years, Kanmantoo residents have been complaining about the smell of chicken manure – one of the key ingredients in its garden mulch products.
Monica Spriggs says the smell emanates from Neutrog at least once or twice a month, sometimes “so thick you can taste it” and other times it can be “almost every day”.
“Sometimes it’s really strong (and) you can’t open up your windows in summertime,” she said.
The Kanmantoo resident said the smell could be “really bad” and had given her headaches. And she said it had stopped the family from inviting people to their home.
“We’ve had people come over and they’re like, ‘you’ve really laid it down thick today’ and we’re like, actually it’s just the wind,” she said.
Daughter Rivah, 5, said: “It’s not fun to play outside when it smells worse than Dad’s feet.” Neutrog Australia managing director Angus Irwin has pointed the finger at a wastewater treatment plant nearby, which is growing to the point of needing an EPA licence.
“The refusal of the council, community and EPA to acknowledge the other local odour source, in the form of a raw sewage treatment facility, has led to our decision to indefinitely suspend the current process and move the matter to the Development Court,” he said.
The EPA said Neutrog was required to “engage a suitably qualified odour specialist” to ascertain if any other sources were contributing to odour in the area.
“Neutrog has implied that the odour residents are reporting is from a wastewater treatment plant at Petwood operated by MACA Developments, 2.5km south of Kanmantoo,” a spokeswoman said. “This would be considered a low risk for generating odours as impactful or with the same odour profile as those described by the community at Kanmantoo and Callington.
“Previous odour specialists engaged by Neutrog had not identified sources of odour other than sources originating from the Neutrog site.” When EPA officers attended the wastewater treatment plant on June 1 and July 6, “no noticeable odour was observed leaving the site”.
Mark Catalano of Alano Utilities, which operates the wastewater treatment plant, said: “On our understanding of the issue, it is unrelated to our operations.” Community spokesman Peter Roberts of St Ives said the idea that the smell was coming from anywhere other than Neutrog was “rubbish”, and he felt for the kids who can’t play outside.
“Literally the stench is unbearable and in the summer months, more days than not in every month, you can’t go outside your house because of the stench,” he said.
“So if people want to have a barbecue and invite friends around you can’t do it, it’s just absolutely intolerable.” Ms Spriggs said Neutrog had grown substantially in the time she’d lived in the area and the smell had increased as well. “There needs to be more things implemented to stop the smell,” she said.
“You can’t mix the two smells between Neutrog and the wastewater plant just up the road.
“They are two different smells – one’s human and one’s animal waste.” In June, The Advertiser reported that Neutrog Australia had raised more than $3m from investors to build a new laboratory and visitor centre.
The campaign was understood to be the largest equity crowd-funding effort this year.
Neutrog, which makes products including GOGO Juice and Rocket Fuel, was founded in 1988.
In 2020-21 the company turned over $17m. Last year, Carl Vadivella Belle, a former Australian diplomat and specialist in Asian politics, urged Neutrog to change the name of its WhoFlungDung product because of “brazenly racist” connotations.
CREDIT: CLARE PEDDIE
Word count: 731
