When asked why she campaigns for the right to practise street gardening, Emma Cutting has a simple answer.
"I want my four-year-old daughter to grow up around nature and I know that it's possible to do that in the city," says Cutting, who lives in South Melbourne.
Cutting, head of community group the Heart Gardening Project, feels closer to that dream after the City of Port Phillip backed down from proposed restrictions to the planting of gardens on nature strips.
A petition the group started claimed the council's draft nature strip guidelines for suburbs such as St Kilda and Port Melbourne would have meant "the end of street gardening for the vast majority of residents". On August 3, after hearing those concerns, the council voted unanimously to introduce modified guidelines.
Cutting said the council decision was "fantastic" and was a big step forward for the Heart Gardening Project's big goal of creating the Melbourne Pollinator Corridor.
The corridor will support the movement of pollinating insects - including native bees, flies, wasps and beetles - across inner Melbourne by creating an unbroken green link south of the Yarra River from Westgate Park in Port Melbourne to the Royal Botanic Gardens in South Yarra.
A crowd-funding drive for the corridor that finished yesterday raised more than $30,000.
Cutting said after the initial eight-kilometre pollinator corridor is established, it would be expanded elsewhere in Melbourne. And she has had inquiries about starting versions in Adelaide and Sydney.
Cutting, a music teacher and keen gardener, who in the past suffered from chronic fatigue syndrome, said street gardening helped her get out and connect to the community.
"It's such a positive activity, it ticks so many boxes to do with improving mental health, greenness and liveability, and I've seen what it does for biodiversity."
In December she told The Age that the council's original specifications for distances between plants and kerbs, driveways, trees and services infrastructure would be too limiting. But Cutting said after negotiation with the community, the council's final guidelines would allow a lot more street gardening and preservation of existing plots. Cutting said she supported council restrictions to protect tree health, and also residents' accessibility and safety in relation to paths and roads.
Port Phillip Mayor Marcus Pearl said: "We have listened to our community and believe we have come up with the best possible way of greening our city through beautiful street plantings while not risking the safety of people with mobility or vision concerns."
Pearl said the council was looking into ideas such as de-paving to provide more space for street gardening and hiring a part-time community greening officer.
CREDIT: Carolyn Webb
Word count: 442
