Easier said than done but it is the pledge Craig and Larysa Williams work towards in their successful crowd-funding of medical and survival kits towards the war effort in Ukraine.
The hardest part has not always been getting the gear but prioritising what could save a life.
Needs shift conversations in the Williams household, often on the back of a call, text message or email from contacts in Australia, Poland, Ukraine and beyond.
When News Corp met with the pair, a shortage of needles for decompression on the Ukrainian frontline was front of mind following an Australia-wide search for a small but critical apparatus.
Without the said needle, a patient with collapsed lungs (air building up inside the air cavity) is unlikely to survive.
“It’s just a needle but costs a human life,” Larysa lamented.
They sourced 100 needles from a supplier who could guarantee timely delivery.
Enough supply to save 100 lives potentially, in a more tangible sense.
“This time we can get just 100, we can’t get more, not enough time,” Larysa said.
“We can’t do everything and that’s the hardest part.”
Larysa will head to Poland this week to complete the paperwork and approvals needed to cross the border into Ukraine.
She will be joined by champion jockey Craig and children Victor, 24, Olena, 20, Oliver, 13, and Summer, 10, once the bureaucracy is done.
Retired jockey Chris Symons has been enlisted to document the delivery of equipment into Ukraine.
Larysa is remarkably stoic despite her country’s plight, emboldened by the resistance effort.
“We don’t believe, we don’t hope, we know we will win … even though we are here, we want them (Ukrainians) to know we are helping them fight those monsters,” Larysa said.
“The first two weeks (of the invasion) we were broken, hopeless (then) we started to pull ourselves together and think how do we help and find the people to help.”
The first delivery, a secret midweek trip to the Poland-Ukraine border in April, primarily consisted of 92 Special Forces Trauma kits and a drone loaded into six suitcases.
News of the Williams’ mission, on their return, triggered an outpouring of donations.
Craig launched an appeal with a goal to raise $100,000 in six weeks.
He ended up receiving more than $300,000 in cash deposits alone.
The racing and wider industry has rallied behind the cause, with prominent owners, stakeholders and participants chipping in.
News Corp and Tabcorp raised about $6500 with a Warrnambool May Carnival tipping challenge.
“Every dollar goes to getting this lifesaving equipment to support the people over there,” champion jockey Craig said.
“We’re trying to look after the people defending the people that can’t defend themselves, with all the atrocities we see on TV and know that’s going on, we have to do everything we can to help support them.
“We’ve been overwhelmed by the generosity and support and now it’s up to us to deliver on our promise … we’re only a bit of conduit putting things together, facilitating and promising we can deliver it.”
The June trip is bigger and more complicated logistically, with nine travellers enlisted to carry the 37 donated suitcases filled with 200 trauma kits, 100 decompression needles, 50 survival packs and more.
The NATO-standard first aid kits will be shared between three resistance groups in Ukraine.
Each kit has the materials to save three lives, while the military-grade survival packs include fire-starters and water purification tools.
Cars bought to drive the equipment into Ukraine will be redeployed as mobile ambulances.
Experts in medical, military and logistics are the backbone of the collective, Craig and Larysa dubbed ‘Tim-work’.
“They provide all documents we need to make this as smooth as possible,” Craig said.
“Plus we have people who are trustworthy and professionals doing their part.
“I‘m glad they’re not jockeys, we’d be having big competition, they’re just the best at what they do.”
The project, realistically, has now got too big to be managed out of a home office, however, the “blueprint” is there for the ongoing support.
“I’d say from now on, with communications with companies and business people, the next step is away from Larysa and I, it‘s bigger than us,” Craig said.
Craig has juggled riding commitments, including interstate hit-and-run missions to Adelaide and Brisbane, and the supply chain.
“The Ukrainian people have given me strength, I’m so motivated in my job and I pride myself on doing my job well, I pride myself on making people’s days really happy and exciting, profitable or not,“ Craig said.
“With this project we can save someone’s life, it gives me a greater perspective, for me, perspective is a good pendulum.
“We’re overwhelmed to get to the target and save lives, rapt with the quantity … we can’t do it without everyone’s contributions.”
Craig and the children will spend nine days abroad, including five in northern Ukraine with Larysa’s elderly parents.
The trip was originally planned and paid for long before Covid – lest the current situation – for the Williams children to spend time with their Ukrainian grandparents.
Larysa’s parents remain “quite safe”, albeit housebound due to her father’s health, in a town which was bombed early in the conflict.
Stable internet, “thanks to Elon Musk”, has helped Larysa maintain regular contact.
“When it’s time to go to the bunker my mum cannot go, physically she can but her morals don‘t let her leave dad in the apartment,” Larysa said.
“She can’t leave him, she knows he wouldn’t be sleeping, they just close the windows and hope.”
Larysa has inherited her mother‘s resilience and strength, leaving husband Craig in awe.
“Larysa is more resilient and stronger than I am,” Craig said.
“It’s sad and upsetting, we get upset and cry, I can’t comprehend it, the raping and torturing of innocent people.
“Larysa keeps it pretty simple, she knows I get upset when I watch the stuff and she said ‘when I get upset, you worry, but at the moment don’t be worried’, she knows it upsets me more.”
There will be time for sentiment and reflection, but for now, Larysa is laser-focused on the job.
“In the family we have good cop and bad cop, bad cop is me,” Larysa said.
“If we can save a human‘s life, a fighter, they will save another life, it will be saved.
“Those soldiers have to be well and alive, if they are, they will fix it.
“They’re the heroes of the story.”
Word count: 1024
