The sobering words were spoken by a family spokesman of Bernice Prats seven weeks after the tragedy that claimed the life of the retired grandmother who died in a campervan accident.
“People say that you forget and you move on but you never forget,” family spokesman Ron Todd said.
“Everyone misses her and the children miss her desperately but you can’t change it, you just have to move on.
“It’s just one of those things, you don’t expect that day to be your last.
“It was such a massive shock, you don’t ever accept it but you leave it to other people to find out if anyone is to blame.
“It’s unexplainable.”
The 80-year-old former teacher’s aide was killed on May 2 on the Bruce Highway at Goolboo, south of Innisfail.
Following a police appeal for information, last week it was revealed the driver of the truck had been identified but no charges have been laid.
Mr Todd said he had heard reports of a car parked on the road shoulder and he understood the truck involved in the death of Ms Prats took evasive action to avoid the vehicle parked by the side of the road.
“Another person I knew drove past and saw the car and thought that was a silly place to park,” he said.
“It’s a 90km zone because there has been a lot of accidents there.
“Generally the roads in North Queensland are pretty basic because there’s not enough access to (overtaking) and in my view people take risks because they get frustrated and try to do something they shouldn’t do.
“Hopefully moving forward the roads improve but we don’t have enough people to pay the taxes to build the roads.”
Midway through the year, already 14 lives have been lost on Far Northern roads in a shocking 40 per cent increase on the same period last year.
Most recently, 80-year-old Innisfail grandmother Bernice Prats died after a collision with a truck in May.
The Far North appears to be over represented in statewide fatalities that as of June 12 it is reported that there are 136 road deaths.
And according to Department of Transport and Main Roads data Queensland, in the 12 months to May 31, this year recorded the third most fatalities in the country by averaging 5.69 deaths per 100,000 behind Tasmania and the Northern Territory.
In an update to the investigation into the road death of much-loved Innisfail grandmother, Bernice Prats police have revealed progress on the inquiry.
Ms Prats was killed on May 2 when the trailer of a truck collided with her campervan on the Bruce Highway at Goolboo, south of Innisfail.
“Queensland Police have identified all parties involved in the crash, including the truck driver,” spokesman told the Cairns Post.
“Investigations by the Forensic Crash Unit are continuing.”
Here we acknowledge the faces and stories behind the TMR numbers on a page in tribute to those taken too early in Far North road crashes so far this year.
FAR NORTH ROAD FATALITIES
JANUARY 19 – JEFF ALI
A Mareeba man who died after being struck by a truck at a worksite near Chillagoe is being remembered as a gentle, unassuming man who loved the outdoors.
Jeff Ali, 50, was killed when struck by a truck on January 13 on the Burke Development Rd.
Brother-in-law Steve Cosatto said the tight-knit Mareeba community was reeling from Mr Ali’s sudden death.
“I’m so impressed that such a quiet, unassuming man influenced so many lives, with many messages of condolences and people paying their respects,” Mr Cosatto said.
“He was genuine and reliable, if you ever needed anything, you just had to call.”
Mr Ali loved fishing in Gulf rivers and was a vintage car enthusiast.
He played soccer and loved camping, and was planning a long caravanning trip with wife Tania.
“He loved trail bike riding, and the outdoors, and that was one of things he loved about his job, he got to travel around Chillagoe and Cooktown,” Mr Cosatto said.
“He was a gentle guy – so many people have been absolutely devastated by his passing.”
Investigations by police and officers from Workplace Health and Safety are continuing and a report will be prepared for the coroner.
JANUARY 20 – SEAN MCMAHON
A core member of the Tinaroo Rural Fire Brigade Sean McMahon, 53, was remembered as kind and quiet “bushy” that would not hesitate to give you the shirt off his back following his death on January 20.
Mr McMahon was killed on Burton Rd Tinaroo when his car left the road and hit a tree.
Tinaroo Rural Fire Brigade first officer Les Green said Mr McMahon was a quiet, unassuming, community-minded man who was always willing to roll up his sleeves for his mates.
“We started (the fire brigade) in 1998 and in 1999 we only had about six members and Sean came along and asked if he could join,” he said.
“He did about 12 years of active service and due to family commitments he went to work for a big farming company and (recently) could not do as much.”
The sheet metal worker by trade Mr McMahon came to the Atherton Tablelands from Western Australia in 1997.
For a time the Channel Rd East resident worked at the Atherton hardware store and left for a job at another hardware supplies shop when the business was sold to Bunnings.
He then took on a role with Costa farming.
Mr McMahon’s ex-wife Colleen McMahon said he was the most beautiful, true blue Aussie man.
“He was a very special man, I have been so upset. We were very close, we never had an argument for 20 years. I loved him to bits,” she said.
JANUARY 25 – ANDREW BEAZLEY
The tiny Tablelands community of Irvinebank was left heartbroken by the death of Andrew Beazley in January when the young lad was killed in a motorcycle crash involving a truck.
The 14-year-old was killed on Herberton-Petford Rd after being hit by a truck on January 25.
Early investigations by police Forensic Crash Unit officers indicate the teenager came around a bend on the unsealed section of road and collided with a truck which was travelling in the opposite direction. Andrew died at the scene.
The sudden death of the mad-keen footy fan and motorcycle enthusiast has shaken the tight-knit community.
Lifelong friend of Andrew’s mother, Carly Wallace, said the teen was out riding his new motorbike when the tragedy occurred.
“Linda is a single mum of four Aboriginal kids, Andrew was her oldest boy,” she wrote in a crowd-funding description she set up to assist the family.
“Linda is one of the most kind and compassionate people in this world and this tragedy is absolutely heartbreaking for her and her family.
A controversial move by police to target mourners at the boy’s funeral on February 4 angered family members.
Police said they kept a heightened presence in the area for a period of a day “in the interest of public safety and enforcing Queensland OMCG legislation”.
MARCH 22 – COL THOMPSON
A close-knit Tablelands community mourned the tragic death of a pony club stalwart on March 22, well-known as one of the town’s greatest characters.
Col Thompson, 84, was killed in a tragic accident on Rankin Street while riding an electric mobility scooter.
A silver 2011 Mitsubishi Outlander was travelling in the opposite direction when the crash occurred.
He was initially transported to Mareeba Hospital as a precaution but later died in hospital.
Mr Thompson is being described as a true gentleman and “an inspirational man” by friends and residents of Mareeba following the news of his untimely death.
Mareeba councillor Lachlan Bensted said Mr Thompson’s influence on the Mareeba Pony Club had been profound and the region was saddened by his tragic death.
“It’s always sad when someone who has been a part of the community for so long passes away,” he said.
“He trained a lot of kids through the pony club, a lot of kids who went on to be champions in that sport and some Olympic competitors.
“So Col always had a great influence on people and he leaves a great legacy.”
Friend Trishalee Moore said Mr Thompson was an “inspirational man”.
“Absolutely the most humble and inspirational man you could ever meet,” she said.
“He instilled respect and so many values in us all.
“Thank you Col for everything, may there be a nice cold beer waiting for you on the next side.”
MARCH 28 – DIWAN FATAL
A 39-year-old man died in a single vehicle crash along Cape Tribulation Road in Diwan on March 28.
Police said the initial investigation showed at about 9.50pm the car was travelling in Diwan and crashed in to a fixed road sign.
The 39-year-old man from Diwan was the only person in the car and was found dead at the site.
MARCH 28 – IAN MARTIN
A man who single-handedly resurrected one of the Tablelands’ largest industries in the late 1900s has been identified as the victim of a fatal crash on Malanda Atherton Rd.
Atherton man Ian Martin, 82, suffered critical injuries after his utility collided with a hatchback on March 28 at East Barron.
He was transported to Atherton Hospital where he later died.
Sadly, awaiting his arrival at the Kairi Research Centre was colleague Veronique Keating, who said she was still coming to terms with the tragic news.
“Ian was on holidays last week, and he was supposed to be coming back to work,” Ms Keating said.
Mr Martin moved to the Tablelands in the ’60s after graduating from an agriculture college in Brisbane, and helped resurrect the region’s maize industry.
Growers at the time were facing diminishing yields due to disease, yet the produce was crucial for the region’s 400-odd cattle and dairy farms.
“Even after working with him for 20 years, I still couldn’t learn everything he knew,” Ms Keating said.
“He was always a nice person, very committed to his work and it’s hard to describe the feeling (of his death).”
APRIL 4 – STEVE OHL
Steve Ohl, 67 died on April 4 leaving behind four children and his 12 siblings, including younger brother and Cairns resident Lindsay.
He was remembered by his family as a “kind and quiet kind of bloke who was really good company.”
Lindsay Ohl remembered his older brother as his partner in crime, saying they “were attached at the hip” and “did everything together”.
“Like all families, we were closer to some than others, but I was born right after Steve so I thought of him more as my twin,” Mr Ohl said.
“He was a kind and quiet kind of bloke who would give you his last six pence if he thought you needed it.
“I’ve never felt so bad in my life”.
Speaking on behalf of the family, Mr Ohl sent best wishes to the truck driver involved in the crash and thanked emergency services.
“Our hearts go out to him, he had no part to blame in this and we hope he recovers well,” he said.
MAY 2 – BERNICE PRATS
Innisfail grandmother, Bernice Prats was killed on May 2 when the trailer of a truck collided with her campervan on the Bruce Highway at Goolboo, south of Innisfail.
She was remembered as a spirited adventurer who experienced one of the most fulfilling retirements imaginable as an independent and capable woman following her tragic death in a multi-vehicle crash.
While Ms Prats had grown up on the Cassowary Coast, she had raised her family in Tasmania, where her two sons remained, while her daughter moved to Sydney.
She had married her high school sweetheart Laurie and later in life the couple had enjoyed their time together back in the Far North before Laurie sadly died from a heart attack about 15 years ago.
From there, Ms Prats’ journey was anything but that of an ordinary retiree whose active nature never slowed, according to family spokesman Ron Todd, whose late wife Nevis Todd was the niece of the “adventurer”.
“Amazingly capable woman, and she recently found a place at Innisfail but before that she lived out of her campervan for quite a period of time while travelling,” Mr Todd said.
MAY 24 – DEERAL FATAL
A witness to a tragic car crash that killed a Far North man on May 24 has described the harrowing phone call to emergency services and the gut wrenching wait for help to arrive.
Wangan resident Joelene Pitt-Baker was driving along the Bruce Highway near Deeral on Tuesday afternoon when she saw a car “flip and land” less than 200 metres from her.
In a dramatic account, the shocked woman immediately phoned triple-0 in a frantic effort to help save the life of the 61-year-old Innisfail driver, accompanied by other good Samaritans.
Tragically, the man died at the scene from his injuries.
“It was very tough,” she told the Cairns Post.
“I saw the car flip and land, it was less than 200 meters from my vehicle, and I rang emergency services as soon as I saw it flip.
Ms Pitt-Baker was tasked with staying on the line with an emergency service operator to give updates on the man’s conditions before paramedics could arrive.
She also relayed instructions to others and was able to provide vivid detail about what she saw.
“It was the first time I’ve witnessed a fatal accident, it was very confronting,” she said
MAY 25 – RODERICK HINKS
Former long-haul truck driver Roderick Hinks was found unconscious in the cab of his Ford ranger dual cab utility at the corner of Herberton and Walsh streets after clipping a road sign on May 25.
Nephew Brett Hinks said his uncle had a pre-existing heart condition but had the awareness to know the warning signs and to get his vehicle off the road.
“He would have started having a major heart attack and he had realised that and taken the sign out to get off the road,” he said.
The former owner of NT Car Carrying spent a lifetime on the road hauling his road train between Darwin and Adelaide before relocating from the Northern Territory to Mareeba about 12-years ago.
“He was a long time truck driver and a very good one, he was a good operator,” he said.
“He would push himself to get stuff done and to make sure he got across the line.
“And he was pushing to get stuff done that afternoon. But it was too much for him and this is what ended up happening.”
JUNE 7 – MARIO RACCANELLO
Mario Raccanello, 59, died on June 7 following an accident on a private property near Lake Barrine involving a front bucket tractor.
Mr Raccanello had only recently sold his farm at Tully and it’s understood he and wife Franca were in the process of moving north to phase into semi-retirement.
Close family friend and Tully pharmacist Raymond Evans said he’d known Mr Raccanello since their kids started primary school together, many years ago.
“He was a very good friend, a reliable, loyal and honest man who was larger than life,” Mr Evans said.
“He will be dearly missed. It’s very shocking news.”
Division 2 councillor Teresa Millwood who grew up in Tully also knew the Raccanello family with her brothers attending school with Mr Raccanello.
“He was very well-known. His mum was the Mayor of the Cardwell Shire Council, and they’re a very-well respected family,” Cr Millwood said.
Cairns Post where to get news
peter.carruthers@news.com.au
Twitter follow Peter Carruthers
Word count: 2474
