THERE’S soon to be a new entrant in the fast-growing equity crowd-funding space, with capital-raising under way to launch Swarmer.
A consortium of investors led by Enterprise Corporation – former senator Sean Edwards’ Adelaide-based corporate advisory firm – has bought the equity crowd-funding licence previously held by Crowd88 and has kicked off an “invitation-only” raise for a fast launch in the next couple of months.
The platform also has the backing of former Afterpay and PayPal executives, and already has a pipeline of companies ready to raise capital.
The equity crowd-funding sector is growing rapidly in Australia and is dominated by Birchal, which itself raised $3m on its own platform at a $48m valuation last week.
Birchal claims to account for about 75 per cent of the equity crowd-funding, by volume, carried out in Australia, with others such as Equitise and VentureCrowd also involved. The models vary significantly, however, with VentureCrowd offering investments in two property funds, while Birchal is focused on more traditional start-ups.
VentureCrowd also ran its own $3m capital raise in November last year, with a pre-money valuation of $21m.
While Birchal currently holds top billing in the sector, Enterprise Corporation’s managing director, Roseanne Healy, said the pie was growing quickly in Australia – following the UK and US trend.
Ms Healy, who is the founder and chief executive of Swarmer, said there was the ability to compete and contribute to the landscape on product differentiation. Swarmer is looking to develop the ability for secondary trade in company shares – something Birchal is also looking at – as well as other product platform and service innovations.
Swarmer’s price structure is similar to Birchal’s, which charges modest upfront fees to companies that want to raise capital. It then takes a 6 per cent cut of money raised.
Under legislation which came into force in recent years making equity crowd-funding possible, there are only 15 licences on the market.
The companies that raise money through the platforms have less onerous requirements around their pre-raise financial reporting as compared to listing on the ASX.
The platforms are designed to allow retail investors to invest in early-stage companies. Previously, that was only easily achieved by wholesale or sophisticated investors, or via managed funds.
The enthusiasm with which Australians have embraced investing in early-stage companies is evidenced by successful capital raises such as ZeroCo, which raised $5m with a parallel $6m investment from Square Peg, crypto company Coinstash which raised $2.8m from 1329 investors, and Bubble Tea Club, which raised $1.7m from 1399 investors. Birchal’s investment documents indicate that the sector in the UK has been growing at a compound annual rate of 20 per cent for the past four years, with more than Â£500m ($A881m) raised in 2020.
Birchal says funding hit $70m last year in Australia and could reach $500m by 2024. Swarmer is expecting to be profitable in its first year, and is aiming to launch next month with three companies ready to go.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 498
