Ablett Wines has joined forces with Austin’s Wines to release the 2020 limited-edition Gary Ablett Jr and Sr Family Collection.
The pinot noir will feature Gary Ablett Jr and the shiraz will display his famous father on the label. Every bottle sold is personally hand-signed. There are 2000 complete collections available.
Individual bottles are available for $299 each or both bottles for $550.
Ablett Jr said the opportunity to release The Ablett Family Collection alongside his father, was the perfect way to share and celebrate their collective football careers with fans of the game.
“When I first raised the Ablett Wines project with Dad, I wasn’t quite sure what he would say to be honest,” Ablett Jr said.
“After we started talking about it, we both felt it was a nice way to bottle and put a ‘cap’ on our respective careers, whilst at the same time sharing it with all the footy fans from around the league who have supported us over the generations.
“Together, we’ve been involved in footy for the past 36 years, and while we will always be drawn back to the game we both love, it is also nice to give a nod to what we achieved over the course of our careers.”
Belinda Austin, co-owner of Geelong-based Austin’s Wines, said it was too good of an opportunity not to partner with two of Geelong’s most celebrated champions.
“It has been such an honour to collaborate with the Ablett Wines team on their third release, and when two of the greatest players combine to produce this limited-edition collection we couldn’t say no.
“The wines we have been able to produce for the team are of exceptional quality and the premium wine together with two of the games greatest players will be an unrivalled combination,” Ms Austin said.
Along with the wines, you can also purchase 1 of 10 experiences up for the grabs with the two Ablett legends. There are five coffee experiences ($4495) and five lunch experiences ($6900) available.
The Ablett Wines Family Collection is now available at www.ablettwines.com
Geelong lags behind on solar power uptake
A renewables business is warning some regions are being left behind in Australia’s “incredible growth” in solar energy, claiming Geelong’s solar uptake is barely half of the national average.
Renewable energy broker Teho has crunched Census numbers and figures from Australia’s Clean Energy Regulator, finding just 15 per cent of houses in Geelong’s 3220 postcode have small-scale solar installations, compared to a national average of 29 per cent.
And the company’s Geelong numbers are more forgiving than data from the region’s power supplier Powercor, which showed just 9.43 per cent of homes in 3220 have solar systems.
“There has been incredible growth in the solar sector in Australia,” Teho co-founder David Green said.
RELATED: DEAKIN UNI OPENS 23,000 PANEL SOLAR FARM
“However, when there is incredible growth we also see some regions get left behind.”
“Often, when we see arrears with a low uptake of solar it is for two key reasons. Accessibility and understanding.
“In some regional and more rural areas just getting solar can be a challenge due to the lack of choice. Then when it is difficult to navigate and understand, we find a lower uptake of solar.”
The Teho warning comes after Powercor this month revealed there were more than 26,000 residential customers with rooftop solar access across the City of Greater Geelong and Surf Coast Shire.
Local Government area data showed Golden Plains Shire had the highest solar penetration across four local council areas in the region, with 28 per cent of customers using rooftop solar, followed by the Surf Coast Shire (18 per cent), City of Greater Geelong (17 per cent) and Colac Otway Shire (14 per cent).
The power supplier last year revealed “unprecedented” demand for rooftop solar combined with ageing infrastructure in Geelong was leaving customers locked out from sending power back to the grid and accessing lucrative tariffs.
Infrastructure in some areas of Geelong had reached capacity and was unable to support new customers sending power back to the grid, Powercor acknowledged.
But, the provider was also moving to improve capacity by building new substations and upgrading infrastructure, proposing a $61m works program expected to unlock more than 95 per cent of solar exports that are otherwise constrained.
— HARRISON TIPPET
Flexible work holding back CBD recovery
Geelong workplaces are being encouraged to support the CBD’s COVID-19 recovery as more employees transition back into city offices.
The state government removed the 75 per cent cap on private and public office workers last month.
Geelong Chamber of Commerce chief executive Ben Flynn said he believed many businesses would still have a staged approach to returning to the office.
“We encourage those businesses to get workers back to the CBD,” Mr Flynn said. “I think there’s a long way to go to get into the level of traffic we saw pre-COVID, particularly lunchtime traffic.”
City of Greater Geelong director strategy, people and performance Kaarina Phyland said like many organisations, the city had moved towards a workplace model that combined office-based work and flexible arrangements for staff.
“City employees have continued to return to the office, since the return to office-based work was announced in early February,” she said.
“Daily attendance varies across departments and teams, depending on the requirements of the role and the needs of the community.
“Our community is at the centre of the work we do and we remain firmly focused on our role in leading the region’s COVID-19 recovery and continuously improving our customer service.”
A revised flexible work policy for the Victorian Public Service (VPS) was released in March, with a default starting position of three days a week in the office for full-time office-based VPS employees.
The government said the position would continue to be flexible and subject to relevant chief health officer workplace directions.
Transport Accident Commission head of people and culture Jane Barker said the TAC headquarters in Geelong was now available to all 1200 staff to use.
“As we are opening more desks for use across the building, we are seeing more staff take up the opportunity to come back into the office and collaborate in person,” she said.
Ms Barker said there was a desk-booking system in place.
“Like other VPS agencies, we have taken this opportunity to remodel how we work to best serve our clients and the Victorian community — while we’re encouraging staff to be increasingly present in the office we allow people to work flexibly where they need to,” she said.
A WorkSafe spokesman said the organisation would continue to follow government directions around density and capacity as more team members returned to its 1 Malop Street office.
“On average, the number of returning staff has increased 10 per cent each week, for a daily high of 350 and we look forwardto welcoming more team members back in the coming weeks,” he said.
A National Disability Insurance Agency spokeswoman said the NDIA established flexible working arrangements to support staff working from home throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, in line with state and Department of Health guidelines.
“Victorian-based staff are returning to offices, in line with those guidelines,” she said.
“The NDIA seeks to provide a flexible and productive environment for all staff, which includes providing the opportunity to request access to working from home arrangements.”
Rare Geelong whisky hits cellar door
The team behind The Whiskery is finally releasing a whisky.
The Bellarine Distillery’s Bad Boy Billy Australian single malt whisky is thought to be the first commercial whisky made in the Geelong region for almost 40 years.
The distillery’s cellar door, The Whiskery, has become known for its gins but producing whiskey was always the plan for business founders Russell Watson and Lorelle Warren.
“Since opening early 2018, the cellar door has proven to be a popular venue for visitors both local and far and wide, with our gin products now being sent all over Australia,” Mr Watson said.
“However, from the beginning the dream was to produce our own single malt whisky, made, matured and bottled on the Bellarine,”
Keeping with the tradition of naming products after family pets, Bad Boy Billy was named after distillery dog Billy the staffordshire terrier.
Bellarine Distillery was established in 2015 with commercial production starting in 2017 when distillery manager Craig Michael joined the team with Mr Michael becoming a partner in the business with his wife Nicky in 2019.
Bad Boy Billy being a single cask release will produce a very limited number of bottles but the distillery has been constantly laying down barrels to secure greater volume releases in the future.
The first batch of Bad Boy Billy will go on sale at the Bellarine distillery website on Monday at 3pm.
– DAVID CAIRNS
The Ghan to start rare trip from Inverleigh
For the first time ever, The Ghan is coming to Victoria, with an exclusive train tour leaving from Inverleigh.
The one-off expedition will travel to Adelaide before making its normal trip to Alice Springs and Darwin.
The trip will be hosted by Gold Logie winner Ray Martin, and is the brainchild of Geelong Travel managing director Stuart Coffield, who has chartered the exclusive trip.
“Australians have a love affair with train travel and this is one of the world’s most unique trips,” Mr Coffield said.
“We’re seeing more of our own backyard while we are unable to travel overseas and so we’re looking for different ways of seeing Australia.”
Passengers will have the choice of 133 private cabins for the all-inclusive trip, which includes sumptuous dining and attentive service as well as a range of off-train experiences.
Martin said the trip would be his first time on the iconic train.
“I’ve seen so much of the world and the Australian Outback is up there with my most favourite destinations, but I am yet to have seen it by train,” he said.
“It’s been on my bucket list for a long time and I can’t wait to join the adventure.”
Packages go on sale on April 20 and are available from Geelong Travel on 03 5244 3666 or aussietrains.com.au
— JESSICA COATES
Inside resurrected Geelong milk powder plant
A spray drying milk powder plant in North Geelong is back on track to become operational this year.
The speciality milk dairy plant will be operated by Maeil Australia, a subsidiary of South Korean company Maeil Dairies, which bought the incomplete Corio Bay Dairy Group plant for $13.5m in January.
Maeil Australia re-engaged the principal builder of the stalled project, George Rydell Constructions, in February with construction of the building now almost complete.
It is planned for the plant to be in operation by the end of August.
Maeil Australia operations director Phil O’Malley said there was still some work to do on finalising process works and connecting building services before the plant would undergo comprehensive cleaning to make it fit for purpose.
“The hygiene clean will take a number of weeks, we have to make sure it is up to our standard before we start introducing any product,” Mr O’Malley said.
A handful of businesses were left with unsecured debts of about $12m when the Corio Bay Dairy Group venture was put into liquidation by joint venture partner Wattle Health, the only secured creditor, last year.
George Rydell Constructions was owed more than $4m and Geelong engineering, fabrication, security firms and trades people were among those caught out when work on the plant stopped with it about 70 per cent complete.
Mr O’Malley said all the major contractors on the original project had been re-engaged.
“When Maeil purchased the incomplete project, that was the agreed best outcome as they were the best people to finish the job,” he said.
Maeil Australia chief executive Tony McKenna said the plant, once envisioned as Australia’s first dedicated organic milk spray dryer, would be processing speciality milk supplies such as goat’s milk, organic milk and a2 milk.
“We are in the process of sourcing those milks from various suppliers
in Victoria and we are quite a long
way down the track in terms of
supply agreements,” Dr McKenna said.
He said the focus would be on infant milk powder formula and adult nutritional powders from non-traditional milk sources.
“We are looking at building a business here for Maeil Dairies, which services Australia, South-East Asia, and other exports markets,” he said.
About 60 per cent of the product is expected to go to export.
Dr McKenna said testing of the spray dryer was scheduled for early August before becoming operational later that month.
By the end of the year, Geelong-based Maeil Australia hopes to be employing about 25 full-time staff.
– DAVID CAIRNS
Behind the scenes of Blues Train’s survival
Hugo T. Armstrong is usually full-steam ahead.
But the animated music promoter pauses intermittently to draw breath and gather a thought or two as he recounts the rollercoaster journey of trying to save his beloved Blues Train,
It’s been a tough ride. And the anguish and tension of the year are still simmering inside.
While he has finally secured a COVID-Safe plan that will see the Bellarine Peninsula attraction back in business in October, the very thing that makes the Blues Train special, the uniqueness of the experience, is the thing that nearly forced it to the wall.
One of the most frustrating things is since it was founded in 1994 until COVID-19 closed it down in March last year, the Blues Train has been a successful venture, paying its way, employing staff and bringing people into the region.
But it didn’t fit any government model to reactivate in a COVID-safe way and the business supports for the arts were not geared to an enterprise like the Blues Train.
“We didn’t have a new business to create, we had an old one to save,” Mr Armstrong said.
And while grateful for the Federal Government’s JobKeeper program, that didn’t help with the fixed costs of running a business that was getting zero income.
“It’s not called BusinessKeeper,” he said. “There was, and probably still is, a misconception that somehow JobKeeper was paying your power bill or your public liability insurance, or your 50 per cent reduction in rent.”
Taking out a loan when there was so much uncertainty about the future of the industry didn’t make sense to him, so Mr Armstrong said he propped up the business by tipping into his savings and superannuation and, eventually, a crowd-funding campaign that has raised about $44,000.
At the start of this year, he set about negotiating a way to reopen under approved COVID-safe protocols but the Blues Train did not fit neatly into an industry template.
“I did not fit the event guidelines, the live music venue guidelines, the hospitality guidelines or the railway guidelines,” Mr Armstrong said.
He said the Blues Train was ruled ineligible for support for State Government funding for liquor licensed venues and was denied a Federal Government grant opportunity because the business was deemed “a non-creative enterprise, because we are a train”.
“We were in a really big world of pain,” he said.
The roadblocks prevented his ability to restart earlier this year and the clock was ticking towards the end of JobKeeper at the end of March.
With the plight receiving support from local MPS, and local and statewide tourism bodies, he said the matter was pushed before the heads of the Victorian Health Department and the Department of Premier Cabinet who were told that March 28 would be D-Day for the Blues Train.
The plan to restart the Blues Train involves having all the windows open, and while it will be October before that plan is workable, Mr Armstrong stressed to department heads that he needed to get money coming in.
”If I can get the tickets on sale, I can get cashflow coming,” he said. “Even though I hold the money in a trust account, I can borrow against it. I can show the bank that I am trading again, that I am not insolvent.”
Days out from D-Day, the Blues Train COVID-Safe plan, adapted from guidelines that apply to events, was approved.
Mr Armstrong described the withdrawal of JobKeeper for his industry as “financial insanity” with events and attractions needing to be kept alive to play their vital role in the resurrection of the tourism industry.
He will now take up a Federal Government-backed six month loan to get through to “The Blues Train Revival Concert Series” in October when, hopefully, people will be feeling more confident about having a good night out.
While the 54-year-old has a lot of hard work in rebuilding the business ahead, he now knows where he is going with the unique enterprise he has developed with the Bellarine Railway,
“I have something to work towards; for a long time you were treading water and trying not to drown.” he said.
Mr Armstrong said he had been fuelled by the knowledge that 6000 to 8000 patrons a year “want to come back on that train”.
“It brings a lot of joy to people, (pause) … so how lucky am I?” he said.
Blues Train tickets go on sale to the general public from May 4.
– DAVID CAIRNS
Word count: 2761
