Mariah Huthmann Grace, a mother of six, fell from the 22nd floor of an apartment in Surfers Paradise on Tuesday.
Police have confirmed to NCA NewsWire the 28-year-old mother’s death was being treated as non-suspicious.
John Grace told NCA NewsWire he was trapped in Adelaide’s six-day lockdown because of the coronavirus outbreak and unable to return to Queensland.
“Even if I made it to Queensland, I’d be in lockdown up there for two weeks at my own expense, which I can’t afford,” he said.
“I can’t ask my kids or their mother to hold out almost a month for me, I don’t see that as being right.
“I’m lost.”
Mariah was the third youngest of Mr Grace’s seven children.
He hopes to at least be able to watch his daughter’s Tangi, a traditional Maori funeral, via livestream.
“As long as my daughter gets a great send-off, I’ll be happy,” he said from isolation in Adelaide.
“I’ve seen many families over the past few months go through exactly what I’m going through, but I never thought I would be in their position.
“It’s pretty devastating, the loss of father, mother, son or daughter, but then, not being allowed to attend their funeral is a heartbreaking in itself.
“The stress and strain can be too much sometimes.”
A crowd-funding page, with a target of $10,000, was set up on Thursday morning by Mariah’s sister Che to cover the funeral costs, with $860 raised in the first hour.
“It is with great sadness that we announce on the 17th of November Mariah passed away, leaving behind her six beautiful children,” Che Huthmann wrote.
“We are absolutely devastated by Mariah’s passing and are struggling to find the funds to cover the cost of her funeral.
“We want to give Mariah the service she deserves to honour her memory and say our last goodbyes.”
Che wrote that no funeral arrangements had been made.
Mr Grace wrote on Wednesday about his loss and the pain he was going through.
“It is of a shattered heart that I announce the passing of my daughter Mariah Huthmann Grace,” he wrote on Facebook.
“I don’t know what else to say, my heart is broken. And my love goes out to my kids, Jamie, Fiona, Che, Lee-Roy, Jayson, Levi and Lawrence and to my kids’ mum Necia Amanda Huthmann.
“Kia kaha. Love Dad.”
Mental health support
Word count: 375
