ALTHOUGH many lawyers are used to spending their days in a courtroom, or working with detailed contracts, those are rare and daunting experiences for most. And dealing with the law can be complex, time-consuming and costly.
This has led to innovative approaches to funding litigation or legal matters, including using crowd-funding platforms such as Kickstarter or GoFundMe. We have seen a significant increase in third-party litigation funding in recent years.
These funding sources won’t suit all matters but can, in some cases, be valuable when it comes to covering legal costs. And they are subject to strong safeguards and a strict regulatory framework to protect the interests of those who make use of that support.
Lawyers in all states and territories use the Australian Solicitor Conduct Rules, developed by bodies such as the Law Council of Australia, to create a national set of conduct rules for lawyers.
They are largely identical across the country, but there are a few differences between jurisdictions.
Importantly, South Australia’s version has a unique feature in the form of Rule 16A, which requires SA legal practitioners to inform clients if and when they are eligible for legal aid. This can be from the Legal Services Commission, the Litigation Assistance Fund or one of various other schemes which deliver legal aid or legal assistance.
Lawyers are also expected to help clients make an application for legal-aid funding where that is available to them, and legal-aid providers must treat legal-funding applications confidentially.
This rule reinforces that lawyers have a duty to help with access to justice and to act in the best interests of clients.
South Australia has a complex network of legal-assistance schemes, each of which have different eligibility criteria. It can be of comfort to know that lawyers have a duty to help people avail themselves of these valuable services.
The legal profession operates with a primary duty to the administration of justice, is dedicated to serving the needs of clients, and is subject to many regulatory layers guiding the way that lawyers practise law to help ensure they meet the highest professional standards.
The solicitor conduct rules have been subject to ongoing review since their adoption so as to ensure they remain current and reflective of modern expectations. As part of that review process, SA representatives have suggested the Rule 16A obligation become part of the national rules.
Should that occur, it would be another example of SA leading the way when it comes to community assistance and increasing access to justice. REBECCA SANDFORD IS LAW SOCIETY OF SA PRESIDENT
CREDIT: REBECCA SANDFORD
Word count: 430
