Those planning to explore the region’s own backyard are in luck with tourism operators across the region reopening their doors following the recent easing of COVID-19 restrictions for regional Victoria.
Meanwhile, a new free online live music festival ‘The Long Weekender’, is set to hit lounge rooms on Monday featuring never-before-seen footage of some of Victoria’s most iconic festivals and musicians.
The state government announced the long-weekend festival on Friday, with $360,000 going to artists and festival organisers to air six hours of quality footage.
Hosted by music legend Myf Warhurst, the online event will take viewers through specially curated sets from festivals including Falls Festival, Meredith, Queenscliff, Golden Plains and A Day On The Green.
Sets will include from artists such as You Am I, Mo’ju, The Cat Empire, Frente!, Courtney Barnett, Magic Dirt, Teskey Brothers, The Black Sorrows.
Creative industries minister Danny Pearson said the online festival would provide direct relief to artists.
“Live music is such an integral part of Victorian culture and our artists and festivals are recognised right across the globe so jump online this Monday for your chance to see our world-class performers shine,” he said.
Viewers will have the ability to pause, rewind and fast forward the virtual festival between midday and midnight on Monday.
Timetables, reminders and livestreaming of the festival will be available at www.together.vic.gov.au.
Here’s a roundup of what’s on, what’s not, and the places and attractions you can and can’t visit this weekend.
What’s on:
• Torquay Farmers Market – Saturday
• Side Hustle Market South Geelong – Saturday
• Belmont Market – Sunday (operating outdoor stalls only)
• ‘The Long Weekender’ music festival – online
What’s not on:
• The Inn Jungle Giants DJ set – to be rescheduled to a later date
• Point Lonsdale Farmers Community Market
• National Celtic Festival
• Geelong Outdoor Living Show - rescheduled to January 2022
Places open:
• The Carousel
• The Potato Shed
• Geelong Gaol Ghost Tours
• Geelong Arts Centre (due to capacity limits, some events may not proceed)
• Live Wire Park
• Great Ocean Road Chocolaterie
• Geelong Regional Libraries (closed Monday)
• National Wool Museum gallery
• Otway Fly
• Searoad Ferries
• Jirrahlinga Koala and Wildlife Sanctuary
• Museum of Play and Art
• Bellarine Adventure Golf
• Geelong Art Gallery
• Bounce Geelong
• Great Ocean Road Mini Golf
• Rollerway Skate Centre
• Australian Surf Museum
• Port Campbell National Park 12 Apostles
• Werribee Open Range Zoo
• Curlewis Golf Club Mini Golf
• Narana Aboriginal Cultural Centre
Places closed:
• Bellarine Railway Heritage Trains – no return date set
• Port Phillip Ferries – set to recommence June 19
• Surf Coast Strawberry Farm – closed for season, reopening October
• Fairy Park – no return date set
— NATALEE KERR
Plan to bring wool plant to Geelong revealed
GEELONG will reclaim a slice of its history under plans to create a modern wool manufacturing plant in the city.
A company that makes woollen felt as a sustainable alternative to environmentally damaging polystyrene packaging wants to base a fully Australian supply chain in Geelong.
Planet Protector Packaging, which claims annual revenues approaching $5m, has scoured and processed the wool in China for the past four years.
CEO Jo Howarth said COVID-19 highlighted the country’s over-reliance on China and the company wanted to bring wool manufacturing back onshore as part of its mission to rid the world of polystyrene.
“I am spearheading the campaign to bring wool processing on Australian turf,” Ms Howarth said.
She said that as it used course waste wool, Planet Protector Packaging could not get it scoured in Australia and even if it could, there was nowhere to process it into the felt.
Planet Protector Packaging this week launched a crowd-funding campaign to raise $3m to fund the proposed Geelong plant estimated to create more than 30 ongoing jobs.
“We are looking at a facility between 3000 and 3500 sqm,” Ms Howarth said.
“It will have the very latest wool felting equipment that will enable us to have so much capacity that will be able to service the whole of the Australian market.”
The ”Woolpack” packaging not only replaces non-degradable polystyrene destined for landfill, but its insulating properties make it attractive for use by food and beverage, seafood and pharmaceutical companies.
A recyclable or compostable liner that encloses the wool is micro-perforated to allow wool fibres to breathe and create a natural cooling system.
Ms Howarth said Woolpack packaging gave sheep farmers another income stream and the company would source its wool for the Geelong plant through existing local players.
She said the company had more than 300 active customers in Australia and New Zealand and in four years had generated about $20m in revenue.
“People are now seriously looking for a sustainable alternative to polystyrene,” she said.
The Sydney company has applied for federal government assistance through the Manufacturing Modernisation Fund and the crowd-funding campaign is being hosted on Birchal.
— DAVE CAIRNS
Operators of famed lighthouse to walk away
A family who has run the Cape Otway Lighthouse for quarter of a century will walk away from the business at the end of the month.
The Bowker family said a disastrous tourism climate where visitation was down 70 per cent on the same time in 2019, and Parks Victoria’s unwillingness to offer a 10 or 15-year lease for the facility, was behind the decision.
The lighthouse will reopen on Friday after being shut due to the Covid lockdown and will open daily until June 30.
From July, 26 staff are expected to have a new boss at the facility which attracted about 180,000 visitors annually pre-Covid.
Regional Parks Victoria Director Jason Borg said the current lease was in place until June 2022.
“Should it be terminated early we will step in and manage the site to maintain local jobs and continue to attract tourists to the area,” Mr Borg said.
Lighthouse lessee Matt Bowker said he had sought certainty from Parks Victoria on the lease for nine months.
“We’ve given Parks Victoria so much notice. I said very clearly that we needed to know by the end of JobKeeper what’s happening because I needed to be making allowances that this thing was going to be losing money for a long time,” Mr Bowker said.
“(Parks Victoria) never ended up offering us a 10-year lease. Traditionally we’ve always been 50 per cent international (visitation) and 20 per cent interstate. They are both gone.”
Mr Bowker predicted ­international tourism to the Great Ocean Road wouldn’t return to 2019 levels until 2025.
He said the certainty of a long-term lease was needed due to the poor tourism climate.
It is understood the lease of the lighthouse has been promised to the Eastern Maar Aboriginal Corporation. Mr Bowker said he’d offered to train traditional land owners from Eastern Maar to run the business as part of lease negotiations.
Western Victoria Liberal MP Bev McArthur said the lighthouse was a “huge” attraction and, with 26 full-time staff, an important local employer.
“(It) has been run by the current lessees for the past 24 years,” Ms McArthur said.
“They have invested in the site over that time to provide a distinctive visitor experience for millions of people over the course of their lease.
“It is a huge attraction, bringing people from across Victoria, Australia and internationally.”
— CHAD VAN ESTROP
Regional Vic gets green light for Qld, NT travel
Geelong residents looking to escape the region’s cold snap will be able to travel to Queensland from Friday.
Queensland joined the Northern Territory on Wednesday by announcing regional Victoria would no longer be declared a coronavirus hotspot.
Under the changed guidelines Victorians from anywhere other than metropolitan Melbourne can enter without an exemption.
But other states have kept their borders clamped shut for now.
NSW is understood to be monitoring the Victorian outbreak and will reassess its border restrictions.
Western Australian chief health officer Andy Robertson said the state was in “constant contact” with Victorian officials and was pleased to see the situation improving.
“We continue to review the situation and, if matters continue to improve, will make a decision to reduce our risk level,” Mr Robertson said.
Meanwhile, many Victorians who had booked flights from Avalon to the Gold Coast later this month have had their flights rescheduled.
Jetstar is understood to have directly contacted affected customers and will continue to adjust schedules in line with border restriction changes
Under current restrictions Victorians cannot travel to the Tasmania or South Australia without exemption.
— OLIVIA SHYING
Full list of restrictions easing June 9 at 11.59pm
COVID rules for regional Victorians will ease further from Friday with greater capacity limits at public events and a return of community sport at all levels.
Visitors to homes will be capped at two adults and their dependants once a day.
Capacities at restaurants and cafes will be lifted to 150 people for seated service with a maximum of 75 allowed inside. The one-person-per-4sq m rule will still apply.
Masks will still be ­mandatory indoors and in outdoor situations where you can’t socially distance. Office caps will remain at 50 per cent as the government moves to introduce compulsory QR code check-ins for staff in coming weeks to allow for easier tracking of workplace Covid outbreaks.
Gyms and indoor sport will be allowed to reopen from Friday but capacity limits will apply.
Religious gatherings will be allowed to increase to 150 with no more than 75 people allowed indoors.
Funerals will be capped at 75 people with weddings limited to 20.
Visitors to aged-care homes and hospitals will only be allowed for limited reasons such as a birth or end-of-life visits.
Regional Victorians will continue to be allowed to travel around regional Victoria but not to metropolitan Melbourne for leisure.
Melburnians will not be allowed to travel to regional Victoria for at least another week.
A further $8.36m will be available in $2000 grants to businesses that need to remain closed due to Covid restrictions.
Acting Victorian Premier James Merlino flagged the regional-metropolitan border could be lifted late next week.
“Subject to the public-health advice through the next week, we expect next Thursday night the regional-metro divisions will come down and we will be able to travel more freely around the state again,” Mr Merlino said.
“This isn’t over yet and until we have widespread vaccination across Victoria and across our country, the virus will still be with us — so we cannot let complacency creep in.”
It is expected community sport and gyms in Melbourne will be allowed to reopen from next Friday.
From Friday other easings of restrictions in Melbourne will include offices returning to a 25 per cent cap while restaurants and cafes will be allowed to reopen for 100 seated people with a maximum of 50 inside subject to a venue’s floorspace. Retail will also be allowed to reopen.
In Melbourne 10 people will be allowed at outdoor gatherings and at weddings, face-to-face learning will return, 50 people will be allowed at funerals, and religious ceremonies will be capped at 50 people inside.
Visitors to homes in Melbourne will not be allowed.
Chief health officer Brett Sutton urged people with the mildest symptoms of Covid to get tested immediately.
“We’ve found cases in the community that we would have not otherwise found because people are stepping up to get tested,” Prof Sutton said.
“If you get tested we can drive this back to zero.”
The state recorded one case on Tuesday, which was linked to a known outbreak. The infected person had been in quarantine during their infectious period.
More than 28,000 Covid-19 test results were received on Tuesday. Overall there are 83 active cases of Covid-19 in Victoria.
— CHAD VAN ESTROP
The Geelong air unit aiming to take down Covid
A Geelong company is ready to start making next-generation air disinfection systems that offer a new line of defence against Covid-19.
Using proven technologies in an advanced way to kill airborne viruses, the Katharsis units have been pitched to the federal government as a potential game changer for quarantine facilities.
The C6 Group says the units can bolt on to conventional heating, ventilation and cooling systems without overloading them.
The company’s air quality expert, Steve Atkinson, said that based on mechanical performance alone, without their additional UV light and nanotechnology virus-killing properties, the Katharsis units achieved best-in-class results.
Mr Atkinson said the mechanical performance delivered the equivalent of putting an N-95 face mask on an airconditioning system, a filtration upgrade conventional systems had previously not been able to achieve.
“What we have with this unit is a pre-filter to protect the system, then we have got UV lamps and special catalysts activated by the UV which capture and destroy the aerosol,” Mr Atkinson said.
Scientific testing is still under way but the company is confident it has a world-leading product that combines proven technologies with nanotechnology sourced from Deakin University’s Institute for Frontier Materials that can defeat all airborne nasties, including Covid-19.
“This unit will take out airborne viruses, bacteria and fungi,” Mr Atkinson said.
“We have tuned it mainly for viruses, but if it kills the virus, it will kill the others as well.
“By combining it with the mechanical side, it’s basically something you can drop into an existing system and you don’t have to upgrade the rest of the system.”
He said by constantly filtering the air, the Katharsis units addressed the problems experienced in hotel quarantine, where viral loads built up and drifted into other spaces.
The C6 Group says other benefits of the units include eliminating odour and lowering carbon footprints by allowing heating, ventilation and cooling systems to operate more efficiently.
The C6 Group, an alliance between Geelong boutique engineering firm Workplace Alliance and GPS Electrical Services, is committed to making the units at its base in Corio.
Workplace Alliance managing director Wayne Allan said the company was ready to start limited production and could ramp up based on demand using a significant local supply chain.
The C6 Group is expecting to field domestic and international interest from major accommodation providers, residential and commercial property developers and cold storage and food processing companies.
It is accepting expressions of interest via katharsis.com.au
— DAVE CAIRNS
Road map plea to secure Geelong business future
Geelong leaders have called for a road map to provide a sense of security for businesses going forward, with changes to restrictions expected this week.
Geelong Chamber of Commerce chief executive Ben Flynn said a road map outlining how coming weeks and months could look for business would be “super important” for planning purposes.
“I worry the tail end of restrictions is a longer tail than necessary,” Mr Flynn said.
“So many businesses continue to be impacted by the finer detail.”
Regional Victorian hospitality venues are currently able to open for seated service only with a maximum patron cap of 50 people per venue.
Group sizes are capped at a maximum of 10 people and density quotients of one person per 4sq m apply.
Mr Flynn said the 50-person cap was “tough”.
“Increasing caps and decreasing per square metreage requirements would be great for hospitality and entertainment venues,” Mr Flynn said.
He said a lack of confidence in being able to book events was “heartbreaking” for venues.
Tourism Greater Geelong and the Bellarine executive director Brett Ince said he “definitely” wanted to see change to the hospitality cap.
“If distancing requirements are to stay at one per 4sq m allow larger venues to have more people … and then start to move to one per 2sq m again,” he said.
“Let’s start to reopen regional Victoria a lot quicker and hope we get back to parity with Melbourne.
“It’s so important to get Melbourne visitors down.
“We’re really calling on the government to provide a road map to give surety to business.”
Melbourne’s lockdown is expected to ease from Thursday night, while regional restrictions are expected to ease further.
Asked whether the government would release a road map, Acting Premier James Merlino said it wanted to provide “as much comfort and certainty” as is possible.
“We remain on track to later in this week announce … further easings of restrictions in regional Victoria and careful easing of restrictions in Melbourne,” he said on Tuesday.
He said Melburnians would still not be able to travel to the regions on the Queen’s Birthday long weekend this weekend.
“It remains the public health advice that for a period of time we will have different settings between regional Victoria and metropolitan Melbourne.”
Mr Ince urged locals to consider a staycation in the region over the long weekend to support the tourism sector.
“There’s definitely last-minute booking opportunities,” he said.
— TAMARA MCDONALD
Meal deal gives green cafe a healthy start
REGULAR subscribers to its home delivered meal service means a central Geelong cafe starts each week with cash in the bank regardless of rain, hail or Covid-19 lockdowns.
The weekly service, the result of a quick pivot 14 months ago when the state’s first major lockdown was imposed, has become a sustainable, long-term business at the Little Green Corner café.
With the hospitality industry again forced into takeaway only to tick over, the kitchen at the Little Ryrie St venue has been humming as the cafe’s Good Meal Project fielded extra orders.
Owner Hugh Whitehead is angry about the waste and toll another lockdown is taking on the industry, which also impacts his café, while recognising that it was also going to be a big week for home deliveries.
“Our model was built for this scenario; with people not being able to leave their home,” Mr Whitehead said.
Founded on core principles of being simple, local and sustainable, Little Green Corner received solid support for the Good Meal Project as soon as it was launched.
“What is really lovely is that many of our weekly subscribers who came on board from when we first pivoted, still continue to receive a meal,” Mr Whitehead said.
With traffic at the central city café still well down on pre-Covid times, the Good Meal Project now accounts for more than 70 per cent of the business, with about four out of five meals going to ongoing subscribers who pay upfront.
“It’s a phenomenal thing for a small business, and for a small business in hospitality, to have that consistent, genuine cash flow,” he said. “It’s part of our long-term business now.”
Initially catering almost exclusively to Geelong CBD office workers, the home delivery service has greatly expanded the cafe’s market to the Bellarine Peninsula, the Surf Coast and even to Colac and the Otways.
Mr Whitehead said an investment in Good Meal Project website has improved the engagement with customers, making it easier for them to manage subscriptions and easier for the business to manage orders.
“We have struck on something that is really good, but it is still a small business, there are still those balances that we need to be really aware of,” he said.
“It’s not a set and forget model. It requires a lot of customer engagement and social media interaction, to keep the flow each week.”
The business’s founding principles include a commitment to reducing waste and use of plastics, and Mr Whitehead said it had been challenging to find a suitable packaging solution and it currently paid a premium to have a compostable option.
But determined to remain an exemplar of sustainability, Mr Whitehead is pursuing the ability to offer reusable stackable Tiffin boxes but at the moment he cannot secure a supply that would work.
“If we can nail reusable boxes for the Good Meals themselves, it would be a game changer,” he said.
— DAVE CAIRNS
Stay Informed Geelong Advertiser
Word count: 3129
