A crowd-funded bid to challenge Victoria’s electric vehicle road-user charge has been lodged with the High Court, arguing the state lacks the power to levy the charge on constitutional grounds.
Climate change law specialists Equity Generation Lawyers has filed the claim on behalf of two Victorian drivers, Chris Vanderstock and Kath Davies, who are raising money through a crowd-funding site to pay their legal costs.
So far $4500 of the $120,000 target has been raised, with former Redflow chairman and tech entrepreneur Simon Hackett and high-profile company director and commentator Simon Holmes a Court chipping in $1000 each.
Both have also urged others to contribute via Twitter.
Victoria’s road-user charge, which is being emulated in NSW and South Australia, was introduced at the start of July and charges fully electric vehicles 2.5c per kilometre driven and hybrid vehicles 2c per kilometre.
The Victorian government has also earmarked $46m for subsidies for the purchase of electric vehicles, with the first round providing 4000 subsidies of $3000 for eligible, new zero-emissions vehicles.
Mr Vanderstock said on Thursday that the government should be promoting the take-up of electric vehicles, rather than taxing them.
“Instead of taxing clean technologies, the Victorian government should be concentrating on getting dirty cars off the road,” Mr Vanderstock said.
“Electric vehicles are cleaner and improve health and climate outcomes for everybody.
“Why is the Victorian government taxing electric vehicles when they have a demonstrable health benefit?” The lawyer for Mr Vanderstock and Ms Davies said they would argue the state lacked the constitutional power to levy the tax.
“In addition to the validity of the tax, our clients are concerned it’s also bad public policy,” Jack McLean said.
“It discourages everyday Australians from switching to lower-emission vehicles, prolonging our dependence on polluting oil.
“It’s bad for Victorians, it’s bad for the climate and we will argue that it is unconstitutional.” Think tank The Australia Institute says South Australia should delay the implementation of its own road-user charge.
“This EV tax has been a terrible idea from the beginning and now there is a serious legal cloud hanging over its constitutionality,” said Noah Schultz-Byard, SA director at the institute.
“This tax was rushed, poorly thought through and, if passed into law, will pull the handbrake on our state’s transition to the clean transport technology of the future. It would be foolish for the state government or the parliament to legislate this backwards tax while an identical policy in Victoria is being challenged in the High Court.’’ A spokesman for Victorian Treasurer Tim Pallas did not comment on the case but said the government was “investing in the future of electric vehicles and ensuring everyone pays their fair share to building and maintaining our roads’’.
CREDIT: Cameron England
Word count: 459
