THERE is no question, these are challenging times for South Australia. Even allowing for how well the state has adapted and coped with the onslaught of the coronavirus pandemic, SA is going to need leadership, imagination and energy to thrive in a post-COVID-19 world.
The 21 people across these pages will be at the forefront of creating a new SA. They have been chosen not only because they have already contributed mightily to the state but because their influence on the future of SA will only grow. They cover many fields, from politics and public service to business and philanthropy, sport and science.
1 Grant Stevens Could you make the argument that Police Commissioner Grant Stevens is the most powerful unelected South Australian since Captain John Hindmarsh rowed ashore in 1836? You probably could.
On March 22 last year, Mr Stevens, as state co-ordinator, declared a “major emergency’’ under the terms of the Emergency Management Act because of COVID-19.
The Act conferred extraordinary sweeping powers on Mr Stevens, which essentially meant he had the authority to direct the lives of every South Australian: where they could go, who they could see, the places they could eat and drink. Stevens could isolate and segregate people in the name of public health.
He would take advice from chief public health officer Nicola Spurrier and Premier Steven Marshall but the power resided in him.
Before COVID-19, the longest a public emergency had lasted was four days. But Mr Stevens’ low-key but serious demeanour in holding all this power won him the trust of South Australians, which has been a key ingredient in the state’s impressive battle against the global pandemic.
2 Nicola Spurrier The coronavirus pandemic has propelled Professor Spurrier from relative anonymity as the state’s chief public health officer to celebrity status.
She has become the public face of SA’s overwhelmingly successful battle to eliminate COVID-19.
Her calm, consistent messaging kindled confidence, leading to widespread public acceptance of social distancing, hygiene and other critical measures. Even though community transmission has been wiped out – at least for now – Professor Spurrier will continue to shape the lives of the entire state through her public health advice to authorities.
Her recommendations can set the agenda for lockdowns, business restrictions, event crowds, QR code check-ins, the number of guests allowed in private homes – far-reaching aspects of public and private lives.
There are no guarantees that a looming vaccination rollout will prevent COVID-19 transmission – meaning her huge influence will continue for some time.
3 Simon Birmingham The state’s most senior federal Liberal was judged SA’s most influential person in The Advertiser’s list of 50, revealed in February last year. Since then, the senator’s star has continued to rise.
In October, Senator Birmingham was elevated in Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s leadership team, becoming the government’s Senate leader.
At the same time, he was promoted from the trade, tourism and investment portfolios and handed the vital role of Finance Minister.
This puts him at the forefront of expenditure and Federal Budget preparations as the government deploys pandemic spending of historically epic proportions.
Importantly, the finance portfolio makes him “shareholder minister” for the government-owned ASC – responsible for lucrative submarine maintenance.
This hands him a critical decision-making role in whether 700 jobs remain at the Osborne shipyard, to support full-cycle docking for the Collins Class submarine, or are moved to Perth.
His close relationship with Steven Marshall is bolstered by family ties – his wife, Courtney Morcombe, is the Premier’s chief of staff.
4 Steven Marshall Just days after Mr Marshall marked the second anniversary of his election as Premier, the newly formed national Cabinet triggered a widespread national shutdown to combat the coronavirus pandemic.
Effective from March 23, 2020, restrictions were placed on businesses including pubs, gyms, restaurants, cinemas and cafes. The pandemic has defined Mr Marshall’s first term in office and bolstered his case for re-election in March next year.
His adroit delegating of decision-making to experts has been politically popular but also created a heat shield in the event of mistakes.
Fortunately for the public, these have been relatively few. South Australians have, for the most part, been able to live almost as they would have before the pandemic. Armed with an MBA from the UK’s prestigious Durham University, Mr Marshall is driven by evidence, data and a desire to remake the state’s economy.
The pandemic has honed his political skill, which previously was, at times, lacking.
The Premier has, on occasion, displayed a ruthless streak to pre-emptively crush opponents’ arguments that would make his mentor, John Howard, quite proud.
5 Sanjeev Gupta Whyalla’s man of steel has had a few doubters since buying the town’s ailing steelworks in 2018.
British businessman Sanjeev Gupta was unknown to South Australians when he swooped in at the last minute to scoop up the assets of the old Arrium. But Mr Gupta has lived up to his word to restore the ageing steelworks and is predicting that it will now make a profit this year, a feat he admits he “didn’t think was possible’’.
But his plans for the region extend far beyond the steelworks. There is the 280MW solar plant at Cultana, with plans for 3000MW of $1bn of renewable energy projects in the pipeline.
Mr Gupta’s plan is to turn Whyalla into a new green hydrogen steel hub by 2030.
6 John Olsen After taking over as chairman of the Adelaide Crows last October, Mr Olsen is already moving with clinical efficiency to haul the club off the canvas.
He formally scuttled a bid to redevelop the Adelaide Aquatic Centre and is leading the process to relocate from West Lakes, with Thebarton Oval considered a favourite destination.
Change is sweeping the Crows – chief executive Andrew Fagan’s resignation was announced at the club’s season launch last month.
Mr Olsen, a hugely influential former Liberal premier, in August became the party’s federal president. He will spearhead the organis­ation in the lead-up to a federal election, which increasingly seems likely to be held in October or November. Mr Olsen was premier from 1996-2001.
He achieved international renown through almost seven years as an Australian diplomat in the US and as consul general in Los Angeles (2002-06) and New York (2006-09).
He was chairman of the Adelaide Oval Stadium Management Authority from 2014-18 and SANFL chairman from 2010-20.
7 David Lloyd Hammered by the pandemic as they were robbed of lucrative international students, universities are scrambling to overhaul their models of finance, research and teaching.
University of South Australia vice-chancellor David Lloyd is the state’s leading figure in this crucial sector, not least because he has engineered UniSA into a comparatively strong financial position and boosted its reputation.
Mr Lloyd is extremely well-connected in the political and business communities. He continues to champion the modernisation of SA’s economy, particularly through education and technological innovation.
Through his role as the Committee for Adelaide chairman, Mr Lloyd has been unafraid to enter civic debate – some Adelaide leaders shy away from this.
He last year helped knit together a summit of The Advertiser’s 50 Most Influential People in SA.
Following this, he proposed folding Adelaide’s three universities into two as part of an extensive tertiary education overhaul to drive economic recovery. Expect momentum to continue on the merger issue, particularly between UniSA and Adelaide University.
8 Tanya Hosch The current South Australian of the Year is a senior executive at the AFL, as general manager of inclusion and social policy.
Ms Hosch was the first Indigenous person, and only the second woman, appointed as a senior executive in the football monolith.
She attended Gilles Plains Primary and Enfield High schools and has spent her working life fighting racism – a cause which has new energy in the wake of the Black Lives Matter movement – and for equality.
Before working for the AFL, Ms Hosch was joint director of Recognise, a group seeking to have Indigenous people recognised in the Australian constitution.
While she has a natural interest in Indigenous issues, Ms Hosch is also responsible for increasing the diversity of Australian Rules football, making it welcoming to all sectors of society regardless of gender, disability, ethnicity or sexuality.
Ms Hosch has also overhauled the AFL’s anti-vilification policy and founded advocacy organisation the Indigenous Players Alliance.
9 Gabby Costigan There has been plenty of talk about the potential of more than $85bn in naval shipbuilding projects centred on Osborne’s shipyard.
This year, though, that starts to be realised as BAE Systems embarks on a massive hiring spree for the $35bn project to build nine frigates at the Lefevre Peninsula shipyard.
The scale of the super-sized sheds for steel fabrication, module building and ship construction dwarf those for the previous major projects there: the Hobart class air warfare destroyers and the Collins Class submarines.
BAE is looking to hire about 1000 people this year ahead of construction starting on the Hunter class frigates late next year.
After the nation’s first recession in almost 30 years, BAE Systems Australia’s jobs boost is hugely important for SA and Ms Costigan is the firm’s chief executive.
Much will also depend on Craig Lockhart, managing director for BAE’s Maritime Australia arm. Lockhart leads the Osborne shipbuilding team.
10 Peter Malinauskas There are only 13 months until the next state election and Labor leader Peter Malinauskas will be in campaign mode from now until election day, March 19, 2022.
But he is starting behind the eight ball. The most recent Advertiser poll shows the Liberals ahead of Labor, 53-47.
Mr Malinauskas also has to hope voters don’t want to reward Premier Steven Marshall for what has been generally regarded as his sound handling of the coronavirus crisis.
Mr Malinauskas was elevated to the Legislative Council in 2015, after almost a decade running the state’s biggest union, the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association.
The 40-year-old father of three has said he doesn’t believe the pandemic will be a factor in the election and has indicated he will fight on issues such as the economy, privatisation and education.
11 Darren Thomas The businessman is an example of how to not only bounce back from adversity but to create something bigger and better.
When Thomas Foods International’s Murray Bridge abattoir burnt to the ground at the start of 2018, it threw the future of one of the state’s most successful companies into doubt.
Indeed, Mr Thomas could have pocketed the insurance money, walked away and lived a comfortable life. Or he could have accepted the financial incentives offered by other states and left SA.
He did neither.
Instead, Thomas Foods, established by Mr Thomas’s father, Chris, decided to start again on a greenfield site about 10km out of Murray Bridge.
The soil was turned in December, signalling the start of construction on the new $300m plant, which is expected to eventually employ about 2000 people.
12 Sandy Verschoor The Adelaide city area was the hardest hit in SA by the pandemic-induced recession, suffering a 6 per cent jobs slump by the end of 2020, compared with a statewide 2.5 per cent decline.
Hospitality and event industries were hammered, as were businesses dependent on CBD workers who were now working from home. The challenge of reviving the city – economically, socially and culturally – is being led by Ms Verschoor.
Indeed, our CBD has bounced back better than most. The task comes as there is finally progress on North Adelaide’s dead zone, the former Le Cornu site. In December, developer Commercial & General unveiled its $250m vision for the O’Connell St site, and a joint venture between Adelaide City Council and a property company to spend $400m redeveloping the Adelaide Central Market Arcade was approved last month.
Ms Verschoor is also unafraid to court controversy, recently breaking ranks to write a column for The Advertiser which firmly put council mergers back on the agenda.
13 Nick Reade After more than six years as BankSA boss, Nick Reade this month became the state’s top public servant – the chief executive of the Department of the Premier and Cabinet.
He signed a five-year contract worth an estimated $625,000 a year – likely a pay cut. Mr Reade will be at the helm of Premier Steven Marshall’s bid to refashion the SA economy in the wake of the nation’s first recession in almost 30 years. He is charged with implementing government policy and running the public service – the state’s biggest employer.
Announcing his appointment last November, the Premier praised Mr Reade’s success in digital transformation and innovation. These will be deployed throughout this year and beyond as Mr Reade transfers his corporate skills into public service.
14 Sam Shahin The Shahin family is the state’s wealthiest and runs Peregrine Corporation, which generates more than $2bn in annual revenue and employs more than 3500 people.
Peregrine’s businesses include On the Run, Krispy Kreme SA, Smokemart and The Bend Motorsport Park. In recent times, Dr Sam Shahin, Peregrine’s executive director, has boosted his public profile, particularly to spur civic debate.
Traditionally, SA business leaders have shied away from the spotlight, so Dr Shahin has displayed rare courage to lead debate aimed at improving the state.
In February last year, he successfully challenged his counterparts on The Advertiser’s list of SA’s 50 Most Influential People to “put that ‘influence’ into action to serve country and state”.
This resulted in a summit organised by the Committee for Adelaide, at which Dr Shahin emphasised his desire for action, rather than another talkfest.
Expect the tycoon to deploy his significant resources and influence to keep the heat on in a bid to ensure the challenges facing the country and state are acted upon.
15 Heather Croall Ms Croall leads the event on which the incomes of hundreds of artists depend and thousands of people working in associated businesses rely.
The 2020 Adelaide Fringe snuck in just ahead of the nationwide shutdown triggered by the coronavirus pandemic’s first wave. The arts industry is desperately hoping this year’s event will continue that good fortune and succeed in the so-called new normal.
Much depends on Ms Croall, who has been Fringe director and chief executive since 2015.
Her record is impressive. Last year’s event, staged from February 14 to March 15, attracted an estimated 3.5 million patrons (a 2.8 per cent increase on 2019) and generated $21m in box-office value (an 8 per cent increase from 2019’s $19.5m). Long may it continue.
16 Vickie Chapman The first female Deputy Premier in SA history has been at the heart of driving the biggest legislative changes in the Marshall Government.
Many of these have been in social policy. The list of new and amended legislation she has championed includes updating abortion laws, abolishing the defence of provocation and toughening laws for killer drivers and in domestic violence.
Ms Chapman, who was first elected in 2002, has proposed banning election posters and introducing optional preferential voting.
It is expected she will this year also make another attempt to update prostitution laws and introduce legislation to allow assisted dying.
17 John Davis The man at the sharp end of one of what should be a building block of the state’s economy for decades to come.
Mr Davis is chief executive at Naval Group in Australia, which is responsible for building Australia’s $50bn submarine program.
It’s a program that is not without controversy and some powerful figures still want to see it scrapped.
Construction is not due to begin until next year and Mr Davis this year will be aiming to get all the program’s nuts and bolts in place to try to avoid the kind of controversies that plagued the Collins Class submarines for so many years.
18 Jack Buckskin A Kaurna man, Buckskin is at the forefront of significant advances in the preservation and honouring of Indigenous art, cultures and language.
He is a key member of the Aboriginal Reference Group for the $200m Aboriginal Art and Cultures Centre, to be built at North Terrace’s Lot Fourteen (the old Royal Adelaide Hospital site).
This is a centrepiece of Premier Steven Marshall’s agenda and will be the linchpin of the transformed site.
Mr Marshall has been keen to emphasise the reference group’s important role; when designs were revealed on February 1, he stressed that they had been developed in close consultation with the group to “reflect Aboriginal values and aspirations”. Construction of the centre is scheduled to start later this year and is due to open in early 2025.
Mr Buckskin is representing Kaurna people, along with Jessica Davies-Huynh, through the Kaurna Yerta Aboriginal Corporation.
He was named the Young South Australian of the Year in 2010, honouring his continuing efforts to teach and spread the Kaurna language, of which he is one of the rare fluent speakers.
19 Isobel Marshall The 21-year-old medical student is Young Australian of the Year. At school, a leadership conference inspired Ms Marshall and friend Eloise Hall to investigate the possibilities of social entrepreneurship.
They decided they wanted to tackle the subject of period poverty. So, in 2017, the duo started TABOO and raised more than $50,000 the following year through crowd-funding.
The money helped produce their social enterprise’s first sanitary pads and tampons – a step which the founders hope is just the start of their mission to improve the lives of girls and women around the world.
Profits from sales are committed to Victorian charity organisation One Girl, which helps disadvantaged girls and women, especially in Africa.
The TABOO sanitary pad and tampon packs are sold online and at Malvern IGA.
20 Simon Kardachi Mr Kardachi has done more than most to change the way Adelaide eats. The list of restaurants that have carried the Kardachi footprint over the years is as extensive as it is impressive: Press Food & Wine, The Pot, Nido, Maybe Mae, Shobosho, Osteria Oggi and Bread & Bone, just to name a few.
Mr Kardachi and his various associates have modernised and updated the Adelaide restaurant scene, with a flurry of well-executed ideas backed up with great food.
His latest ambition is to revive the old Rigoni’s site on Leigh Street, in the CBD. It has a working title of the Fugazzi Bar and Dining Room, and Kardachi has teamed up with MasterChef runner-up Laura Sharrad, her husband, Max Sharrad, and winemaker Justin Lane on the venture.
21 Nikki Govan The businesswoman is at the sharp end of influencing how SA’s future will look through her membership and guidance of a host of high-profile organisations.
Ms Govan has been chairwoman of Business SA for almost two years, helping steer the lobby group through the choppy pandemic waters. But more recently, she has taken on the top position at two bodies expressly designed to drive growth in SA post-pandemic.
Ms Govan is chairwoman of the government’s Events Advisory Group, which is charged with bringing new events to SA. The owner of the renowned Star of Greece restaurant with husband Doug, she is also heading up Adelaide City Council’s new Economic Development Agency. She also has a voice on the national stage as a board member of the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
21 AGENDA-SETTERS FOR 2021 Do you agree? Tell us who we missed or reorder our list of agenda setters at bit.ly/21agendasetters
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK MICHAEL McGUIRE
Word count: 3229
