THE battle for South Australia’s most marginal seat has ramped up, with newly declared independent candidate for Boothby Jo Dyer forced to defend herself against claims of hypocrisy for accepting anonymous donations via a crowd-funding website.
It comes after Ms Dyer previously criticised former federal attorney-general Christian Porter for accepting anonymous donations to fund a defamation fight against the ABC.
Ms Dyer, who recently said the receipt of such donations showed an “astonishing dereliction of ethics and accountability”, started a GoFundMe campaign that attracted contributions from about 80 anonymous donors within two days of its launch.
But the outgoing Adelaide Writers’ Week director said she knew the identity of the contributors and has committed to publishing them before next year’s federal election.
Ms Dyer was the leading advocate for an Adelaide woman who alleged she was raped by Mr Porter in the 1980s when they were both teenagers. Mr Porter has repeatedly denied the allegations.
He resigned from the ministry and announced he would quit politics at the election after he faced criticism over his legal funding, which he described as a “blind trust”. It is estimated he received up to $1m in anonymous donations.
“That Christian Porter asserts that accepting anonymous cash via a carefully structured trust is in any way acceptable demonstrates yet again the astonishing dereliction of ethics and accountability under this government,” Ms Dyer tweeted in September.
Senior Liberals have now accused her of hypocrisy.
“Jo Dyer pretends to be an independent despite having sought Labor preselection and won’t even hold herself to the same standard that she attacks others for,” one Liberal told the Advertiser.
Senator Simon Birmingham publicly savaged Ms Dyer’s campaign, tweeting on Tuesday she was “Labor to the core”.
But Ms Dyer denied any collusion, saying a 1999 tilt at Labor preselection was on the public record and she had not been a member since 2000 when she left the party “disillusioned at its direction”.
Ms Dyer said she had not received funding from entrepreneur Simon Holmes à Court’s Climate 200 organisation, but would not rule out accepting “some sort of support from them” in future.
“To reassure my anonymous critics: I am a supporter of full disclosure of all campaign donations and am happy to hold myself to that standard,” she said.
As of Tuesday night, Ms Dyer’s online fundraiser had attracted more than $34,000 in donations from nearly 300 donors. A spokesman for the Australian Electoral Commission said there were no laws prohibiting the use of crowd-funding platforms to collect political donations. PAGE 26: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: KATHRYN BERMINGHAM
Word count: 429
