IT’S a giant, 15m-tall Christmas present – but the History Trust of South Australia says Adelaide City Council's decision to hand it the iconic Santa is not in the spirit of giving.
History Trust chief executive Greg Mackie, who is also a city councillor, has branded the move to give the big Santa to the trust “disingenuous” and cost-shifting.
But that didn’t stop councillors voting – at a heated meeting on Tuesday night – to present the trust with the much-loved Santa statue.
The statue used to front John Martin’s department store in Rundle Mall and the Adelaide Central Market but now needs more than $120,000 in repairs and annual maintenance.
Mr Mackie initially moved a motion to have the council take responsibility for the preservation and display of the Father Christmas, which is about 60 years old.
But Cr Alex Hyde instead suggested giving the Santa to the trust – and his amended motion was carried by the council.
The structure needs $34,000 in repairs and costs another $90,000 a year to store and erect over the festive period.
Cr Hyde said the trust – a state government agency – would be better equipped to restore and maintain the heritage statue.
“St Nick ain’t in good nick … it’s approaching 60 years old and it needs a lot of TLC,” he said.
“We’re not experts in taking care of heritage items, but the History Trust are.” But Cr Mackie brandished the gift a cost-shifting move.
“To say that this was a disingenuous move on the part of Cr Hyde and the Lord Mayor would be an understatement,” he said.
“They’re trying to cost-shift it over from the city council to the state government.
“It is not the job of the History Trust of SA to be erecting and removing an object from a council-owned building – that is the business of council.” The trust may not be able to accept the gift, Cr Mackie said. “We have very rigorous processes, and it would therefore remain to be seen that it’s even viable for the History Trust of SA to accept this and rescue the council from its own ignorance,” he said.
But Cr Hyde said the council did not have the means to fund the big Santa. “If the History Trust don’t want big Santa and we can’t afford it right now, then I suggest we look into a public appeal, seeking sponsors and possibly even crowd-funding,” he said.
CREDIT: DIXIE SULDA
Word count: 414
