Fired-up seller goes to court claiming new firearm legislation is invalid
A GEL blaster store owner who closed down after the “guns” were declared imitation firearms is challenging the new regulations in the Supreme Court.
Peter Clark shut Tactical Edge Hobbies at Dudley Park on October 8, the day that SA Police announced gel blasters would be classified as imitation firearms.
The regulations meant that anyone who owned or sold gel blasters had to obtain firearms licensing and registration – the same law for paintball guns – or hand them in to police in a six-month amnesty period.
It was estimated there were 62,000 gel blaster owners in South Australia. Many firms warned the strict legislation would be a death knell for the industry.
Mr Clark has filed court documents asking a full sitting of the Supreme Court to hear his case and consider the validity of the new regulations.
In the documents seen by the Sunday Mail, Mr Clark’s legal team argues that a crucial section of the Firearms Regulation Act, which the Registrar of Firearms used to declare gel blasters imitation firearms, is invalid.
They say the section conflicts with the strict definition of a firearm set out in the separate Firearms Act.
Mr Clark has asked the Supreme Court to rule that both the section and the subsequent gel blasters declaration are invalid.
In a statement of defence filed with the court, the Crown Solicitor’s Office, on behalf of the Registrar and the State Government, argue the law is valid and gel blasters fall under the definition of a firearm. The Crown also argues Mr Clark would be able to continue running his business legally if he sought a licence.
It has requested the court to dismiss Mr Clark’s case and order he pay the government’s legal costs.
Mr Clark told the Sunday Mail that he had to let go of four staff members and had suffered significant financial loss since closing his store.
“I can’t see there not being a win for us (in court),” he said. “In fact, there is no argument to our argument, that’s why we’re quite confident with it.
“They don’t have the power to do what they did. It just needs the clarification from a judge, and for a judge to say ‘that is correct’.” Mr Clark said he also intended to seek compensation for his losses and those of other gel blaster businesses. Gel Blasters Association of Australia treasurer Chris Sinclair has backed Mr Clark, raising more than $22,000 to help with legal costs through crowd-funding.
CREDIT: DIXIE SULDA MITCH MOTT
Word count: 432
