A BAROSSA Valley resident is planning to use a legal technicality to get a tourist train back in operation.
Grant McDougall’s ambitious plan has captured the imagination of locals – but some say his dream is too good to be true.
Mr McDougall is crowd-funding for two 1955 Redhen railcars from Victoria. After securing the railcars, he will place them on the disused Barossa line. This, he says, will force the leaseholders to fix the ageing line due to a legal technicality.
The Gawler to Barossa section of the line, which runs alongside vineyards and rolling hills, has remained dormant since 2003.
The line’s reopening has been hotly debated among the community. Most recently, Light Labor MP Tony Piccolo formed a task force to investigate its return. It included the Gawler and Barossa mayors and a former chief executive of the Planning, Transport and Infrastructure Department.
However, Mr McDougall said the Barossa Tourist Train Task Force was destined to fail.
“They want the state government to operate the line, which it has no interest in doing. I plan to do it privately,” he said.
Mr Piccolo said the task force had never been interested in a publicly run railway and that the long-term goal was a privately operated service.
“I appreciate Grant’s enthusiasm but he’d be better off to work through the task force,” Mr Piccolo said.
“If there was a faster way to do this, I’d be doing it. There are a whole range of permissions needed and issues to resolve.” Mr McDougall, who grew up near the Gawler line, said once the railcars were on the line, the leaseholders of the line, One Rail, must restore it due to a clause in the lease.
“Once I have accreditation, it will be up to One Rail to fulfil their lease requirements and get the rail corridor up to an operating standard as required in the 1997 lease agreement its beholden to,” he said.
Mr McDougall who works in a Barossa hotel, plans to purchase the trains for $1000, crowd-funding their initial $4000 transport and wants them to take tourists between Adelaide and the popular winegrowing region.
While he has raised $2200, Mr McDougall says if they haven’t been moved by July, the vintage trains which serviced South Gippsland until 2014 will be scrapped. “People have been very supportive … and hopefully more people get on board,” he said. One Rail was contacted for comment.
CREDIT: JASON KATSARAS
Word count: 409
