WHEN Jay Marinis bought an old pub at Norton Summit nearly two years ago, his intentions were far greater than stripping back some daggy wallpaper and adding on-trend items to the menu.
The Scenic Hotel is the linchpin of a plan to improve the lives of people experiencing mental ill-health – and he’s now calling on the community to help get the next part of the project off, or on, the ground.
The Topsoil Garden Project will transform a 2ha patch of land opposite the hotel into a working produce garden and greenhouse, for nature-based therapies. Those involved will ultimately have the opportunity to sell the produce back to the hotel, and it will then be used in pay-what-you-can dinners for the entire community.
“So the participants get to grow the vegetables … make connection with the therapists and social workers, then if they so choose they can present what they’ve grown in a harvest dinner,” said Mr Marinis, a provisional therapist with experience in Adelaide’s hospitality scene.
“There’ll be optional hospitality trainings provided through the pub and kitchen trainings on how to cook the food that you grow.” Team Topsoil comprises Mr Marinis, social impact practitioner Rose Williamson, mental health nurse Laura Miller, gardener Lilly Stephens and project manager (and pub third part-owner) Enoch Yates. And they’re in the final days of a crowd-funding campaign to raise $46,000 to bring the initiative to life.
Ms Williamson, who met Mr Marinis while working in some of Adelaide’s better-known restaurants, says two years of isolation and stress as a result of Covid makes the timing of Topsoil vital.
The Scenic Hotel is already known for its inclusive nature, but the future long-table harvest dinners will magnify its potential, Mr Marinis says.
“You’ll sit where you’re sat – you might be a really wealthy person and you might get to learn something about somebody else,” he says. “It’s trying not only to provide participants with a platform to express themselves and find worth, but it’s also about everyone realising the worth of people other than themselves. It’s about making everyone aware that everyone has intrinsic value.
“Everyone has a place at the table.” Donations close on May 1. Visit startsomegood.com/topsoil-the-garden-project
CREDIT: JESSICA GALLETLY
Word count: 371
