A HOBART start-up courier service focusing on express delivery, which grew rapidly during last year’s pandemic, is set to expand interstate.
Rocketeer connects customers to a fleet of drivers via an iPhone app, offering high-speed deliveries along the lines of ride-sharing.
The 24/7 service first launched in June 2019 and will soon roll out across Melbourne and Adelaide, with plans for further cities to be added at a later date.
Co-founded by Mark Dance and Zain Khaishagi, Rocketeer has 942 registered drivers and has completed 70,000 deliveries in Tasmania, with an average delivery time of 41 minutes in the greater Hobart area.
Mr Dance said the company experienced 1000 per cent growth during the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, putting on as many as 30 new drivers a day.
He said Adelaide had been selected for the national rollout because of its similar geography and size and Melbourne was physically close.
“We’re doing it in a staged approach – we don’t want to go too big, too soon,” he said.
“Because of the nature of it, it’s just a matter of switching on postcodes for us, but we wanted to make sure what we were doing was working well.
“Most start-ups at this point are still running at a loss, but because we haven’t branched out too much, we’ve been able to fine tune and make a bit of a profit and reinvest it into the business.” Rocketeer services businesses such as supermarkets, bottle shops, automotive, hardware, florists and trades and keeps 15 per cent of each delivery made.
Odd jobs have also included delivering suitcases for crew from the production of TV series Rosehaven and a teleprompter for the Red Hot Chili Peppers gig in 2019.
Mr Dance said the backgrounds of their drivers were diverse. “We’ve got some people who drive full-time for us and others who might be a nurse and they have a big bill or are saving for a holiday, so they’ll come drive for a month for some extra money,” he said. A crowd funding campaign for the expansion, through online platform Birchal, ends in just under two weeks.
CREDIT: Jessica Howard
Word count: 359
