WHILE the bond between siblings is pretty special, in the case of fun-loving Ollie and Hunter, it’s something that’s cherished.
Brothers, Ollie, 3, and one-year-old Hunter have both inherited a rare genetic disease, with the younger boy’s diagnosis made just weeks after the devastating disorder was detected in Ollie.
The inseparable pair have Leigh syndrome, a rare progressive neurodegenerative, mitochondrial disorder that has no cure.
Mum Jess Sargent says while doctors haven’t been able to tell her or the boys’ dad, Daniel Roberts, how long their precious sons will live, they were advised to treat Christmas 2021 as if it was the last they’d all spend together.
“It is a fight against time … you always have this secret hope that (the medical experts) have got it wrong and that something will magically come along to make it go away,” Ms Sargent, 24, said.
The condition weakens the central nervous system with symptoms including a loss of motor skills.
“From the time Ollie was one we knew something wasn’t right … he would vomit up to 20 times a day, hadn’t learned to walk, then he stopped growing – instead of getting stronger, he was getting weaker,” Ms Sargent said.
It was just before Ollie’s birthday, in March last year, the diagnosis was made with follow-up tests confirming the couple’s worst nightmare; little Hunter had also inherited Surf 1 mutation.
She says despite their illnesses, both little boys are happy and “full of attitude”.
“They are always laughing and happy. They love socialising and want to be friends with everyone … they have a few hours at childcare each week and love it,” she said.
Due to the worsening nature of the illness, Ollie is most severely affected and is unable to walk and suffers from seizures. Baby Hunter is on medication to lessen his tremors.
“(Ollie’s) little body is just stopping to work … his bones are so weak that his legs are bendy.” The community is now rallying to raise funds to help make life for the family a little easier.
Spearheading the effort is family friend, Adelaide grandmother Helen Ireland, who has set up a page on crowd-funding site, GoFundMe, “Go Chop the Locks for Ollie & Hunter”. “My granddaughter Jasmin (Howarth), aged 16, has been growing her hair and waiting for a special cause to cut it for,” she said
CREDIT: REBECCA WHITFIELD-BAKER
Word count: 398
