THE construction watchdog has begun legal action against several union officials who have been accused of abusing contractors at the $123m Yatala prison redevelopment.
Construction, Forestry, Maritime, Mining and Energy Union (CFMMEU) representatives Wyatt Raymount, Alexandra Russell, Travis Brook and Desmond Savage are being pursued in the Federal Court by the Australian Building and Construction Commission (ABCC), following a series of on-site confrontations last August and September.
The ABCC claims the officials engaged in “abusive, derogatory and offensive behaviour” over three days, starting on August 30 when Ms Russell is alleged to have targeted a health, safety and environment manager, telling them they were “completely f--king useless, you are going to kill someone. Seriously aren’t you ashamed? It’s amazing how useless you are”.
As part of an ongoing push to prevent court penalties imposed on union officials from being paid through crowd-funding campaigns, the ABCC is seeking personal payment orders against all four union officials.
The officials are also accused of ignoring health and safety rules at the site. It is alleged that Ms Russell removed a safety barrier to enter an exclusion zone and refused to leave the area when directed to.
The ABCC alleges that the following day Mr Raymount and Mr Brook disrupted a concrete pour by raising a safety concern, and later told a site engineer, “I hope to God that something goes drastically wrong and gets people seriously hurt, I really do. Then we can take (the contactor) to the cleaners in court and you might learn your lesson”.
CFMMEU state secretary An­drew Sutherland said the un­ion was exploring its legal options. “This has been a project rife with serious safety issues, and yet again the ABCC would rather run a protection racket for dangerous builders and sue unionists for allegedly being impolite, than do anything to protect the lives of construction workers,” he said. The latest allegations follow a string of penalties slapped against the union and its officials for right-of-entry breaches on SA building sites totalling $2.239m.
In August, the union and six of its officials copped a record penalty for breaches of workplace laws, when they were fined $428,250 for refusing to show right-of-entry permits, ignored directions and bullied workers during the expansion of the Adelaide Airport in 2019.
At the time, Federal Court judge Richard White said past penalties did not appear to have had any effect on its conduct.
“The CFMMEU did not adduce any evidence of an intention to ‘mend its ways’ … to ensuring that its organisers comply with the law in the exercise of their rights of entry,” he said in his judgment.
Master Builders Association SA chief executive Will Frogley said “everyone deserves to be safe at work”. “Hard-working men and women in the building industry shouldn’t have to put up with bullying,” he said.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 473
