A $19M art museum could bring thousands more visitors to Kangaroo Island each year and address a lack of wintertime drawcards, the group pushing the project says.
Despite a knock-back from the local council, the Art Museum of Kangaroo Island Establishment Association says it will not give up on the project.
The association’s chairwoman, Kathie Stove, has lodged an application with the federal government for a $10m Black Summer Bushfire Recovery Grant, to launch the museum.
If came after Kangaroo Island Council voted not to provide a support letter as part of the funding bid, amid concerns about its proposed location and the group’s business case.
“We’re quite determined to get the museum because … it will be a transformational project for the Kangaroo Island community,” Ms Stove said.
The site would host major exhibitions and the works of local artists, and provide people an opportunity to see high-quality art without travelling to Adelaide.
“The project would be compelling at any time but, with the profound ravages of both the 2019-20 bushfires and Covid-19, Kangaroo Island needs beacons of hope for a ­future beyond simply the struggle for recovery,” the ­association’s business case says. It says the project would bring work for 80 people ­during construction, taking two years, and direct and ­indirect jobs for 70 to 120 workers once operational.
The group has already raised almost $200,000 in ­donations, grants and crowd-funding for the project, which would draw about 10,000 new visitors to the island.
Ms Stove said the organisation had identified Captain Morgan Park – on crown land under the council’s control – as the ideal place for the museum.
But she acknowledged the group may need to buy another piece of land. It also plans to apply for $5m in state government funding, with the remainder of the money coming from donations and loans.
Ms Stove, a writer, said she and other committee members, all local artists, pursued the project after their work ­featured in an exhibition that travelled to 14 regional galleries, but not Kangaroo Island, as there was “nowhere to put it”.
Kangaroo Island Mayor Michael Pengilly said the group’s proposal was tied to Captain Morgan Park, which the community wanted kept “in its present state”.
He said it was adjacent to Reeves Point, which held significance that “cannot be understated” as the site of the first settlers’ arrival.
Mr Pengilly also questioned the business case’s claim that the project had the support of 80 per cent of the community.
SA Tourism Industry Council chief executive Shaun de Bruyn said it supported the “incredible” proposal.
“It will tell the story of Kangaroo Island and it will enhance opportunities for visitors from all over the world that go there and have not just an experience that’s all about nature but about art and culture at the same time,” he said. Pierre Gregor, chairman of the island’s tourism alliance, said the group’s board supported the proposal in principle.
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE REGIONAL EDITOR
Word count: 497
