Zoo economics ZOOS SA play an amazing and important role in animal conservation, animal welfare, educating us and providing fantastic facilities for family friendly outings.
This is achieved through dedicated staff, sound management and tight budgeting. Zoos are incredibly expensive facilities to operate.
One can only assume that replacing an iconic, quality, local product with a questionable interstate substitute in their canteens is purely an economic decision.
If Zoos SA could indicate the amount of increase in profits this move is estimated to generate, perhaps someone could start a crowd-funding site which, in all probability, may generate more than this questionable decision is likely to generate.
BRUCE FARQUHAR, Hyde Park
Being Australian THE world is a place of uncertainty at present for all the reasons we know. I read Lachlan Murdoch’s speech to launch The Centre for the Australian Way of Life at the Institute of Public Affairs.
What an inspiring address.
The content to take hold of, and stay true to, is the course of what it means to be an Australian. It was a theme to reflect on and cherish. And not lose sight of what our values are.
And what we, as Australians, can evolve to be. It caused me to sit for a while and become optimistic for our future.
ALLAN AMBER, Mount Torrens
Political games SAMANTHA Maiden’s account of that end-of-parliamentary-term political back stabbing made depressing reading (“A back stabbing tirade to spoil a budget night”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
Such treacherous political skulduggery occurring on and around the Ides of March. All very Julius Caesar.
And, metaphorically, it’s happening across the gender divide, with both male and female pollies with their knives out menacing their political enemies in fulfilment of their political ambitions.
Who’d be a politician with all that skulduggery afoot?
No wonder they are under such stress.
They are all watching their backs. And well might they do so. TERRY HEWTON, Henley Beach South
Pristine coast SEAN Kennedy supports renegade hard right Liberal Senator Alex Antic’s call to once again encourage oil drilling in The Bight by suggesting we shouldn’t worry about the well being about 380km offshore (“Drilling support”, The Advertiser, Friday).
But this means a huge risk of spilling associated with dealing with deep water. Regular 6m-plus southwesterly swells mean a catastrophic spill would damage the fragile marine ecology of our gulfs and southern Australian coastline for decades to come.
DAVID HALl, Tranmere
Green vote BECAUSE Australia exports coal and gas many Australians, after seeing the devastation caused by fires and floods, must be considering our moral responsibilities.
Using coal and gas to produce energy causes climate change, which has produced many deaths across the world.
The question I ask is: Should Australia be selling these products? We cannot claim to be ignorant of the consequences. We have all seen them on our TV screens.
We have a federal election coming in May that offers a democratic choice. It will not be easy for many Australians to decide who will receive their vote, but there are many options available. I hope people will vote in a manner that can lead to an end to the use of coal and gas.
Providing a healthier and cleaner future for all children is a strong incentive. BRIAN MEASDAY, Myrtle Bank
AFL time out HOW long will it be before our AFL coaches get the chance to call time out during critical times of the game like in basketball?
Already our Australian rules coaches have adopted the game plan of having all players chase the ball from one end of the playing area to the other.
Remember those games where we had one-on-one battles of players to win their position?
Those were the days.
GARRY TURNER, Port Pirie
Word count: 623
