LET HIM GO (M) Never too old to do the right thing, US, 113 mins. In cinemas.
The last time we saw Kevin Costner and Diane Lane together on the big screen was as Clark Kent’s parents in the Superman flick Man of Steel. Now the veteran stars have been reunited to play vigilante grandparents in what turns out to be a very solid genre thriller set in the American west in the early 1960s. Costner’s George is a retired lawman, and Lane’s Margaret is his resourceful wife. Together, they make a pact to not only ascertain the exact whereabouts of their lost grandson, but also haul him back to a safe place his own mother and her new husband are in no shape to provide. A long and worrying journey interstate puts George and Margaret on a collision course with a set of outlaw in-laws who will not relinquish their grip on the child, and will do anything to keep it that way. Pacing and performances (especially Lesley Manville as the evil backwoods matriarch who is Margaret’s polar opposite) remain in the right zone throughout here, even if the storytelling sometimes strays from clarity. * * * 1/2
DAVID BYRNE’S AMERICAN UTOPIA (PG) What a stage he’s going through, US, 105 min. In cinemas.
The record shows David Byrne was front and centre for one of the greatest music concert movies of all time, 1984’s Stop Making Sense.
In those days, he was the driving force behind Talking Heads. These days, Byrne works in a self-defined space where the lines between recorded music, performance art and cultural commentary are erased, moved or blurred as he alone sees fit. It is in this space that Byrne’s most recent cross-media project ended up enjoying a short sellout run on Broadway in 2019. Luckily, just before its close, renowned director Spike Lee (Blackkklansman) was tapped to film Byrne’s show for posterity.
The end result? A brilliant music concert movie that lands in the same exalted company as Stop Making Sense itself. All you see is a squad of multi-tasking musician-dancers working through a repertoire of tracks sourced from Byrne’s solo output and his time with the Heads. However, what you feel is a total sensory overload, with Lee’s cameras moving through, around and above the activity on-stage with an exemplary eye for detail. Magnificent stuff. * * * * 1/2
HILLBILLY ELEGY (MA15+) Kid does it hard, movie goes soft, US, 116 min. In cinemas.
Whew. This is what can only be described as a hot mess. It feels as if it has been made by people who assume that multiple Oscar nominations will be coming their way, simply by virtue of the socially conscious raw material they are working with. While Hillbilly Elegy will probably draw a little awards heat – there is one stunning performance on its books – there is no doubting its contents are going to leave a lot of viewers cold. The movie is adapted from the best-selling 2016 memoir by J.D. Vance, which told of the author’s struggle to rise above a poverty-stricken background to get into Yale Law School. Unfortunately, a tone-deaf script offers little insight as to how the teenage J.D. (Owen Asztalos) was able to endure a hardscrabble upbringing without any lasting impairment. Instead, bad stuff happens on a consistent basis – usually because of his drug-addicted mother (Amy Adams) – and the movie glides from one unlucky break to the next. Worth a look only for the witheringly on-point support work of Glenn Close as J.D.’s tough-as-teak grandma. * *
MISBEHAVIOUR (M) Beauty queens met with an ugly protest, UK, 106 min. In cinemas.
Misbehaviour has a cracking true story to share with us: one that took place five decades ago, but is just as relevant today. Why the movies took so long to tell it is immediately apparent. What went down at the 1970 staging of the Miss World beauty pageant in London requires some nuanced explanation and a lot of information to be fired at the viewer. That is, if the movie is to be done right. And, for the most part, Misbehaviour conveys the political turmoil, the sexism, the racism and the utter absurdity of the event in all its garish glory. If you don’t know the full details of what transpired at Miss World that year, keep it that way until you see the movie. All you really need to be across is that a prototype version of what would soon become the Women’s Liberation Movement had a form of protest in mind for the live global telecast of the show that remains more audacious, daring and kind of silly than anyone would dare try today. Though a bit slow to get going, the heated finale proves well worth the wait. Stars Keira Knightley, Greg Kinnear, Lesly Manville and Gugu Mbatha-Raw. * * * 1/2
ALL MY LIFE (M) Walking an aisle in their shoes, US, 93 mins. In cinemas. Solomon Chau and Jennifer Carter had locked in the perfect wedding date almost as soon as they were engaged. August 21, 2015, gave them plenty of time to make all the crucial arrangements. Instead, that much-circled place on the calendar became the day of Solomon’s funeral. This unabashed weepie tells the sincerely moving true story of how this resilient couple didn’t let a worst-case scenario (Solomon was diagnosed with a terminal liver condition shortly after their engagement) erase their best-laid plans (a viral crowd-funding campaign ensured the couple got married before losing each other forever). While the movie is certainly nothing to write home about in terms of creative energies expended, its fundamental respect for a tragic, yet truly inspiring tale saves it from turning into manipulative mush. Likewise, stars Harry Shum Jr and Jessica Rothe share a graceful, yet grounded screen chemistry that helps convey what this committed couple went through to salvage a dream from a nightmare. Definitely bring a hanky, and tissues for backup as well. * * 1/2
CREDIT: LEIGH PAATSCH
Word count: 1008
