A closed border did nothing to slow Western Australia’s progressive pace. With doors open, Fleur Bainger reveals how the Wild West is ready to play
Six-hundred-and-ninety-seven days is a long time to see no one but your fellow statesmen. With the WA border finally, properly open, West Aussies are eager to welcome the rest of Australia – and the world – back to our country’s largest state and longest coastline. Tourism is perhaps the most excited sector of all. While some operators haven’t made it, others have thrived, refining their offerings, testing shiny new things or investing money into stellar experiences. Here’s a selection of the best new ways to get reacquainted with WA.
1  CRUISE WITH   SEAFOOD     Fancy kicking back on a 60ft     pleasure boat, glass of Margaret     River rosé in one hand, Rottnest Island scallops in the other? You don’t have to be a mining magnate to join this new aquatic dream. In January, South West Cruises launched its Taste of the Bays experience from the holiday town of Dunsborough. Greeted with cocktails, you coast to Margaret River’s picturesque cove, Meelup Beach, and dive into turquoise ocean so clear you can spot grains on the sea floor. Next, white tablecloths are flounced for seven courses of WA wine and seafood, followed by sunset. Yes, please.
southwestcruises.com.au
2 SEE DAM BIG ART The world's largest dam mural now coats the vast Wellington Dam wall, two hours south-east of Perth. Mega-mural artist Guido van Helten sprayed his last drop in February 2021 after camping in Wellington National Park for four months, rising at 4am with a headlamp to work. Reflections, a series of painted photographs depicting the community's connection to Collie River, stretches across most of the 34m high, 367m long wall. Van Helten used abseiling equipment and suspended platforms to access its curved surfaces. A connecting Mural Trail has launched in nearby Collie, as well as a network of mountain bike routes called the Wambenger Trails.
colliemuraltrail.com
3  CLIMB OPTUS   STADIUM     Scarfing a Mrs Mac’s pie isn’t the     only way to enhance your     experience at Perth’s glitzy sports stadium, judged the world’s most beautiful sports facility by the Prix Versailles 2019 architecture awards. Along with hosting the AFL Grand Final, Optus Stadium has another trick up its sleeve: a 42m-high rooftop climb that can be undertaken during games. Throw on a fetching grey jumpsuit then take 78 steps up for giddy views of the field. The HALO experience will soon be joined by a viewing platform jutting 5m over the roof edge, allowing harnessed climbers to lean out as if r)ecreating that Titanic scene.
theozone.com.au/experiences/halo
4   DO LEEDERVILLE   LANEWAY CRAWL     One of Perth inner city’s biggest     pubs, the Leederville Hotel     reinvented itself in late 2021, creating a craft beer microbar, a chic laneway restaurant, a courtyard of market umbrellas with a garage playground and a sizzling kebab window. Most are accessed via Electric Lane, so-named because the Leederville Hotel was the area’s first business to have electric lights, flicking the switch in 1905. Start your alley-crawl a few steps away, at another new opening, Naber + IIII. Its lively mirror-ball wine garden is the place to have pre-drinks and inventive nibbles.
theleedervilleprecinct.com.au
5 DISCOVER 50,000-YEAR-OLD ART A 700m boardwalk draws you ringside to a prolific area of rock engravings inside Murujuga National Park (formerly Burrup Peninsula) in the Pilbara. Previously, visitors would search in vain for the chiselled artworks of megafauna, fish, animal prints, symbols and people. Now, the Ngajarli Trail leads you to an estimated 10,000 rock engravings within this gorge alone. In all, the Pilbara landscape outside Karratha bears a staggering million pieces - the world's largest mass of petroglyphs. UNESCO World Heritage status is being sought.
parks.dpaw.wa.gov.au/site/ngajarli-deep-gorge
6  CROSS THE   NULLARBOR   EMISSION-FREE     You can now comfortably cross     Australia’s longest stretch of straight road in an electric vehicle, with the Nullarbor’s first charging station set up at WA’s Caiguna Roadhouse, 830km west of Ceduna. The eco-bowser doesn’t just cut the carbon cost of taking on the storied 90 Mile Straight, it earns its green credentials by recycling oil from the roadhouse’s deep fryers to generate power. BiØfil was paid for by a crowd-funding effort entitled, “The lap has a big gap”. BYO Tesla.
7  STAY OFF-GRID   AMID THE GRAIN     If staring over endless fields of     canola with no one else around is     your idea of bliss, drop a pin on Narrogin, in WA’s grain farming heartland. Heyscape’s off-grid cabins are positioned so their wall-window, which yawns beside the comfy bed, looks out on to wide landscapes absent of any signs of humanity. There are only two cabins in Wheatbelt, sharing 2000ha of farmland with grazing sheep and dark night skies. Each is equipped with a composting loo, gas stove, barbecue, and one has an outdoor bath plus doorstep access to an 18km mountain biking trail.
heyscape.com.au/wheatbelt-cabins
8 FLY HIGH OVER ESPERANCE There’s a handful of new ways to gawp at the mesmerising beauty of Esperance’s island archipelago: a newly opened 415m-long jetty, a freshly paved coastal bike and walking path ribboning along the Great Ocean Drive and recently launched, year-round scenic tours to Middle Island’s bubblegum pink Lake Hillier with Fly Esperance. Our pick, however, is to whip the winds with Helispirit, who set up on the town foreshore in late 2020. Take a 30-minute zoom over Cape Le Grand National Park – home to Lucky Bay, Australia’s whitest sandy beach with sunbathing roos – before landing on Woody Island, where newly kitted-out “luxury retreat” tents beckon.
helispirit.com.au
9  DAMPIER   CULTURE   REVEALED     The once-corrugated Cape     Leveque Rd became fully paved in November 2020, opening up access into Aboriginal communities and new tourism experiences across the Dampier Peninsula. Bardi Jawi woman Rosanna Angus follows the watery paths of her ancestors who rode the world’s biggest tropical tides on hand-hewn mangrove rafts. Her Oolin Sunday Island Cultural Tour uses dinghies, but the experience is no less exhilarating. Meanwhile, Bolo Angus weaves through marsh flats, tropical bush and mangroves in a family friendly drive-and-walk experience with Lullumb Tours. In addition, the region’s first Camping with Custodians site is set to open at Djarindjin in April, with 37 powered and 10 unpowered campsites.
djarindjin.com.au
10  SET SAIL OVER   NINGALOO AT   SUNSET     The only thing better than     swimming alongside a whale shark is spotting marine life from the hull of a luxury catamaran as it coasts over Ningaloo Reef by sunset. The vessel glides across UNESCO World Heritage listed coastline through whale shark and humpback whale-watching seasons (March-August, June-October). It catches the sun setting over the Indian Ocean as toasty reds glow along the rocky curtain of Cape Range National Park. Stars and tranquillity complete the experience ningaloodiscovery.com.au Scan the code to discover eight luxe stays to spoil yourself in Perth.
CREDIT: Fleur Bainger
Word count: 1133
