SHAYNA Jack’s drawn-out anti-doping case has finally been given a hearing date, with the appeal against her reduced two-year ban scheduled for June 28 and 29.
Jack’s appeal will take place through a video link, with the Australian swim star defending herself over two days in front of a panel of three arbitrators.
It is expected Jack’s defence team will again call on several high-profile witnesses to vouch for her character, including coaches and swimmers likely to be picked on the Dolphins squad for this year’s Tokyo Olympics.
A member of the Australian relay that set the current 4x100m freestyle world record, Jack is prevented from trying to make the team because her two-year suspension ends just weeks after the Australian trials for Tokyo, taking place in Adelaide from June 12-17.
The Queenslander was allowed to resume full training last week but faces being kicked out of the pool again if she loses her appeal, which comes almost two years to the day after she tested positive for the banned anabolic agent ligandrol at a national team training camp before the 2019 world championships.
Jack, 22, has always maintained she did not intentionally cheat and has no idea how the drug got into her system but her case is still ongoing.
Initially suspended for years by Sport Integrity Australia (SIA), Jack’s ban was halved to two years after she appealed to the Court of Arbitration for Sport, who agreed with her version of events that it was an innocent mistake after the levels found in her samples were so low as to be “pharmaceutically irrelevant”.
However, both the SIA and the World Anti-Doping Agency (WADA) appealed against the reduction, seeking “clarity on key anti-doping legal principles”.
That’s what will be decided next month although the verdict is not expected until after the Tokyo Olympics, prompting complaints from Jack’s supporters about how long and costly the whole saga has been.
Stripped of her funding, Jack has already spent more than $100,000 fighting to clear her name and launched a crowd-funding campaign to cover her appeal costs, raising over $50,000.
Before adjudicating on Jack’s case, the Court of Arbitration for Sport will hear Sun Yang’s case next week, with the verdict expected before the Tokyo Olympics.
Sun was banned for eight years for tampering with his samples before they could be tested for drugs but his high-powered international legal team won an appeal. It will be held from May 25-27 – also via video link – leaving the arbitrators just eight weeks to make their findings before the Olympics start on July 23.
CREDIT: JULIAN LINDEN
Word count: 435
