There’s soon to be a new entrant in the fast-growing equity crowd-funding space, with a capital raise under way to launch Swarmer.
A consortium of investors led by Enterprise Corporation – former senator Sean Edwards’ Adelaide-based corporate advisory firm – has bought the equity crowdfunding licence formerly held by Crowd88 and has kicked off an ‘invitation only’ raise for a fast launch in the next couple of months.
The platform also has the backing of former Afterpay and PayPal executives, and already has a pipeline of companies ready to raise capital.
The equity crowdfunding sector is growing rapidly in Australia, however is currently dominated by Birchal, which itself raised $3m on its own platform at a $48m valuation last week, closing the book on that effort in just over an hour.
Birchal currently claims to account for about 75 per cent of the equity crowdfunding by volume carried out in Australia at the moment, with others such as Equitise and VentureCrowd also involved.
The models vary significantly, however, with VentureCrowd, for example, offering investments in two property funds, while Birchal is focused on more traditional start-ups. VentureCrowd also ran its own $3m capital raise in November last year, with a pre-money valuation of $21m.
While Birchal currently holds top billing in the sector, Enterprise Corporation’s managing director Roseanne Healy said the pie was growing quickly here in Australia, following the UK and US trend.
Ms Healy, who is the founder and chief executive of Swarmer, said there was the ability to compete and contribute to the landscape on product differentiation.
Swarmer is looking to develop the ability for secondary trade in company shares – something Birchal is also looking at – as well as other product platform and service innovations which will be revealed at a later date.
Swarmer’s fee structure is similar to Birchal’s, which charges modest upfront fees to companies who want to raise capital, and then takes a 6 per cent cut of money raised.
Under the legislation which came into force in recent years making equity crowdfunding possible, there are only 15 licences on the market.
The companies that raise money through the platforms have less onerous requirements around their pre-raise financial reporting, as compared to listing on the ASX, and the platforms are designed to allow retail investors to invest in early-stage companies. Previously that was only easily achieved by wholesale or sophisticated investors, or via managed funds.
The enthusiasm with which Australians have embraced investing in early-stage companies is evidenced by successful capital raises such as ZeroCo, which raised $5m with a parallel $6m investment from Square Peg, crypto company Coinstash which raised $2.8m from 1329 investors, and Bubble Tea Club, which raised $1.7m from 1399 investors.
Birchal’s investment documents indicate that the sector in the UK, which is more advanced, has been growing at a compound annual rate of 20 per cent for the past four years, with more than Â£500m raised in 2020.
Birchal says funding hit $70m last year in Australia and could reach $500m by 2024. Swarmer is expecting to be profitable in its first year, and is aiming to launch in May with three companies ready to go.
CREDIT: EDITED BY CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 534
