Cooks & Bakers EP out of the oven
SINCE forming in 2018 and releasing the singles Don't Hold Your Breath and Cage, Newcastle indie-rockers Cooks and Bakers have promised to deliver something delicious.
On Friday they fulfil that promise. The five-track EP Out Of Touch was recorded almost a year ago in Sydney by former Treehouse Children frontman James Osborn and The Grove Studios' Jack Nigro.
"We've always released singles because when we released a body of work we wanted to have bit of a following behind it and we think we've reached a point where that's the next step," Cooks and Bakers bassist Nathaniel Duggan said.
"We wanted to take stepping stones in terms of reaching goals and progressing and we felt it was the perfect time."
On Out Of Touch Duggan and his bandmates Campbell Ross (vocals, guitar) and Finn Ellem (drums) have melded the influences of Nothing But Thieves, Holy Holy and Spacey Jane to create more space.
Despite COVID-19, Cooks and Bakers' popularity hasn't dulled. The band's last three 240-capacity shows at the Cambridge Hotel have sold out. Tickets for the most recent gig were exhausted in less than two days.
"We've been lucky to play two stand-up shows and it's completely different, it's just that much better," Duggan said. "That energy you can source from people up and moving is great."
Out Of Touch is released on Friday and Cooks and Bakers launch the EP at the Cambridge on May 29.
SMOKIN' HENRY SONG CLOSE friends Natalie Henry and Catherine Britt were enjoying a drink together one evening last summer when talk inevitably turned to songwriting.
Henry was going through a relationship break-up, which she described as "the hardest one" she's experienced, and was finally emerging out the other side. The secret to her recovery, Henry explained to Britt, was "weed, wine and women".
"I said something about the things that get me through the night," Henry said. "And she said, 'that's a great idea for a song', so we just started to write through the night."
The result was the honky tonk single Weed, Wine and Women, the first track from Henry's forthcoming second album, due in September.
The single has already attracted high-profile praise. You Am I frontman Tim Rogers described the song as, "grand-honky-tonk writ, sung and played with all the trouble and charm that the best has," and alt-country heavyweight Shane Nicholson said, "from post to post, it doesn't get much more authentic and believable than this."
The album was recorded in February at Rocking Horse Studios in Byron Bay following a successful $15,000 crowd-funding campaign and was produced by Britt and Michael Muchow.
Henry is the quintessential late bloomer. At 34 in 2016 she and her ex-husband Brock Henry released their debut album Cold Love as The Wayward Henrys and in 2019 she released her maiden solo record, Apple & Pride.
Henry said album No.2 is closer to the sound she's been striving for.
"It's really great when an artist finds that," she said. "It takes a long time. Sometimes it takes 20 years to find the sound. I've been doing this six years and I feel like I've finally found my sound."
Henry launches Weed, Wine and Women at a secret show on May 28 in Newcastle.
WOLLOMBI REVEAL NATALIE Henry will also be part of the returning Wollombi Music Festival on November 26 and 27.
After a year off due to COVID-19 in 2020 and a detour to Newcastle's The Station in 2019, the two-day exploration of roots, soul and blues music is returning to Wollombi's Laguna Hall.
Besides Henry, the first announcement also includes Shaun Kirk & The Swamp Stompers, Thirty Three Degrees and Two Tears In A Bucket.
YOU AM I SHOW ROCK legends You Am I release their 11th studio album The Lives Of Others on May 14 and their passionate Novocastrian fan base won't have to wait long to hear the new material live.
Tim Rogers and the lads are returning to the Cambridge Hotel on May 28.
The Lives Of Others is the Berlin Chair hit-makers first album since 2015's Porridge and Hot Sauce and sees the band return stylistically to their early 2000s era of Dress Me Slowly and Deliverance.
You Am I's last Newcastle show was at the Foreshore on New Year's Eve 2019.
BAD//DREEMS NIGHT BAD//DREEMS are also back on the road after COVID-19 and are heading to the Cambridge on June 4.
The Adelaide pub rock revivalists haven't released any new material since their third album Doomsday Ballet in 2019, but plan to use their upcoming NSW and ACT tour as an opportunity to road test material they've written for the upcoming fourth record.
CREDIT:
Word count: 786
