GENEROUS locals, community-minded businesses and a whole heap of goodwill is helping the Tailem Bend Netball Club recover from a huge blow.
In April, The Standard reported the Tailem Bend Netball Club was the victim of a sophisticated scam, robbing the club of more than $150,000.
The club had completed an upgrade to its old, damaged concrete playing surface, replacing it with a new surface and adding a fourth court.
Contractors had worked ahead of schedule to make sure the Eagles had a court to play on when the season started.
The club was then set to pay a contractor for work before foul play resulted in $153,780 being intercepted from the club with South Australia Police confirmed they were investigating after a sophisticated 'false billing' scam.
With a number parts of the upgrade still needed to be completed - including new lighting - the club was uncertain the work could go ahead.
However, Tailem Bend Netball Club committee member Leah Kowald told The Standard despite the club's financial hardship after the theft, local contractors were going "above and beyond" to continue to deliver upgrades.
She said the club was "overwhelmed" by the commitment some local businesses had shown to support the club during its hard times.
The club has set up a Go Fund Me page to help pay for the work and it has attracted the attention of national netball star Erin Bell.
"I had the pleasure of doing a netball clinic a few years ago at Tailem Bend and the people and kids were just awesome," she said on social media.
We had such a fun day so I am sorry to hear this news ... if you are a local SA business and can assist with fundraising let me know so I can pass details on.
"This club is doing all they can to ensure they can pay their contractors and also make sure their players can continue playing."
Tailem Bend Netball Club committee member Emily Edwards detailed the club's plight on the Go Fund Me Page.
"The excitement of our first nights training on our new courts was over-shadowed by the news that our money had not reached the destination and was gone," she said.
"With the situation yet to be resolved, we are left with the daunting task of trying to recoup the large sum of money we are still owing.
"We are working tirelessly on as many fundraising initiatives as we can manage however, we are a long way from reducing our debt.
"We are thankful for the patience of our local contractors Rivercity Excavations, Kowald Industries and Mike Bristow Electrical but we understand the effect this is having on their businesses as they continue to await payment."
The crowd funding effort has so far pulled in $2,015 of a $50,000 goal.
The club has been active in its fundraising efforts outside of its usual home game activities, selling doughnuts at the recent Tailem Bend Street Party and holding a Mothers' Day breakfast and raffle.
- Details: To donate to the recovery fund, visit au.gofundme.com/f/tbnc-recovery-fund
Subscribe to the FREE Murray Valley Standard newsletter which will be delivered to your inbox every Monday, at 12.30pm.
CREDIT: Dylan Hogarth
Word count: 534
