At racetracks, football and cricket matches, in socks, jocks and mascot masks, these daring dashers throw caution – and sometimes their pants – to the wind.
As well as highlighting an apparent lack of inhibition, these grinning streakers highlight some stellar work by security guards and photographers.
It also bears (bares?) mentioning that streaking is illegal, with offenders facing fines of $8000 or more.
NED-3269 Gold Coast Download Newsletter Banner
One streaker in Perth was looking at a $50,000 fine for invading Perth’s Optus Stadium, a penalty that folded in an offence of entering a quarantine zone.
So what prompts someone to risk fines, venue bans and embarrassment to strip off and run across a sporting field?
We don’t pretend to know – but we do have a lot of entertaining photos.
The Bulletin has decided not to include the names of these people.
In no particular order, let’s tackle them – starting with a local.
CROCODILE ROCK
This grand final rugby union game was between the Gold Coast Eagles and the Helensvale Hogs, so we’re not sure why old mate’s wearing a crocodile head, but at least he’s wearing something.
‘IT WAS WORTH IT’: GRAND FINAL STREAKER BREAKS SILENCE IN TELL-ALL INTERVIEW
ARTFUL DIVE
The grey mullet, the crusty foot raised skyward, the rumple of skin made by the security guard’s boot to the bum – this is a picture of more artful composition than should rightfully be expected from any photo on this subject. 11 out of 10 to photographer Clive Mason for this one.
NED-2822-GCB-APP
FEELING THE COLD
Wearing a scarf, socks and a smile, this guy knows it’s cold out there and he simply does not care.
SUPERSTAR STYLE
Remember that time Justin Timberlake accidentally-on-purpose exposed Janet Jackson’s breast at the Superbowl? This was not like that.
ALL BETS ARE OFF
This guy, who casually sprinted down the straight during a Gold Coast race meeting in little more than his shoes and fox socks was slapped with a $2000 fine and banned from Australian racetracks for two years.
He stunned racegoers when he jumped the fence and sprinted down the home straight as horses were at the barriers for a race at the Gold Coast Turf Club on September 20 in 2015.
The two-year disqualification included a series of bans, ranging from not being allowed to step foot on any racetrack in Australia to not being allowed to own a horse or place a bet on any horse race in Australia.
The man pleaded guilty to charge 175A under the AROR which states “any person who has been found guilty of conduct prejudicial to the image, or interest, or welfare of racing may be penalised”.
PAYING THE PRICE
This man was sentenced to three months in jail for this striking appearance at the State of Origin final in 2013.
He pleaded guilty to indecent exposure and running onto a playing field without authorisation.
The man, who was on a good behaviour bond for streaking at an NRL game last year, was also fined $2000.
PURE ART
Here’s another piece of pure art from Australia’s talented news photographers – the smiling cricketers, the flailing shirt of the streaker – the timing was perfect.
Special mention to the security guard for his Mortal Kombat-esque kick.
STREAK OF GOOD FORTUNE
This professional dancer streaked across the football field and into an offer of work with soft-porn mag Hustler back in 1996.
After being fined $650 for streaking across the Sydney Football Stadium – ostensibly to win a $10,000 Triple M radio competition prize – the woman also had an offer to pay her fine.
BIG BASH
These two cousins took streaking to a new level in 2017, crowd-funding $800 towards their fines before even whipping their kits off.
The pair, both of the Central Coast of NSW, evaded 20 security guards while sprinting across the ground wearing only their shoes before they were tackled at a Big Bash match in January, 2017. One even made a daring dash to the crease to remove a stump.
The cash didn’t cover it though – they were fined $2500 each.
STEALING THE SHOW
Here’s another one from the archives, taken from a pre-finals Geelong drubbing of Brisbane.
The female streakers did their best to upstage a moment when then-Lions later Suns midfielder Michael Rischitelli tore off Corey Enright’s shorts in a tackle.
The 34,000-strong Gabba crowd roared as Enright gathered a possession in his underpants while a Geelong runner frantically gave chase with a new pair of strides.
CROSSING THE RUBICON
OK, so this is not a sporting streaker. This guy decided to celebrate the opening of the new bridge to Chevron Island from the Gold Coast Home of the Arts, with a night-time nudie run.
“It was a historical occasion for the area, I lived here for a long time so I wanted to be part of it,” he told the Bulletin last year. “I thought if I couldn’t be the first to walk across it, I’ll be the first to streak across it.”
LEFT HANGING
Rugby legend Kurtley Beale left this streaker hanging went he went for a high five during the Australia-Uruguay Rugby World Cup match in Japan.
The man, clad only in a Wallabies jacket and sneakers, invaded the ground late in the contest and was able to run free before eventually choosing to return to the stands on his own accord.
Even once back among the crowd, there was no security in pursuit and it was initially unclear whether the man had been apprehended. Reports later said he had been taken into custody.
LAUGHING IT OFF
Barry Hall promised excitement in a one-off outing for his regional Victorian footy club The Basin in 2017, and the crowd got more than they expected — or perhaps wanted.
The 40-year-old AFL legend and reality TV star booted the first goal of the day and finished with four but his side went down by 46 points.
The highlight came after the final siren, when a local made a beeline for Hall wearing only his socks. Hall laughed it off.
CRAZY MOMENT
This streaker was working as a stripper at Adelaide’s CrazyHorse nightclub when she famously interrupted the 1982 Grand Final between Carlton and Richmond.
Tiger great Kevin Bartlett later blamed her for costing his team the game.
It would be 35 more years before the team would win a grand final.
Word count: 1015
