It was born in Hollywood but this television ‘baby’ has strong Australian connections, writes Lisa Mayoh
James Lafferty and Stephen Colletti know exactly what happens when a successful young actor’s bubble bursts. But rather than looking back at what once was, they are mining their own experiences for inspiration.
The pair, whose careers first merged on American high school drama One Tree Hill back in the early noughties, have shot, starred, produced and edited late coming-of-age comedy Everyone Is Doing Great themselves using crowd-funding, with a lot of their support coming from Australia The show, which also stars Aussie actors Alexandra Park and Cariba Heine, was born through the real life experiences of the four friends, who have known each other for years.
In fact, Lafferty and Park are engaged to be married – and hopefully in Australia, if all goes to plan.
“Alex is there working in Adelaide at the moment – I’d be on a plane right now if I could,” Lafferty, 36, tells Insider from the LA home he shares with Park, who grew up on Sydney’s north shore.
“I’m working on my visa to get over there as a permanent resident kind of situation so I can spend more time over, there but that will take 12-22 months … so until then I have to wait. I would love to get back to Australia as soon as humanly possible.” Everyone Is Doing Great, which launches on Paramount+ this month, is a comedic take on the life cycle of an actor catapulted into the industry at an early age – and what happens when fame is taken away after a hit show stops, as is so often the case.
It centres of Seth (Colletti) and Jeremy (Lafferty), who having enjoyed fame and success of a hit vampire television vampire drama called Eternal, now find themselves five years after the show ended, leaning on each other as they awkwardly navigate the perils of life and love.
Lafferty had the idea and brought it to Colletti, who has been seen on screens across the world since he was a teenager, starring in MTV reality show Laguna Beach before landing One Tree Hill.
“It really was a labour of love,” Colletti, 35, says, of Everyone Is Doing Great.
“James and I were commiserating about something that didn’t work out – we also shared common sense of humour, and we really bonded over that. We are passionate about filmmaking and telling stories and wanted to see where it went.” The pair shot their first episode in four days, loved what they produced and decided their baby should stay in their own hands.
“We thought ‘let’s not let someone tell us if we can make this or not. We know we want to do with the rest of the episodes, so let’s just press forward’,” he says.
“And that was the fuel that was driving us through all the different stages of trying to get someone to help us shoot this as far as putting up the money, to deciding to crowd-fund it on our own.
“The end game was we were going to find a way to do this, come hell or high water.” They managed to raise $275,000, which was enough to spark the interest of other investors and bridge the gap to fund the rest of the season. So they made their baby – and they did it their way.
“I’d be lying if I didn’t say this wasn’t the most rewarding project I’ve ever worked on – and to see something from script to screen – and even better than the expectations – because there is the reality TV side where you’re very young and naive and all this stuff is being shot and you don’t know what will be used and how it will be edited ... and then that’s a complete surprise,” Colletti laughs.
“This has been one of those rare experiences where it has met my expectations and then some – and that’s something we are very proud of.” He says it was predictable for actors to say they were pigeon-holed for certain genres like reality TV – but that was the easy way out.
“I think that at the end of the day, as long as you’re working hard and getting out there and trying to grow yourself and not rest on your laurels, things are going to happen for you,” Colletti continues.
“It’s not to say you don’t struggle though.
“I can remember getting off One Tree Hill and getting back on the audition thing and you have the confidence of being on the show and think things are going to come easy but the harsh reality is it’s not so easy, you’ve got to be on your toes.
“It’s almost like you have to eat, sleep and be obsessed with trying to succeed because it’s too competitive.” Lafferty agrees, saying Everyone Is Doing Great explores what happens when good fortune from a young age just goes away.
“It can be fate, luck, hard work,” he says.
“For us, coming off One Tree Hill, it was really not about feeling sorry for ourselves. It was being really grateful for the time we had on that show and allowing that previous success to make us comfortable to laugh at what we were going through and how tough it was.
“Sure it was tough, but what kind of version of yourself can you be without a bit of struggle?
“That led us to this and that’s what we wanted to explore in the show. “We’re hoping that resonates with people of all walks of life who have had to make an adjustment or things haven’t quite gone to plan and have to press that reset button.” He says the fact the show is coming Australia was special for all of them. “We are proud of it, just like a little baby that’s grown up and went off to college and is starting their own life and getting good grades,” he laughs.
“It’s been really amazing letting it fly here in the States and get a good response and it’s even more exciting for us now that we can let the rest of the world see it and Australia is one of the first places outside the US that it will be seen.
“And that’s obviously extra exciting for us because we have Australian cast which are so amazing in this, and Australian television is something that has been an influence on us and the way we make the show, so it feels like a bit of a homecoming in a way.” EVERYONE IS DOING GREAT LAUNCHES ON PARAMOUNT+ FROM AUGUST 11
CREDIT: LISA MAYOH
Word count: 1120
