FOR the shiny new Adelaide Fire, it’s their inaugural Hockey One home game. For brothers Chris and Simon Wells, this afternoon’s clash with Brisbane Blaze at the State Hockey Centre is a family reunion.
Having made their debuts together last weekend against Tasmania in Hobart, the boys will this week face off against one of Australian hockey’s finest players, their cousin Matthew Wells.
A three-time Olympian, including a gold medal with the Kookaburras in 2004, Matthew has retired from playing but will coach the Blaze against Adelaide.
“It’s probably a bit cliched, but he’s a hero to us,” Chris said. “Which is probably not what you want when you’re playing against him. “He’s the QAS (Queensland Academy of Sport) coach so he’s been there for a lot of our (junior) hockey tournaments. He’s someone we look to for feedback, and with his experience, he can give us a pretty good insight into what he thinks we need to improve on and what we’re doing well in comparison to the highest level.” Their appearance together in a national league team was a remote possibility until recently. Chris had skipped the last few seasons of the former national league to pursue travel through Europe and Canada the last two years. Simon, aged 20 and six years younger than Chris, had yet to play national league.
“It was eye-opening for me, as it was my first game at that level,” he said of last weekend’s clash with the Tigers.
“It was pretty quick, but playing there and with my brother was a dream come true pretty much. He was travelling a bit and I was just coming up the ranks. I didn’t know if he was even going to be in Adelaide or not.” Chris plays club hockey at North-East, while Simon plays with their other brother Mikey at Seacliff.
“It was a privilege to debut together,” Chris said.
“We don’t get to play together much, so it was good fun playing with my brother.” Adelaide women take on Brisbane from 1pm today. The men begin at 2.30pm. PAYZE ON FIRE FORMER Crows and SANFL Eagles champion Andrew Payze has enjoyed arguably the greatest sporting moment of his life this week. Payze made a rare albatross on the par 5 second hole at Kooyonga on Monday.
An albatross equates to three-under par for the hole, meaning Payze holed out his second shot.
NEW BALL GAME LAST year she had the job of spearheading the Adelaide Thunderbirds forward line.
Now Cathrine Tuivaiti is a mum. Tuivaiti and husband Jimmy welcomed Sebastian Tomaliliu into the world on October 3.
CVETKO’S MISSION ADELAIDE footballer and former Croatian national Australian rules captain Tommy Cvetko is leading a crusade to grow the game in his native country.
The Association of Australian football Croatia has recently been granted land to build the first ever oval-shaped Australian rules ground and Cvetko is part of a crowd funding program to develop the venue.
Croatian football has strong ties to South Australia. Three of the five clubs in the Central European Australian Football League have nicknames borrowed from SANFL clubs.
In the men’s league, Sesvete plays as the Double Blues against the Hawks and the Dockers, while the two current teams in the women’s league are the Zkan Zagreb Panthers and Zkan Sesvete Redlegs. Cvetko, who currently plays with Ramco in the Riverland Independent League, is part of a campaign to raise around $40,000 via GoGetFunding.com CALLISTO FALLS SHORT RENATA Callisto has fallen just short in her quest to take out the National Champion of Champions bowls title in Perth.
Callisto was in strong contention with two rounds remaining on Thursday before dropping a tight match to eventual winner Dawn Hayman from NSW.
Callisto earned a spot in the prestigious tournament after taking out the state Champion of Champions title at Murray Bridge on ANZAC Day.
DE BROUGHE TO STING FOR most of Australia’s domestic women’s cricketers, December will be a pretty cruisy month off. No such luck for SA Scorpions cricketer and Adelaide Fire hockey starlet Emma de Broughe.
The 19-year-old has been named in the Australian under-21 Jillaroos squad to play New Zealand and India in Canberra from December 3.
De Broughe is currently juggling commitments with the SA Scorpions and Adelaide Fire and will front for the Fire this afternoon at the State Hockey Centre.
Last weekend, she played for the Fire against Tasmania in Hobart on Saturday, before rushing home to play a SACA Premier T20 cricket game for Sturt on Sunday.
BUCHANAN TURNS PRO LOCAL teenager Jack Buchanan from Glenelg Golf Club has taken out the Jack Newton International Junior Classic in NSW after a 72-hole score of 280 to win by four strokes.
Buchanan, a member of the 2018 men’s state team, now gains a start in a professional event, the NSW Open, at the end of next month.
Buchanan has a liking for the Cypress Lakes Golf Club setting. He finished seventh in the same event last year.
Meanwhile, Billy Cawthorne from Royal Adelaide Golf Club finished in a tie for second at the Thailand Amateur Golf Open at the Panya Indra Golf Club. Cawthorne began the closing round in the final group with a share of the lead.
But both he and playing partner Jesse Waaralinna of Finland were overtaken by local Wit Pitipat, who came from one stroke back.
IN RARE COMPANY ADELAIDE’S Lachy Barker has joined rare company after earning selection to represent Australia at the Spirit International in the US state of Texas next month.
Currently studying on a golf scholarship at Iowa State University, Barker joins three other top Australian amateur players.
To put the selection in perspective, Barker’s fellow male of the four Australians is Jack Trent, who scored a berth in the US PGA Tour event in Las Vegas last week and spent much of the final round hovering among the top-10.
SA high-performance coach Adrian Wickstein will travel with the team. ROBE FULL COURSE THE major extension of the Robe Golf Club in the state’s south east is almost complete and will be officially open for play next month.
Robe was a 14-hole course, but sold off two holes in 2015 to help fund the new work, taking the course out to a full 18 holes.
Overseen by SA architecture wizard Neil Crafter, Robe’s new six holes weave through coastal native vegetation and the natural contouring of existing sand dunes.
The club will officially open the course on November 10, before hosting the Robe Open the following week.
BOOMING BRILLIANT IF you opted to front for a netball team in this week’s Masters Games and you ran into BOOM as an opposition side, then it’s likely you were on the receiving end of a loss.
Playing in the 35+ age-group, BOOM brushed aside all comers this week before taking out yesterday’s final.
In the side was a plethora of former SA netball stars, including ex-Australians Marlene Elliott and Bec Sanders, as well as Michelle Bahnisch, Trudy Gardner and Fiona Huppatz.
And what does BOOM stand for?“A bunch of old moles,” Elliott joked.
CREDIT: BEN HOOK
Word count: 1189
