Holgate Brewhouse in Woodend is capitalising on a rise in “beer tourism” across Victoria, raising up to $2.5m from mum and dad investors through an equity crowd-funding raise.
While it’s bottoms up for Holgate, breweries in South Australia and Western Australia are complaining they have been locked out of equity crowd-funding altogether because of what they ­describe as outdated legislation.
Holgate Brewhouse co-founder Natasha Holgate told The Weekend Australian her family owns the freehold of the historic hotel and brewery site, and had previously turned to debt finance to build a new production building including a new showroom, taproom and visitor centre.
Demand has now outstripped supply for her 20-year-old brewery, which is aiming to raise $2.5m for a further upgrade that will ­increase Holgate's capacity from 1.2 million litres to five million and allow the company to produce more experimental releases including sour beers.
The Holgates employ about 40 staff and the brewery is proving a significant drawcard for ­Victoria's Macedon Ranges tourism ­industry. It’s one of about 400 craft breweries in Australia, almost double the number of five years ago.
The Australian craft beer ­industry has grown rapidly over that time despite a decline in per capita beer consumption.
“We wanted to get away from further debt financing and an ­equity raise through crowd-funding appealed to us, given we're in the branded products business, and this campaign will help ­engage an army of existing and new ambassadors for our brand,” Ms Holgate said.
“We did look into crowd-­funding a few years ago after seeing it was being used by a number of breweries in the UK, but it wasn’t available in Australia when we started this expansion.” Paul Holgate said crowd-funding’s primary appeal was the direct engagement his family could have with their beer drinkers.
“For us, it's a real opportunity to engage with our consumers and community,” he said. “We're an independent family business and proudly support our local community, so this kind of engagement is important for us.
“As craft beer pioneers, we have been in the business for 20 years and have many fans and ambassadors for our brand who we look forward to welcoming as investors and as part of the Holgate family.” The brewery turned to crowd-funding platform Birchal for the raise, with investors rewarded with commemorative beers and weekend getaways to the brewery. Documents show that before the investment, Holgate Brewhouse was worth about $24.47m.
“The soon-to-be-opened brewhouse and visitor centre could do for Woodend what Four Pillars has done for Healesville in terms of driving visitation and awareness of this beautiful part of Victoria,” Birchal co-founder Matt Vitale said.
“Unfortunately, the West Australian and South Australian liquor licensing regimes are not compatible with the crowdsourced regime, contained in federal legislation.
“This means that brewers in WA and SA, and indeed any business there that holds a liquor ­licence, cannot use the CSF ­regime as a Pty Ltd company, which puts them at a significant disadvantage compared to brewers operating on the east coast.” According to Mr Vitale, West Australian and South Australian liquor laws deem all shareholders in a licensee that is a proprietary company to occupy a “position of authority”, which includes ­requirements that each shareholder is a “fit and proper person” and ­informs the regulator of any convictions they might have.
“Businesses licensed under the liquor-licensing regimes of South Australia and Western Australia are unable to use the CSF regime unless they convert to a public structure,” he said.
The chief executive of Fremantle-based brewery Otherside Brewing, Al Taylor, told The Weekend Australian he had considered crowd-funding for his brewery but it wasn’t feasible.
“Our business is broader than brewing. We have other brands and business that we want to ­develop, and can see this type of funding as an avenue worth pursuing to support these other initiatives,” Mr Taylor said.
“But the licensing impediments that would apply to one aspect of our business make it a non-viable option for our business. It just adds another layer of challenge for us to compete nationally, which, of course, is not ideal.”For the Holgates, they are ­closing in on a successful capital raise that will see their beers continue to spread across Victoria, and the globe.
CREDIT: DAVID SWAN; EXCLUSIVE
Word count: 710
