A quarterly industry spotlight series featuring SA not-for-profit organisations coping with change amid rising demand
WHETHER running a local sport or arts group, or providing assistance to vulnerable members of our community, the not-for-profit sector supports a broad range of worthy causes across the state.
But as competition in the sector intensifies, not-for-profit organisations are being forced to adapt to digital disruption, heightened community expectations and fierce rivalry for funds.
Andrea Petersen has spent 20 years consulting to the sector as managing director of Adelaide-based Not for Profit Accounting Specialists.
She explains that the regulatory environment has become more complex in recent years, placing new demands on operators in the sector.
“The ACNC (Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission) came in (2012) and that increased the regulatory burden,” she said.
“These days, if you don’t have a professional CEO and professional staff, you’re sitting on a bit of a time bomb.” More than 4000 South Australian charities are registered with the ACNC, entitling them to tax-exempt status and other dispensations and benefits, such as the ability to issue tax-deductible receipts.
With close to 300 new South Australian charities registering with the ACNC in the past five years, competition for funds is becoming a major challenge, according to Ms Petersen.
“I don’t think people understand how difficult it is to get funding – there’s competition for donor, corporate and government funding,” she said.
“South Australia is a small market – there are only so many corporates who you can knock on the doors of.
“And, of course, there’s charity fatigue when you’re constantly bombarding people with requests.” But the state’s not-for-profits are finding alternative ways to access income streams.
Last month, Crime Stoppers SA launched a Go Fund Me campaign to bankroll a statewide campaign cracking down on rural and regional crime.
Crime Stoppers SA chairwoman Sharon Hanlon explains that crowd-funding is nothing new in the sector – and is an example of how technology is disrupting the industry.
“Our limited resources mean we need to look at technology that can help us,” she said.
“We are starting to get an online following on Facebook so if we can direct that across the online environment, that’s a good opportunity for us.
“Certainly, in terms of community preference with how they interact with our organisation – we are definitely seeing a greater uptake of online reporting and reporting through our online app, and we’ve directed our efforts in that area over the past two or three years.” In the disability sector, several service providers have spoken of teething problems associated with the rollout of the NDIS, including payment delays, unsuitable funding models and a higher burden being placed on service providers and their staff.
In January, these challenges forced the Cora Barclay Centre to merge with Can:Do 4Kids, while Novita and scosa announced last week they are in talks about a possible merger in response to the NDIS.
Business SA chairwoman Nikki Govan, who has served on the boards of several not-for-profits including the Australian Red Cross, Adelaide Convention Bureau and South Australian Motor Sport Board, expects further consolidation across the sector.
“The reality is you’ve got charities that have stronger and broader appeal by virtue of their cause,” she said.
“I think some of the large charities are being challenged by the establishment of new smaller foundations, and it might be time to look at coming together, because there has to be cost savings, especially for those who serve similar causes,” she said.
Ms Govan said attracting and retaining staff and competent board members was another ongoing challenge.
“You want to have really good people at the top and you want to appeal to those with a social conscience who want to give back to the community,” she said.
“In many cases board members have the same duties as those sitting on publicly listed companies but the difference is that they’re not being paid.” Industry Spotlight focusing on the not-for-profitsector in South Australia
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 665
