MORE than half a billion dollars appears to have been raised in response to Australia’s bushfire crisis, but the tsunami of donations is causing a headache for some organisations who have no idea how to spend the cash.
In what could be the biggest-ever fundraising response to an Australian natural disaster, a list of announced donations from charities, celebrities and organisations compiled by News Corp Australia shows the total amount raised is sitting around $535 million.
Social media giant Facebook has confirmed more than $72.6 million has been raised through its platform, with fundraising efforts led by comedian Celeste Barber, who is believed to have raised over half of that total.
Meanwhile, crowd-funding platform GoFundMe has raised more than $35 million, with 480,000 donations made from 170 countries, including the continent of Antarctica.
About $173 million has been donated to major charities, while celebrities and companies have raised about $222 million and fire services will receive at least $33 million.
It is possible there may be some overlap with donations and the final figure will not be known for some time. But – with donations streaming at a rate of knots – some organisations are saying they need more time to work out how to spend the money responsibly.
Rob Snowdon, chairman of South Australia’s Country Fire Service (CFS) Foundation, said it had raised “well in excess of $1 million”. It had already distributed more than $700,000.
“Our purpose is to support volunteer CFS firefighters and if they’re impacted while they’re volunteering through injury, death, loss of property or mental health issues,” he said.
“We’ve supported more than 30 families through places like Cuddlee Creek and Kangaroo Island … we’ve received a lot of donations and we’re distributing them on a daily basis.” A Queensland Fire and Emergency Services spokeswoman (QFES) this week said the agency had received about $2.24 million.
“All donations will support rural fire brigades in undertaking the essential work they do to support their communities,” she said.
“This includes the purchase of water tanks, construction of bores to access water and phone extenders to extend communication coverage.
“Funds will also be used to purchase IT equipment, solar packages, lockers and security systems for stations, and universal sat sleeve wireless hubs to provide communication in remote areas.” A spokesman for the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission (ACNC) said registered charities must use funds in support of their charitable purpose.“This includes the more immediate and direct uses (for example, providing shelter or food to affected communities) and other long-term or indirect uses (for example, rebuilding infrastructure or planning long-term recovery),” he said.
CREDIT: DANIELLE LE MESSURIER
Word count: 439
