ORPHEUS Theatre ***** The Sunken Garden Holden Street Theatres Until March 16
First gripe, the admission price, $25 the top ticket.
Next up, the venue, outside in the afternoon sun (cast not spectators) and, accessible as Hindmarsh is, out in the sticks too. Plain, plain wrong.
Holden St Theatres has a belter on its hands here, two poorly attired lads from northern England, Alex and Phil, pictured below, putting on a contemporary and offbeat retelling of the Orpheus and Eurydice myth. Alex, scrawny and with the look of the down-at-heel, perennial student about him, is testament to the homily that we should not judge by appearance alone; his narration word perfect, rotating the thumping, the soothing and evangelical with ease.
Phil, the singer and guitarist, could, initially only, be mistaken for a portly oaf dressed like a genie with a lack of appreciation of quite what standing in the Australian sun hatless for 70 minutes can do.
But he sings beautifully - Bruce Springsteen, oddly, is a staple - and is compelling throughout with an off-the-cuff wit and smile to complement his more measured, if occasionally manic, pal. This is an intimate show but they need a bigger platform, in the Garden, centre stage, where we can all see and enjoy them.
As for 25 bucks, stick a 1 in front and you’d have a more realistic estimate of their worth. Exceptional.
- RICHARD EVANS
COREY WHITE – X-RAY Comedy *** 1/2 Spare Room, GOUD Until March 3
This bloke’s past is dark – think sexual assault, abuse in foster care, drug addiction, deaths – and it has informed much of his comedy. But this latest show is a little lighter.
Much of it is about Corey White’s (above) hopes for the future with his fiance. Millennials will likely relate to his reflections on renting, dieting, relationships - basically “adulting” and his topical social commentary, including a hilarious argument that pushes the boundaries for gender equality in the most unlikely of “professions”.
There are still moments drawn from White’s traumatic past, like the time he was robbed by homeless blokes, but even here there is light relief in his inability to control his flatulence during the frightening ordeal!
- LAUREN NOVAK ESCAPE FROM TRASH MOUNTAIN Children’s / Puppetry *** The May Wirth, Gluttony Until March 11
Most rubbish bins are full of useful materials that could be reused or recycled. Young children love rummaging around in the making box at kindy or school, building a something new to bring home.
Most quickly find their way back into the bin, but not these beautiful beasts and marvellous monsters. They’re going on tour.
Victoria’s Trash Puppets runs workshops for all ages, giving people fresh ideas and inspiration.
Two years ago, they decided to take it to the next level and raised funds through a Pozible crowd funding campaign to create a children’s theatre show.
It’s a simple story with a message about making the most of what you have at home, a fairytale featuring a grumpy loner who finds a friend and goes on a quest to find paradise.
This is definitely a show where language is no barrier, as the puppets barely speak, they communicate with grunts, shrieks and other animal or childlike noises.
It’s just a shame the venue was so hot when we visited, making it difficult to the enjoy the experience.
– CLARE PEDDIE
SOUND & SILENCE Music **** The Breakout, The Mill Until March 15
The walls are covered with black cloth.
Forty-two uncomfortable black chairs are back-to-back in a line down the centre of the room. On each chair is a battery-operated tea light.
We enter the darkened room and turn our tea lights on. Voice of Transition walk in. There’s around twenty of them, and they line the perimeter of the room. They hold tea lights too.
For half an hour, they sing a cappella arrangements of gently soporific songs, including Light In The Hallway and Run To You (both by Pentatonix), Timshel (Mumford & Sons), Hide And Seek (Imogen Heap).
The arrangement of Billy Joel’s quasi-Irish And So It Goes is particularly fine. No sound reinforcement, no accompaniment.
The singers hold no scores.
Harmonies are challeng-ingly close. The sensation of sitting in near-darkness being surrounded by human voices in complex harmonies is both soothing and invigorating.
Apart from some uncertainties in Hide And Seek, the singing is reasonably accurate and neatly balanced, although a few more baritone/bass voices wouldn’t go astray.
This young choral group, skilfully directed by musical factotum Kim Spargo, left, is developing its own fine sound.
- PAT H. WILSON
KREEPY KENSINGTON Theatre *** Streets and Parks of Kensington Until March 14
Intriguing from go to woe, Kreepy Kensington is more history walking tour than theatre, but no less enjoyable for it.
We gather at Mary MacKillop Park at 7.30pm where Charlotte appears, dressed in Victorian garb, to tell us about life in the area more than 100 years ago, starting with Mary MacKillop, South Australia’s Catholic saint, who encountered prejudice but also kindness.
It arrived in the form of 19th century philanthropist Robert Barr Smith, who helped fund her convent in the grounds of Mary MacKillop College next door.
From there, it’s an early evening troop through streets and laneways to take in villas and cottages, parks and gardens, pubs and shops, and an old cemetery you wouldn’t know was there. It’s not overly creepy but Kensington clearly had its murderers and ne’er-do-wells, as well characters you’d simply call colourful.
We all warmed to our guide, who was slightly nervous but had excellent diction and an eye for fun.
Her landmarks and stories were interesting, and the time of day perfect. - LOUISE NUNN
JELLY OR JAM Children’s / Circus *** 1/2 Little Theatre, RCC Until march 10
When there’s jelly in the title of the show and you’re asked to take off your shoes before entering the theatre, you can kind of guess where it will head. We are intrigued as we hand our shoes to one of the performers and she hangs them up.
This is not your usual kid’s show of circus tricks, audience participation and funny gags.
It’s an abstract performance with a giant block of jelly, below, the centre of attention.
Two performers, display their fantastic and very brave acrobatics, never uttering a word yet there’s a soundtrack of children’s interviews about feelings and emotions playing.
What happens when the jelly is dropped? Can the jelly withstand the weight of one or two people?
Suitable for four to nine year olds, it highlights what it means to be a kid - fun, silly and with some messy play.
Don’t worry, you can wash your feet at the end.- NATALIE DE NADAI
CREDIT: RICHARD EVANS LAUREN NOVAK CLARE PEDDIE PAT H. WILSON LOUISE NUNN NATALIE DE NADAI
Word count: 1142
