The coach of the New Zealand netball team has thrown her support behind star player Maria Folau, ­insisting she has “done nothing wrong”.
The comments came as Netball New Zealand said Folau had not breached any of its policies, after a major sponsor raised concerns about her support for husband ­Israel’s crowd-funding campaign.
A spokesman for ANZ, which sponsors both the Silver Ferns and New Zealand’s netball league, told stuff.co.nz that the bank did not support “the views of Silver Fern Maria Folau”. The spokesman added that those concerns had been expressed to Netball NZ, but the company would continue to support the sport.
Silver Ferns head coach Noeline Taurua said it was a complex situation and that she wanted to keep her team’s focus on the court.
“I have no concerns with her place in the team from a performance perspective. There’s no reason why (she shouldn’t be there) from a performance perspective,” she said.
Maria Folau had been silent throughout her husband’s fight against his former employer, Rugby Australia, but on Friday shared his now-cancelled GoFundMe crowd-funding campaign on her own social media platforms.
She is set to play a key role in the Silver Ferns’ World Cup campaign in Liverpool next month.
Netball NZ made its first comment on the issue in a statement yesterday. “Maria Folau has not breached Netball New Zealand policy,” the statement said. “Netball New Zealand values inclusion and diversity across all areas of the community and our sport whether its (sic) gender, ethnicity, socio economic status, sexuality, religion, and we take responsibility as role models for young New Zealanders very seriously.
“We acknowledge that people have differing views and beliefs. It is important those opinions and views are expressed in constructive and respectful ways.” The move followed similar statements from Netball Australia and Netball South Australia on Sunday. Both groups agreed that Maria Folau had not breached any social media policies, and that while they were committed to creating an inclusive environment, no action was necessary.Ex-Diamonds captain Liz Ellis labelled those statements “not good enough”.
CREDIT: ERIC GEORGE
Word count: 347
