AUSTRALIA’S longest-running community radio station is calling on public help to save it from certain closure next month.
Radio Adelaide has launched a crowd-funding campaign to raise $50,000 to buy time to implement new financial strategies.
Station manager Chris Leese is optimistic Radio Adelaide will reach the target, which will help keep the station running, potentially until the end of the financial year.
“We’ve told many thousands of stories and supported local music, arts and innovative ideas – it would be a real shame to lose that,” he told the Sunday Mail.
“It also means losing the opportunity for people to learn the skills of radio and podcasting and representing their community.” The 47-year-old station – first known as 5UV in 1972 because of its university origins – became independent and not for profit after the University of Adelaide cut ties in 2016.
It moved from North Tce, city, to the Fresh FM building, in Cinema Place, where its team of three staff and 220 volunteers remain. While community radio is “always going to be a hard slog”, Mr Leese said it had been an especially bad year for funding. “We haven’t attracted the sponsorship we were looking for, so we’ve run out of money,” he said.
But, rather than lobby for government funding, Mr Leese said the station could become sustainable with sponsorships and would then provide training for high school and university students and continue local series Podcast Works.
“The scope for growth in our training courses and podcast production is quite big; we just need time to make it happen,” Mr Leese said.
“Between that, refocusing our programming on arts, music and ideas to make it more appealing to new listeners and more sponsors, there’s plenty of potential for us to become sustainable.” Mr Leese said Radio Adelaide gave the community “a voice” and is a training ground for those wanting to break into the media.
“We provide the training and experience for people getting into radio or in the media … and they’ve been able to do that from the experience they’ve gained,” he said.
“I hear it all the time: ‘it was that experience that got me the job’.” People and program manager Nikki Marcel said the station was important to the arts community in Adelaide.
“I love the people and the stories and the way it empowers individuals,” she said.
“Our blues show has been the longest running blues show in Australia and 75 per cent of our music is Australian content, which you don’t hear in any other outlets apart from community radio.” Sarah Martin started with Radio Adelaide seven years ago as a university student, waking up at 3.30am to read news bulletins.
“I’m a terrible morning person but I had a smile on my face every day because I was training in real radio,” she said.DONATE AT startsomegood.com/SaveRadioADL
CREDIT: TARA NASH
Word count: 481
