YOUTH
UNLEY’S young entrepreneurship program “Fish Tank” is returning and the inaugural winners are a remarkable example of what can be achieved.
The project, a take on the popular TV show Shark Tank,offers an opportunity for young people aged 12-15 who live, work or play in the Unley district to win funding for their business idea.
Former Walford students Eloise Hall and Isobel Marshall won the 2016 Fish Tank with their proposal to produce environmentally friendly sanitary products.
The plan was to sell tampons in Australia and use 100 per cent of the profits to fund a program distributing tampons for females in developing countries.
The women’s company, TABOO, looked to take the stigma out of having a period. “We just saw a poster on Unley Rd for Fish Tank and thought we’d give it a go,” Ms Marshall, 20, of Unley, said.
“And now we are about to start selling our products from mid-June by a subscription model and we’ve just got an IGA store on board.” The Adelaide University medical student said inspiration for the social enterprise business model came from Daniel Flynn, the founder of Thankyou, a personal care, water and baby products company that helps fund projects in developing nations.
The women hosted a crowd-funding campaign to buy a first batch of sanitary products and exceeded expectations, raising more than $56,000.
“Our ambition is to give these girls and women the opportunity to go about their day-to-day lives not letting periods hold them back,” Ms Hall, 19, of Goodwood, said.
“There are many health and educational issues that occur without access to proper products.” Ms Hall, a business and international studies student at Flinders University, said Fish Tank made it all happen.
“The best thing we had from winning is all the encouragement from so many people who gave us great feedback and the drive to make it happen,” she said.
“It’s a brilliant platform to see where you can go with a plan.” Fish Tank 2019 will have the top 10 submissions battle it out in front of a panel to gain funding.
Panel members include a Business SA representative, a previous winner, an entrepreneurship expert, and Unley Mayor Michael Hewitson.
Participants will engage in workshop training to develop their entrepreneurial skills before submitting their pitch.
Entries are open now until March 18.See unley.sa.gov.au for more information.
CREDIT: Craig Cook
Word count: 396
