The best part about Westpac’s soft trading update yesterday was the helpful distraction provided barely half an hour later by Bank of Queensland’s thumping profit downgrade.
Suddenly, the plight of the regional banks that was highlighted in Bendigo and Adelaide Bank’s poor interim result a week ago again became front of mind for ­investors.
The main offending item for BoQ, which has a February 28 half year, was lower non-interest income, with the net interest margin also expected to be eroded from 1.97 per cent a year ago to a range of 1.93-1.95 per cent due to funding cost pressures and price competition for new loans.
Cash earnings for the half are now expected to be $165 million-$170m, down from $182m.
BoQ stock slumped alarmingly by more than 6.3 per cent, in line with share-price swings of 5 per cent-plus for earnings transgressions.
Westpac, meanwhile, served up its first quarterly trading update since the practice was abandoned by then-chief executive Gail Kelly in 2013.
The assumption yesterday was that the market has now been “cleansed” in preparation for a sizeable bond issue in the US.
Westpac’s cash earnings for the December quarter came in at $2.04 billion — higher than the $1.91bn quarterly average for the second half of 2018, or $2.05bn before remediation charges.
While the bank said its margin, excluding treasury and markets, was higher in the December quarter due to loan repricing, the downside for the market was the absence of remediation costs.
Westpac said additional charges were likely to be incurred in the second quarter.
The back-ending of the charges means a much bigger figure is now expected in the half-year result, with Credit Suisse analyst Jarrod Martin forecasting a $250m, post-tax remediation expense in the 2019 financial year.
A big chunk of that is expected to relate to fees-for-no-service charged by 1660 planners in Westpac’s aligned dealer groups, included as a contingent liability in the 2018 accounts.
According to the note, the bank kept part of the ongoing advice fees paid to the dealer groups by clients since 2008, and was in the early stages of getting its head around the services that were provided, or not provided, as the case may be. It was therefore not possible to estimate potential remediation costs, and no provision had been raised.
Apart from ANZ, exposure to aligned dealer groups is the big unknown in the fees-for-no-service debacle, with Westpac chief financial officer Peter King commenting in November last year that there was “no industry approach as to how you deal with that at the moment”.
“That’s probably the one that we need to bottom out next year,” King said. New and old in fintech After an ANZ board trip to Silicon Valley in 2013, Phil Chronican said the opaque nature of the threat from financial technology made it fundamentally different to previous waves of competition and disruption.
Chronican, who was then CEO Australia for ANZ and is now acting CEO at National Australia Bank, said fintech was not a clear and present danger, but the threat could unfold quickly in ways that “we can’t yet predict”.
Six years later, the risk to incumbent institutions is taking shape, with the vanguard overwhelmingly occupied by established technology companies, or “big tech”.
So there we were, convinced for many years that it was the emerging, niche players in peer-to-peer lending, crowd-funding and cross-border payments that were sowing the seeds for the sector’s creative destruction.
The fintech model that has evolved — with some clear exceptions in payments and credit — is a co-operative relationship between the new and the old.
This has been driven by some cold market realities, including an inability to tap low-cost funding or build the customer base that would make them a serious competitive threat to incumbents.
The truce works both ways — fintechs can operate viably without scale and unburdened by regulation, depending on their business models, while traditional players can modernise clunky processes through innovation.
That’s not to say the threat has receded — far from it.
Just as Chronican warned, it’s unfolded in a way that wasn’t predicted, with big tech’s footprint already large in financial services (see table) and its impact potentially much greater than fintech.
Companies such as Amazon, Google and Facebook, or the Chinese behemoths Alibaba, Tencent and Baidu, have a huge competitive advantage in enormous customer bases and strong brand recognition and trust.
A Financial Stability Board report also noted they can use advanced analytics and big data generated through other services such as social media.
“Combined with strong financial positions and access to low-cost capital, big-tech firms could achieve scale very quickly in fin­ancial services,” the report said.
“This would be particularly true where network effects are present, such as in payments and settlements and lending.” The FSB’s concern is clear.
While greater competition and diversity in lending, payments, insurance, trading and other areas of financial services could create a more efficient and resilient financial system, more intense competition could also erode the profitability of incumbents.
This could have spillover effects on the stability of the system by leading to greater risk-taking in order to preserve profit margins.gluyasr@theaustralian.com.auTwitter: @Gluyasr
CREDIT: RICHARD GLUYAS; FOUR PILLARS
Word count: 867
