In the month that Flinders Chase National Park celebrates its 100 years, the community opposition against proposed accommodation lodges is taking many forms.
Kangaroo Island locals and about 600 other opponents of the Australian Walking Company's proposal rallied at the steps of SA's Parliament House on Thursday, October 10.
This was the second protest after an earlier rally at Parliament in February.
Well-known conservationist Bob Brown led the rally and the protest received widespread media coverage.
The Eco-Action KI legal case supported by Public Parks not Private Playgrounds group is moving ahead, with two directions hearings in the Supreme Court setting a hearing date in early February.
Spokesperson Fraser Vickery said the matter would be heard before the full bench, with the Supreme Court allowing three days for the case against the legitimacy of the approvals to be heard.
The latest round of crowd funding initiated by the groups to fund the legal battle meanwhile closed on Wednesday, October 16, with the target exceeded and more than $56,000 raised.
This Wednesday also saw renowned classical musicians Anthony Albrecht on cello and Simone Slattery on violin perform a 100-year commemoration concert at Remarkable Rocks in Flinders Chase National Park.
The event was organised by Kangaroo Island's three Friends of Parks groups. The musicians also performed at the Kingscote Town Hall on Tuesday evening.
Friends of Parks spokesperson Bev Maxwell said the date and location of last Thursday's rally were significant as almost 100 years ago, after 27 years of struggle by members of the Royal Society of South Australia, the South Australian Parliament assented to an Act "to Establish a Reserve on Kangaroo Island".
"The recent threat to Flinders Chase National Park as a place for conservation and protection of its native animals and plants was the impetus last week for an estimated 600 people across the political and social spectrum to attend the rally and enthusiastically applaud the well-informed and passionate speakers," Ms Maxwell said.
"Leading the speakers at Thursday's rally was well-known conservationist Bob Brown who described similar developments proposed for parks across Australia.
"Final speaker was Mark Parnell MLC, whose legislation to ensure community input into future developments planned in National Parks will be tabled in the South Australian Parliament on Wednesday, October 16, - 100 years to the day that Flinders Chase was established as a flora and fauna reserve."
CREDIT: Stan Gorton
Word count: 396
