State workers to get help, costs mount for volunteers
Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison, facing heavy criticism for his response to the country’s bush fires, has announced volunteer firefighters from the federal public sector will receive paid leave entitlements.
About 5 million hectares of land have burned nationwide over the past few months, with nine people killed and more than 950 homes destroyed. New South Wales, the country’s most populous state, has received the brunt of the damage, with around 850 homes razed.
Morrison had this week resisted calls to compensate volunteer firefighters, saying it went against the spirit of “volunteerism”. “We will always rely around the country on our volunteer forces, whether it’s on fires or surf lifesaving or anything else,” he said on Monday.
Labor leader Anthony Albanese called on Morrison to take more assertive action, saying he should convene an urgent meeting of state and federal leaders to discuss the bush-fire threat and address the need to pay firefighters.
“I say to the Prime Minister he can do three things immediately, which is to bring forward the COAG [Council of Australian Governments] meeting, meet the former fire chiefs, and do something now to provide support for those volunteer firefighters who have been in the field for such a long time,” Albanese said.
The president of New South Wales’ Volunteer Fire Fighters Association said the state and federal governments had ignored the fact members have racked up expenses, including petrol spent driving to fire fronts, fighting the blazes.
Mick Holton told the Sydney Morning Herald that they had also used crowd funding to pay for smoke masks and given up income.
“Why aren’t we picking up the tab for legitimate expenses like we do for paid people?” he said.
“They volunteer as much as they can afford, sometimes even more than they can afford. It is not sustainable.”
Morrison responded by announcing that federal public servants who volunteer with state rural fire services to battle the blazes would get 20 days of paid leave on top of their regular annual and sick leave.
“With bushfire seasons starting earlier, one of the things I’ve heard on the ground is that some people are dipping into their other leave entitlements to stay out there battling blazes,” Morrison told reporters in South Australia. “Today’s announcement is about ensuring our volunteer firefighters can keep focused on the job at hand.”
Morrison, who has been under growing pressure — not helped by taking a much criticised vacation with his family to Hawaii during the wildfire crisis — urged the private sector to implement similar measures.
“We know this does not address the situation for self-employed and small businesses directly, but it does mean those working for larger organisations can step in and take some of the load from those volunteers who work for themselves or small businesses,” he said.
Authorities have warned that the fires in New South Wales could fester for months, causing more angst for exhausted firefighters.
Morrison has also been criticised for downplaying the role of climate change in the bush-fire crisis. He is refusing to scale down the coal industry amid the debate on climate change, saying such a move would be “reckless” and “job destroying”.
That has prompted former Prime Minister Kevin Rudd to say the current Government has “failed miserably”.
Australia accounted for a third of the world’s coal exports in 2018 and the Government has no plans on slowing down.
Rudd told the BBC Radio 4 Today programme that Australia’s peak scientific body had warned for more than a decade that climate change would lead to “more frequent droughts, more intense droughts, and more intense natural disasters”.
“The question is ... what any Australian Government does by way of national policy ... to provide Australia with the political standing to leverage other governments around the world to take global action necessary to keep temperature increases within 2C this century,” he said. “That has not happened.”
He said the Government scrapped Labor’s successful emissions-reducing carbon price and had “acted with other governments to impede global action on a collective response to climate change”.
He added: “The Government has failed miserably.”
Cooler temperatures in New South Wales provided temporary relief, but authorities warned that conditions could deteriorate this weekend.—agencies
CREDIT: Australia
Word count: 712
