With an infectious smile and beach-blond locks, Jed McDonald looked every bit the sports-loving, fun-seeking teenager.
What his friends and family could not see was the rare, slow-growing brain tumour that at first gave him headaches and affected his movement, and finally, on Monday, took his life.
Jed, 19, had fought hard since being diagnosed with anaplastic pilocytic ­astrocytoma two years ago today, just months from finishing school at Henley High in Adelaide’s west. He underwent a string of operations — the last performed by Sydney brain surgeon Charlie Teo.
“He had it all and it was brutally taken from him … I will cherish the great memories and joy we once had,” mum Louise McDonald told The Australian yesterday.
“The way he handled this bitter­ illness, with bravery, determination, kindness and love for all is what my memory will be.” The McDonalds turned to Dr Teo late last year in a “last-resort attempt” to remove the tumour.
Dr Teo, who has a reputation of taking on cases other surgeons deem inoperable, did not sugar-coat the situation.
“Charlie gave it to us straight and he gave it a shot,” Louise said. “There is a feeling I’m sure among all sufferers that if you don’t go to him you have not done everything possible and that’s how we felt.” The McDonald family paid for the Teo operation using a combin­ation of private health insuranc­e and $42,000 of their own money.
The surgery, just days before Christmas, was first thought to be a success, but complications arose and Jed never recovered.
A tracheotomy was required and, with Jed unable to breathe by himself, the McDonalds — Louise­, dad Giles and brother Lachlan — launched their second online crowd-funding page to fund an air ambulance so they­ could return to Adelaide.
“The opportunity to get back to Adelaide to be surrounded by family and friends would be apprecia­ted beyond words, especiall­y with his (Jed’s) 19th birthday coming up soon,” the family wrote.
More than $33,000 was raised from people who, in equal measur­e, expressed sympathy and optimism.
“About time you fellas came around for another BBQ Jed, so you better get back here soon,” one supporter wrote.
The first crowd-funding campaign­, launched in November 2017, had raised $23,000.
That money went towards Jed’s rehabilitation from early treatments, including an initial surgery that was aborted after seven hours and which affected his cognitive function.
“I have been quite private in this journey but I decided if people­ wanted to help I would let them,” Jed said at the time.
“I won’t be able to get a job or study for a while, and I’d love to get well enough to drive again and will need a safe car maybe with some modifications.” The McDonalds were “overjoyed” after an 11-hour surgery in December 2017 removed all of the tumour, only to be later told it had returned more aggressively.
Dr Teo has been forced to defen­d the “really disturbing” trend of people using online platforms to raise money — often six-figure sums — for surgery from him after concerns were raised by Sydney cancer specialist Henry Woo.
Professor Woo highlighted more than 100 GoFundMe campaigns seeking such donations.
The 12-year-old Perth girl who sparked the discussion, Milli Lucas, is reportedly recovering in Sydney’s Prince of Wales Private Hospital after a six-hour procedur­e by Dr Teo.
“Seriously could this man get any better,” Milli’s mum Monica Smirk wrote on Facebook, alongside a photo of Dr Teo. “Charlie has got it all (tumour) and her right leg and arm is moving but don’t know yet to what extent.”As of last night, Milli’s crowd-funding campaign had raised $164,278.
CREDIT: LUKE GRIFFITHS; EXCLUSIVE
Word count: 615
