CLOSE to 450 delegates are expected to descend on Adelaide during next year’s Fringe festival as part of a long-running program that connects artists with the event’s organisers, theatre producers, talent scouts and other arts industry leaders from across the world.
The Honey Pot arts marketplace is expected to attract a record number of delegates, on the back of Adelaide’s winning bid to host the World Fringe Congress.
Up to 200 delegates are expected to attend next year’s congress, while major delegations from South Korea and China are expected to boost the numbers in the Honey Pot program.
Negotiations between industry delegates and artists take place throughout Honey Pot the event, and often lead to future bookings, touring and other opportunities.
Adelaide Fringe director Heather Croall said last year’s Honey Pot program attracted 256 delegates from 26 countries, and generated deals worth more than $4 million.
She expects this year’s marketplace to generate even more interest. “Honey Pot is the marketplace behind the curtain,” Ms Croall said. “What’s happening in the background at the Fringe is a marketplace where artists are being discovered by venues and festivals from around the world and they are coming here to book shows for future touring.
“We have festival directors, venue curators, theatre directors from New York come in, from SoHo Playhouse, we’ve got theatre programmers from the West End.
“Every Friday during the Fringe we have the Honey Pot HIVE, where we do a matchmaking, speed-dating type experience, we do lunches, brunches and also roundtable meetings.” Ms Croall said about 30 per cent of the deals involved local South Australian artists.
“Artists are doing the Fringe for lots of different reasons but many of them now are doing it because they know that it leads to future opportunities and to being discovered,” she said.
Adelaide cabaret performer Anya Anastasia is taking her show The Executioners to New York later this month after signing a deal as part of this year’s Honey Pot program.
She will perform at the SoHo Playhouse off-Broadway theatre from November 27 to December 3, after attracting interest from theatre producer Darren Lee Cole during his visit to Adelaide earlier this year.
“The Honey Pot program is often the reason established and world-class performers return to the Adelaide Fringe year after year,” Ms Anastasia said.
“The Honey Pot delegates leave Adelaide transformed into international ambassadors for our city and state and our amazing cultural activities.
“I have performed at many Fringe festivals around the world and the Adelaide Fringe Honey Pot program is the leading program of its kind in the world.” Ms Anastasia is running a Pozible crowd-funding campaign to support her New York season.The Electric Dreams technology conference will also be held during next year’s Fringe at the Lot Fourteen start-up hub, and will include a three-day conference discussing the impact of technology on the arts industry.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 483
