They were at the top of their games. International sports stars devoted to their chosen disciplines, to each other and to God.
Now, in the space of just six months, the careers of Israel and Maria Folau appear close to being over — one crucified for a controversial social media post, the other walking away from her stellar netball club career seemingly of her own volition.
Adelaide Thunderbirds announced on Tuesday that Maria, a star of the New Zealand national side due to play Australia in Auckland on Wednesday night, would not return to the club in 2020, despite being named the club’s best and fairest winner this year. She was Adelaide’s leading goal-scorer this year and the biggest draw-card in a side trying to rebuild after a series of disastrous seasons.
Her departure comes after her Wallabies star husband was sacked by Rugby Australia for his infamous social media post proclaiming “hell awaits” homosexuals and other perceived “sinners”.
Maria stood staunchly beside her husband as the firestorm effectively ended his career.
He has mounted a legal challenge against his sacking.
The Thunderbirds declined to reveal whether Maria had been ­offered a fresh contract, but The Australian understands she was not forced out of the team. She has not been picked up by any other Australian or New Zealand club sides.
“There was obviously a great connection and commitment to the Adelaide Thunderbirds and we would welcome her back into our environment with open arms, obviously dependent on her future netball decisions,” said Thunderbirds manager Melody Cooper in a statement.
New Zealand coach Noeline Taurua said: on Tuesday night “To be honest, I’m not too sure [what Maria’s plans are]. I know that she’s really enjoyed her time here and that the environment is something that has been successful and her contribution to netball has been amazing.” The star shooter is on tour with New Zealand’s national team, the Silver Ferns, but the Thunderbirds’ announcement revealed she would not be contracted to a club in Australia, New Zealand or Eng­land next year. Speculation about Maria’s future has swirled all year, with sources suggesting she came close to retirement multiple times, only to be talked into staying on by her coaches. Tuesday’s news heightened anticipation that the 32-year-old will retire from the sport over the summer.
Maria moved to Adelaide at the start of this year from Auckland, where she had played with the Northern Mystics since 2010, to be closer to Israel, who was playing for the NSW Waratahs and the Wallabies.
Although there is no suggestion that the controversy surrounding Israel directly affected Maria’s decision, there is no doubt the saga overshadowed parts of her time with Adelaide.
It came to a head in June, when Maria shared Israel’s crowd-funding campaign on her own social media accounts.
The move sent netball adminis­trators into crisis meetings for days. Ultimately, they decided that Maria had not breached any of the sport’s policies, and that no action was necessary.
Other club bosses were furious about the slow response, and found themselves facing substantial anger from their own members about what was seen as a lack of action in a sport that preaches inclusivity.
Folau’s time in Adelaide has been complicated and largely misunderstood. Fans on social media have regularly battered the team for her selection, but she is widely loved by teammates and coaches.
Those close to the club describe a scenario where the team felt that Maria was an outstanding teammate when she was in Adelaide, but found her a different person when she was in Sydney, where she spent large amounts of time living with ­Israel.
She has been a committed and very visible supporter of her husband throughout the year, regularly leaving her teammates in Adelaide to attend his meetings and procedural hearings.In early October, Maria and Israel appeared together in a YouTube campaign published by the Australian Christian Lobby entitled “We are not ashamed — Israel Folau and Maria Folau”.
CREDIT: ERIC GEORGE
Word count: 666
