A diverse group is being drawn to the ride-sharing platform Companies in the sharing economy need to stop shirking their responsibilities, according to the chief executive of female-focused Uber rival Shebah, which has just launched a $3 million crowd-funding campaign.
Last month, the Treasury announced that sharing economy platforms such as Uber and Airbnb would be required to share data about their users with the Australian Taxation Office (ATO), as part of a proposal to crack down on noncompliance in the sector.
Shebah CEO George McEnroe said she was in full support of the crackdown. “As the industry continues to mature and expand its sphere of influence, both locally and globally, Australia needs to ensure our thriving sharing economy landscape is fully compliant and is operating responsibly and fairly,” she told The Australian.
“The sharing economy cannot be shirking any of its responsibilities, particularly when it comes to its workers disclosing their income and meeting tax obligations. We feel strongly that our community of drivers at Shebah agree with us on this point.” Shebah describes itself as Australia’s only women-friendly ride-sharing platform, and has turned to equity crowd-funding to raise the working capital required for its next phase of growth, ahead of a New Zealand launch this year.
Ms McEnroe said she originally used her share of the funds from the sale of the family home to put towards a solution to what she refers to as “providing a means of full participation” for women in ride-sharing.
She said an equity crowd-funding raise would allow Shebah to invite its loyal community and others to continue to support what she described as a social movement to put an end to the collective fear of ride-sharing for women once and for all.
Shebah’s crowd-funding raise would also allow many people to become shareholders for the first time, said Ms McEnroe.
Shebah has experienced an 8 per cent jump per month throughout 2018, and a 190 per cent increase on 2017. The company turned over $1.8 million in 2018, up from $500,000 in 2017.
“I want the whole community to share in this success,” Ms McEnroe said. “Women have been giving away their emotional labour for a very long time, managing family logistics, driving kids to various activities, caring for their ageing parents, running clubs and a myriad of other activities. We want to ensure that women who drive for us can do so in a way that is financially meaningful for them. We’re all the beneficiaries of that unpaid labour — it’s time that labour was rewarded and recognised.” Ms McEnroe said that as part of the driver onboarding program, women could access financial education on superannuation and other aspects of financial literacy.
“Our drivers love knowing that there is someone they can speak to as part of this initial consultation. We don’t have any financial engagement with this service, we just felt it’s hugely important to support our drivers who are very often single parents, or retirees, who want to get things right,” she said.
“By offering this service, it’s another way we can ensure our drivers feel supported. For lots of our drivers this is the first time they’ve been offered this kind of support. Our drivers are a very varied group — some with backgrounds as CEOs for example, some from banking and finance, and many make the switch to Shebah for the financial independence and to do something more meaningful and larger than themselves.
“For a lot of other women however, this is the first time they’ve had the opportunity to start thinking about themselves as business owners.”The service is available in Melbourne, Geelong, Sydney, Perth, Brisbane, the Gold Coast, the Sunshine Coast and is launching soon in Hobart, Darwin and Adelaide.
CREDIT: DAVID SWAN; EXCLUSIVE
Word count: 629
