AN Adelaide start-up firm that aims to help anxious parents interpret their babies’ cries for help has kicked off a final funding campaign ahead of a product launch later this year.
Goldilocks Suit has developed a smart singlet that uses sensors to monitor a baby’s breathing, body temperature, hunger and sleep patterns.
Via a small module that clips into the onesie and uses machine learning algorithms, information is sent to an app so parents can gain insights into the development and wellbeing of their child.
Ahead of the product’s launch in November, the company has started an equity crowd-funding campaign to raise up to $275,000. Negotiations are also under way with private investors and venture capital funds to source another $500,000.
Equity crowd-funding allows companies to raise money in exchange for a stake in the business. Goldilocks Suit founder and chief executive Shem Richards, a biomedical engineer, said final testing of the product was under way, with the funding to go towards the launch and marketing.
The idea behind Goldilocks Suit was born 3½ years ago when Mr Richards became a parent to eldest daughter Amalie.
Users of the product will have access to exclusive in-app coaching videos and other content created by babycare companies Wink and Mother Nurture, and will be offered clinician-grade advice when they need it.
While the initial plan was to set up manufacturing of the product in China or Taiwan, Mr Richards said delays for prototypes caused by COVID-19 meant the company had to reconsider its strategy.
“We took the conscious step to look at Australian manufacturers and so far everything is Australian made, except for raw materials like textiles for the singlet.
“And for the quantities we’re looking at, it has not added too much to the cost.” Mr Richards said the timing was right to launch another round of funding, especially with digital health in the spotlight.
“Prior to coronavirus we started having conversations with investors to fund the launch and then coronavirus happened and everyone shut up shop.
“Trying to find funding is reasonably difficult and in Adelaide it’s probably a little harder, but we’ve found it a good environment to build a business here.” Page 23: SA BUSINESS JOURNAL
GET IT JUST RIGHT - HOW IT WORKS ■ Sensors built into the cotton singlet detect the baby’s comfort levels ■ Information is fed back to a small bluetooth module clipped into the singlet ■ Data is collected and sent to the parent’s phone ■ Phone uploads the data to a database before it passes through a series of algorithms ■ Information is sent back to the phone and displayed on an app to provide updates or alerts ■ In-app content includes coaching videos and tips, with access to clinician-grade advice when needed
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 465
