She writes songs about whatever she likes, releases them whenever she feels like it and has built an online fan base that pays her monthly. Has Amanda Palmer cracked the code to the music industry? By Andrew McMillen
In May last year, Amanda Palmer arrived at Dublin Airport and found herself swept up in a significant moment in Ireland’s history, as the nation held a referendum on whether to legalise abortion.
Although she had been invited to speak at a literature festival and play a concert, as she stepped into the arrival hall, the singer-songwriter saw scores of women wearing black shirts that said “repeal”, in a large font. They were offering free rides to the polls to any expats who had flown home to vote. Total strangers were high-fiving and hugging one another, and as the visiting American stood and took it all in, she began to cry at the sight of an entire country standing up for its women.
The referendum to repeal the law regulating the termination of pregnancy passed by a 66 per cent majority that night, and as Palmer was swept up in the celebratory mood of what an Irish journalist friend of hers joyfully dubbed “Feminist Christmas”, her mind began turning over an artistic conundrum: how do you write a good song about abortion?
Palmer had attempted this task before: first with Mandy Goes To Med School in 2006, a song by her band the Dresden Dolls — a “punk cabaret” duo, where she played piano and sang while Brian Viglione “hit the drums like a smoke-choked victim pounding on the exit door of a burning building” — which she now describes as a blacker-than-black humour song about a back-alley abortion.
And later, on 2008’s Oasis, from her debut solo album, Who Killed Amanda Palmer, an even more pointedly black tune in the style of the Beach Boys, complete with a sarcastic, major-key arrangement and doo-wop background vocals. Both songs were written in her mid 20s yet, in hindsight, Palmer assesses she failed to give this subject the emotional justice and nuance it deserved.
“I had found it very, very difficult to write a sincere song about abortion, for so many reasons,” she tells Review by phone in late October, during a brief respite between touring Ireland and the UK. “Mostly because it is just very, very hard to get the tone right — which is, of course, the same reason that it’s difficult to talk about abortion, period, with anyone.” When she travelled to Ireland, Palmer was in the final stages of completing the writing for what would be her first album in seven years. On a list in her journal were two blank spaces, in which she had pencilled placeholders for what turned out to be the two hardest creative tasks: write about your miscarriage; write about your abortions.
That short, pointy list signals the sort of artist Palmer has become during almost two decades in the public eye: honest, truthful, authentic and uncompromising. After more than 10 years — and two more abortions, a miscarriage and a child, with her author husband Neil Gaiman – following those earlier attempts, she now felt up to the task, thanks to what she saw in Ireland.
“Every time I sat down to work on the record, I would look at this and think, ‘Oh my god – seriously Amanda, what a to-do list’,” she says with a laugh. “But there was something about the quality of the unapologetic, graceful bravery that this collection of women in Ireland showed me, that kicked my ass.” As she returned to the US, the artist continued mulling over the conundrum. When she was at home, she did something unusual: rather than waiting to sit down at the piano when the mood struck her, she instead wrote to her 15,000 patrons — more on that tight-knit mob later — to announce her intention.
“I said, ‘OK guys, I’m setting myself a really difficult task: I’m going to go into the studio tomorrow, and I’m going to write about abortion. Would you do me a favour and comment on this blog?’,” Palmer recalls. The question she posed to her followers was this: in just a few sentences, what would you say to a person who was going to get an abortion tomorrow?
Overnight, the responses poured in: thoughtful, personal, tearful, respectful. After reading through many of the thousand or so comments the following morning, Palmer was energised. She sat at the piano, and wrote the song in about an hour.
The result is a sparse, five-minute song rooted in a simple concept: a long voicemail left by a woman for her friend, who is on her way to undergo an abortion procedure. Accompanied by a beautifully shot music video that ends with a group of women and men celebrating what Palmer describes as “the abortion shower I never got”, Voicemail For Jill is just one of the 20 songs that comprise There Will Be No Intermission, which was published in March.
Released independently through a licensing deal with Cooking Vinyl Records, it’s the sort of album that barely made a dent on any commercial charts. But for those paying close attention to her work, solo album No 3 was an undeniable smash hit that filled a seven-year gap between long-form releases.
Where many recording artists — whether solo acts or bands — take a somewhat aloof approach to engaging with their fanbase, Palmer is in near constant communication with those who love her work. This isn’t just through social media channels, where she has more than one million Twitter followers. In the last decade or so, practically every artist has either chosen – or been prodded by their management and/or record label – to use social media in an attempt to increase their followers and, in turn, their album and ticket sales. Yet for Palmer, the preferred method of connection is a much more direct and meaningful platform.
Before we discuss that platform, it’s worth a brief detour into what has happened in Palmer’s life between her album releases. Most notably, her 2013 TED Talk, named The Art of Asking, detailed how her background as a street performer led to her rethinking the nature of the relationship between musicians and their audiences.
When she asked for help from her fans to make great art outside the major record label ecosystem that she experienced with The Dresden Dolls, almost 25,000 people responded by opening their wallets to crowd-fund her work on Kickstarter — in excess of $US1.19 million. The success of that 13-minute speech – which has now logged 5.7 million views – led to the 2014 publication of a book by the same name, which detailed Palmer’s journey from street statue to queen of crowd-funding in sparkling, funny, honest prose. It remains a must-read for any artist in search of a road map to guide their creative life.
As detailed in her memoir, Palmer also attracted her fair share of vociferous criticism by publishing a free-verse poem soon after the 2013 Boston Marathon bombing, where she dared to write from the perspective of what the 19-year-old bomber, Dzhokhar Tsarnaev, must have been feeling while hiding at the bottom of a boat in someone’s yard in the wake of the incident.
Near the end of The Art of Asking, she writes unapologetically of this media firestorm: “To erase the possibility of empathy is also to erase the possibility of art. Theatre, fiction, horror stories, love stories. This is what art does. Good or bad, it imagines the insides, the heart of the other, whether that heart is full of light or trapped in darkness.” As her record-breaking Kickstarter campaign showed to the world, Palmer has succeeded at marching to the beat of her own drum like few others before or since. In recent years, this has taken the form of releasing new songs as soon as they were completed, rather than stockpiling these compositions for a grouped EP or album release, like much of the rest of the participants of the modern music business.
She initially thought she’d been freed from the shackles of being beholden to anyone but those who cared most deeply about her music. It worked, to an extent but, over time, she came to realise her songs were now being voraciously consumed and loved by her existing listenership – but for those who weren’t keenly tuned to her frequency, there was very little attention being paid to her tactic of drip-feeding new music. Viewed another way, Palmer had unintentionally created an echo chamber that was all but impenetrable to those not already familiar with her work.
Many artists choose to release their work into the world so that it’s no longer just rolling around inside their heads. And almost every artist wants the widest possible audience to hear, see, feel and respond to their work, because that is the very nature of art: it is composed by people, for the people.
Eventually, Palmer came to understand that her approach of releasing one song at a time wasn’t quite working as she had hoped, and she had to admit a certain level of hypocrisy, too, when she turned the artist-fan relationship around in her mind.
“Even for the artists that I deeply love and admire – from Nick Cave, to Lorde, to Radiohead – I’m not sure I would actually listen to a track if they put one out every 10 days. At a certain point I would just be like, ‘F..k you – make a record, and let me know’,” she says with a laugh. “ ‘Let me digest this all in one sitting. Stop bothering me’.” Hence the release of her third solo album, which Palmer has spent much of this year touring. Over time, There Will Be No Intermission has morphed into a three-hour blend of singing and storytelling, where the singer alternates between piano, ukulele and tales ripped from the pages of her own life.
As well as festival and headline shows throughout Australia from late December, Palmer will stage an unusual, world-first public performance at the Mona Foma festival in Launceston, where she’ll sit for several days in a confession room and invite members of the public to tell her their deepest, darkest secrets.
Says Palmer: “Instead of just collecting people’s stories and pain and confessions, I’m going to take copious notes. And after sitting with people for a few days, I’m going to take an entire day alone at MONA. I’m going to synthesise all of those notes into a song and then I’m going to debut that song at the festival.” And then? “I’ll put it out on my Patreon so that I actually get paid,” she says with a laugh. “MONA’s not going to necessarily pay for me to sit there for 20 hours and listen to people’s stories. But my community will pay me, so it all works out.”
And so, lastly, to this unavoidable and fascinating aspect of Palmer’s artistic life. Since March 2015, she has been using crowd-funding platform Patreon as a hub to connect with fans who have chosen to pay her a certain amount of money per month, whenever she feels the desire to release new art into the world. What does this mean in real terms?
“I live in the world’s sweetest, most profitable echo chamber in history,” she told screenwriter and filmmaker Brian Koppelman on The Moment podcast in April. “I don’t know any other indie musicians out there who can sit down today, demo a song, upload it to Soundcloud and charge their fans $55,000. I can. It’s a really great, lucrative echo chamber.” How this works is that Palmer essentially has access to her fans’ bank accounts, and whenever she decides to publish a piece of new material – a song, a music video, or even a whole album of songs recorded with her father, Jack Palmer, as she did with 2016’s You Got Me Singing – she can essentially push a button and get paid, to the tune of about $US55,000 for the first piece of content per month, then about $US40,000 for the second piece, $US30,000 for the third, and so on.
“It’s like Kickstarter, except fans are charged by the month instead of just once,” Palmer explained to Koppelman. “If you’re a $5 patron, you can either give me an unlimited amount of $5 pledges – meaning that if I put out 10 things that month, you’d be charged $50. That’s a lot, so if you’re on a budget, you can cap your pledge at $10 and still get all the content, but you’d only be charged for the first two events.” On average, Palmer publishes between two and four items per month. “I am making a really insanely good living for a mid-list indie musician,” she said, with evident glee. “But I also work my ass off, and have a full-time team, and a giant office, and basically run a production company.” When Koppelman wondered aloud what an artist like Lady Gaga – whose myriad fans self-identify as “Monsters” – might reap from making such a move, Palmer replied by speaking slowly to emphasise each word: “She would clean the f..k up.” In the performing arts, such unadorned discussions of money are sometimes seen as uncouth or unbecoming. Perhaps you just had a similar reaction as you read the above paragraphs, when you saw an artist doing something that is so rarely seen in popular culture: proudly and baldly revealing the cold, hard facts of the direct financial link she has with her 15,000 or so financial backers scattered throughout the world.
It is a fascinating thought experiment, though: what if Taylor Swift, Paul McCartney, Ariana Grande or Kanye West – or, closer to home, Kasey Chambers, Paul Kelly, Jessica Mauboy or Jimmy Barnes – reached the end of whatever professional obligations they had with their record label, and instead switched to the model that Palmer has so skilfully and artfully adopted?
Such a move takes abundant faith and risk tolerance, as well as a willingness to stay in regular contact with your audience. It’s plainly not for everyone, but for Palmer, the results are both remarkable and undeniable.
When she returns to Australia next month, she’ll meet and greet local fans whose belief in her work is such that they entrust her with an amount of their money each month, so Palmer can continue doing what she does best: make art. And so, whenever she next decides to pencil something as challenging as writing a good song about abortion on her to-do list, she has the resources – and the audience – for it to be heard widely, loudly and clearly.
Amanda Palmer’s national tour begins at the Woodford Folk Festival (December 30), followed by shows in Launceston, Melbourne, Brisbane, Canberra, Blue Mountains, Adelaide, Sydney and Perth, before concluding in Darwin (February 29).
IN THE KNOW Born: April 30 1976, New York City, US.
Studied: Arts at Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut. Big break: In 2013, her popular TED Talk connected the dots from her past as a street performer to her record-breaking crowd-funding project, which raised $US1.19 million on Kickstarter.Career highlights: Signing to Roadrunner Records with her punk cabaret duo The Dresden Dolls and releasing two albums; pursuing a solo career as a crowd-funded independent artist; publishing a New York Times best-selling memoir in 2014 named The Art of Asking: Or How I Learned to Stop Worrying and Let People Help.
CREDIT: Andrew McMillen
Word count: 2600
