VICTIMS
Just two weeks ago, Brian Dallow spent a blissful three days with his only son, Gavin, at the Adelaide Oval watching the second Test.
In the new year, the lawyer, ­Rotarian and tennis umpire was due to serve as a linesman at the Australian Open.
At 4.30pm on Wednesday, 85-year-old Brian led the Dallow family into the front garden of their humble home in Adelaide’s outer suburbs to confirm the worst.
His son, Gavin, 53, and step-granddaughter Zoe Hosking, 15, were both dead in the New Zealand volcano tragedy.
Gavin and Zoe were among seven Australians and two New Zealanders identified as dead or presumed dead by New Zealand Police on Wednesday, with the list of nine expected to grow as the next of kin of at least five other missing people are notified.
Also named were Brisbane mother and IT developer Julie Richards, 47, and her vet science student daughter Jessica, 20, Melbourne woman Krystal Browitt, 21, and Coffs Harbour couple Richard Elzer and Karla Mathews, both 32. The two New Zealanders were tour guides Hayden Marshall-Inman and Tipene Maangi.
Zoe’s mother, Santos engineer Lisa Dallow, 48, is among 22 volcano victims not named by police for privacy reasons, who remain in a critical condition in hospital, requiring airway support to breathe.
Ms Dallow is fighting for her life in a Hamilton hospital, in a coma with burns to 57 per cent of her body.
Among other missing Australians feared dead or severely injured are two Sydney families, who remain unaccounted for after they visited White Island on Monday as part of a 12-night Royal Caribbean cruise of New Zealand and the South Pacific aboard cruise liner Ovation of the Seas.
The Knox Grammar community was on Wednesday fearing the worst for students Matthew Hollander, 13, and his brother Berend, 16, their mother Barbara and father Martin, a Transport for NSW freight investment manager and Old Knox Grammarian.
Family of North Willoughby’s Anthony Langford, his wife Kristine, son Jesse, 19, and daughter Winona, 17, had rushed to New Zealand, amid unconfirmed reports that Jesse was in hospital — with no word from the other three family members.
A crowd-funding campaign was under way to assist parents Karen and Craig Griffiths to travel to New Zealand to be at the bedside of their Coffs Harbour-based son, Jason, 33, who family friends said was in hospital with burns to 80 to 90 per cent of his skin after visiting White Island with now deceased friends Richard Elzer and Karla Mathews.
Retired Engadine couple Marion and Nick London, both 56, are also in hospital — Marion in a critical condition.
As he spoke of being blessed to have had three days of Test cricket with Gavin, Brian Dallow was accompanied by Gavin’s twin sister, Meredith — who choked back tears as her father spoke — and five other family members.
“I was lucky enough to spend those last three days of the Test match with him, which was only two days prior to when he left on the trip,” Mr Dallow said.
“That’s something I will always have with me.” The distraught family also paid tribute to Zoe, a much-loved Year 9 student at Adelaide’s St Aloysius College who was a passionate camper and loved the Girl Guides.
“She was always so busy, she was a keen guider, and she sang the national anthem here at the baseball the other week,” Mr Dallow said. “She was always on the go. Naturally all this will have a big impact on us, just coming on Christmas. We are really going to miss them.” Mr Dallow said his son’s body had been identified at a hospital in Auckland and that he would be flown home after a post mortem had been conducted, but was unclear as to when that would occur.
Lisa’s brother, Melbourne man David Francis, on Tuesday travelled to New Zealand, where he discovered his sister in hospital and conveyed the sad news regarding Gavin and Zoe to family back home.
Mr Dallow told The Australian the family had “great concerns” about the fact that Gavin, Lisa and Zoe were allowed to visit White ­Island at all.
“If anything, Gavin was ultraconservative,” Mr Dallow said.
“He wouldn’t do anything reckless or dangerous or stupid. He worked at the Legal Services Commission for years so he knows what stupid people act like. He would have never done anything to endanger himself or especially his family. If he’d seen or read or been told anything about the dangers, there is no way he would have taken his family to that island.” Deceased Brisbane pair Julie and Jessica Richards were as close as a mother and daughter could be.
The two shared sporting triumphs, family celebrations, overseas holidays, a kindness of heart and, most of all, a thirst for adventure. In family photographs, Julie and Jessica were always beaming, faces pressed cheek-to-cheek, arms wrapped around each other.
Julie and Jessica had been waiting excitedly for months for their latest adventure, a cruise to New Zealand on the Royal Caribbean cruise ship Ovation of the Seas.
On Wednesday morning, Julie’s brother Michael Eborn received the phone call from New Zealand Police that he had been dreading ever since news broke of the White Island volcano tragedy: Julie and Jess had become the first confirmed Australian victims of the eruption.
“What can you say? It’s just devastating news. New Zealand police confirmed this morning that both Julie and Jess are amongst the deceased in this tragic incident in New Zealand,” said family spokesman John Mickel.On Wednesday afternoon, Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk expressed her “deep sadness” over the deaths, revealing she knew the family. “I know members of the family,” Ms Palaszczuk said on Twitter. “I offer my profound condolences to everyone going through what this family is going through.”
CREDIT: RACHEL BAXENDALE; DAVID PENBERTHY; SARAH ELKS
Word count: 980
