AS fires continue to destroy Australian land – killing people, devastating homes, and wiping out our native species – the cockroaches have started to come out.
It’s shocking, yet totally predictable, how quickly nasty little critters emerge to feed on people’s leftover lives.
As people open their hearts and wallets all over the world to pour millions of dollars into bushfire recovery efforts, these crooks scurry around to get some of the loot.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission says there have been dozens of scammers reported to them but that there are likely to be many more. People think they have given to volunteer firies, or grieving families, and plenty of these kind souls have no idea they’ve been duped.
It’s particularly fiendish to work out who to give to because of the bewildering number of options.
From the obviously legitimate, like the Red Cross or the volunteer firefighting associations, to the very busy grey area of online fundraising, to the outright cheaters.
How do you start to sort through them?
The absolute, lying bastard scams are not necessarily easy to spot. In one instance, people claiming to be from a bank – pretending to help, to offer assistance – called fire victims, trying to get their bank details.
An Adelaide Hills woman targeted a church, claiming to be a victim of the Cudlee Creek fires to get donations.
One con artist, within hours of the news breaking that father and son Robert and Patrick Salway had died fighting the NSW fires, had set up an online fundraising campaign pretending to be a niece.
The Daily Telegraph reported the grieving family was gutted when it found out. As well as people impersonating the relatives of victims to ask for money, the ACCC says there are also crowd-funding pages, websites, phone calls and texts pretending to be from charities.
Some scammers create their own charity names.
This is something we’ve seen before in the cancer fundraising area, where unknowns develop names that are strikingly similar to existing charities.
So, you know, make sure you’re giving to the CFS and that it’s not the Cruel Frickin’ Scammers who are after your cash.
“Do not donate via fundraising pages on platforms that do not verify the legitimacy of the fundraiser or that do not guarantee your money will be returned if the page is determined to be fraudulent,” the ACCC says.
And check if the “charity” is registered on the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission’s website.
Look out for the really bad guys. But also be wary of the heartfelt-but-possibly-misguided fundraising efforts.
There are almost 2000 results for “Australian Bushfires” on the crowd-funding website GoFundMe. Many of them say the money will go to large, reputable organisations. But many are overseas.
There are people in Waikiki doing burpees for the Red Cross. Someone in Mississauga, Canada, is raising funds to just “Save Australia”.
They are probably (mostly) entirely well-meaning. But there are more questions to be asked in this grey online world where thousands are competing for your dollars.
Is this person definitely going to give all the money they raise directly to the Salvos, or the Red Cross, or the local firefighters? And if they are, why don’t you just give that money directly?
Are you giving to this specific fundraising effort because it’s a friend, trying to rebuild their home?
Or someone you barely know, tugging at your heartstrings and twanging your guilt nerves? Or is it a celebrity, using their worldwide brand to drum up millions?
Comedian Celeste Barber has raised over $30 million that way, and that is a stellar effort. But do you know exactly where the money is going?
And if you’re giving to a known organisation, is it a group that will spend the money efficiently, or might they waste it on administration because they don’t know what they’re doing?
If they’re a charity, you can suss them out at the Australian Charities and Not-for-profits Commission website.
How will your donation be used? Is it possible it will end up on top of insurance money, or government assistance? Does that matter?
Is it a church, or broader institution, that might suck the funds back into general revenue?
Can you check?
And hey, while your bulls..t detector is on high alert, keep an eye on all the misinformation being circulated online about the cause of the fires and the role of hazard-reduction. Oh, and if you see Liberal backbencher Craig Kelly on the telly, be forewarned that your detector should be going off the charts.
It is heartwarming to see how many people want to give, to help strangers. And it’s a cold, cruel fact that there are plenty of people out there who will take advantage of that generosity.
So you’re better off giving your donation to one of the big guys, or a local mob you know and feel passionately about. Don’t burn it.THE ACCC NOW HAS A DEDICATED LINE FOR BUSHFIRE-RELATED SCAMS. IF YOU SEE ONE, CALL 1300 795 995.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD
Word count: 840
