INSPIRED by NFL team the Green Bay Packers, the Adelaide Lightning is offering fans their own “stake” in the WNBL team under a new crowd-funding campaign.
Two weeks after the franchise was saved by a consortium headed by former Light-ning president Bruce Spangler, the team has set about ensuring its long-term future by turning to its supporters. The Lightning will today officially unveil sponsorship strategy offering fans the chance to buy a brick in the players’ tunnel or to have their name printed on the jersey for next season.
The idea was inspired by the Packers, who are the only publicly owned franchise in the NFL when more than 360,000 shares in the team were snapped up by fans in a stock sale in 2016. In the case of the Lightning, $25 will buy fans a brick with their name on it in the team’s inclusion wall tht players will touch before every home game at Adelaide Arena next season.
The second tier is aimed at small businesses, when $500 will get their name on the players’ singlet and according to the club it has already secured a personal commitment from state Labor MP Katrine Hildyard to be among the first to sign on.
Club legend Rachael Sporn and coach Chris Lucas, who has just re-signed for three years, are encouraging fans to get behind the team for next season. “We really hope to build on that momentum from the amazing finish to the season,” Sporn said.
“It’s etched into everyone’s mind, the buzz in the stadium from game two and what I loved was there was some controversy with the one-point margin. So it was something people spoke about for a couple of weeks and they realise what a great product the WNBL has.
“Chris Lucas is pretty excited about next season and building on that and I want to see it go from strength to strength. I love the concept of that community support. The bricks is thinking outside the square and I hope $25 is not going to be too tough on people who can feel part of the team and the girls will run through the race. There are some great ideas coming out of the club at the moment. They’re even talking about putting people’s names on the court with special lightning so it’s a really exciting time.” In further good news, the Lightning is poised to re-sign star three-point shooter Lauren Nicholson, who was also named the WNBL’s defensive player of the year this season.FANS WANTING TO SUPPORT THE TEAM CAN VISIT WWW.SPORTSFOUNDATION.ORG.AU AND FOLLOW THE “DONATE TO SPORT” PROMPTS
CREDIT: REECE HOMFRAY
Word count: 440
