GREATER Western Sydney has responded savagely at the selection table to last week’s poor performance against Richmond as the Giants bid to ignite their season against Gold Coast on Saturday.
Ex-Demons and Kangaroos ruckman Braydon Preuss will finally make his debut for GWS in his second season in orange and charcoal – but won’t be partnering Matt Flynn, who’s been dropped.
Jake Riccardi and Jarrod Brander also lost their spots in Leon Cameron’s side after kicking only two goals between them in the opening fortnight.
“It’s been a long time waiting (for Preuss) because of the challenges we’ve had with some of the injuries, but he will play this weekend,” Cameron said.
“He played really well (in the VFL) last week. I think people tend to forget he had back surgery in the off-season, so it’s taken us a while to build him up.” Suns coach Stuart Dew said Izak Rankine will miss a second straight match after suffering a corked quad in Perth against West Coast in round 1.
Meantime, Essendon has run out of patience with Devon Smith, cutting the former star recruit for Friday night’s clash against Melbourne.
The Bombers axed Smith and Aaron Francis and brought in Nic Martin, Dylan Shiel and Andrew Phillips, while premiers the Demons remain unchanged from last week’s victory over Gold Coast.
Collingwood dropped Zach Guthrie and Luke Dahlhaus while bringing back Sam De Koning and Shaun Higgins for the clash against Geelong at the MCG on Saturday.
The Magpies get back defender Brayden Maynard from a two-week suspension but they have lost both Beau McCreery and Nathan Kreuger to injury.
Veteran St Kilda ruckman Paddy Ryder prepares to play his first senior match for the year after successfully negotiating his VFL return last week after achilles issues.
Key defender Dougal Howard (health and safety protocols) is another important addition for the clash with Richmond at Marvel Stadium on Sunday.
Richmond brought back premiership stars Dylan Grimes and Jack Riewoldt from injury, and named Territory youngster Maurice Rioli Jr for the Saints clash.
Port Adelaide has dropped off-season recruit Jeremy Finlayson and given Todd Marshall a reprieve as it seeks to find it the best forward formula without star Charlie Dixon.
Port will instead field a shorter forward line in the inaugural Friday night’s clash with the Crows, bringing Jed McEntee and Sam Mayes into the team to play alongside Marshall and Mitch Georgiades. Five-time Showdown Medallist Robbie Gray will be sidelined because of Covid protocols.
CREDIT: MARC MCGOWAN; NICK SMART
Word count: 420
