Sam Messina is the University of Adelaide’s first chief student entrepreneur. And things are going so well with his new business that he believes he and his business partner, fellow student Christian Alexandru, will be making a healthy profit by the end of the year.
Their company, that are designed and manufactured by the two student owners, who are in the final year of their electrical and electronic engineering degree.Ortomi, makes and sells companion robots The robots “are designed to keep you company, especially if you don’t have much social interaction,” said Mr Messina, who is Ortomi’s chief executive.
The title may sound grandiose, particularly because he, as chief executive and Mr Alexandru as chief operating officer, manufacture the product in Mr Messina’s garage, making the cases on a 3D printer and soldering the electronic components themselves.
But sales are growing exponentially, with about 20 sold in May, 50 in June, 100 in July, and they were planning for 200 in August before supply-chain problems interfered. A shipment of parts has just arrived for the pair to fill 40 orders.
The cube-shaped robots, which come in 10 colours, express their emotions on a screen.
“It’s very popular with people who have an office job to have it on their desk,” Mr Messina said.
The robot help people with mental-health issues, such as loneliness and social anxiety. It displays excitement and happiness if you pet it with your finger, it gets scared if you shake it, and if left alone, it might fall asleep.
It costs $65 and Mr Messina said it was the only product in its category in this price range.
was to outsource production. After that, they plan to add new features, such as the ability for the robots to interact with each other.Ortomi’s next step, he said, The company also plans to release a mobile app to allow owners to adjust the characteristics of their robot pet and to load software updates.
Mr Messina said their customers were balanced fairly evenly between females and males. And though the product might appeal to children, most of their users were adults. He said the US was the most popular market.
In his new role as the University of Adelaide’s chief student entrepreneur, which he will hold until the end of 2022, Mr Messina expects to be giving guest lectures to students to help develop their innovation skills and their entrepreneurial mindset.
He and Mr Alexandru have used ThincLab, the university’s start-up incubator, to support their company.
The university’s business dean, Noel Lindsay, said entrepreneurship was a critical part of every student’s skill set. “Sam will provide advice to other students who are looking to work on their own businesses while completing their degrees at the University of Adelaide,” Professor Lindsay said.
CREDIT: Tim Dodd
Word count: 465
