At a glance At Sky Stadium, Wellington: Wellington Phoenix 1 (Ben Waine 75') Adelaide United 1 (Ben Halloran 90+3'). HT: 0-0.
Wellington Phoenix were seconds away from pulling off an unlikely win in their opening game of the A-League Men season.
But they conceded in the 93rd minute to draw 1-1 with Adelaide United in a match where they played most of it with just 10 men.
New signing Yan Sasse's debut lasted just 25 minutes after the Brazilian playmaker was shown a straight red card for a dangerous challenge on Javi Lopez. He is the first A-League player in nine years to be sent off on debut.
The incident occurred when Sasse and Lopez challenged for a waist-high ball with outstretched legs. But with one leg raised, Sasse's planted foot slipped and he ended up scything his opponent's ankle, leaving referee Ben Abraham with no choice but to brandish the red card.
Despite playing with a man down, the Phoenix created better chances in the second half.
Oskar Zawada got on the end of a long ball from Nicholas Pennington and cut inside two defenders but his shot was tame and easily saved.
They looked on track to register their first opening round win since the 2018-19 season when substitute Ben Waine netted his first goal at Sky Stadium to give them the lead in the 75th minute. Waine seized on a loose ball in the box after the initial shot from Kosta Barbarouses was spilled by Joe Gauci.
But the under-manned Phoenix were unable to hang on.
They conceded off a corner in the third minute of stoppage time, with Ben Halloran tucking home a low-driven shot at the back post to snatch a dramatic late equaliser.
All six new Phoenix signings were named the starting XI with Zawada getting the nod to start up front ahead of Waine. Lucas Mauragis took the place of injured left-back Sam Sutton, ruled out with a hamstring niggle.
The big moment
Sasse's early red card was the biggest talking point with the Brazilian experiencing a debut to forget after he slid on the surface and lunged at Lopez. It was the quickest dismissal of any debutant in A-League history and left the Phoenix to play with a man down for 75 minutes.
Player of the day
Left out of the starting XI, Waine provided the impact coach Ufuk Talay wanted when he injected the 21-year-old into the game with half an hour to play. He showed great instinct to pounce on the loose ball in the box and took his goal well.
The big picture
Sasse will miss the Phoenix's next match against Central Coast Mariners back at Sky Stadium this Sunday through suspension. Talay is hoping to have Sutton back from his hamstring injury while Waine will be hoping his performance off the bench will lead to a start.
CAPTION:
Ben Waine, of Phoenix, celebrates after scoring against Adelaide United yesterday, Inset: Phoenix captain goalkeeper Oli Sail argues with referee Ben Abraham after Yan Sasse was shown a red card. GETTY IMAGES/PHOTOSPORT
CREDIT: Phillip Rollo
Word count: 515
