CRIME Stoppers SA has resorted to a Go Fund Me campaign to bankroll a statewide push to crack down on rural and regional crime.
After being denied support from the State Government at the election to fund the campaign, the not-for-profit organisation has turned to crowd-funding to get the initiative off the ground.
Crime Stoppers SA chairwoman Sharon Hanlon said the organisation relied on assistance from the business community and the state and federal governments but was willing to look elsewhere to achieve its goals.
“We rely on and actively seek support from State Government and the business community but tightening of our funding position has forced us to consider all avenues to raise funds,” she said.
“We hope that South Australians recognise the value that comes with the Crime Stoppers program and are generous in their support.” The initiative aims to raise $150,000 to develop and deliver a campaign aimed at reducing the rate of rural crime which leaves farmers millions of dollars out of pocket.
“We believe that a regional and rural campaign is of critical importance to every South Australian, whether they live or work in a country area or not,” Ms Hanlon said.
“Livestock theft across SA left farmers $1.2 million out of pocket in 2016-17. “In addition, farms have experienced theft of farm machinery, equipment, vehicles, material, tools and spare parts, all of which are needed to stay operational. Adding to the concern, theft of produce, seed and grain, as well as deliberately lit bushfires, can bring farming communities to their knees.” Figures show that 17 per cent of all farms will be impacted by burglary. Police Minister Corey Wingard said the Government would be reviewing Crime Stoppers’ funding request at the next State Budget.
“The Marshall Government, in consultation with SAPOL and other stakeholders, is focused on measures which help keep our communities safe, including those which target crime in rural areas,” he said.
Opposition police spokesman Lee Odenwalder said that because of Liberal budget cuts, “Crime Stoppers is being forced to fundraise in order to fulfil its essential role”.
FAIR GO FOR OUR REGIONS
CREDIT: MITCH MOTT
Word count: 355
