EVEN as Gretel Tippett sunk Australia’s final goal in a 73-37 win, the cheers continued as if they’d just won the World Cup trophy.
Zimbabwe fans, after all, had every reason to be ecstatic just to be in Liverpool, after the team launched a crowd-funding campaign so they could attend their first netball show-piece, having qualified as the runners-up of last year’s African Netball Championship.
On Friday the Gems had started with a bang, making history by beating Sri Lanka 79-49 to claim their first World Cup victory.
Yesterday, despite a scoreline that would generally be perceived as a thrashing by the Diamonds, the euphoria from the stands persisted unabated.
African drums, whistles, dance moves, chanting and melodic arrangements punctuated four quarters of pure, unadulterated on-court joy for the 13th-ranked nation – and quite a bit of confusion for the defending champions.
Australia’s performance was not the on-song, full-throttle show they put on against Northern Ireland in their opening match.
Whether their challengers’ raw zeal had rattled their rhythm was unclear, but the Diamonds’ collective movement was markedly more disjointed than coach Lisa Alexander would have liked.
That was evident just looking at the 18-9 opening-quarter scoreline, compared to their 24-7 lead at the same point against Northern Ireland.
They only won the third 15-13. And there was clear frustration at some of the umpiring decisions, some 12 hours after the first-ever permanent send-off in England’s feisty opening win over Uganda.
And there were times when composure rather than outward exasperation would have benefited some players. Goalers Caitlin Bassett (49/53) and Tippett (24/28) were primary offenders, conceding six and nine penalties respectively.
In Australia’s defence, they closed out the game with a strong 19-6 fourth quarter for a 36-goal winning margin, assisted by goalkeeper Courtney Bruce, who made nine intercepts to keep her side afloat.Alexander replaced Liz Watson at wing attack with Kelsey Browne after the second term, and April Brandley with Jamie Lee-Price at wing defence. But they were the only substitutions she made.
CREDIT: EMMA KEMP
Word count: 339
