THE couple who brought Warrawong Wildlife Sanctuary back to life have embarked on a new mission – to set up a hospital for animals injured in the bushfires.
Narelle MacPherson and David Cobbold have begun a crowd-funding campaign to raise money for the facility, which would make use of a large shed and quoll-breeding area on their land near Lake Cumbungi.
Mr Cobbold said the Mylor sanctuary, which reopened in 2018, wanted to provide space for native animals, such as koalas, kangaroos, reptiles and birds, which had been affected by fires, now and also into the future.
“We think there’s an immediate need because of what we call the second-wave emergency,” he said.
“Running into a fire and grabbing an animal is great but then what? Even the ones that aren’t burnt will run out of food.” Mr Cobbold hoped the site would become part of a wider network of properties ready to care for injured animals.
“We’re not even halfway through summer and if there’s such a thing as global warming, it’s going to be worse next year,” he said.
The couple, from Western Australia, initially bought a 28ha piece of the former Warrawong site in 2017 with the aim of resurrecting the sanctuary, which closed in 2013.
They later bought the 14ha Lake Cumbungi property next door, securing water for the operation.
“We’ve got a solar pump down at the lake at the moment and we’re just finding that’s not big enough for the sanctuary, let alone if we were to open up the other property and start using what’s over there,” Mr Cobbold said.
Injured animals would be returned to the wild or, if that was not possible, held in enclosures at the sanctuary.
So far, about $13,000 has been raised towards Warrawong’s $25,000 funding target.
Mr Cobbold said the property could become part of a network securing an “insurance population” of koalas.
Thousands of the marsupials are believed to be dead following the Adelaide Hills and Kangaroo Island fires.“As children, we were brought up to know that we do not keep all of our eggs in one basket,” Mr Cobbold said.
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE
Word count: 359
