MY parents, like Bob Byrne’s, lived through the Depression.
When I asked my father what caused the Depression he said nobody had any money. There was no money about. When I asked where it went, he couldn’t say.
Years later, I did some economics at university to find out where the money went.
You know what? The professors didn’t even know what money was, let alone where it went. All they could say was money was defined by what it did. Money is what money does, whatever that meant.
Anyway, my father, wise man that he was, resorted to an earlier version of crowd funding to buy a house.
The Starr-Bowkett Society organised groups of people, 1000 at a time, to agree to put one pound a week for 20 years into a kitty. Each week, one person got a draw of 1000 pounds to buy a house.
Fortunately, we got an early draw and bought a fine house at Henley Beach where my father lived for 50 years. Those who got a late draw found that, with inflation, 1000 pounds would no longer buy a house.
Doug Allen Toorak Gardens
Cheap beachfront WHEN we first came to SA in the early 1960s, we lived for a time at Kirkaldy Beach, at the end of Grange Rd, next to the sailing club, in a massive old house that had been converted into flats, including what had once been the stables.
I have always wondered who that old home originally belonged to. There were many shacks along the beach and plenty of sand as well. The site is now a block of apartments.
The beach areas were not the sought-after residential areas they are now. Cheap flats and rooms for the less-well-off were the norm.
Peter Blyth Williamstown
Poor subsitute I HAVE to agree with Carole Whitelock’s “Remakes are a mistake” (Boomer, December 31) when it comes to the movie versions of the sinking of the Titanic.
The black-and-white film A Night to Remember, starring Kenneth More, was more stark and moving for me than the coloured, hugely expensive remake, starring Kate Winslet.
The closing scenes of the former movie were unforgettable, with the remaining band members on board standing and playing the hymn Nearer My God to Thee, as the ship slowly sank.
Helen Rugless Glenelg East
Carnival character IN reply to Wendy Whitehorn’s letter about the laughing sailor on the top of the Crazy Castle at Semaphore (Boomer, November 19), I remember him very well after all these years. He was a regular amusement during the summer carnival. He was situated near the bucking-horse ride.
Reg Freak Peterhead● More letters: Page 40
Word count: 444
