OPPONENTS of a major accommodation project in Kangaroo Island’s largest national park are poised to battle the development in court, as the state’s planning panel prepares to rule on its fate today.
A crowd-funding campaign to cover legal fees to fight the plans for Flinders Chase National Park has generated almost $40,000 in donations.
Australian Walking Company wants to build two new “lodges”, comprising about 20 buildings, at Sanderson Bay and Sandy Creek.
Fraser Vickery, a management committee member of Kangaroo Island Eco Action, said groups opposing the company’s plans had engaged lawyers and were awaiting the planning assessment.
“People are keen to see the money used for a legal challenge – people are that angry,” Mr Vickery said.
Australian Walking Company wants to build the accommodation so it can host luxury tours along the Kangaroo Island Wilderness Trail.
Islanders opposing it have raised concerns including its potential to cause environmental damage and ruin the park’s appearance.
The Sandy Creek accommodation would be 1.2km from the walking trail, requiring vegetation clearance for new pathways and roads.
In a submission to the Planning Department, the Kangaroo Island Natural Resources Management Board said the project was “not in the spirit” of accommodation envisaged when the trail was proposed. It said it should be closer to the trail and existing campsites.
“The proposed footprint of the accommodation pods, associated buildings, and additional walking and access trails … and the increased human traffic, will have a negative impact on the fragile coastal habitat,” the board said.
Kathie Stove, who co-ordinated the legal funds campaign, was “thrilled” with its result. “The wild coast there is precious to a lot of people,” Ms Stove said.
Greens MLC Mark Parnell, pictured, said groups may argue in court that the accommodation did not comply with the park’s management plan and therefore the Government should not have consented to it being built.
Australian Walking Company general manager Heath Garratt said the project would create 30 full-time jobs.“To date we have held 20 public and private consultations despite there being no requirement and we will continue to evolve the project until we have met every standard, regulation or other environmental compliance requirement,” Mr Garratt said.
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE REGIONAL REPORTER
Word count: 371
