THE clock was ticking for Ireland-born, now Australia-based singer Áine Tyrrell. Set a goal of whipping up $18,000 in crowd-funding to underwrite her sophomore album, Return To The Sea, time, and money, was slipping through her fingers.
“It’s one of those funds where if you don’t reach your target, you don’t get anything,” Tyrrell tells Music Confidential. “I had 48 hours to go and I was still about $8000 down.” So one Sunday last June, the Byron Bay resident dived into the uncharted waters of social media.
“I wasn’t madly connecting with people on social media until that stage,” she says.
However, a “live Facebook busk” did the trick and the target was raised in just shy of 16 hours.
“I really saw the beautiful connection that can be made on social media,” she says.
Striking a chord with online fans, Tyrrell – who recently toured with SA’s Paul Kelly – was urged to continue connecting, so she began holding “virtual cup of teas” on Sundays.
With 37 under the belt, one particular session clicked with teacher Rachel Black who asked if her Salisbury North school, Lake Windemere B-7, could add the lyrics of her song, In This House, to the curriculum as a way of learning about the colonisation of Australia.
“It really resonated with her,” she says. “It’s not their style of music... it’s not a kid’s song.” She says the tune with indigenous artist Dane Kennedy – nominated for the 2018 International Songwriting Competition – is about consent and the destruction that can be caused without it.
“Some songs come really easily, and this one came through me,” she says. “I haven’t had many come like that.” Tyrrell is Skyping with teachers from 10 different SA schools about implementing similar programs and today she’ll appear at a workshop at Lake Windemere, where students from six other schools – in Salisbury, Woodville, Gawler, Two Wells and Coober Pedy – will present what they have learned.
Once a primary school teacher “in a former life”, Tyrrell has conducted songwriting workshops at universities and high schools.
“It’s just grown and grown and grown. I feel very privileged. The kids have resonated with the song so much,” she says. “It’s been a really beautiful thing that started with an online cup of tea.” SEE: ÁINE TYRRELL, COOEE ARTHOUSE, ALDINGA, TONIGHTTRINITY SESSIONS, SUNDAY
CREDIT: BEN CAMERON
Word count: 395
