THE fate of the near-$3 million owed to suppliers and employees of Hegs Pegs founder Scott Boocock now rests in the hands of liquidators.
Administrator Andrew Heard, of Heard Phillips Lieberenz, was appointed liquidator this week to Sbi Global, which includes Hegs Pegs Australia and other entities, Australians Welcome You, Bizi Bulb, Hegs Pegs and Sbi Innovation.
Mr Heard had been overseeing the voluntary administration process since August 15. He is now leading negotiations with interested parties on the sale of assets, after expressions of interest closed last Friday.
Liquidation, which involves winding up Sbi Global, was chosen as a course of action to ensure the best outcome for creditors.
“We have every expectation that we will be success in the sale of the assets. The sales campaign has attracted a number of interested parties.
“We expect to close out a contract in the near future,” he told The Advertiser. “Some creditors will see return through the sales process, including employee entitlements, but there is more investigation being done.” The list of creditors owed about $2.9 million also includes the Australian Taxation Office.
Mr Boocock attracted national and international fame as the inventor of Hegs – a plastic clothes peg with a hook for delicate clothes – which he designed after attempting to hang his wife’s cocktail dress on the washing line without leaving any marks.
Shark Tank shark and Red Balloon founder Naomi Simson became an investor in the business in 2015, paying $380,000 for a 15 per cent stake in the business. The Tonsley Innovation Precinct-based business, registered in 2013, was named the Telstra South Australian Business of the Year and also took out the SA Start-Up award in 2015.
National retailers, including Woolworths, Harvey Norman and Aussie Disposals, stock the product, which was exported to 18 countries.
The pegs were contract manufactured and packaged in SA through a number of companies until it stopped trading.
As of March last year, about 10 million Hegs were being annually made by about 50-75 people in SA.
“While the product was well developed and accepted into the market, the company’s financial capacity to continue to exploit the product was exhausted and needed fresh investment to continue,” Mr Heard has previously said.
ASIC records show Mr Boocock has a number of current businesses listed to the Tonsley precinct, including Cannabis Corporation, CACO and We Make A Difference Global, which are not subject to administration.
Mr Boocock did not respond to The Advertiser’s calls.Last year, Mr Boocock took to crowd-funding site Kickstarter to raise $105,000 for his other invention, Poppi, a mobile laundry basket with an adjustable height and launched a mobile application LOFO in an attempt to reunite people with their lost possessions.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 456
