LEGAL action could threaten the development of a $4 million nature-based tourism project on Kangaroo Island.
Australia’s most successful guided walking company has State Government-backed plans to develop its next project in the Flinders Chase National Park.
The Australian Walking Company plans include two “eco-sensitive” lodges, individual two-person sleeping pods as well as an upgrade of the historic lighthouse keeper’s cottages at Cape du Couedic to accommodate walkers on a four day hike.
But the project, which received a $900,000 Government grant, has drawn the ire of some locals due to its location and scope.
Environmentalists from the island have sent legal advice to the State Commission Assessment Panel (SCAP), the authority tasked with approving the project, arguing the project should not be approved because it does not adhere to the park’s management plan.
Eco-Action Kangaroo Island is representing the views of a number of groups on the island, including Friends of Flinders Chase, and raised concerns the project is proceeding without a legitimate environmental assessment of the potential impacts on nationally threatened species.
Friends of Flinders Chase spokeswoman Bev Maxwell told the Sunday Mail the planning authority could be meeting within weeks to determine the outcome of the project.
“Our legal advice is that this project is in variance with the plan and that information has been sent to the SCAP,” Ms Maxwell said.
Mr Speirs said he was confident the project was lawful.
“Members of the community should always be able to take legal action if they feel that they have got a case to push,” he said.
“But the Government is confident everything that has been worked through thus far has followed the correct processes.” His sentiments were echoed by the Australian Walking Company’s general manager Heath Garratt who last month answered questions from about 100 concerned residents.
“We responded to a competitive tender process and submitted our proposal based on the State Government’s documentation,” Mr Garratt said. “We have adhered to our compliance obligations and will continue to do so.”Eco-Action Kangaroo Island has a crowd-funding campaign to raise $75,000 it believes it will need for a Supreme Court legal challenge if the project is approved.
CREDIT: MATT SMITH
Word count: 363
