ADMINISTRATORS of South Australian entrepreneur Scott Boocock’s failed business, which includes Hegs Pegs, are trying to recover millions for creditors through a sale of assets.
An expressions-of-interest process for the sale of the assets, which will close on September 13, had already attracted a “good level of interest”, administrator Andrew Heard, of Heard Phillips Lieberenz, said yesterday.
“There has been a good level of interest displayed in the assets from parties, including overseas interest.” About a dozen creditors attended a meeting last week where they received information on the debts totalling $2.9 million, and received a report on the progress of the sales campaign.
Award-winning Hegs Pegs Australia’s parent business, Sbi Global, which also includes Mr Boocock’s other entities – Australians Welcome You, Bizi Bulb, Hegs Pegs and Sbi Innovation – was placed in voluntary administration on August 15.
Mr Boocock attracted international fame as the inventor of Hegs Pegs – a plastic clothes peg with a hook for delicate clothes – which he designed after attempting to hang his wife’s cocktail dress on the washing line without leaving any marks.
Red Balloon founder Naomi Simson became an investor in the business in 2015, paying $380,000 for a 15 per cent stake in the business.
The Tonsley Innovation Precinct-based business, registered in 2013, was named the Telstra South Australian Business of the Year and also took out the SA Start-Up Award in 2015.
National retailers, including Woolworths, Harvey Norman and Aussie Disposals, stock the product, which was exported to 18 countries. While initially made in China, Hegs Pegs is now made in SA through several contract companies.
As of March last year, about 10 million Hegs Pegs had been made, supporting up to 75 jobs.
“The product is well developed and accepted into the market, but the company’s financial capacity to continue to exploit the product has been exhausted and it now needs fresh investment to continue,” Mr Heard said.
Last year, Mr Boocock took to crowd-funding site Kickstarter to raise $105,000 for his other invention, Poppi, a mobile laundry basket with an adjustable height.
He also launched a mobile application, LOFO, in an attempt to reunite people with their lost possessions, including pets.
Mr Boocock, who was not present at the meeting, did not return The Advertiser’s calls.Another meeting of the creditors will be held on September 16.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 393
