QUESTION: WHAT DO tourist destinations have in common with concerts? Answer: A heaving mass of smartphones held aloft.
The mobile phone hasn’t completely eliminated compact cameras but it’s making significant progress. Camera and Imaging Products Association (CIPA) data shows sales of cameras with built-in lenses more than halved between September 2017 and 2019, while Apple iPhones ranked as the most popular “cameras” used to share photos on Flickr. But even the most advanced smartphone cameras come with obvious limitations, and that’s why accessory makers are stepping in to bridge the gap. Here are three companies to watch if you want to take your “smartphoneography” to the next level.
BLACK EYE Created by three Finnish friends – a professional photographer and two snowboarders – Black Eye is a company dedicated to making more of smartphone cameras. Its latest creation, the Pro Kit G4 ($370), comes with a stiff-sided case and contains three smartphone lenses on clips that will fit on most smartphones (even those with multiple rear cameras).
The lenses include a fish-eye option with a fun, face-warping, 180-degree view; a wide-angle lens with 120-degree view; and a 2.5x telephoto lens that doubles as a solid portrait lens. All three lenses are well made, though their lens caps can be tricky to remove. Dedicated phone photographers can pair these with a Black Eye Photo Case ($50) to screw the lenses to the phone directly.
MOMENT The company that began on crowd-funding site Kickstarter describes itself as “in for more moments, less stuff”. However, Moment does offer an incredible array of options for smartphone photographers, from phone lenses and case all the way to filters.
The company’s lens range, for example, includes an anamorphic lens that creates wide shots and artistic flare effects, macro lenses for up-close details, and a “Superfish” fish-eye lens with 170-degree perspective.
Neutral density filters for long-exposure photographs and circular polarising filters to make the most of colours in sunshine are also bound to make your smartphone photography stand out.
OLLOCLIP Long-time iPhone lens maker olloclip has faced a lot of challenges over the years, and none greater than when Apple added a second rear camera to its handsets. The company meets that challenge, however, with a bracket that slips over both iPhone XS lenses and lets users slide a lens into position.
The most popular olloclip kit ($160) includes a fish-eye lens, super-wide option, and a macro lens that help you capture ants’ faces (assuming you have a steady hand or a lot of luck). Unfortunately, it can’t offer solutions for the iPhone 11’s trio of cameras, but they’re undoubtedly working on it.
GADGET APPLE MACBOOK PRO FROM $3799, APPLE.COM/AUThose who need mobile computing grunt should appreciate Apple’s latest power move, releasing a MacBook Pro with a larger screen, better chip, faster storage, more speakers, and bigger battery. This Apple laptop is the first to receive a 16-inch screen and its much-criticised keyboard has been overhauled, now using a scissor mechanism to deliver 1mm of satisfying travel beneath every key. The Touch Bar and Touch ID fingerprint scanner transfer from the old model, but demanding users are likely to upgrade to get its Intel Core i9 chip, up to eight terabytes of solid-state storage, and a battery that will play video for up to 11 hours, or almost as long as you could be awake on that new Qantas flight.
CREDIT: Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 566
