IT’S saying something when South Africa is bound for the World Cup semi-finals and Jamaica is not.
The Sunshine Girls’ loss to England, which will almost certainly mean failing to make the tournament’s knockout stage for the first time since 1995, isn’t just a story about the downfall of the world’s second-ranked country. It’s also a tale of another’s rise.
Because when the SPAR Proteas upset Jamaica 55-52 on Sunday — just as they had downed England in January’s Quad series — Norma Plummer’s fifth-ranked side announced itself as a bona fide global heavyweight.
Beat Uganda today and it will secure a last-four spot, and likely a showdown with Australia or New Zealand.
There’s a sense the continent is the sport’s real sleeping giant. There are three African countries in the world top 10 — South Africa, Uganda (sixth) and Malawi (ninth).
But 13th-ranked World Cup debutant Zimbabwe edged eighth-ranked Northern Ireland on Sunday and even ruffled a few Australian feathers, despite losing.
Zambia is at world No. 15.
“If they got systems and daily training environments and resources that we had, they’d be amazing,” Diamonds coach Lisa Alexander said.
“Norma Plummer has implemented changes in South Africa and she’s only just tipped the top of the iceberg.
“She knows that they’ve got the talent over there. I’ve seen it too. I’ve been to Namibia and observed up-close the talent that there is in Africa.
“If they get a system in place like Australia, New Zealand and England have, they should be dominating in a few years.” As ever, funding is the key and the yawning gap between the haves and the have nots remains as wide as ever. Uganda, known as the She Cranes, qualified for the 2015 World Cup via the 2014 Africa Netball Championship in Botswana on a reported tournament budget of 600,000 Ugandan Shillings ($230) and were short on bottled water for games.
Though the government gave the team a significant funding boost for the Sydney tournament, the players took matters into their own hands, planning a car wash to cover travel logistics. That was cancelled due to its potential to humiliate the government.
This time around, it was Zimbabwe that was forced to resort to a crowd-funding campaign from within the country and the diaspora just to get the team to Liverpool.South Africa is looking forward to hosting the 2023 tournament in Cape Town partly because it means resources can be diverted directly to athlete development instead of travel.
CREDIT: EMMA KEMP LIVERPOOL
Word count: 419
