CLOSING the investment gap for women entrepreneurs by supporting them to work together is at the heart of a new cooperatives-focused incubat­ion program that will celebrate its first graduates this week.
On Thursday, 13 women, from regional areas – and with their own stories of resilience – will be pitching their business ideas to a group of 100 at a Hen House Night, at Welland.
“These women have found each other to come together to set up three cooperatives and they will be cash-raising and customer-raising on the night,” organiser Moira Were told The Advertiser.
A business consultant and co-founder of a 2500-strong South Australian-based Facebook networking group, Chooks SA, Ms Were said the Hen House incubation program, funded by philanthropic organisations, was different from other start-up support groups around.
Hen House is a co-operative venture by Ms Were and local social entrepreneurs Amy Orange and Dorothy Belperio.
“Everyone knows about the gender pay gap; the gender investment gap is phenomenal,’' Ms Were said.
“Less than 4 per cent of venture-capital funds go towards backing women entrepreneurs but we know women are incredibly investable and can be savvy investors.
“When Shebah (a private taxi service for women, by women) opted for crowd-funding, nearly 90 per cent of the investors were women.
“Through Chooks SA, Hen House Night and another as-yet unfunded program, Hatched (for ongoing mentoring support), we are trying to build more support networks and initiatives for women entrepreneurs.” The Hen House incubator program is open primarily to women founders with ideas to set up for-profit or not-for-profit co-operatives.
“Historically, co-ops have been the best mechanism to support women,” Ms Were said.
The customised 10-week program provides early support in learning how to create a micro-enterprise, including receiving voluntary branding, survey and financial planning support, before pitching to a panel and winning token funding support from potential customers at a Hen House Night event.
“Attendees will vote on their favourite co-op idea. Each group will end up with a nest egg,” Ms Were said.
Part of the ticket proceeds will be converted into tokens for attendees, which can be used to vote for the businesses.
The three fledgling enterprises pitching for support are: ■ Merch Purch: Set up by Wei Gao, Samantha Hester and Griselle Carter to provide promotional products for organisations with sustainable options.
■ Chook Pen Publishing: A social enterprise by founders Christyana Bambacas, Tully Bates, Mary-Anne Bennett, Rommie Corso, Alysha Herrmann and Kirste Vandergiessen to provide writers with support services and alternative publishing pathways.
■ Stellar Bella: Bec Naylor, Sharlene Lynch, Tanya Ede, and Rose Davidson’s initiative to enable women to “pay it forward” by funding self-care experiences for others affected by domestic and family violence.
The Hen House incubator program was supported by a number of sponsors, including the Tingari-Silverton Foundation and the Wyatt Trust.
Applications for the next cohort are open via the Chooks SA group page through Facebook.Gender investment gap is phenomenal
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 493
