In my world, people get jobs when they run out of money. They travel when they can afford to and come home when the dough runs out.
But there’s a new generation of Instagram Influencers who see work as too intrusive and instead ask strangers to fund their travels. This gives them more time to post photos, work on their abs and get more tattoos.
Of course, that’s not how they see it.
In their eyes, they’re not freeloaders, they’re freedom seekers. They’re not selfish, they’re self-aware.
They’re not narcissists, they’re “lovers, travellers, dream chasers”. This is what one German couple, Catalin Onc and Elena Engelhardt, call themselves on their Insta account.
This week they’ve been attracting international ridicule for crowd funding a tandem bike ride from Germany to Africa.
They call it “a celebration of life, as we ride freely across mountains, by the sea and through metropolitans”. They say they want to “take you all on this huge adventure”. Take us for a ride, more like it.
They say: “together we can make a difference”. This really means “together we can get out of having to do an honest days’ work and the difference is that we’re trying to make you feel good about paying for it”.
Their pitch for money on GoFundMe says: “We hope you all enjoy and learn with us.” This really means: “We hope you enjoy the privilege of paying for us so that you learn how much more worthy we are than you.” The twenty-something models, who see being on vacation as their real vocation, say they are all about “less talking more action”. What about less sponging and more job hunting?
“When you have the impact we do on others’ life, getting a job is not an option,” a recent post of theirs said.
I’d say that when you have tattoos over 70 per cent of your body like Catalin does, getting a job is not an option.
“We could model and make fast money, but we don’t want to advertise consumerism. A normal job at this point would be detrimental,” they said.
And yet they are happy to rely on Catalin’s mother working two jobs to support them.
“At this very moment, my mother is funding us, she works two jobs and has not much herself. We didn’t ask her for money but she loves that she is able to help,” one recent post from the couple read.
“Mom, I want you to know, that it is not only us but hundreds of others that benefit from your help.” Can you believe the arrogance?
Catalin and Elena say: “We could live a lavish lifestyle… like most people on social media do. We choose not to.” And yet their Instagram posts show them living in the lap of luxury in Paris, Bali, Germany, Kathmandu, Italy and Nepal.
How on earth can two fools – who write things like: “I wanted a challenge and mountains delivered” think they’re helping anyone?
Pleasingly, the pair is getting slammed on social media and so far has raised just $360 towards their $16,000 goal. In nine days, 11 people had been inspired enough by them to put their hand in their pockets.
This week Catalin posted that he is planning to do “the hardest thing I’ve ever done mentally and physically, soon”.
It’s not working 9 to 5 like the rest of us, but “going on a walk”. “I will walk as long as I possibly can,” he wrote.
One follower responded: “Try walking to a job interview”.
Touche.
I also like this one.
Catalin and Elena write: “Being able to ask for and accepting a helping hand when needed is strength, have the courage, no matter which area of your life it is in.” Someone responded: “I’m sure McDonald’s is willing to lend you a helping hand.” Sadly, they’re not the only ones who think working is something other people do. There’s also US woman Becca Gronski, who calls herself a “spiritual teacher, life coach, reiki and crystal healer”. She asked all the people she has helped on their “personal spiritual journeys” to “give back” by helping fund her holiday.
“I believe we should all have the opportunity to have the things we need at our finger tips, whether or not we have the money for them,” Becca wrote.
Doesn’t this sum up the Instagram culture, where people refuse to see a lack of money – or manners – as a barrier to living their dreams?
Whether it’s the middle-aged woman trying to raise funds for her “midlife crisis squirrel tattoo”, the woman trying to get money to remove the numbers 420 she had tattooed on her forehead or the guys who wanted to put a Tardis into space, it seems no one wants to earn anything anymore.
I’ll give Catalin the last word. Frustrated with all the nasty people trying to call him a freeloader, he hit back.
“Having tattoos, a pretty girlfriend and followers on Instagram opens doors for us, it’s true,” he said.
What a pity the open door doesn’t lead into an employment agency. BLOG WITH SUSIEsusieobrien.com.au, follow her on Twitter @susieob and Facebook.com/susie.obrien.121
CREDIT: Susie O'Brien
Word count: 866
