KATE Miller-Heidke’s quest to represent Australia at the multi-million-dollar 2019 Euro­vision Song Contest is an expensive realisation of a five-year dream.
The acclaimed and award-winning popera singer, composer and performer is personally investing in her performance at the Tel Aviv contest which costs more than $44 million to stage over two weeks.
With SBS, Blink TV, her label EMI and her management also helping to bankroll the campaign, Miller-Heidke is still left with a considerable shortfall which she hopes can be met by an Australian Cultural Fund crowd-funding campaign, with contributions met by the Department of Communications and the Arts and Creative Partnerships Australia up to $60,000.
That funding will support her ambitious staging of her Zero Gravity performance with the internationally renowned performing arts company Strange Fruit.
“The vision we have for those precious three minutes requires sophisticated mechanical apparatus, professional rigging and experienced performers who are physical virtuosos,” Miller-Heidke posted on the Cultural Fund campaign.
“I’m confident there has never been a performance like this on the Eurovision stage, but the catch for me is the artist must fund it. Turns out this Eurovision adventure will be quite an expensive one – somewhere north of five figures and south of seven.” Along with her otherworldly vocals, it is the staging, which now includes Miller-Heidke and two dancers performing high above the stage on bendy acrobatic poles, which considerably shortened the odds of her making the grand final after her scene-stealing first rehearsal last weekend.
Miller-Heidke also switched up her Eurovision costume from the cascading dress she wore during her performance at the inaugural Australia: Decides selection show on the Gold Coast in February.
She engaged Sydney couture designer Steven Khalil to create a stunning metallic tulle and sheer organza costume which fits the song’s ethereal feel and interstellar look of her production.
Australia’s head of delegation Paul Clarke, who is also a director of the SBS broadcast of Eurovision, said Team Kate always planned to revamp the Zero Gravity production from the selection show.
But that became imperative when the diehard Eurovision community didn’t embrace the song or the performance with the same excitement Australia did.
“It seemed they had the reaction that ‘Oh yeah, we’ve heard opera and seen a lady in a big dress before so we’re not that excited’ and I was shocked,” Clarke said.
“So we took everything off the table and reworked it to the point they would go ‘Wow!’” The wow factor struck when Miller-Heidke took the Tel Aviv stage for the first time last weekend.
Some fan polls conducted by the Eurovision blogs placing her at No. 1 while those voting on influential site Wiwibloggs had her at No. 2 just behind Greece’s Katerine Duska after the rehearsals. Clarke, who got Australia invited to perform at the world’s biggest talent show thanks to our fascination with the contest over the past 35 years of its broadcast here, said the more the Eurovision got to know Miller-Heidke, the more they would love her.
“Eurovision is about passion; people believe in the artist or they don’t and we have to work on our public vote. That is imperative for Australia,” he said.
It was the public vote which let Jessica Mauboy down in Lisbon last year with the singer drawing the lowest total from fans and finishing 20th overall when her score was added to the jury votes.
Clarke said the Australian delegation had struggled to get the staging they wanted for Mauboy’s performance and the compromises taken inevitably affected how she looked on television with minimal lighting design and effects compared to other contestants.
They learnt from that experience and have been in close negotiations with the organisers of this year’s contest in Israel to fully realise Miller-Heidke’s creative concepts which not only include those hair-raising bendy poles but a dramatic intergalactic background video display of the earth and stars.
SBS commissioning editor of entertainment Josh Martin questions whether the novelty of Australia competing has worn off for fans, pointing out the stellar achievements of Mauboy, Guy Sebastian, Dami Im and Isaiah Firebrace in making the grand final.
“We’re in an exclusive club in that regard because 20-odd countries don’t make the grand final and we’ve done it every year of competition,” he said.
Martin said the success of the first selection show, which drew almost 300,000 viewers on a generally low-rating Saturday night slot, showed SBS continued to boost the popularity of Eurovision here.
“That was a way to get Australia further invested ahead of the contest by making them feel they had skin in the game,” he said.
Hosts Joel Creasey and Myf Warhurst are back on board this year and have the unenviable task of not only barracking for their homegirl contestant but spruiking the talents of the other performers during the broadcast.
Creasey believes the strength of Miller-Heidke’s distinctive vocals, honed on pop and opera and musical theatre stages here and around the world, will ultimately win over fickle fans.
“I really like the song but when I heard it live, her voice blew right through me. She’s the size of Myf and has this insane voice,” he said.
The politics of performing in Israel has meant that Miller-Heidke and the broadcast hosts have been approached by pro-Palestine activists who have urged entertainers to boycott the country.
“Myf has probably had more approaches because she’s more intelligent than me and no one wants to hear my opinions on politics,” he said. “The true purpose of Eurovision is about unifying people with music, it’s about peace.”SBS’S 2019 EUROVISION SONG CONTEST BROADCAST STARTS 5AM WEDNESDAY, WITH THE GRAND FINAL LIVE FROM 5AM ON SUNDAY.
CREDIT: KATHY McCABE
Word count: 948
