GOLD Coast beach volleyballer Jessyka Ngauamo’s 2020 Olympics dream hinges on a crowd-funding campaign after her funding was slashed.
Ngauamo, 23, and Phoebe Bell, 22, are Australia’s No.2 ranked women’s team and won the Queensland Open in January.
They need an estimated $10,000 to keep their Tokyo Olympics hopes afloat. “Unfortunately this financial year funding got cut and going into an Olympic cycle it’s a bit frustrating because we obviously want to play as many events as we can to improve and develop as a team,” said Ngauamo, the daughter of former Tongan rugby international and new Colleges coach Johnny.
“We’re having to fund or resource funding ourselves for this season so we’re approaching businesses and people in our support network who would want to be a part of our campaign and journey to Tokyo.” The pair will play in a rare Australian-based world tour event in Sydney from today to Sunday, after which they will head to tournaments in Thailand and Vietnam.
“(Those Asian tour events) are important for us to qualify for the world champs in July (in Germany), which we are sitting in a very good position for,” Ngauamo said.
“We’re quite safe with our qualification but we just need to get a couple of decent results to secure that spot.
“Our 2020 campaign kind of all sits on our Continental Cup next year, which is in June in China. It’s kind of like a Davis Cup where you have got a couple of teams playing for your country and if you win both of those games, then you advance.
“If it’s a draw … then you play a golden set, so it is a quite high pressure tournament.
“We’re not having to really depend on our world ranking because we already have a spot at that Continental Cup next year but with that, we still have to be able to play against good teams and test ourselves leading into that.”Born in Auckland and initially raised in Europe before moving to the Gold Coast in 2003, Ngauamo has been based in Adelaide as part of the full-time beach volleyball program for two years now.
CREDIT: CONNOR O’BRIEN connor.obrien@news.com.au
Word count: 362
