Kate Miller-Heidke carries Australia’s hopes at Eurovision with her pop-opera epic Zero Gravity – and then she’s heading to Adelaide’s Cabaret Festival, writes KATHY McCABE.
Ernie Miller Nuttall hates the sound of his mother’s singing. Unlike her massive fan base, Kate Miller-Heidke’s toddler, who turns three in June, emphatically demands she stop trying to share her prodigious talent with him. The little boy, who was lulled to sleep as a baby to the music of heavy metal band Megadeth, isn’t enamoured of any of her extensive repertoire of pop, opera or musical theatre.
“Ernie hates my singing,” Miller-Heidke says. “I have tried to show him my episodes of Play School and he goes ‘no, no’.
“I asked him why and he said he likes the real mummy … maybe it freaks him out to see me on TV but he’s not particularly a fan of my singing.” He may have to get used to it, however, as Queensland-born Miller-Heidke prepares for next month’s 2019 Eurovision Song Contest in Tel Aviv. The 37-year-old singer, songwriter and performer won her spot at the inaugural Australia: Decides show on the Gold Coast in February, orchestrated by SBS to engage the nation in the selection of our representative. And she did it with an over-the-top marriage of pop and opera, the musical intersection that has won her awards and acclaim around the world, from the English National Opera stage in London to the Coachella festival in California.
Perhaps it was the perfection of her soaring operatic runs, maybe it was the melding of her opposing musical loves, but for many people – as evidenced by the online reaction to the song ahead of the Australia: Decides event – Zero Gravity connected because of its brave and unique depiction of depression.
Before Ernie arrived on June 2, 2016, Miller-Heidke, had carved an enviable career juggling the disparate callings of pop star, opera performer and writer of musical theatre. As well as preparing for Eurovision, she and her husband, former Toowoomba musician Keir Nuttall, 44, have also been tweaking their score for the opening of hit musical Muriel’s Wedding’sMelbourne season starting later this month.
This flurry of creative activity is a relief for the woman who feared she might never recover from the fog of postnatal depression and artistic inertia that lasted for two years after Ernie’s birth. Zero Gravity captures the feeling of emerging from the darkness of depression into the light of living. She says there were moments when she despaired she would ever feel the “weightlessness” of joy again.
“Especially as some people describe having a kid as a life sentence,” she says, before pausing. “That needs context … because Keir and I have collaborated on so many projects, when Ernie was first born, I think we just sort of leapt into the concept that ‘OK, this is our new project together, we’re a great team, we can do this, blah blah blah’. And gradually the realisation dawns that this project never ends. And I am different now, and it’s never going to be the same again.” Miller-Heidke says while her recovery has been distilled into three minutes for the song, in reality it took a lot longer. “It was a variety of things that ended up [working]. Therapy, which I have found immensely useful at points throughout my life, and Ernie getting older and slightly more self-sufficient and sleeping better and giving me the time to do things for myself and get my energy back and see my friends, that kind of thing.
“It was great to see those girlfriends who could say, ‘Yeah, it’s f---ing lonely’. Parenthood, especially in the early days, is really hard, so just to hear everybody goes through that to some degree was helpful.” Born in Brisbane on November 16, 1981, Miller-Heidke says one of her earliest memories is of sitting in the old concrete tunnels in a park near her home and listening to her voice bounce around the walls for hours. She grew up in Brisbane’s western suburbs between mother Jenny Miller’s house at Indooroopilly and father Greg Heidke’s house at Auchenflower. She has a younger brother, David, and an older stepbrother, Paul, but no one else in her family is involved in the music industry.
Her father was a high-school principal at Kelvin Grove State College in Brisbane’s inner northwest, where Miller-Heidke completed Years 8 and 9, while her mother had a keen interest in the arts but was not musical.
Miller-Heidke says the first album she owned was a cassette of Kylie Minogue’s Tears On My Pillow, given to her for her eighth birthday, and she cites Joni Mitchell’s classic album Blue, which she bought when she was 15, as the record that changed her life.
Two years later, she was drafted into her first band, a short-lived act that featured three flautists and “broke up for obvious reasons”.
After school – she completed Year 10 at Brigidine Catholic College, Indooroopilly, and her final year at St Aidan’s Anglican Girls’ School at Corinda, a southwestern suburb – Miller-Heidke won a scholarship to the Queensland Conservatorium at Griffith University, from which she graduated in 2002, and later completed a Master of Music degree at Queensland University of Technology.
While she was studying she continued to exercise her pop sensibilities as a solo artist in the city’s bubbling avant-garde music quarters and recorded her debut independent EP, Telegram, in 2004. It was around this time that Miller-Heidke reached a crossroads and had to choose between pop and opera – she had spent several years with Opera Queensland as a developing artist and made her solo professional operatic debut as Flora in Benjamin Britten’s The Turn of the Screw in 2005.
But her pop single Space They Cannot Touch, a love song written with Nuttall, pricked the ears of Triple J and received considerable airplay, which put her on the radar of Australia’s major record company talent scouts.
That song would also become the third single from her debut studio album, Little Eve, released through Sony BMG in 2007.
“After uni, I had to choose between Opera Australia and a record deal,” she says. “I couldn’t do both but now I have found myself in this supremely lucky and awesome position of being able to incorporate different things, different challenges, different projects.” Her foray back into the “classical” world came when Miller-Heidke was offered a role in the most unlikely of musical productions – Jerry Springer: The Opera. It came as she was enjoying mainstream success courtesy of a string of singles from her second album, Curiouser, with single Last Day On Earth scoring her first Top 10 hit in 2009.
But it was another single from Curiouser that would become a defining moment of her pop career and herald Miller-Heidke, not only as a recording artist, but as a musical force for change. Just as Zero Gravity has connected with those battling depression, so Caught In The Crowd, which celebrated its 10th anniversary in February, fostered an important dialogue about bullying.
Winner of the 2008 International Songwriting Competition, the song is narrated from the perspective of someone who didn’t intervene in the bullying of a schoolmate. It achieved platinum sales and is used by teachers to open discussion about “sticking up for your mates”. “There’s power in being vulnerable because it makes people feel less alone to hear about stories and emotions that come from a raw place. There’s something about the power of music that allows you to access your emotions at a deeper level somehow. It’s always been part of my approach to dig out my shame and examine it in the light; it seems like a natural place for songs to spring from,” Miller-Heidke says.” Zero Gravity sprang from a similar place but it took her weeks to get there. As soon as Miller-Heidke discovered SBS was soliciting songs for Eurovision, she bunkered down in her home studio in Melbourne, where she has lived since 2014, and written many “terrible” songs. The lightning bolt moment came when she started to explore the metaphor of emerging from depression into balance and trying to capture that in a pop song, using the dramatic verses to represent the fog and darkness, and the operatic chorus to mirror the “sensation of colour returning to your life, of feeling strong, joyful and relieved”.
After trying out other collaborators, she turned to Nuttall for help to finish the song. Their creative partnership has stood the test of time since their first endeavours back in her debut EP days. Not only do they co-write but they have also recorded together for their side project Fatty Gets A Stylist, releasing a self-titled record in 2011 ahead of her third solo record – and final major label album, Nightflight, in 2012.
“Obviously our collaboration has deepened and become more instinctive over time. I guess Keir just has a deep understanding of my musical and spiritual DNA and vice versa,” she says. “But he did say to me, ‘Why didn’t you just come to me in the first place?’ He’s really clever, a really amazing lyricist and he can do comedy, as you would have heard in some of Muriel’s Wedding, but also beautiful imagery and emotion.” It would have been no surprise to Miller-Heidke trainspotters that she won the lion’s share of votes at Australia Decides against the worthy and well-received performances of electronic duo Electric Fields and pop chart-toppers Sheppard.
Fans have been the ones backing her career since she parted company with Sony after her third record and became an independent artist. Miller-Heidke set an Australian record for a crowd-funding campaign on Pledge Music in 2013, raising the money she needed to make her fourth record, O Vertigo!, in just three days.
She has nurtured her relationship with her fans via social media. A drag queen anointed herself “Zero Dignity” for the annual mardi gras celebrations, fans have covered the song on YouTube, and the spiky silver crown she wore during Australia Decides has become a popular unofficial piece of Miller-Heidke merchandise at her concerts. But not everyone is going to love her in Tel Aviv, and she accepts that her song will polarise as many of the Eurovision family as it will find her new fans.
“I’ve had people turn up to my gigs wearing these massive crowns. The poor people standing behind them – it seems to have entered the Zeitgeist, which is cool,” she says. “But there is a whole subset of Eurovision fans who are so passionate about it, and it is their whole lives and they are on another level, and that has been amazing to discover.
“I was ignorant of the competitive aspect of it, the analysis of all the stats because in my mind, I thought of Eurovision as this big celebration, a concert, and at the end someone did win but that was sort of secondary. I am staying detached from that competitive side of things because I will go insane if I try to control that on any level. It’s highly distracting and impossible not to take things personally. Impossible.” With Eurovision 2019 being staged in Tel Aviv, there have also been political agendas to navigate. Miller-Heidke and the 40 other contestants in this year’s concerts have been targeted by the Boycott, Divestment Sanctions (BDS) movement, which “works to end international support for Israel’s oppression of Palestinians and pressure Israel to comply with international law”.
New Zealander Lorde cancelled her scheduled concerts in Israel last year after being urged by fans to join the boycott. While artists such as Brian Eno and Roger Waters support the boycott, others – including Nick Cave and Radiohead – do not and have made public statements regarding their stance on playing concerts in Israel. Miller-Heidke admits it was a decision she did not take lightly. “Look, I have done a lot of thinking about it and read a lot about the different perspectives and … what Nick Cave said resonated with me,” she says. “Ultimately, what he was saying was music and art exist to break down barriers and not build them, and anything that provokes discussion is good.
“Music, art, learning, it’s about the free exchange of information. Obviously I can see all sides of this and it’s messy, it’s really messy. Eurovision was invented to bring people together across divides and it’s inclusive, and that’s the reason it exists.”Kate Miller-Heidke performs at Thebarton Theatre for the Cabaret Festival on June 22, tickets at adelaidecabaretfestival.com.au. The Eurovision finals and grand final are scheduled for May 14, 16 and 18, televised by SBS.
CREDIT: KATHY McCABE
Word count: 2113
