Two ancient tribes met when an Aboriginal group was hosted in America by a descendant of the Indians' famous Sitting Bull.
The group of Kukabrak community members from southern Australia, including the Coorong, discussed "cultural trama" with the Lakota people of Dakota.
Their meeting was described as "ngopun ruwe wolakota", with ngopun meaning "walking", ruwe "land" and walakota '"we find a way of life".
The group was welcomed by Manny Ironhawk, who is related to Sitting Bull, a Hunkpapa Lakota leader who led his people against the American government.
Sitting Bull was killed at Standing Rock Indian Reservation when authorities tried to arrest him in 1890.
Mr Ironhawk features in a video about the visit.
It was screened for Premier and Aboriginal Affairs Minister Steven Marshall and guests in Adelaide on October 12.
Mr Marshall told the gathering of about 20 people that eight Kukabrak elders had visited the Lakota nation.
He outlined the government's approach to indigenous matters and said he wanted to develop a "much better interface" between his team and the Aboriginal community.
He said the Kukabrak elders had "learned lots of things" in America.
Speaking to elder Mark Koolmatrie, who hosted the members on the trip, Mr Marshall said Mr Koolmatrie was a "leader of your people".
He said Mr Koolmatrie was "one of the inspirations" behind his taking on the Aboriginal Affairs portfolio.
Mr Marshall was presented with a report containing recommendations for action by the government, including reinvigorating the Kukabrak languages, backing another visit to Lakota country and to an international conference, hiring of Kukabrak by the SA Museum, and teaching of tribal practices in schools.
A spokesman said the government was considering the report and would respond to the Kukabrak people.
Mr Koolmatrie told the gathering that the trip meant that "we had to go back, to go forward ... we had to look at the history of the Lakota Indians".
The mission involved crowd-funding on social media that was used to help cover costs with the rest of the world responding to the plea.
"A part of our spirit will always belong to Wounded Knee," Mr Koolmatrie said.
"It was the site of one of the tragic massacres of Lakota people.
"I would like to thank the elders.
"We have both learned from each other."
CREDIT: Greg Mayfield
Word count: 386
