The preservation of wilderness areas that are undisturbed and truly "wild" is imperative, not only for future generations, but also for the landscapes themselves.
"Wild" is also an evening of music featuring singer songwriter Stu Larsen with support from locals acts, along with the launch of a beautiful new book, Children of the Wild, written and illustrated by KI's very own Becky Westbrook and Suzanne Kay Trethewey.
Following the very well attended protest rally in Adelaide for the Public Parks NOT Private Playgrounds campaign, the Wild event will be an opportunity for the Kangaroo Island community to come together and show their support.
All funds raised from tickets sales will go towards the Public parks NOT private playgrounds crowd funding campaign which has to date raised more than $8000.
Becky Westbrook believes that she is here to protect our wild places for the future generations of our planet.
"I love wild places, untouched by man, and I grew up in awe of them," she said. "This book reflects my own childhood while also sending a message of being grateful for what we have and learning that we can all do something to protect our natural environment.
"I always wanted to be an author however it wasn't until I had children of my own that I felt confident enough to stand up and say this is who I am and this is my message to the world. My book is that message. This fight to keep our beautiful Flinders Chase National Park wild is my fight. As it may be yours too."
Organising the Wild event is Sarah Kemp from Smart Future Creative. "To be clear, this is not about being anti-development, ecological sensitive development such as that being proposed are exactly what we want to be encouraging for the Island - but NOT in the pristine untouched areas of our National Park. The message we are trying to send is get back onto the track and leave what little wild places we have left alone."
The Wild concert and book launch will be held on Friday, April 5 from 5pm to 9pm at Mawarra Shearing Shed, 4326 Playford Highway, just west of Stokes Bay Road. Tickets $20 at the gate; kids under 14 free.
Cash only, BYO picnic and chair. Children of the Wild books will be available to purchase for $35, cash only. All ticket proceeds will go to the Public Parks NOT Private Playgrounds crowdfunding campaign.
Word count: 408
