MANCHESTER DIAMONDS coach Lisa Alexander says Netball Australia could not have censured Maria Folau for publicly supporting her husband Israel, and stresses the sport she represents is fiercely inclusive.
New Zealand and Adelaide Thunderbirds sharpshooter Folau came under fire for ­endorsing Israel’s crowd-funding efforts in his legal fight against Rugby Australia, which terminated his contract over a homophobic social media post claiming “hell awaits” gay people.
Netball Australia, Super Netball and the Thunderbirds determined Folau’s supportive Instagram post had not breached their social media policies and she would not be sanctioned.
Australian netball legend Liz Ellis slammed the decision as “not good enough”. Alexander was more diplomatic, submitting her employer had little choice. “I just don’t think they can,” Alexander said.
“That’s a part of what everyone has to understand, and that’s why Netball Australia came out to say there is nothing in the (contractual stipulations). And also that we do support inclusivity, we are ­absolutely for it.
“We’re not the sport that’s having to deal with Israel — Rugby Australia is — but we’ve made it very clear that we’re an inclusive sport and that we want everyone to enjoy our game no matter what race, ­religion, sexual orientation, the whole bit.” Folau is staying silent on the issue as she prepares for the Silver Ferns’ Netball World Cup campaign, starting in Liverpool tomorrow night.
Netball New Zealand last week said Folau had “not breached NNZ policy” and ­assistant coach Debbie Fuller said “our first port of call of course is to care for Maria”.
One of NNZ’s major sponsors, ANZ, has reportedly raised concerns about Folau’s post.
“It’s not just about the sport. It’s contractual, it’s legal, there’s a moral dilemma side of things as well,” Alexander said.
“It’s just really, really complicated.” England star Geva Mentor weighed in last week, saying “Maria’s in a hard place”. “You stay quiet, you’re not supporting your husband; you speak up, you support your husband but you get backlash,” Mentor said.
“Everyone is entitled to their own view, but they (the Folaus) have to understand that they are in an influential position.
“There is no room for homophobia in netball and we have players that are (gay) in England and Australia, and it is putting them in uncomfortable positions.” emma.kemp@news.com.au
WORLD CUP PRELIMINARY ROUND AUSTRALIA v NTH’N IRELAND LIVERPOOL, TOMORROW 8PMLIVE ON CHANNEL 9
CREDIT: EMMA KEMP
Word count: 397
