It would be good if MPs stood up to resist this woke nonsense The latest attack on our freedoms by the woke brigade — destroying statues, changing the name of Victoria, Coon cheese and the refusal of liquor stores to stock Colonial beer — is reminiscent of the day business were telling us which way we should vote at the same-sex marriage plebiscite.
Many Australians are enraged by elected members of parliament over their silence on these demands by minority groups and individuals seeking to destroy our democratic system.
As law abiding citizens, our voice is meant to be that of the MPs elected on our behalf, so the Prime Minister and his ministers should speak up before anarchism takes hold.
Ian Kent, Renmark, SA
The Colonial Brewing Co should stand up to the immature and ill-informed intimidation by Blackhearts & Sparrows in withdrawing the company’s beers from sale (“Colonial ale deemed beyond the pale”, 17/6). Rather than changing its name, Colonial should investigate a challenge because of unwarranted discrimination and damage to its reputation and business. I’m sure most sensible Australians would be happy to help through crowd funding. I would also expect the brewing industry to come to their aid.
Lexie Mincham, Adelaide Hills, SA
Black-list ‘black’ In the spirit of ensuring that no one is offended ever again, may I recommend that we change the All Blacks to something more culturally appropriate? Every silver cloud shouldn’t have a black lining. Baa, baa black sheep is just not on. Black swans should be censored, as should Blackbeard the pirate, a black mark, black board, and the actor Jack Black, even if his life matters.
Blackmores vitamins should be removed from the shelves, and black panthers should be renamed. Black holes should no longer be described as gigantic objects so dense that light cannot escape — although that somehow seems strangely appropriate at this time. For every action there is an equal and opposite reaction, even if it takes time to gather momentum.
John Vickers, Bellbowrie, Qld
Not all unis’ fault Several recent letters have bemoaned the fact that Australian universities are too heavily dependent for funds on overseas students. I agree, but it is not wholly of the universities’ making. Over the past 25 years, governments of both persuasions have cut back university funding. This has forced the institutions to seek income from other sources, the most lucrative being foreign students, overwhelmingly from China. So it’s a bit unfair to criticise universities in this regard.
Further, the attendance of foreign students in Australia is a roundabout way of increasing the immigration and settlement of young, educated people, long a government intention. The idea is that we get immigrants who are imbued with Australian values who wish to make a life here. Such people should fit in well. Whether this works well in practice is another matter. The future will tell us about China and its penetration of Australian life.
Terry Biggenden, Artarmon, NSW
Class action hijacked The class action system, set up to protect the poor, has been hijacked by rich lawyers and wraithlike funders. Last year, for every $10 awarded, on average, class action members collectively received $4 while lawyers and litigation funders got the rest. This contravenes the purpose of civil law to resolve cases involving those who have suffered injury because their rights were infringed.
The size of this take from the purse of compensatory damages demands corrective reform that includes strict supervision by the courts and parliament. Only by reform will fairness be restored and the lot of litigants improved to an acceptable level. Ian Dunlop, Hawks Nest, NSW
Word count: 606
