The preservation of wilderness areas that are undisturbed and truly "wild" is imperative, not only for future generations, but also for the landscapes themselves.
"Wild" is also an evening of music featuring singer songwriter Stu Larsen with support from locals acts, along with the launch of a beautiful new book, Children of the Wild, written and illustrated by KI's very own Becky Westbrook and Suzanne Kay Trethewey.
Following the very well attended protest rally in Adelaide for the Public Parks NOT Private Playgrounds campaign, the Wild event will be an opportunity for the Kangaroo Island community to come together and show their support.
All funds raised from tickets sales will go towards the Public parks NOT private playgrounds crowd funding campaign which has to date raised more than $8000.
Becky Westbrook believes that she is here to protect our wild places for the future generations of our planet.
"I love wild places, untouched by man, and I grew up in awe of them," she said. "This book reflects my own childhood while also sending a message of being grateful for what we have and learning that we can all do something to protect our natural environment.
"I always wanted to be an author however it wasn't until I had children of my own that I felt confident enough to stand up and say this is who I am and this is my message to the world. My book is that message. This fight to keep our beautiful Flinders Chase National Park wild is my fight. As it may be yours too."
Organising the Wild event is Sarah Kemp from Smart Future Creative.
"As a community we need to find ways to come together and celebrate the things that we value," she said. "There has been widespread outrage regarding the plan to develop accommodation on the untouched, sensitive coastal areas of Sandy Beach and Sanderson Bay in Flinders Chase National Park.
"Clearly we as a community value our wilderness areas and we need to continue to send this message loud and clear to the state government and those outside proponents that threaten to take that away.
"To be clear, this is not about being anti-development, ecological sensitive development such as that being proposed are exactly what we want to be encouraging for the Island - but NOT in the pristine untouched areas of our National Park. The message we are trying to send is get back onto the track and leave what little wild places we have left alone."
Stu Larsen, a self confessed vagabond, is currently recording in a Los Angelos studio, following a successful sold out tour of South America and Mexico opening for the highly popular band Passenger.
He returns to Australia for just a few weeks, so we are very lucky to have him coming over to the Island for WIld.
Described as one of the most endearing songwriters to come out of Australia for a long time, his laid back style will make for a very special evening in the Mawarra Shearing Shed.
Wild will be held on Friday, April 5 from 5pm to 9pm at Mawarra Shearing Shed, 4326 Playford Highway, just west of Stokes Bay Road. Tickets $20 at the gate; kids under 14 free.
Cash only, BYO picnic and chair. Children of the Wild books will be available to purchase for $35, cash only. All ticket proceeds will go to the Public Parks NOT Private Playgrounds crowdfunding campaign.
For more information on the crowdfunding campaign please visit https://chuffed.org/project/public-parks-not- private-playgrounds
Smart Future Creative is a boutique company that aims to develop community through creativity - helping people find their connection to themselves, their family, to community and most importantly to the beautiful world around us through creative expression and experiences.
Word count: 626
