They are a key part of Aussie culture and a feature on just about every main street. To celebrate Australia Day today, we have hunted down 26 of the most interesting and unique country Victorian pubs to put on your must-visit list
AVOCA HOTEL Why visit?This magnificently restored, two-storey gold rush pub has, thanks to publicans Alison Chapman and Ian Urquhart, been a Pyrenees wine region destination for a decade, due to an incredible drinks list celebrating the area.
Thirsty? A huge selection of Pyrenees and Grampians wineries are represented on the list that features multiple vintages of many drops (many at cellar door prices). The fridge is also full of beaut brews from here and around the globe. It’s a list with length and breadth that’s exciting to see in a small-town pub.
Hungry? You can get a parmie or bangers and mash, no probs, but you’ll also find a worldly menu executed with class in the dining room to match that incredible cellar. You might start with local rabbit tossed through housemade pasta or roasted quail served with a minty pea pannacotta before moving onto tea-smoked duck with cavolo nero or Asian-style Tuki farm trout “nigiri” served with sushi rice. As an all-round package, the Avoca is hard to beat. DS 115 High St, Avoca. theavocahotel.com.au
THE FISH CREEK HOTEL (formerly the Promontory Gates) Why visit?Striking art-deco pub with a well-run bistro and welcoming bar. As the old name suggests, it’s the last watering hole before Wilsons Promontory. With a big mullet on the roof, it really can’t be missed.
Thirsty? There’s a selection of beers for everyone, from Carlton on tap to craft offerings, and a good range of wines, including from local vineyards. Plus, there’s unobtrusive TAB facilities for those who like a flutter.
Hungry? The highly regarded dining room serves up quality in everything from local Gippsland beef to lovely pasta. You’ll find a terrific beer-battered flake with homemade chips and, apparently, a fine chicken parma. Serving sizes are generous and there’s a good variety of starters. MB 1 Old Waratah Rd, Fish Creek. fishcreekhotel.com.au
WYE BEACH HOTEL Why visit? One of the best views of crashing waves, clean sand and surfers you’ll find in Victoria. On a gentle hill above the hamlet of Wye River, the large deck is full frontal to the beach, bathed in sun and usually sheltered from coastal winds. It’s a great alternative to crowded Lorne and an early pit-stop if your stomach can’t wait until Apollo Bay.
Thirsty?Pick from an eclectic range of more than 120 local and regional wines (although a few have sneaked over the border from South Australia). On tap you’ll find seven locally brewed beers, including a lager specifically made for the hotel and a local cider.
Hungry? Bring your appetite for traditional pub-sized servings at this Aussie beach hotel. Choose from a great mix of traditional and fancy food, plenty of seafood, including spiced beetroot cured salmon, or if you’re there at lunch times (only), don’t miss one of the best beef burgers in the business. There are kids’ meals, vegie, gluten-free and even low-carb options, too. KB 19-21 Great Ocean Road, Wye River. wyebeachhotel.com.au
RAYWOOD HOTEL Why visit?The very best pubs serve as an extension of the town’s personality, and with just 330 people in the postcode, you can expect to be treated as family here. Just 28km from Bendigo, the hotel, built in 1886, is attracting plenty of newcomers with events such as parma nights, musical performances and even whip cracking. But the locals are the highlight of this true community hub, which also serves as the town post office. On a Friday night, you will find what the publican calls the “table of knowledge” — a huddled bar table of local legends with banter of livestock and lifelong friendship. You can also have a beer on the bar stool of former town icon and Aussie film legend Bill Hunter (Muriel’s Wedding).
Thirsty? Choose from an uncomplicated line-up of Carlton Draught and Great Northern on tap, a small selection of boutique beers and bourbons in the fridge and some Australian sparkling, white and red wines.
Hungry? From Wednesday to Sunday plenty of old-favourite pub fare is on offer, from pasta and pizzas to a 15-item chicken parmigiana menu on Thursday nights. AB Raywood Hotel, 48 Sandhurst St, Raywood. PH: 5436 1393
CRAIG’S ROYAL HOTEL Why visit? Like much of pristinely preserved Lydiard St, Ballarat, this hotel has a storied past — it’s where Sir Donald Bradman and the Duke of York, Dame Nellie Melba and Mark Twain have all stayed, sipped or supped. Since 1999, this grand colonial building — established in 1853 — has been steadily restored to its 19th century glory by John and Mary Finning. With antique-filled suites for those staying, a famous high tea in the dining room on Sundays, and a light-filled atrium dining room with art on the walls, Craig’s is a beautiful blast from the past but has one eye firmly on the future.
Thirsty? There’s a standard offering of beers on tap, while the short wine list keeps most of its focus close to home, with good drinking in the $40 range for those sharing a bottle, which comes from a cellar that’s happy to age.
Hungry? Ian Curley (Kirk’s Wine Bar, French Saloon) consults on the menu that’s an elegant selection of Med-inspired plates — gazpacho and terrine and bruschetta to start, through a few pastas and into bigger plates such as Western Plains pork cotoletta, assiette of Great Ocean Road duck and Kirk’s famous steak with remoulade and bone marrow. DS 10 Lydiard St South, Ballarat. craigsroyal.com.au
QUEENSCLIFF BREWHOUSE Why visit? A true one-stop shop for the best of the Bellarine, the Queenscliff Brewhouse — where the Prickly Moses range of beers are brewed on site — houses not only a bar and bistro, but an upstairs whisky room where more than 350 bottles from around the world are offered to sip and savour. There’s also The Tasting Room, a one-stop cellar door for the region with 200 craft beers, 100 wines by the bottle as well as preserves, cheese and oils from the region to make a picnic to go.
Thirsty?An ever-changing line-up for the wine and beer flights give a sample of what’s on offer, while the core range of eight Prickly Moses beers are joined on tap by more than a dozen seasonal brews. A great selection of all styles of beers — predominantly Victorian — are in the fridge, along with a proud selection of wines from the region. With plans for an on-site distillery, the brewhouse has all tastes covered.
Hungry?A “tastes of the region” menu is offered during the day, while at night pub classics — all with suggested beer matches — are augmented by plates that include seafood linguine, Indonesian chicken curry and a vegan burger.DS 2 Gellibrand St, Queenscliff. queenscliffbrewhouse.com.au
RADIO SPRINGS HOTEL Why visit? The road sign points to “The Centre of the Universe” — follow it and you’ll find this fantastically quirky pub in the tiny Wombat State Forest town of Lyonville. There’s a front bar where locals are greeted with their tipple of choice before they’ve pulled up a stool, a nanna-chic dining room where meals are served, and 0.8ha of glorious gardens that include the “back beach bar” — where wearing Hawaiian shirts is encouraged — and a cinema that screens old 35mm films on Sundays and Tuesday “date nights”. Radio Springs is wonderfully unique, eclectic and cool.
Thirsty?Macedon pinot, Heathcote shiraz, Ballarat chardonnay — they’re all here, from quaff to posh — with a half- dozen taps pouring Furphy and Boags draught for summer thirsts and Guinness for winter ones. A good line in whiskies are on the shelf ready to warm the cockles, for nights get mighty cold in these parts.
Hungry? The menu is as eclectic as the pub — start with vodka-soused, panko-crumbed chicken or tempura cauliflower with tamari, or share the excellent smoked fish plate of local trout, salmon and prosciutto-wrapped eel served with house-made spinach blinis. Bigger plates include a seared scallop salad, sesame-tuna and a tasty signature cheesesteak. DS 1 High St, Lyonville. radiospringshotel.com.au
RED HILL HOTEL Why visit?This handsome pub with its vine-covered veranda and sun-drenched beer garden makes a perfect Goldfields pit-stop even without being the only place in the world you can get your hands on a “donug” — a bonkers/brilliant chicken nugget doughnut concoction that’s more delicious than it sounds.
Thirsty? On tap are beers from Shedshaker down the road in Castlemaine and Holgate, joining Carlton Draught, Furphy and the house brew Bevvy, while the wine list offers well-priced worldly drops.
Hungry?That donug is seriously good — a spiced chicken mix panko-crumbed and fried to a crunch, served with a hit of Dijon and chilli flakes. But it’s not the only reason to come hungry. The “pub chips” — doused in curry gravy and melted cheese — are a nod to the publican’s Scottish heritage, while bigger meals include a cracking chicken schnitzel and terrific bangers with mash. DS 163 Main Rd, Chewton. redhillhotel.com.au
SWISS MOUNTAIN HOTEL Why visit?It might be one of Australia’s oldest weatherboard pubs (established in 1865) but it’s today’s custodians — Jim and Dianne Frangos, of Daylesford’s Hotel Frangos — who make this a must-visit when travelling between Daylesford and Ballarat. Named after the La Franchi family — Swiss-Italian immigrants who ran the pub for four generations until the 1960s — and the dormant volcanoes you can see in the background, this is a quintessentially Australian country pub where the welcome is warm, the beer is cold and no one leaves hungry.
Thirsty? A terrific beer list fills the fridge with local crafties — Daylesford Brewing, Brookes from Bendigo, Ballarat’s Red Duck — while wines from the backyard (Blampied) and region (Hanging Rock) are joined by nicely chosen drops from further afield.
Hungry? The large dining room is full of country charm, with large tables filled with family groups tucking into pub and bistro classics executed with class. Roast chicken served with juicy Swiss brown mushrooms and charred cos nods to current restaurant trends, but many are here for one of the best steak sandwiches around: a monster of a meal with tender aged rump, caramelised onion, piles of crisp bacon, egg, cheese and a mound of chips. DS 3454 Midland Hwy, Blampied. swissmountainhotel.com.au
THE FARMERS ARMS Why visit? The best country pubs no longer just offer pots, pool and a parma but are increasingly celebrating the best of their region and The Farmers Arms in Creswick is a perfect case in point. In 2016, Christine Molloy took over a tired and dusty pub and transformed it into a venue with a keen focus on food that’s coupled with a celebration of the region in the glass. A verdant beer garden seals the deal.
Thirsty? The booze keeps close to home with central Victorian chardonnay, Macedon riesling and Heathcote shiraz with great drinking in the $40-odd bottle range, while a dozen taps pour $10 pints of Carlton and Melbourne Bitter alongside a couple of crafties, including Ballarat’s Red Duck.
Hungry?The kitchen, with a focus on house-made charcuterie and in-house whole beast butchery, delivers across innovative daily changing sausage flavours (Thai pork, mango and chilli, for instance), a good line in expertly treated steaks and a regional tasting platter that’s hard to beat. There’s a pie of the day, a couple of pastas and a parma, of course. DS The Farmers Arms, 31 Albert St, Creswick. farmersarmscreswick.com
GOLD MINES HOTEL Why visit?Bendigo’s Gold Mines Hotel quietly reopened its historic doors on New Year’s Eve. Co-owner Tim Foster (Source Dining, Kyneton) is on the pans in the beautifully revamped pub. Adam Cash (ex Union Dining) manages the venue that consists of a formal dining room, bar area, private lounge and large, enclosed courtyard. But it’s the expansive grounds — putting the garden into beer garden — that make the Gold Mines a central Victorian must.
Thirsty?Bendigo draught on tap, a fridge filled with Macedon riesling and chardonnay and a cellar of Heathcote shiraz keep the sips suitably local.
Hungry?Whether in the handsome dining room or out in the covered courtyard, Foster’s menu teams pub classics created with namechecked local produce with restaurant-style plates — rare roasted kangaroo with spiced beetroot and warrigal greens; confit duck with lentils and cumquat puree — to crowd-pleasing effect. DS 49 Marong Rd, Golden Square. goldmineshotel.com
BARNEY’S BISTRO BAR Why visit?It doesn’t get much more Australian than Barney’s, housed in a restored shearing shed, built with materials from sheds across the state. Originally an antique shop named Barney’s Rubble, the building was renovated by the Main family, with the bar and bistro opening in 2009. Outside there’s a beer garden and paddock where kids can run free, with the Grampians as a spectacular backdrop.
Thirsty?All wines are local to the Grampians region. There are a range of more than 20 beers in stubbies and cans, as well as six ciders.
Hungry? There’s a steak night on Wednesdays and parma night on Thursdays. The bistro menu will change shortly, but now features prawn linguine, vegetarian lasagne and grilled kangaroo strip loin. SH Halls Gap-Ararat Rd, Pomonal.
barneysbistrobar.com.au
THE REDESDALE HOTEL Why visit? This bluestone beauty — a Cobb & Co changing station during the gold rush — was brought back to life in 2015 by Beth McIlwain and Garth Campbell, giving the Redesdale community, Lake Eppalock holiday-makers, and city day-trippers reason to celebrate. The family-friendly pub (including four-legged members) has a homely dining room, cosy front bar and outdoor garden, but it’s the vine-covered veranda that’s the prime pick on a summer day.
Thirsty? Macedon and Heathcote region wines fill the cellar — many by small, boutique wineries — with Tooborac summer ale from down the road joining Carlton and Furphy on tap served by the pony, pot and pint.
Hungry? No “gastropub airs” but just simple food done very well. Campbell, a butcher and chef of 35 years’ experience, ensures the good line of steaks are expertly treated — terrific meat with a great caramelised crust served simply with a nicely dressed salad and good chips — while the parma is up there with the best around. A fat, tender, crunchy-crusted fillet with its mozzarella crown grilled brown and beautiful, it’s a winner. DS 2640 Kyneton Heathcote Rd, Redesdale. theredesdalehotel.com.au
METUNG HOTEL Why visit? The Metung lays serious claim to being the best waterfront country pub in the state. Literally pull your boat up out front or watch others sail by while you enjoy great pub food and a cold drink. If absolute waterfront views aren’t enough, there is plenty of open space outside for kids, especially on the grass between the pub and the water. The vibe is sailing crowd meets locals meets tourists. But even in the heart of summer holidays, it still retains its laid-back, casual charm. There’s a TAB, public bar and more fancy seated bistro area inside. In summer, an outdoor cinema operates weekly on the park opposite.
Thirsty?Choose from a good wine list or basic beers on tap. But it could do with some craft beer. Why not stock beers from nearby breweries such as Sailors Grave?
Hungry?There’s classic pub grub (cheaper in the bar) plus more up-market, seafood heavy offerings in the bistro and on outdoor tables looking over the water. Crumbed local scallops are a must. PR Kurnai Ave, Metung.
metunghotel.com.au
BUCHAN CAVES HOTEL Why visit? “What is a country town without its pub?” asks Marg Brick. She knows first-hand what it’s like for a town to be pub-less after the Buchan Caves pub burnt to the ground in 2014. While locals were left to drink at the football clubrooms, Marg and husband Greg organised a campaign to rebuild the pub, creating one of the country’s biggest — and most successful — crowd-funding campaigns and the “world’s first crowd-funded pub”.
Thirsty?It reopened in December 2016 and locals and visitors to the famous caves are now welcomed in for cold frothies by the bar in summer, warming reds by the fire in winter.
Hungry? A selection of parmas join country classics including chicken kiev and grilled lamb cutlets, while Marg says the traditional reef and beef (steak with seafood) is “outdone with our cluck oink swim version”. DS 49 Main Rd, Buchan. Ph: 5155 9203
BOGGY CREEK PUB Why visit?This charming historic pub is a hidden gem of the Otways in the dot on the map known as Curdie Vale. Fishermen can boat right up the Curdies River to the back of the pub. It lays claim to being a regular haunt of Customs detective inspector John Christie, who was hunting for illegal whisky stills in the Otways in the late 1800s. The pub was built in 1882 from yellow limestone but much of the back of the original building was destroyed by fire. It was rebuilt in the 1920s and has been run by the same owners for the past 21 years. But, really, who could go past a place called the Boggy Creek Pub?
Thirsty? Simple, honest beers and wines, with Great Northern mid-strength and Carlton Draught on tap. The beers include a selection from local Sow & Piglets Brewery.
Hungry? Locals rave about the parma. As well as menu mainstays such as scotch fillet and pan-fried salmon and avocado salad, there are specials which change several times a week. SH Boggy Creek Rd, Curdie Vale.
facebook.com/boggycreekpub
HOLGATE BREWHOUSE Why visit? It’s an easy drive (or train ride) from Melbourne and visitors can sit in the beer garden at the front and watch the world go by while drinking excellent brews made onsite by these craft beer pioneers. The wood-panelled bar with leadlight windows is another option on cooler evenings. Peek through the window to where the magic happens at the microbrewery. A new brewhouse and visitor discovery centre are expected to open in March/April.
Thirsty? There are a whopping 12 Holgate beers on tap. Can’t choose one? Go for the beer paddle with eight draught beer samples. The wine list almost exclusively favours Macedon Ranges wines, from Hanging Rock to Zig Zag.
Hungry?Pub favourites (parma is $27, fish and chips $26) plus extras including vegetable Thai red curry and and roasted cauliflower, lentil, potato and cheddar pie. SH 79 High Street, Woodend.
holgatebrewhouse.com
AIREYS PUB Why visit? This Australian coastal pub boasts award-winning beer brewed on site, a vast child-friendly garden where you can watch the sun go down over the ocean, three dining rooms offering large traditional pub meals and a large roaring fire on colder nights.
Thirsty? Located on site, Salt Brewing Co. creates a variety of premium beers, from clean, crisp pilsners, session lagers, wheat beers and pale ales to funky unfiltered IPAs. No artificial ingredients or additives.
Hungry? The Aireys Pub offers traditional pub food with a menu that is constantly changing as many ingredients and produce are sourced from local farms. There are plenty of small plates to share, larger main meals including a delicious Otway Ranges grass-fed black angus rib eye steak, with smashed chats, butter beans, broccolini, carrot crudites and choice of peppercorn, mushroom or red wine gravy. JK 45 Great Ocean Road, Aireys Inlet.
aireyspub.com.au
MARLO HOTEL Why visit? Perched in an area renowned for its fishing. This pub has views as good as you’ll find in Victoria — of the mouth of the Snowy River and Bass Strait. There’s accommodation available and it’s a stroll across the road to the caravan park.
Thirsty?The regulars are on tap — Carlton Draught, Carlton Dry, Great Northern mid-strength — as well as Wild Yak Pacific Ale, 4 Pines Pale Ale and Little Green cider. Wines include two reds from local Lightfoot & Sons.
Hungry?The great menu has plenty of variety. There’s a 100-seat bistro and another 120 spots out on the deck, overlooking the estuary. This is a terrific place for a feed after a day in the water at nearby Cape Conran. MB 19 Argyle St, Marlo.
marlohotel.com.au
COACH & HORSES INN Why visit?For a ghostly experience. On a dead-end street off the Melbourne-Lancefield Rd, this historic hotel is said to be haunted by several ghosts. The hotel dates to 1857, but the existing two-storey bluestone hotel was built in 1873. It was originally a stopping point for Cobb & Co coaches. An Irish seaman who struck it rich on the goldfields and whose haul was stolen by some dishonest troopers is said to haunt the hotel, along with the ghost of a Chinese miner, who was involved in a fight and later found hanged in the hotel, and a young girl who disturbed a violent clash between her parents and was tossed down a well. There have been several ghostly encounters, but visitors today go for a taste of history — with the old stables still standing out the back and several ornate rooms — and friendly service.
Thirsty? Fat Yak, Great Northern and Carlton are on tap.
Hungry?A spectacular Mexican parma awaits. But there are a range of seafood, meat and pasta dishes, from a 350g ribeye to grilled barramundi, to sate your appetite. There are also great value kids’ meals. SH 50 Station St, Clarkefield.
clarkefieldcoachandhorsesinn.com
CALEDONIAN INN HOTEL Why visit?Known fondly as “The Stump”, it boasts of being the oldest continually licensed hotel in Victoria. Established in 1844, it features stone walls and a cosy vibe that will have you reflecting on days gone by. Port Fairy has just been voted the most popular town in Australia (courtesy of wotif) and you can see why when you pop in to have a bite to eat or enjoy a live music session in the beer garden.
Thirsty?Head to the bar for a Frothy (literally), Carlton Draught, Fat Yak, a pint of Guinness, Great Northern mid strength, a Bulmers cider or Brookvale Union ginger beer. The wine list has its usual suspects, with a range of De Bortoli favourites and crisp New Zealand whites.
Hungry?You won’t be left wanting with this menu of great pub grub. The portions are generous, starting with The Stump rump — all 1kg of it — which comes with chips as well as a serve of salad or vegies. You can’t go past the old favourite, lamb shanks with mash, or the varieties of chicken parma, including the Mexicana — sort of like nachos but with a schnitzel instead of corn chips. The chef also creates some tasty curries. Gluten-free meals are available and there is a menu for seniors and children as well. FW 41 Bank St, Port Fairy.
facebook.com/caledonianinnportfairy
SHAMROCK HOTEL Why visit? Parmas — 101 of them. It would be difficult to find a more comprehensive parma menu. Built in 1864 to service Echuca’s riverboat trade, the Shamrock now entices parma lovers from around the state, with everything from a Christmas-style, Thai, Greek and BBQ parma to the “I’m on a diet this week parma” (baked, naturally) and dessert parmas (think choc banana and a rocky road-style version). And if you’re game, try the parmageddon challenge — a five-stack parma. It’s $77.40, but if you can eat it within 20 minutes you get your money back and an “I survived Parmageddon” T-shirt. But the Shamrock isn’t just a 101-trick pony. This Irish-themed pub also has a terrific beer garden and hosts live bands.
Thirsty?On tap you’ll find Guinness, Furphy, CC & Dry, Carlton Draught, Iron Jack, Young Henrys, Carlton Dry, One Fifty Lashes, White Rabbit Dark Ale, Pipsqueak apple cider. House pour wines lean toward Victoria’s northeast.
Hungry?Why you’d choose anything other than a parma (from $10 for the kids’ parma to the parmageddon) is beyond us, but if they aren’t to your liking, you won’t go hungry. Choices include fisherman’s catch ($29.90), beef and Guinness pie ($23.90), Thai beef salad ($24.90) and aged eye fillet ($39.50). SH 579 High St, Echuca.
shamrockhotel.com.au
THE WANDI PUB Why visit? Nestled in the High Country, there’s the charming clutter of an old (circa 1865) country pub with local sporting mementos and fading old photos cramming the walls. But if that doesn’t win you over, the Wandi Pub’s top-notch food and fab outdoor space surely will, with tables among the greenery, open space for kids to let loose and a stage for live music. The meals are delicious and filling, and the service attentive — but don’t even think about not booking during peak times.
Thirsty?Hard to go past the very generously sized pour of local wines from the King Valley, Rutherglen and Alpine regions. There are craft tap brews and cider as well as the usuals (Carlton Draft and Coopers) and some fine cocktail specials.
Hungry?It’s nothing short of a memorable meal at the Wandi. Yes, you can get some classic pub staples, but they’re refined and inspired versions of the likes of steak with pepper sauce, hot dogs, snags and smashed spuds, and pork belly (served with a robust dashi congee and sprinkle of nori). Kids are well looked after with homemade nuggets, spag bol and dim sims, as are vegos.EH 580 Morses Creek Rd, Wandiligong.
thewandipub.com
HOTEL WARRNAMBOOL Why visit? The public bar is as comfortable as a pair of your favourite leather gloves. Its eclectic decor of industrial timber beams, Moroccan-inspired tiles, warm timber and art-deco pieces is both cosy and cool. But it’s the wine buckets that make locals long for home; the generous splash of wine that drinkers are warned is the equivalent of 2.6 standard drinks. On Sunday afternoons, the tables get pushed back for a session celebrating live music.
Thirsty? On tap are 15 varieties of beers, including American IPAs, and an espresso martini. The pub is famous for a hand pump that serves traditional English ale. Wines include a strong offering of local drops from the state’s southwest.
Hungry? The Warrnambool is known for consistently good food with generous servings. Among wood-fired pizzas, the marinated chicken caesar salad pizza has long been a favourite. The slow-roasted scotch fillet with chips and seasonal vegetables, and herb-crusted salt and pepper squid are also winners. The menu also offers a history lesson, highlighting the disastrous fire that destroyed the original grand building in 1929. JH Cnr Koroit and Kepler streets, Warrnambool.
hotelwarrnambool.com.au
GREAT WESTERN HOTEL Why visit?Plonked on the Western Highway between Stawell and Ararat, the Great Western is an example of how the well-maintained country character of a small-town pub can inevitably prove a tourist linchpin.
Thirsty?You’ll find all the basic local brews on tap. But owner Dan Ahchow also has a lease on the local Seppelt Winery — so expect to also see plenty of options from this region famed for its sparkling reds.
Hungry?Only good honest pub fare here. A pickers platter ($20) of cured meats and pickled vegetables should keep your fancy pants friends happy. The chicken and beef parma ($20) also satisfies. But meat lovers need look no further than the “Steak Western” — a prime porterhouse topped with cheese, bacon and mushroom sauce or the “finger lickin’ ” pork ribs with barbecue sauce. AL Western Highway, Great Western greatwesternhotel.pub
PORTSEA HOTEL Why visit?Since 1876, Melbourne has sipped and supped in the sun at the Portsea pub, but there are now seven million reasons to pay the grand old Tudor-clad dame a visit. A renovation has breathed blue-and-white striped life into the old beauty, and, while the view remains astonishingly beautiful, the expansive umbrella’d deck area — plus grassy knoll for two and four-legged family members to run amok — is the place to drink it in.
Thirsty? Local breweries Jetty Road and St Andrews are in the fridge. On tap, there’s Mountain Goat and the pub owner’s own Colonial brews. A few spritz are there for sunny sips, while the shelves are stocked with an impressive array of spirits.
Hungry?A pleasing menu of hits — pizza, fish and chips, burger and parma — are joined by beer-friendly snacks and, for those going all out, a $190 fruits de mere platter on ice. Well, it is Portsea, darling. DS 3746 Point Nepean Rd, Portsea. portseahotel.com.au Think we missed any pubs?GO TO HERALDSUN. COM.AU
CREDIT: COMPILED BY DAN STOCK; SHELLEY HADFIELD; KARINA BARRYMORE; ANNA BYRNE; MARK BUTTLER; JULIE HOBBS; ELISSA HUNT; JON KAILA; AARON LANGMAID; PETER ROLFE; FIONA WELSH
Word count: 4732
