CAREERS WORKERS IN SOME INDUSTRIES ARE SET FOR A BIG SALARY BUMP IN 2022 The Covid pandemic has given Aussie workers a shot of confidence, with new research revealing 55 per cent have become more comfortable asking for a pay rise since it began.
The exclusive figures from LinkedIn – released to support its Jobs Bootcamp webinar series running this week – show men (61 per cent) and workers younger than 45 (about 62 per cent) are feeling particularly confident.
LinkedIn news editor Cayla Dengate says Australians’ new-found comfort negotiating a higher salary is likely driven by two factors – the tighter labour market and stronger workplace relationships that have been nurtured during the pandemic.
“Australians are feeling confident looking for that next job,” she says. “But people also feel more confident talking to their boss and asking for a promotion .” SO, WHO IS GETTING A RAISE?
Indeed’s economist for the Asia Pacific region Callam Pickering says demand for talent is so high that wages can be expected to rise across almost every occupation in 2022.
“The current labour market is very favourable to jobseekers, providing greater bargaining power,” he says.
Still, some occupational groups are better positioned than others: CYBERSECURITY As more businesses move operations online and adopt cloud-based software, the need for cyber experts has swelled significantly, says Robert Walters NSW managing director Andrew Hanson. “This growing demand has coincided with a lack in new talent driven by 2021’s border closures, creating a perfect storm across the mid to senior levels of the technology market,” Hanson says.
Robert Walters 2022 Salary Survey predicts the median salary for ethical hackers and penetration testers will increase 23 per cent compared with last year (a $37,000 rise).
Other IT jobs on track for pay rises, according to Adecco Australia managing director Kevin Alexander, include UX/UI designers, data analysts, and data scientists .
ACCOUNTING AND FINANCE Hanson says restricted migration has left the market extremely candidate short, seeing competition for the same talent. The median salary for financial controllers and planning and analysis heads is tipped to rise 19 per cent ($30,000).
LEGAL Hanson forecasts a thriving hiring market for in-house commerce lawyers skilled in drafting, negotiating and reviewing contracts. In-house counsels with six years of post-qualification experience can expect a median increase of 6 per cent ($10,000).
INFRASTRUCTURE PLANNING Demand for experience in planning and front-end investment decisions has increased as governments focus on infrastructure . The median salary for project managers is predicted to jump 12 per cent ($30,000).
HR AND SAFETY Hanson expects high demand for organisational design and development consultants who can future proof businesses. A median salary increase of 11 per cent is forecast for organisational development managers ($17,000).
HEALTHCARE & AGED CARE Demand for workers is greatly outstripping supply in these booming sectors, but many are covered by awards and enterprise bargaining agreements that stipulate pay levels, Alexander says he foresees “EBA negotiations will begin … in 2022.” SALES & MARKETING Alexander says these areas have not had significant pay increases for many years but this is turning around due to talent shortages.
RETAIL & RESTAURANTS Pickering predicts wage pressures will emerge as businesses have extreme difficulty sourcing staff.
The big ask ● Prepare by framing your role, and what you love about it.
● Write clear points on how you have improved and gained new skills; and exceeded and delivered your core responsibilities – not just KPIs but your contribution to a positive and engaging culture.
● Have industry salaries on-hand to justify what you are asking for. ● Gather feedback from stakeholders and suppliers to demonstrate the value you bring.
● Be honest when asking for the meeting.
● Focus on facts.
● Be patient when waiting for a response.
● Prepare for different outcomes – if you can’t get a pay rise, this is an opportunity to learn where your competency gaps may be.
for current and future goals.
● Ask your manager for a one-on-one each month to track progress ● Ask about ongoing development and mentoring opportunities. Source: Nada Wassef, HR Business Partner, Intuit QuickBooks Australia
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 690
