The Australian Business Growth Fund has taken an $11m stake in the Sydney-based software and technology firm Capsifi, with the alternative private equity investor expected to unveil two further investments before the end of the financial year.
The Capsifi platform enables large and complex businesses to plan and manage business transformation initiatives from concept through to execution.
ABGF co-head of investment Ghazaleh Lyari said Capsifi was a local research and development success story.
“With digital transformation fuelling the largest wave of technical investment of our time, we are excited to invest in an innovative technology business that has experienced significant market traction,” Ms Lyari said.
With the Capsifi transaction, the ABGF now has three growth-ready equity investments. The others include a $15m stake in 3ME Technology, a clean technology business in the Hunter Region, and $10m in Kikada Lane Dental, which provides practice management services across NSW, Queensland, Victoria and South Australia.
The remaining two investments before June 30 are a waste management provider and a last-mile logistics firm.
The ABGF, conceived by the Morrison government in 2020, was founded with initial capital of $540m as a public-private partnership between the commonwealth and six leading banks in Australia – the big four commercial banks as well as Macquarie Group and HSBC.
It aims to take minority positions of up to 49 per cent, investing for a period of up to 10 years in companies with annual revenue of $2m-$100m.
The fund operates commercially and makes investment decisions independently of its six bank shareholders, filling the gap between late-stage venture capital and larger buyout funds.
It supports SMEs by connecting them to capital, ­expertise, and wider local and international networks, while ­ensuring the original founders ­retain control.
Capsifi’s platform captures key information on a company’s operating model including strategies, capabilities, processes and applications, to enable intelligent insights from the interplay between the different layers.
The process improves visibility and decision-making in the organisation. Since developing its cloud-based software in Sydney, Capsifi has commercialised its products across domestic and international blue-chip clients in Europe and North America.
Clients include AMEX, AMP, Costco and Ikea, with Capsifi now ready to scale the business.
Westpac, which banks Capsifi, said the company was an Australian-built enterprise software company, with all research and development conducted locally.
“Capsifi offers a centralised business intelligence tool for large and complex businesses to enable business transformation,” Westpac general manager for commercial customer relationships Tania Motton said. Capsifi chief executive Terry Roach, who founded the company in 2013, said the company aimed to solve a “universal” problem – consolidation of disconnected and disjointed business knowledge. “After con­sidering several investment opportunities, we decided ABGF was the right fit for us,” he said.
CREDIT: RICHARD GLUYAS
Word count: 453
