Conferences for Amazon and Salesforce are amongthe first hit by the COVID-19 outbreak, as the $36bn Australian convention industry braces for dozens of event cancellations and delays.
The Amazon Innovation Day, scheduled in late March at the International Convention Centre in Sydney, has already been cancelled, with organisers citing the “wellbeing of our customers, partners and employees”.
Although the federal government and health experts have reiterated advice that people should continue attending mass gatherings, many companies and countries have cancelled major events to protect staff and patrons.
Facebook recently cancelled its global marketing summit in San Francisco, while on March 2, the UN cancelled the 64th Committee on the Status of Woman — a two-week event due to be held in New York.
However, some events have used innovative methods to overcome the potential hazards.
Cloud-based software company Salesforce changed the format of its World Tour event planned for Sydney. Using the ICC’s facilities, the company shifted to an online broadcast and teleconference event, live streaming speakers.
ICC chief executive Geoff Donaghy said the company was preparing for about 200 events over the next two months.
“We’ve had two cancellations thus far, and there’s roughly around 10 per cent under a cloud. But I’ll stress that the situation is changing daily,” Mr Donaghy said.
“There’s been a relatively small number of people expressing concern with potential postponements. But even though that area of concern grows daily, there’s still a considerable amount of events going ahead.” Several international events planned at Australia’s convention centres could be under threat. This includes health and fitness expo The Arnold Schwarzenegger Sports Festival, The Tax Summit in Sydney, and a performance by world renowned flamenco, rock and pop musicians The Gipsy Kings in Brisbane.
In addition, the Retail Leaders Forum is scheduled to see 400 industry leaders converge on the ICC over two days in early April.
Despite concerns international movie star Jean-Claude Van Damme’s speaking events may be cancelled, publicist Max Markson told The Australian he was not concerned and events in Sydney and Melbourne would continue.
“He’s an action hero, he can beat coronavirus,” Mr Markson said. Anthony Kirchner, CEO of Adelaide Venue Management, said the Adelaide Convention Centre had received “a dozen” inquiries to ask what its available options were.
“We’re expecting that, if anything, they will delay rather than cancel,” Mr Kirchner said.
Cleaning regimes at all venues had been significantly ramped up, including sterilising surfaces and increasing the number of hand sanitiser stations to minimise the threat of transmission.
A spokeswoman for the Brisbane Convention and Exhibition Centre said it was following all guidelines from the federal Department of Health.
Perth Convention and Exhibition Centre CEO Nigel Keen said no events had been affected as yet.The centre next week hosts the 2020 Oil and Gas Expo, said to attracted more than 8700 visitors.
CREDIT: Max Maddison
Word count: 477
