THE SA developers of a digital system that claims to securely “capture and map” production and supply information are urging agribusinesses, especially wine and dairy producers, to join a trial of their system.
Farmers and tech entrepreneurs David Travers and Jeff Grosset have been partnering, through their joint venture G&T, for a number of years on developing encryption technology to counter fraud and other issues within production and supply chains mainly in the wine industry.
Now they have created and are testing Entrust, a cloud-based software as a service platform, which is underpinned by US-based Hedera’s public ledger technology.
Hedera, owned by 15 technology companies, including Google, IBM, Boeing, LG, Nomura, Avery Dennison, Tata and Deutsche Telekom, set up its ledger system a year ago, and claims it is faster and more secure than blockchain technology.
Mr Travers and Mr Grosset were joint winners of a $50,000 prize in the Premier’s Blockchain Challenge in March 2019, and also secured a further $150,000 from the Accelerating Commercialising pool in early 2020.
Mr Travers said the entrepreneurs had matched the funding to develop a more improved system than blockchain.
“Entrust more securely and quickly allows primary producers to capture and map the movement of primary products and track and trace secondary manufactured products into supply chains,” he said. It does this by combining geolocation, time-stamping and immutability via a secure distributed consensus ledger.
Entrust was tested in the Clare Valley during the 2020 vintage. “Australian farmers are among the most efficient primary producers on the planet …,” Mr Travers said. “In a post-COVID-19 environment, the future critical infrastructure for Australian primary producers will be universal multi-commodity digital assets, like large datasets, real time analytics, supply chain visibility and distributed payment and financing systems,” he said.
Mr Grosset said wine companies can create their own free Entrust account to record their immutable Label Integrity Program information.
“The capacity to create individual bottle serialisation in a high-speed bottling process is currently being tested and will be added to the beta trial in the coming months. This will allow the immutable records to be linked to the product throughout the supply chain,” Mr Grosset said. Eventually, they hope the system will allow producers to save time and money by capturing and digitally logging the movement of primary products (like grapes or cattle or sheep) and to track and trace secondary manufactured products (like wine or milk or beef) into supply chains.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 410
