A WASTE management start-up backed by high profile Adelaide tech entrepreneur Geoff Rohrsheim has fallen into the hands of administrators.
Ongoing COVID-19 restrictions have been blamed for the demise of Smart City Solutions, which distributed solar powered smart bins across Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
Established in 2017 by Luke Johnston and Victorians Raymond and Samira Hughes, the company had plans to disrupt the waste industry with its smart bins that monitor and crush waste to cut down on costs and improve the environment.
Mr Rohrsheim, who was appointed chair of the company late last year, said sales had been “materially impacted” by the reduction in large-scale gatherings.
“Smart City Solutions sells to city councils and large stadiums and venues who support mass gatherings of people where rubbish can accumulate quickly,” he said.
“The COVID-19 pandemic has therefore had a significant impact on the operational outcomes of the business. With no definitive date for the end of COVID-19 in sight, the board has taken advice and therefore decided that it is in the best interest of the company, its staff, its customers, its creditors and shareholders to appoint a voluntary administrator.” Smart City Solutions was the exclusive Australian distributor for its flagship Clean Cube product – a solar powered smart bin that uses sensors to monitor how much waste has accumulated and automatically compacts the contents. Once the bin is full, cloud-based software provides a notification that collection is required, reducing the frequency of pick ups.
The company was backed by a group of SA investors including shareholder and director Andrew McAdams – the co-founder of software company PrimeQ which was sold for $31m to Accenture in 2018.
Mr Rohrsheim is not a shareholder but confirmed he had “loaned the company money on commercial terms”. “I still believe strongly in the potential of the underlying business which has already seen around 1200 solar powered smart bins and smart volume detectors installed across Australia and NZ.” Administrator Chris Powell from DuncanPowell said around 20 creditors, including convertible note holders, were owed about $4.5m. “The company is continuing to trade and we are likely to commence advertising a sale process in the immediate future.” The first meeting of creditors will be held on September 17.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 378
