SHARES in ResMed lost ground on Thursday despite the medical device maker unveiling a bumper full-year result as it ramped up manufacturing of ventilators on the back of increased demand due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
San Diago-based ResMed, which is dual listed on the NYSE and ASX, manufactures devices and cloud-based software solutions to diagnose and treat sleep apnoea and other respiratory conditions.
The company produced 150,000 ventilators in the six months to the end of June to help fight the coronavirus crisis in 140 countries, which was 3½ times the number of ventilators produced in the same period a year ago.
“I’ve got to say I’m incredibly proud of the ResMed supply chain team, manufacturing team, distribution team and tech services team because that’s a huge pivot for a business,” ResMed chief executive Mick Farrell told The Australian.
“We probably saved hundreds of thousands of lives because these don’t just get used once, and we kept people breathing and as long as they could keep breathing before the virus filled up their lungs. Then they lived and many, many, many people lived because of that production.” For the full-year to June 30, revenue lifted 13 per cent to $US3bn. Net operating profit increased 40 per cent and ResMed declared a dividend of US39c a share.
Still, the bumper result failed to impress investors and ResMed shares were trading down 4.9 per cent to $26.58 each around midday after the company flagged a slowdown in ventilator demand ahead, while demand for sleep devise products was yet to return to pre-COVID levels.
But ventilator demand is starting taper Mr Farrell said, despite many countries unaffected by the first wave of the virus forecast by ResMed’s epidemiology models to be impacted by a second wave.
Parts of Latin America, the Middle East and parts of South East Asia are at risk of remaining underprepared for a potential outbreak.
“I think the orders that we have got so far in the book are well below what they should have,” he said. “We’re certainly working very hard with those countries to maximise their probability of getting the ventilators they need.” For the full-year, the US, Canada and Latin America, saw a lower demand for sleep devise products which was partially offset by stronger demand for ventilators, prompting revenue growth of 4 per cent in those markets.
Revenue in combined Europe, Asia and other markets grew by 22 per cent thanks to ventilator demand. -The Australian
CREDIT: SAMANTHA BAILEY
Word count: 415
