Prescription drugs have become the latest items delivered via the gig economy as it matures from fulfilling late night hamburger orders and ridesharing, to ensuring medication arrives at your doorstep, even at weekends.
Melbourne-based start-up Medmate is set to launch in its home city, with plans to expand to Sydney, Brisbane, Perth and Adelaide, after running a successful pilot and three years of planning.
The business, led by GP Ganesh Naidoo and pharmacist Wael Hanna, has partnered with food delivery giant DoorDash to perform 24/7 door-to-door deliveries of pharmaceuticals.
Dr Naidoo developed the concept after his mother and some of his patients experienced difficulties fulfilling their medication, with non-adherent rates as high as 50 per cent.
He said Medmate would make “fulfilling prescription medications as simple as ordering a meal from Uber Eats”, processing prescriptions within 60 minutes.
“My mother has diabetes and is on multiple medications. She is in her late 60s now and when I had a look at how she was organising her medicines and was able to actually get them fulfilled from a pharmacy, she really struggled,” Dr Naidoo said.
“As a GP, I knew millions of Australians are struggling with getting their medications fulfilled from a pharmacy.” Dr Naidoo said there were several reasons for a patient not adhering to medications but the main one was logistics: “They simply find it too inconvenient, they forget and they run out.
“We thought there was a (need for) a simpler way for people to access their medications when they need them.” COVID has seen telehealth consultations become more mainstream, particularly after they became covered under Medicare. And it is the rise in remote GP consults that Dr Naidoo said made Medmate a necessity.
“There have been 50 million telehealth consultations in Australia in the past 12 months. “There is a reason why patients have telehealth consultations. They are either isolated, disabled or in pain. There is a reason they can’t come in for a face-to-face consultation so it makes no sense to force them to go to a pharmacy. Medmate closes that loop with telehealth.”
CREDIT: JARED LYNCH
Word count: 352
