Anti-China activist Drew Pavlou from Queensland University and SA Uyghur leader Nurmuhammad Majid also will address the rally.
Senator Patrick has introduced a customs amendment Bill in federal parliament to ban importation of goods and services produced in the Xinjiang province of China, where Uyghur live.
“The Chinese Communist regime’s persecution of the Uyghur people is undeniable,” Senator Patrick told parliament.
“More than one million people have been rounded up and put in internment camps across Xinjiang.
“Mass surveillance, restrictions on free movement, and widespread persecution of the Uyghur people have been confirmed beyond doubt.
“Torture, other forms of gross abuse, coercion and population control have been widely reported and confirmed by credible witnesses and sources.
“This terrible situation is widely recognised for what it is – nothing less than genocide.”
Senator Patrick said he would share the stage at the rally with Queensland MP Bob Katter and Mr Pavlou though he did not necessarily agree with all their views.
Mr Pavlou has campaigned against the appointment of Adelaide University vice-chancellor Peter Hoj, who was formerly head at Queensland University when Mr Pavlou was suspended for misconduct.
Senator Patrick said he had “no hostility toward Prof Hoj”.
However, he urged Adelaide University to close its Confucius Institute.
A university spokesman said the Confucius Institute “operates under the full control of the university and is not engaged in political activities of any kind”.
“Its focus is Chinese language and cultural understanding, primarily within South Australian schools,” the spokesman said.
“The language and art workshops conducted for local primary and secondary schools are run at the request of the school teachers themselves and support the Australian National Curriculum on language and culture.”
The institute is run by a director who is a staff member of the Asian Studies Department and is “bound by the university’s code of conduct and policies”.
It is not registered under the Foreign Influence Transparency Scheme, as the activities “do not fall under the category of registrable activities”, the spokesman said.
Mr Pavlou, who is seeking $3.5m in a lawsuit against Queensland University, Prof Hoj and Queensland chancellor Peter Varghese, has crowd-funded his road trip to Adelaide.
He intends protesting at Prof Hoj’s event to welcome new students to the university on Monday.
“Coming for you Pete,” Pavlou tweeted.
Mr Katter is leading a parliamentary push to overturn contracts by government agencies, including Defence, to use a data storage company Global Switch, which was bought by Chinese interests from a UK consortium.
Mr Katter intends moving a motion to terminate the deal, and all others involving foreign-owned external data storage, which he believes will gain broad support from the Opposition and crossbenchers.
“I don’t think that some of the backbenchers in the … Liberal Party are going to sit comfortably with this at all,” he said.
The Australian Strategic Policy Institute has a database that maps 380 re-education camps, detention centres, and prisons in the Chinese territory. Credit: Australian Strategic Policy Institute via Storyful
Mr Majid is from Adelaide-based the East Turkistan Australian Association, which is organising the rally.
The association has regularly held demonstrations in Adelaide.
Word count: 495
