It should be a standard part of a company’s strategy Kate Chaney’s father Michael, the Wesfarmers chair, nailed the approach to sustainable performance in a corporate mission statement that predates the ESG revolution by some decades.
The company mission, from its third annual report as a relatively newly publicly listed company in 1987, was – and is – to deliver a satisfactory return to shareholders – but “this is only possible over the long term … by looking after customers, staff, the environment, suppliers, communities in which it operates and … acting with integrity and honesty”.
Kate Chaney, the independent member for the federal seat of Curtin and a former Wesfarmers staffer, could only enthusiastically endorse the corporate mission statement.
As company directors armed with their ESG fact books do the rounds of shareholders ahead of this year’s annual meeting season, ESG issues will dominate discussions for right and wrong reasons.
ESG is overhyped and was only ever meant to bring to centre stage the issues of corporate governance, safety and the environment to ensure they are central to company decisions.
As stated by Wesfarmers for the past 35 years, it makes good business sense to operate in a way that doesn’t damage the climate, to interact ethically with suppliers, and to respect staff: if they are happy then they will make customers happy at the Bunnings weekend sausage sizzle, which keeps the tills running hot.
The issues were never meant to take prominence in the way they have; and in Michael Chaney’s eyes this fundamentally confuses purpose and strategy. The purpose is to deliver satisfactory returns while the strategy is to maximise returns over the long term by looking after the environment, customers, suppliers and the community.
Wesfarmers has at times acted in ways that would not rate in the ESG “hall of fame”. It made a ton of money from coal mining and tree logging. Coles was found to have engaged in unconscionable conduct by treating suppliers appallingly. It kept its board appointments as in-the-family as possible, preferably close to Mosman Park.
Progress is, however, being made. Carbon emissions are down and two years ago it was the first big company to include carbon performance in the six-month profit presentations, and its ambitions and strategies are expressed to perfection.
EY’s Emma Herd argues the ESG hype is a transition issue: companies are over-explaining what they are doing as they make the transition to adopting ESG principles as “business as usual”.
Herd says many companies are flying the plane at the same time as they build it. At a time when the national debate is focused closely on climate change, the big super funds are driven in part by members’ desire as they rightly hold investee companies to their word on ESG strategies.
ANZ’s ambition The ANZ pitch to win Australian Competition Consumer Commission clearance for its $4.9bn Suncorp bank bid is based, in part, on the key market being national, not state-based – which makes sense.
Mortgage brokers now control 67 per cent of the home-loan market and only CBA sells more home loans in-house than brokers; the latest figures show 49 per cent of its new loans come from brokers.
A combined ANZ and Suncorp would have 15.4 per cent of the national home-loan market, ahead of NAB at 13.9 per cent but behind CBA at 25.7 per cent and Westpac at 20 per cent. The next in line is Macquarie, well ahead of Bendigo and Adelaide, which has done most of the complaining about the deal. Macquarie is the big mover in banking, a clear No.5 with 4.8 per cent market share, and since 2019 has almost doubled deposits to $120bn, twice that of Bendigo.
Macquarie relies on brokers to sell loans backed by better technology, which means faster processing of competitive rates.
It still lags CBA with $703bn on deposit, Westpac at $522bn, NAB $470bn and ANZ at $358.6bn, but is clearly in the disrupter class, just as back in 1996 it provided the financial muscle to get Aussie Home Loans started.
As noted last month, ANZ will lodge its preliminary case for authorisation on national interest grounds later this month, signalling an ACCC decision in January or February next year.
ANZ boss Shayne Elliott wants Suncorp and the 20 per cent boost it brings to his underweight domestic franchise, and argues anything but a tick of approval would ringfence CBA’s supremacy.
Maybe he should be looking behind at Macquarie because banking is changing. This is highlighted by the pitch from Linfox’s Armourguard and Spanish giant Prosegur to the ACCC to get national interest ground clearance for their merger. Combined, they will have 90 per cent of the Australian cash-delivery market.
The volume of Australian cash transactions has fallen from 60 to 27 per cent from 2007 to 2019, and the number of ATMs by 44 per cent, from 13,814 to 7757.
The pitch is that carting cash around the fast-shrinking branch networks is not the game anymore; the real battle is digital transactions.
Balancing act Melbourne Business School Professor Yalcin Akcay’s PhD was in operations research, using advanced analytics – a technical management science which now, thanks to Covid-19, is centre stage in the “C” suite at both big and small companies.
Supply chain management used to be all about cost effectiveness but now the emphasis is on a balance between cost, reliability and effectiveness.
Management is urged to “learn from experience and unlearn what it has been doing”.
Akcay says “there is a need to continuously monitor the supply, which is where digitisation comes into its own increasing visibility”.
Pre-pandemic capacity problems were rare and consumer demand more predictable. The first stage – what Akcay calls step 0 – is to understand what the supply chain looks like, who are the suppliers and who supplies them. To build a resilient supply chain often means a complete change of mindset.
Knowing your suppliers is key because they have been shown to impose the greatest risk.
There is a need to identify alternatives.
Best practice is dual sourcing, which can include using digital twins which are virtual replicas.
Akcay will present next week at the Melbourne Business School’s analytics conference on “learning and unlearning – thriving businesses in a time of rapid change”.
For him it is all about processes. He quotes the late US engineer Ed Deming: “If you can’t describe what you are doing as a process you don’t know what you are doing.” As the world moves on from the pandemic, Australia has some challenges, including high labour costs; in contrast, countries like the US are blessed by near neighbours like Mexico.
Nearshoring has replaced offshoring, and just in time has a new meaning. But he argues Australia’s challenges also come with opportunities like solar power, which is a boon at a time when the world moves to more data storage.
The pandemic resulted in a shortage of containers, which is easing, but a shortage of truck drivers is still a concern. Imports account for 22 per cent of GDP and 98 per cent of trade happens at the ports, so a shortage of 20,000 truck drivers is a concern. Kate Chaney
CREDIT: John Durie
Word count: 1203
