Public servants told not to expect cash for pay data breach
TENS of thousands of public servants are unlikely to receive any financial compensation from the state government after a major data breach compromised their personal information.
Treasurer Rob Lucas said his party would not be “contemplating compensation” for up to 80,000 workers who may have had personal details stolen from the third-party data storage company Frontier and held for ransom.
However Mr Lucas said while he was not currently aware of any individuals who had lost large amounts of money, special cases would be taken into consideration for potential compensation should they arise.
“If and when they arrive, we’ll consider them at the time,” he said. Now part of an Australian Federal Police investigation, the names, addresses, dates of birth, tax file numbers and bank account information of up to 36,000 public servants and 80,000 government employees in total, from Premier Steven Marshall down, were stolen.
Sources said Russian hackers likely broke through security walls about a month ago.
Both Mr Marshall and Mr Lucas could not directly say whether Frontier would continue to be used to manage payroll data, or if the government would continue to trust the company that has been responsible for managing pay information for 20 years.
Mr Lucas said it was necessary to “establish the facts” before coming to any conclusions.
He said the first priority was to “establish as much assistance as we can for potentially impacted employees” and then investigate how and why the breach occurred.
“Once we’ve established the facts we can make judgment calls about blame, attribution, consequences, but it’s too early for that at this particular stage,” Mr Lucas said.
The Advertiser revealed on Friday evening that an offshore hacker demanded a ransom payment to return the payroll information.
The last major cyber attack on the state government came in April when suspected Chinese hackers set off an alarm at the State Crisis Centre.
Mr Marshall said he was made aware of the breach late on Thursday night. “There has been a breach, it will be thoroughly investigated and whatever comes out of that we’ll make sure that we put the very best security back in place,” he said.
CREDIT: PATRICK JAMES
Word count: 374
