RICHLISTER Cathie Reid has hit the ground running only days after she and husband Stuart Giles sold their remaining stake in Icon Group, the cancer clinic operator they founded a decade ago.
AUCloud, the tech firm Reid chairs, will sell a 20 per cent stake to Brisbane-based data centre operation NEXTDC for around $17m. NEXTDC, founded by another Brisbane richlister Bevan Slattery, has experienced big growth in the last couple of years as the work-from-home phenomenon and expansion of streaming boosted demand for data storage.
AUCloud, which services the government, defence, intelligence and critical national industry sectors, will raise $35m through the issue of new shares as part of the deal.
Reid (illustrated) tells your diarist the couple have been significant shareholders in AUCloud from the beginning and will be participating in the rights issue. Proceeds from the equity raising will be used to build three cloud platforms in Brisbane, Melbourne and Adelaide. The richlisters announced last week they were walking away with a $125m payday after selling the last of their stake in Icon.
TRAVEL BUG JAMIE Pherous’ Corporate Travel Management has picked up a big government contract at the expense of Graham “Skroo” Turner’s Flight Centre. Corporate Travel Management (CTM), which has been bleeding red ink due to travel shutdowns during the Covid-19 pandemic, will from January provide travel booking services for all federal MPs, their staff and former parliamentarians. Federal pollies have a travel budget of about $60m each year so it’s a big deal for CTM which reported a net loss of $32.3m in the 2021 financial year.
CTM replaces FCM Travel Solutions, which is owned by Flight Centre, and follows a competitive open tender process.
SWEET SPOT SPRINGFIELD City Group pulled out all stops on Friday to celebrate Diwali, the Indian Festival of Lights.
About 800 free tickets to the event, which included the screening of the Bollywood blockbuster Sooryavanshi, were snapped up in a matter of hours with the group having to book a second cinema to cater for the big demand.
Guests wore traditional attire for the event, with Federal Member for Oxley Milton Dick, state MP for Jordan Charis Mullen and Ipswich Mayor Teresa Harding spotted among the crowd. Springfield City Group director of marketing and communications Narendran Sinnathamby says guests also were provided with Indian sweets sponsored by Guru Property.
“We wanted it to be much more than just a celebration of Diwali,” says Sinnathamby. “It was also an opportunity for Springfield City Group to acknowledge the tremendous contribution our large Indian community has made to the greater Springfield region.” Springfield founder Maha Sinnathamby is a Hindu of Sri Lankan Tamil descent.
ROUND AND ROUND BRISBANE philanthropist and golf nut Mick McLoughlin is determined to become the country’s newest world record holder with the challenge of playing 2001 golf holes in the next seven days.
McLoughlin started his attempt on Sunday at Wynnum Golf Club and plans to play 286 holes, or 16 rounds a day, over the next week. The slog is all for a good cause with McLoughlin aiming to raise $250,000 for Ronald McDonald House Charities South East Queensland. Those that know McLoughlin, know this crazy idea will be achieved. The event will conclude on Saturday November 27.
Got a tip? glen.norris@news.com.au
CREDIT: GLEN NORRIS; CITY BEAT
Word count: 550
