AS Australia and the world turns to the cloud for data storage, jobs for cloud experts have soared – and not all require a university degree.
Skill shortages for the IT professionals – responsible for designing cloud software, managing data loads and maintaining cybersecurity – are so dire that cloud computing has been added as an event at next month’s international WorldSkills “skill Olympics” in Russia in a bid to attract more people, with Victorian Andrew Brown set to represent Australia.
The number of job ads listed on Adzuna with the title “cloud engineer” jumped by 142 per cent between July 2018 and July 2019. A March report from IBISWorld revealed overall employment in the data storage services sector increased by about 50 per cent in the past five years.
The workforce grew from 2015 Australians in 2013-14 to 3047 in 2018-19 and it was forecast to hit 4000 within five years.
More than two in five (42 per cent) businesses were on the cloud in 2017-18, according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics, up from 32 per cent just two years earlier.
Amazon Web Services commercial director Adam Beavis said the biggest barrier to businesses adopting cloud technology was finding people with the right skills.
AWS runs programs to address the skill shortage across primary schools, secondary schools, TAFEs and universities. It is also launching its re:Start initiative this year to offer pathways for under-served and disconnected groups to access entry-level cloud computing jobs.
“We need to make sure we are skilling up as many people as we can,” Mr Beavis said.
WHAT THE KEY JOBS WILL BE ■ Designers (draftsmen, CAD/CAM).
■ Engineers: electrical engineers, mechanical engineers, software engineers, production engineers.
■ Tradespeople: welders, fabricators (light and heavy), pipers, electricians, mechanical.
■ Support roles: integrated logistics systems, purchasers, project managers, program managers, planners, schedulers.Source: Naval Shipbuilding College
CREDIT: MELANIE BURGESS
Word count: 313
