A SUSPECT in a Commonwealth investigation has won a decisive court battle after a judge ruled he did not have to hand over the password to his mobile phone to authorities.
The man was stopped by AFP officers in Commercial Rd, Salisbury, on August 27 last year as part of the investigation. The officers executed a search warrant on his car and confiscated a Samsung phone.
Magistrate Greg Fisher ordered the man hand over the passwords to the phone to the AFP during a court hearing three days later. The man refused, taking Magistrate Fisher and the AFP to the Supreme Court seeking a judicial review of the magistrate’s order.
The case has prompted renewed calls for legislation that would ensure police have the ability to search electronic devices in the same way they would other property.
Attorney-General Vickie Chapman, pictured, called on her Labor counterparts to back legislation proposed in November that would grant extra powers to law enforcement.
“While I’m unable to comment specifically on the case before the Federal Court, noting it sits in a federal jurisdiction, it’s important that our laws keep up with the fast-changing world of technology,” Ms Chapman said. “This is why the Marshall Liberal Government has introduced legislation into State Parliament to ensure where serious crimes are committed, including child exploitation, terrorist offences and serious drug offences, the police have powers available to them, so they can search computers and data storage devices in the same way they would conduct a search of property.
“We need to keep up with the 21st century, while also protecting people’s privacy, which is why in order to gain access to, for example, encrypted data on a computer, the police have to apply to a magistrate to do so.
“We have a situation where, in the modern age, the internet is used by a number of offenders and the police need adequate search powers to be able to build a case against these serious and organised criminals.” In the most recent South Australian example of privacy trumping a police investigation, the Federal Court ruled if a suspect handed over a phone password, he would “self-incriminating” himself.Federal Court Judge Richard White refused an application by the federal police that would require the man to write down the code on a piece of paper that would be kept in the office of the Australian Government Solicitor until the matter was resolved.
CREDIT: EXCLUSIVE MITCH MOTT
Word count: 408
