TELSTRA is accelerating its massive job-cutting program and says it will have shed 6000 workers by the end of next month.
The nation’s biggest telco will absorb an extra $200 million in restructuring costs this financial year as it brings forward a strategic plan that will result in the exit of one-in-four workers.
The heavyweight blue-chip will also take a $500 million impairment at its upcoming full-year results as it writes down the value of ageing data-storage assets.
Shares in Telstra bucked a broad sell off yesterday as investors overlooked the latest hits to the bottom line and focused on the quicker-than-expected cost cutting.
The company last year shocked its workforce by announcing it would sack 8000 workers by June 2022 as part of a strategic overhaul dubbed T22. Many of those cuts, which are focused on management roles rather than retail staff, were not expected to happen until next financial year.
But Telstra yesterday said it would have the bulk done by the end of this financial year, a month from now.
At its half-year results in February, Telstra revealed it had already parted ways with 3200 workers, including 1500 executive and management roles.
It has since let another 1471 staff go, meaning there are 1329 jobs still to be cut by the end of June.
The company yesterday said it had started consultation with employees and unions on the next stage of the proposed job reductions.
Chief executive Andy Penn said the cuts were not taken lightly but were necessary given the upheaval facing Telstra’s traditional business model.
The national broadband network has pushed Telstra out as the wholesale provider of fixed broadband internet services while it is also facing increasingly aggressive price competition in mobiles and the death of landline phones.
“These changes are challenging and they’re tough and they’re difficult for our people but if you look at it in the broader context of the telecommunications market it can be understood in terms of how that work is shifting from Telstra to the NBN,” Mr Penn said yesterday.
“It’s really important for us to move forward and give the greatest certainty to our teams and our people.” Telstra’s restructuring costs are now expected to weigh in at $800 million for the year to June.Under the T22 strategy, the group is working to strip $2.5 billion in annual costs out of the business by the middle of 2022.
CREDIT: JOHN DAGGE
Word count: 405
