The South Australian Premier's department has been deleting QR check-in data after 28 days, but SA Health has been holding onto the information it receives for contact tracing indefinitely, according to a report by the state's auditor-general.
The state government requested the auditor-general conduct a review into the management of COVID-Safe QR check-in data after the system was brought in last December.
South Australians have checked in more than 400 million times since then, with more than 2 million individual check-ins recorded on the system's busiest days.
The auditor-general found the data was consistently deleted by the Department for the Premier & Cabinet (DPC) after 28 days, as required under legal directions.
"Our testing found that people's contact details are effectively destroyed from the production database, which is the database accessible on a day-to-day basis," the report said.
"This is an automated process that checks for records older than 28 days."
But the report found the data was being retained in the department's back-up IT systems.
[graph] 'Risk' of breach in event of IT system failure
The auditor-general's report stated backup systems were "vital for the recovery of critical systems in the event of a disaster or system failure".
But it found there was a "risk" of the department breaching the deletion direction in the event of a system restoration.
"DPC advised us that it intends to destroy all backups when contact tracing in the state is no longer required," the report stated.
"Until this time, data restorations are possible, although controls exist to protect the data from any unauthorised restorations.
"There is a risk that if backups are restored, the restored information may contain people's contact details captured through the COVID‐Safe Check‐In app that are older than 28 days."
In responding to the Auditor-General's report, the Department for the Premier & Cabinet stated it had "updated its backup restoration procedure" & had "included an additional requirement to verify that once restored, no data exists that is over 28 days".
A spokesperson for the department said it would be "automatically deleted upon restoration" if the IT system had to be restored after a failure.
SA Health holding data 'indefinitely'
SA Health receives a "subset" of QR code check-in data from DPC when needed for contact tracing processes.
But the Auditor-General's report stated SA Health's data storage systems did not fall under the same directions governing DPC, but rather under the Health Care Act.
"SA Health advised us that it intends to retain all data received indefinitely under the Health Care Act 2008," the report stated.
"The act makes detailed provisions for the protection & confidentiality of information."
The report found SA Health's approach was "not consistent" with an order made by State Records of South Australia that all check-in data collected should be "destroyed as soon as practicable when no longer required … or immediately following the declaration of the end of the pandemic".
"It would be helpful if SA Health's public communications included advice that it retains all requested COVID-Safe check-in app data indefinitely," it stated.
In its response to the report, SA Health agreed to review its data retention practices, & "ensure alignment with all relevant legislation".
SA Health said it would aim to "reflect" its data retention practices on its website & other digital platforms by November.
A spokeswoman for the department confirmed it was holding on to QR check-in information but said it would only be released for "official contact tracing purposes or for managing the COVID-19 pandemic".
[Click through to send us your questions about COVID-19]
Word count: 591
