An Adelaide man is facing a raft of charges after alleging watching live-streamed child sexual abuse.
A 66-year-old South Australian man accused of live-streaming the sexual abuse of children as young as three has been charged with more than 20 offences.
It's alleged the man viewed, instructed and recorded 21 separate incidences of abuse between May and October 2019.
He allegedly communicated with people overseas to procure several children to produce and transmit the sexual activity, which he watched from his Adelaide home.
Australian Federal Police officers are now working with their international partners to identify and rescue the child victims shown in footage which they say was also found stored on electronic devices owned by the man, as well as other alleged offenders.
He was arrested on Thursday after the digital forensic examination of two USBs he owned.
The data storage devices were among items seized by police in February 2020 after the man was stopped at Melbourne Airport when he returned on a flight from Singapore.
Australian Border Force officers allegedly found child abuse material and explicit conversations on his iPhone when they searched his luggage.
Analysis of the man’s financial records showed he transferred more than $15,000 to various people in South-East Asia and Africa.
Police are also continuing to examine a mobile phone, travel and financial documents and handwritten notes and letters seized from his home.
The man has been charged with 17 counts of accessing child pornography or child abuse material, four counts of obtaining child pornography material outside of Australia and two counts of procuring sexual activity with a child outside of Australia.
AFP assistant commissioner for the Australian Centre to Counter Child Exploitation Lesa Gale said offences against children were increasing and international borders were no hindrance to predators.
“It is heart-breaking that vulnerable children are being degraded and injured to satisfy predators and the impact of this abuse continues long after the images or videos are recorded," she said.
Authorities had also reported an increase in demand for child abuse material as predators spend more time online during the COVID-19 pandemic.
“We believe predators will be trawling online for potential new victims as children also spend more time online – often with limited adult supervision,” commissioner Gale said.
“We urge parents to talk to their children about what apps and sites they are visiting to help keep them safe."
Word count: 397
