When Italian-born Flavia Tata Nardini moved to Adelaide with her Australian husband in 2014, she wondered if she would able to continue her work in the space industry.
With a master’s degree in space engineering and having worked in The Netherlands as a rocket scientist with the European Space Agency, and then at Dutch innovation company TNO building engines for rockets, she was keen to see what was available in her new homeland.
“I was working in very complex space missions in Europe with the moon and Mars,” she told last week’s lunch in Sydney. “It was my passion and I wanted to keep doing it.” But there was no space agency and only one start-up in Australia at the time. And work in the defence sector, which is a key industry in South Australia, was out of the question in the short term because of the long process of getting an Australian passport.
Instead she teamed up with entrepreneur Matt Pearson and fellow Adelaide-based space specialist Matthew Tetlow to found their own space company, Fleet Space Technologies, which specialises in launching miniature satellites for industry, one of the first space-related start-ups in SA.
Founded in 2015, Fleet raised money in 2017 from investors including Australian-based venture capital group Blackbird Ventures and Atlassian co-founder Michael Cannon-Brookes.
In November 2018 it launched the first four commercial nanosatellites in Australia, with others following.
Tata Nardini says being in Adelaide is no limiter to being involved in the commercial space industry.
“Space is space,” she says. “It’s up there. You don’t have to be in Silicon Valley or Europe to be involved in it.” Fleet has found itself part of a growing space industry ecosystem in Adelaide which has accelerated with the founding of the Australian government’s space agency in 2018, based in the South Australian capital.
“When I arrived in Australia a lot of people were trying to convince the government to create a space agency,” Tata Nardini says. “I have witnessed a big change in the past seven years.” She argues that SA, which has had a history in space since the Woomera rocket range, founded in 1946, has been able to “leapfrog” into the future with its interest in space technology.
The company, which has a staff of 50 people, has raised $25m so far from investors in Silicon Valley, Seattle, Boston and Hong Kong, as well as in Australia.
It is now in another round of capital-raising that could see its staff rise to 200.
“I’ve launched five satellites in the past four years,” Tata Nardini says. “I’ve got customers around the world. I live in Adelaide and no one has asked me to move.” In the first couple of years after Fleet was founded it was really hard, she says.
“But people are moving to Adelaide now that the space agency is there. Adelaide is like the Houston of the southern hemisphere. “People are moving there because it is a centre of excellence for some of the highest technology in the world.”
CREDIT: GLENDA KORPORAAL
Word count: 508
