And while he’s in the twilight of his glittering career, the 34-year-old veteran, whose 428 games is the most of all active players, has no desire to slow down yet.
There isn’t much missing from Gibson’s decorated basketball resume.
He’s a two-time NBL champion, been crowned the league’s best defensive player, three time All-NBL Second Team member and was part of the 2012 Boomers Olympic squad.
On the eve of his second season with South East Melbourne Phoenix another major milestone is inching within sight of the savvy point guard — Anthony Stewart’s record for most games by a Tasmanian (489) and the magical 500 mark.
Although he’ll need at least another two seasons to overhaul Stewart and become just the 14th player to feature in 500 NBL games, Gibson is determined to give both a shake if his body can withstand the rigours.
“I haven’t thought about that but I’m going to try and beat him now,” Gibson joked in an interview with the Mercury when asked if he was aware of Stewart’s record.
“I’d love to get to 500 games, I don’t know how many people have done that but to play 500 NBL games would be pretty special.
“You certainly notice the older you get you can’t do as much as you probably do at a younger age, but I’ve never really played a game where I need to shoot 20 shots or score 20 points to know I have played a decent game.
“That side of things doesn’t affect me, it is just whether I can keep up.
“It’s more the mental challenge of still being sharp, I’ve never been the quickest or whatever but as long as I’m still smart and I read the game well, I’ll be able to play for a little while longer.”
Gibson is currently in Hobart with the Phoenix squad, who along with the New Zealand Breakers were relocated to the state two weeks ago to avoid complications from the COVID-19 hot spots breaking out interstate.
It has continued a turbulent off-season for the club, who were forced into hard lockdown last August as Melbourne was engulfed in its coronavirus crisis.
However for Gibson the longer wait to start the 2020-21 campaign — after several revisions Phoenix is scheduled to play its first game on Sunday against Adelaide — has been a blessing in disguise.
“Obviously my calves have been an ongoing issue now for four or five years and just having this extended time I was able to try different programs.
“It’s probably the best I’ve felt in a little while but being older and chronic issues I guess in the past, you just never know.
“I definitely feel fitter. I’m just ready to play whatever role I get and hopefully I can play out the full season and not miss six or seven games like I did last year.”
In their debut season the Phoenix started in blistering fashion to be sitting at 5-2, but managed just four victories from their last 21 games.
Gibson is confident this year’s squad can give finals a shake in what will be a season with plenty of uncertainty.
“I think we definitely caught people by surprise. A start-up club, people probably didn’t think we were going to win games.
“What we’ve done really well is kept our core group of local content and just added a few pieces in there.
“Cam Gliddon and Reuben Te Rangi from Brisbane are huge pieces coming in and our two imports are great guys and they’re great players.
“I don’t think a start-up club is ever going to win [a championship] in their first year but I think we’ve laid some great foundations and I think will reap the reward for that now.
“With all these challenges coming up now, whoever handles it the best and gets on with the job I think will have the most successful season.”
adam.j.smith@news.com.au
Twitter follow Adam Smith
Word count: 635
