SET UP IN SA SAFETY South Australia has been among the world leaders when it comes to the handling of the coronavirus.
The state has recorded a fraction of the number of cases and deaths compared with cities of similar size in countries across Asia, Europe and the US.
Not only did SA successfully suppress the first wave with a comparatively low loss of life, it has reopened most of its economy while staving off any second wave.
The bulk of restrictions have been lifted, with all borders except Victoria open and few restrictions on movement.
The state also boasts a high testing ratio, a well-policed, secure hotel quarantine system and a superior contact-tracing record that offers a level of confidence in the event COVID-19 re-emerges in the community.
COST OF LIVING AND LIFESTYLE The global pandemic has proved that you don’t have to be in a skyscraper office in a major global city to do business.
Remote or more flexible working arrangements are here to stay and make a place like Adelaide the perfect place to relocate.
Data for October had Adelaide’s median house price coming in at $486,943, only marginally more expensive than Darwin and Perth and significantly cheaper than capital cities on the eastern seaboard, in particular Sydney ($983,262) and Melbourne ($780,836).
Family homes within 10 to 15 minutes of the CBD for under $1m, which are near non-existent in Sydney and Melbourne, are in plentiful supply in Adelaide.
While electricity prices in SA have been high in previous years, they are trending downwards, as are water bills.
When you’re not working, Adelaide offers a highly desirable lifestyle with quality beaches and world-leading wine regions within half an hour of the city.
COST OF DOING BUSINESS An analysis of various business costs across Australia’s capital cities delivers a clear winner: Adelaide.
Premium office space in Adelaide can be less than half the price of that in Sydney – $404sq m a year compared with $947sq m a year, according to the latest Colliers International CBD Office Report.
Even compared with Melbourne and Brisbane, Adelaide still comes in at $200sq m a year cheaper, making it a compelling option.
SA’s payroll tax rates and thresholds have also become far more competitive in recent years, bringing the state in line with, or bettering, most of the other states.
The state’s relatively low cost of living also transfers to a lower cost of labour, which can be 10-20 per cent cheaper than in NSW, Victoria or Western Australia.
INNOVATION Lot Fourteen, an innovation hub in the CBD, is still in its infancy but already has almost 1000 workers based there who are collaborating across some of the most exciting emerging industries.
It is home to the Australian Space Agency, the Australian Cyber Collaboration Centre and Australian Institute of Machine Learning, as well as several start-up companies founded by some of our budding entrepreneurs.
The state’s chief entrepreneur, Jim Whalley, is also there, charged with helping to get the next great ideas into scalable businesses.
Construction of the 16-storey Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre by 2023 is expected to provide workspace for 1500 people.
Beyond Lot Fourteen, innovation hubs at Tonsley and Mawson Lakes are tapping into our burgeoning defence sector.
Each of the three hubs is closely aligned with the state’s three universities, linking tertiary study with the future industries of South Australia.
DEFENCE SA has a rich defence history that is set to accelerate over the coming decades. BAE Systems will cut steel in December at the massive ASC shipyards at Osborne for the start of a prototype for the $35bn Future Frigate Program. Construction on the first of nine ships will begin in 2022, creating hundreds of direct jobs and thousands more in the supply chain across SA and Australia.
Hot on the heels of the Future Frigate Program will be the Attack-class submarine project. The biggest defence project in Australia’s history, worth $50bn, will see Naval Group build 12 new submarines.
Construction of the frigates and submarines will span the next three decades, positioning SA at the centre of Australia’s defence sector for the foreseeable future.
SPACE Space represents one of the most exciting growth opportunities for South Australia.
Lot Fourteen is home to the new Australian Space Agency, which is responsible for developing commercial opportunities in the industry and also identifying international partnerships.
The US ambassador has flagged his country’s interest in our space industry and believes we are well placed to help with America’s space missions to the moon and Mars.
SA also played host to the country’s first commercial “space-capable” rocket launches, from Koonibba, northwest of Ceduna, in September.
SA-based company Southern Launch successfully fired two test rockets to the edge of space, demonstrating our ability to be at the forefront of the industry.
SA companies are also leading the charge with nano-satellite technology, a critical component of the internet of things.
RESOURCES SA owes much of its prosperity to date to the strength of its resources sector. Major projects such as BHP’s Olympic Dam mine, OZ Minerals’ Prominent Hill project and the work of Santos and Beach Energy in the Cooper Basin have provided thousands of jobs over recent decades.
Traditional copper, gold and uranium mining, plus the extraction of natural gas, have underpinned the bulk of the state’s success to date.
These avenues continue to provide plenty of promise, but it’s frontiers such as hydrogen and carbon capture and storage that are now on the agenda.
SA is on the shortlist for $70m of Federal Government money to establish a hydrogen export hub.
The state’s abundant reserves of natural gas and pipeline of huge renewable energy projects leave it well positioned to develop a world-leading blue and/or green hydrogen export sector.
AGRIBUSINESS For all the changes and advancements in the global economy, it’s still SA’s agriculture sector that produces our biggest exports.
Our wine, wheat, barley and other crops are in demand around the world. The State Government recently lifted a moratorium on genetically modified crops, except for the boutique Kangaroo Island, giving primary producers more options for crops. When it comes to wine, SA is home to some of the most revered regions in the world – the Barossa Valley, Clare Valley, McLaren Vale and Coonawarra, to name a few. Through companies such the privately owned SA-based global food processing company Thomas Foods International, the state is also a major producer and exporter of prime meats.
Word count: 1075
