Port Augusta's economic state rides on good governance and quality services, despite COVID-19 setbacks, yet must capitalise on the challenges to survive, a regional industry body says.
The outlook shared by Regional Development Australia (RDA) Far North comes after CommSec's State of the States economic report was released late last month.
The analysis shows South Australia in joint third position - the highest ranking in over a decade - of further evidence of strong recovery from the pandemic.
It highlights population growth in the year to the June quarter, the second strongest on relative population growth, up 11.9 per cent on the decade average.
In contrast, RDA Far North chairman Mark Sutton says his region, while not immune to COVID-19 outcomes, remains stable. "From a regional economic perspective, there is real opportunity from this, there is a real optimism in the community because of good governance by good governments over the last 12 months," he said in response to the report.
"It's a tick of approval for both the national and state governments."
Mr Sutton highlighted agriculture, mining and tourism sectors as key drivers for the regions.
"South Australia has a very high standard of living opportunity," he said.
He cites the housing affordability with the mean average of about $550,000 for a house in Adelaide, compared to $1.2 million in Sydney and $800,000 in Melbourne. The average is under $300,000 in regional SA. "So first home owners get more bang for their buck in SA."
"The regions then naturally benefit from that to a certain extent because even the $550,000 average house price in Adelaide is little bit out of the realms for many first home owners so then the regions become quite popular," he explained.
Mr Sutton said the "competitive advantage" in services found in regions can be a tricky one for people to understand.
"While there can be a 'woe is me' aspect in regions because of a perceived reduction in services, the reality is compared to Adelaide, our services are very good."
He shared an example of GP appointments being met within 24 to 48 hours in regions, whereas anecdotally, it can mean a week or two of waiting in Adelaide.
"The reality is, although services are dropping, some of the services dropping also occur in the city."
Mr Sutton said a shining light to come from COVID-19 restrictions is the visitor economy.
Mr Sutton said that because of the policies relating to interstate and overseas travel restrictions, it has really opened up opportunities for intrastate tourism.
"The problem can be, are we geared up for the higher volumes, which played out on the Eyre Peninsula over the Christmas break."
"There's real opportunity to grow here."
He says one of the key challenges needing to be met by regional centres, like Port Augusta, is around providing a holistic lifestyle to residents.
"We struggle to support whole-of-life cycle aspects in the region, which means we are struggling to attract people here.
"While I know this sounds contradictory to what I was saying earlier, COVID-19 has provided opportunities, but, longer term or take COVID-19 away from our region, we are struggling to attract new residents.
This, he says, comes from a combination of housing quality and quantity, schools and transport and more.
"So it becomes harder to attract both professionals and trades to come live in the region."
Furthermore, he says, while other regions push to keep young people regional, Mr Sutton says it's important to let young people leave, to grow, to learn and explore the world and then return.
"But the challenge is getting them back," he added.
In addition, Mr Sutton says the region's economic transformation over the last 10 years also plays a significant role in the current climate.
"Originally Port Augusta was heavily-weighted towards industrial sectors around the railways and the power generation station."
"Port Augusta has since moved more towards a service economy, where it now provides those crucial services including health and retail and more," he said.
In response to economic development and challenges faced, RDA Far North supports the region by assisting start up businesses, small to medium enterprises and provides advice to the corporates.
"We link existing businesses to the bigger businesses looking for services," Mr Sutton said.
"The network also provides regular advice to both federal and state governments."
CREDIT: Michelle ORielly
Word count: 724
