Carey’s punt pays off big time STRIPPED of his boots and then his gloves, Alex Carey reached for a neck tie. In what seems like a bizarre version of Catch Me If You Can, Carey scored a full-time position at a financial planning firm because at 23 he had already been delisted by Greater Western Sydney and South Australia.
“I would say comfortably he’s an outdoors guy, but he fitted in well,” FinSec colleague and friend Rohan Reid said.
“His role was implementing advice, dealing with clients, booking in review meetings, contacting clients and contacting product providers.
“He was extremely humble, willing to learn, a good listener, punctual, on time, trustworthy – all the things you need in the finance industry.
“We’re an open-plan office and everyone has got their own little pod. He had his own little desk space, probably a couple of metres.” Carey, 30, started a new job last week and his office for the next five days will be right behind the Adelaide Oval pitch … and just down the road from FinSec. Carey’s Brighton Secondary mate Sam Willoughby will return to Adelaide next month for the opening of a $6m BMX track named in the Olympian’s honour.
Perhaps a rollercoaster should be named after Carey, such has been the nauseating ride to his baggy green. The Giants stole Carey from cricket’s clutches – and the promise of a rookie Redbacks contract – in 2009.
With the AFL’s backing, GWS recruiter Neville Stibbard emailed Carey telling him: “You could be a premiership player of a start-up club, which would be history-making to your grandkids”.
Some at the Giants remember coach Kevin Sheedy whispering they’d found the next Joe Misiti after Carey’s first or second training session.
“There were games where in my opinion he was clearly good enough to make it as an AFL player,” said Western Bulldogs star Adam Treloar, who played two seasons with Carey at GWS.
“His biggest weakness was just his speed. But he had a great ability to find the footy and be really composed.
“The same way that he is now, just so composed and cool and calm … he was the exact same as a footy player.” Carey put the runs on the board at GWS, winning the 2010 best-and-fairest as the club’s captain two years before it entered the AFL.
But with Tom Scully (Melbourne) and Callan Ward (Western Bulldogs) poached to play in the midfield and 11 of the first 13 picks in the national draft – used on the likes of Toby Greene and Stephen Coniglio – there was no room for Carey on the Giants’ inaugural AFL list.
“I told him we’ve got 20 midfielders, have a crack at cricket, mate,” Sheedy said. Carey put the runs on the board at South Australia … but only 31 of them.
“He’d come back from AFL and hadn’t refined his skill and ability, because he’d been focused in other areas,” said Tim Ludeman, who was Redbacks’ wicketkeeper at the time.
Carey was dropped after averaging 10.1 as a top-order batsman in three Sheffield Shield matches.
A fear of failure started to overtake the left-hander’s sense of freedom at the crease and after the 2013-14 summer he was gone from both sports.
Two months later he sat in the outer at a packed Adelaide Oval watching former GWS teammate Jack Hombsch help power Port Adelaide to a stunning win against the all-conquering Hawks.
Carey went to bed that night knowing he had to be at his FinSec desk on Monday, but that the corporate world wouldn’t keep him.
“The No. 1 thing with Alex is resilience,” said best mate Andrew Shearer, who went to school with Carey and Willoughby.
“When he got delisted lot of people would’ve gone and sat in their room and cried for a bit and thought the world was over. But he just got back in the horse. Whatever he was going to do he was going to succeed at. He just does everything at 100 per cent.” Every chapter of Carey’s life seems to tell the same story.
Compare Shearer’s words to these from ex-Giants recruiter Sam Sheedy: “Very talented, very dedicated. He was always going to make it at the top level, no matter what he put his heart and soul into.” Or this from Treloar: “Whatever he put his mind he was going to succeed at and it’s no surprise to me that now he’s flourishing.” Carey’s buzz words are hard working, humble and driven and it doesn’t take long for a bingo. There’s no single jaw-dropping anecdote that sums up Carey’s unquenchable thirst to be the best.
Instead there’s countless little examples, like last week when he caught the early bus to the Gabba nets with Nathan Lyon for an extra look at the off-spinner’s bounce and drift before their first Test together.
Carey takes that attitude everywhere – be it playing for GWS on local Canberra ovals in Tuggeranong and Belconnen or striking 71 runs for Australia in what was a World Cup rescue mission at Lord’s.
Treloar said Carey wouldn’t even be aware of the profound and lasting impact he had on players including Jeremy Cameron, Dylan Shiel, Nathan Wilson and himself.
“He showed us the way on how we needed to prepare ourselves to train and play at a higher standard to actually get the best out of ourselves to establish ourselves as bona fide AFL players,” Treloar said.
“I always remember that he was the most professional. He would be the first one out there, he would always train at a high standard and there wouldn’t be drop-offs in his training.
“You could just tell he was born to be a leader with the way he spoke to the group.” Carey returned to Flagstaff Hill Football Club in 2015 to play with Shearer. They were minor premiers but lost the preliminary final.
“(Carey’s) brother was assistant coach, I was playing and his dad coached B-grade that year as well,” Shearer said. “But I think he still had cricket in the back of his mind. Footy was more of a release and to catch up with a couple of mates, hence why he played cricket and not footy finals.” The Redbacks soon came calling again, suspecting Carey would in fact make the grade after a mountain of grade runs for Glenelg.
Full-time state training came at the expense of Carey’s job in finance. He is still on the books, but FinSec suspected he wasn’t a keeper.
“We’ll happily have him back, but let’s hope that’s not for a long, long time,” Reid said.
Carey looked like becoming an honest footballer. So Sheedy told Carey to test himself at cricket, and then cricket tested his patience. Now Carey is Australia’s 461st Test cricketer, and FinSec isn‘t planning on him coming back.
CREDIT: SAM LANDSBERGER
Word count: 1147
