A former managing partner of Deloitte in South Australia, Mr DiMonte has more than 37 years of consulting experience across the public and private sectors.
His appointment follows the passing last year of Mike Canny who had held the position of chairman for almost eight years.
Mr DiMonte said the organisation was in a “very positive position” ahead of implementing a new strategic plan later this year.
He is currently chairman of GP Partners Australia and Australia Grain Technologies, president of RSPCA SA and a director of several public and private sector organisations.
Cleaning company Academy Services has appointed James Pollock as its new chief executive.
He has been acting in the role for the past year, leading a transformation of the operations and brand.
The 41-year-old company will be rebranded to ServiceFM this year, and will move towards a “facilities services model”.
Mr Pollock said new reporting and business systems, an enhanced organisational capability and brand and marketing changes positioned the company for success in the wake of COVID-19.
“This company is maturing and moving in an exciting new direction – progressing to the next level in terms of systems, processes and level of sophistication,” he said.
Mr Pollock has experience in management consulting, local government and the oil & gas industry.
Specialist software and services provider to the financial services industry, Data Action (DA), has appointed Jason de Ross as its new chief financial officer and general manager of corporate services.
He has more than 20 years of corporate and operational executive experience in a range of sectors, including ASX 100 companies.
Mr de Ross said he was looking forward to using his diverse skills and experience in the fintech sector to support the company’s growth.
“It is a growing sector and an exciting time to be with DA at the forefront of banking technology and services.”
The Australian Dental Association SA (ADASA) has appointed Bradley Abraham as its new chief executive.
He was most recently chief executive of science not-for-profit organisation The Royal Institution of Australia and has more than 25 years of experience in change leadership, management and marketing.
He began in the role in January and said he was looking forward to supporting the ADASA board and the group’s membership base.
“I am very much looking forward to working with the board and begin developing a new and focused agenda for 2021 to support our members and the industry at large.”
Property valuation firm m3property has appointed Iain Henshaw to head its Adelaide office.
A former commercial property valuer and consultant with CBRE, he has taken over as managing director from industry veteran Kym Dreyer.
Mr Henshaw said it was a “huge honour” to lead the m3property team.
“The South Australian property market has a very promising outlook and m3property is well placed to capitalise on its success,’’ Mr Henshaw said.
Mr Dreyer will remain with the firm in a new national role.
Digital healthcare start-up Lumary has appointed Craig Harris in the newly created role of chief operating officer.
He has more than 20 years of experience in the technology industry and was most recently chief operating officer at workforce management platform developer Deputy.
Mr Harris said his previous experience would support Lumary’s growth, locally and overseas.
“There’s a real thrill that comes with being in that high- growth environment and I look forward to bringing my experience and passion for SaaS organisations to Lumary,” he said.
Lumary expects to bolster its team from 90 to 150 staff this year.
Mr Harris will be based in Sydney, with regular trips to Lumary’s Adelaide headquarters planned.
Word count: 573
