FOR almost three decades, the flexibility of the SACE has supported students in South Australia to successfully complete their senior secondary schooling. And, in a year like no other, that flexibility is more important than ever, which is why the SACE Board has released a forward-thinking new vision that takes a more holistic approach to education.
“As the world gets more complex and there are more challenges but more opportunities as well, we want to make sure that, through the SACE, students get an education that supports them to thrive,” says Professor Martin Westwell, SACE Board chief executive, above. “That means employment, future learning and being able to thrive in the community.” The new SACE strategy embodies six key elements: lifelong learning, deep understanding and skillful action, ability to transfer learning, agency, human connectedness and belonging. “We recognise that deep understanding and skilful action are still crucial for students to thrive, but they have to be able to transfer that learning into unfamiliar situations, so they’ll have to be lifelong learners as well,” Prof Westwell says. “And when students have a sense of belonging to school, it makes a big difference to the way they see themselves and their achievements.” Student agency is another key factor.”That ability to take hold of a learning situation and make the most of it is really important for students,” Prof Westwell says. “And making sure students make the most of human connectedness – that willingness to be vulnerable and connect with other people.” The new strategy strengthens South Australia’s proven track record with VET opportunities in the SACE. “Through vocational education training, our young people can show that agency, that sense of belonging to their career pathway, whether that be an apprenticeship, a traineeship, employment or university,” Prof Westwell says. That training is also key for the state in creating jobs for generations to come. “The economy has to thrive and the skills students have will make a big difference to that,” Prof Westwell says. “If someone is looking to start up a new company, they should be able to look at the young people of South Australia and say, ‘We want a workforce that looks like this’.”
Word count: 365
