The former was almost a given: his dad’s a chef, his mum’s a chef, his younger brother is an apprentice chef, and his sister married a chef. The Symeonakis family home back in South Australia even has its own commercial kitchen. “We’ve grown up with farm-to-table before it was an actual thing,” Andy says.
His own career path started with an apprenticeship at the Renmark Hotel, where dad Jim has been head chef for 29 years, and included stints as head chef at West Adelaide Football Club, Kingsleys Steak and Crabhouse at Sydney’s exclusive Woolloomooloo Wharf, sous chef for George Calombaris’s Hellenic Republic, helping start up Hotel Argentina in Williamstown and, most recently, learning “massive mega volume” as head chef at Lorne Hotel.
“I like the challenge, nothing’s too hard. My dad thinks I’m crazy,” Andy says with a smile.
As he speaks, he is literally standing surrounded by his latest challenge — head chef of 1915, the restaurant and bar set to luxe up North Geelong’s historic Federal Woollen Mills precinct.
Tradies are everywhere, helping clad 1915 in 21st century glamour. What used to be the boiler house giving life to the sprawling mills complex has been reborn as a chic two-storey venue, the name 1915 paying tribute to when the mills themselves opened.
“You don’t get an opportunity to have a brand-new kitchen, brand new toys, as well as a venue like this. I walked in here and I was like, ‘I can’t believe something like this exists’. It’s amazing,” Andy says. “I think it’s going to be an icon. I’ve never put my name next to something as big as this. I’ve only been in Geelong two years. I know what’s around and what’s competitive, but there’s nothing like this anywhere, even in Melbourne.
“In the coming months it’s free reign on whatever I want to do. That’s pretty iconic for me — to find out who I am and what I’d like to do.”
Anthony Siketa (head chef at Russo Estate in Diggers Rest) was hired as a consultant on both the menu and the kitchen itself and has given Andy his “starting point”, which he says is modern Australian Mediterranean, “which is me”.
Because he likes meals with a communal feel — dishes to which everyone at the table has a taste — the “top notch” menu will feature a lot of different specials like bigger steaks, whole lamb and pork belly. A slow-roasted strip will be one of the steak options, which will focus on prime grass-fed black angus cuts. Other sharing dishes will include cold prawns butterflied with pepper butter, Hervey Bay scallops, oysters, arancini, house made pickles with baby cucumbers and the Greek “go to” dish of saganaki cheese with local honey, oregano and fresh lemon.
TASTES OF EUROPE ON THE GREAT OCEAN ROAD
ONE-STOP-SHOP FOR HEALTHY LIVING
WAURN PONDS SPECIALITY RAMEN STORE
Andy will initially be overseeing a staff of four-to-five, including an apprentice of Andy’s from his time at Kingsleys who is coming on board as one of his junior sous chefs. Another of his former apprentices will lend a hand until Andy can get the full-time staff he wants. But there are no signs he is daunted by the expectations or workload.
“I know what I’m capable of,” he explains “I can do big Greek weddings for a couple of hundred people by myself.”
Complementing the kitchen’s efforts will be a drinks menu crafted in part by Sebastian Reaburn of the award-winning Anther Gin distillery, which backs onto 1915, and sommelier Jeremy Shiell.
That luxury feel might seem at odds with 1915’s working-class past, but within its blue-collar bones lurks more than a touch of class. The heritage-listed building was designed by John Murdoch Smith, the architect responsible for Australia’s first federal Parliament House in Canberra.
That class will only be amplified in the vision of locals Rob Macafee and Cam Hamilton — part of the Hamilton Group that has been developing the Federal Mills precinct since 2013 — who started high school together when the mills were still producing local school uniforms.
The birth of 1915 is something of a labour of love for Rob. The general manager of 1915, he got married in the building in 2015 when it was a vacant shell. He remembers in his speech vowing “watch this space one day”.
“We wanted to celebrate the venue and put our elegant touch on it,” Rob says now. “The building is the hero.”
Perhaps the most obvious example of that is the magnificent arched window that dominates the eastern end of the building and will overlook three “grazing tables”. The past will be both preserved (a second storey door leading nowhere will be highlighted, historic photos line the walls and relics sourced from the site line the shelves of the bar) and complemented (the tallowwood herringbone flooring on the mezzanine looks original but is recycled and took six weeks to lay).
Under the newly-installed staircase is a glassed-in temperature-controlled wine “cellar” capable of holding 1500 bottles with a “real strong local focus”, as well as an exclusive four-person VIP table.
A coffee counter will flow into the bar, which lines the northern side of the ground floor and has eight beer taps with a mix of craft, traditional and local beers. (Another eight are in the upstairs bar.)
Before moving back home, Rob’s career was in the Melbourne entertainment and events industry and lighting is his passion. He’s spent three years designing the lighting for 1915 and promises the space comes alive at night. Predominantly the room will be bathed in a warm amber glow, but as part of future proofing the venue, the colour can be changed, if a corporate client wants it to, say, match their logo.
They will soon take over the neighbouring tenancy, which will grow the potential to host events and other functions, without interrupting the flow of the restaurant. And 1915’s capacity will also expand by summer when a 120 sq m roof deck is completed. Down the track lie possibilities such as a food truck festival, farmers markets, and live music.
But for now, Rob is happy to see the dream come to fruition.
1915 is located under the historic smoke stack at 33 Mackey Street, North Geelong. It is open from 11am-10pm Sunday-Wednesday, and 11am-1am Thursday-Saturday.
cam.ward@news.com.au
Word count: 1034
