In a 2½-hour sentencing hearing at Sydney’s Downing Centre, Acting Justice Paul Conlon read through each and every one of Rogers’ more than 60 charges of corrupt benefits and systemic fraud, the list of which could easily be mistaken for a rich-lister’s holiday itinerary.
Dating back to 2013, there were overnight stays at Sydney’s harbourside Four Seasons for her immediate and extended family, as well as nights at Melbourne’s Crown Towers or Pelperro Winery on the Morning­ton Peninsula.
Holidays weren’t just confined to the major cities, though — with plenty of resort visits a little further afield, and with them private helicopter charters. Go figure.
Over a three-year period up to 2017 — when claims against Rogers and her Human Group alleged co-conspirator Helen Rosamond were brought to light — the 45-year-old chief of staff and her extended family, sometimes up to eight people, chalked up several visits to the ultra-luxe Emirates One&Only at Wolgan Valley (the same one that Magellan’s Hamish Douglass notably booked out to celebrate his 50th birthday in 2018), nights at the Gold Coast’s flashy Palazzo Versace, the secluded Cable Beach Resort in Broome and the even more remote Berkeley River Lodge on the Kimberley Coast.
Then there were the international trips — or should we say, Projects Europe and USA, for that’s what they were referred to in invoices charged to the bank.
Over the 2014 summer break, eight of Rogers’ clan flew business class to the US, stopping in major tourist hubs New York, Washington, Miami and Hawaii — culminating in a total bill of $620,627.30 and making the $159,490.59 Europe trip in the previous year look like a steal.
Still, despite the extravagance, not one of the inflated invoices were flagged by NAB’s internal auditing team, a fact the judge on Wednesday ­described as “absolutely staggering”.
Perhaps, though, it was the code names used by the two women to disguise their spending. Apart from the two projects mentioned above, there was Project Outlaw, the no-expense-spared birthday trip for Rogers’ father-in-law, or Project Eagle, the invoice that purported to relate to the onboarding of former NSW premier Mike Baird.
The latter proved to be one of the final invoices approved by Rogers, and at $2.2m was the largest by far.
Evidence tendered to the court showed that Rogers had told her private banker that the money had been a generous gift from her in-laws, upsized from an initial $1.2m, towards the purchase of her $3.8m Williamstown home in inner Melbourne, even providing a letter from the couple, albeit leaving it unsigned.
Between the holidays, shopping trips and home purchases, it is any wonder she was able to get any work done for either boss Cameron Clyne or his successor, Andrew Thorburn.
This won’t be the last we hear of the scandal, with Rosamond due to face her separate trial in July, and for which Rogers will be called as witness.
In fact, it was that very gesture that helped to shave 10 per cent off her final sentence, along with a further 5 per cent for her past assistance and 25 per cent for her early guilty plea.
Ultimately though, the judge conceded that despite the “difficult sentencing exercise”, the “gravity of the offending is such that none other than imprisonment is adequate”.
Sweet and sour win
A win in her defamation case against Nine Entertainment may have been a victory on paper but the fallout for venture capitalist Elaine Stead had a little bitter with the sweet.
After turning down a settlement early on, and progressing through to trial, the Adelaide-based businesswoman on Wednesday was awarded $280,000 in aggravated damages, judge Michael Lee agreeing she had indeed suffered some real reputational harm.
How much of that makes its way to the champagne fund, though, remains to be seen.
There is, of course, the matter of legal costs — no doubt high-profile defamation lawyer Sue Crysanthou SC doesn’t come cheap.
Both parties will return to court next week to iron out the details, but with victory in two of the three matters complained of, there will probably be some hit to her own, or as some like to speculate, her current employer Mark Carnegie’s, hip pocket.
Then there was the matter of social media use — after both Stead and defendant Joe Aston’s Instagram and Twitter posts were scrutinised at length.
Judge Lee, who wrote that for some sharing feelings on “everything from fascism to fish fingers seems decidedly odd”, agreed that any argument that the tweets of a public figure, however private their account may be, were still fair game.
“It is unrealistic to assume that a mundane post by a newsworthy figure would necessarily stay within a community of social media users (something Dr Stead should have understood),” he said.
At more than an hour long, Lee’s judgment was lengthy, giving points to either side.
Early on in his speech, however, it seems some at the AFR were too quick to call the verdict — publishing at 10.59am that “The Australian Financial Review has won its defamation battle”.
Just moments later that very post was removed, but not before our eagle-eyed operatives were on the case.
Let’s just put it down to selective hearing.
Brick in the room
For all the chatter on local personalities, it is perhaps one fictional character who has been the most consistent through the course of the Elaine Stead’s defamation trial.
True to form, Anchorman character Brick Tamland was there with bells on — or at least watching online — and also garnered another mention in Justice Michael Lee’s 100-page judgment.
Tamland, the “gaping moron” played by Steve Carrell in the 2004 film (and its 2013 sequel) was first referred to by Joe Aston in one of the stories in question, calling Stead “the Brick Tamland of capital allocation” or of “Queensland’s fledgling Venture Capital scene”.
But with proceedings again taking place on Microsoft Teams, the character popped up again as a username in the virtual courtroom.
About 60 people tuned in to hear the final word, shy of the almost 200 who at some stages were watching the trial’s proceedings in December.
Stead herself and her sister Olivia were in virtual attendance, as was start-up coach Alan Jones, who gave evidence in support of Stead during the trial.
Blue Sky’s former interim chief executive Kim Morison was name-checked in the judgment for his attempts, initially successful, to get Stead to stop using Twitter, while an unnamed shareholder and Ord Minnett investment adviser is quoted in the judgment opining that perhaps Stead should have her screen time limited.
“Someone kindly should perhaps take Dr Elaine Stead’s mobile off her to stop tweeting … see below … is this for real?’’ the judgment says, in relation to Stead’s social media activity.
Former ABC journo turned spinner Emma Alberici tweeted in support of Stead, claiming her “the victor”, while some in the start-up scene lamented the modest size of the payout.
Word count: 1127
