The Minnipa Agricultural Centre is among the sites being included as part of the state government's $2.4-million regional AgTech demontsation farms and start-up hubs project.
The AgTech Strategic Plan is aimed to encourage South Australia's primary producers to further adopt technology to increase productivity and profitability.
Primary Industries Minister David Basham said at the launch it was a blueprint on how the state's primary producers could increase productivity and profitability through a greater adoption of on-farm technology.
"The Marshall Liberal Government has injected an initial $2.4 million over three years to achieve the objectives of the plan," he said.
"These initiatives include opening additional AgTech demonstration farms at government research sites in Nuriootpa, Turretfield and Minnipa and on private properties, AgTech start-up hubs at Struan in the South East, and on the Eyre Peninsula, and appointing AgTech extension officers.
"While the plan has been launched, the hard work has only just begun with the AgTech Advisory Group now focusing on providing advice to government on delivering key objectives."
AgTech program manager Ben Baghurst from Primary Industries and Research South Australia said centres including Minnipa would host demonstrations highlighting new technologies.
He said their aim was to empower end users and shine a light on what was relevant.
"We are inviting, through an expression of interest process, companies to come in and display technologies related to the centre and the area," he said.
"We use the trusted position in the community to be an independent stepping stone between companies developing technology and letting end users see and hear that from us.
"We are not salespeople for technologies, but are highlighting where they can be appropriate and useful, and as money needs to be outlaid, we want end users to be comfortable that it fits with their business plan and that the technology does it what it says it will do."
Mr Baghurst said they would host a demonstration at Minnipa "as soon as we can", with the team working through the process to get companies involved. They will then deploy technologies on the farms in the region.
The South Australian AgTech Strategic Plan identifies three key challenges to the adoption of AgTech on-farm in South Australia, with seven priorities and key actions.
Independent chairperson of the AgTech Advisory Group Dr Leanna Read said the plan was the result of collaboration and consultation between producers, AgTech suppliers, the state government and academia.
To learn more about the plan, visit pir.sa.gov.au/agtech-strategy
CREDIT: Luca Cetta
Word count: 411
