The Prime Minister’s announcement of a $2.2 billion investment in a new research commercialisation fund, extra ‘deep tech’ venture capital, and new industry scholarships and fellowships is a strong start.
It’s an investment that has the potential to turbocharge Australia’s research commercialisation success.
Because it can help Australia make the most of the incredible scientific expertise in this country, and propel more great breakthroughs safely across the ‘valley of death’ and along the path to commercialisation.
It’s an investment that is greatly needed. A glance at our competitor economies abroad shows the value of similar dedicated investment vehicles to spur much stronger rates of research commercialisation.
And it’s a concept supported across the political spectrum and at the highest levels of Australian science advice. The Prime Minister, the deputy Opposition leader and Australia’s chief scientist have all made major speeches in the past year on the urgent imperative of research commercialisation.
For several years, Science & Technology Australia has been a leading voice making a powerful case for Australia to create such a research translation fund.
We have consistently argued that it would deliver strong returns on investment to the nation, creating new jobs, start-ups, and income streams for Australia.
It is an important step and an exciting development, and one that can ‘level-up’ Australia’s research commercialisation success.
And it’s a milestone on a journey, not a destination.
Even with significant funds dedicated to commercialising more of our brilliant blue-sky discovery science, we still need to ensure our scientists have the skills they need to be the ‘connectors of commercialisation’.
Boosting research commercialisation requires us to build on ‘bench-to-bookshelf’ science – taking research from the lab bench to publications in top journals. Alongside our crucial discovery research, we must also nurture a new cohort of ‘bench-to-boardroom’ scientists – who can take their lab bench discoveries into business and venture capital partnerships.
Who are these scientists? Science & Technology Australia proposes to recruit hundreds of scientists and researchers Australia-wide, and train them for specialist roles to propel the translation of promising discoveries into technologies and become linchpins liaising between industry and university research.
For Australia to level up on research commercialisation, we don’t need every researcher to become a commercialisation expert. But we need some to do exactly that.
We can equip a diverse and talented cohort of experts with the specialist skills they need, and give them the remit to create new businesses around brilliant science.
We can do this by setting out on day one of a blue-sky research project surrounded by experts with the skills to help our researchers to maximise the social and economic impact of their research.
None of this is abstract or theoretical.
I am one of the current generation of bench-to-boardroom scientists – an entrepreneur, innovator, and neuroscientist at the ARC Centre of Excellence for Nanoscale BioPhotonics based at the University of Adelaide.
Our centre has forged more than 30 industry partnerships, and helped to create 15 start-up and spin-off companies from our blue-sky discovery research program.
This work has included taking technologies from ‘bench-to-brains’ to save lives in brain surgery; and ‘bench-to-butchers’ – enabling lamb to be graded for eating quality for the first time.
Our ‘silo-busting’ approach brings together engineers, physicists, chemists, and biologists to assess from all angles how discoveries can save lives and underpin billion dollar export markets.
Australia needs to support the scientists like those in the teams I lead if we are to realise the full potential of the return on investment we make into science in Australia, and create the economy we want for the future.
A ‘bench-to-boardroom’ program running alongside an Australian government research commercialisation fund would be a powerful driver to create more of these science entrepreneurs.
It would ensure that Australia is able to use its world-leading research more consistently and commercialise it at a far greater scale.
And if this created even a handful of billion-dollar companies, the return on that investment would be enormous.
Australia has an outstanding science and technology capacity – and a business sector eager to tap into the country’s brains trust to strengthen the country’s economy.
The new research commercialisation fund is a hugely-significant first step on the road to creating the innovative future Australia wants. Training teams of highly skilled bench-to-boardroom scientists can drive us closer still.
Professor Mark Hutchinson is the president of Science & Technology Australia.
Word count: 705
