We’ve found Far North business and political players who lived another life, whether on the turf, in the water or on the track.
Zenon Caravella
The A-League star has taken his finesse on the pitch far and wide for clubs both in Australia and Europe.
Playing centre midfield for the New Zealand Knights, Gold Coast United, Newcastle Jets and Adelaide United among others, Caravella has more than 250 professional games to his name.
In 2016, Caravella was acknowledged with an Outstanding Contribution to the A-League award in recognition of his longstanding commitment for football.
The 38-year-old continued his passion for football through the founding of the Caravella Football Academy in Cairns – a nursery dedicated to nurturing the future of FNQ football stars under the guidance of one of its best.
Bob Manning OAM
The Cairns Mayor does not hide it, he’s a mad league fan.
The 76-year-old has two Foley Shield victories for Cairns to his name from 1966 and 1971.
Playing at fullback, “Butch” Manning donned the jerseu once again in 2017 for a charity exhibition match, leading the aptly named Mayor’s Meerkats.
He was back at it again in 2019, playing in a Legends of League exhibition game.
The Top 50 junior cricketers in Cairns, FNQ
Darren Halpin
The Halpin Partners head honcho is a well-known figure when it comes to big-brand developments in the Far North, but his passions weren’t always in that realm.
While growing up in Innisfail, Halpin played his fair share of cricket for the club during the early stages of his life.
After moving up to Cairns about 20 years ago, the Paradise Palms boss took up the bat and ball for Rovers and became a key member of their club, mixing business with pleasure as the club’s treasurer.
The businessman even took his love for cricket to the next level in recent years, becoming the owner of Barrier Reef Big Bash team the Halpin Hurricanes.
Marie Eribo
The seasoned World Cycling Championships veteran is as much of a speedster nowadays as she was during her years in the pros.
Eribo competed in races across Europe and the United States, including the Tour de France in the 1980s.
She also has four gold medals from the Irish National Cycling Championships from 1990 and 1992 at Baltinglass and Cork respectively.
Eribo lives in Cairns, having owned and operated Cairns Bicycle Works in Earlville for 18 years.
Mark Beecroft
Hiring from within is easy when you have a resume as strong as Beecroft’s.
The Cairns Taipans CEO started his days in FNQ basketball with the Cairns Marlins in the NBL1.
There, he played and helped lead the team to win a state title in their 1996-97 season, which ultimately ended with a loss in the national final.
Beecroft then went on to be the FNQ coaching director for Basketball Queensland in the late 90s.
From there, he served as coach of the Marlins in the mid 2000s as well as assistant coach of the Taipans in that time.
Under his leadership, the Marlins qualified for the national titles in 2001, which were postponed due to the collapse of Ansett.
They would return to the national stage in 2004 and 2005, winning an ABA title in the former.
During his tenure, the Marlins also won two QABL titles.
NBL22: Machado’s last-minute three lifts Taipans over Bullets
Shane Knuth
Before being the outspoken Member for Hill, Knuth was a force on the rugby league field.
The Tully-born and raised politician played 97 1st grade games for Redcliffe.
He was with Redcliffe in their 1987 season when the side fell short of a Brisbane Rugby League A grade premiership, losing ultimately to Brothers.
Knuth also played in the Townsville District Rugby football League for the Charters Towers Miners, helping to lead them to a premiership in 1996 over Townsville Brothers.
He also represented North Queensland in 13 games, and was named to the Queensland under-15s, under-18s and under-21s teams as well as Australia’s under-19s squad.
Wayne Mawer
Like a fine wine and good cheese, the combination of Mawer and water skiing was a match made in heaven.
The Cairns-raised skier had world titles in water ski racing spread across the IWSF World Water Ski Racing Championship, the World Wakeboarding Association World Championship and the World Wake Boarding Association World Championship.
Having conquered the world of water skiing multiple times, Mawer hung up the wetsuit in favour of the hammer and measuring tape to start up construction business – Elite Home Builders with his wife Natalie.
Melody Ward
The skilled boxer has an Australian title to her name among plenty of fighting victories.
Ward ultimately pivoted into the realm of personal training, with focuses on using fitness to help manage chronic illness.
The Muay Thai enthusiast lends her services to multiple fitness groups and gyms across Cairns.
Nate Myles
The Cairns-born, Gordonvale-raised NRL journeyman suited up to play for the Canterbury Bulldogs, Sydney Roosters, Gold Coast Titans, Manly Sea Eagles and capped his career with the Melbourne Storm.
Across his tenure, the 36-year-old prop represented Queensland 32 times in the State of Origin, played three times for the Prime Minister’s XIII, represented Australia nine times and was an NRL All Star in 2010.
Myles has continued his love for fitness after his playing days, owning multiple F45 gyms including in Cairns.
QLD Country Championships 2022: Relive the FNQ action
Michael Thwaite
The 38-year-old Cairns-raised defensive midfielder has an esteemed soccer resume that’s highlighted by 24 games for Australia including at under-20 and under-23 level.
Thwaite started his illustrious playing career at the Edge Hill Saints, before playing at Sydney University and spring-boarding across to Europe to play in numerous leagues across the continent.
With 19 years of professional football experience under his belt, Thwaite naturally geared his post-playing life toward helping others succeed in their playing journeys, starting That’s Football – a player mentoring business based on the Gold Coast.
The former Socceroo hasn’t forgotten his roots, regularly visiting the Far North to run clinics.
Max O’Halloran
There was a time when the Division 7 Cairns Regional councillor preferred getting amongst it on an oval rather than a meeting room.
The 69-year-old Tidal Seafood Traders owner played Aussie rules initially for Ulverstone in Tasmania, before getting the call-up to play for Footscray in the VFL in the early 70s before joining up with Carlton for five games.
DID WE MISS SOMEONE? Let us know in the comments below!
Cairns Post where to get news
harrison.murtough@news.com.au
Word count: 1026
