THE state’s biggest export earner – providing services to international students – has enormous potential for growth, the State Government believes.
And the influence of students goes further, with many staying on after graduating to fill highly skilled jobs or create their own businesses.
Leaders in the international student community say SA could pump-prime that potential even further by guiding students in start-up processes and by more employers recognising graduates are the talent they seek to grow their business. MBA student Lex Raj Shylaja, who sits on the UniSA council, said her university had an innovation centre that helped start-ups.
“If you have a brilliant idea, they will help you start a business,” she said. “But students aren’t always aware of the services that are available. And they would benefit from having someone to guide them because there are risks when you come from a different culture.” Adelaide University international student representative Yeganeh Soltanpour said students were always looking for new opportunities. “Much like they invest money in SA educational institutions, they would do so in starting new SA businesses,” she said.
Flinders representative Rubayat Sarwar said many students aspired to stay in SA. Starting a business in Adelaide required less capital than many other cities – though most students were not necessarily flush with cash to invest.
“Their basic capital is their brain, their ideas and concepts,” said Ms Sarwar, who is studying a masters in business finance. “Businesses don’t need to look elsewhere for their research – there are postgraduate students already here.” The government – whose policy goes under the slogan “Live, learn, stay” – has set a target of the sector supporting 23,500 jobs and generating more than $3bn in revenue by 2030. Now it supports more than 19,000 jobs with revenue exceeding $2.2bn. StudyAdelaide, the organisation that promotes SA as a destination, says students make a massive contribution to the state.
“It’s not just about the value and vibrancy international students bring while studying here, it’s about the careers they forge and companies they create or help grow upon graduation,” chief executive Karyn Kent said. “When these businesses thrive, they give back in the form of jobs for locals.” Trade and Investment Minister Stephen Patterson said the economic effect was enormous. “The potential for even more growth is huge – for every three international students studying in SA, one new job is created,” he said. “Some of these students remain in SA and create businesses here, generating further jobs.” The trial flight to bring back 300 students until January has enhanced Adelaide’s reputation. “It’s given hope to students offshore wanting to return, and for students graduating that want their parents to fly into Adelaide for their graduation,” Ms Soltanpour said. Ms Raj Shylaja said Australia’s reputation had taken a hit because the Federal Government had not provided much support during COVID but SA’s position was better because of welfare aid from universities, government and community organisations.
STUDENTS WHO STAYED ON ■ Flinders University graduate Nicho Teng founded Haneco Lighting and Greaton Development, a property developer whose projects include West Franklin.
■ Adelaide University graduate Hinney Lo has founded several start-ups, including pixelforce, EziLicence and Fitbotic.
■ Woojong Hwang, Hyunwoo Kang, Steven Lee and Naphachama Hongsakaola are co-owners of Plus82 Pocha, Gogi and two other restaurants.
■ Hyemi Lee, Hu Lui and Henri run boutique wine distribution service Et cetera, ETC.
■ Adelaide University graduate Sushrut Kulkarni has a senior engineering job with water company Trility.
■ TAFE SA helped NamanTyagi become a chef in the Adelaide Hills, heading a team of 27 in the kitchen.
■ UniSA-trained accountant Li He helped Australian Wildlife Adventures access Chinese tourists. She now works in food manufacturing in Regency Park. ■ From Torrens University, Fernando Rocha became chief financial offer of advisory firm Keylend.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 639
