It was an extraordinary effort from the injury-struck Renegades, who sat at the foot of the table heading into the contest at Sydney Showground.
SCROLL DOWN FOR MORE WBBL MATCH REPORTS
The Stars posted a formidable total of 165, thanks to strong knocks by Meg Lanning (41 from 29), Mignon du du Preez (40 from 29) and Natalie Sciver (26 off 16).
But Webb mustered up a valiant knock (54 of 33 not out) to lock up both teams at the end of their innings.
Watch every WBBL match live and on-demand, only on Kayo. New to Kayo? Get your free trial now & start streaming instantly >
The Renegades sent Webb and Lee into bat for the super-over and the pair posted a sensational 17-runs – including one 4 and one 6 by Lee.
The Stars responded with Meg Lanning and Mignon du Preez. The duo, however, finished up on 12-runs to end their six-game win streak.
“We know that Lizzie has potential to hit a ball and take games away from oppositions, for her to get us a good score in the super over was crucial to the win today,” Webb said.
“We’ve had a pretty tough start to the season, and the Stars were on a bit of a roll, we had nothing to lose coming into it,
“I think we’re doing well to stay up and about and produce really good performances like today.”
MOMENT OF THE MATCH
This Melbourne derby was chock-a-block with big moments. Look no further than Renegades middle order batters Webb and Makinley Blows, who teamed up to force the super over. Or the moment Elyse Vilanni dived in desperation to prevent a four – and Renegades win – on the last over. Renegade Molly Strano also made WBBL history when she became the first player ever to reach 100 wickets. But if we had to choose, Lee’s spectacular 4 and 6 in the super-over takes the cake.
BOWLING SPELL OF THE MATCH
Proud Yorta Yorta/Jawoyn woman Ella Hayward finished on an incredible 4-16 from four overs. The 17-year-old spinner dismissed internationals Natalie Sciver and du Preez in the 16th over. She then found herself on a hat-trick, after sending Erin Osborne and Tess Flintoff packing in the 18th. “It’s awesome to see young players do well, especially (Hayward) against a pretty star studded line up, to take four wickets was an awesome job” Webb said.
“She got her first wicket today, and ended up with four of them.”
KNOCK OF THE MATCH
Lanning (41 from 29) and du Preez (40 off 29) gave the Stars a sensational start. Bottom order batter Alana King also stepped up, smashing four 6s in the final two overs to cement their 165-run total. But the knock of the match must go to Courtney Webb, who kept the Renegades well and truly in the contest. She finished on 54 off 33 not out, notching three 4s and three 6s.
QUOTE OF THE MATCH
Stars bowler Holly Ferling said the loss was tough, but it won’t rattle her side.
“We can be really proud of how much we scrapped, they really should have beaten us in the 18th or 19th over and we just pulled our way back into the game,” Holly Ferling said.
“I don’t think this will rattle us, it’s a good opportunity to reset and go again. We’ve had such an incredible start to this series … this will be a good turning point for the group, as we start up momentum for the backend of the season.
KIWI SUPERSTAR’S BLOW ROCKS WBBL
New Zealand superstar Sophie Devine has sent a scare through Perth Scorchers after being injured in the club’s 34-run victory over Sydney Thunder.
Devine, who became the first player to launch 100 WBBL sixes on Saturday, grimaced after appearing to pull her lower back on the last ball of her third over against the Thunder.
“It’s just one of those areas in your body that is so debilitating,” commentator and pace bowler Trent Copeland said.
“You see her dropping to her knees there. Let’s first and foremost hope that it’s nothing sinister.
“But when it’s your back generally, it’s not a good sign.”
Devine limped from the field after the blow, but her side overcame her absence to prevail and move to third on the WBBL table.
Earlier, the Scorchers opted to bat first and were restricted to 129.
Thunder’s spinner Lauren Smith disrupted the Scorchers deadly partnership of Devine and Beth Mooney, dismissing Mooney early (26 runs off 29 balls).
Hannah Darlington also had a blinder with the ball, taking three wickets (Piparo, Banting and Down). She swung momentum for bowlers Sam Bates (2-20) and Sammy Jo (1-36) Johnson to limit their run chase to just 130.
But the Scorchers bowlers weren’t phased.
Heather Graham (3-22) Nicole Bolton (2-13) and Devine (2-12) shocked Thunder’s top order and dismissed the Sydney side for 97 runs.
“I thought it was awesome the way Taneale Peschel and Bolts (Nicole Bolton) bowled for us and defended what we thought was below par, what’s really pleasing for us is the past four matches we’ve been able to win have all been really different” Perth’s Chloe Piparo said.
MOMENT OF THE MATCH
Perth’s bowlers shocked Thunder’s top order, taking two wickets in two overs. Bolton dismissed Tammy Beaumont in the opening over, after the English international chipped the ball straight into the reliable gloves of wicketkeeper Mooney. Peschel then sent Australian vice-captain Rachael Haynes packing on 6. Devine notched 2-14 before a back injury forced her from the field. Taneale Peschel (1-17) Sarah Glenn (1-18) were also on fire.
BOWLING SPELL OF THE MATCH
Proud Kamilaroi woman Darlington took control of the match in the 16th over. The 18-year-old bowled and caught Chloe Piparo and dismissed Megan Banting on the next ball. Darlington got inches away from snatching the first hat-trick of WBBL06, when Thunder appealed for the stumping of Nicole Bolton. But the third umpire deemed the Scorcher not out. The Thunder youngster finished on 3-21 from four overs.
KNOCK OF THE MATCH
Scorchers skipper Devine was once again reliable with the bat. She hit 45-runs and steered her side for most of their innings. Devine built another solid partnership with Piparo, who scored 30 off 35 balls including three 4s. Thunder’s Heather Knight was valiant on the crease, but the English international was dismissed by Bolton for 44.
QUOTE OF THE DAY
“It’s the first year in the WBBL that you could say, maybe not the best cricket team will win. It could maybe be the team that handles everything that’s thrown at them the best. That’s definitely the case in the upcoming games and there’s no excuses because every team is in the same boat” Sydney Thunder’s Hannah Darlington said.
HEAT TORCH WOEFUL ‘CANES
The Brisbane Heat have pummeled the Hobart Hurricanes by a whopping 10 wickets to notch up their fourth win of WBBL06.
In a day the Hurricanes would rather forget, they were bowled out for 82 in the 19th over and then made mistakes in the field, including a handful of dropped catches, one of which left Belinda Vakarewa so angry with herself, she kicked the picket fence.
The ‘Canes final total included top scores of 19 a piece to Nicola Carey and Emma Thompson as well as three ducks (to captain Corrine Hall, and tailenders Amy Smith and Brooke Hepburn).
It was a meagre total, but that’s exactly the sort of form the Drummoyne Oval pitch had been tossing up earlier in the day, so it certainly wasn’t undefendable.
That was until Heat opener Georgia Redmayne took it upon herself to prove there were some runs in this measly pitch, and she found the boundary at will.
WBBL fans have been used to seeing Redmayne’s opening partner Grace Harris being the one with all the big-hitting prowess. However on Sunday, Harris was less comfortable on the slower pitch and needed time to find her groove.
Instead, she put in a smart, measured innings to take quick singles to keep Redmayne on strike; but Harris did bring up the winning runs with a boundary in the 12th over.
The comprehensive win saw the Heat jump from sixth to third on the ladder, their title defence now in full swing.
THE MOMENT
She’s just finished her Year 12 exams and now the Heat’s 18-year-old off spinner Charli Knott can add “WBBL debut” to her list of 2020 achievements. She came on for the eighth over, and with her fifth ball, bowled Sasha Maloney for 2 (5 balls). She finished with 1/5 from two overs.
THE KNOCK
In Redmayne’s innings, she punished anything too short or too wide and brought up her half century in 28 balls. When Redmayne reached 50, she was given an extra lifeline when she dropped by young Amy Smith and simply continued her heavy hitting. Her unbeaten 61 (33 balls), came together with nine boundaries: for the record, that equalled the number of boundaries the entire ‘Canes side could manage.
THE SPELL
Heat’s new captain Jess Jonassen decided to bowl herself for the fourth over, after Hurricanes opener Rachel Priest had hit 13 runs off the previous over. It was with immediate effect: bowling the New Zealander as she attempted a sweep shot. Jonassen’s breakthrough started a trend, with wickets tumbling from there. She bowled three overs and finished with figures of 2/8.
STRIKERS SHOCK SIXERS TO KEEP SEASON ALIVE
The Adelaide Strikers have pulled off an incredible 14-run win over Sydney Sixers at Drummoyne Oval, to keep their Women’s Big Bash League season alive.
But it seemed unlikely midway through their batting innings: the Strikers were slumped at 6/56 after being sent into bat, but a wonderful display from veteran wicketkeeper Tegan McPharlin, followed by an incredible four-over bowling spell from stand-in captain Megan Schutt saw the Strikers register their second-ever win over the Sixers in WBBL history.
McPharlin – coming in at No. 8 – posted an unbeaten 41, which helped Adelaide finish their 20 overs on 8-119.
The total seemed far too short, but with Sixers all-rounder Ash Gardner ruled out with concussion, was Sydney’s batting depth good enough?
In reply, the Sixers were 4/81 going into the 17th over, needing 39 runs for victory.
With the game on a knife edge, Schutt took the ball for her final over: her first ball saw Ange Reakes caught at deep mid on, her fourth ball had Maddy Drake run out and her final ball saw Jodie Hicks caught at cover. Suddenly, the Sixers were 7/85; Schutt finishing with remarkable figures of 3/7.
The Sixers finished on 9-105 and have slumped to their fourth consecutive loss.
THE MOMENT
On Saturday night, Alyssa Healy may have made her feelings known about life in the hub, when former cricketer Ed Cowan questioned why the WBBL cricketers were being kept in a hub, with community transmission of COVID-19 so low: “Am I right in thinking the All Blacks were allowed in and around Sydney this week?,” Cowan wrote on Twitter. Healy responded: “Don’t even get me started…”. Is there a possibility she’s not enjoying hub life?
Her batting performance was not great against Adelaide. The opener was dropped on 0 in the opening over, only to be out, caught off the bowling of Schutt, in the third over for 5 (14 balls).
THE KNOCK
McPharlin came into bat in the 13th over, with the Strikers collapsed at 6/56 and in all sorts of trouble. With all their recognised batters sitting back in the shed, suddenly, it was up to their No. 8 to bring some respectability to the total. She did just that, the side’s veteran piling on an unbeaten 41 (26) with four fours and a whopping six. McPharlin’s momentum-shifting top score for the day gave her the Player of the Match accolade.
THE SPELL
Much has been said of Ellyse Perry’s return to the game after overcoming a badly torn hamstring. Her expensive bowling so far this WBBL has been particularly talked about (she went of eight-an-over in Saturday’s loss to the Hurricanes). But on Sunday she was on target, taking the wickets of Laura Wolvaardt (10 runs from 16 balls), Bridget Patterson (4 from 12) and Amanda-Jade Wellington (1 from 2). Perry finished 3/14.
WBBL: Madeline Penna gets a hand to the ball, allowing Tahlia McGrath t get under it to dismiss Amelia Kerr and lead the Strikers to victory.
PRIEST HEROICS LIFT HURRICANES TO UPSET
Rachel Priest did what Ellyse Perry couldn’t as the Hobart Hurricanes beat the Sydney Sixers by nine wickets at Sydney Showground Stadium.
The Hurricanes lost just one wicket as they chased down 140 to win with 11 balls to spare as the Sixers struggled to execute their game plan.
With the games coming thick and fast, it’s a worrying time for them to be hitting a wobble.
But that’s not giving Priest due credit.
Watch every ODI, T20 & Test Match of India’s tour of Australia LIVE with no ad-breaks during play on Kayo. New to Kayo? Get your free trial now & start streaming instantly >
CRICKET LATEST
‘Bring it on’: Smith defies India to unleash chin music
How elite batsmen prepare to face 150kp/h bumpers
‘It’s Test chemistry’: Why Burns may yet deny Pucovski
‘See ball, hit ball’ was her mantra before beginning the Hurricane’s chase and the New Zealand international did just that with a brilliant, unbeaten 92.
After reaching her half-century off 41 balls, Priest accelerated her innings to take the game away from the Sixers. It was something Perry struggled to do despite shouldering the responsibility in the Sixers’ innings as she reached her 20th WBBL half-century with an unbeaten 72 off 68 balls.
She and Alyssa Healy got off to a flyer, putting on 33-runs until Healy (7) departed.
The wicket seemed to slow at the back end of the innings, but it was also thanks to some excellent bowling by the Hurricanes that the Sixers found it tough to accelerate.
For the second time in two matches against the Sixers teenager Amy Smith got the big wickets of Ashleigh Gardner (6) and Erin Burns (28), her spell stifling the Sixers.
Despite being set in the middle, Perry struggled to really get a hold of the Hurricanes’ bowling, with her innings lacking some fluency.
At the end the Sixers managed a score of 4-139, setting the Hurricanes an achievable 140 to win.
Their chase received a boost when Priest was dropped on five by Burns and she certainly went on with it. The Hurricanes lost Naomi Stalenberg – Perry with a brilliant direct hit to run her out – but that was merely a blip.
The Hobart side were comfortable with Priest and Hayley Matthews at the crease until the end, with Priest hitting the winning runs with a boundary.
MOMENT OF THE MATCH
The Sydney Sixers will rue the moment Rachel Priest was dropped. The big-hitting Kiwi was on just five when Erin Burns dropped her in the second over and it’s fair to say she made the most of it.
KNOCK OF THE MATCH
‘See ball, hit ball’. That’s what Rachel Priest’s game plan was, and she executed it to perfection. The Kiwi international played one of her best ever knocks, hitting an unbeaten 92 to lead the Hurricanes to a huge win over the Sixers.
BOWLING SPELL OF THE MATCH
For the second time in two matches against the Sixers teenager Amy Smith starred with the ball. The 15-year-old again showed composure well beyond her years, stifling the Sixers by nabbing the key wickets of Ashleigh Gardner and Erin Burns – the same two players she dismissed the last time the two sides met. Smith ended with figures of 2-22.
QUOTE OF THE MATCH
“It’s pretty high up there and probably one of the better innings I’ve ever played in the WBBL. I think any sort of contribution like that against any side is a really special day, but I couldn’t have done that without our bowlers holding them to a chaseable total.” Player of the match Rachel Priest.
KIWIS SUPERSTAR ADDS TO RENEGADES MISERY
The power of Sophie Devine has heaped the misery on the Melbourne Renegades’ disappointing WBBL campaign.
The New Zealand all-rounder smashed an unbeaten 77 as the Perth Scorchers brushed aside the Renegades by nine wickets – and with five overs to spare. It leaves the Renegades bottom of the ladder with just one win this tournament.
Tasked with a modest 123 runs to win at Sydney Showground, Devine started and finished the job. The 31-year-old hit all three sixes of the match on her way to another half-century and she chipped in with the wicket of Sophie Molineux earlier in the match.
The Renegades’ innings was much like their season so far – it never really kicked on.
Molineux and Amy Satterthwaite gave them the perfect platform with a 76-run partnership, the highest for the Renegades all season.
They were helped by some ordinary fielding by the Scorchers, but they certainly failed to capitalise on it.
At the end of their 10 overs they were 1-60 and on track for at least 150 – a par score on the Showground’s belter of a pitch.
But they stuttered. Molineux was dismissed for 39 and Satterthwaite could only manage an unbeaten 48 when a larger score was on the cards.
By the time the final over came around Courtney Webb managed to hit the Melbourne side’s first boundary in 27 balls. At the end of their innings not a single six had been hit, which is partly why they could only manage a modest score of 3-122.
In reply, out strode the formidable pairing of Beth Mooney and Devine and the two made light work of the first couple of overs, until Mooney (9) was bowled by Molineux.
It mattered little though as Devine, along with Chloe Piparo (33 not out), closed out the run chase with five overs to spare.
MOMENT OF THE MATCH
It wasn’t so much a moment as a moment missed. The Renegades were looking at a big score having ended their 10th over just one wicket down for 60 runs, but they missed the chance to kick on. Sophie Molineux in particular was set, but just couldn’t let loose the shackles as the Renegades went on to manage just 3-122.
KNOCK OF THE MATCH
Sophie Devine was, well, divine. The New Zealand all-rounder hit her 100th WBBL six as she led the Scorchers to a convincing win with an unbeaten 77. She was at her power-hitting best, with three sixes and seven fours as she again hit her stride at just the right time of the campaign.
BOWLING SPELL OF THE MATCH
Taneale Peschel continues to be the Scorchers’ most reliable bowler. Not only is she a regular wicket-taker, but she tends to nab the key wickets. After dismissing Carly Leeson early in the Renegades’ innings, Peschel then got the wicket of Lizelle Lee to end with more impressive figures of 2-17.
QUOTE OF THE MATCH
“We’ve been disappointed with how we’ve been going. It’s no one’s fault in particular, we’re all trying our best to improve it, but from a morale point of view and to just gain some respect it would be nice to try and improve things at the back end.” Amy Satterthwaite on the Renegades’ campaign.
Word count: 3133
