Lanning belted 57-runs in the Stars’ thrilling six-run victory over the Perth Scorchers on Tuesday at Hurstville Oval.
But it wasn’t an easy win, for the Stars.
Perth were in it until the very last over – during which international replacement player Rosemary Mair (3-30) dismissed Mathilda Carmichael and Sarah Glenn to shut down any chance of a comeback.
SCROLL DOWN FOR MORE WBBL MATCH REPORTS
“The last two games we’ve been able to fight back, which is really important in T20 cricket, you’re not going to have your own way all the time, it’s a good trait to have,” player of the match Lanning said.
“I was getting a little bit nervous but those backend overs were excellent. Tess Flintoff again showed real class. Rosemary Mair too, who came in for her first game was able to finish it off.”
Watch every WBBL match live and on-demand, only on Kayo. New to Kayo? Get your free trial now & start streaming instantly >
The Scorchers started strong, dismissing as Sarah Glenn dismissed Elyse Vilanni (1 from 3) in the very first over.
Glenn (2-21), Nicole Bolton (3-25) and Heather Graham (2-28) were impressive with the ball, but big knocks by Lanning and Mignon du Preez gave the Stars a strong 149-run lead.
Beth Mooney and Chloe Piparo chased, but the Scorchers struggled without their skipper star batter Sophie Devine and finished on 143-runs.
In the end, the Stars’ bowlers held their nerve to get the job done at Hurstville Oval.
“I thought our two spinners Alana King and Sophie Day were the stars, they changed the game” Lanning said.
The Stars remain on top of the WBBL ladder.
THE MOMENT
Melbourne’s Alana King took the big wicket of Beth Mooney in the eleventh over, to disrupt the Scorchers run-chase. Mooney sent it straight into the hands of young gun Annabel Sutherland to depart on 45 from 30, including six 4s and one 6. King finished on 2-15 from four overs.
THE KNOCK
Lanning had Scorchers fielders running everywhere. She smashed eight 4s and one 6 before Bolton dismissed for 57 (off 39). The Australian skipper built a strong 99-run partnership with South African international du Preez (55 off 48) to set up the Stars with a solid lead.
CHAT LIVE WITH JOSH HAZLEW OOD FROM 2PM AEDT WEDS
Hazlewood chat
THE SPELL
Glenn gave Perth the perfect start. The bowler dismissed Stars opener Elyse Villani (1 from 3) and limited her opposition to 1/3 at the end of the first over. Glenn finished on a strong 2-21 from four overs. Melbourne’s Sophie Day also had a blinder with the ball, finishing on 3-16 from four overs.
THE QUOTE
“There’s no doubt you want to lock in that semi final spot, hopefully we can do that sooner rather than later. Then it’s just about feeling good in the backend of the tournament, making sure everyone is confident … but we need to keep winning and playing aggressive cricket” Lanning said.
KNIGHT’S NIGHT OF NIGHTS
A swashbuckling half-century from Heather Knight led the Sydney Thunder to a resounding eight-wicket win over the Melbourne Renegades at Sydney Showground Stadium.
Chasing a modest 127 to win, it was all too easy for the Thunder as Knight (58 not out) and Rachael Haynes (33 not out) finished the job with five overs to spare.
The win means the Thunder break their three-game losing streak, while it virtually ends any hope the Renegades may have had of making the finals.
On a personal note for Knight, her latest knock means she’s hit a half-century against every team in the WBBL.
The win was set up in the field with a classy death-bowling performance from the Thunder that restricted the Renegades to a below par total of 7-126.
Sammy-Jo Johnson conceded just three runs in the penultimate over and took the wicket of Courtney Webb (7), who was coming off a half-century against the Melbourne Stars.
With Josie Dooley still at the crease going into the final over the Renegades would have hoped to reach the 140-mark.
But Hannah Darlington had other ideas. She bowled a memorable final over, conceding five runs and taking three wickets, including the big one of Dooley. The 20-year-old was the set batter, which is crucial going into the final over, but she curiously played the ball onto her stumps after an attempted scoop shot went very wrong.
Forced to depart four runs shy of a half-century, Dooley was one of three Renegades batters who didn’t quite kick on. Sophie Molineux (22) and Amy Satterthwaite (39) both got starts, but none managed to bat deep enough for the Renegades to post the competitive total they had been on track for.
After losing early wickets Dooley and Satterthwaite steadied the ship for the Renegades, forming a strong partnership. But after Satterthwaite was run out by Tammy Beaumont the Melbourne side just lost their way.
The Thunder didn’t. Beaumont (23) and Rachel Treneman (15) flew to a 31-run opening partnership, before Knight strode out in a hurry to wrap things up. She did just that, bringing up the win with a huge six hit over long on.
THE MOMENT
Josie Dooley was set for the Renegades going into the final over. On 46 runs and doing her best to punish the Thunder for dropping her on five, Dooley needed to kick on to get the Renegades up to a competitive total. But facing the first ball of the final over, she curiously attempted a scoop only to play the ball onto her stumps. It was a match-turning wicket for Hannah Darlington and the Thunder.
THE KNOCK
The Thunder’s Heather Knight batted like she had somewhere else to be. From the moment she faced her first ball in the third over it was clear she was in the mood to knock off the runs - and she did so in rapid time. The English skipper has been in prolific form this tournament and added another unbeaten 58 to her tally. Knight has now hit a half-century against every team in the WBBL.
THE SPELL
The Thunder’s Hannah Darlington was thrown the ball for the final over and she went on to deliver one of the better death-bowling performances of the WBBL. The Renegades would have been eyeing a total around the 140-mark, but Darlington had other ideas. She took three wickets, including the big one of Josie Dooley, while conceding just five runs. She ended her four overs with figures of 3-22 - all three of those wickets coming in the final over.
PENNA HELPS STRIKERS KEEP SEASON ALIVE
A spectacular Madeline Penna knock kept the Adelaide Strikers’ season alive and secured their dominant 64-run victory over the Hobart Hurricanes on Tuesday.
The inconsistent ‘Canes were initially in control, with Brook Hepburn (2-23) and 16-year-old Amy Smith (1-16) taking the big wickets of Katie Mack and Tahlia McGrath.
The youngster inspired a flurry of wickets that limited Adelaide to 6-72 at the fourteenth over.
But a late surge by Penna (56 off 33 not out) caught Hobart completely off guard and propelled Adelaide to a competitive 141-run total.
In the end, Adelaide’s bowlers gave the Hurricanes almost no opportunity to chase.
Bowlers Sarah Coyte (3-10), Darcie Brown (2-19) and McGrath (2-16) stepped up to finish the job at Hurstville Oval.
“I had a job to do out there, I made sure I capitalised on the bad ball and sat on the good balls, and kept rotating the strike” Penna said.
“We’ve been really consistent over this tournament, hopefully we can get another few wins on the board and get into the top four. I’ve really enjoyed the (Strikers) set up. The girls seem to be up and at it all the time which is really exciting.”
The Strikers have moved up to third place on the WBBL ladder, while the Hurricanes now need to win all remaining matches and have results go their way in order to make finals.
THE MOMENT
Penna completely bamboozled Australian bowler Nicola Carey in the final over. The player of the match punished Carey with two 4s and two 6s to finish the Strikers innings on a high. “It was go big or go home, I was looking for the boundaries at the right moment,” Penna said.
THE KNOCK
It wasn’t looking good Adelaide, when they sat 6/-2. But middle-order batter Penna salvaged Adelaide’s innings, smashing 56 off 33 deliveries (not out) to notch her first half-century. Penna’s strong 69-run partnership with Tegan McPharlin (18 from 12 not out) gave the Strikers a competitive 141-run lead.
THE SPELL
Adelaide’s entire bowling group had a field day in Hurstville. Coyte in particular shone, from the moment she dismissed Hobart’s deadly opener Rachel Priest for four runs. She took the wickets of Hayley Matthews and Emma Thompson, and executed the run out of Chloe Tryon. Coyte finished on 3-10 (from four overs).
THE QUOTE
Penna said she is grateful to be playing with — not against — Striker bowler Brown.
“I haven’t faced her in nets yet, thank God. But she’s absolutely ripping them in so it’s really good to see” Penna said.
GADES SHOCK STARS IN SUPER OVER THRILLER
Courtney Webb and Lizelle Lee inspired the Melbourne Renegades to a thrilling super-over victory against WBBL ladder leaders the Melbourne Stars on Sunday.
It was an extraordinary effort from the injury-struck Renegades, who sat at the foot of the table heading into the contest at Sydney Showground.
The Stars posted a formidable total of 165, thanks to strong knocks by Meg Lanning (41 from 29), Mignon du Preez (40 from 29) and Natalie Sciver (26 off 16).
But Webb mustered up a valiant knock (54 of 33 not out) to lock up both teams at the end of their innings.
The Renegades sent Webb and Lee into bat for the super-over and the pair posted a sensational 17-runs – including one 4 and one 6 by Lee.
The Stars responded with Meg Lanning and Mignon du Preez. The duo, however, finished up on 12-runs to end their six-game win streak.
“We know that Lizzie has potential to hit a ball and take games away from oppositions, for her to get us a good score in the super over was crucial to the win today,” Webb said.
“We’ve had a pretty tough start to the season, and the Stars were on a bit of a roll, we had nothing to lose coming into it,
“I think we’re doing well to stay up and about and produce really good performances like today.”
MOMENT OF THE MATCH
This Melbourne derby was chock-a-block with big moments. Look no further than Renegades middle order batters Webb and Makinley Blows, who teamed up to force the super over. Or the moment Elyse Vilanni dived in desperation to prevent a four – and Renegades win – on the last over. Renegade Molly Strano also made WBBL history when she became the first player ever to reach 100 wickets. But if we had to choose, Lee’s spectacular 4 and 6 in the super-over takes the cake.
BOWLING SPELL OF THE MATCH
Proud Yorta Yorta/Jawoyn woman Ella Hayward finished on an incredible 4-16 from four overs. The 17-year-old spinner dismissed internationals Natalie Sciver and du Preez in the 16th over. She then found herself on a hat-trick, after sending Erin Osborne and Tess Flintoff packing in the 18th. “It’s awesome to see young players do well, especially (Hayward) against a pretty star studded line up, to take four wickets was an awesome job” Webb said.
“She got her first wicket today, and ended up with four of them.”
KNOCK OF THE MATCH
Lanning (41 from 29) and du Preez (40 off 29) gave the Stars a sensational start. Bottom order batter Alana King also stepped up, smashing four 6s in the final two overs to cement their 165-run total. But the knock of the match must go to Courtney Webb, who kept the Renegades well and truly in the contest. She finished on 54 off 33 not out, notching three 4s and three 6s.
QUOTE OF THE MATCH
Stars bowler Holly Ferling said the loss was tough, but it won’t rattle her side.
“We can be really proud of how much we scrapped, they really should have beaten us in the 18th or 19th over and we just pulled our way back into the game,” Holly Ferling said.
“I don’t think this will rattle us, it’s a good opportunity to reset and go again. We’ve had such an incredible start to this series … this will be a good turning point for the group, as we start up momentum for the back-end of the season.
KIWI SUPERSTAR’S BLOW ROCKS WBBL
New Zealand superstar Sophie Devine has sent a scare through Perth Scorchers after being injured in the club’s 34-run victory over Sydney Thunder.
Devine, who became the first player to launch 100 WBBL sixes on Saturday, grimaced after appearing to pull her lower back on the last ball of her third over against the Thunder.
“It’s just one of those areas in your body that is so debilitating,” commentator and pace bowler Trent Copeland said.
“You see her dropping to her knees there. Let’s first and foremost hope that it’s nothing sinister.
“But when it’s your back generally, it’s not a good sign.”
Devine limped from the field after the blow, but her side overcame her absence to prevail and move to third on the WBBL table.
Earlier, the Scorchers opted to bat first and were restricted to 129.
Thunder’s spinner Lauren Smith disrupted the Scorchers deadly partnership of Devine and Beth Mooney, dismissing Mooney early (26 runs off 29 balls).
Hannah Darlington also had a blinder with the ball, taking three wickets (Piparo, Banting and Down). She swung momentum for bowlers Sam Bates (2-20) and Sammy Jo (1-36) Johnson to limit their run chase to just 130.
But the Scorchers bowlers weren’t phased.
Heather Graham (3-22) Nicole Bolton (2-13) and Devine (2-12) shocked Thunder’s top order and dismissed the Sydney side for 97 runs.
“I thought it was awesome the way Taneale Peschel and Bolts (Nicole Bolton) bowled for us and defended what we thought was below par, what’s really pleasing for us is the past four matches we’ve been able to win have all been really different” Perth’s Chloe Piparo said.
MOMENT OF THE MATCH
Perth’s bowlers shocked Thunder’s top order, taking two wickets in two overs. Bolton dismissed Tammy Beaumont in the opening over, after the English international chipped the ball straight into the reliable gloves of wicketkeeper Mooney. Peschel then sent Australian vice-captain Rachael Haynes packing on 6. Devine notched 2-14 before a back injury forced her from the field. Taneale Peschel (1-17) Sarah Glenn (1-18) were also on fire.
BOWLING SPELL OF THE MATCH
Proud Kamilaroi woman Darlington took control of the match in the 16th over. The 18-year-old bowled and caught Chloe Piparo and dismissed Megan Banting on the next ball. Darlington got inches away from snatching the first hat-trick of WBBL06, when Thunder appealed for the stumping of Nicole Bolton. But the third umpire deemed the Scorcher not out. The Thunder youngster finished on 3-21 from four overs.
KNOCK OF THE MATCH
Scorchers skipper Devine was once again reliable with the bat. She hit 45-runs and steered her side for most of their innings. Devine built another solid partnership with Piparo, who scored 30 off 35 balls including three 4s. Thunder’s Heather Knight was valiant on the crease, but the English international was dismissed by Bolton for 44.
QUOTE OF THE DAY
“It’s the first year in the WBBL that you could say, maybe not the best cricket team will win. It could maybe be the team that handles everything that’s thrown at them the best. That’s definitely the case in the upcoming games and there’s no excuses because every team is in the same boat” Sydney Thunder’s Hannah Darlington said.
HEAT TORCH WOEFUL ‘CANES
The Brisbane Heat have pommeled the Hobart Hurricanes by a whopping 10 wickets to notch up their fourth win of WBBL06.
In a day the Hurricanes would rather forget, they were bowled out for 82 in the 19th over and then made mistakes in the field, including a handful of dropped catches, one of which left Belinda Vakarewa so angry with herself, she kicked the picket fence.
The ‘Canes final total included top scores of 19 a piece to Nicola Carey and Emma Thompson as well as three ducks (to captain Corrine Hall, and tailenders Amy Smith and Brooke Hepburn).
It was a meagre total, but that’s exactly the sort of form the Drummoyne Oval pitch had been tossing up earlier in the day, so it certainly wasn’t undefendable.
That was until Heat opener Georgia Redmayne took it upon herself to prove there were some runs in this measly pitch, and she found the boundary at will.
WBBL fans have been used to seeing Redmayne’s opening partner Grace Harris being the one with all the big-hitting prowess. However on Sunday, Harris was less comfortable on the slower pitch and needed time to find her groove.
Instead, she put in a smart, measured innings to take quick singles to keep Redmayne on strike; but Harris did bring up the winning runs with a boundary in the 12th over.
The comprehensive win saw the Heat jump from sixth to third on the ladder, their title defence now in full swing.
THE MOMENT
She’s just finished her Year 12 exams and now the Heat’s 18-year-old off spinner Charli Knott can add “WBBL debut” to her list of 2020 achievements. She came on for the eighth over, and with her fifth ball, bowled Sasha Maloney for 2 (5 balls). She finished with 1/5 from two overs.
THE KNOCK
In Redmayne’s innings, she punished anything too short or too wide and brought up her half century in 28 balls. When Redmayne reached 50, she was given an extra lifeline when she dropped by young Amy Smith and simply continued her heavy hitting. Her unbeaten 61 (33 balls), came together with nine boundaries: for the record, that equalled the number of boundaries the entire ‘Canes side could manage.
THE SPELL
Heat’s new captain Jess Jonassen decided to bowl herself for the fourth over, after Hurricanes opener Rachel Priest had hit 13 runs off the previous over. It was with immediate effect: bowling the New Zealander as she attempted a sweep shot. Jonassen’s breakthrough started a trend, with wickets tumbling from there. She bowled three overs and finished with figures of 2/8.
STRIKERS SHOCK SIXERS TO KEEP SEASON ALIVE
The Adelaide Strikers have pulled off an incredible 14-run win over Sydney Sixers at Drummoyne Oval, to keep their Women’s Big Bash League season alive.
But it seemed unlikely midway through their batting innings: the Strikers were slumped at 6/56 after being sent into bat, but a wonderful display from veteran wicketkeeper Tegan McPharlin, followed by an incredible four-over bowling spell from stand-in captain Megan Schutt saw the Strikers register their second-ever win over the Sixers in WBBL history.
McPharlin – coming in at No. 8 – posted an unbeaten 41, which helped Adelaide finish their 20 overs on 8-119.
The total seemed far too short, but with Sixers all-rounder Ash Gardner ruled out with concussion, was Sydney’s batting depth good enough?
In reply, the Sixers were 4/81 going into the 17th over, needing 39 runs for victory.
With the game on a knife edge, Schutt took the ball for her final over: her first ball saw Ange Reakes caught at deep mid on, her fourth ball had Maddy Drake run out and her final ball saw Jodie Hicks caught at cover. Suddenly, the Sixers were 7/85; Schutt finishing with remarkable figures of 3/7.
The Sixers finished on 9-105 and have slumped to their fourth consecutive loss.
THE MOMENT
On Saturday night, Alyssa Healy may have made her feelings known about life in the hub, when former cricketer Ed Cowan questioned why the WBBL cricketers were being kept in a hub, with community transmission of COVID-19 so low: “Am I right in thinking the All Blacks were allowed in and around Sydney this week?,” Cowan wrote on Twitter. Healy responded: “Don’t even get me started…”. Is there a possibility she’s not enjoying hub life?
Her batting performance was not great against Adelaide. The opener was dropped on 0 in the opening over, only to be out, caught off the bowling of Schutt, in the third over for 5 (14 balls).
THE KNOCK
McPharlin came into bat in the 13th over, with the Strikers collapsed at 6/56 and in all sorts of trouble. With all their recognised batters sitting back in the shed, suddenly, it was up to their No. 8 to bring some respectability to the total. She did just that, the side’s veteran piling on an unbeaten 41 (26) with four fours and a whopping six. McPharlin’s momentum-shifting top score for the day gave her the Player of the Match accolade.
THE SPELL
Much has been said of Ellyse Perry’s return to the game after overcoming a badly torn hamstring. Her expensive bowling so far this WBBL has been particularly talked about (she went of eight-an-over in Saturday’s loss to the Hurricanes). But on Sunday she was on target, taking the wickets of Laura Wolvaardt (10 runs from 16 balls), Bridget Patterson (4 from 12) and Amanda-Jade Wellington (1 from 2). Perry finished 3/14.
WBBL: Madeline Penna gets a hand to the ball, allowing Tahlia McGrath t get under it to dismiss Amelia Kerr and lead the Strikers to victory.
PRIEST HEROICS LIFT HURRICANES TO UPSET
Rachel Priest did what Ellyse Perry couldn’t as the Hobart Hurricanes beat the Sydney Sixers by nine wickets at Sydney Showground Stadium.
The Hurricanes lost just one wicket as they chased down 140 to win with 11 balls to spare as the Sixers struggled to execute their game plan.
With the games coming thick and fast, it’s a worrying time for them to be hitting a wobble.
But that’s not giving Priest due credit.
Watch every ODI, T20 & Test Match of India’s tour of Australia LIVE with no ad-breaks during play on Kayo. New to Kayo? Get your free trial now & start streaming instantly >
CRICKET LATEST
‘Bring it on’: Smith defies India to unleash chin music
How elite batsmen prepare to face 150kp/h bumpers
‘It’s Test chemistry’: Why Burns may yet deny Pucovski
‘See ball, hit ball’ was her mantra before beginning the Hurricane’s chase and the New Zealand international did just that with a brilliant, unbeaten 92.
After reaching her half-century off 41 balls, Priest accelerated her innings to take the game away from the Sixers. It was something Perry struggled to do despite shouldering the responsibility in the Sixers’ innings as she reached her 20th WBBL half-century with an unbeaten 72 off 68 balls.
She and Alyssa Healy got off to a flyer, putting on 33-runs until Healy (7) departed.
The wicket seemed to slow at the back end of the innings, but it was also thanks to some excellent bowling by the Hurricanes that the Sixers found it tough to accelerate.
For the second time in two matches against the Sixers teenager Amy Smith got the big wickets of Ashleigh Gardner (6) and Erin Burns (28), her spell stifling the Sixers.
Despite being set in the middle, Perry struggled to really get a hold of the Hurricanes’ bowling, with her innings lacking some fluency.
At the end the Sixers managed a score of 4-139, setting the Hurricanes an achievable 140 to win.
Their chase received a boost when Priest was dropped on five by Burns and she certainly went on with it. The Hurricanes lost Naomi Stalenberg – Perry with a brilliant direct hit to run her out – but that was merely a blip.
The Hobart side were comfortable with Priest and Hayley Matthews at the crease until the end, with Priest hitting the winning runs with a boundary.
MOMENT OF THE MATCH
The Sydney Sixers will rue the moment Rachel Priest was dropped. The big-hitting Kiwi was on just five when Erin Burns dropped her in the second over and it’s fair to say she made the most of it.
KNOCK OF THE MATCH
‘See ball, hit ball’. That’s what Rachel Priest’s game plan was, and she executed it to perfection. The Kiwi international played one of her best ever knocks, hitting an unbeaten 92 to lead the Hurricanes to a huge win over the Sixers.
BOWLING SPELL OF THE MATCH
For the second time in two matches against the Sixers teenager Amy Smith starred with the ball. The 15-year-old again showed composure well beyond her years, stifling the Sixers by nabbing the key wickets of Ashleigh Gardner and Erin Burns – the same two players she dismissed the last time the two sides met. Smith ended with figures of 2-22.
QUOTE OF THE MATCH
“It’s pretty high up there and probably one of the better innings I’ve ever played in the WBBL. I think any sort of contribution like that against any side is a really special day, but I couldn’t have done that without our bowlers holding them to a chaseable total.” Player of the match Rachel Priest.
KIWIS SUPERSTAR ADDS TO RENEGADES MISERY
The power of Sophie Devine has heaped the misery on the Melbourne Renegades’ disappointing WBBL campaign.
The New Zealand all-rounder smashed an unbeaten 77 as the Perth Scorchers brushed aside the Renegades by nine wickets – and with five overs to spare. It leaves the Renegades bottom of the ladder with just one win this tournament.
Tasked with a modest 123 runs to win at Sydney Showground, Devine started and finished the job. The 31-year-old hit all three sixes of the match on her way to another half-century and she chipped in with the wicket of Sophie Molineux earlier in the match.
The Renegades’ innings was much like their season so far – it never really kicked on.
Molineux and Amy Satterthwaite gave them the perfect platform with a 76-run partnership, the highest for the Renegades all season.
They were helped by some ordinary fielding by the Scorchers, but they certainly failed to capitalise on it.
At the end of their 10 overs they were 1-60 and on track for at least 150 – a par score on the Showground’s belter of a pitch.
But they stuttered. Molineux was dismissed for 39 and Satterthwaite could only manage an unbeaten 48 when a larger score was on the cards.
By the time the final over came around Courtney Webb managed to hit the Melbourne side’s first boundary in 27 balls. At the end of their innings not a single six had been hit, which is partly why they could only manage a modest score of 3-122.
In reply, out strode the formidable pairing of Beth Mooney and Devine and the two made light work of the first couple of overs, until Mooney (9) was bowled by Molineux.
It mattered little though as Devine, along with Chloe Piparo (33 not out), closed out the run chase with five overs to spare.
MOMENT OF THE MATCH
It wasn’t so much a moment as a moment missed. The Renegades were looking at a big score having ended their 10th over just one wicket down for 60 runs, but they missed the chance to kick on. Sophie Molineux in particular was set, but just couldn’t let loose the shackles as the Renegades went on to manage just 3-122.
KNOCK OF THE MATCH
Sophie Devine was, well, divine. The New Zealand all-rounder hit her 100th WBBL six as she led the Scorchers to a convincing win with an unbeaten 77. She was at her power-hitting best, with three sixes and seven fours as she again hit her stride at just the right time of the campaign.
BOWLING SPELL OF THE MATCH
Taneale Peschel continues to be the Scorchers’ most reliable bowler. Not only is she a regular wicket-taker, but she tends to nab the key wickets. After dismissing Carly Leeson early in the Renegades’ innings, Peschel then got the wicket of Lizelle Lee to end with more impressive figures of 2-17.
QUOTE OF THE MATCH
“We’ve been disappointed with how we’ve been going. It’s no one’s fault in particular, we’re all trying our best to improve it, but from a morale point of view and to just gain some respect it would be nice to try and improve things at the back end.” Amy Satterthwaite on the Renegades’ campaign.
Word count: 4607
