A SHIFT to hybrid working and a multimillion-dollar contract with the education department are fuelling the growth of specialist data analytics company exposé, which plans to double its workforce by the end of the year.
The company currently ­employs 40 data scientists, technical consultants and other staff at its Lot Fourteen headquarters, and an additional 10 staff across its Melbourne and newly opened Brisbane offices.
A recruitment drive is under way at exposé following a $6.5 million, 10-year contract win with the state government earlier this year.
It is working with the education department to deliver the “edAnalytics Hub”, which is aimed at helping the department better use its data and improve learning outcomes in schools.
The company’s general manager Kelly Drewett says exposé is currently recruiting for its first trainee and will look to bring on more staff across the country to support heightened demand from clients for hi-tech data analytics and ­insights.
“We started with a team of five and in a short space of time have grown to become South Australia’s largest data anal­ytics consultancy with about 40 staff locally and a total of 50 nationally,” she said.
“We are now recruiting for about 20 additional staff here in South Australia and we expect our workforce to double to about 100 by the end of the year.
“The work from home movement that accelerated two years ago during the Covid-19 pandemic has put data analytics and digital transformation firmly on the agenda, with an increasing demand for services and expertise in this area.” Exposé was co-founded by Ms Drewett and Etienne Oosthuysen in 2016 as a sister company to digital technology company Chamonix.
Ms Drewett said the company’s third office at The Precinct start-up hub in Brisbane’s Fortitude Valley would support further growth in the eastern states.
“This is an exciting opportunity on the eastern seaboard and represents an important step in the growth of our business in other states,” she said.
“We have also just kicked off our business focused data analytics project with Loxton High School to encourage the next generation to choose a  career in STEM,” she said. “This project is expected to result in a 200 per cent growth rate for us.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 372
