The state government is calling for submissions of suitable products to showcase as it establishes a new AgTech demonstration site at Minnipa.
The Minnipa Agricultural Centre is among the sites being included as part of the $2.4-million regional AgTech demonstration farms and start-up hubs project.
The AgTech Strategic Plan is aimed to encourage South Australia's primary producers to further adopt technology to increase productivity and profitability.
Primary Industries Minister David Basham said opening up the centre as the new AgTech demonstration site would help show the value of technology to farmers and producers in the region.
"The Minnipa Research Centre has been one of Australia's leading dryland research sites for many years and the addition of AgTech on-farm will be important as the facility continues to move forward," he said.
"The Marshall Liberal Government sees encouraging the uptake of AgTech by primary producers as a key to unlocking the potential of South Australia's agricultural sector and that's why we launched the state's first AgTech Strategic Plan.
"Adoption of the right AgTech on-farm could save our farmers money, increase their profitability, productivity and improve their sustainability."
Mr Basham said primary producers needed to see and experience the benefits of AgTech for themselves, leading to the establishment of demonstration sites at Minnipa, Struan-Kybybolite, and Loxton.
He said they wanted to showcase products suited to the farmland and style of production around Minnipa and Eyre Peninsula as a whole.
"If you have a commercially available AgTech product that has application for South Australia's agricultural industries, we want to hear from you," Mr Basham said.
"It could end up being demonstrated to our primary producers, helping to de-risk their investment in relevant technologies by showcasing how it can improve efficiencies and increase their outputs.
"Farmers and growers will be able to attend the AgTech demonstration sites around the state to experience AgTech solutions on a working farm, once it is safe to do so within COVID-19 regulations."
Expressions of interest are now open for the AgTech demonstration site at Minnipa.
For more details and to apply, visit pir.sa.gov.au/agtech-eoi.
CREDIT:
Word count: 345
