Adam Zampa hopes his success in one-day and Twenty20 internationals will earn him a spot in Australia's Test squad.
One of the world's leading leg-spinners in short-form cricket, Zampa was a key player in Australia breaking their T20 drought on the West Indies tour, claiming 2-20 from four overs in a tense victory. It came after Australia lost the first three matches and the series.
Australia prepare to play their fifth and final T20 match against the West Indies in St Lucia this morning (AEST) before relocating to Barbados for three one-day matches beginning Wednesday.
The ever-confident Zampa, 29, believes he can convert his white-ball mysteries to the red ball despite a modest first-class bowling average of 48.
"[Those are] conversations I'll be having with selectors once Tests, particularly to the subcontinent, start up again. I'm bowling well and I'm keen to be on those tours," Zampa said yesterday.
There will be no shortage of potential opportunities next year, with Australia scheduled for Test tours of Pakistan, Sri Lanka and India, depending on security and the pandemic.
"I definitely still harbour ambitions [to play Test cricket]," Zampa said. "I'll play any cricket that's available. It's just worked out that in recent years white ball has been the highlight of that. We've had so many white-ball tours where I just haven't had the opportunity to play red ball.
"Every time I've been available, I've tried to play."
Zampa began his first-class career for NSW almost a decade ago but moved to South Australia for more opportunities.
He returned home last season looking to swap in and out of the NSW side with Nathan Lyon, Australia's leading Test spinner. It seemed an easy fit, with Zampa on international white-ball duties and then playing for the Blues when Lyon was in the Test side.
However, the nature of the schedule complicated by the COVID-19 pandemic meant Zampa did not play a single Sheffield Shield game last season while Lyon played nine and was the competition's leading bowler, with 42 wickets at 26. Zampa's last first-class match was for South Australia in early December 2019. Since then he has played 13 ODIs, claiming 27 wickets, and 18 international T20s for 17 wickets.
He is eighth on the International Cricket Council's T20 bowler rankings and 15th in ODIs. "I don't think playing Shield cricket is the be all and end all of getting in the Test squad," he said.
CREDIT: Malcolm Conn
Word count: 407
