AN additional electric vehicle charging station has been installed in the Hindmarsh Shire, as part of a new route charting western Victoria's culturally significant Indigenous sites.
Jeparit will now host an electrc charging station, complementing existing ports in Dimboola, Nhill and Rainbow.
The electric vehicle charging stations were provided as part of a partnership between Hindmarsh Shire Council and electric vehicle start-up Linga Network.
The company chose the Dimboola and Jeparit locations as part of a project alongside Indigenous-owned consulting firm Baidam Solutions called 'Songlines of Baidam'.
The route will eventually extend from Torquay to Port Fairy, and extend beyond the border into South Australia.
Linga Network chief executive Adrian Kinderis the Songlines initiative was looking to place charging stations in culturally significant locations for First Nations people, with Dimboola and Jeparit the first two nodes of the planned route.
"They have a different design on them and what we are trying to do is number one welcome tourism, but hopefully with that tourism from those townships trying to get those people to engage with the cultural centres that are there and indeed engage with the First Nations people and the history that surrounds them," he said.
"We thought it was a novel way of deploying charging stations. You can deploy them one-dimensionally and just say they are here for a service, but we can do a bit more than that and heighten cultural awareness and culturally engage, then that is a great initiative."
Mr Kinderis said the two charging stations will form part of a larger Songlines route stretching across locations in Victoria and South Australia.
Linga Network has applied for grants from the Victorian and South Australian governments to complete the initiative.
"We are linking up five culturally significant locations in each state, using Dreamtime language creating what is called a Songline," he said.
"It is the connection of these significant sites. A songline is somewhat like a tour, you will be able to tour through these locations - all of which have EV infrastructure - and go and visit the culturally significant points of reference that are located at those particular townships."
Linga Network will also donate $10,000 per year to Baidam Solutions, to provide ICT scholarships to First Nations people - as well as any revenue generated from the charging stations.
"We would like to applaud Hindmarsh Shire for responding to the initiative, they have been fantastic. Number one, they were great to get the notion of EV charging infrastructure in the first place," he said.
"I would certainly like to tip my hat to Hindmarsh Shire, they are a very progressive shire both from an EV perspective but also very respectful for what we are trying to do from a cultural perspective."
Linga Network co-founder Caity Randall said she was pleased to be able to tie electric vehicle user experience with First Nations land and culture.
"As an electric vehicle network, our primary objective is technological progression and infrastructure deployment executed in a thorough and robust manner," she said.
"As a strong advocate for community cultural awareness, I'm particularly pleased that we can combine establishing our high coverage regional network with a meaningful user experience, respecting First Nations land and culture.
"Working with Baidam Solutions will ensure our cultural competency and that we respect and honour the culture and heritage of our First Nations communities."
Hindmarsh Shire mayor Ron Ismay said the stations would increase tourist visitation to small towns throughout the shire.
"It is great to see our small towns having new services for electric vehicles. The charging stations take about one hour to charge, and will encourage tourists to stop and charge in our towns exploring our wonderful attractions and businesses," he said.
This comes after electric vehicle charging stations were introduced to Rainbow and Nhill, with an aim to expand tourism to the region.
Linga Network provided both of the two previous charging stations in the Hindmarsh Shire.
CREDIT: Alex Dalziel
Word count: 659
