Australia has lost more than 100,000 foreign students in the past financial year at a cost of nearly $6bn to the economy, with higher education leaders warning that the sector will not recover from any further Covid-19 induced delays.
New federal government data seen by The Australian shows there are more than 472,000 holders of Australian student visas, including those inside and outside the country, compared to more than 595,000 at the same time in 2020.
Overall commencements at Australian universities by foreign students have fallen 35 per cent from their peak in 2019, and 21.8 per cent in the year to April.
The Delta outbreaks across Australia have already seen NSW indefinitely pause its plan to bring small batches of foreign students into the state, but locked-down South Australia is still aiming to proceed with its international student pilot programs.
International Education Association chief executive Phil Honeywood said the industry’s ability to bounce back from a year of pain was looking dim.
“Political bravery to revive the beleaguered $40bn international education industry appears to now be lacking across all states except South Australia,” he said.
“The whole point of the states’ pilot student return plans is to show the wider Australian community that these young people can be brought back safely to resume their long-delayed studies. Now we are not even permitted to prove that this model can work.
“In the meantime, as highly specialised marketing, admissions and student services staff continue to be made redundant, there is real concern about the industry’s ability to dust itself off and quickly start up again.” Government data shows more than 60,000 student visa holders in the university sector have dropped off in the past year, and more than 20,000 have lapsed in vocational education.
The figures also showed a significant drop in the number of student visa holders attending English language schools, with more than 3000 this month compared to more than 19,000 the previous July.
More than 313,000 student visa holders are currently in Australia and more than 158,000 are outside the country.
At this point last year, there were more than 471,000 student visa holders in Australia and only 124,000 outside the nation’s ­borders.
The International Education Association estimates each student lost in the 2020-21 cohort is worth $60,000 to the Australian economy, with $2.5bn lost in ­tuition fees and a further $3.5bn lost in overall economic input.
Universities Australia chief executive Catriona Jackson said the nation’s closed borders made it difficult for universities to keep up efforts to recruit foreign students.
“Uncertainty regarding when Australia’s inter­national borders will reopen makes it challenging to recruit new students to Australian institutions. As a result, new international student commencements have declined by 21.8 per cent year over year, and fallen 35 per cent since the peak in 2019,” she said.
“Students are now more than a year into this crisis and borders are still shut. No matter how resolute they are in their desire to come here, other options in countries they can enter are becoming more attractive.” Education Minister Alan Tudge said on Sunday he would continue to work with states on returning foreign students, but that the health and safety of Australians must come first. “NSW and SA are the only states to have submitted detailed plans for international student returns and both are now focused on getting out of the current lockdowns and reducing case numbers,” he said.
CREDIT: RICHARD FERGUSON; EXCLUSIVE
Word count: 575
