Here are the top-20 rising tech stars across NSW, South Australia, Queensland and Victoria.
NSW’s hottest start-ups
Sydney’s tech start-up scene is ready to level to up. Years after Atlassian pulled off a blockbuster Wall Street public listing – making its co-founders instant billionaires in the process – other young companies are following suit, changing the world with software and building the jobs of the future in the process. An upcoming 40-storey timber building at Central Station in Surry Hills is promising to serve as Sydney’s next tech hub, yet innovative companies all over the state are vying to be the next big thing.
Canva
Design start-up Canva has become virtually a household name across Australia, growing from its humble roots as an online tool to create school yearbooks in 2007, to now a tech powerhouse employing thousands of Australians and used by millions of users globally.
The company’s most recent capital raising valued it at $US16 billion, and it’s rumoured to be quietly plotting a lucrative public listing, which would likely be on Wall Street, like Atlassian before it.
Canva was born in the Perth bedroom of its founder, then-university student Melanie Perkins, but is now headquartered in Surry Hills, Sydney, with offices spread across Manila, Beijing, Wuhan, San Francisco and Austin.
The company is hiring hundreds of roles and is showing no signs of slowing down. It now has nearly 2000 employees, and 55 million users, while 250 million presentations have been created on its platform.
“For us, growth is what it’s all been about, from both the product side and the customer side,” co-founder Cameron Adams, a former Google executive, said in an interview.
“The last 12 months have been a bit of a rollercoaster for everyone, but our growth has powered on, and been even stronger than ever before.”
Mr Adams said a rise in teams using Canva to collaborate, particularly during the pandemic, has driven its spike in usage. The company’s mission is to ‘empower the world to design’, and teams use its software – which is either free or cheap depending on the tier – to quickly create logos, flyers and presentations.
“With everyone working from home, collaboration has really taken off. We’re giving people new tools to communicate with,” Mr Adams said. “Canva’s not just a social media design tool, people are using it for any type of digital collaboration.
The company has cemented its label as Australia’s fastest-growing start-up, something its co-founders don’t take lightly.
“The journey has been pretty and it’s not something you realise every day. We just often have our heads down focusing on what we’re building,” Mr Adams said. “I’d describe where we’re heading as being big and crazy, we’re encouraging all our team members to stretch themselves and really reach for the stars.”
The executive added he’d seen massive changes in Australia’s start-up ecosystem over the last decade, and is expecting further change to come. “When we were first kicking off with Canva, it was pretty hard to stay in Australia. We eventually ended up having to go to the United States to talk to investors and get funding.
“Around 2012 was when doing a start-up in Australia became a really viable thing, and you saw firms like Blackbird and Airtree start up around that time.
“We actually found it really hard to recruit people in the early days just because they were really risk averse, and they didn‘t value stock as much. Now it’s become easier to convince people to value stock equity and take a bit of risk on something that is going to grow into something really big.”
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
“I’m interested in climate tech and people making a contribution to positively affecting climate change. And a lot of people coming out of tech companies like ours are now starting their own start-ups. Dovetail, a user experience tool, I really enjoy dropping and seeing what they’re doing.
“I invested in a very early-stage company called Uluu, which is focusing on bio plastics made from seaweed. It is really interesting, because it’s a lot more sustainable, it uses a natural resource, and obviously doesn’t use fossil fuels that current plastic uses. There’s another company here in Sydney called Karst, they’re focusing on sustainable stationery and paper and reusing wastes from the building industry. So it’s a fantastic win-win because they’ve got super high quality products, also made from sustainable means. So, very strong environmental impact thread through there.’’
SafetyCulture
SafetyCulture – which counts Atlassian co-CEO Scott Farquhar, Morgan Stanley executive Paul Kwan and Blackbird Ventures managing director Rick Baker as advisers – has grown from being a modest safety checklist app, to a fully-featured holistic platform for a company‘s safety and compliance needs.
The start-up was founded in a Townsville garage but now employs hundreds of people and has grown to become one of Sydney’s hottest tech companies to watch.
The company was most recently valued at a whopping $2.2 billion, smashing past its previous ‘unicorn’ status from April 2020, receiving funding from former Australian prime minister Malcolm Turnbull and his wife Lucy Turnbull and heavy-hitting investors including Index Ventures TDM Growth Partners.
“We recently surpassed 100 million completed inspections in our flagship product, iAuditor, and this new funding allows us to continue that momentum,” SafetyCulture founder and CEO Luke Anear said.
“It also allows us to invest in the development of our platform which will ensure the information captured by workers can easily be acted upon to improve quality, efficiency, and safety in the workplace.
SafetyCulture currently helps 28,000 companies improve every day by streamlining the flow of critical information through their mobile-first platform, and its platform is used across a wide range of industries including manufacturing, hospitality, retail and logistics.
The company, which is now headquartered in Sydney with offices in Townsville, Kansas City, Manchester (UK) and Manila, is busy rapidly expanding its global product and engineering teams.
“Up until now it’s very much felt that I was the person driving the business. And now we’re seeing the maturity has increased to the point where it’s a team of people driving the business,” Mr Anear said.
“The difference is that I was the one making a lot of the big decisions, and now we‘re empowering an executive team around me to make great decisions and move quicker than I could have alone.“
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
“One start-up I’ve watched closely for years is EdApp who offer mobile-first training. I first met Darren Winterford and his EdApp team of eight people in Manly in 2017. I’ve seen first-hand what a great leader he is and how he’s built a business that now delivers 50,000 lessons a day in 90 countries. We invested in their business in 2018 and they became part of SafetyCulture in 2020. I think more and more we’ll see founders backing each other and teaming up to solve problems and build better businesses.”
Deputy
Cafes, restaurants and other hospitality businesses across the globe use Sydney-based workforce management software start-up Deputy to modernise their HR processes and simplify time-sheets and workplace communication.
Before starting Deputy 12 years ago, chief executive Ashik Ahmed began his first job at Hungry Jacks in 1994.
He was the first in his family to find a job after migrating from Bangladesh.
Now, Mr Ahmed has built up Deputy into one of the nation’s leading tech start-ups, working with more than 250,000 workplaces internationally, with a motto of ‘simply shift work’.
It has offices in Sydney, San Francisco, Atlanta and London, and has bounced back from a difficult 2020 – in which Covid-19 ravaged the global hospitality industry – to resume its rapid growth trajectory.
The company is estimated to be worth nearly $1 billion, which would give it the esteemed ‘unicorn’ status.
Mr Ahmed has held onto about a third of the business, with co-founder Steve Shelley owning another third – and Deputy employees most of the rest.
“Starting a business is like climbing a mountain,” Mr Ahmed said. ”It‘s one thing to climb a mountain to 1000 metres, then to climb it to 6000 metres is another matter. There are different challenges you face at every step along the journey.
“My wisdom for any founder is that it‘s not just about what it’s like today, it’s about what it’s going to look like 12 months from now, then 36 and 48 months from now as you scale your business.”
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
Mr Ahmed looks up to Atlassian for putting the Australian tech industry on the world map, and Xero for making small business software beautiful. “As a customer and user, I know how much it has meant for me.”
Stake
US stocks like Tesla, Apple and Gamestop are all the rage with investors, and Australian fintech Stake is helping Australians take advantage. The start-up closed a $40m funding round from Tiger Global and DST Global this year and is now expanding globally.
Stake, founded by Matt Leibowitz in Sydney in 2017, was the first company to offer commission-free brokerage for customers to buy and sell US stocks in Australia, and Mr Leibowitz says the company is now ready to offer its app to customers in even more countries.
In the past year alone, Stake’s customer base has grown by more than six times, and it now has more than 330,000 customers globally.
“Our mission drives our focus to put the US stock market at the fingertips of investors and traders around the world. To achieve this, we push the boundaries with innovative technology and systems. We listen to our customers. We only work with partners who share our attitudes and we don’t compromise on safety and security.”
The Stake team describes its aim as to democratise global share markets in order to bring the world’s largest and “most dynamic” market to the rest of the world.
“We’re really excited to get to this point but it’s just the start. We set out to change the game for retail investors, and were self-funded for the first four years of our journey. We’ve proven the model and now have the chance to expand our product and bring our zero-brokerage service to more retail investors,” Mr Leibowitz said.
“We started with US shares, but that’s just the beginning. Our DNA is embedded in access, and we’ve got exciting plans to give Aussies even more opportunities both in the short-and long-term’’
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
“I am constantly impressed by Larry and the team at Zip, and have been lucky to follow their journey closely, being an early investor in the business since 2013.
“The way Larry has built the company, by creating a strong internal culture, and executed on Zip’s ambitions both locally and globally to provide a great proposition for merchants and customers.
“Stake has followed in similar suit, making Australia its first and core market and then delivering that again overseas.”
WithYouWithMe
Much has been made of how Australia treats its veterans, and WithYouWithMe is a tech start-up doing something about it.
The Sydney-based company, founded by ex-veterans, has attracted thousands of Australian military veterans to its program, which helps them gain meaningful employment in high-growth areas including cyber security, robotics and data analytics.
George Frazis, Bank of Queensland managing director and a former engineer in the Royal Australian Airforce, said he has experienced first-hand how the skills developed through military service can translate to a long-term business career.
“Every Defence member receives exceptional leadership training; they know how to work in cross-functional teams in an agile manner and are extremely strategic and resilient. Veterans work hard and understand how to deliver on a mission and be motivated by a higher purpose.
According to WithYouWithMe co-founder Luke Rix, around 5500 military personnel leave every year, with around 4000 of those then active job seekers. Most are under 30, and have had about $2 million worth of training over their careers to date.
“Right now WithYouWithMe’s focus is all on getting people into new tech careers and making tech roles more accessible,” Mr Rix said.
“This drives everything we do from perfecting the WYWM Potential platform to help individuals find their best tech career match, to building new training courses in demand careers like Data Analytics and Cyber Security.
“Over the next year we will be looking to launch a range of new courses and keep improving the platform to allow more organisations to hire talent based on potential, not on experience.
“We‘re also focused on building out operations in Canada, the US and the UK, with the team growing quickly across the globe.”
For tech companies, they get job-ready, hungry workers and can save recruitment costs by 90 per cent, while veterans gain access to the jobs of the future. A genuine win-win.
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
“BenchOn is a great platform helping companies manage their workforces in new ways, focused on helping companies tap into other organisation‘s under-utilised talent – something which we saw a big need for during Covid. Its founder, Tim Walmsley, is also an Australian military veteran, which is great to see at the helm of a growing tech company.”
SA’s tech stars to watch for
There’s been plenty of hype around technology businesses in South Australia recently – Lot Fourteen is a hive of activity bustling with entrepreneurs at various stages of the journey, the Australian Space Agency is up and running, and major businesses such as Amazon and MTX Group are putting down roots.
But the hype is real. In areas such as artificial intelligence, satellite technology and health, local companies are making their mark on the local, and even extra-planetary stage.
Complexica
Complexica managing director and founder Matt Michalewicz. Picture: Russell Millard
Helping some of the biggest brands across Australia and the globe make better decisions is a simple way to explain what Adelaide-based artificial intelligence firm Complexica does, but it also vastly undersells them.
It’s by no accident that the company has been able to bring on brands like Pfizer, Pernod Ricard and Metcash over the past seven years, with products such as Decision Cloud and Larry, the Digital Analyst helping Complexica’s customers navigate decision-making processes well beyond the capacity of human managers.
Managing director and co-founder Matthew Michalewicz explains that when making a business decision, ideally you aim to collect and examine all of the available data.
Unfortunately in a business with perhaps 5000 or more product lines, affected by vagaries such as the weather, cost inputs, consumer trends, and logistics, to name but a few factors, the process becomes too complex, and humans fall back on their instincts.
Complexica, backed by the 20 PhDs on its advisory panel and with co-founder and globally recognised AI-pioneer Zbigniew Michalewicz guiding technology development, allows its customers to optimise their processes, whether they be supply chains or sales funnels.
One of the larger projects to go live recently was their execution for Pernod Ricard, which Complexica has been working with for the past couple of years to help them optimise the winemaking process from end-to-end from vineyard through to bottling.
“This is something that has traditionally been done through manual processes, spreadsheets, planning boards, and disjointed software systems, and I’m not aware of any software project anywhere in the world that has successfully digitalised and optimised such a complex end-to-end process within a single system, Matthew said recently.
“Needless to say, that’s incredibly exciting and groundbreaking, and the project has also allowed Complexica to further its research into artificial intelligence algorithms for optimising complex, multi-component supply chains — something that’s applicable to most large manufacturers.’’
With the company running a software as a service and project-based revenue model, it is now looking to a sharemarket listing next year, with the current capital raising target in the realm of $25 million-$50 million.
“Looking into 2022, the listing of Complexica on the ASX would allow us to accelerate our organic growth in Australia, enter foreign markets earlier and on a stronger footing, and execute an M & A strategy to bolt on a few strategic acquisitions that would broaden our software footprint within some verticals we operate in,’’ Matthew Michalewicz said.
Mr Michalewicz says AI is dependent on having suitably skilled people to devise solutions for each customer, which provides a strong economic moat for companies such as Complexica, as their intellectual property or business concept cannot be easily replicated.
Complexica now employs about 70 staff across two Australian and one European office.
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
“Looking at the Australian tech landscape, I’ve been most impressed by the Canva story over the past few years. Besides the incredible success they’ve achieved and continue to achieve, I admire the simplicity and elegance of what they offer, and the fact that they’ve addressed a real problem in the market that remained unsolved until they came along.”
Fleet Space Technologies
Satellites and the companies which build them aren’t what they used to be. Fleet, which has gone from three employees at launch (excuse the pun) in August 2015 to 31 now, raising $16m along the way, has the ambition to build “a global digital nervous system to power the next industrial revolution’’.
It’s heady stuff but with the dynamic Flavia Tata Nardini heading the ship, backed by co-founder and chief operating officer Matthew Pearson, the Beverley-based firm has already put five nanosatellites into low-earth orbit with another two to follow by the end of this year.
The company says it’s aiming for mass production by the end of this year, with the goal a constellation of 140 satellites in space by 2027.
Funding rounds of $5m and $11m in 2017 and 2019, backed by the likes of Blackbird Ventures, Horizons Ventures and Atlassian co-founder Mike Cannon-Brookes, helped fund the jump into space, and the company now has numerous customers including Snowy Hydro, CSIRO and BHP.
It is also collaborating on research projects with the likes of OZ Minerals and the University of Adelaide.
Fleet has applied for a $5 Million Federal Government Modern Manufacturing Initiative (MMI) grant which, if successful, would allow them to scale up to become a manufacturing hub, and quadruple staff numbers to more than 120.
“Space is no longer just for governments and multi-billion dollar satellites,’’ the company says.
“Space is open for business and we are making its technology accessible for everyone.’’
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
Flavia, CEO:
“I absolutely admire Gilmour Space and their aim to be the first Australian commercial launch company. They are scaling at an incredible rate and creating pathways to meet local demand for the Australian space industry, through providing affordable and reliable transportation for locally built satellites and keeping our country in the space race. To have an Australian-built payload in an Australian-built satellite, on an Australian-built rocket is just so exciting.
Matthew Pearson COO:
“Apart from my other start-up Airspeeder, I can’t ignore Canva and the success of another non-Silicon Valley tech company that has blitzed it operating here from Australia. An innovator in her field and the latest start-up unicorn from Australia, I admire Perkins and what she has founded with minimal staff in an isolated part of the world.”
Myriota
Myriota’s journey from a university spin-out to a growth business has been stellar with the business having raised more than $50m from local and international investors since 2015.
Japanese giants-backed InterValley Ventures fund is among the latest investors attracted to the business, offering advanced satellite communications for remote and urban internet of things (IoT) devices avoiding the need to use cellular networks.
The fund is led by former Virgin Entertainment Group CEO Simon Wright, and is backed by Japanese investment bank and securities firm Mizuho Securities and large private group Daiwa House Industry Pension Fund.
“All our investors are strategic partners as we grow,” Myriota co-founder Dr Alex Grant said.
“Everyone that we have formed a relationship with has been because we see an opportunity.
“Access to a high-tech sensors and electronics market is a good fit for our business.”
Other investors in Myriota so far include Boeing Horizon-X, Right Click Capital, Singtel Innov8, superannuation fund Hostplus and the CSIRO’s Main Sequence Ventures.
Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull is also an investor.
Mr Grant said Myriota had a steady stream of customers across traditional asset-rich sectors like agribusiness and mining.
“By the end of the year, I think we will have almost a new product each week on average,” he said.
For Myriota, which employs 50 staff, the next 12 months will focus on growing in the US and Canadian markets.
He said Australia and SA had “some way to go” in terms of general infrastructure support for start-ups, but initiatives like the establishment of Lot Fourteen, the creation of a space agency and attracting high-calibre talent were positive developments.
“They provide good oxygen for growth,” Mr Grant said.
One to watch for and why: Sensors business Ping, surveillance business Selentium Defence and space tech company Inovor are exciting because of their unique capabilities and products.
Lumary
Freshly cashed-up Adelaide software business Lumary has a $17m growth kitty, a strategic partner in global giant Salesforce and a vision to prove its technology in the US market.
Lumary says it will launch an evolved version of the software management platform it developed for Australia’s complex National Disability Insurance Scheme for the US market by the end of the year.
“It will be fundamentally a specialised offering for behavioural health services providers, which combines our platform’s capability and our experience in a niche healthcare setting,” co-founder Joseph Mercorella said.
“We know there is a huge gap and together with Salesforce’s platform capability and partnerships, I think we will be offering something unique and much-needed in the market.”
Mr Mercorella and co-founder Matthew English were long-time colleagues working in the disability services space before they identified an opportunity to be a part of the National Insurance Disability Scheme, which has been fully operational since last year.
Lumary was born as Enrite Care in 2017 with a goal to help simplify the back-end software needs of the NDIS.
Lumary integrates with a number of other software products like Xero, MYOB, Pendula, Formstack, Netsuite and others to provide a single workflow platform.
“We are a sum of integrated applications,” Mr Mercorella said.
“There is a lot of wastage in technology, so we want to be ambassadors of repurposing (existing) technology to suit the needs of customers.”
The company, which has 200 customers, processes more than $2.5bn in NDIS funding for more than 200,000 users.
Employing more than 100 staff, the business is targeting $20m in revenues this financial year.
Including its $17m capital raising in March, the business has so far attracted support from OneVentures, Salesforce Ventures, Equity Venture Partners and the SA government through the SA Venture Capital Fund.
One to watch for and why: Dr Silvia Pfeiffer’s NSW-based telehealth business Coviu for creating something to fill a huge gap in healthcare systems, especially during a pandemic.
Teamgage
Teamgage’s 20-second, regular check-in with teams became a critical need for some major Australian businesses during the pandemic-forced lockdowns last year.
As they grappled with the challenges of dispersed staff working from home, Teamgage’s software check-ins, available as often as possible, ensured businesses had an ongoing connection to sustain workforce morale through unprecedented challenges.
As demand for its product grew and so did investor interest, leading to its first external investment.
Melbourne angel investors Matt and April Allen, founders of Tractor Ventures, invested in the already-profitable business last month.
When Noelle and Ben started the software business in 2016, the goal was simply to build great workplaces by enabling a sustained oversight of team engagement and improvement for all stakeholders.
The team has grown to 20 on the back of its biggest influx of demand last year with its client list now including the UK Government, Federal Government, NSW Government, Westpac, Allianz, DXC Technology, SA Water, Microsoft and Santos.
“It’s been awesome to join the Tractor Ventures family, and beyond the capital, it’s about having people like Matt & April Allen supporting us, offering their experience & insight,” Mr Smit said.
“While we don’t need to raise more funding, the investment late last year enabled us to hire for growth, and do it faster than we would have otherwise.
“We expanded our sales and marketing teams and hired senior operators like Ben Colley (chief-of-staff) and Steve Karamannis (chief engineering), both of whom have recently returned to Adelaide, and bring a years of experience in scaling technology companies.”
Teamgage will invest in growing its presence and customers outside Australia with the support of a $350,000 grant from the SA research, commercialisation and start-up fund.
One to watch for and why: Jindou Lee’s Adelaide and US real-time property management business HappyCo; it’s a quiet achiever, but the global delivery of realty services convenience is worth applauding.
Queensland’s under-the-radar tech gurus
From world-leading fintechs to global video editing platforms, Queensland’s tech industry is teeming with companies to watch. Here we list five under the radar firms, some of which plan to raise millions this year, that investors should keep an eye on.
Canopy Tools Group
Craig Adams reckons there’s an ocean of data out there looking for meaning.
And that’s what Canopy Tools Group is doing within the Internet of Things (IoT) realm which encompasses the billions of physical devices around the world that are connected to the internet — all collecting and sharing data.
The chief executive and co-founder of Canopy with Dan Pearson, Mr Adams said there was a sea of raw data generated by IoT devices which is forecast to reach 73.1 million petabytes by 2025.
“It’s important to remember that data itself is not the answer, data itself doesn’t provide an outcome,” he said.
“There’s so much of it flying around and a lot of businesses are not managing or using it the way they could. It’s all about how they harness the data.
“Our software focuses on collecting the data from IoT or connected devices, then analysing that data and taking action based on the analysis and criteria that’s set by the customer.”
Headquartered in Brisbane, Canopy started in 2009 as a cloud-based business hosting data centres and evolved into an IoT-focus data analytics company.
The company has doubled their team in the last two and a half years to 88 full-time staff around the world working with a range of clients extends across healthcare, defence, education, facilities management, government, housing, tourism, bio-secure cruises and mid-tier organisations.
Mr Adams said an important part of the process was the conversation with the customers.
“If you look at a lot of companies they have an enormous amount of data available to them and quite often that data is ignored,” he said.
“When they realise what they can do with that data, it’s actually a light bulb moment for them and often the catalyst which encourages them to take stock of all the data at their disposal. It’s actually a really good opportunity to get their house in order.”
Mr Adams said Canopy recorded an increase in revenue every year since 2017 and in 2019-20 its audited result was $17.2 million.
Last year Canopy closed a $21 million pre-IPO fundraising round in advance of a potential float. While at this stage there is no scheduled float date, there was the potential for a further capital raising in the near future.
Mr Adams said the IoT market “grows exponentially by the day” with estimates that in a few years there will be 75 billion connected devices in the world ranging from an object simple in the bankcard to as complete as a state of the art warship.
And it’s not just the raw data producing big figures with and estimation that by 2025 the IoT will have a global economic value of more than $4 trillion.
Mr Adams said with offices or a presence in Australia, New Zealand, Singapore, Philippines, Vietnam, the UK and the US, Canopy was well positioned to take advantage of the sector’s untapped potential.
“What we’re talking about is the potential for hyper growth and what that really means is that you’ve gone from your normal growth cycle over a period of time to an expediential type of growth over a smaller period of time,” he said.
Mr Adams said currently Canopy was focused on the Asia Pacific and particularly the UK’s $80 billion IoT market where they have increased staff from two to 14.
“We also have plans to get into the US market. Importantly, we just don’t sell to the global market but we actually operate in those areas as well and have a relationship with customers in those areas.”
What other Australian start up impresses you?
“There have been a number of Australian start-ups that have impressed me. Empired which is out of Perth is one and the other unicorn is Atlassian which is worth about $50 billion to $60 billion now. They started out as a bootstrap software company in someone’s garage and the two founders are still the majority owners of the company.”
Send Payments
It’s about as under the radar as you can get with its tech secretly sitting behind some big players in the money exchange space.
Send Payments co-founder Paul Billing, 37, said the company, headquartered on the Gold Coast, has grown quickly from inception two years ago and is looking to expand further.
Billing says for a country with a huge amount of foreign currency exchange transactions, Australia has lagged behind with one of the most expensive systems beset with delays and compliance issues that Send’s platforms aim to fix.
The firm’s products are used by Flight Centre’s Travel Money Group, Woolworths Team Bank, as well as for Jetstar.
“We also work with some of the best relocation companies such as Grace and Crown. We have just signed a great relationship with Pepperstone,” Mr Billings said.
“By proxy we are probably the biggest payments company in the world that no one has ever heard of,” he said.
“There is no vanity there for us. We are there to get in behind the scenes and improve what’s on offer.”
“We’ve grown 20-30 per cent month on month,” he said noting it now had about 30 staff currently across Australia, New Zealand, the UK and the Philippines.
He said Send would start to “seriously look over the next few months” to raise between $5 million and $10 million.
“We have got to the point with larger clients now that we need to build quicker and have more product maturity,” he said.
“We are thinking that in the coming months it then makes sense for us to do our first institutional raise with the rationale being we have the clients all ready to sell to.
“We are ready to scale those opportunities, that comes at a cost. We need more bums on seats but off the back of that we will have more diverse products.”
He said Australia’s location and population makeup meant huge potential.
“We have one of the top five most transacted currencies in the world and yet we have the second or third most expensive currency transaction mark ups,” he said.
“So we are a country of immigrants that move money all around the world and it’s one of the most expensive to do so.”
“The big challenge we have had to solve is creating value for the end consumer and also the partners and enterprise businesses we work with.
“It’s a hyper competitive market.
“We have had to create one platform to holistically manage payments from the first mile to last mile.
“That means we can move things cheaper and quicker than anyone else but also increase transparency of what’s going on in the background.
“It is complex to move money from A to B and the only way to tackle that was to build a linear way and that allowed us tackle pricing.”
What other Australian start-up impresses you?
Other trading platforms such as Ripple, Coinbase and CoinSpot are doing amazing things.
Clipchamp
A global video editing platform has added an extra five million registered users over the past 12 months with a surge of activity in non-English speaking countries backed by a range of new product features and collaborations.
Brisbane-based Clipchamp notched up 16 million registered users in April — up from 10 million just 12 months ago — with a growing customer base of more than 390,000 small and medium-sized enterprises, Fortune 500 companies, creators and influencers.
The company’s co-founder and chief executive Alex Dreiling said up to April year-on-year template usage was up 183 per cent with the coronavirus pandemic creating a “permanent impact” on the use of video platforms, with businesses needing to stay in contact with clients during lockdown.
Clipchamp is acquiring twice the amount of users compared to the same time last year and usage rate has doubled as well with a surge of internal business communication usage.
Mr Dreiling said Clipchamp almost tripled its team since the start of last year to 89 to cater for global expansion plans.
“We continue to experience strong user and customer growth internationally, particularly in Spanish-speaking countries, Brazil, India, Philippines and Indonesia,” he said.
“Our international growth also translates into growth of our team outside Australia, with a growing number of people in the US and Philippines in particular.”
Clipchamp is an in-browser platform which gives users access to video editing tools and features, from simple cropping and resizing, to special effects like transitions, motion titles, and Green Screen.
It has partnered with Dropbox and Box to enable customers to import and export their content with ease. Last year Clipchamp launched several features to help accommodate changing user needs, including webcam and screencam recording, green screen, audio-video separation and freehand positioning of video elements.
Clipchamp, which launched in 2014, has a variety of backers including high profile Queensland entrepreneur Steve Baxter.
Mr Dreiling said they have raised about $14 million and in the future will be looking to raise more to expand its rollout of intuitive features and focusing on collaborations with major online platforms.
“By building deeper product integrations with partners including Google, Microsoft and Pinterest, customers can create videos with greater ease and accessibility, by importing their favourite assets and exporting to their primary channels,” he said.
“Our integration partnership with visual inspiration platform Pinterest is particularly exciting as the company boasts a global monthly active user base of over 459 million.
“The new collaboration allows Clipchamp users to create video Pins from our platform using one of our Pinterest video templates.”
What other Australian start-up impresses you?
“Here in Brisbane, Kapiche comes to mind, Floodmapp or ProcurePro,” Mr Dreiling said.
“Carted is just getting started off the back of the e-commerce boom the pandemic caused with a huge vision. And Mr Yum in Melbourne had all the reasons to fold when the pandemic started and people couldn’t dine out anymore.”
Youly
While a new player on the scene, this start-up has honed in on a very specific market that it sees as ripe for disruption.
And rise of telehealth during Covid-19 has played right into the hand of Brisbane entrepreneur Nic Blair and his latest venture.
Billed as providing Australia’s first emergency contraception delivery, Youly was launched by Mr Blair in February to target what he saw as gaps in women’s health for hassle-free and discreet access to medical treatments.
With cash from the sale of his previous digital marketing business, serial entrepreneur Blair was researching where next to make his move just before the pandemic hit.
“I was having a look at the telehealth space and a few businesses in the US doing some cool things in this area and starting the process of conducting research,” he said.
“With anything that disrupts the world, there is opportunity and that’s (Covid) definitely created opportunity for telehealth and e-commerce businesses in general.
“Australian consumer habits didn’t steer towards telehealth but as 2020 hit that changed.”
The next six months saw him connect with pharmacists, one of which came on board the business as a partner.
Mr Blair said the research kept showing women’s health as having problems that needed solving, such as long wait times for appointments and awkward experiences when getting medications.
It also came as Covid saw telehealth boom across Australia.
With $450,000 he and his partners built the platform that currently offers assessment, consultation and fast delivery of prescription and over-the-counter medication from emergency contraception to thrush and cold sore treatments.
He said the company was currently seeking investment from venture capital firms in Brisbane and Sydney with a view to raising $500,000 now and up to $2 million later in the year.
“Every week is about continuing growing that pharmacy network so we can expand where we can offer these services,” he said.
Mr Blair said Youly now had 50 pharmacies and eight doctors in its network who triage clients that come through the online platform.
The client either has a telehealth appointment with a GP who can then write e-prescriptions that are sent to a Youly pharmacy and delivered to the patient’s door.
Or for over-the-counter medication, a pharmacist oversees the order directly with same-day delivery available in Brisbane, Sunshine Coast, Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Canberra.
Mr Blair said it was the first of several areas the Youly platform was designed to power with men’s health and medicinal cannabis other growth markets.
What other Australian start-up impresses you?
“I’ve recently been very impressed by Greg Taylor and his start-up Step One underwear,” Mr Blair said. “I’m always impressed by someone that can achieve huge success in an industry that’s already over-saturated and highly competitive.
“I believe they’re on track for over $70 million in revenue this year in such a short time frame and have done an exceptional job on their marketing strategy which has obviously translated into some great success,” he said.
Tanda
It’s the start up tech company that investors would love to own a piece of.
It all began when four QUT mates were trying to figure out why their student bar was losing money and paperwork and what was created from those discussion — Tanda (the shortened version of time and attendance) — has grown into a global powerhouse with 10,000 companies on the books.
Alex Ghiculescu, Josh Cameron, Jake Phillpot and Tasmin Trezise — who launched Tanda in 2014 with the software to automate the payroll process for shift-reliant companies — still own the company.
It is the ultimate bootstrap company which has grown without needing to raise outside funds and the four shareholders have no intention to do so in the future.
As a mark of success as a tech start up Tanda has their signage on top of an office building that houses their new Australian base at 545 Queen St in the Brisbane CBD.
Unfortunately, the four owners were not there to see the sign go up because they’re holed up in their US base in Chicago unable to return home because of the Covid-19 pandemic.
However, Brisbane-based general manager Phil Johnson, 30, said it was business as usual with Tanda which is focused on global expansion.
He refused to disclose revenue figures or forecasts other than to say that revenue keeps increasing with Tanda having a presence in seven countries and offices in Australia, the US and the UK.
Among the thousands of businesses on their books in Australia there are Dominos Pizza, Bunnings, ALH, Betty’s Burgers, Boost Juice, Grilld and The Cheesecake Shop on their books.
While they continue to refine and update their software Mr Johnson said they have no plans to introduce other applications.
“Our goal is global expansion and in Australia we are focusing on payroll compliance,” he said.
“That’s the main offering and our philosophy has always been to double down on that area of the business.
“When you look at the sorts of clients they are all shift worker industries. That’s the main controllable cost for them and also the main area for the best customer outcome.”
Mr Johnson said they were working on the “localisation” of the product to deal with industrial relation laws of those countries.
“In Australia basically what we’re doing now is looking at the shift in compliance obligations for employers from payroll perspective reporting to the ATO and build out a couple of years ahead of where we think legislation will be,” he said.
“When we go to other markets you will find a local version of that.”
Mr Johnson said Tanda currently had more than 100 staff globally and 60 in Brisbane.
“Our staff levels have actually been flat for the past two years,” he said.
“While our revenue has actually increased, our staffing is about corporate efficiencies. We now have a lot more senior staff on the books.
“We’ve gone towards being heavily skewed towards graduates and bright young developers and now we have some grey hairs in the room with a lot of senior hires in key positions.
“It’s just a point of time in the maturity curve where we needed to get the next level up in skills and there is also value in internal mentoring by having those team leaders there.”
What other Australian start-up impresses you?
“Safety Culture started in Townsville and I think they’re an impressive story,”
Tanda general manager Phil Johnson said. “They have a billion dollar valuation. They offer a safety checklist that ticks off the statutory obligations in the workplace which highlights the type of software that does well in Australia.”
Victoria’s tech hot-shots
Melbourne may be known for its coffee, hidden bars and laneways but it’s fast gaining a reputation for its globally-competitive fintech scene, along with hi-tech start-ups focused around marketplaces, HR, health, sports-tech, and design.
Melbourne has long held the title as Australia’s most liveable city but according to a report by UK real estate company Savills, it’s the nation’s most tech-career friendly city, too.
Local entrepreneurs have been buoyed by support from the state government’s start-up agency LaunchVic, and now populate the city’s burgeoning physical hubs Melbourne Connect at Melbourne University, and Cremorne.
Culture Amp
Culture Amp chief executive Didier Elzinga has traded in the flashy world of Hollywood visual effects for start-up life, building a small scrappy team of four into a culture analytics company now employing hundreds of ‘people geeks’ globally.
Founded in 2009, Culture Amp produces software for companies to ­collect and understand employee feedback, and Mr Elzinga said 2021 was so far proving a pivotal year for his fast-growing tech outfit.
The pandemic has forced companies everywhere to focus on retaining and attracting staff, who are now more picky than ever.
“The workplace is changing and things aren’t going backwards,” Mr Elzinga said. “There’s been a big change, with remotely-distributed workforces, to a whole range of issues and conversations that we weren’t having before in the workplace.
“It’s not going to be easy, but we see a huge opportunity for us to be at the heart of helping companies navigate those questions and those challenges, as we pull the handbrake after last year. We’re looking at a year now where we can’t hire fast enough.”
The Melbourne-based company, which was founded in 2009, was most recently valued at $US700 million in 2019, after raising a $US82 million funding round led by Sequoia Capital China.
Mr Elzinga is the former chief executive of Rising Sun Pictures, a leading Hollywood visual effects company, and is close friends with Atlassian co-CEOs Scott Farquhar and Mike Cannon-Brookes.
The last decade has been centred around technology and embracing digital, he said, while the next one will be about embracing people. He is confident Culture Amp is well-positioned to be the one start-up that underpins that shift.
“If you don’t you’ll struggle and get left behind,” he said. “The last year has, I think, brought that to the forefront and really demonstrated our mission of creating a better world of work.
“Its time is now. And at the same time I think the last year made everyone realise just how complicated this problem is, and it’s not like there’s a playbook for it.
“There’s a lot of stuff we’re working out together. And the challenge for everyone in the world of work at the moment is, how do we keep looking after people in the workplace?
“Because it’s not over yet, and people are struggling and are burnt out. The next 12 months will be very interesting on that front.”
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
“Phoebe and Beyond AG are what I love about start-ups – a crazy hard problem (food waste) with science fiction solutions (essentially bio software via insects).”
Airwallex
Airwallex was started in Melbourne by five university student friends in 2015, and was the fastest Australian start-up to ever reach a billion-dollar valuation. The fintech’s platform allows other businesses to operate internationally, by enabling quick cross-border transactions.
Airwallex CEO Jack Zhang that his company has now grown to 420 people from about 200 a year ago, and he aims to appoint more staff over the next 12 months.
“We would have had an ever higher valuation without the COVID-19 issue, but it’s hard to say – I’m just guessing,” he said.
According to Mr Zhang Airwallex has grown its revenue 10-times in the last 12 months, with its first quarter 2021 revenue for Australia nearly reaching the entire figure it achieved in 2020.
He said he’s confident his company will have triple digit growth in the next three years, and has set a milestone target of reaching $US1bn of revenue in 2025.
Airwallex currently has over 600 employees across 12 global offices and is looking to fill over 500 open roles.
“We started the business by solving one issue, cross-border payments for businesses, but we want to become a one-stop-shop with bank accounts, cards, and potentially in the future cash management and lending,” Mr Zhang said.
“We’ve really evolved to becoming a modern financial services cloud for businesses who want to grow both domestically and ­internationally.
“We have more than $US400m on our balance sheet, and the demand is increasing us for us to expand even more aggressively. We haven’t really filled out our headcount yet, especially in the UK and Europe, and in the US.
“My number one priority is still hiring. The key success of Airwallex is having a group of very talented people, and we want to be the largest player in this space
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
“I’ve long admired Atlassian, an Australian tech company that has truly made its mark on the world stage. It’s fantastic to have both founders recently invest in Airwallex through their private investment firms (Skip Capital and Grok Ventures). This has opened up opportunities for our team to draw on their expertise in product innovation, global growth and social impact.”
Linktree
Linktree was founded as a mere side hustle three years ago by the Zaccaria brothers, Alex and Anthony – along with their friend Nick Humphreys – and is quickly drawing comparisons to the likes of Canva and Atlassian in terms of growth.
High profile social media users Elizabeth Warren, Chrissey Teigen and Jamie Oliver are all using the Linktree platform, which now has 14 million global users and more than 30,000 new sign-ups per day.
In March the Melbourne-based start-up landed a $US45 million Series B funding round co-led by Index Ventures, a heavyweight investor in Patreon and Discord.
Linktree’s platform connects a celebrity’s online feeds, giving them one link to share to all their followers and allowing them to house all their content in one place.
By allowing high-profile users to direct their followers to multiple websites and YouTube posts from a single link, the start-up is looking to capitalise on the changing tastes of social media users.
“There’s been a sea change when it comes to how we interact with the brands and creators we love,” co-founder Alex Zaccaria said.
“We want to understand them holistically and connect with them directly; we learn about their values, philanthropic causes, passion projects and promotions through social media where we’re spending our time. There’s no longer a need for brand-immersive websites or big campaigns to make a memorable impression or drive engagement.
“We have a huge vision for this company; there are major changes and shifts in the way people use the internet. It’s a more and more fragmented place these days, there are more social networks popping up and we want to be the one unifying place people can post all their content.”
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
“Simplicity and empowering others are core values at Linktree and we love how Australian B Corp, Who Gives A Crap, is tackling critical issues like access to basic sanitation in the developing world in a simple yet impressive, inspirational way. Through clever and lighthearted branding, and a clear goal, they’ve continued to grow while staying true to their roots – making the world a better place for people in need.”
Tribe
Radio and television personality Jules Lund started Tribe in 2014 in a bid to help brands hire and connect with influencers, and has since scaled it up to be something much more significant.
The entertainer-turned-start-up executive, who has hosted TV shows like Getaway and hosted drivetime radio alongside Fifi Box and Sophie Monk, tapped now-CEO Anthony Svirskis to help build out his idea, which is now a fully-fledged subscription marketing platform for businesses.
Tribe has evolved from its influencer marketing roots to become a place where brands can source content, often produced by their everyday customers, to be used as sponsored content, social media ads, digital ads, out-of-home ads, website collateral and in e-commerce.
The company is busy planning an IPO to raise capital to scale its subscription product, expand product integrations into more social media networks, and continue growth in the US, following a $5.5 million pre-IPO funding round this year to support its plans.
CEO Anthony Svirskis says Tribe creators have earned $24m producing over one million branded pictures and clips, and that brands were just scratching the surface when it comes to the broader influencer marketplaces.
“The marketing landscape is evolving before our eyes. Digital advertising is now bigger than traditional channels, eyeballs have moved to mobile and e-commerce has become a habit,” he said.
“These new ecosystems need content, and more of it than ever before. Our platform has produced over one million pictures and clips for brands to use in their social media, ads and e-commerce, produced by our creator network who’ve made $24 million on our platform. It’s an exciting time to be a scalable creative solution for brands as they continue to embrace digital.”
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
“Octopus Deploy was an impressive raise. It feels like it caught everyone off guard, but it’s amazing to see a top-tier US fund like Insight Partners start to make serious moves in Australia.”
Phoria
Virtual reality and augmented reality are sometimes perceived as fad technologies, but Phoria is the real deal.
The company runs a Melbourne-based immersive tech studio, producing futuristic VR and AR content in partnership with the likes of Netflix, Google and OnePlus.
Phoria recently produced a major installation, Rewild Our Planet, featuring narration from David Attenborough. The project toured the world, including stops in Singapore, Bristol and New York, and is now available to billions of smartphone users worldwide via a smartphone app.
The studio has also made a free virtual reality nature documentary series with Facebook-owned Oculus, Ecosphere, and more than 200,000 people have downloaded and experienced it. Ecosphere has won numerous awards including Best VR Film at the Los Angeles Film Awards and Best 360 Storytelling at the Jackson Wild Media Awards and Best Immersed Audience Award at the Vancouver International Film Festival.
Phoria co-founder and CEO Trent Clews-de Castella said technologies like augmented reality have many implications for collaborating in the real world using 3D tools, and Phoria is working on bringing this technology to the mainstream in Australia.
“It all started with the Melbourne Accelerator Program, where I pitched an idea around 3D data,” he said.
“We’ve working on raising a small round of funding, and partnering with amazing companies like Google to keep moving forward.
“We want to keep driving forward, these tools really can be used in transformative ways.”
Which other Australian start-up/tech company impresses you and why?
From Samuel Tate, XR Director at Phoria.
“Melbourne-based Variant founded by Ben Ferns is super impressive. Variant is a system that manages variations in a 3D file, so online stores can deploy 3D previews that adapt to customer selections. This means that users can make 3D models with thousands of variations built in, and modify the model in real time, for example customising a car.”
“PHORIA creates digital twin experiences (DTX), so we are exploring using Variant as a way to scale our asset pipeline. In the future customers will access an infinite variety of products, or manage their own, displayed in their PHORIA DTX, with content managed by Variant.
“Ben is such a memorable founder as he is incredibly skilled, super smart and on top of that, just has the best attitude. We‘ve collaborated with him on a number of occasions – including on the network system for the award-winning AR storytelling REWILD content – and he’s a real powerhouse. Ben consistently leads his small team to create globally leading, high leverage products.”
Honourable mentions: Cortical AI, Moonshot, Zilio, Brosa.
Word count: 8652
