Health Minister Jeremy Rockliff said the hospital’s statistics showed 373 patients have arrived at the hospital via the helipad since it opened in May 2020.
“These figures show the new helipad is making a real difference to people’s lives all across Tasmania,” Mr Rockliff said.
“Every second counts in the case of emergency treatment.”
He said before the new helipad was built at the RHH, helicopters landed at the Domain or the Parade Grounds, with patients offloaded, reloaded into an ambulance, driven to hospital, and then transferred to the correct ward.
“With the helipad now located at the Royal Hobart Hospital, those same critically ill patients can now be flown directly to where they can be treated,” Mr Rockliff said.
“Once they land, lift access takes them right into the heart of the hospital – the new K-Block and its world-class facilities.”
RHH medical staff association chair Dr Frank Nicklason said the helipad was more efficient with less “double handling”.
“For patients it means only one move from the helicopter to the hospital rather than being transferred to an ambulance and that has real advantages in time-sensitive situations,” Dr Nicklason said.
The worrying effects of Tassie’s GP shortage
THE owner of a new doctors surgery in the heart of Hobart says a shortage of general practitioners is continuing to have flow-on effects to the broader health system, with many practices booked out for appointments weeks in advance.
Scott Finlayson, who opened Treasury Medical earlier this year, said he kept a handful of appointments available daily for last-minute consultations, but said many would not be able to.
“The problem I’m hearing from other doctors is they are just so busy, they’ve had to close their books,’’ he said.
“We’re in a unique position because we’re brand new. The places that are chockers are not able to take on new patients.”
Dr Finlayson said people migrating from the mainland were also finding it difficult to get into a GP when they arrived in Tasmania.
“I had a six-month-old the other day who had missed vaccinations,’’ Mr Finlayson said.
“A couple of kids with asthma where it’s been peaking. They need to be seen within a day or two and I’ve seen them, otherwise they would have to go to the ED.”
It comes after news the Brighton Doctors Surgery would be downsizing due to the respective retirement and resignation of two long serving GPs.
The Australian Medical Association said the centre’s struggle was not a surprise due to a shortage of GPs across the state.
Dr Finlayson said the work of GPs was key to ensuring patients avoided the need to attend emergency departments, which would ease pressure on the state’s strained health system.
NED-4071-Highest-surgery-fees
Ambulance ramping and lengthy wait times at Tasmanian emergency departments, particularly at the Royal Hobart Hospital, have long plagued the state’s troubled health system.
Dr Finlayson, who moved to Tasmania from NSW in 2018, has seen the effect of doctor shortages in country areas.
“We’re a capital city here, but it’s like a rural doctor shortage,’’ he said.
“There are massive issues with GP training and attraction to GP programs.
“It’s certainly concerning and it’s not improving.”
Family reunion severed by GP shortage
A 72 year old woman who reunited with her son after more than two decades fears she may have to return to mainland after she was unable to secure a doctors appointment.
Joy Bryce had been searching for her son for 26 years after they lost contact.
“Back in 1994, over in Perth was the last time we saw each other,” Ms Bryce said.
“Ron went his way and we lost contact.”
Ms Bryce said she decided to find her son when her health declined.
“He’s my closest living relative, I needed to find him,” she said.
It took a private investigator four days to narrow down the search.
“They sent me an email giving me the details but he’d moved so I rang police and asked them to pass on a message,” Ms Bryce said.
“They did and he called me on June 16, that’s why I’m here in Hobart.”
On July 11, the 72 year old packed up her motorhome in Mount Gambier, hopped on the Spirit and travelled down to Hobart for an emotional reunion.
“That is indescribable,” Ms Bryce said.
“There was a lot of cuddles and we’re still trying to catch up.”
But after nearly a week after, Ms Bryce has run into a big problem, she hasn’t been able to book in to see the doctor.
“I started ringing around doctors on the 13th to make an appointment to see someone, the first was in Glenorchy and they told me they were not taking any new patients,” Ms Bryce said.
“I rang Moonah medical and I was also told they weren’t taking new patients.
“I rang argyle medical on the other side of town, same problem.“
She said she called around in Hobart, the Eastern Shore, New Norfolk and even the state’s north.
“My options are, I can either start up my motor home and go back to the mainland which I’m not wanting to do or I can go to Deloraine where they will take new patients in a fortnight,” she said.
Ms Bryce said she would see a doctor two or three times a week in Mount Gambier.
“I’m in chronic pain 24/7,” she said
“My left kidney is practically dead and I’ve got a massive hip problem after a fall back in 2016.
“I saw a doctor the 9th of July, I went and saw a renal specialist at the Mt Gambier hospital.”
“I find it absolutely difficult to understand in this day and age.”
“It’s heartbreaking, devastating.”
cameron.whiteley@news.com.au
Twitter follow Cameron Whiteley
Word count: 907
