FROM global leaders in engineering and the space industry, to disability advocates and emerging big screen stars, South Australia has become the destination of choice for the country’s game changers.
The state government’s New State of Mind campaign shines a light on the remarkable people who call SA home, including these 26 women who are leaders in their field.
The group embodies the spirit of the campaign, which showcases SA as the perfect place to build a career and make a difference.
“You can have a global career in SA, living, studying and working alongside the world’s current and emerging leaders, coming together to achieve great things,” said Premier Peter Malinauskas at the campaign launch.
There’s no better examples of this than the following list of Adelaide-based high achievers, who have been featured as part of a partnership with News Corp SA.
INSPIRED FILLED WITH PURPOSE
1 Christina Vithoulkas The paraplegic drift car racer and influencer is breaking down the stigma of spinal injury. Christina – who was injured in a 2018 motorcycle accident – uses her social media to normalise disability.
2 Farida Ayubi The founder and joint owner of Parwana restaurant, specialising in Afghani cuisine, that has hosted sold-out fundraising dinners in aid of those left behind in Afghanistan after the war, providing emergency relief to hundreds of thousands of people.
3 Alison Hams The acclaimed musician and dedicated philanthropist has dedicated her life to making a difference through music. As co-owner of Stormfront Productions, Alison provides opportunities for First Nations, disadvantaged and special needs students through education and mentoring.
4 Mary Kelly An innovation ecosystem leader and founder passionate about sustainability, addressing single-use plastic waste through her tech-based circular economy start-up, recently launched on Kangaroo Island.
5 Elsy Wameyo During Covid-19, the self-managed artist applied for a grant through Carclew and purchased a home studio. With determination, Elsy produced a six-track extended play. Elsy hails from the Nilotic tribes of Kenya. She won Best Hip Hop artist at the 2019 SA Music Awards.
6 Alex Bruhn Alex, a sociology/anthropol-ogy student at the University of Adelaide, has a keen interest in work and play in the construction of human identity. She is also the Community Builder at Youth Inc., a member of Global Shapers and recently attended the World Economic Forum.
7 Marceline Overduin Marceline is a senior mechanical engineer with a strong focus on sustainable, human centred design. With international experience in the Netherlands, she has experience in areas including water-management infrastructure and district-heating distribution and custom solution. Two of her prototypes for Solidworks are currently in use.
8 Anika Talukder A project engineer at BAE in the Tonsley Innovation District, she is working on robotics at line zero. With a Bachelor of Engineering (Biomedical) with honours and a Master of Engineering (Biomedical), in her final year she designed and developed a wearable device to monitor lower limb impact dose in netball players and a deep-learning CNN engine for the reconstruction of a real face using a thermal image.
UNEXPECTED TO BE CREATIVE, TO CHALLENGE
9 Shantae Barnes-Cowan The star of the ABC’s Total Control, the Adnyamathanha woman from Whyalla now stars in fantasy TV series Firebite, with film Wyrmwood Apocalypse and miniseries Sweet As due in 2022.
10 Bianca Nilsson At 18, she established her company, Renegade Records, in 2015, as an independent recording label with artist management, music publicity and sync licensing thrown in.
11 Anika Johnstone Co-designed MOD., a STEM-focused museum, with young adults aged 15-25 to create a space for them to be inspired about science, technology, engineering and maths.
12 Georgia Davies-Thain A campaigner for sex worker rights, a union organiser and a researcher, she is the convener of the Sex Industry Decriminalisation Action Committee of SA, campaigning for sex worker rights in the state.
13 Taylah Suridge Started La Strand Hair and Body in 2017 to provide an affordable salon experience and support the local economy by using SA products. Taylah employs 10 staff, including three apprentices, and has grown her business to now have a $900,000 annual turnover.
14 Katherine Sortini An emerging actor, writer and theatre-maker, she founded Deus Ex Femina, whose first original work, All the Things I Couldn’t Say, will debut in the 2022 RUMPUS Season. An honours degree graduate from the Flinders University Drama Centre, she received the highly competitive Carclew Fellowship for 2022 and will undertake mentorship with award-winning playwright Emily Steel.
15 Darcey Watson She graduated from the University of Adelaide with a Bachelor of Biomedical Science and an honours degree in Molecular and Biochemical Sciences and is currently the executive officer at the Andy Thomas Space Foundation. Darcey won the Emerging Industries Award at this year’s 40 Under 40 Awards for her work in promoting the burgeoning space industry across Australia.
16 Stephanie Wan She is a self-branded “space diplomat” and results-driven tech collaborator with diverse experience across the US and Australian governments and non-profit and private sectors. Currently the space industry lead at KPMG and working closely with the Australian Space Agency, Stephanie is assisting Australia’s goal of tripling its domestic space economy and workforce growth by 20,000 by 2030.
CONNECTED TO BRING TOGETHER
17 Melanie McHugh She is leading the way in engaging local youth in innovative programs aimed at keeping local youngsters out of strife. Her approach has led to several highly commended community programs producing positive results for Port Augusta’s teens.
18 Aaliyah Sirengo She is the founder of Maisha Flow, an impact-based social enterprise. It is an initiative that empowers girls in Kenya by giving them sustainable sanitary products. Aaliyah has empowered 1000 girls to date with uninterrupted education. She provides jobs to women in Kenya who sew the pads.
19 Lily Biggs and Nikita Trewartha They are the co-founders of Salty Sips, a community initiative that encourages the people of Adelaide to step out of their comfort zone and connect with others every Wednesday morning. This involves a 30-minute yoga flow, followed by jumping in the ocean and ending with a cup of coffee. About 700 people gather at the beach every week.
20 Dr Gemma Munro She is a thought leader, transformational facilitator and an award-winning speaker, with a PhD in performance psychology – and a flair for providing inspiration to leaders. Gemma has inspired more than 72,000 people around the world, and her keynote address at Google headquarters in Silicon Valley was livestreamed to every Google office on the planet. She is also a classically trained singer.
21 Noelle Smit She is the chief executive and co-founder of Teamgage, whose software allows employees to give real-time, anonymous feedback on things such as workload, energy levels, management effectiveness, and fulfilment via a 20-second survey. It also engages employees in finding solutions to problems in their business.
22 Ruchi Sinha An organisational behavioural psychologist, she is passionate about assisting people to thrive in the workplace and creating human capital growth for organisations.
23 Justyce Manton After completing an Indigenous traineeship at Defence SA in 2021, Justyce has been offered an internship with BAE Systems and will be observing, inquiring about and engaging in manufacturing projects, including the E-7A Wedgetail and the P-8A Poseidon. She is currently studying mechanical engineering at the University of Adelaide and is an active member of her community and the Youth Aerospace Association.
24 Sumen Rai A director at Defence Innovation Partnership, Sumen has broad-ranging experience across government and the private sector, facilitating, developing and supporting defence and space-related innovations.
25 Ma-Musu Nyande A proud Sierra Leonean, she is an activist, writer and business owner. Ma-Musu is using her platform to instil confidence in black and African women through open conversations.
INSPIRING SOUTH AUSTRALIAN WOMEN A NEW STATE OF MIND
Word count: 1287
