After getting the green light from the liquor and gaming regulator for a restricted opening in just over a week, several of Crown’s restaurants, including exclusive Japanese joint Nobu, Chinese restaurant Silks and waterfront bar The Waiting Room, will be taking orders come December 28.
But despite all of his hard work campaigning for the site through the years, billionaire former chairman James Packer, still the largest holder of Crown shares through CPH, seems to be headed in the opposite direction.
His superyacht IJE was last spotted at Sint Maartin in the Caribbean (the Dutch side), after its journey from Tahiti — where Packer had beamed into Patricia Bergin’s casino inquiry last month.
While the findings of her probe, and with it any hope of gaming operations, won’t be known until February, and with a fresh review by the Victorian regulator under way, it seems Packer’s headed as far away from Australian shores as possible.
He’s just across the way from Barbuda, where he had planned to develop a casino with Hollywood heavyweight Robert De Niro.
Those plans have been stalled after the devastation of Hurricane Irma in 2017, but that hasn’t stopped the superyachts from flooding into the luxury haven.
The 110m mega-yacht CHAOS was last seen in Packer’s vicinity, fresh from a refit but still with a helipad and all the trimmings, along with Axioma, a regular charter yacht that’s all yours for just $885,000 a week.
Back on dry land, the evolving COVID-19 scenario in Sydney is putting a dampener on any grand opening theatrics.
Here’s hoping chairman Helen Coonan has a mask handy for the launch.
Margin Call hears Crown had been planning an opening event for tourism sorts to mark the occasion, but any invites have been put on ice pending developments from the northern beaches outbreak.
Just their luck.
Builders can still be seen making the final touches on the public bars and restaurants (10 in total) while work continues to finish the boutique apartments on the higher levels, with a move-in date set for March 2021.
With most of the city’s pyrotechnics canned by Gladys Berejiklian’s government, there won’t be much to see from the new venue come New Year’s Eve, but no doubt there’ll be fireworks within Crown’s board in the weeks to come.
Narrow focus
It may have been National Australia Bank’s AGM, but when it came to questions from shareholders, the biggest issues were focused on the gaffes of the rest of corporate Australia.
In the last major shareholder meeting for the year, investors peppered chairman Phil Chronican with queries on the bank’s finances, its board gender mix but also its stance on the Wet’suwet’en first nations people of northwest British Columbia. Go figure.
To that he responded, as on several other occasions through the meeting, that it was inappropriate to use the meeting to discuss issues outside of NAB’s remit or remark on the inner workings of other company’s boards.
Still, Simon McKeon, who celebrates his 65th birthday this weekend, was called to account on his shareholdings, including any stake in rival bank Macquarie, where he was former executive chairman at the bank’s Melbourne office.
The latest appointee to the board admitted he still held shares in the competitor, assumingly garnered during his time there under former chief Nicholas Moore, but said he “fundamentally rejects the notion of any conflict”.
Another concern was brought to light over his role at Rio Tinto — where he was recently elevated to the role of senior independent director with key responsibilities over the board’s response to the Juukan Gorge disaster and likely a cog in the promotion of CFO Jakob Stausholm to the top job earlier this week.
“Over the past 10 months that Simon has been on the board, he has provided a significant contribution and in many cases some new thoughts to the board,” Chronican rebuffed shareholders.
After the retirement of director Geraldine McBride, who continues with her AI start-up MyWave with daughter Amy Johnson, there are now two empty seats on his board, which Chronican told shareholders he was keen to fill in the new year.
Probed on the board’s diversity, he pointed out the bank had been well served by female directors, including current members Ann Sherry, Katherine Fagg and Anne Loveridge, as he pledged to appoint at least one more.
With ANZ’s Paul O’Sullivan also on the hunt for a new director after David Gonski’s exit no doubt there will be some stiff competition.
Tribunal tribe
A mixed bag of former pollies and advisers has been cobbled together to form Christian Porter’s new Administrative Appeals Tribunal, including ousted liberal MP Jane Prentice. The former member for Ryan had been in the running for preselection in Brisbane at the start of the year, but was pipped at the post by communications executive Greg Adermann.
Now, she’s joined the overseer of government administrative decisions full time (think ASIC, freedom of information requests and most notably visa decisions) along with government adviser types Rachel Da Costa, Namoi Dougall and Justin Gibbs.
Former Labor deputy premier of South Australia, John Rau, also gets a look-in, appointed as a part-time senior member, while Victorian Labor figure Philip Dalidakis too snagged a part-time role.
Dalidakis made waves at the start of the year when he pulled the pin on his executive general manager role at the then-Christine Holgate-led Australia Post after just seven months.
Reasons behind the shuffle have been kept under wraps, but needless to say he didn’t get a Cartier watch.
The organisation earlier this year came under fire from Labor over “stacking” the tribunal with former staffers — whether the latest recruits put their concerns at bay is anyone’s guess.
And with that we put a line under our final column for the year. Looking back we would like to extend our thanks for all the feedback, tip-offs and titbits of information from our wonderful readers and look forward to bringing you more in 2021.
Word count: 964
