And they would never have conceived that a tailings dam failure in Brazil, combined with a strong forward thrust in Chinese steel production plus the beginnings of electrification of the globe, would be among the forces that exploded BHP’s profitability and caused it to be awash with cash.
They would be equally stunned that their cherished BHP tradition of looking ahead to the next major development would be set aside by the current BHP top managers in favour of massive dividends to shareholders.
The BHP shareholders of 2021 are enjoying the rewards of the McLennan-McNeill-Loton decisions plus those who later enhanced them. But the current generation of managers are not investing for future on the scale that was the BHP tradition. Of course some of those “future” investments failed.
This change is not widely debated because current shareholders are enjoying the BHP share price rise that comes with the current strategy.
But given that part of the current iron ore price boom was created by highly unusual events there is a clear underlying controversy in the 2021 strategy, particularly as BHP is sitting on one of the world’s greatest copper deposits at a time when both Australia and global electrification may boost the copper price in the same way as iron ore has been ballooned.
While the giant Olympic Dam in South Australia is increasing production from its relatively small underground operation, the massive copper reserves which BHP purchased from Western Mining are untouched and lie underground.
And because much of the current cash bonanza will not be retained by the company the huge reserves may never be developed because they require very costly start-up expenditures. But it is conceivable in a copper-deficient world that Australia may demand that the copper be extracted by BHP or someone else.
BHP CEO Mike Henry is very proud of the fact that the company’s iron ore production costs are well below those of Rio Tinto. In decades gone by the cost position was reversed but Rio managing Australian iron ore from St James Square in London was never a good idea and The Big Australian has become much more skilled in its iron ore production techniques.
Accordingly, whatever happened to the iron ore price, BHP was set to make good money given its low cost levels. Indeed, the company would have been very happy with an iron ore price around $US90 a tonne, but around double that is over the top.
There is no doubt that the biggest force driving the higher price is the fact that China has a major infrastructure program to deliver its recovery and that requires steel and the US —-as it pump primes its economy——is boosting demand for Chinese goods. The US abandoned its own manufacturing many years ago and the attempts to revive it by former President Trump are yet to bear fruit.
BHP originally had plans to substantially increase its iron ore production but when the slump took place many years ago those plans were put on hold. Then came the tragic 2019 tailings dam collapse in Brazil. Whereas the main Brazilian producer Vale was looking towards producing at a 400 million tonnes production rate it fell back to not much above 300 million tonnes and has stayed there for some years. While Vale expects production to come back to 400 million in 2022 this is proving difficult.
Some of the Vale production disappointments are a result of COVID-19 but the major force has been the tailings dam failure. When that dam broke no-one could have foreseen that not only would Australian iron ore producers be the major beneficiaries but so would the Australian government’s tax revenue via the consequent higher price. It also offset the Chinese actions against Australia.
But China is now committed to producing large quantities of iron ore from Guinea in Africa and Australia will face long term competition particularly as scrap becomes more important. And the whole iron ore / steel trade will need to adapt to lower carbon methods which could easily depress iron ore prices.
It is possible the iron ore price will fall sharply in coming months later this year or in 2022, but it is still likely to remain high. But longer-term predictions are less certain. In other words, this cash bonanza gives BHP the chance to insulate itself from a major change in the iron ore market either via higher copper production or increased production of other minerals that will benefit from electrification.
And of course BHP still has its potash development. Although potash may be accelerated in the next year or so a major strategic change from BHP is not on the horizon and the short-term thinking institutions do not want any change in the BHP high-distribution policy.
And to be fair to BHP there are problems with Olympic Dam that were not originally foreseen.
The ore has a substantial quantity of uranium and that makes transporting the concentrates to a smelter a hazardous exercise. Currently it overcomes that with a smelter near the mine so if production was to substantially increase either a new and larger smelter will need to be built or new technology used to treat the Olympic Dam ore.
Former BHP CEO Marius Kloppers planned to remove the overburden on top of the deposit and make it an open cut mine. When the copper price fell, like the iron ore plans, it was shelved. But if copper keeps rising in price the economics of such a big development may be greatly improved. Of course, if the copper price keeps rising then substitute materials may be found.
Meanwhile BHP shareholders are going to be showered with cash.
Word count: 927
