South Mackay’s Roxanne McKenzie said she felt “really strongly” about the issue, asking: “What are we doing to bring people here?”
“It’s sad, I have to say, I grew up here and it used to be the hub of the city,” Ms McKenzie said.
She said the council had to seriously consider treasuring the historical buildings, and proposed commercial landlords let pop-ups open for free, albeit temporarily, to liven retail trade.
Ms McKenzie also suggested a saltwater swimming enclosure, more events, letting “grey nomads” camp at the showgrounds to bring tourists, and more attractions to keep families holidaying in Mackay instead of at Airlie Beach.
Beaconsfield great, great grandmother Gladys Fryer said the CBD could be an op-shop haven.
The Salvation Army volunteer said there was an amazing $2 op-shop in Redcliffe which would do wonders in Mackay, provided stores were handy to bus stops.
“They need (to run) on Sunday,” Ms Fryer said.
“You can’t get anywhere here on Sunday unless you’ve got a car.”
South Mackay resident Colin Zampirutti said he would like the council to “force the hand” of landlords to find tenants for their premises or convert them to more usable spaces such as office buildings.
“A lot of the CBD is owned by people who don’t live in Mackay, they’re southerners and they don’t care much about the city heart,” Mr Zampirutti said.
“Look what’s happening to the old Commonwealth Bank, it’s falling to bits.”
Rural View grandmother Leonie Chataway voiced the gripe of many Mackay dwellers when she said parking was the major deterrent keeping her out of the CBD.
“People get sick of going round and round the block and not being able to get close to the shops they need to get to,” Ms Chataway said.
“Maybe block off the streets and turn into a mall as well as make the rents more attractive.”
More stories:
Mackay’s homeless given clean clothes and warm bellies
Blaming shopping centre for CBD retail exodus a ‘cop out’
South Mackay resident Carmel Rankin seconded the idea, adding Mackay could have an eat street once a month, more cafes and a direct factory outlet, as enjoyed in Brisbane and the Gold Coast.
Balnagowan’s Cheryl Allnatt said the CBD felt uninviting, dark and dreary.
“The only thing I find you go there for is restaurants,” Ms Allnatt said.
Kuttabul resident Fay McKay said the city centre was once brightly lit-up at night, with families “window shopping” as a favourite pastime activity.
Subscriber benefits:
How to activate your free Courier-Mail subscription
How to get Daily Mercury news straight to your inbox
Mackay residents also had their say on Facebook, after a national retail expert said blaming Caneland Central for the exodus of retailers from the CBD was a “cop out”.
Here’s what you said:
Katherine Morgan: “Rent is exorbitant, parking is difficult, lease spaces are poorly maintained. There is also no publicity and/or motivation to entice customers to the CBD. Years ago, they used to always do markets on Saturdays down the main strip. Used to attract a lot of people. The Dome (under the library) should have been converted to a permanent night market like Cairns. Would be a great way to promote and help to grow small local businesses, they are the ones that are most likely to rent lease spaces in the CBD.”
Alana Gear: “The problem is the parking. You can’t park anywhere there. The parks are always taken up. On nearly every street.”
Jussy Kay: “Well (if) rental prices dropped for retail shops and residential, maybe the CBD wouldn't be so (quiet).”
Glenn Littleford: “Ah the long term consequences of a mining boom. Good while they last, but they don't last forever.”
Leo Scott: “They need to allow for more mix zoning of residential developments in Mackay CBD inner area itself. Residential above levels with commercial and offices at street level. This will create an inner city population which will need hospitality services, convenience retail, government administration services, (etc). Deco facades can be saved and incorporated. CBDs from yesterday concepts is now over in our contemporary times. Even plazas, malls and shopping centres are adapting, struggling and even closing down completely as internet shopping becomes more convenient (but not for all retail as customers still prefer hands on for fashion, hospitality food, convenient retail).”
Daniel Vincent: “Lower the rents and increase start up businesses.”
Jaime Patten: “How about how degraded and in disrepair all the CBD buildings are? Why would you pay rent for a garbage building?”
Shannon Clare: “I simply don’t like the parking so I avoid going unless I really have to.”
Erica Shaw: “People look for convenience. It is more convenient to go to a shopping centre, where everything they need, is right there. Whereas in the street — CBD — it‘s a mongrel to get a park, you have to go to several different blocks to get what is wanted, and then go elsewhere for pharmacy and groceries. Gone are the days when people had time and desire to do this.”
Kirstie Louise: “None of the shops in the CBD interest me in the slightest. I can’t be the only one. And the shops in Caneland that are similar I also avoid.”
Steve Brown: “Townsville CBD no different – absolute ghost town – well down both incompetent councils ðŸ‘ŽðŸ‘Ž.”
Lana Erin: “Those ridiculous raised cement garden beds in the city heart make it challenging to angle park easily — the scrape marks along the sides are evidence of that. And when this is a town with a huge percentage of 4WD driving shoppers, it makes no sense at all. A bad addition for the businesses nearby.”
“Those ridiculous raised cement garden beds in the city heart make it challenging to angle park easily — the scrape marks along the sides are evidence of that. And when this is a town with a huge percentage of 4WD driving shoppers, it makes no sense at all. A bad addition for the businesses nearby.”
Shannon Kliese: “Rental prices are ridiculous and the parking is really bad! You have more gardens in the centre of town than parking.”
“Rental prices are ridiculous and the parking is really bad! You have more gardens in the centre of town than parking.”
Claire Quinn: “We used to do markets years ago. Brisbane is a city, Mackay is regional. I hope someone get it going. Markets should only be there when retailers are closed as some markets sell similar products and it gets on retailers nerves.”
We used to do markets years ago. Brisbane is a city, Mackay is regional. I hope someone get it going. Markets should only be there when retailers are closed as some markets sell similar products and it gets on retailers nerves.”
Word count: 1089
