The space start-up, led by brothers Adam and James Gilmour, is busy building its proprietary rocket engine it hopes will efficiently – and lucratively – address the growing global demand for putting satellites into orbit.
“We’re really happy. And what I’m even more happy with is the quality of these investors who have joined the round,” Mr Gilmour said in an interview. ”And what that means for me is in the future when I want to raise more money, I’ve got an amazing pool of investors who can now easily step up to do it.”
The executive said that he’d inquired with one of his venture capital colleagues about pitching to super funds 12 months ago, but had been told “no, they’re too risk averse”.
The company’s Series C round, which includes US-based Fine Structure Ventures, Australian venture capital firms Blackbird and Main Sequence, and Australian superannuation funds HESTA, Hostplus, and NGS Super, brings the company’s total funds raised to date to $87m.
“What’s happened in the past 12 months or so, is that space as an asset class globally has become really popular,” Mr Gilmour said.
“There are some fantastic valuations on some of my competitors in the US, and people are starting to realise that this isn’t a short-term thing. This is a long-term industry trend. And super funds, while they’re still investing just tiny portions, some of them now think they have been given somewhat of a moral task to nation build, and support infrastructure.
“They’re trying to help Australian companies like ours trying to build national assets and infrastructure in Australia and help our nation do new things. We’re not just a good financial bet, we’re a national bet.”
Mr Gilmour said that since launching its first hybrid rocket in mid 2016, his company has achieved a series of significant technology milestones to become a world leader in orbital-class hybrid propulsion technologies that use safer and lower cost fuels than traditional chemical propulsion rockets.
Gilmour has signed three launch contracts to date, with customers including US-based Momentus, Sydney-based Space Machines Company, and South Australia’s Fleet Space Technologies.
The investment will give Gilmour the runway to launch its first orbital rocket in 2022, its CEO said, and will help it develop multiple Eris vehicles, grow its team from 70 to 120 in the next 12 months, build a sovereign space manufacturing capability for rockets and satellites, and facilitate a commercial spaceport in Queensland, where it hopes to launch the world’s first hybrid rocket to space.
“We‘re confident we’ll launch somewhere around June, we’re starting to assemble the launch vehicle and a lot of the components have arrived in the factory,” he said. ”The raising gives us enough money to build multiple launch vehicles. So our plan is to very quickly build a second vehicle, so that if the first one fails, we have a backup ready. And then if the first one succeeds, we can start commercially launching … You’re not limited to just one.”
He added that Gilmour is aiming to initially get to 12 launches a year, which would give the company revenue of around $200m a year.
“Then we‘ve also got plans to build bigger vehicles. And so the combination of bigger vehicles plus pushing the boundaries of launching more than 12 times a year, gets you up to around a $400m a year revenue,” he said. “We’re predicting a margin of about 40 per cent, which is fantastic, and we’re going to generate a lot of free cash flow that allows us to keep investing in new technology.”
Despite 2021 shaping as a watershed year for Australia’s space industry, Mr Gilmour said he’s still not seeing enough support or encouragement from the federal government.
“When you look at my competitors in the US, at the same level of technology, they get $50m contracts from their air force, and $30m contracts from their space agency,” he said. ”It just makes it so much easier for them to raise multiples of the amount that I raise. I think it‘s still the missing piece, if we could get some government contracts to launch stuff into space, we could then leverage that and the next raise we could easily do $200m.”
Blackbird Ventures partner Rick Baker, who led Gilmour Space’s first $5m Series A round in 2017, said it had been amazing to see what Gilmour Space has achieved to date.
“They’re proving that they can build a reliable hybrid rocket engine capable of powering the next generation of launch vehicles,” he said.
Martin Duursma, the partner at CSIRO deep tech investment fund Main Sequence, who led the company’s $19m Series B in 2018, added: “The Australian space industry is attracting significant investment, and Gilmour Space is leading the way. They are hiring, training, and building a new supply chain that is driving capabilities at scale across the whole space sector.”
Meanwhile HESTA CIO Sonya Sawtell-Rickson said Gilmour offered a strong example of how HESTA is investing to support visionary businesses take that next step in their growth and development.
“Gilmour Space is going where no Australian business has gone before, which can open up exciting new opportunities for hi-tech industries and jobs in Australia, while helping to grow our members’ retirement savings.”
David Elia, Hostplus’ CEO, said Hostplus’ investment strategy is long-term focused, which is why it invests in innovative local companies that will provide enduring economic and societal benefits.
“This unique investment presents potential strategic benefits as we anticipate Gilmour’s valuation increasing, and we are delighted to support the exciting future ahead for Australia’s space industry.”
Word count: 910
