PERFECT CONDITIONS HAVE SEEN WINERIES START UP IN THE HUNTER AND OTHERS SHOW INNOVATION, WRITES CASSANDRA BALDINI
WINERIES remain one of the centrepieces of the Hunter’s tourism industry and despite a rough few years with bushfires and then the global pandemic, new cellar doors continue to open and others are innovating to offer a fresh take on the iconic region.
These are some of Wine Country’s newest and recently improved cellar doors.
CHARTERIS WINE Charteris Wine Room opened in Pokolbin at the end of last year and has since offered visitors a bottled Trans Tasman adventure.
Critically acclaimed winemaker PJ Charteris started his journey at the age of 13 while working at Vilagrad Wines, in Ōhaupō, New Zealand.
He went on to study winemaking at the University of South Australia and after graduation hitchhiked solo to the Hunter.
After arriving, PJ met his wife and partner in wine Christina Pattison. “Chrissi and I met in 1999 when we were working at Brokenwood together, we started making our wine under our label in Central Otago in New Zealand,” Charteris said.
“We‘ve been making wine under our label since 2008 and started our Hunter Valley wines around 2018-2019 do our tasting rooms are new but I have been in the wine industry for over 30 years.” PJ’s attachment to both regions is explored through the artisan wine range. Together the couple make shiraz, semillon and chardonnay in the Hunter Valley, as well as pinot noir and riesling in Central Otago.
“When you taste them side by side there is an interesting story to tell,” he said.
“These contrasts and connections give us a unique lens through which we can tell our story of why we do what we do, giving visitors a new world wine perspective.”
WILD WREN WINES Creator, director and CEO Renee Burton opened her Pokolbin cellar door in November last year.
The selection of full body and light body wines unapologetically embody female empowerment.
“We are one of the only female-owned brands in the Hunter,” Ms Burton said. “I have a passion and a love for Hunter wine and just wanted to celebrate that with a female twist influencing the branding that we’ve created.” The previous owner and co-founder of Gundog Estate, Ms Burton has more than 20 years of experience in the wine and tourism industries.
After a personal event led her to re-evaluate her future she wanted to make her daughters proud.
“It’s a bit of a journey and was very unexpected — sometimes I don’t know how I landed here, but I did and it’s very much my own thing,” she said.
The name Wren plays on both Renee’s name (Ren) and the bird. “When I read about the actual personality of the wren, it kind of it just replicated who I am,” she said. “They’re quite reserved, but also become powerful and embody a strong little bird.” Local designer Krysten Jade is the artist behind the authentic labels on each bottle.
“Every wine label has a different piece of artwork that we pulled together,” Ms Burton said.
“It‘s sophisticated, we have some beautiful labels, which people just love and find inspiring as well.” The untamed semillon, off dry gruner veltliner and sangiovese are some of the cellar’s most popular drops.
“Our philosophy and direction behind the brand is really keeping those beautiful small varieties as well as looking at some versatile alternative varieties that we showcase in the hunter,” Ms Burton said.
SCARBOROUGH Scarborough winery were recipients of the Cellar Door of the Year and Innovation of the Yyear award in 2021.
Sally Scarborough said the family-run business understands how important the entire customer journey is.
“We were judged on the entire visitor experience for the cellar door of the year award,” Ms Scarborough said.
“We understand as a business that the visitor experience isn’t just when people come through the cellar door, it starts well before that at the research stage, and then ends long after they have left.” Scarborough’s cellar doors have been open for 35 years and the family continues to adjust to modern-day requirements and external pressures.
“The innovation of the year award came about in lockdown, we put into place an online tasting format that could be rolled out to our customers,” Ms Scarborough said.
“We came up with a system where we could decanter our wines into 100ml bottles, we then packaged those up and sent them off to customers.
“That really allowed us to firstly still connect with customers while the door was closed during the pandemic, but also it allowed us to keep all of our staff during that time.” Scarborough are known for their Chardonnay and cellar door exclusive range The Obsessive. The winery plans to release a super premium range a little later in the year.
“There is a lot to enjoy in our range depending on budget and taste,” Ms Scarborough said.
WINMARK WINES Owner of Winmark Wines Karin Adcock decided to give visitors a taste of something other than the vineyard’s chardonnay.
“We opened an art gallery right next to our cellar door in February 2021,” Ms Adcock said. “I felt that when people were coming to taste our wine, it would be lovely for them to also be exposed to some beautiful art.
“I wanted to position ourselves as a place not only to go to taste a great chardonnay but also to enjoy art and the sculptures in the beautiful countryside around the vineyard.” The sculpture walk showcases 16 monumental pieces including work from the 2017 winner of Bondi’s Sculpture by the Sea, David Ball, ceramic sculptor Katarina Wells, Todd Robinson and Sonia Payne among others.
The ever-changing art gallery displays works from contemporary artists including Felicia Aroney and Rebecca Pierce, as well as multi-award-winning sculpture Michael Purdy and Newcastle’s Simon Zablotsky.
“We always encourage our guests to take the sculpture program and just soak it all in and be inspired,” Ms Adcock said. Winmark, which translates to field of wine in Danish, solely focuses on chardonnay.
“We have four different styles of Chardonnay so visitors certainly have some different wine to taste at our cellar,” Ms Adcock said.
“It’s a bit unusual that you have a vineyard that only focuses on one variety, but rather than trying to be everything to everyone we do one and we do it very well.”
BRIAR RIDGE Alex Beckett, winemaker at Briar Ridge, was the recipient of the 2021 Alasdair Sutherland scholarship award which aims to foster the talent of young aspiring wine show judges in the region.
The award winner will attend the Australian Wine Research Institute to undertake an Advanced Wine Assessment Course. “When I received the award, I was a little bit shocked but incredibly humbled, it‘s a great opportunity,” Mr Beckett said.
“It’s considered a pretty big moment in terms of evaluating where you’re at and where you can improve so I think that’s really important for the future.” Mr Beckett studied winemaking at the University of South Australia and has worked at Briar Ridge Vineyard since graduating in 2016.
“Briar Ridge is a 50-year-old estate this year, what we have been doing for the past ten years has a strong focus around traditional winemaking,” Mr Beckett said.
“When I kind of took over the winemaking in 2018, the big thing for me was not about losing tradition but making room for new possibilities.
“We launched a number of alternative grape varieties, alternative winemaking techniques dating back hundreds and thousands of years and we‘re just kind of reimagining and bringing them forth again.” Innovation at the vineyard can also be seen in the shifting way it makes Hunter Valley semillon.
“Hunter semillon originally back in the 50s and 60s was always fermented and matured in large old wooden casks,” Mr Beckett said.
“We shifted to stainless steel for these really pretty, bright, zingy styles of white wine.
“A number of our wines have kind of shifted back into these quite large casks and neutral casks to kind of just give more breadth and texture on the palate.
Mr Beckett spent weekends working at cellar doors and was drawn into the industry despite first undertaking study in linguistics.
“I fell in love with the people, language is one thing, and I’m still really interested in that but the big thing for me is that every single time you go out to work, you get to talk to someone, and you get to see the way that wine changes their lives,” he said. “To me that’s special there are not many industries where you see constant evolution, and you see the way that it affects people so quickly.”
CREDIT: CASSANDRA BALDINI
Word count: 1450
