Ron has been around the block a few times and like so many people has locked some everyday stories about his travels away in the memory vault. ‘Everyday’ they might be, but it doesn’t mean they don’t bear telling. Here are a couple.
Re your article on the Driver’s Salute in the Townsville Bulletin.
“I did some driving out west in the 60s and 70s when many roads were still dirt (you’ll remember the Crystal Highway between Hughenden and Cloncurry, which was littered with broken windscreen glass) and cars and trucks were slower and heavier and hotter (no aircon) and were prone to breakdowns in the heat.
“It was natural to give the wave and to stop and help if you came across someone in trouble.
“One trip from Mt Isa to Winton in about 45-50 degree centigrade heat, fuel evaporation stopped me halfway along the track to Boulia. “After taking the fuel pump off a few times I eventually got going again, but there were only two other drivers who stopped in the hour or so I had my head in the motor. Both stopped to help and have a chat.
TRUCKIE’S LUCKY ESCAPE
“ANOTHER time in 1973 about two hours short of Winton, I picked up a truckie who came staggering out of the scrub. He’d found some shelter under the only large trees in the whole landscape after he hit a bullock and smashed his radiator. This was three days earlier.
“I was only the third vehicle he’d seen going through in those three days.
“He’d missed the first two because he was so far (away in the shade) from the road – no tourists then. Even though he was almost exhausted, what he wanted most was a smoke. Luckily I had some Drum tobacco plus plenty of water, sandwiches even a couple of soft drinks, which livened him up, although we had to stop twice so he could empty his stomach of all this luxury!
“I used to stay in the North Gregory Hotel in Winton, but it was full, so we found a room in Tatts and had a beer or two.
“He said he would send me a ticket in the Opera House Lottery when he arrived home in Darwin, but it never arrived, so who knows? I could be a mystery winner of that old lottery.
TYRES AIN’T TYRES
RON had another yarn up his sleeve: “Another memory from around 1974. I had to visit the new mine at Gunpowder, which meant travelling in a company car on standard radials along a track that was mostly flint rocks. “I picked up a bloke in a Land Cruiser who had delivered extra tough tyres to the mine, but blown two of his own on the rocks. He bought me a couple of beers in the Isa and swore me to secrecy.”
BUSH LEGENDS: LONELY DEATH UNDER A TREE
THESE stories from the bush are always fascinating and remind me of others, particularly those stories that offer a warning, but can never be pinned down and sourced with 100 per cent accuracy. These are the bush versions of the more familiar urban legends.
This one is about the station hand who died after his arm became stuck in a cockatoo’s nest – it was one of the first I ever heard.
He had set out on horseback, his faithful dog following behind, one Saturday afternoon for a galah’s nest he knew of in the hollow limb of a tree near the shearing shed on Terrick Station near Blackall.
He found the nest and stood up in the saddle on the back of his quiet old horse and reached down into the hollow limb to try and grab a baby galah.
Something must have frightened the horse.
It shied away from under him, leaving him dangling by the now trapped arm from the limb of the tree. He was in an impossible situation and could not free himself. His cries for help went unanswered as he was too far from the station complex. His dog stayed with him for hours, but eventually it turned up at the station homestead at midnight.
The alarm had already been raised and with the dog back without his master, people knew that something had happened. They found the young station hand at daylight, lying under the tree.
He had attempted to cut his trapped arm off the elbow with his pocket knife, but that had failed and he had then put the knife to his shoulder, which he did manage to cut through.
When his body parted from the severed limb, he fell to the ground and bled to death under the tree. He had wanted to give a fledgling galah to his sister in Sydney.
We don’t know if this story happened or if it is a bush legend told to stop young men and women doing foolish things on their horses.
BRIDEGROOM DIES OF THIRST
ONE story that we know did happen is that of the Richmond policeman who set out to drive to Brisbane where he was to be married to his girlfriend. He broke down south of Richmond. No one came by and he set off across the open plains to try to find a homestead.
The days ticked by. Saturday afternoon arrived and his bride arrived at the church expecting him to be there. He never arrived.
No one knew what had happened. The search began out there on the Richmond plains. It was Fred Tritton, a former mayor of the Richmond Shire Council who noticed kite hawks circling in the sky. He rode towards a point where the hawks were circling and found the policeman propped up in a sitting position under a spindly tree.
It was his last resort from the sun. He had been dead for several days.
GOVERNESS EATEN BY PIGS
AND this is another that I’m sure is a bush legend. It was a story you used to hear, but no one could ever pinpoint where it took place.
A young governess went out riding one Sunday with the head stockman from the station on which she was working.
There was a log lying on the ground that made a perfect jump. She galloped her horse towards the log, but at the last second it propped, sending her crashing into the log.
She was knocked unconscious and her leg was badly broken. The head stockman propped her up in the shade as best be could and then galloped off towards the station for help. It was a three-hour ride away and by the time he got back with the station manager in a Land Rover, it was almost dark.
A large mob of pigs ran from the area as they drove towards the spot in the trees where the girl had been left.
What they found shocked them to the core.
The foraging pigs had found the helpless girl.
Her partly eaten remains were strewn around the bank of the creek. Perhaps this never happened and that the story was told as a warning to young girls about the dangers of the bush.
It became a bush legend. Maybe, too, it served as a warning about the dangers – in an oblique way – of going off riding for the day with one of the stockmen.
DEAD DIVER FOUND ON MOUNTAIN
THERE are urban legends aplenty. There is a recent old, but an urban legend nevertheless. It’s about a dead person wearing a wetsuit, face mask and snorkel, lying on the floor of a fire-ravaged mountain.
No one could work out how he got there. And then one of the investigators had a light bulb moment.
The theory was that the man was snorkelling when he was scooped up by the bucket of a firefighting aircraft.
He was carried inside the bucket from the lake to the fire front where he was unceremoniously dropped hundreds of metres to the forest floor below when the pilot hit the water release button.
The image was of the helpless diver swimming desperately around inside the bucket slung under the aircraft until that final moment when he was released into the air space.
ROOF REPAIRMAN A GONER
WHAT about the bloke who was working on his roof? To be on the safe side he tied a rope to the rear bumper of his car, which was parked in the driveway and knotted the other end around his waist.
He then climbed up on the roof, going all the way to the top and then over to the other side where he was fixing some tiles. The idea was that if he lost footing, the rope on the bumper would stop him sliding to the ground.
What he didn’t take into account was that his wife was going shopping. She walked around the front of the car and didn’t see the rope. He heard the engine start up, but it was too late.
He shouted his lungs out as she drove out of the driveway, dragging him up and down the roof as he frantically tried to undo the now tightened rope at his waist. He was probably killed when he hit the ground, but the bloodied stump of human flesh still attached by a rope to the back bumper when the wife arrived at the supermarket was certainly devoid of life. Moral of the story? Think about what you’re doing.
There must be urban legends from Townsville. Does anyone know of any? Maybe the vast caverns under the city’s outskirts that are said to be still holding hundreds of American Jeeps and trucks from WW2 qualify as an urban legend.
Word count: 1567
