RENEW Adelaide has shaken up its board and renewed talks with the state government about reviving a funding arrangement to support an economic recovery program in the wake of COVID-19.
Knight Frank SA managing director Bobbette Scott, Cminus managing director Fairlie Delbridge and Jam Factory chief executive Brian Parkes are among five new members appointed to the board, while Property Council SA executive director Daniel Gannon, CBRE SA managing director Alistair Laycock and Boral’s Richard Harris have all stepped down.
Renew Adelaide chairman Nick Begakis said the board changes came at an important time, with property owners facing economic uncertainty as the effects of COVID-19 linger.
“Work-from-home rates bring implications for commercial property use, while additional public health measures necessitate changed business services and offerings,” he said.
“Our role is to bring a new type of entrepreneur to the city, as well as attract different demographics that support the existing traders.
“Programs targeted at all levels of the economy support a complete economic recovery. Every dollar invested into the Renew Adelaide program generates $3.90 into our economy.” Renew Adelaide was established 10 years ago to connect fledgling businesses with short-term, rent-free leases in vacant properties, while helping landlords activate dormant spaces. In a year underlined by the COVID-19 pandemic, the organisation launched 15 new ventures last financial year, supported an additional 18 businesses, and had nine tenants graduate from the rent-free program to a commercial lease.
Following the state government’s decision to pull its funding arrangement with Renew Adelaide, the organisation has been left reliant on funding from the Adelaide City Council. In a COVID-19 recovery action plan developed by Renew Adelaide, the organisation says it can play a key role in assisting Adelaide with its post-COVID recovery, with 50 per cent of its ventures graduating to a commercial lease.
Mr Begakis said additional funding was important for the organisation to continue its work supporting start-up businesses and property owners in the city.
“Further funding for Renew Adelaide will leverage the shovel-ready start-up and property sector to play its role in the recovery process,” he said.
“Renew Adelaide is in discussions with the state government to secure funding for Renew Adelaide’s economic recovery response.” Sarah Curtis-Fawley, from the Australian Centre for Business Growth at UniSA, and Max Kim, from Bentleys SA, have also joined the Renew Adelaide board.
Mr Parkes said he was excited about “Adelaide’s post-COVID boom”. “I’m confident we will see increasingly innovative business models that bring more creative and collaborative energy into the CBD,” he said.
“Young creative entrepreneurs are looking for locations that provide great quality of life.” Ms Scott said activating space through Renew Adelaide was a “win-win” for landlords and new ventures, and gave the city “a great sense of diversity”. “I have experienced the benefit of Renew Adelaide ventures first-hand,” she said.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 473
