TECHNOLOGY giant Amazon has moved into Adelaide’s Lot Fourteen. The company yesterday announced it has established an office at the North Terrace site and it plans to create 50 jobs in South Australia by 2024.
Its Adelaide office will house teams from Amazon’s cloud company subsidiary Amazon Web Services (AWS) and Amazon Sciences, which researches artificial intelligence and machine learning.
The AWS teams will provide support and cloud enablement to local businesses and government agencies “to assist with their digital transformation journeys” and help local businesses to become more competitive on the global stage, the company said.
Meanwhile, the Amazon Sciences team will carry out new research to improve services for customers of Amazon.com.
AWS’s head of South and Western Australia, Sarah Bassett, said the company looked forward to helping SA to develop its emerging tech workforce.
“Our new office in Adelaide demonstrates our ongoing commitment to invest in Australia, and the long-term potential we believe there is for our nation to be a leader in the global digital economy,” she said.
“AWS provides SA customers with access to the latest technology to expand their business into global markets from their home state, improve their customer experience, and lower their operating costs”.
AWS head of channel and alliances Davinia Simon said the expansion of the company into Adelaide would allow “local companies of all sizes across all industries can tap into the world’s most comprehensive and broadly adopted cloud platform”.
Adelaide-based start-up Presagen has welcomed Amazon’s arrival. “One of the practical things that we’re doing is delivering artificial intelligence into the IVF clinics to help patients get pregnant quicker through using AI to analyse images of embryos during the IVF process and helping the doctors to select healthy embryos that are most likely to lead to a healthy pregnancy,” Presagen chief executive officer Dr Michelle Perugini said.
“It’s a global product that we’ve developed; we’re selling into multiple countries and we’re doing that because AWS enables delivery via their cloud services.” Premier Steven Marshall said Amazon’s announcement “highlights that global companies are looking to SA as a destination”. “The decision by Amazon to invest here is proof that SA is a major drawcard to international companies across high-tech and high-growth sectors,” he said.
CREDIT: ELIZABETH HENSON
Word count: 377
