GOVERNMENT procurement practices that favour local start-ups and growth-focused businesses – or at least don’t actively disadvantage them – are needed to ensure we foster a vibrant ecosystem of entrepreneurial companies, tech founder George Freney says.
Mr Freney, who was an inaugural member of the State Government Entrepreneurship Advisory Board and is a co-founder of Space Machines Company, said other jurisdictions around the world “do it really well’’ but Australia had a way to go in this area.
“From a start-up perspective, or early-stage companies, government procurement, both federal and state, let’s buy from these companies and take some risk on to help enable these companies,’’ Mr Freney said.
“We’re really bad, as a state and country, in my view, at buying from early-stage companies.
“Other jurisdictions around the world do it really well. I think that would really help get the flywheel of growth going.’’ Mr Freney, who is based at the Lot Fourteen innovation precinct in the Adelaide CBD, said the growth in areas such as space technology companies in Adelaide in the past few years, from pretty much a standing start, had been exceptional.
Mr Freney said when he joined the EAB in 2018, Lot Fourteen was in its early stages and the Australian Space Agency, now based on-site, had not yet been created.
He said the space sector in Adelaide had real momentum now.
“And to see the evolution of that, and the number of jobs that it has created, in the design phase as well as the manufacturing phase, if you think of Inovor – that’s now a 40-plus person company building satellites at Lot Fourteen.
“Myriota, they’re a 50-plus person company who are building satellites and technology, and I think they’re using South Australian companies in the supply chain.
“Fleet Space … they’re employing upwards of 100 people soon. In my view that creates a pull-through for the supply chain in Adelaide.’’ Mr Freney said the recently developed industry base gave he and his partners the confidence to found Space Machines Company here, which focused on building orbital transfer vehicles.
“And this environment is what enables people to be fearless in pursuing those sort of objectives,” he said.
“Our objective there, five or six years from now, is to be building one of these vehicles every month, at least, and employing 100 people in South Australia and probably across the country in the supply chain that provides parts into that.’’ Mr Freney said there were other companies such as Airspeeder, founded by Fleet co-founder Matt Pearson, that were spearheading world-leading projects. Airspeeder is on the cusp of launching a global electric flying car grand prix, backed by marquee brands such as IWC Schaffhausen and DHL.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 455
