Suncorp is understood to have been working on a sale of its banking operations for 16 months, with discussions starting with ANZ about two months ago, sources say.
Earlier other suitors were part of the discussion, including the Bank of America-advised Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, which was rebuffed recently.
Investment bank Barrenjoey has been aiding Suncorp in what was known as Project Galileo.
ANZ was always the keenest suitor, with its interest stretching back years. Apparently, Barrenjoey’s Matthew Grounds had seen overseeing a deal as an important win for the investment bank start-up. It had been on and off the agenda for years while he was running UBS in Australia.
On Monday ANZ announced the $4.9bn acquisition of Suncorp’s bank and a $3.5bn equity raising through Macquarie Capital and UBS to fund the transaction – about eight months after DataRoom revealed that a spin-off of Suncorp’s bank was being worked on by Barrenjoey.
Plans to buy accounting software business MYOB from KKR for almost $4.5bn are on ice, after the market’s negative response to ANZ’s confirmation of talks last week, amid concerns about a potential equity raising.
This was something no doubt raised with ANZ by underwriters Macquarie and UBS, in what is already a volatile trading environment.
Any acquisition of MYOB is likely to be off the table for at least six months or even a year.
It is understood that KKR would have needed more time – about six weeks – to get the company in order for a sale, despite the talks being advanced.
After buying the business for $2bn in 2019, KKR had been planning to float or sell MYOB in 2023, after it had turned its performance around to become strongly profitable.
However, sources suggested that ANZ approached KKR about an acquisition. The $3.5bn raising to pay for the $4.9bn Suncorp bank acquisition has drawn a reasonable response from investors so far, sources say.
The shares are being sold by way of an entitlement offer, where shareholders can get one share for every 15 they own, for $18.90 each.
The price is a 12.7 per cent discount to ANZ’s closing share price on Friday. The next big challenge for ANZ is competition clearance.
The Australian Competition & Consumer Commission had always taken a tough stance on competition in the banking sector under chairman Rod Sims, but now the decision lies with Gina Cass-Gottlieb, who started in the job in March and previously offered competition advice to Suncorp while she was a partner at Gilbert + Tobin.
Of the top four banks, ANZ has the smallest market share, while Suncorp has a market share of less than 2.5 per cent in banking, so from one perspective the transaction looks like it will get the green light from the competition watchdog.
A merged Suncorp and ANZ would have market share of less than 15 per cent in Queensland.
But the ACCC could have concerns about market concentration, with NAB recently acquiring Citi’s retail banking operations and Bank of Queensland buying ME Bank.
ANZ was an underbidder for both.
When NAB tried to buy AXA, AMP ran a targeted campaign, so if Bendigo and Adelaide Bank remains a keen buyer of Suncorp bank, it could try a similar tactic.
The completion target for the deal is 12 months, which may suggest that both parties think getting a deal past the regulators could be challenging.
Observers and analysts say that ANZ has paid a full price for Suncorp’s bank, at 13.8 times its net profit or 1.3 times its book value.
Rivals Bank of Queensland and Bendigo and Adelaide Bank trade at about nine times.
As part of the transaction, job cuts in Queensland or branch closures are off limits for three years.
It means full synergies will not be achieved from the acquisition for some time, but there could be some cost savings from integrating Suncorp’s systems with ANZ’s. Full synergies are expected to take six years to achieve, and then the deal is expected to cost ANZ 9.3 times Suncorp’s net profit.
CREDIT: EDITED BY BRIDGET CARTER
Word count: 680
