THERE seems to be a plethora of high-level jobs going in South Australia at the moment, but if you’ve got a reasonably high appetite for risk, we’ve got the job for you.
GFG Alliance is recruiting for a head of finance, based in its Adelaide corporate office and overseeing SIMEC Mining. The mining arm of GFG takes in the company’s iron ore operations in the Middleback Ranges, outside Whyalla, and Tahmoor coalmine, in NSW.
There is no mention of whether the role demands an intimate understanding of supply chain financing.
GFG is fighting for survival on many fronts following the collapse of its main financier, Greensill, which had debts within the order of $US5 billion ($6.5 billion).
The “innovative” supply chain financing model, which involved GFG being able to borrow against future revenues, collapsed leaving the Whyalla steelworks owner scrambling to find another funder.
US firm White Oak Global Advisors came to the party, then almost backed out when a probe into GFG was announced by the UK Serious Fraud Office.
Hours after saying it was out, White Oak was back in, and just this week GFG executive chairman Sanjeev Gupta, pictured top, said he was in talks with key creditor Credit Suisse about a standstill agreement on the debt it’s owed while refinancing is sorted. The GFG ad says its business is “complex and dynamic’’, which could be a slight understatement.
BANK SEARCH Hot on the heels of news that Crestone Wealth Management would be setting up in Adelaide, headed by finance industry veteran Kieran Purcell, Westpac is on the hunt for a head of private wealth.
It’s no coincidence, with Crestone poaching former Westpac associate director SA Global Investment Services Nick Hamersley into its new team, which also includes Ida Wong, previously of BankSA, Sonya Brocklehurst, from NAB, and James McBride, from ANZ.
CLEANING UP ServiceFM has brought some serious firepower on to its board, drafting former top-level sports administrator and later council boss Mal Hemmerling, pictured left.
The Adelaide-based cleaning company, which now has a national footprint turning over close to $80 million a year, has welcomed Chapman Capital Partners managing director Jennifer Ma to the board.
HEALTHY RETURN Not everyone can boast of investing $500,000 into a promising Adelaide start-up and getting 15 times back.
When tech entrepreneur and founder of telco business Vocus James Spenceley turned angel investor for Uniti (previously Uniti Wireless) in 2016, he pumped in that amount as seed funding.
The now-chairman of recently listed gig economy business Airtasker and telco Swoop was full of praise this week for the team that has driven the near-$8 million return on his initial investment.
Mr Spenceley and Tony Grist, co-founder of Albion Capital Partners and Amcom, bought into Uniti early and recently left the business with their millions.
Founded in 2012, Uniti listed on the ASX on February 14, 2019, with founders Che Metcalfe and Sasha Baranikov being sacked soon after.
Former colleagues in M2 Group at the time of its merger with Vocus, Uniti managing director Michael Simmons and executive director Vaughan Bowen (also M2 founder) have supercharged Uniti’s growth with rapid-fire acquisitions, turning it into a $2 billion business.
“Bowen and Simmons … are very clever at what they do. They build things up,” Spenceley said. “They are incredibly capable telco executives and they’ve done a fantastic job with Uniti.” Uniti shares were changing hands at $3 on Friday, up from 25c on listing.
Word count: 573
