RENEW Adelaide has secured the backing of the Adelaide City Council, which has committed to another year of funding for the not-for-profit property activation group.
As part of the agreement the council, through its ­recently formed Adelaide Eco­nomic Development Agency, will contribute $225,000 ­towards Renew Adelaide ­activities in 2021-22.
Renew Adelaide chief executive Andrew White, who took over from Tim Boundy earlier this year, said the funding would help launch and support 15 new business ventures across “strategic locations” in the CBD.
“We have recently cele­brated 10 years of successful operations in the CBD, and in that time we have supported well over 200 new ventures,” Mr White said.
“This past year alone, we have yet again achieved over 50 per cent of our ventures graduating to commercial ­leases and created over 50 new jobs.” Renew Adelaide was established 10 years ago to connect fledgling businesses with short-term, rent-free leases in vacant properties, while at the same time helping landlords activate dormant spaces.
The aim is to allow start-up ventures and entrepreneurs to test and trial their concepts ­before transitioning to a commercial lease.
The organisation helped launch 15 new ventures last fin­ancial year, supported an additional 18 businesses and had nine tenants graduate from the rent-free program to a commercial lease.
However, it has remained reliant on funding from the Adelaide City Council since 2017, when the state government pulled its funding ­arrangement with the ­organisation. Renew Adelaide chairman Nick Begakis said the new agreement with AEDA came at an important time for the city as it recovered from the impact of Covid-19.
“This program increases CBD vibrancy and visitation as well as the positive economic impact that goes along with championing innovation and entrepreneurship,” Mr Begakis said.
“This is further highlighted by the significant increase in demand for Renew Adelaide, with over 290 entrepreneurs seeking to launch new businesses in the CBD.” AEDA managing director Ian Hill said the work of Renew Adelaide aligned with the objectives of the new council body, which launched this year to drive economic growth in the city.
“The focus of AEDA is to position the city as one of the best places in the world to live, work, study, visit and invest,” Mr Hill said. “Renew Adelaide contributes to this by supporting new business ventures to trial their offer to the marketplace and fill under-utilised retail spaces.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 399
