Bob Byrne charts the Hills history of woollen blanket production
THERE was a time when on almost every bed in every Australian home there was an Onkaparinga woollen blanket.
Every bride-to-be had various-sized pairs of Onkaparinga blankets stashed in her glory box and every car had an Onkaparinga picnic rug in the boot.
Onkaparinga is a name every baby boomer grew up with – a name that is now making a quiet comeback.
It’s a story that began more than 150 years ago in the Adelaide Hills when two brothers, Heinrich and Edward Kramm, migrated to the new colony of South Australia, bringing with them a small amount of weaving equipment. Setting up in Hahndorf in a simple mud hut, they established a small weaving business, comprising a single carding machine, a horse-driven spinning mule with 30 spools and a couple of hand looms.
The brothers made use of the nearby river to wash their locally purchased fleece before teasing it by hand.
Impurities such as grass seeds and burrs were painstakingly removed. The wool then was oiled before carding and the horse-powered spinning machine spun it in preparation for weaving. It was a modest and unremarkable beginning.
As the enterprise began to expand, the brothers ordered new machinery. They ran into trouble, however, because by the time the new equipment had arrived in Australia, they were unable to pay the customs duty.
Continued Page 26 Onkaparinga dyed-in-wool firm From Page 25 At the same time, Friedrich Kleinschmidt was searching for a business to fill his vacant stone building in nearby Lobethal. He came up with the idea of raising the duty owed on the machinery from fellow villagers and enticed the brothers to relocate.
A few years later, Friedrich purchased the fledgling business along with all the machinery but despite a government contract for 10,000 yards of cloth, the venture struggled to survive.
A new syndicate was formed and in 1877 a freshly named premises was opened as The Lobethal Woollen and Tweed Company.
A year later and severe drought and trade depression in SA brought another closure.
The business, however, remained in the town and made a return in 1883, this time as the South Australian Woollen Factory.
In 1885, after receiving a further cash injection, new buildings were erected to house 16 new looms and the company became one of Australia’s largest wool brokers, with a full-time staff of 30 employees.
By the end of the 1800s, the mill was successfully operating and supplying uniforms to those serving in the Boer War, producing cloth for the military, plus clothing for customs and railway workers.
World War I provided further stimulus and by 1928, with Australia in the midst of a manufacturing boom, the company began enjoying unprecedented success and was renamed again as the Onkaparinga Woollen Company.
During World War II, the mill produced more than one million military blankets, more than 800km of tunic fabric and heavy cloth used for making overcoats.
By the 1950s, Onkaparinga had grown into the country’s largest mill for blankets and rugs. The company also expanded into household products, including boys’ and men’s dressing gowns, upholstery fabric for both national and international markets and woollen goods for the clothing trade.
Over the next two decades and more, the name Onkaparinga became a well-known label in households all around the nation.
At the end of the 1960s, the company had more than 1000 employees and was distributing products to numerous countries worldwide, with warehouses in the USA, subsidiaries in Canada and trading agencies in Asia.
It continued to provide employment, as it had for generations, for the people of Lobethal and surrounding areas. At the height of production during that time, the mill was operating 24 hours a day.
Husbands worked during the day and their wives worked the night shift. Children left school and joined the mill. It became a family affair and played a key role in the life of the community.
However, with cheaper imports becoming more readily available, the industry was in decline by the 1970s, with many Australian manufacturers closing their doors. Onkaparinga remained the largest mill operating in Australia and the business continued to operate successfully until, in 1983, it was taken over by Macquarie Worsteds and Warrnambool Textiles.
At that time, some of the heavy machinery and some employees moved to Victoria and in 1991 it was decided to close Lobethal and move operations to Warrnambool.
Two years later, all production at the mill ceased.
There are countless stories of the quality and durability of the Onkaparinga brand.
Many baby boomers can relate stories of receiving blankets as a wedding gift more than 50 years ago, some still in excellent condition and in use today.
There are accounts of blankets now almost treated as family heirlooms, handed from one generation to the next.
Picnic rugs given as 21st birthday gifts and, 55 years and seven cars later, are still kept in the boot.
On my Adelaide Remember When Facebook Page, Elaine Zilm England shared a photo of a rug with particular significance.
“I worked there for many years and each employee was presented with a commemorative rug when the mill closed down,” she recalls.
Marian Dickson has a similar story.
“I worked at Onkaparinga Woollen Mills for years,” she says. “When they closed they gave us all a double sided rug which was designed specifically for the workers remaining. Mine’s still in its box.” Many readers report having retro-coloured blankets, including mustard, purple and burnt orange.
They appear to still be on beds or in cupboards of plenty of homes more than 50 years after being bought.
Anne Chaney says she is still using her Onkaparinga blankets 56 years later. Today, the Onkaparinga brand is owned by William A McNeil & Company, a Melbourne-based firm which has introduced an Australian-made range of products bearing the famous trademark.
And part of the beloved old mill building has been given a new lease of life with an initiative known as Fabrik.
“When the mill closed, the precinct came under the jurisdiction of the local council and became home for start-up business enterprises,” says Fabrik director Melinda Rankin.
“Today there are eight established food, wine and engineering businesses on site and as many people employed there as when the mill closed.
“Our vision for the future includes a redevelopment of part of the mill to become home to gallery spaces, artist studios, workshops, artists in residence, retail and a heritage display celebrating the important history of our Onkaparinga Woollen Mill.” Bob Byrne is the author of Adelaide Remember When and posts memories of Adelaide every day on facebook.com/ adelaiderememberwhen
CREDIT: Bob Byrne
Word count: 1115
