THERE’S a palpable buzz among Adelaide’s start-up community. Where a few short years ago the conversation around fast-growth companies might have focused on small firms – a handful of people getting together to launch an idea – these days it’s just as likely to include global success stories, such as Tobi Pearce and Kayla Itsines’ Sweat and Antony Ceravolo’s Sine.
Both companies were sold for princely sums in the past couple of years – $400m in the case of Sweat – providing an inspiration to others looking to reach the coveted “unicorn” status, conveyed on a company valued at more than a billion dollars.
We’ve looked at some of the likely contenders over the next few years.
VALAI AFTER impressing some of the world’s largest banks with its sustainability valuation platform, local start-up ValAi is in talks with potential investors.
The platform, known as Greenhouse, is designed to encourage homeowners to invest in sustainability upgrades, such as smart meters, solar and batteries, by measuring and reporting the impact of sustainability performance on a property’s value.
It’s the brainchild of former Conservation Council SA general manager Allys Todd and property valuer Tom Reed.
PREPD AFTER a soft launch in the US last year, PREPD is looking for investors to help build its brand in the lucrative sports nutrition market.
The sports drink acts as a two-step hydration enhancer, consumed before and after exertion. It has been used by elite cricketers, AFL teams and Olympic hurdler Michelle Jenneke, who is its global ambassador. PREPD wants to raise $1m to support its US move, which chief executive Andrew Perry believes could be a game-changer.
AIRSPEEDER ELECTRIC flying cars, fighting it out in a grand prix series at sites around the globe, beamed to an audience potentially in the billions. It’s the stuff sci-fi movies are made of but it’s a reality and it’s being developed right here in Adelaide.
Airspeeder and Alauda Aeronautics have attracted heavyweight sponsors – and a bunch of investors – to back their vision. With cars being piloted at speeds greater than 150km/h on virtual race tracks, there’s plenty of excitement to be had, and huge potential upside financially.
LUMARY JOSEPH Mercorella and Matthew English established Lumary in 2017 after identifying a need for new software to manage the complexities of the NDIS. It has grown to 150 staff and processes more than $2.5bn in NDIS funding each year.
Now it has its eyes on the lucrative US market, where it has opened an office in Denver and is launching a new product for autism therapy providers. Last year Lumary raised $17m from investors, including Salesforce and the SA Venture Capital Fund.
FLEET SPACE TECHNOLOGIES ADELAIDE’S space industry is evolving rapidly, with Fleet Space Technologies at the forefront. The company, led by Flavia Tata Nardini (pictured below) recently raised $US26m from investors including Atlassian co-founder Mike Cannon-Brookes’ Grok and Blackbird Ventures, valuing Fleet at $US126m. Fleet has an office in Houston and has six satellites in space, with plans to build a constellation of about 140, providing Internet of Things connectivity to millions of Earth-based devices.
It also intends to build a satellite “hyper factory” in the planned Australian Space Park at Adelaide Airport.
BIOMEBANK THE importance of having a healthy microbiome – the community of microbes which exists on and in all of us – has been demonstrated in recent years, and BiomeBank is positioning itself to be a world leader in the field.
The biotechnology company has a first-generation drug product to treat two common gut diseases, Clostridioides difficile infection and Ulcerative Colitis. It is also working on a pipeline of live biotherapeutic products which have the potential to treat many chronic diseases.
FIVECAST IN a short space of time, Fivecast has grown from a small SA start-up to a company with an office in the US and customers around the world.
The digital intelligence company employs more than 70 experts in Adelaide and Washington DC. Its software uses artificial intelligence and machine learning to analyse masses of online data to identify threats to national security and organisations. In the past six months, and on the back of a major US national security contract, Fivecast has added more than 20 new staff.
COMPLEXICA LED by serial entrepreneur Matt Michalewicz, Complexica is aiming to list on the ASX after signing up global companies such as Pernod Ricard and Pfizer on the strength of its artificial intelligence capabilities. Its technology allows businesses to optimise elements such as manufacturing and pricing, personalise customer interactions and make forecasts about their performance.
Complexica signed up Flinders Ports as a customer, which then invested $5m back into Complexica, joining other investors such as listed company Microequities Asset Management, which have poured in $16m in investment collectively to date.
CARINA BIOTECH THE promising biotechnology company secured a big-name investor last year as it progresses a potentially revolutionary new cancer therapy.
Carina is developing a treatment known as chimeric antigen receptor T-cell (CAR-T) therapy. It involves the extraction of “T-cells” (key immune cells) from a patient’s body, modification of the cells in a laboratory, and then reinjection of the cells back into the body where they target and destroy cancer cells. Last year Carina secured $5.6m from investors to progress to a phase-one clinical trial. Mining magnate Andrew Forrest’s Minderoo Foundation was a major investor. The T-cell therapy market is predicted to reach $US20.3bn by 2028.
SILENTIUM DEFENCE THE Wingfield company is developing world-leading technology to revolutionise the way objects in space are monitored from the Earth.
Its passive-radar technology uses reflected radio energy already broadcast into the atmosphere from sources such as commercial radio stations, to detect and track objects. Because it doesn’t emit energy, it can “see without being seen”, making it suitable for the space and defence industries. Silentium recently launched its Oculus Observatory in the mid-Murray region, which can track satellites and space debris. The ambition is to build a global network.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 997
