New horizons beckon, divine new destinations are ready to be discovered. Whether you’re longing to go back to nature or go forth into foodie heaven and hardcore indulgence, here are 52 ways to celebrate that release from captivity.
Wilga Station1611 Mid Western Hwy, Evans Plains;0427 688 542; wilgastation.com.auTHE LOCATION The beauty of Evans Plains, equidistant from both Sydney and Canberra, is that it feels like the middle of nowhere, yet it’s only a few minutes’ drive south-west of Bathurst, Australia’s oldest inland settlement. THE PLACE As the former CEO of Mayfi eld Garden, an acclaimed horticultural attraction near Oberon, third-generation sheep farmer Hamish Keith knows a thing or two about tourism. Cue the 2020 opening on the 105-hectare family property of the Farmer’s Hut, a grass-roofed, off-grid cabin for two that overlooks a wildfl owerstudded meadow and a valley that disappears under morning mist. A three-sided picture window is a standout feature. It’s both day lounge and dining table, where you can graze on the complimentary antipasto welcome platter and bottle of regional wine, or enjoy a hot breakfast made from provisions left for you to cook up a storm. A group option – the fi vebedroom Shearers Hall – has just opened nearby. THE EXPERIENCE After zigzagging like sheep through fences, races and ramps to reach the front door, ditch the bags, grab your swimming costume and wander the Sheep Trail to reach a rockpool in the willow-framed creek. Pop into town for dinner (or barbecue your own), toast yourselves (and provided marshmallows) at the campfi re, raid the treasure chest of books and games, and switch off from the world. DON’T MISS It’s a 45-minute drive to Keith’s old day job, Mayfi eld Garden, a botanical estate so photogenic you can spend an entire day admiring its features. FROM $450 a night; two-night minimum stay. Katrina Lobley
Salty CabinsAddress provided upon booking;0477 025 366; saltycabins.comTHE LOCATION Drive 25 minutes north of Byron Bay to the farming town of Yelgun; there, on a forested hilltop road, you’ll find The Cabin. THE PLACE When Sydney builder Dave Wilkinson and his wife started dreaming of a city escape in 2017, they decided to migrate to Byron Bay and create their own. The following year, they leased a lush hilltop with 360-degree views over the forest to the sea and built The Camp on it, a canvas bell tent attached to a tiny home. Then, in July 2021, they added The Cabin on the same land. Wilkinson built The Cabin entirely by hand, making for some gorgeous detailing including curved decking, a timber roof and a bathtub cut into the deck. The building is run entirely on solar power. THE EXPERIENCE It’s all about reconnecting with nature, without compromising on convenience or style. Hours slip away soaking in the tub beneath the eucalypts, or sipping wine by the fire pit gazing out to the ocean, a 10-minute drive away. Inside it’s clean lines and a nature-inspired palette, with sandy-white rendered walls and terracotta linen sheets on the queen-size bed, and an elevated camp vibe thanks to the potbelly fireplace, the kitchenette’s camp stove, the rain shower and (surprisingly elegant) composting toilet in the generous bathroom. DON’T MISS Roco ramen and sake bar in Brunswick Heads, a pop-up, while award-winning Fleet takes a sabbatical until January 2022. FROM $249 a night; two-night minimum stay weekends. Nina Karnikowski
Crown Sydney1 Barangaroo Ave, Barangaroo;(02) 8871 7171; crownsydney.com.auTHE LOCATION You can’t miss it, which is entirely the point. Towering over the city like a gigantic, gleaming raised digit, the 275-metre-high Crown Sydney dominates the northern extremes of the $2 billion Barangaroo harbourside commercial and entertainment district. THE PLACE With 349 luxurious and giddily pricey rooms and villas (one for seemingly every scandal that’s beset its owners since its opening late last year), the twisting, cylindrically shaped landmark designed by august British architect Chris Wilkinson bills itself as the harbour city’s first authentic six-star hotel. Exaggerations aside, it's difficult to demur, since rarely in these parts are there hotels with such hangthe-budget attention to detail. THE EXPERIENCE Put aside, if you can, the unending, unflattering headlines surrounding it and savour what is the closest you’ll encounter Down Under to a buzzing, grand contemporary south-east Asian bolthole. Right from the dazzling white marbled (and at times Kardashian look-alike-laden) lobby, above which hangs a Czech-crafted chandelier, to the high-tech, lavishly furnished and decorated suites themselves, the 75-floor Crown Sydney impresses and transports. DON’T MISS Where to start? Aside from the dizzying array of flashy, though well-reviewed, restaurants, pack your chicest togs for Crown’s true showstopper. We refer to the dramatic, Singapore-style infinity swimming pool, replete with resort-style private cabanas, day beds and poolside dining, overlooking Darling Harbour. FROM $999 a night. Anthony Dennis
Hillcrest Merimbula97 Merimbula Dr, Merimbula;0412 966 204;hillcrestmerimbula.comTHE LOCATION The seaside town of Merimbula is a tiny jewel on the Sapphire Coast, surrounded by rugged coastlines and lush inland rainforests. It’s a six-hour drive from Sydney, seven from Melbourne and three from Canberra. THE PLACE Opened in 1974, this motel has all the wood cabinetry, exposed brickwork and flat roofing you’d expect from the era, but the new owner, Caspar Tresidder, with the help of Sydney’s Atelier Chardon Architecture, has given it a contemporary update. The new Exhale suites feature art by Melbourne abstract painter Adela Kusur above pouredconcrete banquettes with textured throws and native floral arrangements. Original rooms are also still available, with new beds and bathrooms featuring Kevin Murphy products. Private balconies give uninterrupted ocean views. THE EXPERIENCE Enjoy sunrise from your balcony with complimentary coffee and freshly baked croissants from Wild Rye’s Baking Co in nearby Pambula. Set amid two hectares of gardens with its own box-seat view, the original swimming pool area has had an upgrade with the addition of an adjacent fire pit to take you from lazy days to marshmallowfuelled evenings. Be sure to pack your tennis whites, as the motel’s original clay court has been restored to its former glory. DON’T MISS Merimbula Gourmet Oysters, a family-owned oyster farm serving up great seafood tasting plates. FROM $130 a night. Georgina Saf
Eltham Hotel441 Eltham Rd, Eltham;(02) 6629 1217; elthampub.com.auTHE LOCATION A one-pub town dozing in the hinterland halfway between Byron and Lismore, Eltham was a buzzing railway village in the early 1900s, and its watering hole is still a popular meeting place for Northern Rivers locals. THE PLACE Young publicans Luke Sullivan, Matt Rabbidge and Julia Ashwood bought the keys to this 120-year-old boozer in 2019, ripped out the pokies and restored the hotel into a destination for travellers to unwind. Its lovingly decorated rooms are each inspired by a different woman who used to live in the region. Ashwood’s keen eye for vintage treasures breathes life into “the girls”, such as Rhonda, Patsy and Margaret. THE EXPERIENCE Whadayahavin? Natural cabernet or cold beer? Schnitzel or steak? Chips or pickled fennel and radicchio salad? The kitchen mixes counter-meal classics with modern panache, while friendly staff make it easy to settle in with a post-pudding nightcap. Bric-a-brac that wouldn’t be out of place in a Wes Anderson film frames the bar and – because this is still very much a pub – guests should expect the occasional sound bleed from touring country bands in the beer garden. Luxe touches including Pony Rider throw cushions and In Bed linen create elegant, spacious rooms in which to relax regardless. DON’T MISS Dinner at Ciao, Mate!, the Eltham team’s swish new pizza and negroni parlour 20 minutes’ drive west in Bangalow. FROM $200 a night. Callan Boys
The GreenhouseRetreat Pearl Beach11 Diamond Rd, Pearl Beach;0432 066 647;thegreenhouseretreat.comTHE LOCATION Pearl Beach is so close to Sydney’s northern beaches, you can see it. By road, however, it’s 90 minutes’ drive north on the M1, or a scenic ferry ride from Palm Beach will deliver you to the neighbouring village of Patonga in half an hour. THE PLACE This four-bedroom classic fibro sleeps six in a textbook contemporary beachshack-chic redo. New owner Carla Luce has added her own style, making it the beachy dream, with a Besser block-backed magnesium swimming pool, wood burner, pretty native garden and green lawn, fire pit and white-onwhite Instagram readiness. Hen's weekend planners, take note. THE EXPERIENCE Linen lounges and breezy drapes, essential oils, organic teas and eco candles make a restful base for exploring the Central Coast’s most fashionable enclave. Rinse off under the alfresco shower after a dip in the ocean, take the SUP boards out for a paddle, or kick back with a gin and tonic – with the girls or the gang – on the pool deck. DON’T MISS Tackle the threekilometre Pearl Beach-to-Patonga trek through Brisbane Water National Park, followed by lunch at the lauded Pearls on the Beach. FROM From $850 a night; minimum two-night stay, five across Christmas and January. Sheriden Rhodes
Ooralba Estate47 Cavan Rd, Kangaroo Valley;0429 100 098; ooralba.comTHE LOCATION The estate is set on 81 lofty hectares overlooking the Kangaroo Valley and fringed by Morton National Park, 160 kilometres south of Sydney. THE PLACE The price is steep but this is the ultimate in glam family or group getaway pad, sleeping 14. Valley views and big skies are captured by floor-to-ceiling windows and amplified by vaulted ceilings. There’s an entertainers’ lounge, chef’s kitchen, dining room and library flanked by two wings comprising seven guestrooms all up. The larger wing includes a master suite with en suite endowed with a sauna, spa and twin bathtubs (when one isn’t enough). You’ve got a private chef, concierge, housekeeping, full breakfast and dinner and select beverages. Why not chopper the clan in? There’s an on-site helipad. THE EXPERIENCE Guests have exclusive run of the estate’s bushwalking trails, dreamy topiary maze and gardens designed by Hugh Main of Spirit Level Designs. Then there’s the tennis court, cabana and soon, a heated lap pool (due for completion by January 2022). There’s even a pizza oven in the chef’s garden. Take an outdoor yoga class; drink in the view from various decks, or warm yourself by the indoor fireplace during daily canapé-andcocktails hour. DON’T MISS Get your concierge to organise a trip to Morton National Park’s sacred Indigenous sites. FROM $12,500 a night for up to eight guests and $1000 a night for each additional guest; two-night minimum stay. Catherine Marshall
Nimbo Fork330 Nimbo Road, Killimicat;(02) 6944 9099; nimbofork.com.auTHE LOCATION It’s not exactly on the fabled “track winding back”, in the dinky-di Road to Gundagai folk song. But you will find the deluxe Nimbo Fork at the end of an idyllic back road of the Snowy Mountains foothills between Gundagai and Tumut, about five hours from both Sydney and Melbourne. THE PLACE Nimbo Fork, an erstwhile exclusive fishing lodge now open to all, is the real tuckerbox – no dog in sight – in this picturesque pocket of a Riverina region starved of decent dining. Three Blue Ducks, the slick restaurant collective renowned for its simple, but not simplistic, food credo, and with outposts stretching from Brisbane to Melbourne, is Nimbo’s newest addition. THE EXPERIENCE Stay in either the attractive main lodge building, home to Three Blue Ducks’ dining room complete with fine rural views, leading off a suitably cosy lounge, or in one of a row of six cute, comfortable and identical cottages neatly arranged along the hill above the Tumut River and Nimbo Creek. Along with securing the essential Three Blue Ducks reservation, go for a horse or bike ride, or head off on a bushwalk. Or simply prop yourself up with a pinot on your cottage verandah overlooking the delightful watercourses. DON’T MISS Consider popping into a pair of waders for fly-fishing with a professional local guide. FROM $220 a night for a lodge suite; $425 for a stand-alone cottage. Anthony Dennis
Berrima Vault House11 Old Hume Hwy, Berrima;(02) 4877 1592;berrimavaulthouse.comTHE LOCATION A former stagecoach stop 130 kilometres south of Sydney, Berrima is renowned for its 19th-century architecture, museums, cafes and historic jail. THE PLACE Hand-built by convicts in 1844, Taylor’s Crown Inn was a rest stop with prison holding cells below. Now it’s a private members’ club catering for wellheeled Southern Highlands locals, and two of the cells are now atmospheric private dining rooms, popular for poker nights. A cafe, bar, restaurant and beer garden are open to the public. So, too, is the elegant Courthope Residence, a three-bedroom suite occupying the entire top floor, with access to all club facilities for guests. THE EXPERIENCE Developer Simon Philby and designer wife Carlie, responsible for the bold colours and exquisite furnishings, have combined the Georgian-era bones of sandstone and wrought iron with the softer fabric of contemporary sensibilities. The walls are adorned with everchanging exhibitions of local and global artwork chosen by curator Ali Hillman. Chef Tommy Prosser (formerly of Alain Roux’s Michelinstarred Waterford Inn in the UK) uses locally sourced produce and ingredients to twist mainly English classics – fish and chips, afternoon tea, Eton mess – into new taste sensations. Warning: the creaking floorboards of the Residence add credence to the legend that a ghost stalks. DON’T MISS In WWI, Berrima Gaol became an internment camp for Germans, who were allowed to roam during the day. Visit the local museum to see what they contributed to the town. FROM $600 a night; two-night minimum stay weekends. Steve Meacham
Tinonee VineyardEstate1273 Milbrodale Road, Broke;0488 127 321;tinoneevineyardestate.com.auTHE LOCATION Find this luxury stay at the end of a long gravel drive in Broke, a tranquil, less-visited hamlet in the Hunter Valley wine region, 25 kilometres west of the main tourist hub, Pokolbin. THE PLACE Tinonee is a 20-hectare working vineyard and cellar door offering The Residence, a sprawling six-bedroom, three-bathroom, red-brick farmhouse with a wraparound verandah, and The Cottage, a two-bedroom, two-bathroom timber villa that’s been converted from an old milking shed. THE EXPERIENCE With its spacious entertaining areas, vaulted ceilings and manicured lawns, The Residence is perfect for groups of friends or extended families. Kids can frolic in the outdoor pool or play a game of garden chess. The Cottage is a cosier, more intimate proposition, with a gas log fire and a freestanding period bathtub. Both properties are decorated in a relaxed, French-provincial style, with tiled floors, oversized sofas and decorative throws, and each features a well-equipped kitchen. Another aspect they share: sweeping vineyard views. Look out for kangaroos at dawn and dusk. Stays include a complimentary cheese platter and tasting of the property’s estate-grown wines, which range from a smooth, easy-drinking fiano to the big, bold Governor shiraz. DON’T MISS A private inresidence dinner by Boyd & Co, a new catering operation run by local husband-and-wife team Thomas and Eliza Boyd, who met while working at London’s two-Michelinstarred restaurant, The Ledbury. FROM $400 a night for The Cottage, $2500 a night for The Residence; two-night minimum stay. Rob McFarland
Hideout Cabins,Rosthwaite Farm268 Yarrawa Rd, Moss Vale;0410 794 946; hideoutcabins.com.auTHE LOCATION With its manicured estates, character-fi lled villages and gourmet trail, all within two hours of Sydney, the Southern Highlands region offers a bucolic escape reminiscent of the English countryside. THE PLACE The Hideout Cabins are two cute-as-a-button, architect-designed tiny houses with minimalist interiors maximising rural views of farmland through picture windows. Hideout 1.0 features a deck that juts over the dam and has a Scandinavian-style cosiness, with fl uffy cushions and a pink-tiled bathroom with brushed-gold tapware and wooden walls. Hideout 2.0 features a more masculine look with whitewashed birch plywood panelling and black fi xtures. THE EXPERIENCE This is not your typical "Old MacDonald" farm stay; rather than waking to the cluck of chickens, it’s the clip-clop of horses’ hooves that echoes across the 48-hectare property as some of Australia’s most promising showjumpers prepare for action. Rosthwaite Farm is home to James Arkins and his steed, Eurostar, a dynamic duo with their sights set on the 2024 Paris Olympic Games. Guests can watch Arkins training in the arena, or coaching up-and-coming equestrians at the on-site riding school. End the day toasting marshmallows over a fi re pit before retiring to a cloud-like bed (dressed with In the Sac fl ax linen), strategically positioned to capture a misty sunrise. DON’T MISS See the farm from the saddle on a leisurely trail ride, or stretch your own legs to explore paddocks fi lled with some of Australia’s most valuable livestock. FROM $285 a night. Julie Miller
Little National Hotel26 Clarence St, Sydney;(02) 9135 0222;littlenationalhotel.com.auTHE LOCATION This cool, spatially effi cient central Sydney workand-play pad is directly on top of Wynyard Station, and just a fourminute walk to Barangaroo. THE PLACE The dark, narrow, street-level entrance to Little National seems to be almost hiding, but what lies beyond – or rather, sits above – the groundfl oor concierge is a sleek 10-fl oor, 230-room, high-amenity hotel. A standard room fl oor plan is compact but airy, with clean whitetile lines and blond timber fi ttings, and the super-king bed – nudged directly up against a fl oor-toceiling window – makes you feel like you’re sleeping among the skyscrapers. THE EXPERIENCE The Little National is tech-forward yet user-friendly, from self check-in at reception (with helper nearby, as needed) to the in-room iPad controlling everything from lights and blinds to temperature and entertainment. Feeling sluggish? Visit the 150-square-metre state-of-the-art gym. Behind on work? Find a bentwood chair at a communal desk in the peaceful penthouse library where unlimited WiFi, reading lamps and a wireless colour printer make satellite productivity easy. DON’T MISS The library shares the 11th fl oor with the open terrace rooftop bar. Fetch a cocktail and park yourself on a couch by the glam open fi replace, and you’ll feel like you’ve arrived. FROM $229 a night. Konrad Marshall
The Sunseeker100 Bangalow Rd, Byron Bay;(02) 6685 8900; thesunseeker.com.auTHE LOCATION Stay here and you’re just far enough from the centre of town to avoid the crowds, yet close enough to rent one of the hotel’s bikes and take it for a spin to cafes and Tallow Beach. THE PLACE Sunseeker’s exposedbrick exterior makes it look like the kind of motor inn with your choice of Kellogg’s at breakfast. There’s not a cornfl ake box to be found across 12 rooms and six kid-friendly bungalows, however – at least, not since Jess and Dave Frid relaunched the rundown 1980s motel in January. The couple’s redesign channels midcentury Californian beach vibes by way of fl agstone fl oors, Spanish renders and no shortage of burnt orange. Also note what might be Australia’s fi rst poolside “brutalist tiki bar”, exclusively for guests. THE EXPERIENCE Each of the breezy rooms features a private patio or balcony with views to the original pebblecrete pool, engineered for margaritas and burying your nose in a paperback. A library is stacked with books on skating, art and design, and if you’re in a Sunseeker Room, there’s a lot to be said for borrowing one to read on the ochre corduroy daybed and cracking open a natural wine from the minibar. Meanwhile, the bungalows are equipped with a hammock, Smeg fridge and Weber for nightly barbecues – the nearby Bay Grocer cafe will deliver a custom steak-and-snag pack. Brilliant. DON’T MISS Lunch at Beach Byron Bay, 30 minutes’ walk away, open daily for ocean views, market fi sh, chips and chardonnay. FROM $280 a night. Callan Boys
Powerhouse HotelTamworth By Rydges248 Armidale Rd, East Tamworth;(02) 6766 7000; rydges.comTHE LOCATION Power to the people has played a big part in Tamworth’s history. In 1888, the then township of 3000 became, believe it or not, the fi rst place in Australia to receive electric street lighting. Now, the latest power play, of sorts, is the reborn Powerhouse Hotel in this burgeoning, increasingly switched-on regional city, fi ve hours’ drive north of Sydney, today home to 65,000 people. THE PLACE Five minutes by car from Peel Street, Tamworth’s main drag and a focal point of its annual, nearly 50-year-old country music festival, the Powerhouse (named, you guessed it, after an electricity station that once occupied its site) earlier this year completed a $12 million refurbishment, elevating it to near enough fi ve-star standard. Sydney’s prolifi c hotel and hospitality creator, Paul Kelly Design, was engaged to revamp every facet of a property that was more motel than hotel, including its now snazzy 81 rooms and apartments. THE EXPERIENCE The Powerhouse’s spacious rooms are decked out in shades of blue, green and grey, and feature bigcity hotel accoutrements like plush pillow-top king beds with leather bedheads, smart TVs, 24-hour room service and, in some suites, private outdoor terraces. DON’T MISS For an easy excursion from town, reserve a table for lunch at the Glasshouse restaurant, an award-winning architectural landmark overlooking the boundless Liverpool Plains agricultural lands. FROM $209 a night. Anthony Dennis
Mitchelton AirstreamHotel470 Mitchellstown Rd, Nagambie;(03) 5736 2222; mitchelton.com.auTHE LOCATION Mitchelton, an idyllic estate of vineyards and handsome architecture on the banks of the Goulburn River, is home to Mitchelton Wines and is the easiest of drives, just 90 minutes north of Melbourne. THE PLACE Five Airstream campers, polished “silver bullets”, comprise an adults-only glamping set-up with all the attributes of a boutique hotel, thanks to its on-site sister property, Mitchelton Hotel. Each has its own permanent site overlooking vines or bush, with a private deck and retractable awning. Grazing kangaroos may keep you company from a respectful distance as you dine alfresco from the included breakfast hamper and mini-bar. The camper’s retro style belies the modern comforts inside of leather banquette, bed with fine linen and compact bathroom. THE EXPERIENCE Explore the 100-plus hectares of the Mitchelton estate by bike. Drop by the cellar door, Indigenous art gallery or the award-winning Hecker Guthrie-designed boutique hotel with day spa and pool. Stay on the property and enjoy breakfast, lunch or dinner at Muse, with its menu of rustic dishes offering fresh local produce such as woodfired Murray cod and triple-cooked potatoes. DON’T MISS Panoramic views from the top of the 55-metre tower that was part of renowned architect Robin Boyd’s property masterplan and completed by the equally lauded Ted Ashton following Boyd’s death. FROM $300 a night, two-night minimum stay. Jane Reddy
Glamping tents,Peninsula Hot Springs140 Springs Ln, Fingal;(03) 5950 8777;peninsulahotsprings.comTHE LOCATION While soaking in Japan’s thermal pools in the ’90s, hot springs co-founder Charles Davidson figured the ritual would appeal to Australians at home. Today that vision is a sprawling 16-hectare bathing mecca on the Mornington Peninsula which, just 90 minutes from Melbourne, is a crowd favourite. THE PLACE From the exclusive 10-tent space, glampers connect by private entry to the grounds that include a reserved pool for night bathing. Khaki canvas walls are the only things resembling camping in your tent, which is firmly in the realm of glamping, with its thermally heated concrete floor overlaid with high-pile rug, brass rain shower and king bed made up with hotel linen. THE EXPERIENCE Among wetlands featuring native animals and plantings, find your optimal bathing temperature in the 50-plus mineral-rich pools. Steam up in the Turkish hammam or take a “reflexology walk” in water on a path of specially inlaid stones. It’s a white-bathrobe dress code at the Spa Dreaming Centre for plates of house-made dhal, free-range chicken and a local wine list that features Red Hill’s Foxeys Hangout and Montalto. Finish a day in the great outdoors with room service and sleep surrounded by frog-song (earplugs are provided). Breakfast is included in this adults-only oasis. DON’T MISS The guided Fire and Ice experience includes a sit in a sauna followed by an exhilarating plunge into a pool with a temperature of 4C. FROM $650 a night. Jane Reddy
The Stables @ Heartof Gold260 Mandurang Rd, Mandurang;0411 046 088;heartofgoldvineyard.comTHE LOCATION This small-scale vineyard is just 10 minutes’ drive from Bendigo, and a 90-minute drive north of Melbourne. THE PLACE The grapes and gardens are new, but the stables date from the 1860s and have been transformed into a couple’s retreat with a large open fireplace, exposed timber beams, stone walls and a sun-soaked garden terrace above a creek. In summer, you’re welcome to take a dip in the owner’s pool. Call ahead and you can even bring your pet. THE EXPERIENCE Bendigo might be famous for its gold-rush history, but the city and region is a UNESCO City of Gastronomy. Spend a day exploring the vineyards around Bendigo and Heathcote and cideries of nearby Harcourt. The kitchen has the basics (breakfast provisions are included), but it isn’t really geared up for you to cook a culinary extravaganza, so plan on a big lunch – try Ms Batterhams, Masons or the Goldmines Hotel in Bendigo. On weekends, there are tastings and live music at the adjacent cellar door, or take a bottle down to the dam for a sundowner on the jetty. When the temperature drops, warm up around the fire pit or retreat inside to the fireside sofa. DON’T MISS Take a drive up to the top of Mount Alexander for expansive views. FROM $350 a night; two-night minimum stay. Lee Atkinson
The Glut Farm43 The Glut Rd, Raglan;0437 674 083; theglutfarm.comTHE LOCATION Luxury awaits on a Dorper sheep farm on the edge of Mount Cole State Forest in the Pyrenees food and wine region, about a two-hour drive north-west of Melbourne. THE PLACE A barn-style living space features comfy couches, cathedral ceilings festooned with pendant lights and a freestanding glass fireplace. A wall of windows leads out to a vine-covered terrace overlooking a vineyard and duck-filled dam, with views beyond Mount Lonarch. This contemporary farmhouse redefines the concept of a farm stay in a decidedly luxe way. There’s room for seven in three bedrooms (one with en suite), and the shared bathroom has a lavishly deep bath. It’s also flanked by a spectacular fruit and vegetable garden. THE EXPERIENCE The wellequipped kitchen is the heart of the house and is stocked with staples and those spices that you invariably forget to bring on a weekend away. And if you’re running short of supplies, you’re welcome to forage in the garden or collect a few eggs from beneath the chooks, though there are plenty in the included breakfast hamper, along with home-made bread and jam. Stoke up the woodfired pizza oven and settle in for a long lunch at one of the large tables, indoors or out. Sleep it off on one of the rocking chairs on the sundrenched deck. If it’s hot, cool off on the jetty; if it’s not, pull up a chair beside the outdoor fire pit with a glass of local red. DON’T MISS The walking track to Raglan Falls in Mount Cole State Forest is just beyond the back fence. FROM $500 a night; two-night minimum stay. Lee Atkinson
Next Hotel Melbourne103 Little Collins St, Melbourne;(03) 9118 3333;nexthotelmelbourne.comTHE LOCATION Enveloped in Melbourne’s new 80 Collins precinct, the 255-room hotel is at the Paris end of the eponymous strip. The entrance, however, is via an unassuming glass foyer on Little Collins. Look for Ingresso, Next’s slim-line coffee and Campari bar out front. THE PLACE Checking in at the lobby on the third floor of this 24-storey hotel, the feel is clubby and a little secretive. But the streetscape through the lobby lounge’s soaring windows sets you right in the city’s beating heart. In the restrained, flounce-free guest rooms, it’s all names, names, names: local Hunter Lab amenities, Dyson hairdryers and Bose sound systems. THE EXPERIENCE Consider this your Melbourne CBD pied-àterre, the place to use when you’ve scored that elusive restaurant booking, or have a night of laneway bar-hopping planned. But Next is no mere flophouse: set aside time to swirl the hotel’s own barrel-aged whisky at the bar at the end of the night, and don’t skip breakfast. DON’T MISS Sicily meets Hong Kong via chefs Daniel Natoli and Adrian Li in the hotel’s main restaurant, La Madonna. Essential eating: the stuffed ox-heart tomato compressed in white soy. Essential drinking: a negroni matured in a clay pot amphora for eight weeks. FROM $280 a night. Belinda Jackson
Jetty Road Retreat230 Nungurner Jetty Rd,Nungurner; (03) 5156 3224;jettyroadretreat.com.auTHE LOCATION East Gippsland’s upmarket village of Metung, with its bobbing boats and popular waterfront pub, may be a mere 10 minutes’ drive away, but it’s also a world away from this nature lover’s nirvana at Nungurner, around three hours, 45 minutes’ drive from Melbourne. THE PLACE At the end of a narrow, bush-enshrouded road, Nungurner’s jetty juts into the calm Gippsland Lakes Reserve, beyond which lies Ninety Mile Beach, the sandy stretch that levees the mighty Bass Strait. Just above it is Jetty Road Retreat, a set of four holiday bungalows well positioned for privacy and lake views. With unfussy, stylish furnishings, three cabins sleep up to five, and one sleeps six. Kitchens are fully equipped and there is split-system air-conditioning. But the real selling points are the private decks and designated patches of rustic grounds, some with fire pits. THE EXPERIENCE You’re not off-grid – there’s good TV and WiFi. But cottagecore enthusiasts can revel in the simple things, like the myriad native birds that descend, thanks to the seed provided for your feeding pleasure. Read or star-gaze from a canvas deckchair overlooking the lake as Bass Strait rumbles in the distance. Push out a canoe. Jetty-jump, swim, fish or walk the lakeside trail. Above all, just breathe in the serenity. DON’T MISS Enjoy a pub meal with a view at the Metung Hotel. FROM $250 a night; minimum two-night stay; three- or sevennight minimums on peak dates. Julietta Jameson
BullerRoo at A Viewto a Hill177 Melba Rd, Barwite;0400 872 480; aviewtoahill.com.auTHE LOCATION Find BullerRoo on a bucolic pygmy goat farm at the foot of Victoria’s high country. In the Mansfield Shire, it’s a 15-minute drive from town and just under an hour from Mount Buller. THE PLACE In this two-bedroom apartment attached to the family home of Vickie and Ed van der Hoeven, the magic is in the details, handcrafted mostly by tiler-by-trade, Ed, from an amazing interior granite stone wall to tropical plants under skylights in the hyggestyle bathroom. Open the front door from your private carport, take off your shoes, head up the iron staircase to a landing from which the bathroom, second bedroom (that can sleep three) and main living space (beyond which you’ll find the main bedroom) are accessed through industrial sliding doors. Step into the living area and behold: huge picture windows stunningly capture the “view to a hill” after which the overall property is named. Move back onto the landing, take the next set of stairs, push open the skylight hatch and you’re on the barbecue deck and rooftop terrace: those views are now a 360-degree affair. THE EXPERIENCE A roaring fire, fabulous lighting, generous dining table, sofa adorned with reindeer pelts, big television and top-class kitchen make getting cosy all too easy. But the outdoors beckons: roam the property, swim in the river and commune with the sweet little pygmy goats, which the van der Hoevens breed as pets. DON’T MISS Head into Mansfield and enjoy lunch or dinner at the local Delatite Hotel, an authentic country pub. FROM $550 a night. Julietta Jameson
Lyon House15 Lyons St N; Ballarat Central;0404 633 203;lascellesballarat.com.auTHE LOCATION The gold-rush city of Ballarat, a 90-minute drive north-west of Melbourne, is full of architectural gems, including Lyon House, just two blocks from the city centre. THE PLACE Originally built in the 1880s, the house is now a beguiling mix of Victorian features, arts-and-crafts embellishments and contemporary pizzazz. High ceilings, three huge bedrooms that sleep a total of seven, three bathrooms, two sitting rooms, library, oversized kitchen with butler’s pantry and a fireside lounge make this two-storey terrace feel much bigger than it looks from the street. This lightflooded home’s original dark-wood panelling is complemented with lots of black, smoky greys and charcoal. Add in striking feature lighting, textured stucco walls and a contemporary art collection and the result is a moody opulence. THE EXPERIENCE Ballarat’s best restaurants are only a few minutes’ walk away, but should you wish to get Masterchef-ish, the extremely well-equipped kitchen was built for entertaining and has a six-metrelong dining table. Browse the art books in the library and curl up in one of the many sitting areas, or binge your favourite streaming series on the big-screen TV. The former stables’ pool house, with a kitchenette, salvaged stained-glass windows and heated plunge pool, makes for a magical night-time dip beneath the coloured reflections. DON’T MISS Start your morning off right with a stroll around Lake Wendouree. A lap will take about an hour. FROM $600 a night; two-night minimum stay. Lee Atkinson
W Melbourne408 Flinders Ln, Melbourne;(03) 9113 8800; marriott.com.auTHE LOCATION Trams. Coffee. Laneways. Linguine. And lurking inconspicuously within all that, the W. You’d think hiding a 294-room hotel in the centre of Melbourne would be a big ask, but the W has done it. THE PLACE This masterfully put-together property has a real swagger about it, with a design narrative based on Melbourne’s laneway culture: plenty of contemporary art here and there, and mood lighting. There are 10 different room types, from a Cosy King Room to the Wow Suites. (There is also a 175-square-metre Extreme Wow Suite.) THE EXPERIENCE In the room, you might find a stand-alone, neon-topped bar laid out with bottles of artisanal gin and a cocktail set, all ready to go, like walking into a James Bond film, circa 1963. One of the best features about this place is the ambient music, with carefully curated playlists that change according to your location. There’s also a “wet deck”, an indoor pool area on the 14th floor, overlooking Flinders and Collins streets, where you can recline in big, generously cushioned, clam-shaped lounges. The signature restaurant, Lollo, is headed up by chef Adam D’Sylva, of the award-winning restaurants Coda and Tonka (he’s culinary director across the hotel). DON’T MISS Curious, the cocoon-shaped cocktail bar. It’s hidden away underground, below the hotel. FROM $359 a night. Tim Elliott
Karbeethong Lodge12 Schnapper Point Dr, Mallacoota;(03) 5158 0411;karbeethonglodge.com.auTHE LOCATION Wildernessringed Mallacoota, on the East Gippsland coast, made global news as it burned during the bushfires of 2019-20. But the lovely little fishing and holiday town has settled back into serenity. THE PLACE Purpose-built in the 1920s as a seaside guesthouse, Karbeethong Lodge was a survivor of the fires. Current custodians Graeme and Jenny Mitchell are on a quest to maintain the creative atmosphere that historically lured the likes of Banjo Paterson. It’s an Edwardian collection of white timber-walled accommodation wings branching off a common area of lounge, communal dining and large kitchen, where guests can cook (or open their BYO local wine and cheeses) and from where the owners prepare the included continental breakfast. Sleeping 24, it can be booked as one. THE EXPERIENCE There’s something about the thoughtfully curated vintage furnishings and curios, the grass-green corrugated roof, the wide verandah and the lush lawn sloping down to a painterly view of Mallacoota Inlet that transports you to a gentler time. There’s no TV, though there’s good internet. Rooms are cute and comfortable – but they’re not the point. Find a spot with a view and open a bottle of East Gippy’s own Lightfoot & Sons pinot noir, offer a glass to a fellow traveller and toast your good fortune. DON’T MISS Explore picturesque waterways with Mallacoota Cruises aboard the 1910-built former ferry, the MV Loch-Ard. FROM $150 a night. Julietta Jameson
Hilton MelbourneLittle Queen Street18 Little Queen St; (03) 9116 8888;hilton.comTHE LOCATION Five years after vacating the Victorian capital, Hilton’s eponymous flagship brand is back in a rather unexpected manner with this stunning 244-room, central CBD hotel, carefully blending the best of old and new Melbourne on the corner of Bourke and Little Queen streets. THE PLACE On the site of Victoria’s first synagogue, the Bates Smart-designed, un-Hilton-like Hilton, which opened earlier this year, operates inside both the charming early 1930s Romanesque-style Equity Chambers building and a brand new (and sympathetic) 16-storey tower. The contrasting two buildings are linked by a striking, lower-rise enclosed atrium dining and lounge space. THE EXPERIENCE Absorb the stunning Manhattan-like heritage surrounds at Luci, the top-notch, modern Italo-Oz inhouse restaurant in the atrium as well as the Douglas Club, a cosy 1930s art deco-style cocktail bar, facing Bourke Street and its tintinnabulating trams. Upstairs, in the heritage wing proper, some of the more expensive suites, reached by an adorable antique elevator, are clad in the original Queensland maple timber panelling from the building’s legal-eagle glory days. DON’T MISS In a sharp, contemporary foil to the Equity Chambers, check out the huge, specially commissioned street-art style mural on the Little Queen laneway. The artwork, directly opposite the discreet reception, is reflected in a series of external swivelled bronze sculptural panels. FROM $285 a night. Anthony Dennis
Oak & Anchor Hotel9 Bank St, Port Fairy;(03) 4508 4206;oakandanchorhotel.comTHE LOCATION Port Fairy is a tiny Irish outpost on the south-western coast, dotted with whalers’ cottages and famous for its folk festival. THE PLACE This white-washed, bluestone pub dates back to 1857, when the town was called Belfast and Cobb & Co coaches were hitched out the front. In 2018, locals Blair and Sally Robertson bought it and spent two years transforming it into six light, unfussy suites sitting atop a cafe, bar and restaurant space that can accommodate weddings and other events. Just before opening, the couple asked Ally Richardson, who ran Driftwood cafe across the road, to be their business partner. So Richardson picked up Driftwood and moved it to the O&A. Incidentally, Richardson’s coffee is the best in town and the Sri Lankan curries on the dinner menu are essential. THE EXPERIENCE Each suite is different but all feature exposed bluestone, freestanding bathtubs, youthful current decor touches and views over either the stripedumbrella-lined back lawn, or Norfolk pine-lined Bank Street. The largest is the bridal suite, which has a west-facing balcony. When the winds are whipping off the Southern Ocean – which they frequently are – head to the open fires in the bar and order a Noodledoof gin made in the nearby town of Koroit. DON’T MISS A walk to the lighthouse on Green Island, where you’ll spot the nests of about 40,000 shearwaters. FROM $300 a night. Ardyn Bernoth
Battista3 Dawson St, Ballarat Central;0408 177 700;battistaballarat.com.auTHE LOCATION Ballarat is a 117-kilometre drive from Melbourne, or you can catch the train from Southern Cross Station to Battista, which places you right in the heart of the city centre, and close to cafes and boutiques. THE PLACE With incarnations as a nightclub, then derelict pigeon haunt, the 1867-built Baptist church, with a grand temple facade and neoclassical fluted columns, has had a glorious and sensitive revival. Owner Michael Whitehead spent three years creating his contemporary glass-framed home, plus a selfcontained one-bedroom apartment stay with an open living, dining and kitchen area. THE EXPERIENCE The past and present sing beautifully here without compromising either. Savour divine design while gazing at the lofty coffered ceiling, ornate friezes, handcrafted arched windows and the old choir-stall facade. Peruse art and travel books in the upstairs reading nook that adjoins the glass-walled bedroom, then sink into the freestanding tub in the black-tiled bathroom. Artwork by Brit Damien Hirst, Spanish surrealist Joan Miró and pieces from the Ballarat International Foto Biennale star in this splendid rebirth. A welcome hamper is stocked with all the good things in life: local cheese, bread, olives and wine. DON’T MISS Stays include a breakfast voucher to use at L’Espresso Ballarat. It’s just around the corner on Sturt Street, and is known for fabulous muffins as well as doing double time as a CD store. FROM $400 a night. Sue Wallace
The Mysa Motel1100 Gold Coast Hwy, Palm Beach;0407 467 976; themysamotel.comTHE LOCATION You’ll find it just off the highway in the southern Gold Coast suburb of Palm Beach, seven minutes’ drive north of Gold Coast Airport. Surfers Paradise is 30 minutes north. THE PLACE Local 30-somethings Jason and Eliza Raine have transformed a run-down motel into somewhere you might’ve stayed at in Palm Springs in the 1950s. Each room (there’s seven) has a unique layout, with walls painted lavender, peach, carnation pink and mint. The low ceilings have been vaulted, private courtyards added, and the crowning glory is a kidney-shaped magnesium pool encircled by pink sun loungers. THE EXPERIENCE The antithesis of the clichéd Gold Coast holiday, staying here takes you back to a time before skyscrapers. It might look like you’re sleeping in another era, but the amenities are very 2021 (silent fridges, fancy welcome snacks, filtered-water taps, enormous showers). You’ll love being 100 metres from one of the quietest stretches of beach on the coast, and smack-bang in the suburb that epitomises the new Gold Coast. DON’T MISS Palm Beach is fast becoming the southern Gold Coast’s trendiest bar and restaurant precinct. Eat the best Italian on the coast at Balboa, then catch live music in the whisky bar, Scottish Prince, across the road. FROM $220 a night. Craig Tansley
Hotel X458 Brunswick St, Fortitude Valley;(07) 3519 1000; hotelx.com.auTHE LOCATION Look for the white geometric facade (at night, it lights up like a Christmas tree), a new landmark in inner Brisbane’s most fashionable suburb, Fortitude Valley. THE PLACE Brisbane’s newest five-star hotel and the world’s first to carry the International Hotel Group’s new brand, Hotel X manages to exude the fashionista vibe you’d expect of the Valley, with custom furnishings, artwork by Brisbane-based photographer Justin Nicholas, and Karl Lagerfeld bathroom amenities. Larger suites literally have the X-factor, in balconies or terraces overlooking the city, Story Bridge and the Brisbane River. Even entry-level rooms have a hell of a view of the concrete jungle below. THE EXPERIENCE Your room’s just the beginning. There’s the French bistro and bar in the lobby, Bisou Bisou, with its Michelintrained head chef. Then there’s the rooftop pool, restaurant and bar, Iris – no better sunset location in the city. When you’re ready to leave, the trendy boutiques of the James Street precinct are 300 metres away, while the nightlife of the Howard Smith Wharves is 500 metres in the opposite direction. DON’T MISS If you’re up and about, walk further down Brunswick Street to New Farm Park in time for the Saturday morning market beside the Brisbane River. FROM $249 a night. Craig Tansley
Hazelwood Estate422 Binna Burra Rd, Beechmont,(07) 6502 9710;hazelwoodestate.com.auTHE LOCATION In a valley of green pastures, fringed by forest in the Gold Coast hinterland, Hazelwood Estate is an hour’s drive from Gold Coast Airport. THE PLACE This estate has long been a multi-tasker, with its wagyu cattle farm that hosts a polo club and tournament field. Now it’s added destination dining and luxury stays to its repertoire. The ponies may attract polo enthusiasts to their paddock, but the Paddock restaurant, set in an enormous central building with vaulted ceilings and windows affording views of fields and kangaroos, attracts foodies from near and far. Hazelwood’s accommodation comprises three Luxury Pavilions and 17 King Farm Cabins that look out across the property through floor-to-ceiling windows. Rooms are farmstyle, with warm, natural wood furnishings, an open fireplace and a private outdoor deck with a mighty comfy couch. THE EXPERIENCE This is a foodcentric stay: your tariff covers your room, plus three-course dinners and hearty breakfasts. Chef-inresidence Cameron Matthews is one of regional Australia’s most awarded chefs – and has been Spicer Retreats’ executive chef for 12 years. He’s built his menu around the best local produce (as you might expect, the coal-grilled beef is a must-pick menu item), and you’ll find him outside most afternoons foraging in his garden. DON’T MISS Binna Burra – one of the most picturesque sections of World-Heritage-listed Lamington National Park – is seven kilometres down the road. FROM $649 a night. Craig Tansley
Starry Nights LuxuryCamping36 Carruthers Rd, West Woombye;0435 825 999;starrynightsluxurycamping.com.auTHE LOCATION This property is only an hour north of Brisbane Airport, but feels a world away. It’s a 20-minute drive to the beach at Mooloolaba and 10 minutes to the town of Montville. THE PLACE Owners Shane and Nicole Nelson took three years to find the right property, and two years building the pair of glamping tents they felt best suited it. They didn’t mess around. Each measures 75 squaremetres and features recycled barn floorboards, a hand-carved stone basin, rotating fireplace, hot shower, flushing toilet and clawfoot bath. All that comfort – and you’re surrounded entirely by rainforest. THE EXPERIENCE Kookaburras start up at dawn, followed by yellow-tailed black cockatoos and whipbirds. This is the only wildlife corridor between the national park next door and Petrie Creek a few hundred metres away (which has great swimming holes), so there’s wildlife aplenty, including kangaroos feeding outside your tent. Make use of the guest lounge with infra-red sauna, pool tables, games, books, a selection of organic beverages and an espresso machine. Hampers, laden with food grown on the property or sourced locally, can be delivered for you to cook on your barbecue. DON’T MISS While Montville is a Sunshine Coast hinterland hotspot, the lesser-known Woombye is even closer (five minutes). Check out the great cafes in a village so pretty, it looks like a year-round flower show. FROM $355 a night; two-night minimum stay, three nights across public holidays. Craig Tansley
CABN XMcLaren Flat Rd, McLaren Vale;cabn.lifeTHE LOCATION The clever people behind CABN hold the locations of their wilderness pods secret until the last minute, adding to your feeling of escape. CABN X occupies a corner of McLaren Vale where shiraz vines meet sheep paddocks and ancient gum trees. The site is 40 minutes’ drive from Adelaide, and five minutes from McLaren Flat. THE PLACE CABN X comprises two off-grid tiny homes, named William and Giles. Functioning like well-appointed yachts, they’re set before a sea of vines and anchored by generous timber decking. William is charcoal inside and out, with light flooding through sliding glass doors and a “moon roof” over the bed. There’s a galley kitchen, a generous stone-lined bathroom with stand-alone tub and – surprise! – a small sauna room. Outside is a fire pit, barbecue and sunken bath. THE EXPERIENCE Fill the outside bath, pop the comp bottle of Gemtree “April’s Dance” bubbles and watch the sun set on a huge slice of the McLaren. Nature will oblige throughout your stay: think kangaroos in the vines while you eat breakfast (fat bacon, golden eggs, crusty bread, all provided) and a boobook owl keeping noisy sentinel while you sit around the fire pit. If you must, BYO TV. DON’T MISS Walking to Gemtree’s smooth cellar door on the brow of the hill. If you’d prefer, they’ll happily pick you up in a Polaris Ag-vehicle for a tour. FROM $595 a night; two-night minimum stay. Max Anderson
Sequoia Lodge1 Mawson Dr, Crafers;(08) 8130 9230;sequoialodge.com.auTHE LOCATION Mount Lofty House has it all: heritage (the grand mansion and gardens date to 1852), fine dining (Hardy’s Verandah Restaurant has three hats) and elevation (it sits close to Mount Lofty Summit). At 727 metres, the estate looks into the Piccadilly Valley, a sensational spread of artisan growers and cool-climate winemakers. The otherworldly environs belie the 15-minute transit from Adelaide’s CBD. THE PLACE Sequoia’s 14 luxury suites and dedicated lodge are built on an escarpment in front of the old mansion. The property affects a contemporary alpine aesthetic using local sandstone and spotted gum, with fabrics of burgundy and emerald, and flora-filled canvases by local artist Stephen Trebilcock. Outside are three pools of artesian spring water heated up to 42 degrees, plus the Gatekeeper Day Spa. THE EXPERIENCE Sequoia is rightly obsessed with its horizons. If the TV obscures the view from the bed, or the bed head obscures the view from the bath, push a button and both obstacles sink out of sight. Complimentary experiences similarly connect with the vistas: do wine tastings with local growers, guided forest walks and history tours of the old house. Gratis in-room bubbles are made from vines on the estate. Breakfast is also included. DON’T MISS Sequoia has a dedicated kitchen, but the seven-course wine-paired degustation in HVR ($345 a head) is a must. While you’ll feast on the views and savour the local growers, this culinary adventure is decidedly international. FROM $1000 a night. Max Anderson
Eos by SkyCityFestival Dr, Adelaide;(08) 7077 3588;skycityadelaide.com.auTHE LOCATION Positioned between the River Torrens and North Terrace in the City of Churches, Eos by SkyCity overlooks that most worshipped of landmarks, the Adelaide Oval. THE PLACE If it’s design cred you’re craving, look no further. International firm Buchan Architects (Westfield Chadstone among many other high-profile projects) created the curved, shining 12-storey, gold-glass exterior. Melbourne’s Hecker Guthrie (various beautiful retail and residential works) and Adelaide’s Walter Brooke (Adelaide Oval redevelopment) created the consistently airy interiors of the 120-room hotel. Works by local artists including glassblower and Jam Factory alumnus Liam Fleming feature throughout. Part of the casino precinct in the heritage-listed Adelaide Railway Station, the hotel’s entrance is by underground concourse. THE EXPERIENCE From the marble-metallic lobby where you’re greeted by staff kitted out in duckegg blue to the Leisure Deck with heated pool, spa, sauna and steam room, the name of the game here is modern glamour. That theme extends to generously sized, muted grey rooms of floor-to-ceiling windows and velvet armchairs. Help yourself to the complimentary mini bar with local snacks and water bottled by the hotel. Behind the fluted-glass door, find a marble bathroom with stand-alone bath, its own decadent relaxation space. Just be sure to leave the tub in time for sunset cocktails with hill and coast views at rooftop bar, Sol. DON’T MISS A meal at Sol Restaurant led by chef Kane Pollard, a champion of the state’s food producers. FROM $399 a night. Jane Reddy
Old Chaff Mill Retreat371 Plains Rd, Sellicks Hill;0412 186 033; oldchaffmill.com.auTHE LOCATION Flanked by the Mount Lofty Ranges and the white-sand beaches of the Fleurieu Peninsula, this intimate retreat is at the southern tip of the McLaren Vale wine region, a 45-minute drive from Adelaide. THE PLACE Owners Richard Jasek and Bernice Devereaux spent six years transforming an abandoned 19th-century stone granary into this character-filled, two-suite retreat. In addition to some innovative repurposing (the old chaff hatch is now a pantry door and the rusted drive shaft a clothes rail), they’ve added wellequipped kitchens, recycled timber floors and swish contemporary bathrooms with stand-alone tubs. THE EXPERIENCE The two-storey suites are full of intriguing details, such as a wallmounted vintage rotary phone, a retro LP sound system (with bluetooth) and a glass pane revealing the building’s original footings. Thoughtful touches abound, from delicate posies of wildflowers to a complimentary bottle of organic shiraz. Stays include a generous continental breakfast pack and both suites offer sweeping views over a tranquil montage of vineyards and olive and almond groves. DON’T MISS A treatment from qualified beauty therapist Devereaux in the on-site spa, which has been converted from an old dairy. FROM $475 a night, plus $100 cleaning fee; two-night minimum stay. Rob McFarland
Hotel IndigoAdelaide Markets23-29 Market St, Adelaide;(08) 8472 2400;adelaide.hotelindigo.comTHE LOCATION Hotel Indigo – a boutique arm of Intercontinental Hotel Group – is within striding distance of the famed Adelaide Central Market. It’s on a tiny side street off the restaurant hub, right in the middle of the city’s increasingly buzzy Chinatown. THE PLACE Bright and modern with playful pops of pink, Indigo pays homage to the late, flamboyant and formidable former premier and arts champion Don Dunstan (the pink shorts he wore to parliament are iconic) as well as Adelaide’s “festival state” reputation, with posters from past events adorning the walls. With an ethos of inclusivity, the striking foyer and Market & Meander restaurant open onto the street, welcoming locals, who are lured to its kaleidoscopic rooftop bar – the city’s highest. THE EXPERIENCE This hotel is a visual feast of contemporary art that invites you to experience Adelaide’s vibrant and often trailblazing history and culture within its walls as well as outside. Relax poolside or in its meticulously designed rooms: the premiums offer floor-to-ceiling windows with splendid views of the CBD and the glittering Southern Ocean. DON’T MISS The Central Market is an obvious choice. Tour it with Food Tours Australia. FROM $195 a night. Kylie McLaughlin
Kittawa Lodge1272 South Rd, Pearshape,King Island; 0437 962 020;kittawalodge.comTHE LOCATION Home to some of the country’s best cheese, beef and golf, this small island in Bass Strait, a 40-minute flight from Melbourne, also offers one of Tasmania’s most thoughtful luxury stays. THE PLACE There are two secluded, off-grid lodges on this 40-hectare property, both of which are positioned for cinematic ocean and sunset views. Each has a living/dining room, bedroom and bathroom tastefully appointed with artworks by King Island locals, a custom, locally-made amenities range and an all-Tasmanian produce and drinks selection. Wallabies graze outside the floorto-ceiling windows and in place of a TV, the focal point of the living/ dining area is a wood-stoked fire. THE EXPERIENCE Relax by the fire or pull on the gumboots at the door and walk along the blustery coastline to a stone cairn memorial marking Australia’s worst peacetime maritime disaster – the sinking of the Cataraqui in 1845. There’s more fascinating shipwreck history in Currie, a short drive away, and further north, stunning beaches where Kelly Slater is rumoured to have surfed. Return from a day exploring to the warm hospitality of owners and ex-Sydney sea-changers, Nick Stead and Aaron Suine – you might find herbal tea and homebaked banana bread waiting, or perhaps a crayfish to pop in the oven. For an extra fee, Suine can cook you a sumptuous four-course meal starring King Island produce. DON’T MISS At least one sunset from your lodge, Tasmanian pinot in hand. FROM $980 a night; minimum two-night stay. Kate Simmons
The Granary1097 Cressy Rd, Cressy;0407 874 873;granaryrichmondhill.comTHE LOCATION On a picturesque property called Richmond Hill, The Granary is in the township of Cressy, in farming and trout fishing country 33 kilometres south of Launceston. THE PLACE At the end of a long driveway, the two-storey sandstone Granary rises up like a Tuscan farmhouse, its entrance flanked by giant urns and beds of lavender, but this striking edifice is decisively Tasmanian, built by convicts in the early 1800s. Owners Fiona and Nick Moses live on the 60-hectare farm in a Regency-period home with a beautiful formal garden, tours of which Fiona will happily give guests. THE EXPERIENCE Cathedral ceilings with exposed oak beams and thick stone walls evoke The Granary’s agricultural past. A grand wooden staircase leads to the top floor where, incredibly, sheep were once sheared. Now, it’s a vast loft-like living area that stretches from the spacious country kitchen at one end (with a 10-seater table) to the large wood heater encircled by couches at the opposite end. With three generous bedrooms and two large bathrooms (both with heated floors), there’s ample room for six – though not recommended for children under 10 – yet it’s intimate enough for two. The gently flowing Macquarie River is a five-minute walk away for a picnic, fly-fishing or swimming. DON’T MISS Antique shopping at historic Evandale, 25 kilometres away, followed by lunch at Josef Chromy winery in nearby Relbia. FROM $750 a night; two-night minimum stay. Gabriella Coslovich
Old Bishop’sQuarters26 Fitzroy Pl, Sandy Bay;(03) 620 1887;bishopsquarters.com.auTHE LOCATION Leafy, well-to-do Sandy Bay looks over the broad waters of the Derwent and the yacht clubs that hug its shores. It’s a 15-minute walk to Hobart’s city centre or historic Battery Point. THE PLACE The Old Bishop’s Quarters sprawls over half a hectare where its owners have created a nest of four unique apartments within, or adjacent to, the main building. There’s a guest courtyard with barbecue and, hidden deep in the gardens, Monty’s Hideaway, a converted shipping container, has a retractable roof for star-gazing. THE EXPERIENCE The School House apartment has a small private courtyard, a vast bathroom with freestanding bath and walk-in shower, one small bedroom and a lounge and main bedroom that was once the schoolroom for the bishop’s nine children – one of whom became renowned British Army officer, Field Marshal Bernard Law “Monty” Montgomery. The schoolroom interior reflects its era but with a luxurious overlay; Monty didn’t have a smart TV, a vast king bed, or a welcome pack of wine, bread, butter and homemade jams. DON’T MISS Sandy Bay Road, just down the hill, has all you need for restaurants and supplies, but walk 10 minutes further and you’re in Battery Point, with all its history and wonder. FROM $210 a night ($150 a night for Monty’s Hideaway); two-night minimum stay. Jim Darby
The Burrows7 Addison St, Swansea;0437 752 547; theburrows.com.auTHE LOCATION From Hobart or Launceston, it’s about 135 kilometres to the sleepy east coast town of Swansea and this restored farmhouse with views across Great Oyster Bay. THE PLACE Bek Burrows and Paul DeRuyter transformed this 1860s stone cottage (extended in the 1950s and '70s), after buying the property in 2019, knocking down thick stone walls to open up the space, putting in salvaged colonial timber windows to frame the views, adding an intimate bathhouse with antique claw-foot bath on the deck, and letting the garden grow into a wonderfully rowdy field of self-seeded flowers, grasses and shrubs. THE EXPERIENCE Linen is the textile of choice inside and the palette a calming mix of dusky blues, chalky greys and soft white. Atmosphere rules over mod-cons in this adults-only two-bedroom home (one bedroom is an annexe accessible from the deck). In the classic country kitchen, you’ll find locally produced sourdough bread, butter, jam and free-range eggs; in the lounge, a glowing wood fire, cut-crystal glasses and Swansea’s The Splendid Gin. Curl up on the couch or the daybed and watch the light change. Vintage artworks, antique objects and family treasures are placed just so, and yet the effect, like the garden, feels natural and undone. DON’T MISS Book a wine-tasting at Gala Estate in nearby Cranbrook, housed in the town’s original 1901 general store. FROM $425 a night; two-night minimum stay. Gabriella Coslovich
Wombat LodgeQuoin Cattle Farm, 3951 PalanaRd, Killiecrankie, Flinders Island;0474889236; onislandtime.com.auTHE LOCATION If you don’t find Tasmania’s natural wonders wild enough, a hop to this jewel in the Furneaux Group islands in Bass Strait should do it. It’s a direct flight from Melbourne (one hour), Launceston (35 minutes) or Hobart (one hour). THE PLACE Flinders Island, with a population of less than 900, has always attracted adventurers, but since 2018 cattle farmers Tom and Jo Youl have made it a haven for the hungry too. Flinders Wharf, their restaurant, providore and distillery draws top chefs to cook crays, abalone and wallaby on special weekends. Their newest boutique accommodation, Wombat Lodge – one of the three options they offer – is on their farm and has a serious kitchen which can be fully stocked with Flinders’ best produce, wines and spirits on request. THE EXPERIENCE Wombat Lodge is a former shearing shed that now sleeps six in luxe cabin comfort. Soft linens, a flickering fire and a deep bath with mountain views meet bespoke timber tables and wallaby-leather stools. Outside, private walks lead in every direction and e-bikes are provided to reach secluded beaches. Craggy mountains roll down to turquoise waters, from which southern rock lobsters are plucked with ease. DON’T MISS There’s a new menu at Flinders Wharf, where chefs Mikey Yeo and Ronan Sherry focus on locally caught seafood and island produce. FROM $390 a night; two-night minimum stay. Gemima Cody
Villa Talia68 Airds Rd, Wattle Grove;0427 901 188; villatalia.com.auTHE LOCATION A steep gravel driveway leads to this quietly grand estate set on a private hill overlooking the majestic Huon River with views to the mountains beyond. It’s 60 kilometres south-west of Hobart and 10 kilometres from Cygnet. THE PLACE Built in 2008 on three hectares, Villa Talia is a replica of an 1800s colonial homestead the previous owners fell in love with in Victoria’s Yarra Valley. New owners George and Vivian Luo ramped up the luxe factor after buying the property in 2019, installing an outdoor stone bath and a helipad that doubles as a gazebo site for special occasions. THE EXPERIENCE It’s all about the view in this sumptuous two-bedroom home with fivestar-hotel touches, including champagne, cheese and fruit on arrival and a surfeit of gourmet goods in the pantry and fridge. Light streams into high-ceilinged rooms through French doors that open to the wrap-around verandah. Salvaged timber floors are softened by Persian and Afghan wool rugs. It’s an Eastmeets-West feel with French provincial and Chinese lacquered cabinets, cut-velvet couches scattered with Thai silk cushions, and walls hung with Chinese prints and contemporary art. Local chefs are on hand to cook dinner if you choose. DON’T MISS Float under the Milky Way to a choir of frogs in the large outdoor bath that was carved from a single piece of volcanic rock and imported from Indonesia. FROM $800 a night; two-night minimum stay. Gabriella Coslovich
Sea Stacks7 Deals Rd, Douglas River;(03) 6375 1247; seastacks.com.auTHE LOCATION Sea Stacks feels utterly remote. It's just behind Denison Beach, 10 kilometres from the seaside holiday town of Bicheno and 180 kilometres north-west of Hobart. THE PLACE Amid wallaby-nibbled lawns on the reedy bank of Denison Rivulet, three double-storey wood-and-glass cubes are set for a painterly view over the rivulet to the ocean surf in the distance. Designed by Tasmanian architects Taylor and Hinds, the cubes are named Quartz, Mica, and Feldspar – all found in granite, the stone that defines Tasmania’s east coast. Each cube is distinct: there's a stone bathroom in Quartz (which has the finest views and the most private deck), there are pink hues in Feldspar, and a brass kitchen and bathroom in Mica, reflecting the golden tones of its namesake. THE EXPERIENCE Sea Stacks’ simple and clever design, incorporating understated, Danish hygge-inspired luxury, creates a cocoon-like comfort inside the oiled wooden exteriors. Bedroom windows peel back to bring the outdoors in. It’s the perfect eastcoast base, in easy reach of the Freycinet Peninsula and St Helens, but also a place where you’ll want time to enjoy the space and savour the stillness and the big-sky views. Full kitchens invite evenings in, aided by an abundant hamper of local cheeses, wine and other goodies. DON’T MISS Walk the white sand of wild Denison Beach at the front of Sea Stacks – it stretches for about 10 kilometres. FROM $550 a night; two-night minimum stay. Andrew Bain
The Picker’s Hut1329 Elderslie Rd, Broadmarsh;0409 344 303; thepickershut.com.auTHE LOCATION So seemingly remote yet within such easy reach; hop out of the plane in Hobart, fire up your hire car and reach the Jordan Valley in 45 minutes. THE PLACE The hut (once used to house soldiers and, for its size, it might be better called a “lodge”) was relocated here and then completely overhauled. Clever design and multiple glass sliding doors bring the outside in when the weather suits. There’s a barbecue and bar out on the deck and inside is a fully-equipped kitchen, beautiful blackwood dining table and a lounge built around the fireplace. Both bedrooms bring in the views, as does the bathroom, with its big bath and walk-in shower. THE EXPERIENCE If you were thinking of coming back as an eagle, Picker’s would do for a test run. The views stretch over the valley, past grazing sheep and budding crops and into the bush beyond. Vines are growing out the back and there’s a complimentary bottle of the wine that is their result in a hamper of bread, cheese and breakfast essentials. There are staples in the pantry and frozen meals available for purchase. DON’T MISS It’s difficult to find a reason to move beyond the hut, but for an adventure in innovative food, try The Agrarian Kitchen, a 25-minute drive away in New Norfolk. FROM $595 a night; two-night minimum stay. Jim Darby
CREDIT:
Word count: 10668
