As a boy Enrico Palermo dreamt of space. Now he’s leading South Australia’s push for the stars Enrico Palermo always wanted to be a spaceman. As a young teen that was the dream. To rocket into space. “I wanted to be an astronaut, that was the goal,” he says.
Palermo hasn’t quite made it to the stars – not that he’s given up – but that’s not to say he’s not a spaceman. Palermo’s out-of-this-world dreams now are in his capacity as the chief executive of the fledgling Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency, building space up to be a $12bn industry by 2030.
The childhood dreams were fuelled by the feats of Adelaide astronaut Andy Thomas, NASA’s space shuttle program and the International Space Station, and the interplanetary probes that took humanity’s curiosity to Saturn and beyond.
Then, of course, there was the geek staple of Star Trek and Star Wars. But space is a difficult place to reach for a young boy from Western Australia, born into a large Italian immigrant family. Palermo loved maths and science at school and studied mechanical engineering and physics at the University of WA and then took a job with oil giant Woodside as an engineer supporting offshore platforms.
The mechanical engineering bent came from his grandfather, a whitegoods technician with no formal training, but one of those blokes who could fix anything.
“He told me about pumps and electricity and taking things apart, maybe not always putting them back together. So, I think I’ve always had an interest in how things work and creating new things,” he says.
It was a career he could have easily settled into for a long time. “You can stay there the rest your life,” he says of Woodside.
But. There was a but.
“I learnt a lot there that I think I still utilise in things I do today. But it’s like, this isn’t … what I wanted to do. It wasn’t a passion.’’ There was a lot going on his life at the time. He had become engaged to his now wife Nadia, he started applying for jobs in Europe.
“Nadia’s like, ‘are we coming or going? We want to get on with our lives. You’re looking at jobs in Europe. What are we doing?’” On New Year’s Eve 2004, a decision was made. It was time to take a risk. Palermo quit Woodside and Nadia, who was an accountant also working in the resources sector, left her job as well. Their next stop was London.
“Overnight, it was a different environment, an entrepreneurial sense, you start to see this belief you could do anything,” he says.
The dream of space remained just outof reach though. Palermo worked as a business analyst for a UK start-up that specialised in composite materials. There was opportunity for him to set up offices for the company in the Asia Pacific, but that was not why he and Nadia had left WA.
So, he took another risk and left that job as well and then won a scholarship to the International Space University in Strasbourg, France. For nine weeks in the summer of 2006, while his wife remained working in London, Palermo studied space policy, space law, space engineering, space design and operations.
It was in Strasbourg that his “sliding doors” moment happened. Palermo met Alex Tai, who was then chief operating officer for Richard Branson’s Virgin Galactic, who had given a presentation on the company’s grand plan for space travel. It was early days for Galactic but Palermo says they were “looking for someone that had sort of a combination of engineering but also business”.
He signed up and became one of Galactic’s earliest employees. There were fewer than 10 when he started work in the company’s London office. For the next two years he shuffled back and forth between London and Los Angeles, from where he would take the 150km trip north to Mojave, a small town which has been at the heart of the US aerospace development since the 1940s.
In Mojave, there was a company working on the prototypes for the spaceship program and Palermo helped develop a business plan for his new employer.
By the time the spaceship was approaching test flights, Palermo and Nadia made the move to Mojave.
“We placed ourselves right in Mojave, so we moved from Central London, that cosmopolitan mixing pot, amazing city to Mojave. It’s a small town. Four thousand people in the desert.” But if you are in the world of aerospace development this is where you want to be.
Edwards Air Force base is 10 minutes down the road. That is where Chuck Yeager broke the sound barrier in his Bell X-1 in 1947. This is where the space shuttle used to land and where the engines for the Apollo program were tested. It is home to the US Air Force’s test pilot school and NASA’s flight research centre. And the infamous Area 51, that alleged home to secret alien remains kept by the US government, isn’t too far away.
“You are on the shoulder of giants out there,” Palermo says. “It’s the supersonic flight test corridor. There was an environment there to have a community that would support you firing rocket motors and flying spaceships. It was that sort of life out there.” This was home to the Palermos for the next 12 years and where the couple’s sons, Nicola, named for Enrico’s late father, and Alessandro, were raised. Nadia Palermo’s accounting skills were useful in the early days of the Spaceship Company and she would later work for an internet sales company as well.
It was a good life. The children grew up watching spaceships being built and being taken before dawn to watch test flight preparations.
“They grew up in an environment where sonic booms were something that were normal,” he says. “We lived watching aircraft and contrails in the bright blue sky above the Mojave.” Palermo, 42, also likes to feel the ground under his feet and he and Nadia would travel around the US, hiking in national parks. He estimates they traversed 38 out of America’s 61 national parks, listing the Grand Canyon, Yosemite and Mount Whitney, the highest peak in the continental US, among his favourites.
“One of our pastimes there was big road trips. We did pretty good, we’ll have to go back at another point to finish the grand tour,” he says. “Once a year at least, I like to just go into the wilderness and disconnect and detox digitally. I love being out in nature hiking.” Palermo became president of The Spaceship Company and was promoted to Galactic’s chief operating officer before the lure of a move home was dangled.
“I could have easily spent and set my career in the commercial space industry in the US, but I mean, the opportunity to lead a nation’s space agency is very rare and the opportunity to lead it so early in its development is equally as rare,” he says.
The family arrived home in Australia in November 2020 and he says the family has settled in well to Adelaide life. Nicola is now eight and Alessandro seven, and their father says despite the upheaval of moving countries the children are happy being in school after Covid-enforced shut-outs in the US.
“We’d come up off a year of distance learning, so the kids had been doing distance learning from March,” he says. “They hadn’t really been in the classroom so it was kind of exciting to be coming back so the kids have that really social engagement.” Still, it was a hard decision and Palermo muses that if the Australian Space Agency job hadn’t come up, he would still be hanging around in Mojave. He says it was enjoyable working with Virgin’s ebullient founder, billionaire Richard Branson.
“I was very fortunate to work for Richard for so long and he backed up the program all the way,” he says.
Branson, with fellow billionaires Tesla founder Elon Musk and Amazon’s Jeff Bezos have led a new generation of commercial space exploration. Branson and Bezos made it to space this year on their company’s rockets, drawing criticism from some that it was a billionaire’s frolic.
Which is not how Palermo sees it.
“Anything humans have done in space has had profound effects back here on earth,” he says. “Space is the reason we know the condition of our planet and are able to monitor it, so the more we can access space, (make it) lower cost, more reliable, we’re going to enhance our understanding of climate change and how we adapt to it,” is one example he gives.
He also says the next generation of potential scientists will be inspired by this latest bout of space exploration in the same way people like Branson and Bezos were inspired when they were kids by the Apollo missions to the moon.
Palermo believes eventually space travel will be in the reach of most, but there is a way to go yet. In its third quarter financial results released in November, Galactic said its “private astronaut commercial service” was on track to start late in 2022. It said it was selling seats on flights for $US450,000 ($630,000). Despite the extreme cost, Virgin Galactic said it had sold 700 out of 1000 tickets.
Palermo compares it to the early days of commercial aircraft flight a century ago, when the idea of taking a ride in an aircraft would have been regarded as similarly out of reach for the average person.
“You just have to look at what happened in aviation,” he says. “From the early barnstorming flights and commercial aviation it was incredibly expensive at that point in time.
“But through innovating, through learning, through failure, through setbacks … we have airliners now that are safer than driving a car around the city. I see the same thing happening with space.” Palermo sees a grand future for Australia in a global space industry that is predicted to be worth between $1 trillion and $3 trillion by 2030. He believes humans could be launched into space from Australia within a decade.
“Here in Australia, there’s a real potential for us to be a regional hub in the Indo Pacific for human spaceflight activity,” he says.
“We’ve got work to do on the regulations to support that but once you can safely and reliably launch payloads or satellites and other things into space … the short answer is yes.
“It’s not going to be tomorrow (but) I think that is something that is an opportunity for the nation.” Next year, NASA will launch a rocket from a site near the Northern Territory town of Nhulunbuy, the first of what is expected to be three launches.
But Palermo is also passionate about Australian companies being heavily involved in the broader industry. He talks of Australian companies supplying components, launching satellites, operating spaceports, communications or even space medicine.
This is where the predicted $12bn revenue and an additional 20,000 jobs will be created.
“It’s an ambitious goal,” he concedes, before predicting Australia could top it. “I think we’re going to hit it. I think we could even do bigger than that.” Australia, he says, has some strong advantages compared with other nations that are also vying for the space dollar.
One is Australia’s heritage in space. Australia became one of the first countries into space when the Wresat satellite was launched in 1967. Australia played a crucial communications role in NASA’s space program, including when Neil Armstrong became the first person to step onto the moon in 1969.
Palermo says Australia’s geography is another advantage.
“Australia’s geography, its location on the planet, its view of the sky, and its stable, geopolitical climate is good for understanding the space environment,” he says. “Our view of the eastern and southern hemisphere, which other nations don’t have, the US doesn’t have, we have to give that to them. And that extends into astronomy as well.”
In 2019, the Australian government announced a $150m program to help Australian businesses build capabilities to join NASA’s Artemis lunar program and its Moon to Mars ambition.
At the time, Prime Minister Scott Morrison said it was about “backing Australian businesses to the moon, and even Mars, and back”.
“We’re getting behind Australian businesses so they can take advantage of the pipeline of work NASA has committed to,” he said.
At the same time, ASA and NASA signed a letter of intent confirming potential Australian involvement in “areas of mutual interest such as robotics, automation, and remote asset management – similar to that currently used by Australia in mining operations”.
Palermo says some of the technology used in the Australian mining industry to guide machinery that is thousands of kilometres away could be adapted so that you could use it on the moon.
He says the same for medicine. The Tasmanian-based Centre for Antarctic, Remote and Maritime Medicine provides medical support for the Australian Antarctic Program, as well as others who are operating in the Southern Ocean.
He says the government’s “demonstrator” program, which aims to help Australian companies prove their technology will work in space will be crucial.
The federal government handed out grants of up to $200,000 to 20 companies earlier this year to help companies through the “technology readiness and development curve”.
“If we can start to get that hardware into space in the harsh environment of vacuum radiation, temperature extremes, suddenly you have a product you can sell,” he says.
Then there is the Moon to Mars Trailblazer program. The federal government is putting up $50m to help an Australian company design a small rover that will head to the moon with NASA, possibly in 2026.
“The goal of Artemis, why we need to be part of it as Australia, is this is about a permanent presence,” he says.
“You’re not going there to just hold the flag and come back, which is incredible achievement, don’t get me wrong. It’s going to be a launching bay not just to Mars, but for decades and centuries to come, so we need to be part of that.” Then there is the replacement for the International Space Station and NASA’s Gateway, which will be an orbiting outpost above the Moon, which will be both a support for the lunar return and a staging post for deep-space exploration.
Australian companies are already making headway in space.
Outfits such as Flavia Tata Nardelli’s Fleet Space Technologies has already launched six nano satellites and aims to eventually send 140 small satellites into low earth orbit.
And alongside Palermo’s Australia Space Agency at Lot 14 on North Terrace are other space companies such as local start-ups Inovor Technologies, Myriota and Neumann Space.
“This is so exciting,” he says with the air of a man who genuinely loves his job.
But will we find anything out there? Or are we alone in a vast universe? “I think it’s one of the reasons humans have always looked to space,” he says. From a purely mathematical point of view he thinks it’s likely. There are so many stars and galaxies out there after all, but he’s not committing to a definite answer.
“My short answer. I don’t know. We’ll see. “I hope we’re not alone but space is big and you know, how many millennia away are some of these things. So, yeah, I don’t know what the right answer is.” ■
CREDIT: Story MICHAEL McGUIRE
Word count: 2583
