ENCOURAGING big investors to back local ideas remains a key piece of the state’s business puzzle, South Australia’s chief entrepreneur Andrew Nunn says.
While Adelaide’s innovation hub Lot Fourteen is now filled almost to the brim with start-up firms and more established businesses, sourcing investor capital to take them to the next level was vital, Mr Nunn said.
An engineer with a long history of innovation in environmental remediation, Mr Nunn said he had been inspired to invest in about a dozen start-ups himself since starting in the unpaid role early last year.
But getting SA’s high-net worth investors and attracting venture capital funds to do the same remained a challenge – one which Mr Nunn is keen to help solve.
Mr Nunn’s role as chief entrepreneur is part of the state government’s overarching push to generate high-growth companies locally and attract other companies and investors to the state.
The Lot Fourteen start-up hub on North Tce, which Mr Nunn said now had about 1300 people on site, and the upcoming Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre, where Commonwealth Bank will be a cornerstone tenant, are at the heart of the strategy.
But it is also about creating an environment that attracts investors and makes it easier for them to get involved in backing high-growth local companies.
Mr Nunn, pictured, said with a platform now laid in terms of generating a community of entrepreneurial companies in and around Lot Fourteen, one of his key priorities was the need for capital.
He said the success of Lot Fourteen showed results could be achieved “with a reasonably clear vision of where you’re going, and putting some capital in behind it’’.
“You’ve actually got what is a very innovative, really interesting entrepreneurial hub now in a city that wasn’t really known for it in the past,” he said.’ Mr Nunn said there was plenty of untapped wealth in SA and investing in a start-up was a rewarding way of contributing to the state’s growth.
“We’ve got to get more people in SA recognising it’s a genuine investment opportunity,” he said. “We’ve got all the ingredients coming together at the right time at the moment and I think there’s now a genuine recognition that SA is a great place to bring your business.’’
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 381
