THE Commonwealth Bank will be the cornerstone tenant in the $400m Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre (EIC) at the Lot Fourteen start-up hub.
One hundred and fifty technology specialists will be based at the building, which is set to open in mid-2024.
Developer Quintessential Equity said there was strong interest from numerous large technology firms in taking space in the new 16-storey premises, which will be fully tenanted by opening day.
The developer’s executive chairman, Shane Quinn, said conversations were ongoing at the moment with another large corporation and, once that deal was announced, the project would be “over-subscribed’’.
Mr Quinn said the ability to co-locate with companies working in hi-tech fields such as space, cybersecurity and software design was attractive for companies looking to build their presence in Australia.
“It’s the ecosystem that’s created here at Lot Fourteen of collaborators and its inspiring location, the ability for people to come together and solve the problems of the future and create solutions,’’ he said.
“If you look at how it’s curated, people can have meetings connected via 5G out the front of the building.’’ Commonwealth Bank’s chief information officer for technology, Brendan Hopper, said the bank would set up a technology hub at the EIC to take advantage of the tech ecosystem developing at Lot Fourteen.
“Our hope for our Technology Hubs is that they are places where people go to collaborate, innovate, share ideas and learn from others – which is why the Entrepreneur and Innovation Centre is the ideal home for us,” he said. “We plan to hire up to 150 technology specialists within the next five years who will utilise the Technology Hub at the EIC, including software engineers, data scientists and cybersecurity specialists.” The EIC will also house a $20m Innovation Hub as part of the Adelaide City Deal, with the ground floor to be used for events and collaboration, accessible to the public and offering indoor and al fresco dining opportunities.
Mr Quinn said that once the EIC was developed, his company would have more than $1bn worth of property assets based in South Australia, including 100 King William Street, 431 King William Street and the Port Adelaide Distribution Centre. The 41,000sq m project is expected to create about 430 jobs at the peak of construction.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 384
