THEY might be renowned for their excellence on the field, in the pool or on the racetrack, but many Australian sports stars are also finding success in the business world.
Some have begun setting themselves up for post-competition life while still in the game; others have made innovative career moves upon retirement.
Many have teamed up to launch enterprises in industries such as hospitality, fitness, education and liquor.
Others have gone out alone or taken up side hustles to make extra cash, and some have chosen to invest in companies rather than starting their own.
A collective of 40 big-name sporting figuresformed Athletic Ventures, a private equity group that has poured money into digital healthcare start-ups eucalyptus and HealthMatch, “human performance” tech company Fusion Sport, as well as Mexican food chain Guzman Y Gomez.
The syndicate was founded by Greater Western Sydney midfielder Matt de Boer, and more sporting figures who are a part of the group can today be revealed.
They include former NBA star Andrew Bogut, world champion surfer Joel Parkinson, Olympic gold medal swimmer Bronte Campbell, NSW Swifts Super Netball coach Briony Akle, Collingwood forward Josh Thomas, Hawthorn midfielder Jaeger O’Meara, Melbourne defender Adam Tomlinson, AFLW star Tayla Harris, and Olympic sprinter Steven Solomon. De Boer said the group of elite athletes “understood the mindset of high-growth companies”.
“We’re a like-minded network from a diverse set of codes. Investing together as Athletic Ventures only compounds the value that we can offer purposeful companies looking to accelerate their growth,” De Boer said.
He said that since Athletic Ventures had invested in Guzman Y Gomez, it was “seeing record numbers of professional athletes and their teams support the business by ordering catering for their post-match meals”.
“It’s a great partnership,” he said.
The value of Guzman Y Gomez is now about $1.06bn according to the latest valuation of the restaurant chain by fund manager Magellan Financial, which is sitting on a 12 per cent stake.
Here are some of the other business moves our on-field champions have made off the field in the past decade.
david.aidone@news.com.au
LIZ CAMBAGE Age: 30 Status: Competing Company: Vitadrop Not only does Liz Cambage play for the Las Vegas Aces and the Australian Opals, the Victorian also co-founded Vitadrop, which sells electrolyte and vitamin powders, in 2018.
BEN SIMMONS Age: 25 Status: Competing Investment: FaZe Clan The Philadelphia 76ers forward revealed last year he had invested an undisclosed sum in the e-sports organisation FaZe Clan.
Simmons, who grew up in Melbourne and has been a gamer since his teens, also became a brand ambassador to the organisation as part of the deal.
MARK WEBBER Age: 44 Status: Retired Company: JAM Sports Management Webber, who retired from Formula One racing in 2016, launched JAM Sports Management, a talent management agency, along with wife Ann and corporate chief executive Jason Allen.
He also tried his hand in the fashion world with Aussie Grit Apparel, however, it looks to have wound up operations with both its Facebook page and website offline.
GREG NORMAN Age: 66 Status: Retired Company: The Greg Norman Company Spending 331 weeks as the world’s no. 1 ranked golfer in the 1980s and ‘90s isn’t Greg ‘The Shark’ Norman’s only impressive feat.
He founded the now multinational Florida-headquartered firm the Greg Norman Company in 1993.
Among the company’s many ventures is a line of golf-inspired sportswear, golf course design, a wine collection and even a range of Wagyu beef.
Norman has spent many years living in the US, but it recently emerged he was selling is $A52 million Colorado ranch and $A77 million Florida compound to with plans to return to Australia DYLAN ALCOTT Age: 30 Status: Competing tennis player Companies: Co-founder of Get Skilled Access, and Able Foods Investments: Investor in investment syndicate Athletic Ventures The Paralympian is as much a star in the business world as he is on the court. The wheelchair tennis champion has launched at least two ventures while still in the game including co-founding consultancy firm Get Skilled Access, and last year opening ready-made meal service Able Foods.
He is part of the syndicate Athletic Ventures, which has invested in digital healthcare start-ups eucalyptus and HealthMatch, “human performance” tech firm Fusion Sport, and Mexican food chain Guzman Y Gomez.
JAMIE WHINCUP Age: 38 Status: Racing Company: LOCA Cafe & Drive Thru Coffee Investments: Triple Eight Race Engineering Whincup might be preparing to retire this year but he’s made the right moves to set himself up for life after racing.
The seven-time V8 Supercars winner opened LOCA Cafe & Drive Thru Coffee in Hope Island, Queensland, in 2016.
Whincup is set to take over as team principal of Triple Eight Race Engineering in 2022; he has a 19 per cent stake.
NATALIE COOK Age: 46 Status: Retired Company: Sandstorm Former Olympic beach volleyball player Natalie Cook, who became the first Australian woman to compete at five Olympic Games, has turned her love of the game into a business.
Cook, 46, heads up Sandstorm – a beach sports event company that operates in Queensland.
BILLY SLATER
Age:38 Status: Retired Played for: Melbourne Storm (2003-18) Companies: Brick Lane Brewing (co-founder), MOVE with Billy Slater, Slater Thoroughbreds, Billy’s Buddies The former Storm fullback was among 25 co-founders – including ex-Collingwood president Eddie McGuire and lawyer Paul Bowker – of Brick Lane Brewing. The craft brewery was launched in 2018, the same year Slater retired.
Since then he has launched a number of other ventures, including fitness app MOVE with Billy Slater, and Billy’s Buddies – a ball sports program for children. He also owns a thoroughbred breeding business, Slater Thoroughbreds, with his wife Nicole.
NICK RIEWOLDT
Age: 38 Status: Retired Played for: St Kilda (2001-17) Company: Co-owner of Body Fit studios Body Fit revealed last year that the retired Saints star, along with former top cricketer George Bailey and Test captain Tim Paine, had secured the rights to open studios across Tasmania.
Riewoldt was four years out of the game when he decided to take on the venture, while Bailey had left the field six years earlier.
The trio have opened clubs in Hobart and Devonport and plan to launch at least another six.
ISAAC SMITH Age: 32 Status: Competing PlayS for: Hawthorn (2011-20), Geelong (2021-) Company: Co-owner of Jamu Dining, Smith opened Jamu Dining with former teammate James Frawley, and Evelyn Lau (owner of the nearby A Thousand Blessings cafe) in 2018.
The restaurant, just outside Melbourne’s CBD in Richmond, markets itself as drawing inspiration from “Asian street food, Malaysian coffee shops, Japan’s izakayas and regional home cooking”.
SHAUN HAMPSON Age: 33 Status: Retired Played for: Carlton (2007-13), Richmond (2014-18) Company: Co-founder of Ascot Food + Wine Hampson and his model fiancee Megan Gale became partners in Ascot Food Store, owned by Dave Stewart, in 2017.
The cafe, now known as Ascot Food + Wine, is in Ascot Vale, about 20 minutes northwest of Melbourne’s CBD.
Last year the pair snapped up a “vintage Hollywood era”-inspired weekender in Daylesford for $800,000. Dubbed Dollywood Daylesford, it’s available to rent via Airbnb for $818 a night.
CHRIS JUDD Age:37 Status: Retired Played for: West Coast (2002-07), Carlton (2008-15) Company: Co-owner of Jaggad Chris Judd, along with his wife Bec and former ex-footballer Steven Greene, launched activewear brand Jaggad in 2013 while competing for Carlton, two years before his retirement.
In 2020, the brand denied copying designs by rising Australian fashion label, Nagnata.
Menswear was also quietly dumped from the Jaggad range last year.
DYLAN GRIMES Age: 30 Status: Competing Plays for: Richmond (2010-) Company: Mt Macedon Winery The Richmond defender was six years into his AFL career when he and his then-fiancee Elisha took the keys to Mt Macedon Winery, about an hour northwest of Melbourne.
When he’s not on the field, Grimes tends to more than 2.5 hectares of vines and also runs a restaurant, cellar door, accommodation and wedding centre on the property.
FERGUS WATTS Age: 35 Status: Retired Played for: Adelaide (2004-2005), St Kilda (2006) Company: Bastion Collective Fergus Watts moved into the business world after his short stint with the AFL, having played just five games for Adelaide and one game for St Kilda across 2004-2006.
Three years after he was delisted and at just 23-year-old, Watts founded what now claims to be the largest independent communications agency in Australia, Bastion Collective.
SHANE WARNE Age: 51 Status: Retired Played for: Australia (Tests: 1992-2007) Company: SevenZeroEight, The Shane Warne Project Investments: Social Energy Warne in late 2019 launched gin line SevenZeroEight, which last year also pumped out hand sanitiser for two WA hospitals as the pandemic worsened.
The cricket legend also launched The Shane Warne Project, a range of cricket and golf wear, three years ago.
He is also a shareholder in British-based artificial intelligence start-up Social Energy, although his stake is unknown. Warne also helped the brand – which manages household power needs using rooftop solar and batteries – launch in Australia last year.
STEVE SMITH Age: 32 Status: Competing Investments: Koala, Cashrewards The international cricketer and former Test captain reportedly invested $100,000 for a 10 per cent stake in mattress start-up Koala in 2015.
He also became a brand ambassador as part of the deal.
Smith’s stake would have been diluted after Koala completed a $500m capital raising with private investors last year. However, his original investment is likely to have grown significantly to an estimated $30m.
He also purchased a $200,000 stake in financial technology company Cashrewards ahead of its IPO late last year.
LAYNE BEACHLEY Age: 49 Status: Retired surfer Company: Awake Academy Former pro surfer Layne Beachley has recently turned to the wellness industry, launching her company Awake Academy where she has the title Chief Awakening Officer.
Beachley, 48, started the business in September last year and offers an “Own Your Truth” course at a cost of $297.
The seven-step program claims participants will, among other things, “develop the ability and awareness to express (their) feelings” and learn “actions to energise (their) life and awaken (their) spirit”.
JACK WATTS Age: 30 Status: Retired Played for: Melbourne (2009-17), Port Adelaide (2018-20) Company: Co-founder of Skwosh Five years before his retirement in 2020, Jack Watts along with friends Jack Turner and Adam Walsh launched men’s swimwear brand Skwosh.
The former No.1 draft pick, who first played for Melbourne before joining Port Adelaide, looks after publicity for the business. Walsh takes care of operations, while Turner is the creative mind.
Watts told the Herald Sun in February that he could see himself “selling it into overseas markets”.
GIAAN ROONEY Age: 38Status: Retired swimmer Company: GR Giaan Rooney The Olympic swimming champion and TV presenter is trying her hand at fashion design. This year she launched her label GR Giaan Rooney, a range of activewear and loungewear stocked at Harris Scarfe.
KATIE BRENNAN Age: 28 Status: Competing Plays for: Western Bulldogs (2017-19), Richmond (2020-) Company: KB Performance Among her impressive list of achievements, including leading the Western Bulldogs in the AFLW from 2017-19 before taking the helm at Richmond, Brennan also owns the gym KB Performance. Found north of Melbourne in Coburg, the club says it specialises in “female-focused strength and conditioning”.
CREDIT: David Aidone
Word count: 1866
