But murmurings do abound that the empty chambers of Stoke Lodge, the official residence, may soon be filled once more, according to our spies, who say former South Australian premier Jay Weatherill is being vigorously touted for the appointment.
Brandis, a former Queensland senator, was anointed High Commissioner in 2018, succeeding Alexander Downer.
Since retiring from politics, Weatherill has spent two years grubbing away at Andrew Forrest’s Minderoo Foundation – specifically as CEO of its Thrive by Five initiative – and even longer providing lectures on industry at the University of South Australia.
Margin Call approached him to ask whether London had, indeed, been calling, and he told us via a spokesman that he had not received any offer for the role of High Commissioner.
We would caution, however, that with Foreign Minister Penny Wong so pivotal to the decision, it’s plain that Weatherill would feature strongly in the consideration, and we expect a forthcoming announcement.
Consider that Wong and Weatherill have maintained healthy relations for decades, harking back to their salad days when both were still banging away at the tradesman’s entrance to politics.
A biography of Wong, written by journalist and author Margaret Simons, also put it on record that she and Weatherill had been long-term partners while she was at university and while he was an industrial officer with the Australian Workers’ Union. Comment was sought from the Foreign Minister about the appointment.
Meanwhile, Liberal MPs recently put out of work by the federal election results are keeping their eyes very much peeled for availability in the job market, lest they all just open more bog-standard consultancy firms.
Margin Call understands former ACT senator Zed Seselja, unseated just days ago by David Pocock, is being encouraged to apply for a CEO role with Greyhounds NSW.
The role, currently being advertised online, seeks a candidate who can grow the industry and advance the safety and rehoming of retired dogs. Seselja was contacted but declined to comment.
Presumably now he’ll face more competition – Andrew Constance? Trent Zimmerman? Jason Falinski? Dave Sharma? – given our amplification of the matter.
Barilaro’s new gig
Margin Call attempted to tread softly on Friday with the news of John Barilaro’s resignation from Coronation Property to accept an appointment as NSW Trade and Investment Commissioner to the United States.
And we were most foolish to do so, given we were bloody well right. By 4pm the NSW government was trumpeting a press release stating that Barilaro, formerly the state’s deputy premier, would relocate for the position in the coming months.
As reported, his official title will be Senior Trade and Investment Commissioner to the Americas, with the government also appointing Helen Sawczak, the former CEO of the Australia China Business Council, as Trade Commissioner to Greater China.
NSW Trade Minister Stuart Ayres said the appointments followed a “highly competitive and rigorous global talent search” managed by specialised recruitment firm NGS Global, and we judge that to be a curious line item to include in the press statement.
Why? The announcement was intended to be made prior to the May federal election but was held back to prevent claims of nepotism that could have placed further pressure on the Morrison government, which itself was under pressure over its resistance to a federal anti-corruption body.
Netball news
The future of Netball Australia is looking rather precarious given its debt position and a ‘‘going concern’’ notice issued by auditors, who warn of dark times on account of fiscal mismanagement.
The position of the organisation’s chair, Marina Go, is equally in doubt, with an announcement on that front to be made imminently, or so we have been informed.
And yet one person who seems to have conveniently snuck off the board just in time is Mitch Catlin, who ceased his NA board appointment in November to accept a chief of staff role with Victorian Liberal opposition leader Matthew Guy.
He’d been at the board for more than a year, long enough we say to preside over some of this havoc.
“The party for economic management has as their chief of staff a guy who was on the board of an enterprise that is going broke,” a well-placed Victorian Liberal said.
Bitter Butter
We’ve already chronicled the implosion of Victorian coworking enterprise York Butter Factory and ventilated troubling complaints about the internal culture at the firm before it collapsed last year.
But Margin Call could not ignore yet another leaked email from an employee who quit the fintech incubator after just five months, citing her disgust with the leadership team and a “toxic culture of blame and fear within the organisation”.
Anelia Heese, YBF’s head of experience, said in an email obtained by Margin Call that she arrived at work on July 23, 2018, ready to serve out her notice period – having already resigned – but was frogmarched out of the premises.
Before leaving, she told a YBF senior manager, who had asked about her immediate future, that she intended to visit South Africa to care for a family member undergoing treatment for cancer.
“He asked me if I would be okay if YBF cited this as the reason why I am departing from the organisation,” Heese wrote to the YBF board on departure. “I was chaperoned out of the building, feeling baffled and traumatised.”
YBF was placed into administration last year, owing $5.6m to creditors that include start-up companies that invested in its co-working spaces in Victoria and NSW.
It came to prominence after luring former ANZ chief Mike Smith to chair its board. Smith wasn’t paid a salary but did invest $1m in the enterprise. Take it as a sign of the company’s health that he was gone by 2019, just as letters from despairing employees began circulating at the board level.
INSIDE MARGIN CALL
Catlin’s timely exit from Netball Australia
Word count: 945
