FINGERS CROSSED! The 2020 Tokyo Paralympic Games have been rescheduled to August 24 to September 5 this year, with approximately 4400 athletes taking part in more than 500 events across 22 sports in 21 venues. We touch base with three of our South Australian hopefuls about their Paralympic dreams MEG LEMON PARA-CYCLING Just getting to the opening ceremony of the Tokyo Paralympics will be cause for celebration for Seacliff cyclist Meg Lemon. The 31-year-old dietitian – who suffered a traumatic brain injury in a 2014 road accident while cycling in Darwin – is poised to make her Games debut in Japan, competing in the C4 class in the 4km individual pursuit on the track, and the time trial and road race. However, the Port Adelaide Cycling Club member is still waiting to have her place in the Australian team confirmed; expecting that announcement to be made in July. “I have met the selection criteria and medalled at every major event (World Cup and World Championships) on the road and track, but it’s very competitive and we don’t know the number of spots Australia has,” Lemon says. “However, I am fairly confident I can continue to show I am on track and will continue to improve and podium – if selected – at the Games. You just have to train and have the mindset you are going, or you won’t put in 100 per cent.” Never a competitive cyclist prior to her accident, Lemon was challenged to get back onto a bike by her physiotherapist during her subsequent rehabilitation – and in so doing found a new driving force. “My physio challenged me to face a fear and get back on a bike during my initial rehab. So I borrowed an Adelaide City bike and tried it out. “As soon as I started pedalling, it felt like freedom and all my worries were washed away in that moment.” Lemon has a healthy perspective about the move to postpone the 2020 Olympic Games as originally planned, as it has provided her with further opportunity to prepare. “Personally, it gave me some extra time to work on my skills, strength and focus on my worksport balance,” she says. “I’m quite confident it will go ahead this year – just not as ‘normal’ – but the safety and health of all athletes and staff will be the No.1 priority.” Lemon is now looking forward to adding Japan to her passport. “There is a lot of hard work, things put on hold, sacrifices made and a whole team of people working so hard to get us all there for one to three days of glory,” she says. “The closer it gets, the stronger the butterflies in my stomach get, so the excitement is definitely building.” DANIEL KIRK PARA-ATHLETICS Hobbling out of the SA Aquatic Centre one day in 2014, the realisation hit Daniel Kirk: his football career was finished and he needed a new challenge in life. The one-time Glenelg ruckman’s sporting dreams had come crashing down two years earlier when he landed awkwardly in a clash against Norwood; the ankle injury and six subsequent failed operations leaving him with limited movement in his lower right leg.“About two years after the injury I was walking out of the SA Aquatic Centre,” he recalls. “Well, I wasn’t walking actually – I was shuffling, and in a world of pain. I was just trying to get back to the car and I was in a pretty ordinary mental state. To me it was a pretty clear moment: ‘I’d had two years and nothing’s working ...’.” But as the doors to the Marion swimming centre closed behind him and Kirk made his way across the barren carpark, he found a passage open through to another sporting challenge – para-athletics. “I was pretty emotional,” the now 38-year-old says. “I got in the car and rang Paralympics Australia and said ‘Hey, I’m a bit lost with life and I need a purpose again’. “They were terrific. A week later, I was meeting up with them in Adelaide and discussing different options; then, a few weeks later, I’m in Melbourne, catching up with the national throws coach and the guy who makes specialised foot orthosis splints.” With expert advice – and the support of the splint designed to aid the restricted movement in his ankle and reduce pain when standing – Kirk was fast-tracked into the para-athletics program, with discus becoming his new sporting challenge. Competing in the F44 class – for athletes who have an impairment in one leg below the knee – he has been able to recapture some of the feelings he used to enjoy from football and other sports through hurling a discus as far as possible. After missing out on selection for the Rio Paralympics in 2016, he made his Australian team debut at the 2017 World Para Athletic Championships in London, where he finished seventh, notching up a new Australian record in the process with a throw of 52.16m. “It’s an insane sport,” Kirk says. “You’re constantly seeking perfection in an imperfect world of movement. It’s kind of like the unsolvable puzzle.” Having missed out on the 2019 world titles in Doha for family reasons – wife Kim was experiencing pregnancy complications – he had his sights set on a good showing in Tokyo in 2020. But he’s philosophical about the event going on the back burner for a year. “Kim’s last trimester was pretty stressful and then, when our daughter Zendaya came along, the first six months were pretty intense,” he says. “And, when COVID hit, to be honest it was almost a relief that we had more time – there was just so much going on. I felt if we’d gone it wouldn’t have been on our terms, and we wouldn’t have been able to prepare the way we would have wanted to.” Kirk, who today runs coaching and education business NEXA Sports Performance with South Adelaide footballer Ben Haren, expects to learn in July if he is on the plane to Tokyo. He credits the para-sports program for giving him a new lease on life after his sense of self disappeared with the 2012 injury. “At 29 or 30, to feel like your best days are behind you is a pretty scary thought,” he says. “It was definitely a tumultuous time ... you have to adapt and find a way to reinvent yourself and understand a bit more about what’s worthwhile in life.” SAM VON EINEM PARA-TABLE TENNIS He is a man on a mission. Since claiming a silver medal at the 2016 Rio Paralympics, the 25-year-old table tennis star has been determined to go “one better” at the Tokyo event – a dream he’s had to leave simmering for a year as the world adjusts to life with COVID-19. However with the 2020 event rescheduled, the Glengowrie resident, who has been diagnosed with autism and competes in the class 11 division of the sport, has reset his sights. “The silver I managed to win in Rio (eventually going down to world No.1 Florian Van Acker in the final) was the first table tennis medal since 1984 so it was a big result for the table tennis team and for myself,” Von Einem says. “Ever since I won the silver, the goal for Tokyo has been to try to go that one better and win the gold. The result out of the Rio games gave me the confidence that I can do it.” A member of the Woodville Table Tennis Club, Von Einem acknowledges that, without any competition last year due to the pandemic, regular tournament-style training was an issue. “I’ve used the extra year as more time to try to get better and stronger for the postponed games,” he says. “Training was difficult during the lockdowns but luckily I’ve been able to keep training hard here in Adelaide after our longer lockdown, with some opportunities to train interstate in Melbourne as well. This year we have been lucky that Australia hasn’t seen big COVID numbers, which has enabled competitions to start up again around the country. However, unfortunately, there are still no international competitions until the Games this year.” A coach at Woodville spotted the former Immanuel College student’s potential for the sport as a junior, sparking a career that has since taken him around the world. “I started getting good results at local tournaments and competitions, and I realised I could have a successful career in para table tennis when I played my first international tournament in Hungary and beat highly ranked players in the world.” Hoping to complete a diploma in remedial massage therapy after the Tokyo Paralympics, Von Einem’s present focus is purely on the Games. “I always look forward to being able to compete for Australia on the biggest stage, which is the Paralympic Games,” he says. “The Tokyo Games will be a lot different due to COVID, of course, but I’m still motivated to play for the biggest prize.”
CREDIT: WORDS / DAVID GOLDSMITH
Word count: 1509
