TECHNOLOGY has been the key accelerator for South ­Australia’s top three fastest growing companies.
Gaming companies Foxie and ODD saw average turnover grow by 242 per cent and 176 per cent, respectively, with software business Solutions Plus Partnership, growing by more than 100 per cent, taking up the third spot on BDO’s Top 25 Fast Movers 2021 list revealed yesterday.
Founder Dineth Abeynayake’s mobile games business Foxie employs 24 staff, creating original mobile titles for a global audience of over two million players every month.
The maker of the popular Horse Riding Tales mobile game — downloaded more than two million times since it was developed in 2018 — attributed its growth to connecting players to their passions and hobbies through virtual-world experiences.
“Targeting a niche market rather than competing against the masses,” Mr Abeynayake said, describing it as a key strategy to achieving growth. “Persistence is critical – trial and failure increase success.” ODD Games co-founder and managing director Ben Marsh said the business, which creates racing video games for multiple platforms, hasn’t reached its full potential yet.
“ODD Games was a textbook garage start-up,” Mr Marsh said.
“In the early days, we worked with very little funds and minimal resources … I met my business partners at a start-up program and we didn’t know much about finance or business planning.
“Knowing that we haven’t yet reached our full potential motivates us to keep going, make more content and achieve more as­ ­a business.” ODD Games, which employs eight staff, launched its first game Monster Trucks nine years ago.
“We hoped it would rank within the top 20 in the ­racing games category,” Mr Mash said.
“To our surprise, it ranked No.1 in over 100 countries.
“The learning process never stops.” The annual Fast Movers SA program, led by BDO, has been running since 2005, identifying 25 growth businesses across different sectors through metropolitan and ­regional SA each year. The program has supported more than 300 businesses through that time. Public or private companies with a registered head office in SA and a minimum turnover of $200,000 per annum in the past three financial years are eligible to apply. See the full list of winners online at adelaide now.com.au/business
CREDIT: TECHNOLOGY VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 375
