A passion for customer service and working outdoors have been described as the keys to success for this year’s South Australian Young Entrepreneur of the Year.
Luke Timmins dropped out of an aerospace and mechanical engineering degree to pursue his passions, leading to the creation and rapid growth of his high-end gardening business Adelaide Hills Lawns & Gardens (AHLG).
In 2015 he partnered with long-time friend Jarrad Tait to establish AHLG, which provides garden maintenance, tree services and landscaping to a range of residential and commercial clients.
The business was last year ranked the eighth fastest growing business in South Australia as part of the Fast Movers SA program, and since then it has continued to grow, currently employing 46 staff.
Like all entrepreneurs, Mr Timmins took a risk to start-up the business, and it’s paying dividends.
After completing Business SA’s SAYES (South Australian Young Entrepreneur Scheme) program, he was last month named this year’s SA Young Entrepreneur of the Year.
Mr Timmins, 28, said it was an unexpected prize but capped off years of hard work.
“I had never considered myself particularly entrepreneurial, but after nearly two years of an aerospace and mechanical engineering degree, I suppose making a swift transition to partnering in a lawn and garden business would make me so,” he said.
“It’s been a fantastic and rewarding program and it is an honour to win the award.” During the 12 months of the SAYES program, AHLG generated 65 per cent growth in revenue, 53 per cent growth in profit and 11 per cent employee growth.
Business SA programs and employer solutions executive director Jenny Briggs said the SAYES program was designed to nurture, grow and scale start-up and early-stage businesses operated by South Australians under the age of 35.
“Luke has put his heart and soul into learning and developing a comprehensive business plan over the last 12 months,” she said.
Other award winners included Wickham Marketing’s Blair Wickham and Nood Australia’s Anthony Wilson who shared the business plan of the year award, and Vinify Wine Co’s Christian Canala who took out the business growth of the year award. The SAYES program, which has been running for 23 years, recently secured an additional two years of state government funding.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 378
