Labor has promised to spend $60m on airport runway improvements to service long-distance freight and widebody international tourist flights.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison has promised $50m as part of a $400 million expansion at Nyrstar, but there has been no announcement on the airport runway.
The project is top of the wishlist for Tourism Industry Council CEO Luke Martin.
“The Liberals not yet committing to finishing upgrading Hobart’s runway so we can take direct flights to Asia is just turning into example of Hobart being screwed in another federal election,” he said.
“I’ve got a growing pile of letters from senior Tasmanian Liberals all saying they personally support the runway being finished.
“But it seems we’re having have to wait until the eleventh hour of the campaign to get a public commitment.
Mr Martin said Hobart had been dudded again and again.
“I don't know what it is with the Liberals, Hobart and federal elections,” he said.
“Last election we had the cynical north-south politics play out over funding to upgrade MONA.
“The election before that we had funding committed to help bring tours back to Cadburys, that seemingly was dashed as soon as the election was over.
“Right now it seem they are content with a half-finished international runway.”
A Liberal Party campaign spokesman said further announcements would be made during the campaign.
“The Liberals have a plan to create a strong economy for a stronger future, including in the south of the State,” he said.
“Already we have made significant commitments to saving Nyrstar, investing in Norske Skog, and investing in the Sorell Jobs Hub.
“We will have more announcements regarding our plan ahead of election day.”
Cheers! Labor, Libs make major Tassie grog, tourism commitments
Both major parties have made significant funding commitments across Tasmania’s three northern marginal electorates.
At liquor start-up Sanyou Baijiu, at St Leonards, Labor candidate for Lyons announced a Labor government would dedicate a further $3.4m of funding towards fermentation accelerator and hub FermenTasmania.
The Legana project, which previously has received $7.5m under the federal government’s Building Better Regions Fund, $3.6m from West Tamar Council, $1.6m of industry support and operational funding from Food Innovation Australia Ltd, is due to commence construction later this year and be operational in late-2023.
Labor industry spokesman Richard Marles said the additional funds would enable FermenTasmania to purchase additional equipment and fit-out its site.
Mr Marles repeated an earlier claim made by Liberal Bass MP Bridget Archer, when she announced the initial $7.5m BBRF grant, the hub would support 640–650 direct and indirect jobs.
FermenTasmania chair, Kim Seagram, previously described the 1800ha facility as a “global first”.
“Not only is it a space for industry to play and innovate small-scale commercial products, but it will also provide spaces for cutting edge research and development, hands-on training and even agritourism and fermentation experiences for locals and visitors alike.”
Speaking on Sunday, Sanyou Baijiu co-founder Ian Sypkes, said a facility like FermenTasmania would have helped him cut his development time drastically through the provision of specialist equipment and expertise.
“I spent three years trying 1000 different methods before figuring out the process,” he said.
Meanwhile, at Westbury’s Western Tiers Distillery, Liberal candidate for Lyons Susie Bower announced a re-elected Coalition government would create a new national fund of up to $15m to enable small to medium-sized wineries, distilleries and beer producers for the construction or upgrade of cellar door or tourism-associated facilities such as restaurants, tour facilities and viewing platforms.
Grants of up to $100,000 would be made available, with producers and distillers required to match the funding.
An additional $5m will also be provided through the Wine, Spirits and Craft Breweries Tourism Events program to provide up to $100,000 to tourism and local government organisations to create new events and experiences to attract tourists and showcase wineries, distilleries and craft beer makers.
“Lyons is iconic not just for wine and sparkling, we’re also the country’s favourite top shelf, with our gin, whisky and vodka the go-to tipple for many,” Ms Bower said.
“Leveraging this to bring more visitors and tourists will support our wonderful local businesses.”
Finally, Liberal Braddon MP Gavin Pearce announced a re-elected Coalition government would invest $10m to upgrade and expand the Don River Railway.
“Since it opened its doors in 1976, the Don River Railway has welcomed school
groups, interstate and international tourists, and avid rail enthusiasts to step back in
time and take a ride on historic steam engines,” Mr Pearce said.
“Our funding commitment will enable the Don River Railway to steam ahead with their planned expansion of tourism offerings at the largest heritage railyard in the southern hemisphere.
“It will also allow them to upgrade track infrastructure and redevelop visitor amenities, including the museum and cafe.”
REVEALED: Coalition and Labor’s promises for Hobart
TWO weeks out from the federal election, the major parties are remaining coy about whether they will match each other’s major Southern Tasmanian infrastructure commitments.
The Coalition has pledged $50m towards a $400m expansion of Nyrstar’s Lutana zinc plant.
Meanwhile Labor has promised $60 million towards the $80 million Hobart Airport runway project and $20m towards ferry infrastructure and new terminals.
Industry pressure is mounting on the parties to show bipartisan support for the projects, however neither the Coalition nor Labor will be drawn on any announcements that may come before polling day.
“The Liberals have a plan for Tasmania for a strong economy and a stronger future and we will have more announcements to make ahead of election day,” a Coalition spokesman said.
A spokesman for Labor reiterated the airport commitment.
“Labor is proud of our commitment that will help turn Launceston and Hobart airports into economic powerhouses, upgrading facilities and laying the groundwork for thousands of new jobs across Tasmania.This sits alongside Labor’s other commitments in Tasmania that support more secure, well paid jobs right here in our state,” he said.
Staff at Nyrstar have highlighted the importance of the new electrolysis plant at the Lutana site, with the plant ­expected to radically improve environmental output and secure jobs for its 500 employees.
Environment principle Kylie Veale, who has worked at the site for seven years, described the project as “incredibly exciting” for environmental management.
“I also believe it will secure the future of the zinc works,” she said.
Graduate electrical engineer Brenton Lester said the upgrade would provide further career pathways for graduates.
Project contractor supervisor Simon “Sav” Saville, who has worked at Nyrstar for 30 years, said the future of the site was looking bright after many ups and downs over the years.
“I want to be part of it,” he said.
Meanwhile, nine of Tasmania’s peak industry groups have co-signed an open letter to the Prime Minister urging bipartisan support for the airport runway project.
The letter says the project will generate an additional $122 million in economic activity and create 1261 additional jobs across the state, in tourism, agriculture and Antarctic industries.
While the runway was lengthened in 2017, it must be further strengthened to enable fully loaded long haul flights to depart Tasmania.
“Committing in this federal election to complete the upgrade of Hobart Airport’s runway is a no brainer opportunity to invest strategically in the future of our industries and the broader Tasmanian economy,” the letter said.
blair.richards@news.com.au
Word count: 1164
