Plenty of people can have an innovative idea but it takes gumption to turn it into a reality.
It then takes funding and business acumen to turn it into a viable business model.
It's a challenge Australia's agtech start-ups know well but one several accelerator programs are working to address.
For two SA innovators, their ideas are gaining recognition thanks to winning the ThincAg Challenge on Wednesday night.
Third year ag science student Liam Place won first prize in the undergraduate category for his innovative financing model for deep ripping practices.
Wine science PhD candidate Stephanie Angela won first prize in the postgraduate category for her idea around the ultra-filtration of wine waste.
ThincAg is an agriculture and innovation competition run by the Adelaide Business School's ThincLab incubator.
Across the border in Vic, the state government launched a new initiative to support agtech start-ups last week.
Funding of $2.2 million has been committed to the Victorian AgTech Entrepreneurs Initiative. The program will be run in partnership with start-up agency LaunchVic.
Eligible organisations will be provided with grants of up to $600,000 to run pre-accelerator programs to provide support for early-stage start-up founders and help develop their product, business model and connect them with investors.
LaunchVic chief executive officer Kate Cornick said the initiative was an exciting and logical partnership.
"We know we have great start-ups in Vic, and we also know we are one of the largest food bowls of the country - building on the innovation in the sector makes perfect sense," she said.
Development opportunities exist for start-ups in other states with the SparkLabs Cultiv8 accelerator program based in Orange, NSW, and the Agtech and Logistics Hub at Toowoomba, Qld, delivering a series of open innovation and acceleration programs.
Start-up network evokeAG also runs a virtual accelerator aimed at supporting businesses and the adoption of new technologies on-farm.
CREDIT: Melody Labinsky
Word count: 313
