LOT Fourteen places Adelaide on the world innovation map, but more still needs to be done to open up the North Tce hub for SA’s next crop of business achievers.
That’s the view of the state’s chief entrepreneur Andrew Nunn, who said the research and innovation precinct at the former Royal Adelaide Hospital site would result in rich rewards. “Turning that 7ha on North Tce into an innovation and entrepreneur centre is a game-changer for us globally,” he said.
“We don’t realise it fully yet though, because probably only four years ago you could have had your appendix out there.
“Over the course of the next 12 months we really need to just open that place up to make everyone feel like it’s their place, where ‘If I’ve got an idea I can go there and people will help me develop it’.” Mr Nunn said Adelaide – which he described as being “on the precipice of being the most awesome city in the world” – was the perfect city to launch a start-up company.
“It’s big enough to give you some scale and capacity … but I think its biggest strength is its interconnection.” His view is shared by Taboo Period Products’ Eloise Hall, who – along with Isobel Marshall – established a menstrual health social enterprise in a bid to eradicate “period poverty”.
“Adelaide is a wonderful size where people are relatively well connected, and if you’re very passionate about something, there are a lot who can help you out in introducing you to the right people,” she said. “And it’s not too small that you don’t really have a market to grow into – it’s that perfect Goldilocks-size of encouraging innovation and letting it flourish.” Mr Nunn and Ms Hall are among a panel of experts who will look at the big issues in the state’s innovation and enterprise sector in the ninth Flinders University Fearless Conversations forum, to be held this week. The 13-week campaign, in partnership with The Advertiser, brings together leading South Australian voices to discuss some of the big issues facing the state.
Other industry figures involved in Wednesday’s 45-minute discussion – to be hosted by business reporter Joe Tauriello – include MyBudget founding director Tammy Barton and Flinders University Professor Melissa de Zwart. Issues on the agenda will include seed funding, the importance of networks and alliances, building resilience when things don’t go to plan and post-Covid opportunities.
Streamed live on advertiser.com.au every Wednesday from 10.30am, the series encourages the community to engage in the debate about SA’s future. Questions can be submitted through advertiser.com.au or on Twitter via #fearlessconversations
The Advertiser FEARLESS CONVERSATIONS Flinders University
CREDIT: DAVID GOLDSMITH
Word count: 447
