Coach Craig Deans could look to Liridon Krasniqi for "something special" on debut, while Apostolos Stamatelopoulos may play an even bigger role up front as Newcastle try to regain their goal-scoring touch against Sydney FC on Saturday.
Deans added former Albanian and Kosovo international Krasniqi to his squad for the first time on Friday and indicated the towering midfielder could feature off the bench at Jubilee Stadium.
Krasniqi, 29, joined the club last month from the Malaysian Super League and he has impressed with his strength and creativity on the ball in training.
The Jets (11 points) have slipped from sixth to 11th on the A-League table after losses to Wellington (2-0) and Adelaide (2-1) and face Sydney (15), who have drawn 1-1 with Brisbane and beaten Western United 2-0 in the past week.
Deans was disappointed with his side's attack and composure on the ball against Adelaide last week and he was hoping Krasniqi could help them improve.
"He's trained now for probably three weeks solid and he has got a little bit of X-factor, so he'll bring something different to the team, off the bench at the moment," Deans said.
"So definitely if the game is a game for a player like him, off the bench, we'll bring him on and have a look at him, but he's the only new one into the squad.
"He's just a little bit different. He's got some tricks and some skills. The challenge at the moment is trying to get him to do it at the right time, in the right part of the field, but I'm sure he's an experienced player and he'll work that out as we move on through the season.
"We've had a couple of games where it's been difficult to break opponents down, the Wellington game in particular, and he's got a little bit of difference about him where he might be able to do something special."
While Krasniqi is an option in the middle of the park, Stamatelopoulos looms as a chance to start up top.
The ex-Adelaide and Western United striker, known as AP, has impressed Deans in his 31 and 34 minutes off the bench in the recent losses to start his Jets career.
Newcastle have the worst attacking record in the league, with just nine goals from 11 games, and Stamatelopoulos could get even more time against Sydney to help the Jets correct that situation.
"There's a little bit of a good problem, in that AP came off the bench and I thought contributed quite well to the game," Deans said of the Adelaide match away.
"He hit the bar with a header, he was quite busy, he works hard with and without the ball, so there's options there.
"We're not scoring as many goals as we'd like, last week definitely we didn't create as many chances as we did in the previous games, so we need to get back to creating the chances again."
Another change could be the return of Luka Prso to the starting side. He made way for Ali Abbas last week as Deans looked for a winning combination without injured midfielder Ramy Najjarine (ankle) and the versatile Jason Hoffman (groin).
"Luka is available again and AP I thought did well when he came off the bench, so we've got a couple of options. It's just trying to find the combinations that are going to get us back to playing some good football again."
CREDIT: Craig Kerry
Word count: 579
