Four Corners
12 June 2021
'Scandal'
'GOOD MORNING BRITAIN', RACHEL REEVES MP: It's about lobbying, it's about sleaze, it's about cronyism & corruption.
ROBERT SMITH, CAPITAL MARKETS CORRESPONDENT, FINANCIAL TIMES: There were so many elements of this where it looked like a house of cards.
STEPHEN LONG Reporter: This is the story of one of the biggest corporate scandals since the Global Financial Crisis
SATYAJIT DAS, FORMER FINANCIER AND AUTHOR: You use terms like financial engineering, disruption, democratisation of finance, you spice with mystique, get a few endorsements from the good & great, then you stir it, & then you serve it up to the ignorant customers & investors as something very clever, glamorous & innovative.
STEPHEN LONG: The tale of an Australian who wooed the rich & powerful on his way to becoming a billionaire.
DAVID CAMERON, BRITISH PRIME MINISTER (2010-2016): I was paid an annual amount, a generous amount, far more than what I earned as Prime Minister.
JOHN HEMPTON HEDGE FUND MANAGER: Lex bought credibility really well, he associated himself with politicians, with famous people he looked the part.
STEVE CLAPHAM, FORENSIC ACCOUNTANT AND FOUNDER "BEHIND THE BALANCE SHEET": He's been a brilliant salesman, & he's had an incredible ambition.
CORPORATE VIDEO: Greensill changing finance to change the world.
STEPHEN LONG: Before the business Lex Greensill built came crashing down.
SIOBHAIN MCDONAGH MP: Mr Greensill, are you a fraudster?
LEX GREENSILL, FOUNDER, GREENSILL CAPITAL: No, Ms McDonagh, I am not.
STEPHEN LONG: The collapse is threatening the business empire of another billionaire, steel baron, Sanjeev Gupta.
Putting tens of thousands of jobs at risk across the globe …including in Australia
KINGSLEY EWINGS, TRUCKING CONTRACTOR: Well, it's the largesse of a billionaire but we're not being paid.
STEPHEN LONG: The fallout has sparked a political scandal & investigations of suspected corporate fraud.
SUSAN HAWLEY, EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR, SPOTLIGHT ON CORRUPTION: We are looking at fraud, we are looking at balance sheet manipulation, we are looking at a major, major accounting scandal.
STEPHEN LONG, REPORTER: Tonight, on Four Corners, we trace the rise & fall from grace of two billionaires: an Australian farmer turned financier & a so-called saviour of steel, whose businesses, & fates, are entwined.
We look at how they beguiled the rich & powerful & lift the veil on the financial dark arts they used to conjure money, seemingly, out of nothing.
TITLE CARD: SCANDAL
STEPHEN LONG: Bundaberg — famous for sugarcane & Bundy rum.
This is the hometown of Lex Greensill.
His family has worked the land here for three generations.
VINCE HABERMANN, BUNDABERG RESIDENT: The farm was established by Roy Greensill in 1945 & it's now a third generation Greensill operation.
I just admire the whole family, from Roy initially & then Lloyd & Judy, & then through to their sons, Lex & Peter & Andrew.
STEPHEN LONG: Vince Habermann's family has lived in the district since the 1800s, & he's known the Greensills all his life.
VINCE HABERMANN: They're just genuine, hardworking community minded people. To me, they are very good business operators.
LEX GREENSILL (CORPORATE VIDEO): Let me be honest with you, this is not the clothes that I would want to wear every day, I'm actually a farmer, every chance I can I'm on a tractor…
STEPHEN LONG: But not everyone here buys the folksy story
RUSSELL MORTIMER, SWEET POTATO GROWER: It's a joke.,I think he's lucky to know one end of a tractor from another.
As far as I'm aware he had little to do with the family farm growing up & was more interested in the books.
STEPHEN LONG: From his neighboring property, Russell Mortimer watched on as Greensill Farming expanded far & wide.
RUSSELL MORTIMER: We've seen an explosion in land acquisitions on behalf of Greensill Farming, equipment, labor, & basically crop area grown.
They've gone from smaller cane, melon growers into huge, sweet potato growers.
STEPHEN LONG: It's a far cry from the struggling family farm that Lex Greensill says drove him to set up the finance business that would make him rich.
LEX GREENSILL, (CORPORATE VIDEO): Where did the inspiration for Greensill come from?
In fact, it came from the adversity that my parents, our family, endured being farmers in country Queensland in Australia.
ROBERT SMITH: Lex Greensill he's a financier, but within about five minutes of meeting the guy, he'll tell you this great story about how he grew up on a farm in Bundaberg in rural Queensland, & that his family supposedly had sort of financial difficulties when large companies were late paying their bills on time.
So Greensill's whole sort of corporate origin story was all about solving this problem.
He said that he had a financial product that could help small businesses like his parents get paid faster with essentially zero risk.
LEX GREENSILL, (CORPORATE VIDEO): So, I guess our central thesis has always been to deliver finance fairer, to the battlers, to the small businesses in every corner of the globe.
ROBERT SMITH: Greensill came to London in the 2000's.
He studied at Manchester Business School, up north here.
And then he ended up getting a job at Morgan Stanley, a big U.S. investment bank & he was in the division doing supply chain finance, which was kind of, yeah, it was quite an unsexy bit of banking.
STEPHEN LONG: At Morgan Stanley he made an influential friend who would catapult his career.
Jeremy Heywood, one of Britain's top civil servants, who was on secondment to Morgan Stanley.
SUSAN HAWLEY: Lex Greensill managed to persuade the very topmost senior civil servants in this country, the cabinet secretary, Jeremy Heyward, that he was a, a kind of miracle child.
STEPHEN LONG: In 2012, Heywood made Lex Greensill a senior advisor in the office of conservative Prime Minister David Cameron.
LEX GREENSILL, CORPORATE VIDEO: I think my only claim to fame is being the only boy from Bundaberg ever to have an office at number 10 Downing Street here in London.
David Cameron's best advice to me when I was starting my company was, 'Lex don't worry about being a novice chief executive just give it a go — after all I'm a first-time Prime Minister'.
ROBERT SMITH: He had his own business card; he had his own security pass. I mean, this is sort of, this isn't normal, it's not normal for a financier to kind of have free reign of the corridors of power in the U.K.
SUSAN HAWLEY: He was able to have the kind of access no one can dream of, I mean, generally big banks in the UK have a lot of access to government regular meetings, but no one has an office in, in the Prime Minister's ministry, you know, no one has a card saying that they're the Prime Minister's special advisor, this is an absolutely unparalleled level of access.
STEPHEN LONG: The Prime Minister was clearly impressed with his new advisor.
David Cameron soon adopted a plan from Lex Greensill to help small businesses get credit.
DAVID CAMERON: Lex Greenhill (sic) where are you; Lex give us a wave.
STEPHEN LONG: It was a version of what's known as supply chain finance – the core business of his newly-launched firm, Greensill Capital.
ROBERT SMITH: The whole idea with supply chain finance is you have a very big company with a lot of smaller suppliers.
And big companies are sometimes not great at paying the smaller suppliers.
You know, they might have chaotic systems or whatever.
So, the idea here is that a finance company interjects itself in the middle of this & it pays the suppliers, but it pays them a discount.
So, it pays them a bit less than what they are owed & then the finance company collects the full amount from the big company later.
SATYAJIT DAS, FORMER FINANCIER AND AUTHOR OF "A BANQUET OF CONSEQUENCES": It's been going on since the bronze age in Mesopotamia & all the way from the Industrial Revolution to today.
STEPHEN LONG: There's nothing new about this then?
SATYAJIT DAS: There's very little new about it.
STEPHEN LONG: Greensill Capital marketed itself as a company that could use technology to bring supply chain finance into the 21st century.
SUSAN HAWLEY: I think it was maybe the UK government's, you know, Silicon Valley moment.
They were like, "Ah, this is, you know, a really exciting new fintech product" & it was also a new ideology, "we need to get businesspeople into the heart of government", but no one really thought through the implications & how you manage the conflicts of interest that that creates where you have a private interest inserted right into the heart of government & that's what happened with Lex Greensill.
STEPHEN LONG: Robert Smith is the lead reporter in an award-winning team covering the Greensill Capital story at the Financial Times.
ROBERT SMITH: I first wrote the word Greensill in a story in 2014.
So, I've been covering this for years & years & years & it's always seemed obvious to me that it was going to end in tears.
You know, there were so many elements of this where it looked like a house of cards.
STEPHEN LONG: By 2014, the still-fledging finance firm was acquiring serious assets.
In Germany, Greensill Capital bought a defunct lender & promptly renamed it Greensill Bank.
Through the bank, it bought the first of what would become a fleet of private aircraft.
SATYAJIT DAS: In my experience, trade finance was never very glamorous. Trade financiers flew in the back of the plane, not in private jets as seems to have been the case with Greensill.
STEPHEN LONG: Despite the trappings of wealth, Greensill Capital appeared to be struggling.
In 2016, it posted a loss of 62 million dollars.
But the fortunes of Greensill Capital were about to change as its founder forged a relationship with another budding entrepreneur.
SANJEEV GUPTA, CORPORATE VIDEO: Welcome everybody to Liberty Steel Newport, it's a proud day for us today as we start production – please let me show you around.
STEPHEN LONG: Indian-born, British educated Sanjeev Gupta had audacious plans to become a giant of the steel industry.
ROBERT SMITH: Sanjeev Gupta was like a nobody in the steel industry. He wasn't even a big name in commodities trading. That was his background.
He was a pretty obscure figure there.
And he came out of nowhere & just started buying asset after asset after asset.
SATYAJIT DAS: Commodity trading & commodity firms are a small tight knit community where everybody knows everybody & what they're doing.
The arrival & growth of Sanjeev Gupta's GFG Group caught them a little bit by surprise.
They were not clear on what the business model was, how you could take the risks he was taking & where the money that was funding his empire was coming from.
STEPHEN LONG: Gupta's sprawling network of companies, known as the Gupta Family Group or GFG Alliance needed finance.
Greensill's emerging start up needed business.
They came together like hand & glove.
ROBERT SMITH: The relationship between Greensill & Gupta is forged at a time when Greensill's business was going through a lot of difficulties.
So, this is back in 2016 & it lost a lot of money on sort of bad loans, bad debts.
It had been doing the supply chain finance for some inferior companies.
And what Gupta did was he rode in, & he said, "I'm going to pay you massive fees if you start providing me this financing."
And suddenly on paper Greensill's business looked like it'd been resurrected.
STEPHEN LONG: The purchase of an ageing aluminium smelter in Scotland & a hydro-electric plant that supplied its power was the first major deal involving Gupta's GFG Alliance & Greensill Capital.
ROBERT SMITH: The deal in Scotland, which was kind of it was like the deal which cemented this marriage of Greensill & Gupta, & it really it was really the sort of origin of this financial engineering taken to extremes between them.
CORPORATE VIDEO: The GFG Alliance bought the smelting operation at Lochaber because they could see a positive future built on Scotland's century of experience making aluminium.
STEPHEN LONG: The Scottish government was desperate to stop the smelter closing.
This leverage allowed GFG Alliance to extract extraordinary terms.
ROBERT SMITH: What the Scottish government guaranteed was, they guaranteed a deal to sell power between a business owned by Gupta's father & a business owned by Gupta.
So very strange relationship there, not a normal guarantee & what Greensill did was it turned this guarantee into kind of financial investments that it was able to sell.
STEPHEN LONG: That government guarantee of power sales was a valuable asset & Greensill Capital turned it into gold, raising nearly 500 million pounds for GFG from investors.
STEPHEN CLAPHAM: Gupta has been extraordinarily clever in the way he's financed himself, & some of the transactions I've observed have been, you know, genius financial engineering, getting other people to pay to allow you to take over a business.
ANNOUNCER: From the United Kingdom please welcome the CEO of the year Liberty House Group's Sanjeev Gupta.
STEPHEN LONG: After saving jobs & factories, Sanjeev Gupta was hailed as a business genius.
ANNOUNCER: You're the man behind Britain's industrial revival, so how does it feel to pick up award tonight?
SANJEEV GUPTA: I'm not the man there's 5000 men, everyone is behind us
STEPHEN LONG: And who was there cheering him on but his friend & financier.
Lex Greensill was also winning accolades.
Royally bestowed as Commander of the Order of the British Empire for services to the economy.
The boy from Bundaberg, & the saviour of steel, were in the embrace of the British establishment.
PRINCE CHARLES: It's so remarkable what Mr Gupta has achieved here in ensuring a future for this steel mill.
ROBERT SMITH: Here in London, you know, the Financial Times we talk to banks every day, & normal sources of financing that it's sort of bankers who'd usually do these deals, they were sort of baffled by it.
They're like, "Where is the money coming from?", & it was Greensill.
STEPHEN LONG: As the Gupta Family Group Alliance bought steel mills throughout Europe, Greensill Capital lent it billions.
ROBERT SMITH: Often what Greensill would do, would, he'd provide to over fund a deal & that would almost provide money for the next deal, & you had this sort of daisy chain of deals where the financing of one was dependent on the other
And crucially it all allowed Gupta to make these deals without putting much of his own money in.
Often, no equity really went into these transactions.
So incredibly risky, just borrowing money after money, after money to do the sort of self-perpetuating chain of acquisitions.
STEVE CLAPHAM: Clearly, there was a very close relationship between Gupta & Greensill, and, & clearly, Gupta was being extended a very significant amount of credit that wasn't, wouldn't ordinarily have been given by an independent arms-length third party transaction.
CORPORATE VIDEO: The future is coming fast.
Greensill is already there.
STEPHEN LONG: Greensill Capital created some complicated financial products to help fund its lending.
SATYAJIT DAS: So, what they did was take the invoices against which they'd lent, bundle them up into securities & these securities were then sold to other banks or investment funds for them to raise the money, which they on-lent to their clients.
CORPORATE VIDEO: Working capital finance is easy
Greensill uses your customers' credit rating to pay your invoices early
And then we turn those invoices into bonds
STEPHEN LONG: Investment bank Credit Suisse raised billions for Greensill Capital through this model, telling investors insurance took away the risk.
ROBERT SMITH: What Credit Suisse did was it set up these funds, which only invested in Greensill's products & it told its investors that these were super safe.
Okay?
Because of the insurance, because of the financial engineering, you don't even have to worry about them.
These are the sleep at night funds.
These are the really safe funds.
JOHN HEMPTON: The way it was funded was by having Credit Suisse run a fund which bought assets from Greensill.
It was sold to relatively rich investors.
And they were sold on the promise that the assets were all insured by a double A insurer.
STEPHEN LONG: Normal supply chain finance is pretty safe, short-term lending.
But the allegation is that somewhere along the line, Greensill Capital started giving credit for possible future sales that might never happen, to potential future customers, that might never exist.
ROBERT SMTH: What Greensill seems to have done, what some of their clients allege that they did was they gave them credit on the basis of customers they didn't even have.
This is really aggressive stuff, & it shows how far Greensill strayed away from the normal path of this sort of financing.
STEPHEN LONG: Lex Greensill denies this.
In a statement to Four Corners, his spokesman said Greensill Capital issued credit "based on future forecast trade with current customers."
SIOBHAIN MCDONAGH, BRITISH LABOUR MP: I am completely flummoxed that somebody can make money out of guessing what business will be done between companies in the future, & lending on the basis of it.
That, to me, sounds a bit more like clairvoyancy than high finance.
STEPHEN LONG: As Greensill Capital expanded, the boy from Bundaberg embraced life in country England.
Home was a stately manor in the village of Saughall.
And the finance firm had so many planes, people joked it could start an airline.
STEVE CLAPHAM: If you've got a large corporate, then you may well have a fleet of aircraft, but it usually is a very big company, not a company the size of Greensill.
JOHN HEMPTON, Hedge fund manager: It had four & they weren't just four private jets, one of them was a Gulfstream 650.
Now, a private jet is a thing that a billionaire might buy, but a Gulfstream 650, is a plane outside the realms of ordinary billionaires.
Think of it as sort of being able to fly New York to China or maybe London to somewhere in Queensland in one hop & it would cost about as much as 10 private jets.
And you have to lend an awful lot of money before you can start affording a Gulfstream 650.
That makes you an organisation the size of a Citigroup or a Bank of America, & I doubt either Citigroup or Bank of America would splurge that much, there was a lot of other people's money, & he wasn't very careful with it
STEPHEN LONG: Sanjeev Gupta also had a plane, named in honour of his metals empire.
STEVE CLAPHAM: The extraordinary thing was that Gupta's aircraft had a particular livery & one of the Greensill fleet had the identical livery.
And yeah, well that's, like, bizarre, kind of, relationship, where you paint your planes the same colour.
STEPHEN LONG: Sanjeev Gupta's plane was often spotted in Bundaberg – which is where the two men hatched a plan to rescue Australia's troubled steel industry.
Backed by Greensill Capital Sanjeev Gupta turned his sights to Whyalla, buying a steelworks that had gone under with crippling debts.
And Whyalla embraced the Man of Steel.
ARTHUR SINODINOS: This man is a great Australian, he's now become a great Australian starting with South Australia.
SANJEEV GUPTA: This truly is the spiritual home of steel in Australia & here we can build one by one a world class steel industry.
CLARE MCLAUGHLIN ,WHYALLA MAYOR: Whyalla was in a very precarious situation at that time.
We didn't know what our future held, so when GFG & Mr. Gupta came in & bought the steelworks, it was wonderful for our city.
It meant we had a future, so it was very welcome, & it was a very exciting time.
SCOTT MORRISON, PRIME MINISTER: Hi Sanjeev, how are you? Great to see you.
Hi Clare, how are you nice to meet you too.
What you're doing here Sanjeev what you're doing here Whyalla is making our economy stronger.
STEPHEN LONG: GFG Alliance promised massive new investment – & everyone wanted to believe.
CLARE MCLAUGHLIN : The vision was to build & transform the current Steelworks here in Whyalla to set our industry here up for generations to come.
REX PATRICK, INDEPENDENT SENATOR FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA: Mr. Gupta doesn't think about small ideas.
He only thinks about big ideas.
He's a man with extreme optimism & it's infectious when he talks to you.
Of course, that doesn't necessarily mean that the foundations are there to execute some of his big plans.
KINGSLEY EWINGS, TRUCKING CONTRACTOR: Well, it's the largesse of a billionaire but we're not being paid.
STEPHEN LONG: Ewings Contractors is a trucking company that supplies the steel mill at Whyalla & owner Kingsley Ewings had high hopes when Gupta's GFG Alliance took over.
KINGSLEY EWINGS: In the first nine months it was business as usual & then it started to change, they just didn't pay us.
STEPHEN LONG: How long for?
KINGSLEY EWINGS: Oh, a hundred days, 120 days, or not at all until you did something about it, & there was never anybody to talk to about it.
STEPHEN LONG: How much debt did they rack up owing to you?
KINGSLEY EWINGS: Oh, at times up to 600, $700,000.
REX PATRICK: I was talking to probably 20 or 30 contractors.
All of whom were under great stress & pressure because they weren't getting paid on time.
In effect, Sanjeev Gupta was treating his suppliers as a bank, & that was most inappropriate.
KATE CARNELL, FORMER SMALL BUSINESS OMBUDSMAN: My office got significant numbers of complaints from small businesses that were having extended payment times from the Gupta Group, particularly in the Whyalla area & remember, these are businesses that are already under pressure.
STEPHEN LONG: Suppliers were told -- if you want to get paid on time use Greensill Capital's supply chain finance.
KATE CARNELL: GFG brought Greensill to the table, in fact, had a joint meeting with the small businesses in Whyalla, where they together put forward a proposal where the small businesses could be paid on time, but only if they paid a percentage of their invoice & that percentage could be as high as 8%.
STEPHEN LONG: To Greensill?
KATE CARNELL: To Greensill.
It's a huge whack & of course, it all depends on how quickly they want to be paid but remember, for a lot of those small businesses, they told us that they already had their price squashed or squeezed by GFG.
They were having to offer really low prices to get the contract to start with.
So, another percentage on top of already reduced prices made it not profitable.
STEPHEN LONG: What do you reckon about this supply chain finance?
KINGSLEY EWINGS: I think it's a method of extracting money from people & kicking the can down the road, it's just a method of moving money around in circles.
STEPHEN LONG: The astounding thing is much of the finance for GFG Alliance was short term credit from Greensill Capital, that had to be constantly renewed.
It was borrowing from Greensill Capital, paying it back, & borrowing again.
Four Corners has learned that senior executives in GFG's Australian operations repeatedly raised concerns with Sanjeev Gupta about the solvency of the steel business here & its rickety financing.
He was urged again & again to find long-term funding & stop relying on short term credit from Greensill.
In response we're told he'd say, "don't worry, I've got Lex in my top pocket".
By now Greensill Capital boasted a bevy of blue-chip clients alongside GFG -- including Airbus, Ford, Vodafone, & Telstra.
It also caught the eye of Japan's richest man.
STEPHEN CLAPHAM: You've got to hand it to him, he's, he's built a business in a very short time, & managed to extract money from one of the most savvy investors in the world, Masayoshi Son.
STEPHEN LONG: Masayoshi Son, CEO of Japan's Softbank, scouts the world for investment opportunities.
Lex Greensill became part of the entourage, after Son adopted him as a protégé.
MASAYOSHI SON (SUBTITLES): He's the money guy (laughs)
STEPHEN LONG: Through Softbank's Vision fund, Son tipped 1.5 billion U-S dollars into the Australian finance house come fintech.
Making Lex Greensill a multi-billionaire.
LEX GREENSILL, CORPORATE VIDEO: One of the great things about joining the Softbank Vision Fund family hasn't just been the network, the capital, & the advice.
It's actually been having Masa as a partner & a mentor.
CORPORATE VIDEO: Greensill looks at things differently seeking answers to questions others find impossible to answer.
STEPHEN LONG: Yet seasoned observers were sceptical.
Author & financier Satyajit Das forecast the Global Financial Crisis; he found the Greensill Capital spin all too familiar.
SATYAJIT DAS: You use terms like financial engineering, disruption, democratisation of finance, you spice with mystique, get a few endorsements from the good & great, then you stir it, & then you serve it up to the ignorant customers & investors as something very clever, glamorous & innovative.
Greensill did very well at this in taking what is one of the most traditional forms of financing with an ancient lineage & presenting it as something highly clever & that actually was their great achievement.
STEPHEN LONG: How fintech was it?
SATYAJIT DAS: Well to me it's a bit like taking the plough & cart & basically painting it in gold.
STEPHEN LONG: In London, the relationship between David Cameron & Lex Greensill had come full circle.
DAVID CAMERON: I started working as a senior adviser to Greensill Capital in August 2018. Lex Greensill wanted me to help him grow what was becoming a successful UK-based fintech firm.
JOHN HEMPTON: Lex bought credibility really well, he associated himself with politicians, with famous people, he looked the part.
STEPHEN LONG: David Cameron spared no effort in promoting Greensill Capital lobbying his old colleagues to secure government contracts
SIOBHAIN McDONAGH: He was found to have sent 25 text messages, 12 WhatsApps, 8 emails, 11 calls, & require 9 meetings by chief civil servants in the Treasury, at the height of the pandemic, to discuss work with Greensills.
I mean, it's beyond belief that anybody else would get that amount of attention when really the economy was going into meltdown because of the pandemic.
STEPHEN LONG: The former Prime Minister was paid well for his efforts, as he later told a Parliamentary committee.
DAVID CAMERON: I was paid an annual amount, a generous annual amount, far more than I earned as Prime Minister.
JOHN HEMPTON: He at one stage thought his options were worth 80 million pounds, it takes a politician of high integrity to not cash out their reputation for that much money when they've left office.
SUSAN HAWLEY: He was exploiting his personal contacts & his knowledge of government, very aggressively.
I mean, it was across a broad range & some of the parliamentarians in this have described it almost as stalking.
STEPHEN LONG: Australia's former foreign minister Julie Bishop also joined the payroll spruiking Greensill on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum in Switzerland.
Labor MP Ed Husic is leading Opposition efforts to find out more about her role.
ED HUSIC, LABOR MP: We had someone in the form of Julie Bishop, who'd had 20 years' experience as a parliamentarian, deep contacts within the coalition contacting directly senior ministers, I mean, in Davos, there you had the former finance minister being approached by Julie Bishop to start talking with Lex Greensill, who heads up that firm, about the idea of extending one of those products to the federal public service in a way that the finance department was very skittish about & likened to payday lending.
STEPHEN LONG: Julie Bishop went on to personally approach Treasurer Josh Frydenberg to arrange a meeting between Greensill Capital & Treasury officials.
But, at the time, she hadn't formally declared herself on the lobbyists' register as an influence peddler for Greensill Capital.
Julie Bishop did not respond to Four Corners' inquiries.
SUSAN HAWLEY: Julie Bishop seems to have done exactly what David Cameron did in the UK, which is exploit a loophole in the lobbying rules, where they don't need to declare themselves as lobbyists because they're actually employed by the company, & then use their position, a very influential position as former ministers, with all the contacts that brings, to promote a company and, & benefited & it's a nonsense that the rules don't capture that kind of activity.
STEPHEN LONG: As the virus ravaged Britain, Greensill Capital was made a lender under a government guaranteed emergency loan scheme.
All but one of the loans it made went to Gupta's GFG Alliance, as Greensill Capital channeled 350 million pounds to Gupta's businesses.
SUSAN HAWLEY: The Gupta empire, as it's now emerging, set up various new companies to be able to access as many of these UK government backed loans as possible.
STEPHEN LONG: As his firm was taking taxpayer-backed cheap loans, Sanjeev Gupta splashed out 42 million pounds on a mansion in exclusive Belgravia, a stone's throw from Buckingham Palace.
But the cracks were starting to appear.
Behind the scenes, a bank Gupta's GFG Alliance owned was under investigation.
SUSAN HAWLEY: It's emerging from some of the parliamentary inquiries in the UK that the bank of England alerted the National Crime Agency, possibly as long ago as a year ago, about this bank & some concerns they had about it.
And the National Crime Agency started investigating, it looks like they may have been doing some covert monitoring.
STEPHEN LONG: In Germany, the finance regulator began probing Greensill Bank.
It discovered the bank had massive lending exposure to Gupta's GFG Alliance.
STEPHEN CLAPHAM: That's very unusual for a bank because, you know, the nature of a bank, is that you don't bet it all, bet the ranch on one client.
STEPHEN LONG: In a special forensic audit, the German regulator contacted companies that were meant to be trading with GFG.
It concluded much of the trading had never happened.
CYNTHIA O'MURCHU, INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER, FINANCIAL TIMES: You know if you artificially inflate the amount of business you do, & on the back of that get loans, then that's potentially criminal.
STEPHEN LONG: The team at the Financial Times, was following a similar trail.
Investigative reporter Cynthia O'Murchu examined a list of customers of a GFG subsidiary, Liberty Commodities.
CYNTHIA O'MURCHU: I spent about a morning calling, as many as I could in that timeframe, and, you know, one, after the other kept coming back to me & saying, we have never traded with Liberty Commodities, ever.
Not just, not in the last year, not just not that year, but ever.
ROBERT SMITH: So, this has sort of raised more serious suspicions of fraud shall we say, because this isn't to do with financial engineering, it's not to do with providing credit against hypothetical stuff.
This appears to be pieces of paper that say that Gupta's business sold metal to people who denied doing business with him.
So, this is sort of a whole other different level of, you know, potential dubious lending.
STEPHEN LONG: GFG rejected the allegations.
In a letter to the Financial Times, Sanjeev Gupta shifted responsibility to Greensill Capital, saying it financed "prospective receivables".
And that "Greensill selected & approved companies with whom [GFG] could potentially do business in the future."
CYNTHIA O'MURCHU: It just doesn't ring true because you don't, how can you issue an invoice for a particular dollar amount, for a particular product, at a particular date, and, & then say that it's a future transaction?
STEPHEN LONG: By last year pressure was mounting on Greensill Capital.
Insurers, so critical to its business model, were getting nervous.
Greensill's main insurer, based in Australia, warned it would not renew Greensill's polices.
STEPHEN CLAPHAM: You can't expect the insurers to insure uninsurable credit risks.
And, you know, it wasn't as if the insurers just said overnight, "Oh, we're not going to renew your premiums."
They, Greensill had ample warning.
STEPHEN LONG: The fate of the global finance empire rested on the outcome of an emergency late night court hearing in March this year in Sydney.
Just hours before the policies expired, Greensill Capital urged a judge to force the insurer to maintain coverage.
The judge declined.
ROBERT SMITH: Credit Suisse which had billions invested in these Greensill products it suddenly discovers, oh no, there's no insurance underlying this & it has to sort of halt the whole operation.
So that's the kind of key trigger this year, which brings the whole edifice crashing down.
STEPHEN LONG: Lex Greensill declined to do an interview with Four Corners.
LEX GREENSILL SPEAKING AT TREASURY COMMITTEE INQUIRY: Please understand that I bear complete responsibility for the collapse of Greensill Capital.
I am desperately saddened that more than a thousand very hard-working people have lost their jobs at Greensill.
Likewise, I take full responsibility for any hardship being felt by our clients & their suppliers & indeed investors in our programs.
It's deeply regrettable that we were let down by our leading insurer whose actions assured Greensill's collapse.
STEPHEN LONG: There are now multiple Parliamentary inquiries into the collapse of Greensill Capital.
At a House of Commons hearing, Lex Greensill was called to account.
SIOBHAIN MCDONAGH : Mr Greensill are you a fraudster?
LEX GREENSILL: No Ms McDonagh I am not.
STEVE CLAPHAM: He's been a brilliant salesman, & he's had an incredible ambition.
And I think we'll find that he sailed too close to the sun.
STEPHEN LONG: Greensill Bank has been shut down by the German regulator.
ROBERT SMITH: And the bank's management are now under criminal investigation in Germany.
There's a potential they could be charged with balance sheet manipulation, which is sort of no joke.
It, I think it carries a maximum three-year sentence.
STEPHEN LONG: The demise of Greensill Capital's has plunged Sanjeev Gupta's empire into crisis.
Stripped of his major funding source, GFG Alliance is desperately trying to refinance & offload assets – but says it plans to keep Whyalla.
REX PATRICK: I've always wanted Sanjeev Gupta to succeed.
If he were to succeed, if his plans were to materialise, it would have such a positive effect on Whyalla & South Australia generally.
STEPHEN LONG: The UK Serious Fraud Office is now investigating the Gupta Family Group Alliance for suspected fraud, fraudulent trading, & money laundering.
Its inquiry includes GFG's financing arrangements with Greensill Capital.
SUSAN HAWLEY: Between them the Gupta empire & Greensill are now being investigated by the UK's three top, criminal investigators for this kind of economic crime.
So, you've got the Serious Fraud Office, the National Crime Agency & the Financial Conduct Authority, & they could all impose some, some heavy penalties.
JOHN HEMPTON: People like to believe in magic beans.
They like to believe that there's somebody out there that has solved finance.
He was making finance fairer as he jumped in his Gulfstream 650 & flew across the Atlantic.
I don't believe that for a second. It's just sort of obvious bullshit.
STEPHEN LONG: In Bundaberg, locals have watched on as the drama unfolds.
The struggling, 80-hectare family farm that inspired Lex Greensill to "make finance fairer" now spans 3200 hectares.
Money the family harvested from Greensill Capital has been ploughed into the land.
RUSSELL MORTIMER: In a nutshell, they've taken hills out, & left flat paddocks.
The stuff that they did is the thing of dreams for the rest of us mere mortal farmers.
They've spent a lifetime worth of money in a number of years.
STEPHEN LONG: Where do you think the money's coming from?
RUSSELL MORTIMER: Oh look, it's no real secret amongst us.
We do believe it's come through Greensill Capital.
I can't see any other way that that amount of money could come into that business & have been spent in the short period of time,
STEPHEN LONG: Sweet potato grower Russell Mortimer says the Greensill farming giant is crushing small family farms.
RUSSELL MORTIMER: It has absolutely devastated our industry, hands down.
The volumes that are being grown & hitting the marketplace & for the price that they're being sold for in the marketplace has, yeah, it's put a lot of us to the wall.
STEPHEN LONG: They've flooded the market.
RUSSELL MORTIMER: They've flooded the market, yes, & continue to do so.
REX PATRICK: In the end, karma, if anything has played out & that's why Greensill has gone under.
The business model wasn't one that worked & it wasn't fair.
RUSSELL MORTIMER: They were spruiking to help farmers like myself & others in the industry with these finance scenarios but nothing has come of that.
They've profited themselves & have not uplifted anyone else with it.
Before the business Lex Greensill built came crashing down.
SIOBHAIN MCDONAGH MP: Mr Greensill, are you a fraudster?
LEX GREENSILL, Founder, Greensill Capital: No, Ms McDonagh, I am not.
The collapse is threatening the business empire of another billionaire, steel baron, Sanjeev Gupta.
Putting tens of thousands of jobs at risk across the globe …including in Australia
KINGSLEY EWINGS, Trucking contractor: Well, it's the largesse of a billionaire but we're not being paid.
The fallout has sparked a political scandal & investigations of suspected corporate fraud.
SUSAN HAWLEY, Executive Director, Spotlight on Corruption: We are looking at fraud, we are looking at balance sheet manipulation, we are looking at a major, major accounting scandal.
STEPHEN LONG, REPORTER: Tonight, on Four Corners, we trace the rise & fall from grace of two billionaires: an Australian farmer turned financier & a so-called saviour of steel, whose businesses, & fates, are entwined. We look at how they beguiled the rich & powerful & lift the veil on the financial dark arts they used to conjure money, seemingly, out of nothing.
TITLE CARD: SCANDAL
Bundaberg — famous for sugarcane & Bundy rum.
This is the hometown of Lex Greensill.
His family has worked the land here for three generations.
VINCE HABERMANN, Bundaberg resident: The farm was established by Roy Greensill in 1945 & it's now a third generation Greensill operation. I just admire the whole family, from Roy initially & then Lloyd & Judy, & then through to their sons, Lex & Peter & Andrew.
Vince Habermann's family has lived in the district since the 1800s, & he's known the Greensills all his life.
VINCE HABERMANN: They're just genuine, hardworking community minded people. To me, they are very good business operators.
LEX GREENSILL (Corporate video): Let me be honest with you, this is not the clothes that I would want to wear every day, I'm actually a farmer, every chance I can I'm on a tractor…
But not everyone here buys the folksy story
RUSSELL MORTIMER, Sweet potato grower: It's a joke. I think he's lucky to know one end of a tractor from another. As far as I'm aware he had little to do with the family farm growing up & was more interested in the books.
From his neighboring property, Russell Mortimer watched on as Greensill Farming expanded far & wide.
RUSSELL MORTIMER, Sweet potato grower: We've seen an explosion in land acquisitions on behalf of Greensill Farming, equipment, labor, & basically crop area grown. They've gone from smaller cane, melon growers into huge, sweet potato growers.
It's a far cry from the struggling family farm that Lex Greensill says drove him to set up the finance business that would make him rich.
LEX GREENSILL, (Corporate video): Where did the inspiration for Greensill come from? In fact, it came from the adversity that my parents, our family, endured being farmers in country Queensland in Australia.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times: Lex Greensill he's a financier, but within about five minutes of meeting the guy, he'll tell you this great story about how he grew up on a farm in Bundaberg in rural Queensland, & that his family supposedly had sort of financial difficulties when large companies were late paying their bills on time. So Greensill's whole sort of corporate origin story was all about solving this problem. He said that he had a financial product that could help small businesses like his parents get paid faster with essentially zero risk.
LEX GREENSILL, (Corporate video): So, I guess our central thesis has always been to deliver finance fairer, to the battlers, to the small businesses in every corner of the globe.
ROBERT SMITH Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times: Greensill came to London in the 2000s. He studied at Manchester Business School, up north here. And then he ended up getting a job at Morgan Stanley, a big U.S. investment bank & he was in the division doing supply chain finance, which was kind of, yeah, it was quite an unsexy bit of banking.
At Morgan Stanley he made an influential friend who would catapult his career.
Jeremy Heywood, one of Britain's top civil servants, who was on secondment to Morgan Stanley.
SUSAN HAWLEY Executive Director, Spotlight on Corruption: Lex Greensill managed to persuade the very topmost senior civil servants in this country, the cabinet secretary, Jeremy Heyward, that he was a, a kind of miracle child.
In 2012, Heywood made Lex Greensill a senior advisor in the office of conservative Prime Minister David Cameron.
LEX GREENSILL, Corporate video: I think my only claim to fame is being the only boy from Bundaberg ever to have an office at number 10 Downing Street here in London. David Cameron's best advice to me when I was starting my company was, 'Lex don't worry about being a novice chief executive just give it a go — after all I'm a first-time Prime Minister'.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times: He had his own business card; he had his own security pass. I mean, this is sort of, this isn't normal, it's not normal for a financier to kind of have free reign of the corridors of power in the U.K.
SUSAN HAWLEY, Executive Director, Spotlight on Corruption: He was able to have the kind of access no one can dream of, I mean, generally big banks in the UK have a lot of access to government regular meetings, but no one has an office in, in the Prime Minister's ministry, you know, no one has a card saying that they're the Prime Minister's special advisor, this is an absolutely unparalleled level of access.
The Prime Minister was clearly impressed with his new advisor.
David Cameron soon adopted a plan from Lex Greensill to help small businesses get credit.
David Cameron: Lex Greenhill (sic) where are you ; Lex give us a wave.
It was a version of what's known as supply chain finance – the core business of his newly-launched firm, Greensill Capital.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times: The whole idea with supply chain finance is you have a very big company with a lot of smaller suppliers. And big companies are sometimes not great at paying the smaller suppliers. You know, they might have chaotic systems or whatever. So, the idea here is that a finance company interjects itself in the middle of this & it pays the suppliers, but it pays them a discount. So, it pays them a bit less than what they are owed & then the finance company collects the full amount from the big company later.
SATYAJIT DAS, Former financier & author of "A Banquet of Consequences": It's been going on since the bronze age in Mesopotamia & all the way from the Industrial Revolution to today.
STEPHEN LONG: There's nothing new about this then?
SATYAJIT DAS There's very little new about it.
Greensill Capital marketed itself as a company that could use technology to bring supply chain finance into the 21st century.
SUSAN HAWLEY: I think it was maybe the UK government's, you know, Silicon Valley moment. They were like, "Ah, this is, you know, a really exciting new fintech product" & it was also a new ideology, "we need to get businesspeople into the heart of government", but no one really thought through the implications & how you manage the conflicts of interest that that creates where you have a private interest inserted right into the heart of government & that's what happened with Lex Greensill.
Robert Smith is the lead reporter in an award-winning team covering the Greensill Capital story at the Financial Times.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times: I first wrote the word Greensill in a story in 2014. So, I've been covering this for years & years & years & it's always seemed obvious to me that it was going to end in tears. You know, there were so many elements of this where it looked like a house of cards.
By 2014, the still-fledging finance firm was acquiring serious assets.
In Germany, Greensill Capital bought a defunct lender & promptly renamed it Greensill Bank.
Through the bank, it bought the first of what would become a fleet of private aircraft.
SATYAJIT DAS Former financier & author: In my experience, trade finance was never very glamorous. Trade financiers flew in the back of the plane, not in private jets as seems to have been the case with Greensill.
Despite the trappings of wealth,
Greensill Capital appeared to be struggling.
In 2016, it posted a loss of 62 million dollars.
But the fortunes of Greensill Capital were about to change as its founder forged a relationship with another budding entrepreneur.
SANJEEV GUPTA, Corporate video: Welcome everybody to Liberty Steel Newport, it's a proud day for us today as we start production – please let me show you around.
Indian-born, British educated Sanjeev Gupta had audacious plans to become a giant of the steel industry.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times Sanjeev Gupta was like a nobody in the steel industry. He wasn't even a big name in commodities trading. That was his background. He was a pretty obscure figure there. And he came out of nowhere & just started buying asset after asset after asset.
SATYAJIT DAS, Former financier & author Commodity trading & commodity firms are a small tight knit community where everybody knows everybody & what they're doing. The arrival & growth of Sanjeev Gupta's GFG Group caught them a little bit by surprise. They were not clear on what the business model was, how you could take the risks he was taking & where the money that was funding his empire was coming from.
Gupta's sprawling network of companies, known as the Gupta Family Group or GFG Alliance needed finance.
Greensill's emerging start up needed business.
They came together like hand & glove.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times: The relationship between Greensill & Gupta is forged at a time when Greensill's business was going through a lot of difficulties. So, this is back in 2016 & it lost a lot of money on sort of bad loans, bad debts. It had been doing the supply chain finance for some inferior companies. And what Gupta did was he rode in, & he said, "I'm going to pay you massive fees if you start providing me this financing." And suddenly on paper Greensill's business looked like it'd been resurrected.
The purchase of an ageing aluminium smelter in Scotland & a hydro-electric plant that supplied its power was the first major deal involving Gupta's GFG Alliance & Greensill Capital.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital Markets Correspondent, Financial Times: The deal in Scotland, which was kind of it was like the deal which cemented this marriage of Greensill & Gupta, & it really it was really the sort of origin of this financial engineering taken to extremes between them.
Corporate video: The GFG Alliance bought the smelting operation at Lochaber because they could see a positive future built on Scotland's century of experience making aluminium.
The Scottish government was desperate to stop the smelter closing.
This leverage allowed GFG Alliance to extract extraordinary terms.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times: What the Scottish government guaranteed was, they guaranteed a deal to sell power between a business owned by Gupta's father & a business owned by Gupta. So very strange relationship there, not a normal guarantee & what Greensill did was it turned this guarantee into kind of financial investments that it was able to sell.
That government guarantee of power sales was a valuable asset & Greensill Capital turned it into gold, raising nearly 500 million pounds for GFG from investors.
STEPHEN CLAPHAM, Forensic accountant, "Behind the Balance Sheet": Gupta has been extraordinarily clever in the way he's financed himself, & some of the transactions I've observed have been, you know, genius financial engineering, getting other people to pay to allow you to take over a business.
CORPORATE VIDEO: From the United Kingdom please welcome the CEO of the year Liberty House Group's Sanjeev Gupta
After saving jobs & factories, Sanjeev Gupta was hailed as a business genius.
ANNOUNCER: You're the man behind Britain's industrial revival, so how does it feel to pick up award tonight?
SANJEEV GUPTA: I'm not the man there's 5000 men, everyone is behind us
And who was there cheering him on but his friend & financier.
Lex Greensill was also winning accolades.
Royally bestowed as Commander of the Order of the British Empire for services to the economy.
The boy from Bundaberg, & the saviour of steel, were in the embrace of the British establishment.
PRINCE CHARLES: It's so remarkable what Mr Gupta has achieved here in ensuring a future for this steel mill.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital Markets Correspondent, Financial Times: Here in London, you know, the Financial Times we talk to banks every day, & normal sources of financing that it's sort of bankers who'd usually do these deals, they were sort of baffled by it. They're like, "Where is the money coming from?", & it was Greensill.
As the Gupta Family Group Alliance bought steel mills throughout Europe, Greensill Capital lent it billions.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital Markets Correspondent, Financial Times: Often what Greensill would do, would, he provide to over fund a deal & that would almost provide money for the next deal & you had this sort of daisy chain of deals where the financing of one was dependent on the other. And crucially it all allowed Gupta to make these deals without putting much of his own money in. Often, no equity really went into these transactions. So incredibly risky, just borrowing money after money, after money to do the sort of self-perpetuating chain of acquisitions.
STEVE CLAPHAM Forensic accountant, "Behind the Balance Sheet": Clearly, there was a very close relationship between Gupta & Greensill, and, & clearly, Gupta was being extended a very significant amount of credit that wasn't, wouldn't ordinarily have been given by an independent arms-length third party transaction.
CORPORATE VIDEO: The future is coming fast. Greensill is already there.
Greensill Capital created some complicated financial products to help fund its lending.
SATYAJIT DAS, Former financier & author: So, what they did was take the invoices against which they'd lent, bundle them up into securities & these securities were then sold to other banks or investment funds for them to raise the money, which they on-lent to their clients.
CORPORATE VIDEO: Working capital finance is easy
Greensill uses your customers credit rating to pay your invoices early
And then we turn those invoices into bonds
Investment bank Credit Suisse raised billions for Greensill Capital through this model, telling investors insurance took away the risk.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital Markets Correspondent, Financial Times What Credit Suisse did was it set up these funds, which only invested in Greensill's products & it told its investors that these were super safe. Okay? Because of the insurance, because of the financial engineering, you don't even have to worry about them. These are the sleep at night funds. These are the really safe funds.
JOHN HEMPTON, Hedge fund manager The way it was funded was by having Credit Suisse run a fund which bought assets from Greensill. It was sold to relatively rich investors. And they were sold on the promise that they assets were all insured by a double A insurer.
STEPHEN LONG: Normal supply chain finance is pretty safe, short-term lending.
But the allegation is that somewhere along the line, Greensill Capital started giving credit for possible future sales that might never happen, to potential future customers, that might never exist.
ADD extended grab
ROBERT SMTH: This is really aggressive stuff, & it shows how far Greensill strayed away from the normal path of this sort of financing.
Lex Greensill denies this.
In a statement to Four Corners, his spokesman said Greensill Capital issued credit "based on future forecast trade with current customers."
SIOBHAIN MCDONAGH, British Labour MP: I am completely flummoxed that somebody can make money out of guessing what business will be done between companies in the future, & lending on the basis of it. That, to me, sounds a bit more like clairvoyancy than high finance.
As Greensill Capital expanded, the boy from Bundaberg embraced life in country England.
Home was a stately manor in the village of Saughall.
And the finance firm had so many planes, people joked it could start an airline.
STEVE CLAPHAM: If you've got a large corporate, then you may well have a fleet of aircraft, but it usually is a very big company, not a company the size of Greensill.
JOHN HEMPTON, Hedge fund manager: It had four. And they weren't just four private jets, one of them was a Gulfstream 650. Now, a private jet is a thing that a billionaire might buy, but a Gulfstream 650, is a plane outside the realms of ordinary billionaires. Think of it as sort of being able to fly New York to China or maybe London to somewhere in Queensland in one hop. And it would cost about as much as 10 private jets. And you have to lend an awful lot of money before you can start affording a Gulfstream 650. That makes you an organisation the size of a Citigroup or a Bank of America, & I doubt either Citigroup or Bank of America would splurge that much, there was a lot of other people's money, & he wasn't very careful with it
Sanjeev Gupta also had a plane, named in honour of his metals empire.
STEVE CLAPHAM , Forensic accountant, "Behind the Balance Sheet": The extraordinary thing was that Gupta's aircraft had a particular livery & one of the Greensill fleet had the identical livery. And yeah, well that's, like, bizarre, kind of, relationship, where you paint your planes the same colour.
Sanjeev Gupta's plane was often spotted in Bundaberg – which is where the two men hatched a plan to rescue Australia's troubled steel industry.
Backed by Greensill Capital Sanjeev Gupta turned his sights to Whyalla, buying a steelworks that had gone under with crippling debts.
And Whyalla embraced the Man of Steel.
ARTHUR SINODINOS: This man is a great Australian, he's now become a great Australian starting with South Australia.
SANJEEV GUPTA: This truly is the spiritual home of steel in Australia & here we can build one by one a world class steel industry.
CLARE McLAUGHLIN ,Whyalla Mayor: Whyalla was in a very precarious situation at that time. We didn't know what our future holds, so when GFG & Mr. Gupta came in & bought the steelworks, it was wonderful for our city. It meant we had a future, so it was very welcome, & it was a very exciting time
SCOTT MORRISON, Prime Minister: Hi Sanjeev, how are you? Great to see you.
Hi Clare, how are you nice to meet you too.
What you're doing here Sanjeev what you're doing here Whyalla is making our economy stronger.
GFG Alliance promised massive new investment – & everyone wanted to believe.
CLARE McLAUGHLIN, Whyalla Mayor:
The vision was to build & transform the current Steelworks here in Whyalla to set our industry here up for generations to come
REX PATRICK, Independent Senator for South Australia: Mr. Gupta doesn't think about small ideas. He only thinks about big ideas. He's a man with extreme optimism & it's infectious when he talks to you. Of course, that doesn't necessarily mean that the foundations are there to execute some of his big plans.
KINGSLEY EWINGS, Trucking contractor: Well, it's the largesse of a billionaire but we're not being paid
Ewings Contractors is a trucking company that supplies the steel mill at Whyalla & owner Kingsley Ewings had high hopes when Gupta's GFG Alliance took over.
KINGSLEY EWINGS, trucking contractor: In the first nine months it was business as usual & then it started to change, they just didn't pay us.
STEPHEN LONG: How long for?
KINGSLEY EWINGS: Oh, a hundred days, 120 days, or not at all until you did something about it, & there was never anybody to talk to about it.
STEPHEN LONG: How much debt did they rack up owing to you?
KINGSLEY EWINGS: Oh, at times up to 600, $700,000.
REX PATRICK, Independent Senator for South Australia: I was talking to probably 20 or 30 contractors. All of whom were under great stress & pressure because they weren't getting paid on time. In effect, Sanjeev Gupta was treating his suppliers as a bank, & that was most inappropriate.
KATE CARNELL, Former Small Business Ombudsman: My office got significant numbers of complaints from small businesses that were having extended payment times from the Gupta Group, particularly in the Whyalla area & remember, these are businesses that are already under pressure.
Suppliers were told -- if you want to get paid on time use Greensill Capital's supply chain finance.
KATE CARNELL, Former Small Business Ombudsman GFG brought Greensill to the table, in fact, had a joint meeting with the small businesses in Whyalla, where they together put forward a proposal where the small businesses could be paid on time, but only if they paid a percentage of their invoice & that percentage could be as high as 8%.
STEPHEN LONG: To Greensill?
KATE CARNELL : To Greensill.
Look, it's a huge whack & of course, it all depends on how quickly they want to be paid but remember, for a lot of those small businesses, they told us that they already had their price squashed or squeezed by GFG. They were having to offer really low prices to get the contract to start with. So, another percentage on top of already reduced prices made it not profitable.
STEPHEN LONG: What do you reckon about this supply chain finance?
KINGSLEY EWINGS: I think it's a method of extracting money from people & kicking the can down the road, it's just a method of moving money around in circles.
The astounding thing is much of the finance for GFG Alliance was short term credit from Greensill Capital, that had to be constantly renewed. It was borrowing from Greensill Capital, paying it back, & borrowing again.
STEPHEN LONG: Four Corners has learned that senior executives in GFG's Australian operations repeatedly raised concerns with Sanjeev Gupta about the solvency of the steel business here & its rickety financing. He was urged again & again to find long-term funding & stop relying on short term credit from Greensill. In response we're told he'd say,
don't worry, I've got Lex in my top pocket.
By now Greensill Capital boasted a bevy of blue-chip clients alongside GFG -- including Airbus, Ford, Vodafone, & Telstra.
It also caught the eye of Japan's richest man.
STEPHEN CLAPHAM, Forensic accountant, "Behind the Balance Sheet"
You've got to hand it to him, you know, he's, he's built a business in a very short time, & managed to extract money from one of the most savvy investors in the world, Masayoshi Son.
Masayoshi Son, CEO of Japan's Softbank, scouts the world for investment opportunities.
Lex Greensill became part of the entourage, after Son adopted him as a protégé.
Masayoshi Son (SUBTITLES): He's the money guy (laughs)
Through Softbank's Vision fund, Son tipped 1.5 billion U-S dollars into the Australian's finance house come Fintech.
Making Lex Greensill a multi-billionaire.
LEX GREENSILL, Corporate Video:
One of the great things about joining the Softbank Vision Fund family hasn't just been the network, the capital, & the advice. It's actually been having Masa as a partner & a mentor.
CORPORATE VIDEO: Greensill looks at things differently seeking answers to questions others find impossible to answer
Yet seasoned observers were sceptical.
Author & financier Satyajit Das forecast the Global Financial Crisis; he found the Greensill Capital spin all too familiar.
SATYAJIT DAS, Former financier & author: You use terms like financial engineering, disruption, democratisation of finance, you spice with mystique, get a few endorsements from the good & great, then you stir it, & then you serve it up to the ignorant customers & investors as something very clever, glamorous & innovative. Greensill did very well at this in taking what is one of the most traditional forms of financing with an ancient lineage & presenting it as something highly clever & that actually was their great achievement.
STEPHEN LONG: How fintech was it?
SATYAJIT DAS: Well to me it's a bit like taking the plough & cart & basically painting it in gold.
In London, the relationship between David Cameron & Lex Greensill had come full circle.
DAVID CAMERON: I started working as a senior adviser to Greensill Capital in August 2018. Lex Greensill wanted me to help him grow what was becoming a successful UK-based fintech firm.
JOHN HEMPTON, Hedge fund manager: Lex bought credibility really well, he associated himself with politicians, with famous people, he looked the part.
David Cameron spared no effort in promoting Greensill Capital lobbying his old colleagues to secure government contracts
080 SIOBHAIN McDONAGH, British Labour MP He was found to have sent 25 text messages, 12 WhatsApps, 8 emails, 11 calls, & require 9 meetings by chief civil servants in the Treasury, at the height of the pandemic, to discuss work with Greensills. I mean, it's beyond belief that anybody else would get that amount of attention when really the economy was going into meltdown because of the pandemic.
The former Prime Minister was well paid for his efforts, as he later told a Parliamentary committee
DAVID CAMERON: I was paid an annual amount, a generous annual amount, far more than I earned as Prime Minister.
JOHN HEMPTON, Hedge fund manager: He at one stage thought his options were worth 80 million pounds, it takes a politician of high integrity to not cash out their reputation for that much money when they've left office.
SUSAN HAWLEY, Executive Director, Spotlight on Corruption He was exploiting his personal contacts & his knowledge of government, very aggressively. I mean, it was across a broad range. And some of the parliamentarians in this have described it almost as stalking.
Australia's former foreign minister Julie Bishop also joined the payroll… spruiking Greensill on the sidelines of the World Economic Forum in Switzerland.
Labor MP Ed Husic is leading Opposition efforts to find out more about her role.
ED HUSIC, Labor MP: We had someone in the form of Julie Bishop, who'd had 20 years' experience as a parliamentarian, deep contacts within the coalition contacting directly senior ministers, I mean, in Davos, there you had the former finance minister being approached by Julie Bishop to start talking with Lex Greensill, who heads up that firm, about the idea of extending one of those products to the federal public service in a way that the finance department was very skittish about & likened to payday lending.
Julie Bishop went on to personally approach Treasurer Josh Frydenberg to arrange a meeting between Greensill Capital & Treasury officials.
But, at the time, she hadn't formally declared herself on the lobbyists' register as an influence peddler for Greensill Capital.
Julie Bishop did not respond to Four Corners' inquiries.
SUSAN HAWLEY, Executive Director, Spotlight on Corruption: Julie Bishop seems to have done exactly what David Cameron did in the UK, which is exploit a loophole in the lobbying rules, where they don't need to declare themselves as lobbyists because they're actually employed by the company, & then use their position, a very influential position as former ministers, with all the contacts that brings,to promote a company and, & benefited & it's a nonsense that the rules don't capture that kind of activity.
As the virus ravaged Britain, Greensill Capital was made a lender under a government guaranteed emergency loan scheme.
All but one of the loans it made went to Gupta's GFG Alliance, as Greensill Capital channeled 350 million pounds to Gupta's businesses.
SUSAN HAWLEY, Executive Director, Spotlight on Corruption: The Gupta empire, as it's now emerging, set up various new companies to be able to access as many of these UK government backed loans, uh, as possible.
As his firm was taking taxpayer-backed cheap loans, Sanjeev Gupta splashed out 42 million pounds on a mansion in exclusive Belgravia, a stone's throw from Buckingham Palace.
But the cracks were starting to appear.
Behind the scenes, a bank Gupta's GFG Alliance owned was under investigation.
SUSAN HAWLEY, Executive Director, Spotlight on Corruption:
It's emerging from some of the parliamentary inquiries in the UK that the bank of England alerted the National Crime Agency, possibly as long ago as a year ago, about this bank & some concerns they had about it. And the National Crime Agency started investigating, it looks like they may have been doing some covert monitoring.
In Germany, the finance regulator began probing Greensill Bank.
It discovered the bank had massive lending exposure to Gupta's GFG Alliance.
STEPHEN CLAPHAM, Forensic accountant, "Behind the Balance Sheet": That's very unusual for a bank because, you know, the nature of a bank, is that you don't bet it all, bet the ranch on one client.
In a special forensic audit, the German regulator contacted companies that were meant to be trading with GFG.
It concluded much of the trading had never happened.
CYNTHIA O'MURCHU, Investigative reporter, Financial Times:
You know if you artificially inflate the amount of business you do, & on the back of that get loans, then that's potentially criminal.
The team at the Financial Times, was following a similar trail.
Investigative reporter Cynthia O'Murchu examined a list of customers of a GFG subsidiary, Liberty Commodities.
CYNTHIA O'MURCHU, Investigative reporter, Financial Times: I spent about a morning calling, as many as I could in that timeframe, and, you know, one, after the other kept coming back to me & saying, we have never traded with Liberty Commodities, ever. Not just, not in the last year, not just not that year, but ever.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times: So, this has sort of raised more serious suspicions of fraud shall we say, because this isn't to do with financial engineering, it's not to do with providing credit against hypothetical stuff. This appears to be pieces of paper that say that Gupta's business sold metal to people who denied doing business with him. So, this is sort of a whole other different level of, you know, potential dubious lending.
GFG rejected the allegations.
In a letter to the Financial Times, Sanjeev Gupta shifted responsibility to Greensill Capital, saying it financed "prospective receivables".
And that "Greensill selected & approved companies with whom [GFG] could potentially do business in the future."
CYNTHIA O'MURCHU, Investigative reporter, Financial Times It just doesn't ring true because you don't, how can you issue an invoice for a particular dollar amount, for a particular product, at a particular date, and, & then say that it's a future transaction?
By last year pressure was mounting on Greensill Capital.
Insurers, so critical to its business model, were getting nervous.
Greensill's main insurer, based in Australia, warned it would not renew Greensill's polices.
STEPHEN CLAPHAM, Forensic accountant, "Behind the Balance Sheet": You can't expect the insurers to insure uninsurable credit risks. And, you know, it wasn't as if the insurers just said over night, "Oh, we're not going to renew your premiums." They, Greensill had ample warning.
The fate of the global finance empire rested on the outcome of an emergency late night court hearing in March this year in Sydney
Just hours before the policies expired, Greensill Capital urged a judge to force the insurer to maintain coverage.
The judge declined.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times Credit Suisse which had billions invested in these Greensill products it suddenly discovers, oh no, there's no insurance underlying this & it has to sort of halt the whole operation. So that's the kind of key trigger this year, which brings the whole edifice crashing down.
Lex Greensill declined to do an interview with Four Corners.
LEX GREENSILL: Please understand that I bear complete responsibility for the collapse of Greensill Capital. I am desperately saddened that more than a thousand very hard-working people have lost their jobs at Greensill. Likewise, I take full responsibility for any hardship being felt by our clients & their suppliers & indeed investors in our programs. It's deeply regrettable that we were let down by our leading insurer whose actions assured Greensill's collapse.
There are now multiple Parliamentary inquiries into the collapse of Greensill Capital.
At a House of Commons hearing, Lex Greensill was called to account.
SIOBHAIN MCDONAGH, MP: Mr Greensill are you a fraudster?
LEX GREENSILL: No Ms McDonagh I am not.
STEVE CLAPHAM, Forensic accountant, "Behind the Balance Sheet": He's been a brilliant salesman, & he's had an incredible ambition. And I think we'll find that he sailed too close to the sun.
Greensill Bank has been shut down by the German regulator.
ROBERT SMITH, Capital markets correspondent, Financial Times: And the bank's management are now under criminal investigation in Germany. There's a potential they could be charged with balance sheet manipulation, which is sort of no joke. It, I think it carries a maximum three-year sentence.
The demise of Greensill Capital's has plunged Sanjeev Gupta's empire into crisis.
Stripped of his major funding source, GFG Alliance is desperately trying to refinance & offload assets – but says it plans to keep Whyalla.
REX PATRICK: I've always wanted Sanjeev Gupta to succeed here. If he were to succeed, if his plans were to materialise, it would have such a positive effect on Whyalla & South Australia generally.
The UK Serious Fraud Office is now investigating the Gupta Family Group Alliance for suspected fraud, fraudulent trading, & money laundering.
Its inquiry includes GFG's financing arrangements with Greensill Capital.
SUSAN HAWLEY, Executive Director, Spotlight on Corruption: Between them the Gupta empire & Greensill are now being investigated by the UK's three top, criminal investigators for this kind of economic crime. So, you've got the Serious Fraud Office, the National Crime Agency & the Financial Conduct Authority, & they could all impose some, some heavy penalties.
JOHN HEMPTON Hedge fund manager: People like to believe in magic beans. They like to believe that there's somebody out there that has solved finance.
He was making finance fairer for, fairer as he jumped in his Gulfstream 650 & flew across the Atlantic. I don't believe that for a second. It's just sort of obvious bullshit.
In Bundaberg, locals have watched on as the drama unfolds.
The struggling, 80-hectare family farm that inspired Lex Greensill to "make finance fairer" now spans 3200 hectares.
Money the family harvested from Greensill Capital has been ploughed into the land.
RUSSELL MORTIMER, Sweet potato grower: In a nutshell, they've taken hills out, & left flat paddocks. The stuff that they did is the thing of dreams for the rest of us mere mortal farmers. They've spent a lifetime worth of money in a number of years.
STEPHEN LONG: Where do you think the money's come from?
RUSSELL MORTIMER: Oh look, it's no real secret amongst us. We do believe it's come through Greensill Capital. I can't see any other way that that amount of money could come into that business & have been spent in the short period of time,
Sweet potato grower Russell Mortimer says the Greensill farming giant is crushing small family farms.
RUSSELL MORTIMER: It has absolutely devastated our industry, hands down. The volumes that are being grown & hitting the marketplace & for the price that they're being sold for in the marketplace has, yeah, it's put a lot of us to the wall.
STEPHEN LONG: They've flooded the market.
RUSSELL MORTIMER: They've flooded the market, yes, & continue to do so.
REX PATRICK: In the end, karma, if anything has played out & that's why Greensill has gone under. The business model wasn't one that worked & it wasn't fair.
RUSSELL MORTIMER: They were spruiking to help farmers like myself & others in the industry with these finance scenarios but nothing has come of that. They've profited themselves & have not uplifted anyone else with it.
Word count: 12195
