What’s a former professional tennis player turned Seattle financier to do when he gets stuck in a rural Australian town during the pandemic? Start the presses rolling, of course.
DEPENDING ON your temperament, the past year of Michael Waite’s life has been either a random series of tragic coincidences or something more fateful, a test of emotional endurance out of which has grown something rare and remarkable.
Waite, who describes himself as “an optimist, with spoonfuls of realism,” sees it as a bit of both. “It’s been a year of epic experiences,” the 44-year-old says.
“A heck of a roller coaster, that’s for sure.”
In 2018, Waite and his wife Whitney were living in Seattle with their two young daughters, Scarlett, who was then 5, and Nora, 3. Waite, who grew up in Naracoorte, a small town in regional South Australia, had spent the past 20 years in the US, first as a professional tennis player on the International Tennis Federation tour, then as a chief financial officer for several large US businesses, including Cascade Investment, owned by Bill Gates. Whitney, who is American, was a professor of paediatrics at Seattle Children’s Hospital and the University of Washington.
The couple was thoroughly embedded in their community: Michael had even become a US citizen; in 2016 he ran for Washington state treasurer. (He picked up more than one million votes, and placed second out of a field of five candidates.) In July 2018, however, one of Whitney’s closest friends, Patrick Walsh, a senior public servant in Houston, was diagnosed with brain cancer. He died four months later, at the age of 45, leaving behind a wife and a 15-month-old baby. For Michael and Whitney, Walsh’s death was a moment of reckoning. “We’d been on the treadmill for a long time and had always shared a passion for travel,” says Michael, who was then a senior vice-president at a multinational investment company, Bentall Kennedy. “Patrick’s death made us look at what could be possible if we took a different approach.” Within seven months, the Waites had quit their jobs and rented out their house. They then gave away most of their belongings, put the rest in storage, and hit the road.
The family – which by then included Hazel, their then four-month-old – travelled first to Costa Rica, then on to French Polynesia. By October 2019, they were in Sydney, after which they travelled to Naracoorte, where they planned to spend November with Michael’s parents, Sue and Neville, before heading to Asia and the Middle East. On their first day back, however, Michael was having breakfast with Sue when she told him she’d been feeling unwell, and that she’d had some bleeding. Within 10 days she was diagnosed with stage 4 uterine cancer. In March 2020, they were told it was terminal. Soon afterward, COVID hit. A few weeks after that, the local newspaper, The Naracoorte Herald, suspended publishing. “There was so much stuff going on, we were reeling,” Michael says.
The newspaper’s shuttering hit the town hard: The Herald had been published for 145 years. Locals were furious: they felt that the paper had abandoned them in the middle of a pandemic. But the paper’s closure had particular significance for the Waites. Sue had worked at The Herald for 30 years, managing the staff, selling ads and training journalists. “The paper was integral,” Michael says. “When I was growing up, it was all I knew.”
Naracoorte, which is four hours’ drive south-east of Adelaide, is small, quiet and out of the way. It’s got one main street, a bakery and a meatworks, but most of its population of 5300 is involved in some way with farming, mainly of grain, cattle and lamb. The biggest tourist attraction is the fossil cave just out of town. But it’s Waite’s home town. The prospect of it being left without a newspaper seemed unaccountably sad. And so he decided to do the only logical thing he could think of, and start up one of his own.
NEWSPAPERS HAVE been in crisis worldwide for at least 20 years. The advent of the internet has seen advertising, particularly classifieds, go online, where the bulk of revenue has been hoovered up by Google and Facebook. Some of the worst hit papers have been in regional areas. “Local newspapers are marginal businesses to begin with,” says Allan Fels, chairman of the Public Interest Journalism Initiative, an independent, not-for-profit research body. “They have high fixed costs, like printing and distribution, and are more dependent on local advertising than city papers, all of which makes them highly vulnerable during a downturn.”
According to the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission’s Digital Platforms Inquiry, 106 local and regional newspapers closed between 2008 and 2018. Those that survived have shed staff and pared back their operations. As more papers close, whole districts become what are known as “news deserts”. Outside media might pay attention now and again, but it can’t do the job of a good local newspaper, whether that be reporting on local sports or sitting in on council meetings. “Research out of the US shows that less local news means more government corruption,” Fels says. But local papers also play a civic role.
“They are important for community cohesion and public wellbeing. They let people know what is going on, what’s important to them.” Not for nothing is a local newspaper sometimes referred to as “the heart” of its community.
When it came to Naracoorte, that heart had been dying for some time. Founded in 1875, The Herald was independently owned until 2010, when it was bought by Fairfax Media, which incorporated it into Australian Community Media (ACM), the company’s regional newspaper arm. ACM published some 170 titles nationwide, many of them in small, one-paper towns like Naracoorte. In 2018, Fairfax was bought by Nine Entertainment Co. (the publisher of this magazine). In 2019, Nine offloaded ACM to entrepreneur Antony Catalano, who made his name in real estate publishing.
Catalano had taken on a struggling business, with problems that predated his acquisition. He said he intended to grow the business, but added that many of the smaller papers “don’t make sense” from a business point of view. To cut costs, ACM centralised operations in regional hubs, and sometimes shared stories across different South Australian newspapers.
“We started seeing little random stories from other areas that didn’t mean anything to the locals,” says Selina Southern, who owns the Naracoorte newsagents, newsXpress. The editor of The Herald was actually based in Port Pirie, more than 500 kilometres away, and was charged with overseeing more than five regional newspapers.
“The Herald had essentially become a zombie newspaper,” contests Waite. “All pictures, no content, with press release stories and non-local ads. They hadn’t renewed their office lease, so the paper didn’t even have a physical presence in the town.”
The Herald was one of dozens of newspapers ACM suspended in April due to COVID. (Rupert Murdoch’s News Corp shut 60 community newspapers around the country at about the same time.) ACM boss Antony Catalano tells me the company had no choice: “To protect our papers we had to pause them, just like every other business in Australia.” He adds: “Virtually all the papers we suspended have returned.”
The Herald relaunched in late July, but some locals were in no mood to forgive it. “You let us down when we [needed] you most,” one woman wrote on the newspaper’s Facebook page. Another added: “So you’re going to pick and choose when you are going to make a paper … after you couldn’t be bothered with the town.”
ACM paid Selina Southern to deliver 200 Heralds to old customers in the hope of them renewing their subscriptions: only seven took up the offer. “One man was so angry he threw the paper at me,” she says.
It quickly became apparent that ACM had made a critical error: in the heat of battle it had left the field.
And Michael Waite had stepped into the breach.
WAITE IS almost two metres tall and whippet-thin.
He has pale blue eyes, an ear-to-ear smile and the faintest trace of an American accent. When it came to setting up the newspaper, he happily admits he had no idea what he was doing: “I don’t claim to be a journalist! I’m nowhere near it!” But he did have certain things in his favour. Cascade Investment, where he’d been CFO from 2008 to 2012, had $100 billion under management, so he knew a thing or two about putting together a budget. Perhaps more importantly, he has an almost complete absence of ego, which comes in handy when you are starting something from scratch and, as he puts it, “have to keep asking lots of dumb questions.”
Waite was determined that the new newspaper, which he called The Naracoorte News, would not be an exercise in nostalgia: it had to be sustainable. And so one of the first things he did was gauge support. “To test whether people really wanted a new newspaper, I asked local business leaders to put in $5000 each. Four out of the five people I called said yes.”
He then set about designing a business model.
Established publishers such as ACM invariably operate at scale, which enables them to share costs across a large number of papers. Since he only intended to have one paper, Waite had to come up with something different. The News would make money through traditional means, by selling ads and from cover sales. (The News sells for $2; The Herald for $1.70.) But it would also offer annual sponsorships and memberships. “Sponsorships allow companies to buy a package of ads and place them whenever they want throughout the year,” Waite says. “People also pay to be members of the paper, just like being a member of your footy club.”
Waite then started hiring. He contacted Veb Johnson, an ebullient Filipino woman who had sold ads at The Herald for seven years before being suspended without pay by the paper in April. Quietly, behind the scenes, Veb began selling ads for the first issue of The News.
“Locals trust Veb,” Waite says, “so they bought ads even though our paper didn’t exist yet.” He also approached Chris Oldfield, a veteran journalist and grandmother of five who had reported for several regional newspapers before retiring to her farm in 2013. Oldfield was at once sceptical and intrigued. “I said to Michael, ‘So you want to start a newspaper in the middle of a pandemic in a town with one cave, a cattle-killing centre and about 5000 people?’ He said: ‘Yep.’ And I said: ‘Sounds like fun! I’m in.’ ” Worried that The Herald might return, Waite gave himself just two weeks to produce his first issue, a deadline he now describes as “insane”. He found himself working 18-hour days, wrangling stories and ads with Oldfield and Johnson, locking in sponsorships, arranging printing and distribution and working with a local designer on the layout. “For the first layout, we actually put paper on the floor of the office to see where the ads and stories should go,” Waite says. Despite her cancer, Waite’s mum, Sue, also chipped in, selling ads and providing advice. “I told her she didn’t have to do it but it really brought this amazing energy to her world.”
The paper didn’t have a photographer, so Waite took photos himself, sometimes on his phone. He also convinced the local photography club to take shots, a practice he still employs. “I’ll email the president of the club and if he can, he’ll send a photographer out.” Waite pays the club $500 every now and again. “It’s a totally random system but it works.” The only place that would print The News was in Mt Barker, a six-hour round trip from Naracoorte. And so on the Tuesday before the first issue, Waite hit the road in his dad’s 1994 non-airconditioned Ford Falcon, returning in the early evening with a boot full of newspapers.
By then, the Waites’s world trip had gone up in smoke: they had cancelled their plane tickets and hotel reservations; the state border closures meant they couldn’t even see Australia. “It was very different to the year we had been imagining,” Whitney says.
Waite wells up when he recalls this period. “I was really bottoming out,” he says. “We’d cared for Mum, and we just assumed we’d get through it. That, together with making the paper, it was all so surreal, like an out-of-body experience.”
But it paid off. The first issue of The News, which like The Herald, is published weekly, came out on May 6, 2020. Bundles were sent to the two local service stations, Foodland, the general store and the newsagent.
The print run was 1700 copies, and it sold out in 36 hours. Sales today are around 2400. ACM won’t discuss circulation, but it’s understood that The Herald now sells about 400 copies a week.
THE NEWS’S office is just off Naracoorte’s main street, between Attwoods Shoe Store and the derelict shell of the old Blades hairdressers. It’s a small, plain, undecorated room, with freshly painted white brick walls and beige carpet.
There are three or four desks towards the back where the journalists and sales staff work, and a long table off to the side. Waite often pops in and out with Scarlett, Nora and Hazel, and the place has the feel of a crèche, with lolly wrappers and sippy-cups and colouring pencils strewn about on the floor. The paper now has four reporters: Alice de Bruin, Eliza Berlage, Gabrielle Duykers, and Oldfield. (Not all of them are full-time.) Then there is a former agronomist and property valuer, Danielle Moore, who has become the paper’s general manager and catch-all troubleshooter.
When I visit, one sunny morning in November, Duykers, who is 22, is writing up a small piece about the local Remembrance Day ceremony. She’s also working on a story about a proposal to build a giant wine barrel in the nearby Padthaway wine region, and a piece on a gas company that’s been approaching local landholders to get permission to drill. “People sometimes don’t know what their rights are when it comes to drilling,” Duykers says.
Berlage, who sits next to Duykers, has been writing a series of articles on the local hospital, which is so underresourced that the community had to raise its own funds to buy a CT scanner in 2015 and expand the maternity ward. “There is a six-week wait to see a doctor here,” Berlage says.
“In October, there were five days straight when the hospital didn’t have an emergency doctor. People who needed treatment had to go to Mt Gambier Hospital, an hour-and-a-half drive away.”
Originally from Sydney, Berlage, who is 30, has worked as a journalist in Canberra and Victoria. She has dark, shoulder-length hair, a pair of excellently kitsch prawn earrings, and the politely efficient manner of a woman who decided early in life that she would not tolerate bullshit of any description from anybody. She is also bisexual: one of her first stories was on an LGBTQI group in Mt Gambier, the only one on the Limestone Coast. She tells me that the Naracoorte area is politically conservative and a safe Liberal seat: “It’s probably easier to say you’re gay than you’re a Labor voter.”
But the locals are “innovative and dynamic”, and she couldn’t imagine living anywhere else. “The pace is more gentle, people care about you and know you. I like to connect, and belong.”
She believes equity and fairness should be at the heart of journalism, and that it can, at its best, be an agent for change. “People in the bush are used to things being crap, whether it be the medical system or the lack of rental places or the internet, which is shocking here. I want to tell stories that galvanise communities to push for better services and get attention from decision-makers.” She adds: “Being second-best shouldn’t be normal in the country.”
AFTER LEAVING the office, I drive 20 minutes north of Naracoorte to visit a local farmer named Roger Dickenson. Tall and lanky with a snow-white handlebar moustache, the 62-year-old Dickenson runs 600 hectares of lamb, cattle and oats, and lives with his wife Jenny in a home built by his grandparents in 1919 from local limestone. “It has 40-centimetre-thick walls,” says Jenny. “It can get to 40 degrees plus for three days running and as long as you keep the place closed up, it’ll stay cold.”
In 2017, Dickenson requested that the Naracoorte Lucindale Council repair a 600-metre length of road on his land. (Lucindale is a tiny town 15 minutes’ drive from Naracoorte.) The road had been maintained by council for the past 40 years, and was essential for Dickenson to get produce and emergency vehicles on and off his property. But it had, over time, become dangerously potholed. Dickenson repeatedly asked the council to act, and the council repeatedly declined. In 2019 he became fed up, and obtained a copy of the local roads register. The register, which is available on the council’s website, is a hierarchy that determines what level of care a road will receive. In Dickenson’s case, his 600-metre access road had been downgraded to a “track”, meaning that, as far as the council was concerned, it no longer required any maintenance. “The road was essentially just deleted,” Dickenson says. “It was no longer listed as a road, but the council never told me, even though I’d been paying rates on it the whole time.”
Dickenson then discovered that another 54 roads had been dropped from the register. He says that no councillors would reply to his letters, so he went to The News, which subsequently published a series of articles on the problem. “Farmers pay between $10,000 and $110,000 in rates a year, but they’re lucky to see a grader up their road once a year,” says Chris Oldfield.
(Dickenson has still not had his road repaired.) In 2018-19, the council had a budget of $16 million, with 64 employees and four managers. Its wages bill alone was $5.2 million. By way of comparison, when Waite was at Cascade the fund had 80 people managing $100 billion. “All the community wants is for the council to be responsive and transparent. At the moment, there is a total lack of consultation. When our journalists ask questions, the council sometimes just refuses to comment.” (Mayor Erika Vickery denies this: “Council staff and elected members have met many times with The News to share information, some of which was either not printed or had an editorial negativity added.”) The paper has reported on crucial rezoning decisions taken in the face of overwhelming public opposition and disability access problems that were so bad that people in wheelchairs and using walking frames found it difficult to go shopping. The level of community distrust remains such that the local ratepayers association refuses to meet with the council unless The News is present, so that there is a record of proceedings.
One of those ratepayers is Geoff Robinson, who owns the Lucindale post office. Robinson locked horns with the council when it began implementing a “master plan” for Lucindale – Robinson calls it a “disaster plan” – that involved ripping up the community’s tennis courts and picnic area. “No one knew what the hell was going on in council before, because ACM’s paper didn’t bother reporting it.” Now, the council is being “held to account, and they don’t like it at all”.
Vickery tells me the council “very much valued” The News starting up, and that it “valued honest and fair reporting”.
When I ask Robinson about this, he laughs. “The council hates Michael’s guts.”
WHEN WAITE was born, his father, Neville, who was a keen tennis player, seeded a grass court on some land next to the house. As a boy, Michael would hit balls with Neville morning and night, before and after work. Waite became an excellent player, winning single and doubles events and a state championship. In 1995, he dropped out of his commerce degree at the University of Adelaide to join the pro tour. He went to the US, where he spent three years travelling around the country by Greyhound with a racquet bag and a backpack, playing small, satellite tournaments where the first-prize winnings could be as little as $US4000.
“My income was about $US5000 a year!” he says. “But I absolutely loved it.”
His failure to become the next Pat Cash taught him how to lose, and what you could learn from losing – namely, humility. Indeed, Waite’s self-effacement is one of his most endearing traits. He also has a strong sense of civic duty, a product, no doubt, of his upbringing.
(His grandfather was Naracoorte mayor in the late 1970s, and his mother was a councillor in the 1980s. “I have early memories of me and my younger sister being dragged around door-knocking.”) From the beginning, then, Waite wanted The News to be a community service as much as a newspaper. Part of that is The News Gives Back Program, whereby 25 cents from every sale is invested via grants into sports, arts or community clubs. (As of November, the paper had given away more than $10,000.) The paper’s motto is “locals helping locals”, something Waite practises at an almost granular level. One morning I’m chatting with him in the office when a woman comes in to make a payment for a funeral notice she’d placed in a recent issue.
Her name is Kylie Catton, and she works at the local hospital. She owes $20. Waite tells her not to worry about paying, that placing a funeral notice in the paper is “all part of the service”. But Catton insists on paying.
Waite then insists on her not paying. They go back and forth like this for a time before Catton makes it clear she is determined to pay, and Waite gives in. (Catton later tells me she would have come back and slipped the money under the door had Waite not relented.) Some people I talk to for this story believe Waite has bitten off more than he can chew, and that ACM is not going to just give up. Waite, for his part, believes the business model he’s established for The News will ensure its survival. He is also confident that as general manager, Danielle Moore is capable of steering the ship through the roughest seas. It’s important to him that The News continues, for reasons that go beyond good journalism or civic duty. “I put so much energy into the paper,” Waite says. “I think it was a way of grappling with the fact that Mum was dying.” Sue passed away three days before Christmas. He concedes there’s a certain synergy in this: his mother dies; the paper is born. Reincarnation in a country town.
The family’s travel plans are still on hold. In the meantime, Waite is showing his daughters a part of his Naracoorte childhood. Breakfast at Morris’s Bakery; playing hockey in the park. There’s an old Shell roadhouse just up the street from Waite’s home where, as a kid, he would run every afternoon after school to buy an ice-cream. Now he takes his daughters there. They get an Icy Pole or a Milo Cup.
Sometimes they say they miss Seattle, but a trip to the Shell works wonders. “Ice-cream is a winner in any country,” says Waite. n
CREDIT: Tim Elliott
Word count: 3932
