INNOVATION hubs at Tonsley and Mawson Lakes are going from strength to strength, reinforcing South Australia’s reputation as an advanced-manufacturing state.
Flinders University’s Tonsley Campus is working on world-class research and development projects with global shipbuilding and defence companies Naval Group Pacific and BAE Systems, as well as rising small-to-medium enterprises and international companies.
“We have not only built strong ties with local global companies, but also created a two-way avenue for our state’s agility in moving from traditional manufacturing to new fields of enterprise,” Flinders pro vice-chancellor Professor John Spoehr said.
Agricultural equipment company Seed Terminator, operating from the Flinders University building, is among the businesses to have flourished at Tonsley.
“From a small start-up in 2016, science, engineering and research has seen us scale up to be deployed internationally from SA,” co-founder Mark Ashenden said.
Tonsley-based Micro-X has grown to 55 employees since launching its first X-ray product in 2018. “It’s been an amazing opportunity to be part of the rapid growth of Micro-X and to see so many local university graduates now working here,” research and development project manager Steve Trewartha said.
At UniSA’s Mawson Lakes campus, a $2m hi-tech Industry 4.0 Testlab, with 3D printing facilities, virtual reality spaces and industrial-scale manufacturing demonstrator, is up and running.
In 2020, Technology Park-based Tindo Solar invested $7m to expand its operations and double its production. Meanwhile, Raytheon Australia chose Technology Park, at Mawson Lakes, for its first production facility in Australia.
And business and innovation hub, the Polaris Centre, also at Mawson Lakes, has experienced a 15 per cent increase in people accessing the business since the coronavirus pandemic hit SA earlier this year. Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni said the State Government was “driving the transformation of the SA economy to create the jobs of today and tomorrow”.
CREDIT: ELIZABETH HENSON
Word count: 306
