BOOMER LETTERS
WHAT an interesting article by Frank Sebastyn in last week’s Boomer (Frank’s Life in Rock ’n’ Roll, June 13).
I also was brought up at the same age to the music but in another part of the world, England.
There was no advance booking – you just turned up with your seven shillings at the local cinema to enjoy many of the artists that he mentioned, including the great Buddy Holly.
Had he lived, he would have gone on to also have been a reformed rocker to a ballad singer which he was exploring on his last recordings.
Elvis was already there with records like O Sole Mio, which we queued for after school to purchase from the record shop for six shillings. Then, just as everyone said rock and roll was finished, The Beatles came along and stirred the pot and gave it all back to us.
I had a good friend, former Procol Harum singer Gary Brooker, who has recently passed, come over to Australia some years ago with Alice Cooper, Roger Daltry and many other old rockers. He allowed us to go backstage at the Entertainment Centre for a meet and greet. Many of them had turned their lives around to a softer sound. Yes, rock and roll will never die – it just mellows as you get older.
Stan Evans Port Elliot
Hair apparent I DO enjoy Boomer pages on a Monday. The Frank Sebastyan story struck a chord with me. Only last week in a fit of nostalgia I was listening to Guy Mitchell and others of that era. I know lots of the words to most but never all – and I have to admit I have never known of Harry Nilsson.
My hair was like the one of Frank in the picture from 1960 but, alas, not any more. Same with the cigarette in hand – and that is gone, with my hair!
Jim Acton Davoren Park
Station’s 50 years IT was good to see the item on the start-up of Radio University in The Way We Were column (Boomer, June 13).
That radio station, now long known as Radio Adelaide 101.5FM, has grown since 1972 as a local independent community radio voice for news/current affairs, ideas, culture, art and music in South Australia, nationally and overseas.
In that time it has been able to give expression to alternative perspectives on a wide range of social, political and cultural topics to the great advancement of our free and democratic society.
Radio Adelaide was the first community radio station in Australia. It has always had a strong educational focus, including a strong role in the education of young journalists.
On Tuesday, June 28, it will celebrate the 50 years so far of its existence. Well might it do so, given the fine contribution it has made – and continues to make – to our community.
So, congratulations to all the station’s volunteers and staff – past and present – on a half-century of very fine broadcasting. And here’s to the next half-century and beyond of so doing.
Terry Hewton Henley Beach South
The right type Back in 1960 I started my four-year apprenticeship with Ralph Peterson and Son, at 100 Pirie St, as a 16-year-old typewriter mechanic.
Back in 1960 the big three were Remington, Royal and Underwood. Ralph Peterson was the agent for Oliver, the British version of the Halda made in Sweden, who held the state government service contract statewide on typewriters for years. IBM was not yet a force – it would take another four years before the appearance of their Golf Ball typewriter.
Other brands were Smith Corona, Olivetti, Mercedes (taken over by Underwood) and Adler/Triumph (the Adelaide Cash Register Company was their agent until Adler from Germany opened up Australia-wide).
You could always tell a typewriter mechanic by their grey dust coat and square leather tool bag, walking all over Adelaide from one job to another. All typewriter mechanics back then knew each other; Adelaide was a unique place in those days.
All gone now – how things have changed.
Malcolm Sparre Booleroo Centre
Word count: 687
