PROTECTIVE EYES IN THE SKY
A PLANE-mounted sensor that will map, in real-time, the path of an active bushfire could be the latest weapon in preventing future tragedies.
The South Australian FireFlight Sensor can send data to a firefighting agency in under a minute, allowing crews to accurately track a fire’s path and potentially limit its destruction.
UniSA start-up FireFlight Technologies has received a $100,000 state government grant to conduct a season-long trial of the technology with the CFS.
FireFlight Technologies founder and chief executive officer Dr Paul Dare said the SA trial – which is currently underway – will be the longest trial of the sensor in Australia.
“The FireFlight system will deliver real-time fire intelligence to incident controllers, helping them to efficiently deploy resources such as firefighters, fire trucks and firebombers where they are really needed,” he said.
“The fire maps provided by the FireFlight system will show exactly where the fire is at that moment.
“The maps can be updated on a minute-by-minute basis, enabling the CFS to monitor the progression of the fire and better understand its behaviour.
“The length of the trial will enable us to make changes to the system during the season, based on feedback from the CFS, so that we can ensure we are meeting their needs.” The system has previously been trialled by the Australian Army in Queensland, Tasmania and on Kangaroo Island, as well as during the California bushfires in 2020.
CFS manager state air operations Nik Stanley said the trial would help to further develop the technology.
“The CFS is looking forward to seeing the results of further trials, developments and evaluations of the FireFlight fire mapping technology,” he said.
“The current trial will be fully evaluated at the end of this fire danger season by our Fire Behavioural Analysis team within the CFS and our partner agencies.” SA Emergency Services minister Vincent Tarzia said the trial would help future-proof the state against bushfires.
“Our $97.5m response to the Keelty review has significantly strengthened South Australia’s defence against bushfires,” he said. “We’ve boosted CFS resources with new trucks and state-of-the-art thermal imaging cameras, and just opened our new $80m Emergency Services Headquarters at Keswick.
“Two Black Hawk helicopters are now on call to fight blazes this summer and now we’re trialling a real-time fire mapping system in a move that could have huge community safety benefits.” Former Federal Police Commissioner Mick Keelty delivered a review into the catastrophic 2019/20 bushfire season. He made 15 recommendations including investment in enhanced technology like Automatic Vehicle Location systems, burnover protection systems, new trucks and a single source of truth and information for community and stakeholders.
CREDIT: LYDIA KELLNER
Word count: 447
