AFTER establishing a start-up venture in his kitchen in Norwood, and developing it into one of the nation’s biggest privately owned environmental con­sulting companies, South Australia’s new chief entrepreneur feels it’s time to support others with big dreams.
Andrew Nunn took over from inaugural chief entrepreneur Jim Whalley last week, bringing an impressive business pedigree.
A one-year transfer from Melbourne in 1999 turned into a permanent stay for Mr Nunn and wife Alexandra Dimos, who fell in love with Adelaide’s lifestyle. In 2002, Mr Nunn established a soil and groundwater consulting business that went on to become JBS&G – a company with 300 staff and offices across the country.
He continues to chair the group, which specialises in site remediation, contaminated land and environmental assessments and auditing.
Having built the business from scratch, the 50-year old is familiar with the challenges facing entrepreneurs in SA, but says with more support they can play a key role in the state’s recovery from COVID-19.
“There’s a lot of people that have returned to SA with some great ideas, with some financial support, and they’re back here for the beauty and the safety and the great lifestyle,” he said.
“But they’re also going to want to build their businesses, they’re going to want to take their opportunities here.
“And it’s really about that concept of connections – connecting people with great ideas, people with funds and people with the talent, and try to get them all working together. I think we’ll pull out of COVID really well – there’s a really strong entrepreneurial spirit.” Mr Whalley was appointed to the voluntary position in 2018, tasked by the State Government to help shape a supportive environment for entrepreneurs to flourish in SA. He played a central role in developing the Future Industries Exchange for Entrepreneurship strategy – aimed at developing a culture of entrepreneurship – and has overseen the evolution of Lot Fourteen into a vibrant hub for local entrepreneurs.
While acknowledging the progress made under Mr Whalley’s stewardship, Mr Nunn hopes to put his own stamp on the role.
“I think there’s a view in the wider community that Lot Fourteen is very much a tech space and a space industry space but I’d like to see the net cast a little bit wider,” he said.
“I’d like to see the definition of entrepreneur going into Lot Fourteen as being a much broader church. I’d like to see things like advanced manufacturing getting in there, social and environmental enterprise getting in, specialist groups.
“In relation to social entrepreneurship, I think that’s huge. The board has a very strong focus on that and I’m keen to champion it – things like homelessness, education and obviously environment is close to my heart.
“And the other thing I’d like to very much look at is bringing in Lot Fourteen as almost a broader discussion of innovation, and really getting more happening at Tonsley, more happening at the other innovation hubs around the state.
“Trying to make the state feel a little more entrepreneurial rather than associating it with one little bit of real estate.” Mr Nunn, who joined the state’s Entrepreneurship Advisory Board in December, was a winner of an EY Entrepreneur of the Year award in 2017.
In the same year, with Alexandra, he established the Nunn Dimos Foundation – a philanthropic fund that supports social, arts, education and envir­onment-based charities in SA.
Premier Steven Marshall welcomed Mr Nunn’s appointment. “I really want to thank Jim Whalley for his outstanding contribution to SA whilst chief entrepreneur and am delighted to welcome a person of the calibre of Andrew Nunn to this vital role,” he said. “It speaks volumes of both men that they are willing to donate their valuable time to helping drive the transformation of the South Australian economy.”
CREDIT: EXCLUSIVE GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 640
