Adelaide company to spearhead lunar push
SOUTH Australian rocket scientists are preparing Australia’s first-ever mission to the moon.
The intention is to send our first nanosatellites to orbit around the moon in 2024.
A new industry-led consortium called Lunar Ascent, spearheaded by Adelaide-based Space Machines Company and supported by finance giant Deloitte, is inviting all companies and related entities in the space industry to join the program.
Deloitte Asia Pacific chief transformation officer Rob Hillard told the Sunday Mail the consortium championed Australia’s participation in the space economy through partnerships on lunar missions.
“This is also a mission designed to inspire the nation, to encourage Australians to be bold in pursuing lofty goals and to leave a positive legacy for years to come through the space know-how developed,” Mr Hillard said.
Space Machines Company chief executive Rajat Kulshrestha said Lunar Ascent would use an innovative and cost-effective in-space transportation platform to deploy nanosatellites in lunar orbit. “Development of such capability in Australia for the mission will play a critical role in a globally competitive supply chain and skills growth for Australian Space Industry,” he said.
“This mission will demonstrate sovereign capability in building, testing and deploying technology for deep-space missions.” Premier Steven Marshall, who championed the industry in Adelaide to securing Australia’s first Space Agency, has backed the plan.
“It is brilliant to see Deloitte partnering with Space Machines Company to pursue this mission of national importance in a way that captures the unique value created when an established large organisation collaborates with an entrepreneurial start-up,” he said.
“Having formed the collaboration at Lot Fourteen, it is an example of the vision we had for how the precinct can help the space industry grow and create jobs across the country.” Industry consultation and engagement will continue until late March when the mission will be officially launched. PAGE 65: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: MATT SMITH
Word count: 313
