FORGET cadavers, Adelaide now has a surgical training clinic where medical students and qualified surgeons can hone their skills on 3D-printed body parts, ranging from noses and hips to knees and brains.
The clinic, built by Adelaide start-up Fusetec, offers 25 surgical simulation stations aimed at attracting surgeons from around the globe to train on advanced manufactured body parts.
Each body part is anatomically accurate and can be manufactured with added conditions such as tumours.
The clinic, which officials say is the first of its kind in the world, opened this week on North Tce in the Adelaide BioMed City precinct.
Fusetec chief executive Mark Roe said it was a game-changer for medical training.
“When compared with the age-old method of surgical training using cadavers, Fusetec’s body parts are a safer and practical solution as they do not contain potentially harmful bacteria and can be produced with pathologies on demand,” he said.
“Training on advanced manufactured body parts de-risks real medical procedures for patients and medical professionals, as surgeons can train and rehearse on lifelike, soft-tissue models that feel, look and behave under the knife like the real thing.
“We have even created models that bleed with a pulse.” Trade and Investment Minister Stephen Patterson said Fusetec was a prime example of a health and medical company “taking it to the next level” by combining hi-tech capabilities with traditional practices.
“This world-first 3D advanced surgical training clinic will be the envy of medical practitioners from around the globe,” he said.
It is anticipated the clinic will create 157 direct jobs at Fusetec and 816 indirect jobs.
Fusetec released its first range of ear, nose and throat models in November 2019.
The company now offers more than 30 soft-tissue surgical training models, including a brain in a head modelled on Barack Obama. It exports products to more than 20 countries and supplies universities and pharmaceutical companies.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 319
