MORTGAGE lender RAMS has put Adelaide at the centre of a national expansion strategy, with plans to open five home loan centres across the city in the next 12 months.
South Australia is currently home to just two of the brand’s 66 franchises, at Salisbury and Morphett Vale, and the new suburban centres are designed to expand the brand’s presence on all sides of the city.
RAMS managing director Jake Bromwich said the company, a subsidiary of Westpac, was aiming for 15 openings across the country in the next 12 months, and South Australia had been identified as a key growth region.
“We are going through a national expansion strategy, and over the next 12 months South Australia is a critical part to that,” he said.
“Within South Australia, there’s tens of thousands of customers looking for a home loan or who have home loan needs every year.
“And we believe we should be well placed to help those customers, given the service proposition and locally owned business offering that we have.” RAMS is currently looking for franchisees to run the five new home loan centres, which connect borrowers with the lender’s range of mortgage products.
Districts on offer include Adelaide central, northeast, west and greater east, and Port Adelaide.
Mr Bromwich said the investment required by franchisees varied, and mostly covered store fit-outs and working capital for salaries, wages and other start-up costs.
The average RAMS franchise employs about six staff.
RAMS’ expansion in Adelaide follows a two-year surge in the city’s house prices during the pandemic period.
Mr Bromwich, who previously spent two years in Adelaide as head of SME banking at BankSA, expects house prices to stabilise in Adelaide following five consecutive interest rate rises, but he’s not expecting a major correction like the type seen in east coast markets.
He said customer demand for RAMS products across the country remained strong despite uncertainty around future interest rate rises, inflation and global economic uncertainty.
“We’re still seeing quite strong application volumes in the mortgage market,” he said.
“In terms of the opportunity out there, there’s still a greater level of property stock on the market now than there was a year ago. That was one of the things that, a year ago, was holding back some of the volumes.” Mr Bromwich said that despite the rapid rise in interest rates, most customers remained ahead on their mortgage repayments, and very few required assistance in meeting their higher repayments.
“Whilst we haven’t seen it yet, as rates go up that may change,” he said. “What we do is encourage our customers to contact us early if they’re concerned – our support team for customers seeking hardship is actually based in Adelaide as well.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 458
