Ad misleading WITH the election campaign winding down, the state’s electoral commissioner ruled that a major plank in the Labor campaign – an advertisement about ambulance ramping – was misleading.
And it told Labor to stop using is. I think that horse has bolted. How many voters will take notice?
And how many early and postal votes have already been made on that premise? How does paramedic Ash feel now?
In the event of what everyone is saying, the state election will be an easy Labor victory. Could the Liberals call for a new vote?
ROGER BATES, Paralowie Hydro technology A PROMISING new breakthrough in technology suggests South Australia may be on the right track with visionary green hydrogen plans, despite critics (“High cost of power plant”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
Hysata, an Australian start-up associated with the University of Wollongong, has claimed that an efficient electrolyser it is developing will deliver the world’s lowest hydrogen cost, save hydrogen producers billions in electricity costs, and enable green hydrogen to out compete fossil fuel-derived hydrogen.
Let’s hope so.
SA is well positioned to harness innovations that will take advantage of renewable energy to reduce energy costs and emissions.
CHING ANG, Magill Big health plans ABOUT two years ago, we predicted health would be the major issue in this state election. And so it has come to pass.
The government has failed in its attempt to correct, restore and maintain our hospital system. It has been incapable of recognising that the key problem lies with bed and clinical staff shortages and the flawed management of patient throughput.
Complicated and expensive programs of community care, exhortations for patients to avoid hospitals, and enlarged emergency departments will never solve the underlying problem: People get sick and need inpatient care.
The government has sought to blame Labor’s Transforming Health and defend its record. After four years, this is no longer sustainable.
Labor has offered a comprehensive plan for the resourcing and expansion of our hospital system. It must be held to these promises if it gains office.
Professor WARREN JONES, WCH Alliance convener Budget numbers I THINK Guy Mudie may have mixed up the end of his comment: “Out with the old and in with the new”(“Autumn clean-up”, The Advertiser, Friday).
If, as he suspects, Labor wins, I think he should have said it would be “Out with the new and in with the old”.
That’s because the budget calculations sound like those of past Labor governments.
BRUCE HAMILTON, Valley View Gloves are off WELL said, David Harris, (“Truth and honour”, The Advertiser, Tuesday). “Judge the politicians on their performance,” he said.
The words of Paul Simon’s song The Boxer are pertinent. If I may paraphrase the words: Don’t squander your resistance (vote),For a pocketful of mumbles.Such are promises,All lies and jest.Still, a person hears what they want to hear,And disregards the rest.
As voters, we need to remember which party has been in power in our state for most of the past five decades.
We need to consider the decline of SA during this time in comparison to other states.
Still, some have said the people always get it right, and we must accept the verdict.
Labor, and some independents, have not been able to accept the verdict of four years ago and have stood in the way of government initiatives.
But we must accept the people’s verdict at the ballot box.
As long we do not get hoodwinked by lies and jest, such as empty promises. ROB MITCHELL, Glenelg Night chemists HOW safe will staff be if the Labor Party opens pharmacies 24 hours a day? I believe that the crime rate will soar.
SUE PEARCE, OAM, Fullarton Money well spent THE obvious response to Phil Robins’ observation that the state debt has almost doubled in the past four years is that the Marshall government is fixing the problems that the Liberals inherited from 16 years of Labor’s neglect (“Spending spree”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
Things like Lot Fourteen, upgrading of metro intersections, regional roads, reopening The Repat and a now booming economy are just a few examples.
CHRISTOPHER JAY, Hackney Serious virus EACH day, we are given statistics of the number of new Covid-19 cases, hospitalisations, etc.
The percentage of deaths is low, giving the perception of some that this disease is scarcely worth worrying about.
We’ve been told we must live with Covid in the same way as we do with flu. But it transmits even more readily.
Our politicians have given credence to business interests and opened the doors. As a result, case numbers have been increasing rapidly.
However, one statistic we are not being given is the number of “long Covid” cases.
There are reports that more than 30 per cent of cases may result in the debilitating long Covid.
Symptoms can last months or years – including painful breathing, lethargy and brain fog. This is a major disease.
Dr P.J. CARSON, Glenelg South
Word count: 824
