ADELAIDE will soon have its first dedicated co-living accommodation for young professionals and students, when The Switch opens next year on North Terrace.
The $30m residential tower, just west of Gawler Place, will be able to house 347 renters in a mix of private ­studios through to seven-bed shared apartments. It is aimed at people aged 18 to 38, although there is no age limit.
Among its features are co-working spaces, pop-up events, gym and a community garden, which will all be open to the public.
The features aim to connect like-minded people.
A rooftop bar at the 35-storey tower will be available just for residents, and an “honesty kitchen” will be stocked with locally sourced produce.
The Switch co-founder Craig Oliver said the tower was filling a gap in the market for “share accommodation that brings the outside world in”. The development, which will retain the facade of the state heritage-listed G & R Wills & Co warehouse, built in 1878, was initially touted as solely for student accommodation.
However, Mr Oliver said the decision to widen it to all young people, including entrepreneurs, creatives and professionals, was made before COVID-19 stopped the flow of international students.
“More than 250,000 25 to 34-year-olds live on their own in Australia,” Mr Oliver said.
“A fifth of them earn above the average national income, and 1.46 million rent, and will do for most of their lives, but they want housing options that better suit their lifestyle and needs.
“In Adelaide, early evidence of the popularity in urban co-living among young professionals from start-up, creative, financial and professional sectors is what made it a key city for us, plus the fact that the city is a hub for a young, transient population, including students.” Mr Oliver said The Switch, scheduled to open in February next year, would also help address a shortage of rental accommodation in Adelaide.
The Advertiser reported last month that an average 20 sets of hopeful tenants were applying for every unit and house put up for rent, as people desperately tried to find somewhere to live. State Government data also showed large increases in weekly rent – up to 79 per cent for houses and 61 per cent for units in some suburbs. Mr Oliver said rent at The Switch would include furniture, fast-speed internet, utilities and gym membership, but he declined to give a guide on how much it would be.
CREDIT: RACHEL MOORE
Word count: 408
