Your next escape can be luxe but off-grid and at one with the land that surrounds it. Celeste Mitchell checks in to see the next generation of low-impact, sustainable stays sweeping Australia Tucked into forest and perched above the glistening waters of Lake Wyaralong in Queensland’s Scenic Rim, five “Wanderpods” are welcoming their first guests this summer. Floor-to-ceiling glass, king beds topped with flax linen, and deep outdoor bathtubs make them undeniably luxe, but they are also completely powered by solar and rainwater, embrace composting, and are cleaned with eco-friendly products.
The pods are a first for Wander (wander.com.au) – a next-gen sustainable travel company working with like-minded landowners and passionate communities across Australia to offer a stylish accommodation alternative for today’s conscientious traveller.
This first site provides lodging that is in complete alignment for the historic grazing property turned new-world winery, The Overflow 1895, which is starting to turn heads for its alternative wine varietals such as vermentino and tempranillo. Stays here are completely off-grid and support Bush Heritage Australia by contributing $10 from every booking to regenerative replanting projects.
While sustainability has been in the traveller’s lexicon for a while now, it’s matured, especially over the past couple of years. Travel is now not just, “Where are we going?” but “Why are we going?” Unsurprisingly, the pandemic has also shifted our priorities, evident in booking.com’s annual Sustainable Travel Report, in which 61 per cent of travellers said it had made them want to travel more sustainably in the future. Seventy-three per cent of us are now also more likely to choose an accommodation if it has implemented sustainability practices.
Anecdotally, travellers are asking more of accommodation providers – they want to know about the impact of a stay. How are the providers leaving the land better than they found it?
Instead of ticking a box, sustainability needs to be viewed as a deep-rooted collaboration between traveller, operator, country and community.
“Sustainability is not the end goal. It will be forever a continual process of improvement,” Wander chief executive and co-founder Cassandra Sasso says. “There’s always something more that we can do, but we have gone throughout the whole supply chain to look at how sustainable (our partners) are. Are they supporting the right people? Are they getting their materials from the right places? This has to be a real movement, rather than Wander just flying the flag itself.” After a career in hotel interior design, Cassandra and co-founder Cameron Crispin were inspired to create their own hotel about three years ago after feeling let down by sustainability “initiatives” in the developments they were working on.
“We thought, instead of doing a hundred rooms in one location, let’s do 100 locations and create a network of these beautiful off-grid, sustainably built rooms all around Australia where your landscape is changing,” Cassandra explains.
Guided by the ethos of connecting with country, community and yourself, stays in Wanderpods are complemented by add-ons that range from local produce boxes, to sensitive nature-based tourism (personalised hikes with local guides is an example), and activities focused on wellness and mindfulness.
“We don’t want a Wander experience to be, ‘Oh, yeah, I went there for the weekend and it was great’,” Cassandra says.
“It has to inspire and make you think about what are the changes you can make in your life to be more sustainable when you come home as well.” The Wanderpods are built off-site and set in place with a smart footing system that doesn’t require concreting, which limits harm to vegetation. The Scenic Rim was chosen as the first destination for Wander, in part, because of the region’s One Million Trees project – a goal the council is hoping to reach by 2025.
“At The Overflow itself, we’re planting 500 of those trees around the pods and in certain areas where it’s going to be regenerative,” Cassandra explains.
The next site, due to open to guests by Easter on Kangaroo Island, is also being regenerated after a history of destructive farming, with the landowner recently receiving a grant to plant 1500 trees.
Covid has shone a spotlight on the transformational benefits of connecting with nature. One West Australian government department has gone so far as to invite start-up Hidden Cabins (hiddencabins.com.au) to place its first off-grid escape within a national park.
“Florence” is a design-forward tiny house operating completely off the grid, with recycled lithium batteries, solar, water tanks and a composting toilet. But it’s what’s inside that highlights the company’s further commitment to sustainability, with local products from brands who align with their values and support the community as well as the environment.
“Guests are understanding the impact they’re having on the environment and wanting to find getaways that are a bit different to the day-to-day, and even teach them a little bit more about what they could be doing at home,” says co-founder Ashleigh Bamford.
In the Capertee Valley, two-and-a-half hours from Sydney, another independent off-grid retreat opened to guests in June. No.33 The Retreat House is the first escape for Wikloe (wikloe.com), built intentionally with minimal waste while ticking the aesthetic and comfort boxes conscious travellers demand. Most affecting, however, is the setting – an area of wild natural beauty which also happens to be the world’s second widest canyon.
“When we look at nature as separate from us, we aren’t as conscious about how we interact with it,” says Wikloe co-founder Nadia Anderson. “If we don’t honour our connection with nature… I just think we deny a huge part of ourselves.” As well as aiming for zero impact, Wikloe plants a tree for every booking received, working in conjunction with the organisation One Tree Planted.
“People are seeking more considered experiences, whether that be through food choices or travel choices, to minimise our impact on the planet going forward,” Nadia says.
That’s because, as she sees it, “We’re in a pretty dire situation at the moment.”
More off-grid stays Salty Cabins Offering two sustainably built and self-sufficient getaways near Byron Bay – the A-frame and The Cabin – Salty Cabins are also members of 1% for the planet and donate $20 from every booking to Sea Shepherd. saltycabins.com Lost Retreats After launching with their first architecturally designed off-grid cabin on a vineyard in Mount Jagged in South Australia, Lost Retreats have unveiled a second, atop Willunga Hill, with a powder pink clawfoot tub and ocean views. As well as integrating recycled materials into the build and championing local artists, the company offers free staycation packages to those less fortunate, through partnerships with nonprofits.
lostretreats.com Unyoked Now with more than 30 off-grid cabins scattered along the east coast – deep in the forest yet within a couple of hours’ drive of major cities – Unyoked has just launched two pet-friendly stays in the Noosa Hinterland called Gili and Zerya. unyoked.co
TICK OF APPROVAL Another way to make considered choices is to look for official accreditation, such as Ecotourism Australia or B-Corp. Ecotourism Australia launched a new-look brand in November to celebrate its 30th birthday, bringing to the fore its certification process. Operators need to satisfy 300 criteria that span not only environmental impact, but also contributions to conservation, support of local and Indigenous communities, and accessibility. The Green Travel Guide – also available as an offline app – makes it easy to search more than 500 certified sustainable providers before you book your next holiday. greentravelguide.org Scan the code to read more about the tiny houses Aussie travellers are loving right now.
CREDIT: CELESTE MITCHELL
Word count: 1258
