THEY’RE THE SMALL COMPANIES THAT ARE THINKING BIG
AUSTRALIA’S BEST 50 START-UPS
AUSTRALIAN start-ups are creating everything from non-alcoholic skinny margaritas and fitness apps that unlock cryptocurrency rewards to grocery and alcohol deliveries that happen in minutes.
And they’re winning international recognition and huge financial support for their efforts, with more than $10bn invested in new Aussie ventures in 2021 — more than three times as much as the previous, record-making year.
In part two of our look at Australia’s 50 top start-ups, we highlight companies with fewer than 100 employees that are still privately owned and ranked on their influence by Crunchbase.
25 LYRE’S SPIRIT CO Founded: 2019 Investment: $53m Founders: Carl Hartmann, Mark Livings Proof that mocktails are big business can be found in this start-up that has raised more than $50m in investments and now sells non-alcoholic spirits in 60 countries. The company’s products range from non-alcoholic absinthe to American malt and can be bought in sets to create virgin cocktails such as martinis and margaritas.
24 MAPLE FINANCE Founded: 2020 Investment: $2.7m Founders: Joe Flanagan, Sidney Powell This Melbourne start-up uses blockchain technology to connect businesses that want to borrow cryptocurrency with those who want to lend it. Maple Finance won $2.7m in funding over two rounds for its peer-to-peer DeFi system after its creation by former NAB executive Sidney Powell and former adviser Joe Flanagan.
23 OWNHOME Founded: 2020 Investment: $31.1m Founders: James Bowe, Tim Harley What if the money you paid in rent helped pay for your home? That’s the question asked by this start-up that buys homes on behalf of its customers, counts “rent” towards equity and lets them buy it back at an agreed value, plus interest, within seven years. OwnHome won $31m in Series A funding in 2022, and operates in Sydney, Newcastle, Wollongong, Brisbane and the Gold Coast.
22 ALL G FOODS Founded: 2020 Investment: $16m Founder: Jan Pacas All G Foods is not just developing alternatives to meat but dairy products, too. The brainchild of 2015 chief executive of the year Jan Pacas, it secured $16m in seed funding and has also attracted investment from Woolworths, started shipping products to Singapore and Thailand this year, and has plans to expand into China. Its plant-based arancini balls launched in Woolworths supermarkets in June.
21 VOW Founded: 2019 Investment: $6.8m Founders: George Peppou, Tim Noakesmith Vow promises to develop the next generation of meat by cultivating it from animal cells rather than animal farms. The Sydney-based initiative is currently investigating 11 meat products, and says cells can go from Petri dish to plate in as little as six weeks. The meat, they say, will introduce a new category of sustainable food.
20 CAPE Founded: 2020 Investment: $33.1m Founder: Ryan Edwards-Pritchard This start-up, which raised $33.1m in pre-seed funding, is dedicated to helping other businesses succeed without being weighed down with financial administrative tasks. The company’s software is designed specifically to make business expenses easier to manage. The company boasts 18 staff members across three countries.
19 CARMA Founded: 2021 Investment: $103m Founders: Lachlan MacGregor, Yosuke Hall Perhaps karma was involved in the fortuitous launch timing of this start-up that’s designed to help buyers navigate a tricky second-hand car market. The company, which secured $75m Series A funding, buys cars, inspects and reconditions them and lets shoppers take a closer look online. The start-up is currently in Sydney, with plans to expand to Brisbane and Melbourne.
18 OMNISCIENT Neurotechnology Founded: 2019 Investment: $60m Founders: Michael Sughrue, Stephane Doyen “Google Maps but for the brain” is how chief executive Stephen Scheeler describes this start-up that uses tech tools such as artificial intelligence and machine-learning with an MRI scan to create a personalised brain map for doctors. It’s hoped these maps could be used to treat conditions including strokes and autism.
17 PYN Founded: 2019 Investment: $13.5m Founders: Jon Williams, Joris Luijke Making human relations more relatable is the goal of this successful start-up, run by business veterans Jon Williams and Joris Luijke. The company provides targeted and customised communications for employees, based on their specific role or position, for example. The company’s $10.4m seed funding round was led by Silicon Valley venture capital firm Andreessen Horowitz.
16 MILKRUN Founded: 2021 Investment: $86m Founder: Dany Milham Created for much more than just milk, this speedy service is designed to deliver groceries to customers in minutes rather than days. Milkrun, which operates in 50 suburbs across Sydney and 26 in Melbourne, was created by Dany Milham, who co-founded bedding brand Koala, and has hired more than 1000 e-bike delivery riders. The start-up recently launched alcohol deliveries.
15 OFLOAD Founded: 2020 Investment: $27.5m Founders: Geoffroy Henry, Thomas Andersson Uber manages cars on the road and Ofload is doing something similar for trucks. Funded by three successful rounds, this Sydney start-up uses its digital platform to connect shippers to carriers in a bid to eliminate waste. It now boasts more than 15,000 trucks, 1600 carriers and 55 big-name clients.
14 LOAM BIO Founded: 2019 Investment: $50m Founders: Frank Oly, Guy Hudson, Guy Webb, Mick Wettenhall, Tegan Nock This agricultural biotechnology company is attracting worldwide attention and funds. Created in Orange, NSW, Loam Bio recently won $40m in Series A funding from world-leading investors for its technology that coats seeds with microbial fungi, allowing the roots to store more carbon. The invention promises to deliver healthier crops and greater carbon credits.
13 V2FOOD Founded: 2019 Investment: $185m Founder: Nick Hazell Proof there’s plenty of bite to meat-free burgers is this company that launched in 2019 and is already selling in countries including New Zealand, Japan and South Korea. V2food, which launched in partnership with the CSIRO and Hungry Jack’s boss Jack Cowin, raised $77m in Series B funding in 2021 and sells plant-based mince, burgers and sausages in supermarkets and through restaurants.
12 PATHZERO Founded: 2020 Investment: $7.8m Founders: Carl Prins, Charbel Ayoub Climate change and business meets with Pathzero, a start-up tracking companies’ carbon footprints, helping them to report them and address their causes . The Sydney business, which raised $7.4m in its second funding round, recently released a software tool to estimate carbon emissions from investment portfolios.
11 VOLY Founded: 2021 Investment: $18m Founders: Mark Heath, Thibault Henry Groceries delivered at speed is the idea behind this unusual start-up operating in Sydney’s city, inner west and eastern suburbs. Created amid the Covid-19 pandemic lockdowns of 2021, the company raised $18m in seed funding, and runs its own fulfilment centres to get food to customers fast.
10 PAYTRON Founded: 2020 Investment: $9.4m Founders: Francois Henrion, Jaco Veldsman Designed to help small businesses, Paytron is the brainchild of two veteran banking professionals who saw a gap in the market to make it easier to manage foreign currencies. Paytron, which raised more than $4m in 2021, can help organisations convert payments in 30 currencies.
9 INAURO Founded: 2020 Investment: $3m Founders: Angus Kennard, Craig Kesby Data start-up Inauro promises to make work easier for its clients. It does this by combining information gathered from different connected devices to develop more efficient workflows, often in industrial operations. Its work recently won a $3m investment from another Aussie firm, SafetyCulture.
8 WILLED Founded: 2020 Investment: $6m Founders: Aaron Zelman, Dave Kaplan, Tim Glasson Created in Melbourne in 2020 after co-founder Dave Kaplan ’s father died intestate, Willed is an online platform for organising wills, probate applications and even cremations, simply and inexpensively. The company recently wrapped up a $6m Series A funding round amid plans to expand its products to potentially include cryptocurrency details or social media accounts.
7 STRONG COMPUTE Founded: 2021 Investment: $11.5m Founder: Ben Sand The small Sydney-based team behind Strong Compute recently won an $11.5m investment from big names in self-driving cars and venture capital to fund its promise of speeding up the time it takes to train an algorithm. The cloud-computing firm, which was part of Y Combinator’s winter 2022 cohort, promises it can boost AI speeds by 10 times.
6 REEJIG Founded: 2019 Investment: $27m Founders: Mike Reed, Shujia Zhang, Siobhan Savage Reejig didn’t just close a $23m funding round this year, it also won a Technology Pioneer award at the World Economic Forum for its take on using artificial intelligence in the workplace. The company’s software is designed to find the right fit for employers and employees using AI, with the difference that its software is independently audited for bias.
5 EUCALYPTUS Founded: 2019 Investment: $98m Founders: Alexey Mitko, Benny Kleist, Charlie Gearside, Tim Doyle Founded just one year before its industry exploded, Eucalyptus is a digital healthcare hub with five brands under its umbrella. They include men’s telehealth arm Pilot, women’s fertility venture Kin and a customised skincare brand called Software. After a $30m investment from Woolworths in 2021, the company recently raised $60m in Series C funding from investors, including Bond.
4 ILLUVIUM Founded: 2020 Investment: $5m Founders: Aaron Warwick, Grant Warwick, Kieran Warwick Inspired by the crypto success of older brother Kain, Kieran Warwick teamed with brothers Aaron and Grant to create an open-world, monster-fighting game where players collect and battle NFT creatures and unlock ILV tokens on the Ethereum blockchain. The PC and Mac game is due for release in open beta this year and recently raised $104m in virtual land sales.
3 AVOCADO DAO Founded: 2021 Investment: $25.7m Founder: Brendan Wong This blockchain-based start-up, at less than a year old, is now worth more than $200m. Avocado DAO supports play-to-earn crypto-currency games, buying in-game items and lending them to players for a cut of the rewards they earn. The company recently raised $25.7m in a Series A round from investors, including Animoca Brands.
2 UPCOVER Founded: 2019 Investment: $4.7m Founders: Anish Sinha, Skye Theodorou This insurance start-up began by packaging straightforward policies for gig workers but has since expanded its offers to more than 5000 small businesses and sole operators, from hairdressers to fitness instructions. Upcover recently secured $4.7m from its seed funding round and is planning to launch policies for rideshare drivers.
1 STEPN Founded: 2021 Investment: $5m Founders: Jerry Huang, Yawn Rong This thoroughly modern fitness app, created in South Australia’s Find Satoshi Lab, makes a game out of earning cryptocurrency. StepN users choose and buy an NFT sneaker to suit their earning needs, equip it in the app, and measure their next walk, jog or run with their phone to earn USDC cryptocurrency. The company announced a $122.5m profit in the second quarter of 2022, and announced plans to expand its team.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON NATIONAL TECHNOLOGY EDITOR
Word count: 1762
