SPORT AND MOBILITY Matthew Pearson – AIRSPEEDER/ALAUDA Flying cars are a reality in Adelaide, where Matt Pearson, also a co-founder of nano-satellite company Fleet Space, is on a mission to create the world’s first racing series for a manned flying electric car as a catalyst for innovation, on the basis that competition accelerates progress. Pearson is the founder of Alauda, a manufacturing business set up to build the EVTOL (electric vertical takeoff and landing) vehicles, as well as Airspeeder, the racing series. Excitingly, the AlaudaMk3 – which looks like a futuristic super-sized drone – recently completed unmanned test flights in South Australia, bringing Pearson’s vision to life.
Mina Nada and Michael Johnson – ZOOMO This Australian startup has a mission of electrifying delivery fleets through e-bike subscriptions. It rose to prominence through partnerships with Uber Eats and DoorDash but is now fast expanding on its own, with a fleet that now exceeds 10,000 vehicles worldwide. Its custom-designed bikes can bear more than 200kg of load, with the coronavirus pandemic fuelling a demand for delivery across all industries. “We initially built our products to service the demands of gig workers in the food delivery industry,” Zoomo co-founder Mina Nada says. “Their expectations for quality commercial vehicles, on-demand service, flexible financing and tech-enabled security features spurred us to innovate. We’re now seeing enterprises and fleet managers benefiting from the platform we have built. Enterprise fleet managers looking for clean and efficient vehicles are choosing us.” The company is backed by Australian venture capital outfit AirTree, with support from the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, Maniv Mobility and Contrarian Ventures.
Andrew Moore and Siobhan Lyndon – AMSL AERO Husband-and-wife team Andrew Moore and Siobhan Lyndon are aiming high – for “the world’s most efficient electric vertical takeoff and landing (EVTOL) aircraft”. Their design, Vertiia, will be piloted and will carry up to four passengers cruising at 300km/ hour, powered by electric batteries or range-extending hydrogen. Their current focus is on the aeromedical sector, and they hope to have Vertiia in use for emergency medical use with Careflight by 2023. “Its unique design makes it the most efficient electric vertical takeoff and landing design under development in the world,” Moore said in a recent video unveiling. The company’s aircraft relies on four tilting wings with eight motors and propellers to achieve vertical takeoff and forward flight. AMSL Aero’s roots date back to Telstra’s muru-D start-up incubator program, where it received an initial capital injection, and it later received $3m in funding from the London-based IP group.
Word count: 422
