ALEX Carey is poised to secure the precious baggy green cap that will vindicate AFL legend Kevin Sheedy’s blunt message that he should give up on football a decade ago.
The wicket-keeper who blasted an impressive Marsh Cup century for South Australia on Sunday has the backing of Cricket Australia’s selectors to take over from Tim Paine and could be confirmed as Australia’s new No.7 in the next 48 hours.
The West Australians from Australia’s T20 Word Cup squad, including wicket-keeping rival Josh Inglis, flew home on Tuesday on a pre-approved trip to visit their families and while Inglis can return at any time, all signs point to Carey keeping at the Gabba next Wednesday.
World Cup hero Mitch Marsh also flew home on Tuesday, but is booked to return to Queensland early next week for the Australia A tour match against the England Lions.
While boom youngster Inglis had support from one of the three selectors at the weekend, it now appears the battle-hardened Carey will live out his boyhood dream after serving a long apprenticeship as Paine’s understudy.
Carey, 30, captained Team GWS, which became Greater Western Sydney, in 2011 but didn’t win a place on the inaugural list when the club entered the AFL the following year.
One former Giants staffer remembered Sheedy saying after Carey’s first or second training session that the inside midfielder was the next “Smokin” Joe Misiti, who was a dual premiership Essendon star. But while Sheedy, a handy leg-­spinner in his day, had a coffee with Carey at the Rooty Hill RSL following the 2011 TAC Cup season, he broke the news that Carey would be delisted.
“I told him we’ve got 20 midfielders, have a crack at cricket, mate,” Sheedy said on Tuesday. “You’ve got to play the odds here for a person of your height and your weight and your talent.
“So if you want to be in the best talent, you’re going to have to beat Toby Greene, the captain (Stephen Coniglio), and we’ve just knocked off the (No.1 draft pick) in Tom Scully.
“So we’ve got all these midfielders and I said, ‘If you want to have a decent crack at a sport, have a crack at cricket’.” Former Giants recruiter and star talent spotter Neville Stibbard has been credited with initially converting Carey to the winter code.
Stibbard flew to Adelaide twice to meet with a teenager who was making runs for fun at Glenelg Cricket Club and sent him emails outlining that an AFL career at the Giants was paved with a shot at history.
“They (emails) said you could be a premiership player of a start-up club. I took him through the boys he’d be playing with. He was certainly in that group.”
CREDIT: SAM LANDSBERGER
Word count: 462
