ALEX Carey is poised to secure the precious baggy green cap that will vindicate AFL legend Kevin Sheedy’s blunt message of a decade ago that he should give up on football.
The wicketkeeper who blasted an impressive Marsh Cup century for South Australia on Sunday has the backing of Cricket Australia’s selectors to take over from Tim Paine and could be confirmed as Australia’s new No.7 in the next 48 hours.
The West Australians from Australia’s T20 Word Cup squad, including wicketkeeping rival Josh Inglis, flew home on Tuesday on a pre-approved trip to visit their families and while Inglis can return at any time, all signs point to Carey keeping at the Gabba next Wednesday.
World Cup hero Mitch Marsh also flew home on Tuesday but is booked to return to Queensland early next week for the Australia A tour match against the England Lions.
While boom youngster Inglis had support from one of the three selectors at the weekend, it now appears battle-hardened Carey will live out his boyhood dream after serving a long apprenticeship as Paine’s understudy.
Carey, 30, captained ‘Team GWS’ – which later became Greater Western Sydney – in 2011, but failed to win a place on the inaugural list for the club’s AFL entry the following year.
One former Giants staffer remembered Sheedy declaring after Carey’s first or second training session that the inside midfielder was the next ‘Smokin’ Joe Misiti, who was a dual premiership Essendon star.
But Sheedy, a handy leg-spinner bowler in his day, broke the news to Carey he would be delisted over a coffee at the Rooty Hill RSL after the 2011 TAC Cup season.
“I told him we’ve got 20 midfielders, have a crack at cricket, mate,” Sheedy said.
“You’ve got to play the odds here for a person of your height and your weight and your talent.
“So if you want to be in the best talent you’re going to have to beat Toby Greene, the captain (Stephen Coniglio) and we’ve just knocked off the (No.1 draft pick) in Tom Scully.
“So we’ve got all these midfielders and I said, ‘If you want to have a decent crack at a sport, have a crack at cricket’.
“He was a midfielder because then I had Zac Williams at half-back, and he was pick 198. It was trying to get people placed so you don’t stuff up their lives. The Giants gave a chance for someone’s career to flourish at another sport.
“He’s a guy who missed out on a grand final for the Giants (2019) but he may get recompensed with a Test career.” Former Giants recruiter and star talent spotter Neville Stibbard has been credited as the man who initially converted Carey to the winter code.
Stibbard flew to Adelaide twice to meet with a teenager who was making runs for fun at Glenelg Cricket Club and sent him emails outlining that an AFL career at the Giants was paved with a shot at history. “They (emails) said you could be a premiership player of a start-up club, which would be history-making to your grandkids,” Stibbard said.
CREDIT: Sam Landsberger
Word count: 524
