FORMER Adelaide Crows ruckman Brad Moran is celebrating a $205m payday following the sale of his start-up software company.
The sale of CitrusAd to French multinational advertising and public relations firm Publicis Groupe comes a decade after Mr Moran’s AFL career at the Crows was cut short by injury.
Mr Moran, 35, now based in Brisbane, describes his forced retirement in 2011 as a “sliding doors” moment that kickstarted a successful career in business.
“Would I have liked to play another 10 years? Maybe, but I look back now and probably think it’s the best thing that’s happened,” he said.
“I heavily lent on the club to help springboard me into business. (Former Crows chairman) Rob Chapman was the very first person I went to about my first business idea. He helped set me on the train to meet various other individuals across town.” CitrusAd is an online advertising platform that enables supermarkets and other retailers to charge brands a premium for the best product placements on their online stores.
Just like brands compete for eye-level product placements in physical stores, CitrusAd replicates that concept for online shopping.
Since it was launched by Mr Moran and Adelaide business partner Nick Paech in December 2017, CitrusAd has secured prominent customers including Woolworths, Coles and Dan Murphy’s in Australia, as well as Tesco in Britain and Target in the US.
Other backers of the company include John-Paul Drake of Drakes Supermarkets, ASX-listed MA Financial and a number of private investors.
Mr Moran said the technology had struck a chord with many supermarket chains that were grappling with the high cost of running an online store.
“What we learnt after talking to the grocers for a long time was that they used to make a lot of their money from the eye-line shelf space,” he said.
“And so we basically decided to build the digital version of that – a system where the retailer could allow their suppliers like Unilever and Coke and Pepsi to bid like they would on Google for the top spots on Google, but for the top spots on woolworths.com or coles.com.” CitrusAd is Mr Moran’s second start-up venture to get off the ground. He sold out of mobile ordering platform NoQ in 2016 after launching that product on the day of his retirement from the Crows. Mr Moran will remain as chief executive of CitrusAd.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 401
