ALEX Carey is poised to secure the precious baggy green cap that will vindicate AFL legend Kevin Sheedy’s blunt message a decade ago that he should give up on football.
The wicketkeeper, who blasted a Marsh Cup century for South Australia on Sunday, has the backing of Cricket Australia’s selectors to take over from Tim Paine and could be confirmed as Australia’s new No.7 in the next two days.
The West Australians from Australia’s T20 Word Cup squad, including wicketkeeping rival Josh Inglis, flew home on Tuesday on a pre-approved trip to visit their families. While Inglis can return at any time, all signs point to Carey keeping at the Gabba next Wednesday.
World Cup hero Mitch Marsh also flew home on Tuesday, but is booked to return to Queensland early next week for the Australia A tour match against the Eng­land Lions.
While boom youngster Inglis had support from one of the three selectors at the weekend, it now appears the battle-hardened Carey will live out his boyhood dream after a long apprenticeship as Paine’s understudy.
Carey, 30, captained Team GWS, which later became Greater Western Sydney, in 2011, but didn’t win a place on the inaugural list for the club’s AFL entry the following year.
One former Giants staffer remembered Sheedy saying after Carey’s first or second training session that the inside midfielder was the next “Smokin” Joe Misiti, who was a dual premiership star with Essendon.
But over a coffee at the Rooty Hill RSL after the 2011 TAC Cup season, Sheedy, a handy leg-spinner in his day, broke the news to Carey that he would be delisted.
“I told him we’ve got 20 midfielders, have a crack at cricket, mate,” Sheedy said on Tuesday. “You’ve got to play the odds here for a person of your height and your weight and your talent.
“So if you want to be in the best talent you’re going to have to beat Toby Greene, the captain (Stephen Coniglio), and we’ve just knocked off the (No.1 draft pick) in Tom Scully.
“So we’ve got all these midfielders and I said, ‘If you want to have a decent crack at a sport, have a crack at cricket’. He was a midfielder because I had Zac Williams at halfback, and he was pick 198.
“It was trying to get people placed so you don’t stuff up their lives. “The Giants gave a chance for someone’s career to flourish at another sport. “He’s a guy that missed out on a grand final for the Giants (2019), but he may get recompensed with a Test career.” Former Giants recruiter and star talent spotter Neville Stibbard has been credited as initially converting Carey to the winter code.
Stibbard flew to Adelaide twice to meet a teenager who was making runs for fun at Glenelg Cricket Club and sent him emails outlining that an AFL career at the Giants could bring a shot at history.
“They (emails) said you could be a premiership player of a start-up club, which would be history-making to your grandkids,” Stibbard said on Tuesday.
“There will be photos of the first Giants and Suns premiership sides in the offices forever, and I took him through the boys he’d be playing with.
“He was certainly in that group. As a young person he was a quality person. “I found him engaging to talk to and he’ll represent Australia well.” The Giants had signed the likes of Adam Treloar (now at Western Bulldogs), Dylan Shiel (Essendon), Jeremy Cameron (Geelong) and Nathan Wilson (Fremantle).
Stibbard CC’d AFL talent boss Kevin Sheehan on the emails, who told the Giants “if you think he’s that good, go and get him” and also helped secure his signature.
Sheedy’s son Sam Sheedy, who worked as a recruiter at the Giants, remembered the professionalism of Carey.
“Very talented, very dedicated,” Sam Sheedy said.
“Just a little bit slow with his running capacity. Speed and probably agility cost him – but he’s good behind the wickets. “He was always going to make it at the top level, no matter what he put his heart and soul into.”
CREDIT: Sam Landsberger
Word count: 691
