Alex Carey is poised to secure the precious baggy green cap that will vindicate AFL legend Kevin Sheedy’s blunt message that he should give up on football a decade ago.
The wicketkeeper who blasted an impressive Marsh Cup century for South Australia on Sunday has the backing of Cricket Australia’s selectors to take over from Tim Paine and could be confirmed as Australia’s new No.7 in the next 48 hours.
The West Australians from Australia’s T20 Word Cup squad, including wicketkeeping rival Josh Inglis, flew home on Tuesday on a pre-approved trip to visit their families and while Inglis can return at any time, all signs point to Carey keeping at the Gabba next Wednesday.
World Cup hero Mitch Marsh also flew home on Tuesday, but is booked to return to Queensland early next week for the Australia A tour match against the England Lions.
While boom youngster Inglis had support from one of the three selectors at the weekend, it now appears the battle-hardened Carey will live out his boyhood dream after serving a long apprenticeship as Paine’s understudy.
Carey, 30, captained “Team GWS” – which later became Greater Western Sydney – in 2011, but failed to win a place on the inaugural list for the club’s AFL entry the following year.
One former Giants staffer remembered Sheedy declaring after Carey’s first or second training session that the inside midfielder was the next ‘Smokin’ Joe Misiti, who was a dual premiership Essendon star.
But over a coffee at Rooty Hill RSL after the 2011 TAC Cup season, Sheedy, a handy leg-spin bowler in his day, broke the news to Carey he would be delisted.
“I told him we’ve got 20 midfielders, have a crack at cricket, mate,” Sheedy told News Corp on Tuesday.
“You’ve got to play the odds here for a person of your height and your weight and your talent.
“So if you want to be in the best talent you’re going to have to beat Toby Greene, the captain (Stephen Coniglio), and we’ve just knocked off the (No.1 draft pick) in Tom Scully.
“So we’ve got all these midfielders and I said, ‘If you want to have a decent crack at a sport, have a crack at cricket’.
“He was a midfielder because then I had Zac Williams at halfback, and he was pick 198.
“It was trying to get people placed so you don’t stuff up their lives. The Giants gave a chance for someone’s career to flourish at another sport.
“He’s a guy who missed out on a grand final for the Giants (2019), but he may get recompensed with a Test career.” Former Giants recruiter and star talent spotter Neville Stibbard has been credited as the man who initially converted Carey to the winter code.
Stibbard flew to Adelaide twice to meet with a teenager who was making runs for fun at Glenelg Cricket Club and sent him emails outlining that an AFL career at the Giants was paved with a shot at history.
“They (emails) said you could be a premiership player of a start-up club, which would be history-making to your grandkids,” Stibbard told News Corp on Tuesday. “There will be photos of the first Giants and Suns premiership sides in the offices forever, and I took him through the boys he’d be playing with.
“He was certainly in that group. As a young person he was a quality person. I found him engaging to talk to and he’ll represent Australia well.” The Giants had signed the likes of Adam Treloar (now at Western Bulldogs), Dylan Shiel (Essendon), Jeremy Cameron (Geelong) and Nathan Wilson (Fremantle).
Stibbard CC’d AFL talent boss Kevin Sheehan on the emails, who told the Giants, “If you think he’s that good, go and get him” and also helped secure his signature.
Sheedy’s son Sam, who worked as a recruiter at the Giants, remembered what a professional Carey was. “Very talented, very dedicated,” Sam Sheedy said.
“Just a little bit slow with his running capacity. Speed and probably agility cost him – but he’s good behind the wickets.
“He was always going to make it at the top level no matter what he put his heart and soul into.” Carey’s elevation into Australia’s Test team will be widely celebrated in AFL circles given how far and wide his former teammates have spread.
He would become the first Australian wicketkeeper to make his Test debut on home soil since Adam Gilchrist in 1999.
But the gloveman has already done Australia proud, becoming the country’s 26th ODI captain earlier this year and with his heroics at the 2019 World Cup in England, when he was named in the ICC’s team of the tournament.
Carey’s leadership streak and seemingly flawless character will be important in the wake of the Paine sexting scandal. While Carey has missed out in the Sheffield Shield this summer, he averaged 59.7 in the previous three seasons as he smacked four centuries, which coach Justin Langer places a premium on.MIKE ATHERTON P22
CREDIT: SAM LANDSBERGER CRICKET
Word count: 839
