As government embraces EVs, infrastructure rollout must speed up, Andrew Chesterton writes
While the chicken-or-egg debate may never be settled, the big question over what needs to arrive first, electric vehicles or the charging infrastructure required to support them, is a little more clear-cut.
The answer, it seems, is infrastructure. A rechargeable vehicle isn’t much use without somewhere to do the actual recharging – beyond your home, of course – and with range anxiety still a key concern for the EV curious, a robust network of chargers is the obvious answer.
Some experts argue that our charging network, or lack of it, is a core reason EV sales in Australia are growing at a fraction of the rate they are overseas. In 2020, for example, electric vehicles accounted for just 0.6 per cent of total new-car sales here, while in the UK, plug-in cars commanded a 10 per cent market share. In Norway, the gold-standard in all things EV, the number was an impressive 54 per cent that year.
“The key factor holding back the mass uptake of electric vehicles in Australia is consumer uncertainty about charging infrastructure,” says Electric Vehicle Council chief executive Behyad Jafari. “Australians can and should be able to drive all over this massive nation with complete confidence in a zero-emission vehicle. The technology exists. We just need the political will to make it happen.“ It’s true that in Australia, our charger rollout has been a long-distance event, rather than a sprint, but we might be entering the final straight, with private investment now being joined by the public purse to supercharge our EV infrastructure.
The federal government’s latest Future Fuels and Vehicles Strategy included a boost to the Future Fuels Fund, from $71.9m to $250m, which, when matched with private investment, brings to $500m the amount being spent on rolling out 1000 public-charging stations across the country.
Funding for charging infrastructure at 400 private companies and in 50,000 households was also announced, but there has been no detail on how it will be spent.
There are two main charging types for an electric vehicle; AC, or alternating current, which delivers a slower charging rate, and is the same current you use at home; and DC, or direct current, a faster-charging capability used for on-the-go charging. And it’s the latter that is of critical importance to longer-distance driving in Australia.
According to research by Energia, we will need almost 30,000 DC charging points around the country by 2040 to service our national new-vehicle carpark, which is predicted by then to be 100 per cent electrified.
Conversely, the Electric Vehicle Council found that, in 2020, Australia was home to 2307 public charging stations, and just 357 of them were public fast chargers.
It might seem like we have a long way to go, but the charging rollout is at last gathering pace. What started with installations that were counted by the dozen – the NRMA, for example, was one of the first to invest, building a network of 44 fast chargers in NSW, mostly positioned along major highways – they are now being tallied by the hundred, or thousand.
In South Australia, charging start-up JOLT is using a $100m pledge from asset management giant Blackrock to expand from Adelaide out across the country, with 5000 mostly free fast chargers to be spread across every major city.
The JOLT business model attracts users by offering up to 7kW/h of electricity for free (designed to act as a top-up to get you home or to your next destination), and only bills drivers once they exceed that amount. JOLT also uses the chargers as advertising hoardings for another revenue stream, and the company only provides energy from renewable sources.
Then there’s charging firm Evie, which recently partnered with DC experts Tritium to start a rollout of more than 300 new fast-chargers across almost 160 sites around the country.
Even traditional fuel stations are clambering to get on board. Ampol, which recently rebranded the Caltex petrol network in Australia, will put 300 new DC fast-chargers on the forecourts of more than 100 of its service stations.
Part of this rush is privately funded, and some publicly, including about $25m from the federal government’s Future Fuels Fund, which will see some 400 new high-speed chargers installed, including 127 in NSW, 106 in Victoria, 86 in Queensland, 33 in Western Australia, 29 in SA, 10 in Tasmania, nine in the ACT and three in the Northern Territory.
Not to be outdone, the NSW government released its own Electric Vehicle Masterplan in September, designed to make the state “the easiest place to buy and use an electric vehicle in Australia”, which includes a plan for fast chargers to be positioned at 50km intervals across great swathes of NSW.
In Sydney, the gaps will be even smaller, with a charger every 5km in the greater city.
The plan is part-funded by the government to the tune of $131m, along with $160m in expected private investment, and will see about 1000 new fast-charging bays built in NSW alone.
“This master plan will put range anxiety firmly in the rear-view mirror,” says NSW Energy and Environment Minister Matt Kean. “Our EV Strategy will build EV super-highways and commuter corridors across the state, keeping communities connected and ensuring travellers can reach their destination with ease.”
CREDIT: Andrew Chesterton
Word count: 891
