I had the pleasure of being invited to a very inspirational event on Friday - the Foodbank SA Women of Influence luncheon at the Adelaide Showground.
The event is Foodbank SA's biggest fundraiser for the year and all proceeds go to supporting the charity's "mission to end hunger".
Every $2 raised on the day puts a meal on the tables of those in need and Foodbank SA helps to feed more than 100,000 people every month.
The event was cancelled last year due to COVID-19 - a year that saw unprecedented demand for Foodbank's services.
So this year's luncheon was especially important and hundreds turned out for the event, which featured an all-female panel including ABC Radio's Ali Clarke, indigenous musician Jessica Wishart, Senator Penny Wong (all pictured left), and social media influencer Leah Itsines, moderated by media personality Pippa Wanganeen.
All have their own involvements with Foodbank SA and spoke of why they support the charity, but they also talked about how they became influencers in their own respective fields.
RELATED READING: Time to think about those who slip through the cracks
Of particular interest, Ms Wishart spoke about the Kere to Country business she established to address the food crisis faced by Aboriginal families, particularly in central Australia. She said the start-up company (Kere meaning food from animals) came about after realising how much Aboriginal communities were paying for basic food and meat supplies in remote areas.
"In 2020, this situation escalated, meaning Aboriginal families weren't able to afford the essential products they needed to keep their families healthy," she said.
"Meat was just not affordable. How would you feel, if you had to pay over $85 for one kilogram of poor-quality mince? Starting Kere to Country was a call to action, to focus on the provision of affordable meat."
Ms Wishart established Kere to Country with co-founder and mentor Robyn Verrall from Bully Beef, Keith, who helps to source meat for the social enterprise.
It was also the inspiration behind why Ms Wishart got involved with Foodbank SA, to support its Alice Springs food hub launch in the NT last year - one of two outlets that opened during COVID (along with Ceduna) specifically aimed at improving the lives of the first nations people in those areas.
This week I just wanted to highlight these two inspirational causes, which always need more public support.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: Alisha Fogden
Word count: 420
