EUDUNDA farmer Karl Milde may have had a long wait of 2.5 years but it was a night to remember on Sunday when he was announced as the 2021 Agricultural Shows Australia's National Rural Ambassador at the Sydney Royal Easter Show.
It is just the fifth time a SA winner has claimed the national title in the competition's 21-year history.
Mr Milde said he was "really honoured and humbled" to be selected from such a high calibre pool of state winners.
"It has been a pretty surreal week for me, I thought I understood what the program was about and believed I had really grown as a person and used it to its full potential but this week I have had a lot of light bulb moments," he said.
"To spend time around the 10 others really made me see how much being the state winner means to them and how passionate they are about growing young rural men and women in their local communities."
The 25-year-old says the Rural Ambassador program has been a "life changing" experience since being approached to be the Eudunda Show Ambassador in 2018.
From there he went on to win the 2019 state title and is committed to giving others the same opportunities he has enjoyed.
COVID restrictions forced the last minute cancellation of the 2021 Rural Ambassador finals, due to be held at the Ekka in Brisbane last year, so the finals were rescheduled to Sydney, held in conjunction with the 2022 finals.
This made Mr Milde's title reign brief, less than an hour, before Dione Howard from NSW was announced the 2022 winner.
Mr Milde said he was looking forward to continuing to promote youth involvement in country shows.
"It is not about reinventing the wheel but continuing to work with the dozens or even hundreds of fantastic people who have come before me - not just in the Rural Ambassador award but other leaders in other similar programs," he said.
"I want to get around to as many Royals and country shows as I can in the next year, but for me it is not about the next 12 months or even next four or five years.
"I love that the same people involved in similar programs 20 years or 10 years ago are now right at the top echelon of their rural community."
Mr Milde encouraged other young people to become involved in their local show.
Since joining the Eudunda Show, he has established an annual Merino ewe hogget competition and has also helped fellow committee member Kayla Steinborner start up a Merino Young Judges competition. He has also been working with the local school to get students more involved.
"You can ease into the role and just let it happen at your own pace, you don't have to be running a competition at the start, just be a helping hand and see if you connect with the people around you - you may just find your show family," he said.
Inaugural 2001 national winner Peter Angus - who was one of four members of the judging panel - said Mr Milde's authenticity and ability to connect with people from a wide range of backgrounds impressed them.
"He is an authentic, community-minded young person, who is very relatable," he said. "He is passionate about the engagement of youth and working with all levels within organisations to create better outcomes."
Mr Angus - who is the state coordinator of the Rural Ambassador and Young Rural Ambassador awards - said Mr Milde's win would be a great chance to further promote the awards in SA.
CREDIT: Catherine Miller
Word count: 606
