A string of recent investments offering increased competition at port to load grain ships is set to bring immediate benefits for SA and Vic grain producers.
The volumes of the new port entrants are small in comparison to Viterra, which maintains a stranglehold on SA's grain export capacity, but competition is climbing.
Grain exports are already under way from the T-Ports facility.
The start-up of T-Ports new grain facility at Luck Bay offers another export route on the Eyre Peninsula.
Cargill's recent investment in a new mobile loading facility at Port Adelaide will boost competition in the Adelaide zone.
The mobile shipment loader augments Cargill's half a million tonnes of grain storage facilities under its GrainFlow banner at Crystal Brook, Maitland, Mallala, and Pinnaroo.
Similar moves are also occurring in Vic where investment in low-cost mobile ship loaders is lifting competition on the major grain bulk handler GrainCorp.
Optimism is climbing for the 2021 winter cropping season following recent good rains and the favourable price outlook.
Most of NSW, which has been the most volatile production state in recent years, has seen 50 millimetres to more than 150mm since the start of the year.
Global grain price outlooks are also expected to remain positive.
United States grain supplies are expected to remain tight through next year on the back of continued large exports to China. That was the initial forecasts for the soon to be sown US corn, sorghum, and soybean crops by the US Department of Agriculture at its annual Outlook Forum conference.
US farmers are expected to boost grain plantings in response to the current high prices, leading to record large crops, assuming average yields. Record large grain harvests in the US would typically weigh on grain prices as stocks swell. That is not expected to be the case next year.
Another season of massive grain and oilseed imports by China has the USDA projecting tight US grain supplies and elevated grain prices for the 2021-22 season.
Tight US grain supplies are supportive for global feed grain and oilseed prices, including Australian wheat, barley, sorghum, and canola.
It is early days in terms of projecting next year's grain production and demand, and lots can change. But the underlying message from the USDA's forecasts is for Chinese import demand to remain strong and record large crops and there is little to no room for any significant production problems.
- LLOYD GEORGE, AG SCIENTIA
CREDIT:
Word count: 405
