YOUNG country show enthusiasts looking to reboot their local group following the COVID-19 pandemic and make a positive contribution to rural mental health are being encouraged to apply for the Australian Young Farmer Challenge Regional Grant Program.
The AYFC is an initiative of Agricultural Shows Australi and showcases the young people in Australian agriculture competing in diverse challenges of skill, technique, knowledge and safety.
Held at shows across the country, Agricultural Shows Australia executive officer Katie Stanley said AYFC competitions played an important role in improving the mental health of young people living in rural areas.
"A local agricultural show is an opportunity for rural people to get off the farm and meet up with friends and family," she said.
"Ag shows bring communities together.
"It is widely reported there is a shortage of mental health support services for young people living in regional and remote communities across Australia.
"The Australian Government Department of Health has recognised that young people with nothing to do or no social opportunities is a key issue contributing to poor mental health in country areas.
"The AYFC can be part of an innovative community response to mental health servicing, providing young rural people with a platform to come together, form social connections and work as teams in a fun, safe and exciting day out.
"These competitions provide entertainment and crowd engagement as well as education for the broader community about agriculture, food and more specifically, the role of farmers and farm safety."
Ms Stanley said grants were available to support the costs of organising and running AYFC competitions at a local, regional and state level across Australia.
"The purpose of the program is to support the sharing of knowledge, encourage community initiatives and promote community leadership," she said.
"From start-up competitions at local agricultural shows, through to established competitions looking to expand into regional and state competitions, funding submissions will be accepted from all eligible organising committees."
Applications for the AYFC Regional Grant Program close February 2021. To apply for your local show, visit https://agshowsaustralia.org.au/
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 361
