A pair of new red lentil varieties offered by start-up independent plant breeder Grains Innovation Australia are set to offer growers a range of herbicide-tolerant options suited across Australia's lentil producing heartland of Vic and SA.
GIA breeder Michael Materne, based in Horsham, Vic, said national variety trial data showed the varieties stacked up well against industry benchmarks in a range of settings.
Dr Materne said the aim with one of the varieties, GIA Lightning had been to provide growers in lower rainfall, sandy soil environments, such as the Mallee, a solid herbicide-tolerant option that could help them better incorporate a pulse within their broader crop rotation.
GIA Lightning is an imidazolinone (imi) tolerant line that across Victorian and South Australian NVT trials has yielded on average 109 per cent of Hurricane XT - presently one of the most widely grown imi-tolerant varieties in lower rainfall zones.
Dr Materne said the breeding had been tailored to creating a variety with good yield stability and growth pattern and a plant type suitable for sandier soils.
The variety is scheduled for commercial release this year and has proved popular.
Janine Sounness, commercial manager at PBSeeds, the distributor of the new variety, said all available seed had already been sold to farmers across both SA and Vic.
Another variety the fledgling breeder is excited about is GIA Thunder, which has consistently proved the top yielding imi-tolerant lentil across trials conducted both by GIA and its collaborators and in NVTs in major lentil producing regions.
Ms Sounness said these imi-tolerant varieties were helping drive the increase in lentil plantings.
Recently released NVT data shows GIA Thunder's yield potential on average is 112pc of Hurricane XT across Victoria and South Australian trials throughout 2020 and 2021.
GIA are looking at more than just imi-tolerance in their portfolio, with two other new varieties, which will both be control released on a smaller-scale to allow further evaluation, featuring metribuzin and clopyralid tolerance respectively.
"Having varieties with these tolerances will allow farmers to have a solid herbicide rotation and not rely on the same group of chemicals and the associated potential risk of resistance," Dr Materne said.
These two varieties - GIA Metro and GIA Sire - are world first in their types, being the first released varieties with a tolerance to metribuzin and clopyralid respectively. GIA Metro was developed by GIA using a metribuzin trait from a project funded by GRDC and SARDI.
Dr Materne said the success of the varieties highlighted the importance of Australia's end point royalty system for breeders.
"We're a small operation and end point royalties allow us to continue to invest in our breeding program and keep coming up with varieties that address the traits, phenology and yields growers ask for," he said.
CREDIT: Gregor Heard
Word count: 464
