MEDICINE AND HEALTHCARE Dr Michelle Perugini, Dr Don Perugini, Dr Jonathan Hall – PRESAGEN Building on the success of analytics business ISD Analytics, which she sold to Ernst & Young, Dr Michelle Perugini founded Presagen with her husband Dr Don Perugini and Dr Jonathan Hall in 2016. Harnessing the power of artificial intelligence in the healthcare arena, Presagen’s first product, Life Whisperer, is a tool to help embryologists select viable embryos for IVF in order to improve outcomes for women, and is approved for use in the UK, Europe, Australia, New Zealand, Canada, India, Japan, Hong Kong, Singapore, and Vietnam. Perugini is a strong supporter of entrepreneurship in her home city of Adelaide, including as an Advisory Board Member at the University of South Australia Business School. Among many other awards, she was the winner of this year’s Australia and New Zealand Women in AI award in the health category.
Nicole Liu – KIN FERTILITY Nicole Liu left management consulting to start up Kin Fertility under the aegis of Tim Doyle’s Eucalyptus brand incubator. Kin is laser focused on women’s health, ultimately aiming to be a resource partner for women through their fertility journey. Launching with a subscription service for the contraceptive pill, thereby circumventing the inconvenience of frequent GP visits to refill prescriptions, Kin now also offers prenatal vitamins, personalised fertility checklists and video consultations with fertility doctors.
Aengus and Dimitry Tran – HARRISON AI Brothers Dr Aengus Tran and Dimitry Tran, formerly the Head of Innovation at Ramsey Healthcare, are looking to commercialise AI-powered products and services for doctors and patients. Their first product, created in partnership with Virtus Health Limited, is a deep learning model for predicting the likelihood of pregnancy from analysing time-lapse incubation videos, which they claim has increased the clinical pregnancy success rate in IVF treatment by more than 30 per cent compared to an average embryologist selecting embryos. Fueled by a funding round in 2019, the pair hope to develop further products in imaging analysis, pathology and hospital operations.
Milad Mohammadzadeh and Sadaf Monajemi – SEE-MODE Husband-and-wife co-founders of See-Mode Dr Milad Mohammadzadeh and Dr Sadaf Monajemi see themselves as working towards a world without strokes, the second-leading cause of death in the world. SeeMode’s first software tool uses artificial intelligence to analyse and report on vascular ultrasound scans, ultimately allowing better assessment of the risk of stroke and cardiovascular diseases. In a $9m funding round led by Singapore-based MassMutual Ventures with others, including Blackbird, Cocoon Capital, Entrepreneur First and SGInnovate, they have obtained TGA approval in Australia and FDA clearance in the US for their product. Further products are in the pipeline, aimed at detecting vulnerable plaque using machine learning and identifying high-risk blood flow using computational modelling.
Manuri Gunawardena – HEALTHMATCH Her time as a medical student opened Manuri Gunawardena’s eyes to the difficulties faced by patients seeking to access clinical trials, sometimes as a lastditch treatment hope. She co-founded HealthMatch with Dr Arran Schlosberg in 2017 to better match patients and researchers – a boon for both groups – and since then has established a pool of more than 80,000 patients looking for trials across more than 300 conditions. In response to the Covid-19 pandemic, HealthMatch provided patient recruitment services free to all organisations (public and private) for Covid-19 research. Gunawardena recently picked up the Veuve Clicquot Bold Future Award for 2021. She is supported by board members and investors Paul Bassat of Squarepeg Capital and Alister Coleman of Tempus Partners.
Charlie Gearside, Benny Kleist, Alexey Mitko and Tim Doyle – PILOT HEALTH Pilot is a one-stop shop for men’s health concerns, or – in their own words – an “online men’s health navigator”. Addressing concerns from hair loss to cold sores and erectile dysfunction, Pilot offers online medical consultations and prescription medications shipped to your door. Since its launch in 2019 it has treated more than 50,000 men, with the aim of making health checkups stress free and seamless. The business’s co-founder Tim Doyle is a branding and marketing whiz who is building a stable of digital healthcare brands under the umbrella of his telehealth startup Eucalyptus.
Kunal Kalro, Zoe Milgrom, Kate Lanyon – EUGENE LABS Kunal Kalro co-founded Eugene Labs with Zoe Milgrom and Kate Lanyon in a bid to make genetics testing accessible and relevant for everyone, no matter their race or gender. His startup offers an at-home, clinical-grade genetic testing service that he says is an Australian first. The test is designed for couples to assess their risk of passing on serious genetic diseases to their children. It combines a mail-in spit kit and online genetic counselling to test for 300 serious genetic diseases, providing medical advice that people and their doctors can act on in a clinical setting. “I started talking to researchers, and they would emphatically say ’yes, there’s a problem here and it’s much worse than you think’,” Kalro says. “The bias is a problem that leads to treatment guidelines, drug discovery, medication and recommendations that you and I will get at the doctor’s office, so it’s worse outcomes for everyone.” The executive says that 20 per cent of all infant deaths are due to genetic disorders, and carrier screening can help parents understand the risk before it happens. “We’re the only end-to-end service offering consumers direct access to medical-grade testing,” Kalro says. “All couples are provided with genetic counselling and that’s a really important part of what we do. People need to know what the implications of their results are, and we want all of our results to be actionable.”
Dr Aidan O’Mahony, Dr Cameron Ferris and Dr Julio Ribeiro – INVENTIA You’ve heard of 3D printing, but what about 3D bioprinting? Inventia’s technology creates cell culture models layer by layer – for example, breast tissue cell types ranging from diseased to healthy cells. These cell cultures can be used by researchers in academia and industry, and are a quicker and more elegant solution than growing cell cultures and building models manually, allowing for faster drug discovery and biomedical research. Founder and CEO Dr Julia Ribeiro established the company in 2006 and cycled successfully through a number of innovative fields, including bovine IVF, before realising the potential of 3D bioprinting.
Professor Alison Todd and Dr Elisa Mokany – SPEEDX SpeeDx specialises in diagnostic tests that detect infection but also measure resistance to different treatments, thereby allowing doctors to choose the best targeted therapy for individual patients. It is located in the Australian Technology Park, and has offices in the UK and Austin. Co-founder and chief scientific officer Professor Alison Todd has more than 85 granted patents and, with CTO Dr Elisa Mokany, was the recipient of the Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering’s Clunies Ross Innovation Award in 2020 for “discovery, development, and adoption of a technology that has significantly improved societal or industry capabilities”.
Kath Hamilton and Clare Conroy – LOOP+ Loop+ has created an activity tracker for wheelchair users, in the form of a pad that sits under the wheelchair seat and constantly monitors the user’s seated movement and position, feeding the data through to a phone app. Founders and sisters Clare Conroy and Kath Hamilton were driven to create the product to help Clare’s son Evander – in common with many wheelchair users, he has no sensation below the waist so is unable to sense pain or discomfort, which may lead to pressure or other injuries. Loop+ was the first Australian investment for Yamaha Motor’s Silicon Valley-based venture capital arm.
Steve and Grant Frisken – CYLITE Cylite’s 4th-general Hyperparallel-OCT system is a diagnostic tool for ophthalmologists and optometrists that uses 3D spectral imaging technology to measures full volume images of the eye at more than 300,000 A-scans per second. CEO Steve Frisken and CTO Grant Frisken have more than 40 years of experience between them and hold a number of patents. The machine was a Victorian winner of the Australian Engineering Excellence Award, with Engineers Australia Victoria Division manager Alesha Printz describing it as “A cutting-edge technology that has been designed, engineered and manufactured in Australia.”
Dr Sean Parsons – ELLUME Brisbane doctor Sean Parsons was working in the emergency department of Caboolture Hospital in 2009 during the swine flu pandemic when he met a young apprentice electrician with flu-like symptoms who was concerned about being in contact with his pregnant sister. Parsons knew the key to combating a virus was to find ways to test for it as quickly as possible, and could see the need for fast, accurate and affordable home digital diagnostic tests in preparation for the next pandemic. Securing some initial investment, he set up Ellume in 2010 with half a dozen staff while continuing to work as a doctor. The initial goal was to create a home flu test, and when Covid-19 hit in 2020 the Ellume team realised that the core technology it was working on could be developed into a home test for the virus. “We had been researching a flu diagnostic for many years, so when Covid-19 hit the world we were easily able to switch our model to work on a quick and accurate diagnosis for that,” Parsons says. The company was given emergency use authorisation last year by the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) for its Covid-19 home test kits. They can deliver information to people on their smartphone in as little as 20 minutes after the test, which uses a nasal swab. Earlier this year Ellume was given a $300m contract by the US Defence Department, which ordered 8.6 million test kits. This has allowed it to raise the funding to ramp up production at its Richlands facility in Brisbane. “Ellume has grown into much more than I ever thought it would,” Parsons says. He says the company’s goal is to measure itself by how much it can improve people’s lives, including saving lives, adding that Ellume’s technology will also help in future pandemics. “We want to create the tools that can be used by anyone, anywhere to detect common illnesses,” he says. Parsons believes there has never been a better time for innovation, and that it can only come through teamwork. “We have software tools and internet technology tools like never before and the Covid-19 pandemic has really thrust upon us the need to make enormous change in how we operate.”
Word count: 1725
