When venture capital investor Elaine Stead came under sustained attack from a gossip columnist, there was only one way out: she had to take on her chief tormentor.
Elaine Stead is back. Brandishing a glass of Barossa shiraz and a wide grin, the venture capital investor is sifting through the crowd, brimming with confidence at the opening party for Adelaide tech festival Southstart. She’s deep in animated conversation in the corner of the bar with South Australian Premier Steven Marshall. “She’s great, this woman,” he says, stepping to one side. “She really is.” Stead is at the week-long conference to speak on a panel about venture capital investing but she is also working bit by bit to rebuild her reputation. Her peers – including tech executives, university academics and the premier – are welcoming her back with open arms. They line up to speak with her over a drink, assuring her that the hell she’s been through over the past three years won’t be for nothing. “The worst thing I thought could ever happen to me has happened and I have survived it,” she says later. “Not without trauma and not without permanent damage, but I feel like it has all made me basically indestructible now.” Stead was once one of Australia’s most high-profile venture capital investors, in charge of millions. As a director of Blue Sky Alternative Investments her career burned bright until the business collapsed, taking with it more than $1 billion of shareholders’ money. If that wasn’t bad enough, she was being hounded over a three-year period by Australian Financial Review columnist Joe Aston who wrote more than 40 columns describing her as a “feminist cretin”, “stupid”, an “imbecile”, a “prodigious destroyer of capital”, and a “venture capital pyromaniac” who “set fire to people’s money”. Now, feeling vindicated by a successful defamation case that transfixed the business world, Stead is ready to speak.
Elaine Stead was seen as an outlier in Australia’s venture capital scene – with her science background and PhD in biochemistry, the fasttalking executive never really fit in. But for a while the experiment worked. At Blue Sky’s heights it amassed a valuation of $1.2 billion and managed more than $4 billion worth of investors’ money, its young employees wearing matching branded T-shirts and enjoying free beer on Fridays at its bustling open-plan Brisbane offices. Blue Sky had built a culture that aped the tech companies it invested in and its name reflected its sunny optimism about its prospects. Stead was in charge of its aggressive global strategy, jetting between the company’s Brisbane and Manhattan offices, picking hi-tech start-ups that might become the next big thing.
Her first taste of the heady world of venture capital had come years earlier while working on a PhD in biochemistry at the University of Adelaide in the early 2000s. Then in her mid-20s, she worked with her team tinkering in the labs on stem cells and they filed a number of patents that were licensed to a biotech company. She says it was this process of identifying the potential of new research, developing a plan to prove it scientifically and then taking it to market commercially that sparked an interest in venture capital investing. After a stint working for the university’s commercialisation department she was poached by one of Australia’s biggest venture capital firms, CM Capital.
Eighteen months later she took a call from Blue Sky partner Alex McNab and managing director Mark Sowerby, who encouraged her to come to lunch and hear them out about a job in their fast-growing business. “They said their private equity business was growing and they needed someone to help. I joined and became employee number 40.” Stead says she was in charge of the company’s most exciting work and spent her days researching companies to invest in, writing investment reports and attending board meetings. She maintained a widely read blog, including musings on venture capital, men and business, and tweeted voraciously about whatever popped in to her head.
Blue Sky’s mission was to provide mum and dad investors with access to lucrative alternative investments that were previously the domain of highnet worth individuals. Its portfolio included real estate assets comprising hotels and pubs, student digs, a burrito chain and a number of high-growth tech start-ups for which Stead was responsible. Online wine start-up Vinomofo and (now defunct) tech-based shoe retailer Shoes of Prey were her key projects. “Those early years felt like the best of times and the worst of times in the sense that it was not all rainbows and butterflies, but ultimately I do genuinely think the company was trying to build something that was bigger than ourselves,” Stead says. “Over time we earned the right to be taken seriously. Some people saw us as cowboys, trying to raise an alternative fund in Brisbane. But over time we started to deliver returns and people started to take notice… We ended up building a network of about 4000 investors.” In March 2018 the company was the subject of a short-selling attack from US-based activist short-sellers Glaucus Research Group, which claimed in a bombshell report that Blue Sky had aggressively marked up the value of its assets so that it could charge higher fees and post results that were too good to be true. Glaucus had been stalking its prey for months, building up a short position, borrowing stocks and betting it would drop in price, leading to a profit. Blue Sky employees had no idea what was going on.
Stead was buried in conversation with a workmate when an email arrived from managing director Rob Shand, addressed to the company’s board. The baby-faced Shand had taken over from Mark Sowerby in late 2016. Attached was a 67-page pdf document from Glaucus detailing claims of financial mismanagement, missed forecasts and obfuscation. “Who would believe this?” Stead asked her colleague. Shand called an emergency board meeting and a trading halt, and panicked brokers, investors and shareholders began ringing Stead. Before the halt, the report’s release had sent Blue Sky’s shares spiralling 9 per cent in an hour, shedding $80 million from the company’s value. “The fundamental allegations were that we inflated our underlying assets under management and their performance, which was just not true,” Stead says.
Then the columns started. Rear Window, written by former Joe Hockey staffer Aston and his Australian Financial Review colleague Myriam Robin, runs on the back page of the newspaper every day and the business community laps up its sarcastic and scathing takes on the day’s news. Aston’s first column about Stead appeared on April 3, 2018. Titled “Blue Sky’s survival strategy: hugs and sunshine”, it was the first of a stream of attacks on her leadership at Blue Sky, as well as mocking her tweets and Instagram posts. He highlighted Stead’s “gripping photo of her morning coffee” and a tweet that read “I need a hug”. “It was mortifying,” Stead says of her appearance in the columns. “And I was just so confused by it, to be honest. I had been tweeting and had a social media profile for god knows how many years before that, and the content of my tweets had never been an issue previously. I understood the context; our company was under fire. But I was confused as to why I was being made a focus.” Stead knew the Glaucus takedown was a sensational story. “You’ve got a company that was doing really well and was a market darling and now all of a sudden someone’s making allegations that they might be frauds and criminals. And once you accuse a fund manager of fraud – where the only asset they trade on is reputation – then you have effectively committed the business to death.” While the company was being buried by negative press, the barbs from Aston kept coming.
Soren Aandahl was director of research and chief investment officer at Glaucus Research when it launched its attack. Aandahl and his colleagues began planning to target Blue Sky following a successful takedown of Quintis, an Australian sandalwood maker that fell into administration after a Glaucus report accused it of accounting malpractice in 2017. The Texas-based Aandahl made his name uncovering fraud among Chinese listed companies, but Australia is where he’s left his mark. “We started screening for asset managers that reported incredible performance, and I don’t mean incredible as a compliment, but literally not credible. And Blue Sky jumped out immediately because of its historical returns. There were all these red flags that were incredibly suspicious.” Aandahl and his team took months putting together their report. The company collapsed just as he thought it would, he says. “They created their own downfall. Their inability to just answer simple questions about their business was their downfall.” The first columns about Stead came at about the same time as the short-seller reports. That made sense; it was Aston’s job to write provocatively about the business news of the day. He also attacked other Blue Sky executives but they kept coming at Stead, more than a dozen columns in the year after the Glaucus attack. “People were telling me to ignore it and that it’ll go away, and that they’ll move on to something else,” Stead says. “They told me to just suck it up, and I did. For years. But I just… I got to a point where I thought I cannot get out from under this. I couldn’t escape it.” Stead was asked by Blue Sky to stop tweeting but says she was still attacked despite a social media silence.
It was a short phone call from a friend, a former ABC director, that inadvertently sent Stead into an anxiety attack that turned into six months of depression. “I wasn’t allowed to say anything to defend myself and I just felt trapped,” she says. “I went to a psychologist and I had two months of intensive psych treatment. I’m sad to say, but not ashamed to say, that I was quite suicidal. My reputation is all I had, and for it to be torn apart so consistently and relentlessly, I felt I couldn’t get out from under it. I had to have family move in with me because they were extremely worried. They had me on suicide watch.” Stead was put on medication and underwent cognitive behavioural therapy. “Even today I open the newspaper and I have PTSD about it,” she says. She was scarred. And so were investors, some of whom lost hundreds of thousands of dollars. The worst hit were those who had invested their entire self-managed super funds into Blue Sky. Some shareholders are pursuing class action lawsuits against the company and its directors.
Stead’s day in court against Aston came in December 2020. “I remember reaching out to the lawyers, I was quite teary... I was inconsolable, really. The lawyers said, ‘Let us look at this, and we’ll tell you if there’s anything we can do about it’. They sat me down with barrister Sue Chrysanthou and said to me, ‘Why do you want to go down this route?’ I said I wanted to correct the record because I felt I hadn’t been able to.” Despite two offers from Stead to reach an agreement and settle, the defamation trial went ahead at the Federal Court in Sydney.
Aston, who would not comment for this story, flew in from Los Angeles, where he is based. He admitted on the witness stand that he targets individuals, sometimes over years, occasionally going out of his way “to take people down, using the Rear Window column”. He doubled down on his opinion of Stead, quoting from the 1994 film Forrest Gump: “Stupid is as stupid does. Someone who repeatedly does stupid things is by definition stupid.” WhatsApp messages tendered to the court show Aston revelled in Blue Sky’s demise, remarking to contacts “how good is the BLA [Blue Sky] meltdown”, “mate I really need you to help me on this pronto, I need to hit back” and “she has no clue”, of Stead. He joked to a source in response to a social media post by Stead about her mother’s brain tumour that “Elaine’s scan would show she doesn’t have a brain”.
The trial lasted eight days, with gawkers across Australia’s tech, media and legal industries watching on. Justice Michael Lee found Aston’s columns conveyed four defamatory imputations, including that Stead was a “cretin” and “rashly destroyed the capital of business ventures with which she was associated”. Justice Lee said Aston had decided to “go after” Stead because he perceived she was not taking responsibility for her “alleged failures at Blue Sky and because of her insouciance, as he saw it, to the losses suffered by investors”. The “sustained campaign of offensive mockery”, he found, amounted to a “form of bullying”. There was an “asymmetry of power”, with Aston “the one with the column inches” and “one might ask, what was she supposed to do? She was being serially mocked... as being, in effect, a gaping moron.” Nine was ordered to pay Stead’s legal costs, estimated to amount to more than $1 million, and she was awarded $280,000 in damages.
Stead says there were numerous reasons why Blue Sky failed, some of which were due to decisions made by the board in the year after the Glaucus attack, but she maintains the role of the “short and distort” campaign made it nigh on impossible for the company to be salvaged. The company’s reputation had been irretrievably damaged. “There’s no getting away from the fact that for shareholders, it’s been a disaster,” she says. “But I genuinely think before this ‘short and distort’ campaign, we were genuinely a good business. We weren’t perfect, and by that I mean we were growing really fast, and when you go fast there are gaps you have to try to fill. We were building the plane while it was taking off. We had accounting systems that were too unsophisticated and hadn’t kept up with our growth, and when the crap hit the fan, we did not have the spare bandwidth to make sure things weren’t falling through the cracks.” She says Glaucus’ allegations were rigorously probed by the Australian Securities and Investments Commission, including a 12-month investigation of five years’ worth of documents, and no action was taken.
Contrary to what one might assume, Stead says columns like Aston’s have a right to exist, and she doesn’t begrudge the right to free speech. “The thing I object to is that if you’re going to call people frauds, for example, if you’re going to make accusations of the most heinous nature, then you’d better make sure you understand what you’re writing about. It can end a person’s career and lose investors their savings. Just don’t shoot first and ask questions later. Freedom of speech doesn’t mean freedom from accountability.” In court, barrister Sue Chrysanthou alleged that Aston had attacked Stead due to her gender. “Oh, look, I think so,” Stead says when asked if sexism was a factor. “I think there is a bit of sexism at play there, in the sense that it’s just not as acceptable, I think, as a woman to stand up and against the media. I perhaps wouldn’t have thought that if he didn’t use words like ‘feminist cretin’ or called me a hen or used a whole bunch of other gendered terms. I think if his view was I was a terrible venture capitalist you can say that in a whole bunch of ways that doesn’t bring whether or not I’m a feminist into the equation.” Others have pointed to the broader issue of how women in business are portrayed. Venture capitalist and former investment banker Mark Carnegie asked in a Sydney Morning Herald column: “Why is it that women struggle to get more than 5 per cent of chairman positions at major Australian companies, but are asked to consume a much higher proportion of the shit sandwiches handed out for corporate governance missteps?… That she has got so much flack for the demise of Blue Sky relative to the men who actually ran the organisation seems unbelievable to me.” Aandahl describes the Blue Sky rise and fall as a story of the hubris of the Blue Sky management team and the absence of transparency. “When I look back at it, the number one lesson I take for it is the value of what we do in the capital markets, and the value of dissenting opinions. People question the role of short sellers; well, I think it’s about how we alert other investors to misconduct.” ASIC has since changed the rules relating to activist short seller attacks, making it more difficult for an offshore entity such as Glaucus to take down an Australian listed company.
Stead says she’s ready to move on. She’s started a new venture capital company, Human VC, which has invested in a number of US healthcare-focused start-ups. She also now acts as a consultant on funding and entrepreneurship in Adelaide. Her confidence has returned and she’s back in her element, on stage at tech festivals such as Southstart.
“The short attack and the resulting collateral damage ultimately made me unbreakable,” she says. “I was also proud that I was prepared to stand up for what I thought was right even when it was easier and safer not to… I wanted to do that for self-serving reasons, of course, but also did it for my investors and shareholders.” She maintains that Blue Sky’s shareholders are deserving of the most sympathy. “I got to show in court how Aston’s coverage was wrong and traumatised me, but our shareholders have never had the same opportunity,” she acknowledges. “I wasn’t happy,” she says of her legal victory. “I didn’t feel, you know… victorious. I just felt relief.”
CREDIT: By David Swan
Word count: 2979
