NSW has recorded 207 new locally-acquired cases of Covid-19 as infections in greater Sydney continue to surge.
Queensland’s lockdown has been extended to 4pm Sunday after 13 new locally acquired cases of Covid-19 were recorded overnight.
Federal health officials believe NSW is on a trajectory to hit 70 per cent vaccination cover in as little as five weeks, with Gladys Berejiklian tying the relaxation of Sydney’s lockdown to hitting significant inoculation targets.
NED-4196-QLD-Restrictions-lifting
Jess Malcolm 11.30pm: Pharmacies’ concern at jabs risk in hotspots
Pharmacies in southwest and western Sydney are worried they are ill-equipped to deal with the risks posed by vaccination in hotspot areas where the virus is rife, saying a lack of available personal protective equipment and enough ventilated clinical space is putting their workforce at risk.
As community pharmacies are purpose-built retail spaces, with many located in crowded indoor spaces such as shopping centres, pharmacists are worried they are improperly set up for vaccination and may be unable to meet infection prevention and control standards during an outbreak.
More than 90 pharmacies in southwest and western Sydney have been called on to join the vaccination rollout, with millions of doses fast-tracked to the epicentre of the city’s outbreak in a bid to ramp up vaccination rates and immunise the community, thereby slowing the spread of the virus.
FULL STORY
Nicholas Jensen 10.50pm: ICUs prepare for ‘worst-case scenario’
As contact tracers battle to contain the spread of the rapacious Delta variant, Covid-19 wards across Sydney’s major hospitals are making urgent plans to ratchet up intensive care unit capacities in the event of a “worst-case scenario”.
An analysis by The Australian reveals NSW is recording higher levels of hospitalisation, including ICU admissions, in the current outbreak than Victoria did at the same stage of its outbreak last year.
With the suspension of all non-urgent surgeries at Greater Sydney hospitals to come into effect on Tuesday, ICU occupancy has reached its highest levels since the beginning of the state’s outbreak on June 16 — recording 54 patients on Sunday.
FULL STORY
Joseph Lam10.15pm: New exposure sites span several LGAs
NSW Health has added a number of new exposure sites spanning several local government areas from Wollondilly Shire to Penrith, Fairfield, St George and Lane Cove.
Anyone who visited the following venues during the listed times is considered a close contact who must get tested immediately and isolate for 14 days regardless of the result:
● Rockdale: Repco, 395 West Botany Street: Wednesday, July 28, 10.15am to 5pm; Thursday, July 29, 10am to 1pm
● The Oaks (Wollondilly), The Oaks Hotel, 36 John Street: Friday, July 30, 12.20pm to 3pm
● Cabramatta: Hai Ha Money Transfer, 56 John Street: Sunday, July 25, 7am to 8.20am
Anyone who visited the following venues during the listed times is considered a casual contact who must get tested immediately and isolate until a negative result is received:
● St Marys: Easy Script Pharmacy, 38 Queen Street: Saturday, July 31, 12.30pm to 12.35pm
● Lane Cove: ALDI, Shop 2/2 Rosenthal Avenue: Saturday, July 24, 1.30pm to 2pm
● St Marys: Liquor Stax, 27-41 Queen Street: Thursday, July 29, 4.45pm to 5.30pm
● Lane Cove: Coles, Rosenthal Avenue: Saturday, July 24, 1pm to 2.15pm
AFP 9.45pm:Millions under lockdown as China battles outbreak
Millions of people have been confined to their homes in China as the country tried to contain its largest coronavirus outbreak in months including seven positive tests found in Wuhan, where the virus first emerged in late 2019.
China reported 55 new locally transmitted cases on Monday as an outbreak of the fast-spreading Delta variant reached over 20 cities in more than a dozen provinces.
The Wuhan cluster came after the official daily tally was released, but it was confirmed by state media which said the infections had been traced to a train station.
“The seven were identified as migrant workers,” Xinhua reported, citing Covid-19 prevention and control officials.
Major cities including Beijing have now tested millions of residents while cordoning off residential compounds and placing close contacts under quarantine.
Authorities in the capital met and agreed on the need to “raise vigilance, take strict precautions and defend (the city) to the death, sparing no expense,” in comments put out by the Beijing government.
Elsewhere, over 1.2 million residents were placed under strict lockdown for the next three days in the central city of Zhuzhou in Hunan province on Monday, as authorities roll out a citywide testing and vaccination campaign, according to an official statement.
“The situation is still grim and complicated,” the Zhuzhou government said.
China had previously boasted of its success in bringing domestic cases down to virtually zero after the coronavirus first emerged in Wuhan, allowing the economy to rebound.
But the latest outbreak, linked to a cluster in the city of Nanjing where nine cleaners at an international airport tested positive on July 20, is threatening that success with more than 360 domestic cases reported in the past two weeks.
READ MORE: ‘Freedom incentives’ to spur vaccine
Richard Ferguson9pm:Business push to mandate workplace jabs
Australia’s biggest industry groups say the nation is ready for governments to consider mandating Covid-19 vaccinations in the workplace.
Tying vaccinations to employment is already operating in the hotel quarantine system and aged care, but calls are growing for wider powers allowing employers to force staff to get jabbed.
Constitutional experts also say there is nothing in the nation’s founding document preventing the states or the commonwealth from making jabs compulsory.
Australian Industry Group chief executive Innes Willox said on Monday increased supply and evidence vaccines slowed workplace transmission should start the conversation on mandates.
“For the first time, employers are able to give careful consideration as to whether … it is reasonable in the circumstances of their businesses and employees to man­date vaccinations.
“Until now, mandating was not practical,” he said.
“Mandating will not be appropriate for many employers but there are now a lot more circumstances where this will be a potential option than just the narrow circumstances of quarantine and residential aged care.”
Mr Willox also called on groups such as WorkSafe Australia to update their advice on whether mandates were practicable, considering the changes in vaccine supply and eligibility.
Vaccine mandates have gained steam in recent weeks. US President Joe Biden has made vaccinations compulsory for federal public servants and French President Emmanuel Macron is moving to make the vaccine mandatory across most of the population.
FULL STORY
Angelica Snowden8.15pm:Rallying call for ‘our war against virus’
A tech start-up has crowd-­sourced ideas from it’s global network of designers to create what they think could be the face of Australia’s Covid-19 vaccine campaign.
Australian companies DesignCrowd and BrandCrowd chief Alec Lynch said he wanted to leverage the graphic design expertise of nearly one million artists to release a free and powerful image, available to front the country’s marketing strategy.
“There has been some negative commentary about the government’s campaign. I think the ‘Arm Yourself’ concept is not a bad way to summarise that (vac­cines are) the best way for us to protect Australia,” the 37-year-old said.
Mr Lynch selected the graphic, created by Istanbul-based graphic designer Mosa Abosweilem, out of more than 180 entrants as the winner for a small cash prize. He said it played on the theme of the iconic US World War II poster used to attract women into defence manufacturing jobs.
“It is the ‘We can do it!’ poster which featured a woman flexing her arm and it was a creative ­design as a rallying symbol,” Mr Lynch said.
“Our view was Australia and the world is at war with Covid and we think we need positive things — messages, symbols, campaigns — that Aussies can get behind.”
The advertiser behind the 1980s HIV/AIDS Grim Reaper commercial Siimon Reynolds said positive messages did not cut through. Instead, he lauded the style of the ad that featured a woman gasping for air because people responded to fear.
“It did make people wonder about what if Covid is bad for me. If there were another 10 ads like that and ... they put it everywhere, then I think we have got a chance,” Mr Reynolds said.
FULL STORY
Stephen Lunn7.30pm:Small business owners a homeless risk
Family small business owners who have lost their livelihoods in the Covid-19 pandemic are a growing cohort of those seeking homelessness services, advocates warn.
And up to 650,000 more social housing options are needed to cater for the growing demand, they say, with single mothers and their children fleeing family violence a particular concern.
Homelessness Australia chair Jenny Smith said rising house prices and rents were putting pressure on those needing housing, an issue exacerbated by federal government funding cuts.
FULL STORY
AFP 6.45pm: NZ opens travel bubble to Pacific workers
Seasonal workers from selected Pacific countries will be allowed into New Zealand without undergoing two weeks in quarantine, Jacinda Ardern says.
The expansion of the travel bubble will be restricted to workers from Tonga, Samoa and Vanuatu employed in the horticulture and viticulture industries where there are not enough New Zealand-based workers.
“This new one-way travel policy will significantly expand the potential workforce available for those experiencing labour shortages,” the New Zealand Prime Minister said on Monday.
“Our closed border has been critical to keeping Covid out and keeping our economy running but... we know our agriculture sector is experiencing challenges.”
“We’ve heard the call from primary sectors and others to bring in additional workers in a safe way and we think that is now possible.”
Tonga, Samoa and Vanuatu have largely kept Covid-19 at bay. There have been four cases in Vanuatu, three in Samoa and none in Tonga. New Zealand, which has recorded just 26 Covid-19 deaths in a population of five million, opened a trans-Tasman travel bubble with Australia in April.
It was hailed as a major milestone in restarting the global travel industry, but the arrangement was suspended last month when a Covid-outbreak spread through Australia.
Opposition leader Judith Collins said the decision to open up to seasonal workers from three relatively risk-free countries was a welcome move but did not go far enough.
“The question now is, if we can bring in (seasonal) workers without them having to undergo quarantine once they enter New Zealand, why can’t we prioritise other people from these three countries for quarantine-free travel?” Collins asked.
READ MORE: Covid-hit small business owners a homeless risk
Joseph Lam6.05pm: New NSW exposure sites revealed
The NSW exposure-site list grew significantly on Monday night.
Anyone who visited the following venues is considered a casual contact and must get tested immediately and isolate until a negative result is received.
● Ashfield: All Seasons Supermarket, 266 Liverpool Rd: Wednesday, July 28, 6.05pm to 6.40pm
● Baulkham Hills: Woolworths, 375-383 Windsor Rd: Wednesday, July 28, 4.15pm to 4.35pm
● Castle Hill: ALDI, Shop 200B Castle Towers Shopping Centre: Wednesday, July, 28 5.45pm to 6.05pm
● Castle Hill: Coles, Castle Towers S/C, Cnr Castle Hill and Old Northern Rds: Wednesday, July 28, 6.05pm to 6.15pm
● Castle Hill: McDonalds, 6-14 Castle Street: Wednesday, July 28, 6.15pm to 6.25pm
● Thornleigh: Woolworths, 2 The Comenarra Parkway: Sunday, July 28, 11.20am to 12.15pm
● Warriewood: McDonalds, Warriewood Rd: Wednesday, July 28, 11.45am to 1pm
● Ashfield: First Choice Liquor, 159 Liverpool Rd: Wednesday, July 28, 3.15pm to 3.30pm
● Ryde: New Yen Yen Asian Supermarket, Top Ryde City Shopping Centre, 129 Blaxland Rd: Sunday, July 25, 12.35pm to 12.40pm
● Ryde: Akira Sushi, Top Ryde City Shopping Centre, 129 Blaxland Rd: Sunday, July 25, 12.35pm to 12.40pm
● Kogarah: Australia Post Office, Kogarah Town Centre, Shop 9/5-9 Railway Parade: Thursday, July 22, 1.50pm to 2.10pm
● Castle Hill: Tortuga Ventures, 3 Hoyle Avenue: Saturday, July 24, 7am to 6pm
Matthew Denholm 5.35pm: NSW could be locked down ‘for months’
NSW could be in lock-down “for months to come”, Tasmanian Premier Peter Gutwein says.
Mr Gutwein said the delta variant outbreak in NSW showed that “delta is different”.
“This strain has shut down NSW and it might be shut down for months to come,” Mr Gutwein said on Monday. “This is serious and people need to ensure they do the right thing.”
READ MORE:Warne in self-isolatation after positive test
Joseph Lam5.10pm:Rockhampton airport, petrol station join Qld exposure list
Several Rockhampon venues have been listed on Queensland Health’s Covid-19 exposure site list as authorities fear the cluster has spread further north.
Wednesday July 28
Qantas Flight: Brisbane to Rockhampton QF2362: from 8.30am to 9.50am
West Rockhampton: Rockhampton Airport, 81 Canoona Rd: from 9.38am to 9.55am
Gracemere: Caltex, Gracemere Shopping world, 10 McLaughlin Street, Gracemere: from 10.17am to 10.19am
Rookwood Weir: Worksite & Workers Camp onsite at Rookwood Weir: from 11.30am to 12pm
Friday July 30
West Rockhampton: Rockhampton Airport, 81 Canoona Rd, West Rockhampton: from 5.25pm to 6.35pm
Rockhampton Airport: Southern departure female toilet (located in security check in area), 81 Canoona Rd, West Rockhampton: from 6.24pm to 8.23pm
Qantas Flight: Rockhampton to Brisbane QF2365: from 6.40pm to 7.50pm
READ MORE:Queensland lockdown extended until Sunday as state records 13 new local cases
Matthew Denholm4.58pm:Five people cautioned in Tasmania for breaches
Five people in Tasmania have been officially cautioned by police for breaching coronavirus “stay at home” orders imposed on recent arrivals from Queensland.
“A group of four tourists from Queensland each received a caution notice, after they attempted to enter the Cradle Mountain National Park,” Tasmania Police said in a statement. “All four members of the group were compliant with police and are now adhering to the ‘stay at home’ direction as directed on Saturday 31 July.
“A 19-year-old Southern Tasmanian woman also received a caution in relation to failing to comply with the stay at home order. The woman recently returned from Queensland, and on Saturday night attended the Hobart waterfront. Information was reported to police who investigated and later spoke to the woman. The woman has been given suitable advice relating to her ‘stay at home’ direction.
“Information obtained confirmed that the five people have not been in a high-risk premises and the risk to the others in the wider community is low.”
People who have arrived in Tasmania from “high risk” areas of Queensland since July 17 must self-isolate until August 2.
READ MORE:Bye, bye basket-case, as Tassie’s tiger economy untamed by Covid: CommSec
Courtney Gould4.40pm:Vaccine target data must be released: Senator
A key senate crossbencher is calling for the government to immediately release data it has used to calculate its vaccine target that the Prime Minister is keeping under wraps.
Scott Morrison on Friday announced Australians could look forward to a life without lockdowns once 80 per cent of the nation’s adult population is vaccinated.
But South Australian Senator Rex Patrick has warned this figure could be too low.
“We’ve seen already criticism in relation to what’s being put out. Where the Prime Minister says 70 per cent and 80 per cent, others are pointing out that needs to be the entire population,” he told Sky News.
COVID-19 Australia: Cumulative vaccinations by state
“When you translate those numbers back into the entirety the population, including children, you get to numbers like 56%, which is way too low compared to other jurisdictions.”
Mr Morrison’s plan to open the nation up again hinges on having 80 per cent of the eligible population vaccinated. The eligible population does not include individuals under the age of 16, if it did, that figure would sit at just under 65% of all Australians.
Phase B, which kicks in at 70 per cent, would equate to just 56% of total population.
Senator Patrick said for the sake of transparency, Mr Morrison should release the data immediately.
“We’ve got a lack of transparency here and that needs to be fixed,” he said.
“The Prime Minister has failed miserably at that.”
The Doherty Institute was commissioned by the government to model what would occur when a certain percentage of the population was vaccinated and what impact further outbreaks would have on the health system at that rate.
Vaccine doses rollout across age groups
It is understood the government will release the modelling later this week.
His comments follows reports four Labor MPs — Victorian MP Julian Hill, Queensland MP Anika Wells and Western Australian MPsPatrick Gorman and Anne Aly — have backed the call for a royal commission into the government’s handling of COVID-19, despite it not being Labor policy.
A senate inquiry into the government’s handling of the pandemic is ongoing, but Senator Patrick said a formal inquiry was “inevitable”.
“I think the whole point of a serious royal commission into such an event is to basically be able to examine all aspects of the response, including the vaccine purchase, including aged care and how we dealt with that,” he said.
“I think it’s inevitable … I think, eventually, over time, we‘ll get the support of the Labor Party and we’ll put pressureon the Liberal Party to do this.”
READ MORE:End-of-year vaccination rate of 80pc ‘key to taming virus’
Greg Brown4.25pm:Health officials reject Young’s AZ claim
Commonwealth health officials have repudiated Queensland’s chief medical officer Jeannette Young for saying she did not want young adults to take the AstraZeneca vaccine.
Deputy Chief Medical Officer Michael Kidd said the medical advice from Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation was that all adults in hotspots should “strongly consider” speaking to their doctor about taking a vaccine.
“The ATAGI advice remains that Pfizer is the preferred vaccine for those under 16 but the AstraZeneca vaccine is available to anyone over the age of 18,” Dr Kidd said.
“But we are wanting people to have a discussion with their trusted medical practitioner, general practitioner, and to provide informed consent before they receive the AstraZeneca vaccine.”
He said there were 11 local government areas in southeast Queensland that met the thresholds for a commonwealth hotspot, making it a “significant outbreak”.
Health Minister Greg Hunt said the ATAGI advice had been “reframed” since it discouraged people under 60 from taking the vaccine.
“If you are over 60 AstraZeneca is the preferred vaccine,” Mr Hunt said.
“If you are under 60, it is something that in a hotspot …that people should strongly consider, and more broadly than that, anybody can consult their doctor and seek advice.”
READ MORE:Young won’t back away from AZ claims
Robyn Ironside4.15pm:Aviation workers to get Covid support
Domestic airline crew will gain access to Covid support payments of $750 a week, in an extension of federal government assistance for the aviation industry.
Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce has announced a range of measures to “keep domestic aviation ready for takeoff” including assistance to retain workforce capability.
In addition, a half-price airfare initiative will be extended from September to November, after many of the cheap seats sold by airlines had to be cancelled.
The government announcement follows a warning from Qantas Group CEO Alan Joyce that the airline would again have to stand down staff without pay, if current low levels of flying persisted.
In June more than 9000 domestic flights were cancelled as a result of lockdowns and border closures, including 5000 by Qantas and Jetstar.
The Deputy Prime Minster said the Domestic Aviation Network Support and Regional Aviation Network Support schemes would continue until the year’s end, subsidising airlines on routes across the country.
A 50 per cent waiver of domestic air services charges for regular public transport and aeromedical flights would also go on until December 31.
“This will continue to help manage costs for airlines as they navigate the serious ongoing challenges posed by Covid-19 outbreaks, including lockdowns and border closures,” the Mr Joyce said.
READthe full story
Adeshola Ore4.00pm:Labor to mandate anti-harassment training
All Labor MPs will be required to complete new sexual harassment training to be introduced in Parliament House.
The Australian understands that Labor’s caucus today agreed to mandate the training for all opposition MPs.
Last week the Morrison government confirmed it would enact all 10 recommendations from an internal review – sparked by former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins’s rape allegation – aimed at cleaning up parliament’s workplace complaints procedures for serious incidents. The report said anti-harassment education should be offered to parliamentarians and their staff on a voluntary basis.
But the Coalition will require all ministers and their staff to undergo the training, with those who refuse training warned they could lose their frontbench positions.
MPs who do not complete the education program will be named and shamed, with a public register to list all parliamentarians who undertake the training.
READ MORE:Code of conduct needed to get Parliament House in order
Joseph Lam3.32pm:ADF sent into locked-down Sydney
The boots of some 300 ADF personnel hit the ground in southwest Sydney today as NSW Police amped up its capabilities on the ground.
Brigadier Mick Garraway on Monday said the ADF weren’t working as law enforcement officers but rather a “disciplined” support task force.
“What you have with the Defence Force is a disciplined, capable organisation that is vaccinated, tested and compliant and able to do a range of tasks that will take the pressure off the police, take pressure off the Department of Health and other organisations so they can get out and do what they do best,” he said.
“I want to stress up front again that we will be under control of the NSW police. We are not a law enforcement agency and we will do tasks that are supportive in nature.
It’s understood the full 300 personnel will have joined NSW Police on the ground in Sydney by the end of the week.
READ MORE:Army called in to curb runaway Covid-19
Ellen Ransley3.25pm:QLD’s Ekka show cancelled just days from opening
Queenslanders have been dealt a devastating blow with the cancellation of the “comeback Ekka” just days before it was due to start.
Queensland recorded 13 new locally acquired Covid-19 cases on Monday, on the second day of the southeast corner’s snap lockdown.
Authorities say the new cases are genomically linked to the 17-year-old Indooroopilly State High school student, with the state’s Delta outbreak now at 31.
Authorities on Sunday expressed their concerns about low levels of testing, prompting 21,806 Queenslanders to get swabbed which the Deputy Premier said was “fantastic”.
But the rise in cases has meant the annual Ekka, which was cancelled in 2020, will not go ahead this week as planned.
It comes despite rural and regional Queenslanders having already travelled to the capital to prepare for the show.
Mr Miles said as “sad and disappointing” as it was, the risk was just “too great”.
“It will not be able to go ahead. I know that’s sad and disappointing for many,” Mr Miles said.
“We just can’t afford to have an event like that where people travel into town, circulate in large numbers. The risk is just too great.”
Of the new cases, seven are Ironside State School students, and five are related to the school.
The other case is linked to a confirmed case from the karate school.
Dozens of new exposure sites are expected to be listed by Queensland Health later on Monday.
Agencies3.00pm:Despite Delta surge, no lockdown for US: Fauci
The United States is unlikely to be sent back into lockdown despite a surge in Covid-19 cases stemming from the Delta variant, top US scientist Anthony Fauci said Sunday.
America is in for “some pain and suffering in the future” but enough people have now been vaccinated to prevent a repeat of last winter’s deadly surge, the infectious disease expert who advises President Joe Biden told ABC’s “This Week.” “I don’t think we’re going to see lockdowns,” Fauci said, after Biden this week said the United States was probably headed for new restrictions because of the Delta variant surge.
America's top infectious disease expert does not believe the United States will go back into lockdown again despite a surge in Delta variant infections. Dr Anthony Fauci says the highly infectious strain has been spreading mostly among the unvaccinated. This comes after 58 per cent of Americans have received their first dose - with 100 million people who are eligible for the vaccine yet to get a jab. He believes not enough people have been vaccinated to stop the outbreak but it is enough to prevent the mass infections and deaths recorded last winter. The average number of new cases across the US has almost doubled in the past 10 days.
Elsewhere in the world countries including China and Australia have in fact put some of their people back under lockdown as the highly contagious variant spreads, not long after it seemed life was beginning to return to normal.
The US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention changed course this week and said fully vaccinated people should mask up again indoors in higher-risk areas of the country.
The top US health authority says the Delta variant is as contagious as chickenpox and -- critically -- that breakthrough cases in vaccinated individuals, though still rare, may be as transmissible as unvaccinated cases.
This change in mask policy, after Biden had predicted a “summer of freedom” if enough Americans got a shot, has caused worries that confidence in coronavirus vaccines would be undermined.
Fauci tempered this on Sunday by reiterating that people who are vaccinated run a very low risk of infection, and even lower of hospitalisation or death if they do get sick.
“We are seeing an outbreak of the unvaccinated,” he said.
AFP
READ MORE:Millions of Americans risk eviction as virus cases spike
Max Maddison2.38pm:Vulnerable children now eligible for Pfizer: Hunt
Pfizer jabs will be made available for vulnerable 12 to 15-year-old children, says Health Minister Greg Hunt, while ATAGI reduces the recommended interval between AstraZeneca vaccines.
Amid another outbreak of the highly transmissible Delta variant in south-east Queensland, Mr Hunt said GPs could begin administering the mRNA vaccine to immuno-compromised children immediately, which would include around 220,000 children.
The news came as the Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation reduced the recommended interval between receiving AstraZeneca jabs from 12 weeks down to four to eight weeks.
“ATAGI has reiterated that all adults in Greater Sydney should consider the benefits of either protection with the AstraZeneca vaccine rather than waiting for alternative vaccines to become available,” deputy chief medical officer Michael Kidd told a press conference on Monday afternoon.
READ MORE:Young won’t back away from AZ warning for under 60s
Geoff Chambers2.27pm:Dutton in quarantine, Porter to fill in
Peter Dutton has been forced into quarantine after his sons were caught-up in the Queensland schools outbreak, with Christian Porter filling in as Leader of the House in parliament this week.
Mr Dutton, who contracted Covid-19 last year after travelling to the US, will be unable to attend parliament with the ACT Government imposing strict restrictions on MPs arriving from hotspot areas.
Mr Porter, who was Leader of the House for almost two years before losing the job in a Cabinet reshuffle earlier this year, will lead the government’s agenda in the House of Representatives.
In a statement released on Monday, Mr Dutton confirmed Mr Porter would step-in as Leader of the House on Tuesday.
“My sons attend a school subject to the current Queensland Health directive and as a household member I am subject to the 14 day direction. I will quarantine at home with my family,” Mr Dutton.
“I will therefore be unable to attend parliament, although will take part in Leadership, NSC, ERC and Cabinet meetings remotely.
“Having had COVID and being fully vaccinated, I have also tested negative this morning.”
READ MORE:Peter Dutton backs national Covid-19 lottery as a ‘great idea’
Courtney Gould2.00pm:Brutal vaccine reality for sports fans
Australia could be one step closer to implementing the use of vaccine passports at major sporting events and concerts.
An increasing number of countries are shifting towards allowing only vaccinated people to attend events such as concerts and sporting matches and travel overseas.
Speaking to the Today show, the two faces of Australia’s vaccine rollout — former deputy chief medical officer Nick Coatsworth and vaccine taskforce commander Lieutenant General John Frewen — indicated Australia could be headed down the same path.
“I think we are almost certainly going to see different levels of freedom associated with people who are vaccinated,” Dr Coatsworth said.
“We don’t want to exclude non-vaccinated people from everything that they need to do in society … Certainly at sporting events, I 100 per cent agree that vaccinated people should be allowed into the crowds.”
But General Frewen stressed while no decisions had been made just yet, people should use it as a motivator to get vaccinated.
“We have seen those sorts of measures overseas. I don’t think anything has been settled on in that regard just yet,” he told Nine.
“But, of course, down the track, I mean, there is going to be benefits to being vaccinated. I think there will be requirements to be vaccinated in certain conditions.
“So, again, if you are still considering whether to get vaccinated, I urge you to do so.”
Scott Morrison on Friday announced Victoria, the Northern Territory and Tasmania had formed a working group to establish a plan to exempt vaccinated Australians from restrictions.
Mr Morrison on Monday said people who had taken the steps to protect themselves and the community should be rewarded.
“It‘s got nothing to do with politics or freedoms or anything like that. It’s just simple, if you’re vaccinated, then you’re less of a public health risk,” he said.
“And so people who are vaccinated have taken steps to protect themselves and others around them.
“And so in that circumstance, it only stands to reason that where you have taken that step there would be exemptions for you. If you haven‘t, then you’re at risk of catching it and suffering severe disease and worse.”
It comes as Venues NSW chairman Tony Shepherd said the body would seek government approval to require vaccination passports as a requirement to buy tickets for the NRL, AFL or cricket.
“If you choose not to have the jab that is your civil right in a free country but the Delta strain is extremely transmissible and we need to do something to reopen our stadiums,” Mr Shepherd told The Daily Telegraph.
“The venues will have to say you can’t attend. Simple as that. Getting crowds back to sport is important, but we can’t put fans at risk.
“It will be a tremendous incentive for people to get vaccinated.”
READ MORE:NRL prepared for shock grand final move
Ellie Dudley 1.30pm:Christmas in July ‘may have caused superspreader event’
A Christmas in July event at an aged care facility in Sydney’s inner west may have catapulted the city’s latest superspreader event.
The outbreak at the Wyoming Residential Aged Care Facility in Summer Hill grew to 20 cases on Monday, including 18 residents and two staff members.
Residents who live on the top floor of the facility will also be moved to hospital after being deemed close contacts.
NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard said a Christmas in July party that occured on the infected floor was where the virus spread.
“The ground floor residents are, at this point, considered to be in a different situation,” Mr Hazzard told Monday’s press conference.
“They didn’t happen to be exposed to the assistant in nursing that was employed by the private hospital and I understand that the actual numbers are believed to have occurred off a superspreading event that occurred in the aged care facility.
“Sometimes it is not a good idea to have Christmas in July right in the middle of a pandemic but I do understand that it is an effort to try and provide entertainment and to support to residents and those things have to be decided by the aged care facilities.”
Some 83 per cent of the patients and 75 per cent of staff at the centre have been fully vaccinated against the virus, NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant confirmed.
READ MORE: ‘That question offends me’
Ellie Dudley12.20pm:Young victim’s boyfriend: my survivor guilt
The boyfriend of the 38-year-old Sydney woman who died after being infected with Covid-19 has said he is struggling with the guilt of surviving the virus when she did not.
Chef Khalid, who asked not to give his surname, said he was only able to say goodbye to his girlfriend Adriana Takara through a hospital window the day before doctors switched off her life support machine.
“I have my memories of Adriana, that’s all I have of her I need to stay with those now, I don’t have it (Covid) now, I’m ok, but I feel bad, I miss her, she was a modest, beautiful soul,” he told the Daily Telegraph.
“I‘m angry at the situation, why I had to make it and she didn’t?”
Ms Takara, 39, died last Sunday at Sydney’s Royal Prince Alfred hospital after suffering a ten-day battle against Covid-19..
Friends said the Brazilian citizen, who was studying accounting in Sydney, deteriorated quickly after contracting the virus from a friend and had no underlying conditions.
The Kaplan Business School masters student had tried on “numerous” occasions to get an appointment for a Covid-19 vaccination in the weeks before falling ill on July 15 but was informed on the NSW Health vaccine portal no appointments were available until after October, the Daily Telegraph reported.
She did not suffer from any underlying medical condition, a fact seized on by health officials, who are urging a quick uptake of vaccines.
Ellie Dudley 12.05pm: SA to move to next stage of freedom
South Australia will move into the next stage of eased restrictions, as health authorities remain cautious of the potential for new outbreaks of Covid-19.
It has been two weeks since the first case of the Delta strain of Covid-19 was detected in South Australia, forcing the state into a seven day lockdown.
Premier Steven Marshall announced on Monday restrictions would be eased further for the state, but authorities will remain on alert.
“We are still concerned. Yes, it has been 14 days but if we have missed any cases in SA, we would be picking them up around about now and so we really do need to just be a little bit careful for the next couple of days,” he said.
As of Thursday, venues will enforce the two square metre rule, having previously operated under one person per four square metre restrictions.
Gyms will move from the one person per eight square metre rule, to the four square metre rule.
Sport can return for competition, but rules will be enforced about the number of spectators permitted to watch.
Masks will continue to be required in all high-risk settings including personal care services, transport and health care, due to the “air borne” nature of the Delta variant, Mr Marshall said.
Ellie Dudley11.50am:Chant silent on numbers to free Sydney from lockdown
NSW Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant has refused to name an appropriate vaccination rate or case number which will guarantee Greater Sydney emerges from lockdown on time.
The current lockdown has been extended but is scheduled to lift on August 28.
Dr Chant said it was “premature” to stipulate rates at which the city could reopen, saying she was “focused on breaking the back” of community transmission.
“ I am in no way giving up on achieving marked reductions in achieving no community transmission,” she said.
“There are a lot of things that have been put in place to support communities.
“We are making testing easier and we are making sure that people are supported if they have any health needs or any other social and welfare needs.”
Courtney Walsh11.45am: Vic rules out NRL Grand Final bidding war
Victoria will not engage in a bidding war with Queensland for the NRL Grand Final should the Covid-19 situation in New South Wales force the game to be moved.
But Victoria’s sports minister Martin Pakula said the state was willing to assist if the outbreaks in Sydney and southeast Queensland forced rugby league’s administration to make a difficult call on the grand final.
He has exchanged text messages with NRL chairman Peter V’Landys and confirmed Victoria’s tourism organisation was also in discussions with league officials in case the situation worsened in the northern states.
Both the MCG and Marvel Stadium would be available to host the NRL Grand Final, which is held a week after the AFL decider, should a move be required.
“I have exchanged text messages with Peter V’Landys and he indicated ... they are probably looking at New South Wales and Queensland but they are happy having the conversation with us,” he said.
“We are not interested in a bidding war with the Queensland Government about this.”
Mr Pakula also said Victoria would not enter into a bidding war with South Australia or Western Australia for the AFL Grand Final with good reason _ the game is contracted to the MCG until 2058.
Both the AFL and the Victorian Government are working on a Covid-safe plan in relation to crowds attending matches throughout the finals series including the grand final.
Transmission in the latest outbreak in Victoria occurred at both the MCG and AAMI Park.
Mr Pakula said this had prompted a rethink regarding crowd safety measures.
AFL chief executive Gillon McLachlan said he remained optimistic the grand final will be held in Melbourne but was not prepared to outline “thresholds” regarding the league’s hopes for crowds at the MCG.
Optus Stadium in Perth can host 60,000 and Adelaide Oval well over 50,000 fans.
Both McLachlan and Mr Pakula ruled out the introduction of a policy requiring fans to be vaccinated in order to be able the finals series, stating it was too early in the vaccination roll out for that to be possible.
But it is a discussion that will be held for future years,
Greg Brown 11.40am:Labor to oppose ARENA funding expansion
Labor is moving to partially oppose regulations that have expanded the investment remit of the Australian Renewable Energy Agency.
Opposition energy spokesman Chris Bowen is expected to recommend Labor oppose ARENA being used to fund hydrogen and carbon-capture and storage technologies.
Caucus is likely to back moving a disallowance motion in the Senate against a section of the regulation that allows funding to be used on the technologies.
Labor is not opposing the entire regulation because senior MPs believe it was a significant retreat from what Energy Minister Angus Taylor initially proposed in June.
Ellie Dudley 11.35am: Berejiklian: Vaccine incentives on the table
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian has refused to comment on upcoming vaccination incentives, instead saying it is more important to focus on getting people back to school and work.
“I will say this: We can look at (incentive) opportunities in a little while,” she said.
“Let me stress, we can look at those opportunities in a little while and incentives are a good way to move forward.
“Today I want to talk about kids getting back to school and workers getting back to work. All those other things will come in good time.”
Ms Berejiklian said vaccine incentives were “on the table” but she didn’t want to “take away from the fact that we understand what stress people are going through at the moment.”
Incentives could include free alcohol for people who have gotten the jab or permitted entry to sporting events.
There have been 12 residents of an aged care home in Sydney's inner-west taken to hospital after they tested positive to COVID-19. A staff member of the Wyoming Nursing Home in Summer Hill - also known as Hardi Summer Hill - tested positive to the Delta variant on July 27. The worker - who had received one dose of the COVID vaccine - is believed to have been asymptomatic. Testing of residents and staff will continue daily and the facility has undergone deep cleaning while being in full lockdown.
Remy Varga 11.30am:Uncertain if crowds allowed at AFL grand final
Victorian Sports Minister Martin Pakula says it is not yet known if crowds will be allowed at the MCG for the AFL grand final.
Mr Pakula said conversations around crowds would likely happen towards the end of the week.
“We haven’t had that conversation yet, I’d expect to have that later this week or on the weekend,” he said.
Ellie Dudley11.28am:Central Coast, Shellharbour hopes of leaving lockdown quashed
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian has quashed the hopes of residents on the Central Coast, Shellharbour or Wollongong coming out of lockdown early.
There have been zero cases of Covid-19 in the Shellharbour area during the latest outbreak.
“If the health experts tell us that the Central Coast, Shellharbour and Wollongong are able to be treated as regional NSW, we will take that advice,” Ms Berejiklian said.
“It is positive that we have seen very low numbers in those regions or close to zero.
If the health experts say to the NSW government those communities can be treated the same as the rest of regional NSW, we will take that advice.”
Ellie Dudley11.25am:Chant urges under-40s to get jab
NSW Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant has urged Sydneysiders under the age of 40 to adopt “informed consent” when taking the AstraZeneca vaccine, but has urged everyone to get whatever jab is available to them.
New South Wales residents have been called on to make August the month of vaccination records as Premier Gladys Berejiklian hints restrictions may be eased if targets are met. The state recorded 239 new cases yesterday and health authorities have issued a warning to younger health groups. Ms Berejiklian said vaccine milestones were the key to ending lockdown and matches the National Cabinet advisement of a vaccine threshold to eliminate internal border closures. There are renewed calls for people of all age groups to register to get the AstraZeneca vaccine, with Ms Berejiklian stating there is only a three day wait to receive the jab.
“My view is that we follow the ATAGI advice and ATAGI has looked at risk benefits,” she said.
“It is about informed consent. I would also be very concerned if people did not know what actions to take, so if anyone develops headache or abdominal pain following AstraZeneca, it is important that you seek urgent care.
“I’m very much committed to following the expert advice of ATAGI.”
Ellie Dudley11.20am:‘Keep work place social settings segregated’
Up to 30 cases recorded on Monday were acquired in the workplace, causing chief health officer Kerry Chant to issue a plea for those going to work to segregate from one another.
“We have recognised a number of industries and they are probably reflective of the ones that are necessary to keep us as a city going,” she said.
“For instance, freight is an example. We have also had - that’s generated a large number of cases in some freight businesses.
“Because of the good processes that people have put in place, they haven’t led to large numbers of cases but they are obviously complex because we need to keep those workplaces operational and we need to do a lot of work.
“It is really important that you think about the tea rooms and some of the social settings in work places. You might have the best safety plans for the actual premises but if people go and congregate somewhere, it defeats the purpose of segregation.”
Ellie Dudley 11.15am: Latest death linked to Liverpool hospital cluster
The man who passed away from Covid-19 is the fifteenth death in NSW associated with the latest outbreak.
The man in his 90s had received one dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine, and was associated with an outbreak of the virus at Liverpool hospital.
“My condolences to his family and his friends,” NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant said.
“This highlights another point, that two doses of the vaccine are more effective. Even one can provide protection, so there is an opportunity to bring forward your second dose of AstraZeneca to afford that protection.”
The second dose of AstraZeneca can be administered eight weeks after the first, despite the previous advice of a 12 week gap between doses.
Ellie Dudley 11.10am: Outbreak in Sydney aged care home
An outbreak of Covid-19 has occured at an aged care centre in Sydney’s inner west, NSW chief health officer Kerry Chant says.
Eighteen patients and two staff members have tested positive for the virus.
“The positive patients have been removed from that facility and a number of, as a precaution, the remainder of residents of that facility are also being removed (to) hospital,” Dr Chant said.
“The outbreak is occurring on that top floor and that action has been taken as a precautionary approach.
“I can confirm that 83 per cent of the patients were vaccinated and 75 per cent of staff at the facility were vaccinated.
Dr Chant urged anyone working closely with the aged care industry, or elderly Australians, to be vaccinated as soon as possible.
New daily cases in New South Wales
Ellie Dudley 11.02am:NSW records 207 new local cases
NSW has recorded 207 new locally-acquired cases of Covid-19 as infections in greater Sydney continue to surge.
CHO Kerry Chant has also confirmed a 90-year-old man who had received one AstraZeneca dose has died.
At least 51 cases were active in the community for the entirety of their infectious period.
Up to 117,000 tests were conducted in the 24 hours to 8pm last night.
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian said it would be a “combination of case numbers and vaccination rates” to determine what life looks like for greater Sydney when the lockdown is expected to lift on August 29.
“Can I stress that August is the month where we all should come forward and get vaccinated,” she said.
“It will be a combination of seeing where the case numbers are in a month’s time as well as the rate of vaccination that determines what August 29 looks like.”
Ms Berejiklian again pointed out that no one in intensive care in NSW has received both doses of the vaccine.
“One learning we have had in the last five weeks is that the vaccinations, both vaccines, are working extremely effectively,” she said.
“We still don’t know of anybody in intensive care who has received both doses of the vaccine.
“That is a positive thing. We know the vaccine is working and we need people to come forward and get vaccinated.”
Remy Varga10:41am:Positive Victorian case linked to Wallabies match
Of the two-cases Victoria recorded on Monday, one is linked to the Wallabies match at AAMI park.
The other case is a household contact of a traffic controller who worked at the Moonee Valley racecourse testing site.
Both cases were in isolation for the entirety of their infectious period.
Charlie Peel 10.40am:Concerns over spread in Qld schools
Brisbane’s health workforce has been put under increased pressure after a significant number of Queensland Health staff were forced into isolation because their children attend the schools affected by the latest coronavirus outbreak.
Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young said she was very concerned by the impact the spread of the virus in the school communities had on staff.
Six Brisbane schools have been listed as exposure sites.
“I really am very, very concerned about these six schools,” Dr Young said.
“We know Delta is much more likely to spread amongst younger people.
“So in previous outbreaks, we’ve known that younger people have been spared but Delta has a closer affinity to respiratory cells, and we know that younger people are more at risk and although they’re less likely to do particularly badly if they get infected, they’re less likely to die - they are more likely to transmit to other people.
“So although it’s destroying our health workforce numbers because a lot of health workers have children going to those six schools, and now those health workers are in quarantine with their children, they’re not at work.
“I need that to happen because I cannot have those health workers going into the workplace and spreading the virus.”
Dr Young said she hoped the affected staff were only in isolation for 14 days.
Students will be learning from home for the rest of the lockdown.
READ MORE:Disappointment as Ekka cancelled
Remy Varga10.35am: Vic tightens restrictions on NSW border communities
Victoria has announced a strengthening of the border bubble system with NSW in a bid to minimise the risk from the “deteriorating situation” in Sydney.
State Health Minister Martin Foley said residents on the NSW side of border communities would only be allowed to cross into Victoria without a permit to purchase essential goods and services, medical care, care and compassion reasons, paid and voluntary work, to receive a covid vaccine and for sport and exercise.
Mr Foley said any NSW resident was not allowed to travel further into Victoria other than what was reasonably necessary.
He acknowledged the changes would be difficult for communities along the NSW and Victorian border but said the changes reflected the risk of the Delta variant.
“We need to have our border bubble reflect the changes that Delta has brought to how we respond and manage the global pandemic,” he said.
Restrictions on hospitality venues, gyms and tours in Victoria will change slightly from 11.59pm Tuesday.
Group booking limits will no longer apply but venues need to adhere to one person per four square metre density limit.
Charlie Peel10.20am:Higher rate of emergency hospitalisation in Qld than NSW
The delta strain circulating through Queensland has led to a higher rate of emergency hospitalisation than in New South Wales.
It prompted an extraordinary warning from Queensland’s Health Minister Yvette D’Ath who said people who did not get tested for the virus had died in their own homes in NSW.
“We’ve seen two people in New South Wales who have died at home because they have not gone and got tested for Covid,” she said.
“They died in their homes from Covid.
“So please, if you have any symptoms, what we know is that the delta variant in Queensland is leading to a higher rate of hospitalisation than New South Wales, so we need you to take this seriously.”
Ms D’Ath said there were 64 drive-through testing venues across Queensland.
“This is the first time that we’ve seen an outbreak like this one spreading in schools amongst students, teachers and parents, and via extracurricular activities and public transport. It will likely see thousands of people subject to home-quarantine directions, and we thank those schools for working so closely with us.”
Charlie Peel10.00am:Qld lockdown extended to 8 days
Queensland’s lockdown has been extended to 4pm Sunday after 13 new locally acquired cases of Covid-19 were recorded overnight.
Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young said the outbreak was “escalating” and that required the extension of the lockdown, by another five days.
The lockdown will now last for eight days, the longest lockdown in Queensland since the height of the pandemic last year.
The extended lockdown has also dealt a fatal blow to Brisbane’s Ekka show, which was set to take place next week.
Dr Young urged anyone who did not absolutely need to leave their homes to stay put.
Ellie Dudley 9.40am: Qld update at 10am, Berejiklian at 11am
State authorities across the country will face media conferences this morning to inform residents of the latest updates to their respective Covid-19 situations.
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian will hold a press conference at 11am alongside chief health officer Kerry Chant and health minister Brad Hazzard.
A total of 239 cases of Covid-19 were detected in NSW on Sunday, another record day for the state.
Queensland authorities will speak at 10am to speak to the state’s evolving Covid-19 outbreak.
The state recorded nine new cases of the highly-infectious Delta strain of the virus on Sunday, tallying the total number for the latest cluster to 18.
South Australian authorities will speak at 11.20am local time (11.50am AEST), where they are expected to present a roadmap of the state’s restrictions moving forward.
Max Maddison9.30am:PM backs exemptions for vaccinated
Scott Morrison has flagged exemptions for those who get vaccinated, saying it is a “common sense” decision for people who have “taken steps to reduce risk to other people and themselves”.
Venues NSW has called for vaccine passports to be introduced for live sports from 2022, and while the Prime Minister said while any decision would need to be legislated by the states, he backed the idea.
“If you’re vaccinated you’re less likely to get it, you’re less likely to get a serious disease, and you’re less likely to die,” Mr Morrison told 4BC’s Neil Breen on Monday morning.
“If you’re not having the vaccination, then clearly state governments are going to have to make decisions to protect people in those circumstances because they’re basically unprotected.”
“Exemptions would be applied to people because they’ve taken the step to reduce their risk to other people and to themselves.”
Mr Morrison said options were currently being trialled across the country, which would be brought back to National Cabinet with recommendations for other states to pursue.
“We’ve got the Northern Territory government working together with the Victorian government and the Tasmanian government right now,” he said.
READ MORE:PM attacked for ‘state bias’
Ellie Dudley9.20am:SA building industry: we’re essential workers
The South Australian construction industry is calling on the state government to deem them “essential”, in order to safeguard jobs and businesses in the event of another lockdown.
The industry was forced to close during the latest seven day lockdown for the state, which cost approximately $230 million, despite being classified as essential during the state’s first lockdown in 2020.
Master Builders Association SA chief executive officer Will Frogley said the change in status had left the sector “baffled”.
“Over the past 18 months building and construction has clearly demonstrated we have the risk mitigation systems in place to be declared an essential service if lockdown occurs,” he told The Advertiser.
“Most construction work occurs outdoors, safety is ingrained in workers from day one, Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) is routinely used and in many instances required by the nature of the work.”
READ MORE: Resilience silenced Covid prophets of doom
Ellie Dudley 8.55am:Queenslanders can access disaster payments from Sunday
Queenslanders impacted by the latest outbreak of the coronavirus will be able to access the Covid-19 disaster payments from Sunday, despite only being in a three day lockdown.
The payments last week were increased to $750 for those who have lost more than 20 hours of work per week, and $450 for those who have lost less than 20 hours.
Services Australia General Manager Hank Jongen said Queenslanders could start accessing the payments from 8am Sunday.
“Queenslanders, even though they are only in a 3-day lockdown now, under the rules they will be eligible for the Covid disaster payment and they will be at that new rate,” he told Channel 9’s Today.
“However, Queenslanders can’t start claiming until 8am Sunday. This is really important. There is no point claiming beforehand.”
Mr Jongen said Victorians and South Australians could access the payment for their respective lockdowns.
“They can apply retrospectively for the one week lockdown that they had, if they haven’t already claimed,” he said.
“With all of these payments there is no need to rush. You have 28 days to claim from the beginning of lockdowns or from the date they are declared, and we do pay in arrears.”
READ MORE: Moment of truth, for us — and for Morrison
Max Maddison 8.45am:Wilson welcomes Labor getting on board rollout
Federal Liberal MP Tim Wilson says he welcomes Labor belatedly getting on board the vaccination rollout.
Mr Wilson also said the states need to accept they need to share the burden of economic support if they impose lockdowns.
Labor’s preselection of Michelle Ananda-Rajah in the Victorian seat of Higgins drew staunch criticism after she repeatedly criticised AstraZeneca, at one point saying the vaccine had “failed in terms of its efficacy”.
But after former opposition leader Bill Shorten publicly backed the jab, Mr Wilson said he “welcomed” Labor’s decision to support the vaccine program, as he called on Dr Anada-Rajah to “repudiate her views” on AstraZeneca.
“It’s welcome we’re seeing the opposition get on board … rather than trying to dissuade people from getting the AstraZeneca,” Mr Wilson told Sky News on Monday morning.
With Brisbane plunged into another snap lockdown, Mr Wilson said the state needed to accept financial responsibility if they decided to resort to the draconian measures.
READ MORE: Bill Shorten the comeback wannabe
RACHEL BAXENDALE8.40am:Victoria records two new locally-acquired cases
Victoria has recorded two new locally-acquired coronavirus cases to 8pm on Sunday.
Both cases are linked to the state’s current outbreaks and in people who have been in quarantine throughout their infectious period, Victoria’s health department says.
Monday’s three cases follow four on Sunday, two on Saturday, three on Friday, seven on Thursday, eight on Wednesday, 10 on Tuesday and an outbreak peak of 26 on Thursday, July 22.
Only two of the 37 cases over the past seven days had not been in quarantine for the duration of their infectious period.
This includes a traffic controller in his 20s who tested positive for coronavirus after working at the Moonee Valley Racecourse drive through Covid-19 testing centre.
Investigations are ongoing into how the traffic controller contracted the virus.
Aside from a work colleague who the man is understood to have infected when the pair car-pooled, all testing centre colleagues have tested negative for the virus.
Victoria’s latest cases bring the total number of community acquired cases since two incursions from NSW emerged almost three weeks ago to 217.
There are currently 134 active cases, including up to seven active cases acquired overseas - although there were no new overseas-acquired cases in the 24 hours to Monday.
At least 76 of those infected during the current outbreaks have recovered, and more are expected to do so in coming days.
The latest cases come after 21,417 tests were processed on Sunday, down from 25,779 on Saturday, 32,760 on Friday, 43,542 on Thursday and 25,404 the previous Sunday, and well down from the July 20 Victorian record of 59,355.
READ MORE: Media Diary - The Gladys Berejiklian insult that infuriated Dan Andrews
Ellie Dudley 8.30am:Miles restates advice against AstraZeneca for under 40s
Queensland deputy premier Steven Miles has doubled down on the state’s advice against administering the AstraZeneca vaccine to under-40s, despite the latest outbreak being linked to an unvaccinated medical student.
The medical student has been deemed the key to understanding Queensland’s latest Covid-19 outbreak, which grew by nine cases on Sunday.
State health authorities put a ban on medical placements for a week after the cluster continued to grow.
Mr Miles said they would not mandate the vaccine in hospitals due to shortage of supply of the Pfizer jab.
“We don’t even have enough vaccination supply to mandate vaccinations for people in hospitals, we’re working through, making sure that everyone working at our five COVID hospitals are vaccinated,” he told ABC Radio National.
Chief health officer Jeanneatte Young attracted criticism when she strongly advised under 40s to wait for the Pfizer vaccine citing the risks of the AstraZeneca vaccine.
Asked whether Dr Young would change her messaging surrounding the AstraZeneca jab to have the vaccinations done quicker as the cluster grows, Mr Miles said the authorities could continue to follow ATAGI’s advice.
“They are certainly allowed to (get the AstaZeneca vaccine) in accordance with (the ATAGI) advice, but the advice recommends they take the Pfizer and so that’s our focus,” he said.
“As you’d expect most of our medical students are well under 40.”
READ MORE: Pollie spat sparks fresh vaccine confusion
Max Maddison 8am:Sydney lockdown will eventually work: Coatsworth
Former deputy chief medical officer Nick Coatsworth says there’s now “national agreement” that short, sharp lockdowns are necessary, and says Sydneysiders should be “absolutely confident” the measures will eventually work.
After considerable disagreement about whether lockdowns were worth the toll on the economy, particularly with NSW managing to avoid resorting to the draconian measure, Dr Coatsworth said the Delta variant had changed the equation for chief health officers since the pandemic last year.
With case numbers continuing to rise across Greater Sydney despite extended and tightening lockdown restrictions, Dr Coatsworth said people in Greater Sydney should be confident that stay-at-home orders would eventually have their intended effect.
“But, of course, we know now there is national agreement that short, sharp lockdowns are necessary whilst our vaccination rates are increasing. So, this is the best chance that Queenslanders have to get the virus under control,” Dr Coatsworth told Nine’s Today on Monday morning.
“What Sydneysiders are doing, they need to be absolutely confident that it’s working and vaccination is going to be the added thing that gets them out of this lockdown.”
READ MORE: Our resilience has silenced Covid prophets of doom
Ellie Dudley 7.30am:Shane Warne tests positive for Covid-19 in London
Cricket great Shane Warne has tested positive for Covid-19.
The former Australian player is head coach of Lord’s-based team London Spirit, but missed his side’s Hundred match against Southern Brave on Sunday due to his positive reading.
The club confirmed his infection just before the match.
“London Spirit men’s head coach Shane Warne will be absent from today’s match against Southern Brave at Lord’s,” the statement from the club read.
“After feeling unwell this morning, Shane returned a positive lateral flow test and will isolate from the squad and support staff whilst he awaits PCR results.
“A second member of the team management is self-isolating after also returning a positive test. No players have been impacted.”
He was one of two members of the team’s coaching staff to test positive for the virus.
READ the full story here.
Ellie Dudley 7.25am:Qld CHO Jeanette Young pushes mask wearing
Queensland health authorities will continue to rely on mask wearing to curb the spread of the highly-contagious Delta variant, in a strategy starkly different to NSW’s attempt to vaccinate their way out of lockdown.
Queensland’s latest cluster grew to 18 on Sunday, after nine new cases of Covid-19 were detected - the largest daily number for the state in a year.
The state’s chief health officer Jeannette Young penned an opinion article over the weekend to plead with residents to wear masks when they are in public. She only mentioned vaccination at the conclusion of the piece and did not refer to the widely available AstraZeneca vaccine.
“Queensland, COVID-19 is coming,” she wrote. “It’s unfortunate but almost inevitable that we will see a rise in COVID-19 cases here in coming months.
“That’s why I am pleading with Queenslanders to wear masks when they are in public.
“Please get vaccinated as soon as you become eligible. Vaccines are safe and effective.’’
She advised single-use surgical masks were the most effective against the virus, but “any paper or cloth mask would do.”
Dr Young attracted criticism when she strongly advised under 40s to wait for the Pfizer vaccine citing the (remote) risks of the AstraZeneca vaccine.
READ MORE: Queensland health boss Jeannette Young won’t budge on Covid-19 jabs
Ellie Dudley 7.10am:ADF troops begin Sydney street patrols today
Australian Defence Force troops will begin patrolling the streets of Sydney from today, having spent the weekend in training.
Some 300 army personnel have been enlisted by the NSW government to help enforce the city’s stay-at-home orders in a desperate attempt to boost compliance.
NSW Police Commissioner Mick Fuller said they would conduct door-knocks of the residences of Covid-19 positive patients and close contacts to see if they are complying with health orders.
They will be primarily based in south-west and western Sydney, where the outbreak is at its worst.
NSW recorded 239 new cases of Covid-19 on Sunday, with the source of 124 of the cases still under investigation.
READ MORE: Sydney property market runs hot despite lockdown fears
Ellie Dudley6.45am:Qld lockdown won’t end on Tuesday: AMA
Queensland President of the Australian Medical Association Chris Perry says the state’s lockdown will not end on Tuesday as planned, after nine new cases were detected on Sunday.
Eleven LGAs in the state’s south-east were forced into a three-day snap lockdown on Saturday over the spread of the highly-contagious Delta variant.
But with further growth in cases on Sunday, taking the outbreak’s tally to 18, Dr Perry said it was unlikely the restrictions would lift as planned.
“I don’t think it will stop tomorrow, but I hope it will,” he told Sunrise.
“We don’t want a lockdown that goes like a Victorian lockdown, we prefer one that goes a few days, we will take it one day at a time and see what happens this morning and tomorrow.”
The state’s health authorities are struggling to find the missing link between two returned travellers and a medical student, which they believe is the key to understanding how the virus has spread.
With cases appearing at a karate school and high schools, Dr Perry said mystery cases were highly concerning. “We don’t know where it originally came from,” he said. “It is suspected that it came from the Sunshine Coast and (spread to) the family of four, the medical student, the karate class and these massive schools.”
READ MORE: Kyle Sandliands and co helping push out the vaccination message
Ellie Dudley6am:Butcher, supermarket join growing NSW exposure list
All customers at a butcher in Sydney’s south west during a five-day period have been plunged into a two-week quarantine period after a worker tested positive for Covid-19.
36 Meat Mart in Campsie is the latest venue to join NSW Health’s growing list of exposure sites, along with a kebab shop and a supermarket.
Anyone who visited the following places at the time stipulated must be tested for Covid-19 and immediately isolate for 14 days regardless of the result:
Campsie: 36 Meat Mart, 273 Beamish Street, Monday July 26 7.30am to 6pm, Tuesday July 27 7.30am to 6pm, Wednesday July 28 7.30am to 6.00pm, Thursday July 29 7.30am to 6pm, Friday July 30 7.30am to 6pm, Saturday July 31 7.30am to 6pm;
Pemulwuy: Fully Tabooly Kebab Shop, Pemulwuy Marketplace, 70 Butu Wargun Drive, Friday July 30 9am to 9.30am, Saturday July 31 9am to 9.30am;
Canley Heights: An Phat Supermarket, 213-217 Canley Vale Road, Thursday July 29 10am to 10.30am;
Those who visited the following sites at the times indicated must be tested immediately and isolate until a negative result is received.
St Marys (Please note the location of this venue has been corrected from previous PHA): Astley Mobility Pharmacy, Astley Centre, Mamre Road, Thursday July 29 1.30pm to 2pm, Saturday July 31 11am to 11.30am;
Sydney: Sunlite Mitre 10, 74 Pitt Street, Tuesday July 27 3.15pm to 5pm;
Marrickville: Woolworths Metro, Marrickville Shopping Centre, 34 Victoria Road, Monday July 26 10.30am to 11.30am;
Macquarie Park: Commonwealth Bank, Shop Uc1 Level 1, Macquarie Shopping Centre, Herring Road, Friday July 23 12.50pm to 2pm;
Macquarie Park: Suncorp, Shop 1, Macquarie Shopping Centre, Herring Road, Friday July 23 1pm to 1.20pm;
Macquarie Park: Priceline, Shop UC10, Macquarie Shopping Centre, Herring Road, Friday July 23 1.10pm to 1.25pm;
Gladesville: Bunnings (Tool section), 461 Victoria Road, Friday July 23 2.45pm to 3.20pm
Eastwood: BWS, Shop 32, Level 1, Eastwood Centre, 160 Rowe Street, Friday July 23 4.35pm to 5.05pm;
Eastwood: Woolworths, Eastwood Centre, 160 Rowe Street, Friday July 23 5pm to 5.20pm
Strathfield: Omni Mart, Shop 7, Symond Arcade, 12 Churchill Avenue, Saturday July 24 10.25am to 11am;
Strathfield: Fresh Seafood and Meat, 22/11 The Boulevarde, Saturday July 24 10.45am to 11.15am;
Strathfield: GR Buy Asian Supermarket, Shop 8/11 The Boulevarde, Saturday July 24 11am to 11.30am;
Strathfield: Rainbow Cakes, 2 Churchill Avenue, Saturday July 24 10am to 11am;
Macquarie Park: Panetta Mercato, Shop 3369, Macquarie Shopping Centre, Herring Road, Saturday July 24 4.50pm to 5.10pm;
Macquarie Park: Azakaze, Macquarie Shopping Centre, 402/199 Herring Road, Saturday July 24 4.05pm to 4.30pm.
READ MORE: ‘Carrot beats stick’ on vaccine hesitancy
Yoni Bashan5am:NSW faces ‘five-week race to freedom’
Federal health officials believe NSW is on a trajectory to hit 70 per cent vaccination cover in as little as five weeks, with Gladys Berejiklian tying the relaxation of Sydney’s lockdown to hitting significant inoculation targets.
“Once you get to 50 per cent vaccination, 60 per cent, 70 per cent, that triggers more freedoms. We can turn this around in four weeks,” the NSW Premier said after the state reported a record 239 Covid-19 cases on Sunday.
With more than 82,000 doses distributed in 24 hours, commonwealth officials are more optimistic that weekly vaccinations in NSW could rise to 650,000, paving the way for the 70 per cent cover level to be hit in September.
Sky News host Nicholas Reece says there needs to be an independent judicial review into what "went wrong" in Sydney so that Australia "does not make a mistake like this again".
At the current trajectory of about 450,000 doses weekly, however, NSW would reach the 80 per cent cover ­figure used by Ms Berejiklian as the threshold for a return to pre-pandemic ­settings only in mid-November.
The push to accelerate inoculations in Sydney – and in particular the city’s southwestern and western suburbs hard hit by the current outbreak – comes as the scientist in charge of the nation’s Covid-19 road map said she was optimistic Australians would embrace the vaccine program.
“I am still optimistic that once we have really good supply, we won’t be facing the challenges we have and that we are seeing in some countries overseas,” said Sharon Lewin, the director of Melbourne’s Doherty Institute.
It was Professor Lewin’s team that provided national cabinet with modelling that underpins plans for post-pandemic normalisation, with a vaccine coverage target of 70 per cent before the country can move out of the ­current virus suppression phase.
When coverage reaches 80 per cent, restrictions on vaccinated Australians will largely be lifted and international travel will begin to return to previous levels.
The existing lockdown across Sydney is due to expire on August 28, although this is likely to be extended with some changes in areas that continue to record higher rates of transmission.
Prior to the most recent extension, Treasury officials produced economic modelling about the impact of a lockdown that would extend until September 17.
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian says she will “never suggest” the state government’s Covid response has been “mistake free” but argues there is “no road map” for dealing with the Delta strain.
Read the full story here.
Ben Wilmot4.45am:Delta outbreak a major threat to building boom
The emergence of the Delta variant of Covid-19, which has triggered a string of state-based lockdowns, threatens to sap confidence and derail the nation’s infrastructure and construction boom.
The latest quarterly Investment Monitor by consultancy Deloitte warns the Delta disruption in NSW, including its recent construction ban, is placing further pressure on an already stretched building industry, which could lead to delays and cost blowouts for major projects.
The report, which tracks major engineering and commercial construction projects across Australia, notes that before the June outbreak Australia was experiencing one of the biggest building booms of the past decade.
Industries such as mining and energy are underpinning the boom with the value of all projects – under way and announced – increasing by $25.1bn to $783.4bn during the June quarter, Deloitte said.
Read the full story here.
John Ferguson4.30am:Pandemic fat cats dine out on taxpayer dollar
Millions of dollars were splurged on pot plants, morning and afternoon teas, psychologists, work-from-home allowances and overtime in the pandemic response across Victoria’s Department of Premier and Cabinet.
The government also provided some bureaucrats with “staff recognition” Visa cards, UberEats vouchers and gift cards as part of publicly funded incentive ­programs.
New figures show nearly $3.4m was pumped into the department for such expenses as a brass quartet and jazz trio and to hire pot plants and keep them alive during 2020.
The government spent nearly $1m on the work-from-home ­allowance over 10 months and $600,00 on overtime as it struggled to contain the killer corona­virus wave.
The figures highlight the extent to which professional development is emerging as a booming industry for consultants, with coaches and facilitators – some with psychology qualifications – netting more than $1.2m.
Read the full story here.
Word count: 11514
