DON’T reward mediocrity.
That is my message to the AFL amid reports North Melbourne is poised to ask the league for a precious priority pick at this year’s AFL national draft.
While the Kangaroos have won only eight of their past 46 games since finishing 12th with a 10-12 win-loss record in 2019, much of their recent pain has been self-inflicted.
Second-bottom in 2020, wooden spooner last year – its first spoon since 1972 – and sitting second-last this season with a 1-6 record and horror percentage of 59.9, North has paid a heavy price for poor list management.
And for that there should be no reward.
Since 2018 – when they finished ninth two years after making the finals for three consecutive seasons – the Roos have traded out or delisted some top-line talent.
Among the outs to have become key players at rival clubs are key forward Ben Brown, who won a flag in his first season at Melbourne last year, ruckman Braydon Preuss, who is now the Giants’ lead ruckman, Shaun Higgins (Geelong) and Robbie Tarrant (Richmond).
A host of top 30 draft picks – considered a precious commodity – have been delisted in the past four years.
They include Shaun Atley (pick 17, 2010), Taylor Garner (pick 15, 2012), Trent Dumont (30, 2013), Sam Durdin (16, 2014) and Will Walker (23, 2017).
Two players that North traded for in 2018 also are gone – former Port Adelaide defender Jasper Pittard and ex-Demon Dom Tyson.
Another key man brought in from Port on big money that year, wingman Jared Polec, was delisted at the end of last season after playing only five games for the year before being re-signed as a rookie.
He had two years to go on a lucrative five-year deal reportedly worth about $3.5 million in a contract former Power star Kane Cornes labelled as “ridiculous for a player that has talent but had some issues with his body’’.
Polec has played only two games for a struggling Roos side this season. The jury is also out on several other players that North has traded for in the past three years, including Aiden Bonar (from GWS), Atu Bosenavulagi and Jaidyn Stephenson (Collingwood) and Callum Coleman-Jones (Richmond). First-round picks (2020) Will Phillips (No.3) and Tom Powell (13) are promising but still unproven.
Teenage South Australian sensation Jason Horne-Francis, who the Kangaroos took at pick one at last year’s draft, will be a star.
The 18-year-old has played every game this season and averaged 19 disposals, including 11 contested possessions, and five clearances in a losing team.
He was the round 7 AFL Rising Star nominee.
But how can North ask for draft assistance when it knocked back some huge draft offers for the midfield excitement machine?
It is understood Adelaide and Richmond both offered the Roos three first-round picks, with the Crows willing to give up pick four in last year’s draft and two first-round selections this year in exchange for pick one and a future second-rounder.
After that was turned down, the Tigers are believed to have offered picks 7, 15, 26 and Coleman-Jones for pick one, only for the Roos to reject that trade then acquire Coleman-Jones in a separate deal.
As good as Horne-Francis will be – and I think the Roos did the right thing by hanging on to him – those extra, high-end draft picks would have been very handy for a team undergoing a major rebuild.
The last club to be handed draft assistance by the AFL was Gold Coast in 2019, when it was given a significant rescue package that included picks one (priority) and two in the 2019 draft, as well as an extra three picks over three seasons and expanded Academy player access.
But the Suns were a start-up club that after 11 full years in the competition are yet to play finals, with a best-placed finish of 12th in 2014. Even that assistance could be argued because of the plethora of good players who have walked out on them.
Essendon great Matthew Lloyd also is against the handing out of priority picks and suggested the Roos would be better off securing an experienced assistant coach to help develop young players.
“We talk about priority picks, I‘ve seen so many guys go into weak and poor football clubs (and struggle),’’ Lloyd said on Footy Classified.
“I’d rather a Mark Williams (Melbourne development coach) or a Ross Lyon (former St Kilda and Fremantle coach) come into my football club to top up and develop players and harness players because, to be honest, they (draftees) go into a poor club and they’re spat out the door within four years anyway.” Lyon said North had made the mistake of “cutting too deep’’. “They got rid of a 60-goal key forward in Brown. Would he be handy for them at the minute?,’’ Lyon said. “You’re always trading off the present for the future, but on present form, they’ve cut deep, half the list in two seasons, and it’s a big climb back.
“I know why they’ve done it, but now we’re seeing the outcome – a non-competitive AFL team at the minute.’’ In contrast, two other clubs that battled in 2020-21, Adelaide and Hawthorn, appear to be on the right path.
The Crows won 10 games in that period and the Hawks 12 but both have been super-competitive this season, winning three games and sitting just a win outside the top eight.
Significantly, with astute list building and faith in some veterans, there is genuine optimism about their futures and no talk of priority picks.
The pick debate should end now.
NUMBERS GAME 12 Consecutive AFL goals to start a career before kicking a behind by former Cat and current Lion Darcy Fort - a record since Champion Data started recording the stat in 1999.
22.5 Combined goalkicking accuracy percentage of Port Adelaide and St Kilda, who booted 9.31 between them, in Cairns - the second-lowest in the AFL era.
QUOTES OF THE WEEK "He’s getting old but he doesn’t look it with ball in hand. He can just turn a game on its head.
Port Adelaide’s Ryan Burton on teammate Robbie Gray "We’ve played some great footy, shown what it is that we want to show, and then to have a performance like that is really disappointing for us. Adelaide coach Matthew Nicks after the 59-point loss to GWS
CREDIT: MY TWO CENTS WITH ANDREW CAPEL
Word count: 1077
