AN ADELAIDE start-up that has made a product to help anxious parents interpret their babies’ cries for help is among five Australian businesses to share in more than $1m worth of support from e-commerce giant Amazon.
Amazon Launchpad – a program launched in Australia in 2019 to support entrepreneurs across the country – has named its five latest innovation grant recipients, who will each receive more than $200,000 in cash, mentorship and marketing support.
Four Victorian start-ups including environmentally friendly toiletries business Baresop and alcohol-free beer producer UpFlow Brewing Co. are among the winners, together with Adelaide-based Goldilocks Suit.
Founded by Shem Richards and wife Laura in 2017, Goldilocks Suit has developed a smart singlet that uses sensors to monitor a baby’s breathing, body temperature, hunger and sleep patterns.
Via a small module that clips into the onesie, and using machine learning algorithms, information is sent to an app where parents can gain insights into the development and wellbeing of their child.
“Teaming up with an organisation like Amazon … is an amazing opportunity for us to scale our business and our product to really make an impact on the world stage,” Mr Richards said.
“So many people use Amazon to shop online now and with that comes trust, which is an integral part of connecting to our ideal customers.” Each Amazon Launchpad Innovation Grant recipient receives a $20,000 cash grant, advertising support, a boot camp experience with access to Amazon experts, a national advertising package with JCDecaux’s Nurture program, industry mentorship, and on-site marketing placements on Amazon.com.au. The head of Amazon Australia’s Launchpad initiative, Chadd Ciccarelli, said the program continued to highlight cutting-edge products from start-ups and entrepreneurs around Australia, making it easy for them to introduce, market and launch new products to Amazon customers.
“As the Amazon Launchpad Innovation Grants are all about celebrating innovation in small businesses, it’s been amazing to see so many strong businesses apply to take part in this year’s program,” Mr Ciccarelli said.
This year’s five grant recipients were selected by a judging panel including 2020 Amazon Launchpad Innovation Grant winners Rosa-Clare Willis and Andrew Ford from Crockd, Carman’s founder Carolyn Creswell, and Eleanor Ventures managing partner Kylie Frazer. We’re for Bright Futures
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 374
