Aged care provider to develop social connection apps
TECHNOLOGY can help older Australians stay in their homes longer – which is what most want – but a balance with the need for human connection is crucial, ECH chief executive David Panter says.
Adelaide-based ECH acquired Melbourne tech start-up Billy last July and now is looking to develop social connection apps, with Mr Panter saying the COVID-19 crisis put a sharp focus on issues such as social isolation and anxiety.
Aged care provider ECH ­invested $5m into Billy, developed by siblings Tim and Matt McDougall in 2018.
Billy uses discrete sensors placed in a person’s home to build up a profile of their ­routine daily activities.
A change, such as a decrease in the number of times the refrigerator is opened or the toilet is used, for example, is flagged to family members or others with access to the app.
While not a replacement for a medical alert system, it provided peace of mind to family members and helped people stay in independent living longer, Dr Panter said.
“Billy enables families to have clear visibility that daily routines of their loved ones are being undertaken through a simple-to-use app,’’ he said.
Monitoring routines enabled healthcare providers and aged care providers to make early health interventions. “It is the ability to be able to apply preventative interventions that will enable care providers to drive better outcomes for their clients,” Dr Panter said.
The Billy team joined ECH as part of the acquisition and the aged care provider now has a strong tech capability.
Dr Panter, a former chief executive of the Central Adelaide Local Health Network, said as a not-for profit, ECH wasn’t intending to become a tech company but would continue to innovate in its field.
“ECH is determined to make real change in the industry through the investment of technology, as we believe it is a great enabler in helping us to deliver on our purpose to support older people to remain ­living confidently and independently at home for as long as they wish,’’ he said.
“We have some strong in-house digital skills and ... will look to build on our technology portfolio internally. ” However, Dr Panter said social connection and human interaction could not be replaced. “While there is an expectation of greater use of technology there is also a real demand for human interaction,” he said. “Getting the balance right is when everyone, clients, families and providers will really benefit.’’
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 417
