Technology entrepreneur Andrew McAdams has launched a new cloud services start-up to support the ­country’s medium-sized businesses that have been “let down by the major technology providers”.
Mr McAdams has partnered with Queensland-based Oracle Cloud expert Greg Taylor to establish The Big Middle three years after the $31 million sale of his previous software company, PrimeQ, to Accenture.
A high-powered board of directors has been assembled, including Adelaide businessman Geoff Rohrsheim, who also invested in the company as part of a recent $1 million-plus seed funding round.
The Big Middle is a software-as-a-service provider of Salesforce and Oracle software, focusing on businesses with revenue between $100 million and $1 billion.
A regional technology centre has been set up in the Adelaide CBD and the company is on a recruitment drive to employ 150 software consultants in Australia and New Zealand.
Mr McAdams, the company’s chief executive, says The Big Middle has been established with the ambition of disrupting an industry dominated by the major consulting firms. He says medium-sized businesses have been neglected by the major players and The Big Middle will fill that gap by building and delivering industry-specific products via an “annuity-based” business model.
“Australia’s mid-market business community has been let down by the major tech­nology providers who have shifted their focus to larger corporations while acquiring many of the smaller resellers,” he said. “They’ve left an enormous gap in the market and we intend to fill it.
“We are responding to changing customer expectations and believe we are the only cloud software provider in Australia’s mid market to build our business model around long-term contracts rather than short-term project work.” Mr McAdams was one of five founders of PrimeQ in 2016, spearheading its rapid rise to becoming an employer of 160 staff across seven offices in Australia and New Zealand before its sale to Accenture in December 2018.
He said transitioning to cloud software had become even more important for companies in the wake of Covid-19 and that shaping a workforce and culture in the aftermath of the pandemic would give The Big Middle an edge over its competitors.
“We’re entering the market at a time when cloud solutions are proven, increasing in demand and demonstrate significant cost savings for medium to large corporations,” he said.
“The Big Middle will change the way digital tech­nology is delivered to Australia’s mid-market community. We also have the benefit of ­designing our workforce around Covid, rather than adapting to it. “Too often employees in big consulting firms feel stuck and like a number. We bring a different approach, knowing that great organisations are those with a strong culture, where everyone is valued and has an opportunity to flourish.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 452
