The competition watchdog has raised concerned that budget airline start-up Bonza has been locked out of Sydney Airport and that tight control of the gateway's landing slots could be stifling new carriers.
The Australian Competition and Consumer Commission's latest aviation monitoring report, released yesterday, says travellers are getting cheaper airfares thanks to Rex Airlines challenging incumbent airlines Qantas, Jetstar and Virgin on nine major city routes.
Bonza, an "ultra-low cost" new carrier that aims to start flying around the middle of this year, will give consumers even more options but will not initially fly to Sydney due to high fees and a lack of available landing slots.
Rex, the regional airline that launched jet services between capital cities last year, has also been unable to secure permanent slots at Sydney, even as it operates at reduced capacity during the COVID-19 pandemic.
ACCC chair Rod Sims said Australia needed to make it easier for new airlines to establish themselves and grow, with access to slots at the country's busiest airport a barrier to competition.
"It's really sad when an airline is wanting to offer services, but it can't get slots it needs for any reason," Mr Sims said. "We cannot use slots as a protection mechanism for existing players - that would just be an appalling outcome. It has to be fixed."
Slots at Sydney Airport are allocated by an independent body, the Airport Coordination Australia, which aims to maximise services under the airport's movements cap of 80 take-offs or landings per hour.
The federal government has waived the normal "use it or lose it" rules over Sydney Airport's tightly held landing slots, meaning that international airlines retain their slots despite not flying there during the pandemic.
The ACCC said it was working with the federal government on reforms to how airline capacity is managed at the nation's busiest airport, including considering recommendations from a review by former Productivity Commission chair Peter Harris which he delivered to government in February 2021. Failure to improve the system could result in a "permanent duopoly" in Australian aviation, Mr Sims said.
Bonza, backed by US private equity group 777 Partners, plans to launch with 25 routes connecting 16 destinations when it starts flying in the middle of this year. The bare-bones operation is avoiding the busy Sydney-Melbourne-Brisbane triangle, and is instead focused on connecting regional towns and holiday destinations such as the Sunshine Coast, Coffs Harbour and Cairns.
Mr Sims said there had been "significant" declines in ticket prices on routes where Rex now challenged Virgin, Qantas and its budget arm Jetstar, after the new challenger launched jet services from Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, the Gold Coast and Adelaide.
Average airfares across all four carriers had fallen about 25 per cent seven weeks after Rex's launch onto flights from Melbourne to Sydney, Adelaide and the Gold Coast, and Sydney to the Gold Coast, the report says.
CREDIT: Patrick Hatch
Word count: 484
