AUSTRALIA is unable to keep up with the sheer volume of local hi-tech inventions and many fall by the wayside due to a lack of commercialisation, the head of a high-profile space company in Adelaide says.
Fleet Space Technologies chief Flavia Tata Nardini, pictured, has told a space forum that Australia had a “pool of inventions, patents and ideas”, but there was a “massive gap” in commercialisation.
“It’s like a sucking hole,” Ms Tata Nardini told an online COSMOS briefing forum.
“There’s all these smart people (in Australia), then suddenly nothing comes out. “I have to admit, I don’t have enough experience to understand why Australia has got this problem of commercialisation. I just know that there are some fundamental technologies that need to be developed on university levels.” The 2021-22 federal budget released in May included a new $206.4m “patent box” scheme, offering targeted tax concessions on income earned from new medical and biotech patents developed in Australia.
Coming into effect from July 1, 2022, income earned from such patents will be taxed at just 17 per cent – nearly half the rate paid by corporates.
Treasurer Josh Frydenberg said the “patent box” was specifically designed to encourage greater commercialisation in Aust­ralia, a coun­try famous for innovation, boasting world-leading creations such as Wi-Fi, the bionic ear and a cervical cancer vaccine.
Dr Ilana Feain, the CSIRO’s commercialisation specialist for astronomy, told the forum she believed Australia did not have a commercialisation problem.
“What Flavia might view as a bottleneck and a real problem, when you’re inside the system and see how it operates, it’s a very streamlined system and there’s a lot of opportunities,” she said.
Dr Feain said the perceived issue might be more prevalent in space, because of how new the sector was.
Education Minister Alan Tudge said one of his main policies was to “lift the impact” of university researchers, flagging possible changes to intellectual property laws “if necessary”.
“We want, and need, our universities to play a bigger role,” he told Melbourne University in his first major speech in February.
“We want academics to become entrepreneurs, taking their ideas from the lab to the market. We want them to be properly rewarded for their breakthroughs and their engagement with business.” Ms Tata Nardini told the online forum that Fleet was started with “no tech”. “We started Fleet with an idea; we had no patents and now we’ve got 60,” she said.
Ms Tata Nardini said fellow Adelaide space start-up Myriota started with 25 patents and two co-founders with PhDs.
“I’m fascinated about this dynamic – what is the thing that actually works?” she said. ”I think time will tell.”
CREDIT: GABRIEL POLYCHRONIS
Word count: 448
