The newly-launched carrier will run eight new flights out of Toowoomba every week as part of its inaugural route.
It is a coup for Wellcamp owner Wagner Corporation, as the airport looks to establish itself as a domestic passenger port alongside its airfreight potential.
Wagner Corp chairman John Wagner said the announcement would expose Toowoomba as a tourism destination to millions more people.
The airline ‘Bonza’ says 40 airports around Australia have now expressed interest in hosting the new budget start-up. The airline plans to fly eight aircraft within 12 months of its launch next year, with the news prompting a warning from Alan Joyce, who says Qantas is prepared to defend its turf against the new market entrant. AirlineRatings.com Editor Geoffrey Thomas says Bonza will target routes, which the larger companies have “ignored”. “For instance, if you want to go from Adelaide to Broome, you've got to go through Perth – now … one of the routes they may look at is Adelaide – Broome,” he told Sky News Australia. “Their businesses model is to connect the dots that are currently not connected, with really low airfares, and develop new markets. “I see this as a brand-new model for Australia, and I think it's going to be very successful.”
“Wellcamp Airport has worked closely with Australia’s newest airline Bonza to deliver more flights between Toowoomba, Melbourne, Townsville and a brand-new exciting route to Whitsunday Coast,” he said.
“Whether its flying in to visit the wonderful Darling Downs, for a quick getaway to the Whitsundays or heading to an event in Melbourne, these new low-cost flights will allow for more options to and from our region.
“We’re looking forward to seeing friends and family reunite in our airport and more Australians exploring the Darling Downs and beyond.”
Bonza will fly out of Wellcamp Airport to three destinations.
Bonza chief commercial officer Carly Povey said the addition of Toowoomba highlighted the company’s regional approach to budget flying, saying it was going to avoid the “golden triangle” of Brisbane, Sydney and Melbourne.
“With four new routes directly in and out of Toowoomba Wellcamp Airport, we will be delivering on our promise to give Aussies more options for leisure travel,” she said.
“Not only will the flights open up new markets for the region’s tourism industry, locals will have the opportunity to explore their own backyard with ultra-low fares.”
Passengers will also not need physical tickets, with Bonza to run all operations through its app.
“We encourage everyone to download the new app to be the first in the know for flights going on sale, fare sales, destination news and travel tips,” Ms Povey said.
“We’re also offering, via the app, the chance to win flights.”
The new flights are subject to regulatory approval. Bonza CEO Tim Jordan told The Chronicle in December Toowoomba would be an ideal location for the company.
“We look at the region and there is a significant catchment of population and we see it as a fantastic opportunity for people to travel more,” he said.
For updates, head to the Bonza website.
NED-4895 Toowoomba Subscribe Banner
Word count: 501
