MONEY management company SpendAble is working to ensure those living with a disability aren’t being left behind as online banking becomes the norm.
The national start-up seeks to empower people with a disability by giving them a sense of financial independence.
SpendAble chief executive Reece Miller says money management can pose a challenge to individuals, especially when they need their family or support networks to have access to their money.
After establishing disability support service provider Support Your Way, Mr Miller quickly identified a number of issues faced by people living with a disability when it came to managing their finances and banking services.
He says having a third party in control of funds tended to result in a lack of independence, especially for those who may be isolated or living alone.
“The payment is normally the blocker between whether someone would go to the shops by themselves,” he said.
However Mr Miller says assistive technology is having a positive impact. SpendAble gives those living with an intellectual disability the chance to learn an alternate banking process by removing several numeracy and budgeting ­elements.
Mr Miller says the system gives people living with a disability a unique and valuable learning experience by using visual cues to represent banking activity.
“We are able to teach people how to do their own grocery shopping or clothes shopping and get access to their own money,” he said.
“They can use the SpendAble system as their supported decision-making tool. There’s not much in the ­assistive technology space that actually teaches people to handle their own money.” The company operates out of Victoria and South Australia, with the head of technology, Travis Ashworth, based in ­Adelaide.
“It’s to empower people and give them more freedom to spend the money that they want to,” Mr Ashworth said of the system.
“It allows people, particularly those with intellectual disabilities that might not have the greatest financial literacy, to spend their own money.” SpendAble has achieved significant growth, with about 600 NDIS and other service provider ­participants using the friendly alternative to money ­management.
Mr Ashworth describes SpendAble as an app paired to a digital wallet that customers can load money onto and allocate to various budgets for everyday payments.
“The digital wallet is then ­connected to a Visa card that we get through one of our issuers that we’re partnered with,” he said. “The great thing about SpendAble is you know the money is going to be spent the way that you want to spend it.”
CREDIT: EVA BLANDIS FUTURE ADELAIDE INTERN
Word count: 425
