PLAYBACK Cabaret **** Loverboy Until March 6 Set in the trendy Hindley Street nightclub Loverboy, Playback is a journey straight back to the 1980s.
An uber-entertaining dance piece that runs for about half an hour, it’s the perfect way to kick off a night of Fringe-ing with a group of mates.
Playback has been specifically created for the space and uses the club brilliantly, right down to the lighting cues, with every surface used as a stage.
From the moment the audience walks down the alleyway to enter the club they are immediately put in the mood, with Sasha Simic being the perfect host for what lies ahead.
Once inside, the young and energetic cast of dancers take over. The dance routines – set to a soundtrack of blistering ’80s hits – are slick and well choreographed and the performers, above right, are sharp and precise.
It’s interactive, high-energy and reminds us what life was like when you could actually hit a club and go dancing.
The show has the potential to expand and grow, but is a very solid debut from this new company of local performers.
If you’re looking for a deep and meaningful piece of dance theatre with hidden meanings, go see ADT. But if you want a brilliantly fun night out full of neon and cheese, Playback is the Fringe show for you.
– MATT GILBERTSON
THE WHITE MOUSE Theatre / SA *** 1/2 Star Theatre Two, Star Theatres Until March 14 Parachuted in to command a unit of the French resistance in the build-up to D-Day, Nancy Wake’s remarkable wartime escapades are cleverly brought to the stage in this new production. The story of the New Zealand-born and Australian-raised nurse and self-trained journalist, who later joined the British secret service, is told via vignettes.
Emily Jo Davidson plays Nancy, nicknamed the White Mouse by the Nazis because they found her impossible to trap, as the mouse that roared – irrepressible, loud and occasionally foul-mouthed.
Less convincing in a scene discovering her French husband, Henri Fiocca, has been captured and executed by the Gestapo, she is compelling in the very next scene – the most captivating of the production – when interrogating a Hitler Youth member.
Charles Herkes, who will need to recover from split personality as he’s played so many characters over two productions this Fringe, is her equal as the arrogant young soldier.
This is the fifth Fringe offering by writer Peter Maddern, who has built a solid following with successful productions including The Loneliest Woman and Kokoda. With some opening night pacing issues resolved and a tighter all-round production this show will be no exception.
– CRAIG COOK
DAVE THORNTON & DILRUK JAYASINHA – THE DETOUR Comedy/Stand Up **** 1/2 Babylon, GOUD Until February 28 Last year was a detour for all of us and none more so than for comedians. It’s the basis of both the funny men’s 30-minute sets on this double bill, above.
While Jaysasinha struggled alone in his one-bedroom apartment, Thornton dealt with his two daughters and wife in their tiny inner-city abode.
Jayasinha opens and while there’s no denying he is an excellent storyteller, drawing plenty of laughs, he just takes it too far on occasions.
Thornton’s was the tighter set – so fast-paced and hilarious that my face and sides ached from non-stop laughing – which is always a good sign. It would have been five stars for him.
His impersonations are on-point – he might even bring out a few of his mates, Hughesy and Jimeoin, if you’re lucky. A tip, though: Don’t spend the whole show asking for them as one punter did.
– LISA WOOLFORD
A TOTAL COP OUT!
Comedy / SA *** 1/2 The Coleridge Room, The Duke of Brunswick Until March 7 As we await to be seated, we come up with three things each: a crime, a location and an expert.
Our suggestions are noted. When the improv show begins, each are randomly chosen – someone breaking hotel quarantine, Parliament House and an expert in sourdough.
How on earth can the local actors from Tenuous Link Productions tie these together?
With less than a minute’s notice, they begin, which is a bit thrilling to watch a narrative created in front of your eyes.
They trust each other a lot, as they react and bounce off one another. Largely, the actors are convincing, switching between characters well and coming up with some funny lines – but there is also a bit of overacting.
The plot line is, of course, ridiculous, as you’d expect, but that's part of the fun.
At some points, the story seems to be losing direction, but it comes back together for the climax and finish.
It’s impressive and worth the visit to support local theatre. – TARA NASH
COLLISION Circus & Physical Theatre / QLD *** 1/2 Ngunyawayiti Theatre, Tandanya National Aboriginal Cultural Institute Until February 28 Collision from Fringe regulars Casus Circus and Mad Dance House is a mash-up of acrobatics and other circus skills bumping shoulders with some slick b-boy moves.
The six-strong company begins in sync, moving in robotic unison to a propulsive soundtrack. Thereafter, things continue in a consistently good, but ultimately routine vein.
The circus skills are solid, but the urban dance component – kudos to the spectacular Benny Bucho – is by far the most exciting. The show is likely to settle during the short season.
– PETER BURDON
WHITE RHINO Dance / SA *** The AmphiTheatre, Black Box Theatres @ Adelaide Botanic Garden and Watch From Home Until March 12 Like the white rhino, the artist seems perilously close to extinction these days.
This production by Adelaide’s Motus Collective is a conceit, to be sure, but not an undeserving one.
The threatened species is depicted by a many-fringed beast (I name it a Sia-saurus) emerging from the depths of the amphitheatre in the Botanic Gardens, left.
A promising start, that, but the movement veers quickly and at length towards the mundane, with overlong unison sequences, time and time again.
An amusing duet offers some relief, but as the piece moves towards its predictable end – the return of the Siasaurus – the unisons start up again.
White Rhino is a good idea but falters in the execution. – PETER BURDON
CREDIT: MATT GILBERTSON CRAIG COOK LISA WOOLFORD TARA NASH PETER BURDON
Word count: 1061
