A raft of challenging, exciting theatre, dance, music and visual art will be part of Adelaide’s OzAsia Festival, which kicks off this month. A highlight will be White Pearl, playwright Anchuli Felicia King’s examination of toxic corporate culture. She spoke with PATRICK McDONALD Anchuli Felicia King was studying dramaturgy at Columbia University five years ago when a furore over racist advertising in Asia sparked the idea for what would become the Thai-Australian playwright’s comedy hit debut, White Pearl.
“When I was still in college in New York, I saw a bunch of ads which went viral that year, that were deemed racially insensitive,” she recalls.
“I’d grown up in Asia and seen these kinds of ads, and I found it fascinating that suddenly they were being held accountable to a global discourse on race.
“I started writing a play about it, imagining what it would be like to be in the office of one of these companies as they were going through this PR crisis.” White Pearl, which comes to Adelaide as part of this month’s OzAsia Festival, was one of three plays by King which premiered in 2019. It also had three different productions around the globe, marking an auspicious start to her professional career at the age of just 25.
“White Pearl got programmed at the Royal Court in London, which was very exciting, and then my play Golden Shield went up for Melbourne Theatre Company, and I was also doing my play Slaughterhouse at Belvoir (in Sydney),” King says.
“I was doing three productions of White Pearl in three different countries (UK, Sydney in Australia and Washington in the US) so it was a very, very exciting year, jetting around to three countries in rapid succession, which is kind of insane.” This meteoric level of success seems even more unbelievable when you consider that White Pearl was King’s first full-length play.
“I’d written this terrible, one-act play when I was in college,” she laughs. “I try not to dwell on that (her rapid success) too much – I feel very grateful and lucky to be an artist for a living. I just kind of put my head down and kept working.” White Pearl is set in the ultra-cool Singapore offices of Clearday, a rising player in the highly competitive skincare industry.
Sales of its new skin-whitening cream are going through the roof, and the company’s team of ambitious young women have their sights set even higher – until their new TV commercial is leaked online and goes viral for all the wrong reasons.
“I chose to write about whitening cream, because it felt like a really useful lightning rod to talk about a bunch of different themes the play explores around anti-black racism in Asia, but also intra-Asian racism and skin whitening in Asia, which I think is a really under-explored industry, even though it is such a huge phenomena,” King says.
In some Asian cultures, lighter coloured skin is seen as more attractive, but it can also be associated with affluence and social standing.
“It’s a very complicated history that gets tied up in two things,” King says. “One is the legacy of Western colonisation across Asia, which has different impacts across different places. There’s evidence to suggest that in countries like Japan, lighter skin was valued as a cultural norm pre-colonisation. That’s not true in some other countries.
“The other thing that is really complicated is that Asia is not a monolith. One of the things that the play really tries to explore is how difficult it is to reduce a bunch of really radically different countries and cultures to a single discourse around what beauty or culture looks like.” White Pearl also looks at the “intra-Asia racism” which exists between different Asian countries, and even between different peoples and castes within nations.
The “equally thorny and complicated” issue of anti-black racism in Asia also has “a long, deep-seated, really ugly history”, King says.
“So the play tries to explore all of that through comedy,” she laughs. The Asian commercials which sparked King’s interest were anti-black and for products similar to the play’s fictitious “White Pearl” cream.
“One of them featured a Thai model in seeming blackface … although there’s a lot of questions whether at the time there was even an acknowledgment in Asia or understanding of what blackface was.
“Then there was another horrifically racist Chinese ad for a laundry detergent, again featuring a black actor in a racist scenario.” King says that, even since she wrote the play, discourse about this kind of racism has grown in Asia.
The challenge was to write a comedy about racism, without making the audience complicit in laughing at race.
“The play’s theme is really why people in some cultures find things funny, that other people don’t, and how humour and language is weaponised,” King says.
“It really walks a fine tightrope and I have relied on my collaborators and colleagues … as we have done this play in three countries … to help me work out where that line is. I don’t want to make sanitised or watered-down art to pander to the audience – but at the same time, I don’t want to perpetuate harm.” Melbourne-based King and her twin sister grew up between her mother’s hometown Kanchanaburi in Thailand and Manila, where her Australian father was a climate change scientist for the Asian Development Bank.
Her sister was an international trade lawyer for the World Trade Organisation, “so I think there’s a bent in my family towards international policy and that’s rubbed off on me, definitely”.
Economic, technological and social systems – and how these intersect with race – were at the heart of King’s early works.
Golden Shield was a global corporate thriller involving a Chinese-American lawyer and a big tech company, while Slaughterhouse is a monologue in which four staff at an ethical eating start-up – and their drug dealer – offer their perspectives on a violent incident at a party.
“My work tends to explore issues at the nexus of rapid-onset globalisation and technologisation,” King says.
“I’m a millennial kid who grew up in a bunch of different countries, but they’ve also been the dominant forces in my life, so it’s naturally the stories that I gravitate towards.” White Pearl also addresses the trend toward “homogenised global beauty standards”.
“That proximity to whiteness has bled so much into every aspect of global society that it is very hard to discern where culture starts and colonisation starts,” King says.
“Ultimately, it’s really a play about language and power and how easily language can be weaponised to punch down on historically oppressed peoples. If the play is about anything it’s about how accepting the complexity of language in a globalised, digitised society can allow us to become better people and better consumers.
“Racism describes a system of historical oppression that affects every aspect of people’s lives from their employment to their housing to their income.
“When people talk about instances of ‘casual racism’ what you are talking about is perpetuating a harmful system that we should be collectively working to deconstruct.
“Another term people might use for that system is white supremacy.” Golden Shield will open off-Broadway next year and King is also working on a number of new TV projects, including a horror-comedy series called The Baby with UK company Sister Pictures for HBO.
“I’ve increasingly found that I’m medium and genre agnostic – I am far more interested in what the story is and what the work has to say about the world.” White Pearl, Dunstan Playhouse, Oct 20-23. ozasiafestival.com.au
CREDIT: PATRICK McDONALD
Word count: 1274
