Judo Bank chief executive Joseph Healy is not your typical start-up founder, and nor does he say the things you generally expect to hear from senior Australian bankers about the housing market.
Most new financial businesses are launched by young tech-savvy entrepreneurs trying to turn banking on its head in some way, but Healy co-founded Judo in his 50s, seeking to bring back the "craft" of small and medium business banking.
The basic idea for the business, started with another former banker David Hornery, was to blend new technology with old-school banking know-how such as skills in risk management and access to capital.
Says Healy, a banking veteran of more than three decades: "This is a business for grown-ups. It's not for people who've got a piece of technology and an app, and a black T-shirt and torn jeans. This is for serious people."
And although most bank CEOs are loath to sound too negative on residential property, Healy describes himself as a "bear". When questioned about how the housing market might respond to higher interest rates, he replies: "Therein lies the Achilles heel in the banking system," before detailing the country's unusually high household indebtedness.
"There is no way in the world that that does not represent a significant systemic risk, because if there's a correction in the housing market, that spills over into the wider economy, and of course impacts the SME economy," he says.
"I know that it's unfashionable for a banker in Australia to talk negatively about the housing market, but I am particularly cautious about that."
Healy says he is not predicting a big market slump. He says he does not have a forecast for where prices will go. "I'm not forecasting a big correction. I'm simply highlighting this segment of the economy probably represents the biggest single risk to the economy," he says.
Nor is he dismissive of technology and fintech; indeed, he thinks there will be far more disruption in banking.
Even so, the frank comments from the banking veteran are a reflection of how Judo is trying to take a different path to rivals, including other start-up banks.
Judo is regarded as the most successful of the several new banks to launch in Australia in recent years. Other start-up banks include the fallen Xinja, which pulled the pin in 2020 and returned its licence, 86 400, which was bought by National Australia Bank, and Volt Bank.
Judo was founded in 2015 by Hornery and Healy, after they first got the idea over Friday evening drinks at the Greengate Hotel at Killara on Sydney's upper north shore. Healy, who grew up in Scotland and played international soccer for the country as a youth, has previously worked at banks including Citi, ANZ and NAB, and now splits his time between Sydney and Melbourne.
He owns 3.2 per cent of Judo's shares, and says moving from executive to co-founder was a "huge change, but the most exciting and most rewarding thing I've ever done".
After floating last year at $2.10, Judo's share price is lower today at $1.98. But the company still has a market capitalisation of about $2.2 billion, which is about a 40 per cent of Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, even though Judo's loan book is a fraction of the size of Bendigo's.
To justify the valuation, investors are betting Judo can grow rapidly. Last week's results show the bank made a statutory loss of $16.1 million due to float-related costs, but brokers are more interested in its gross loans and advances, which were up 37.8 per cent to $4.85 billion.
Speaking after the results, Healy says he's confident that in the "medium term" Judo can expand the loan portfolio to be around $15 billion to $20 billion, which would make it fifth largest SME lender behind the big four.
Yet Australian banking is notoriously concentrated, and even global players such as Citi failed to make a meaningful impression in the mortgage market after operating here for decades. Why would Judo be different?
Healy says its strategy targets just one market: small and medium business. "If you try to come into a market that's dominated by giants, you've got to really focus on what makes you unique in order to compete," he says.
In recent years, some of the big banks, most notably SME-lending powerhouse NAB, and Commonwealth Bank, have been seeking to win back lucrative small business customers, as they chase credit growth outside the housing market.
But despite this added competition, which Healy says has squeezed margins in some segments, the banker remains upbeat about going head to head with the majors, and about how its loan book will hold up if interest rates rise, as the bank expects. He says the lender's customers have all been tested for how they would cope with a 2 percentage point rate hike, and the bulk of its loans were written against tough economic backdrop of the pandemic.
"$4 billion of our lending book has been done in a COVID world, where we've had our eyes wide open to the realities and the uncertainties of COVID," Healy says.
CREDIT: Clancy Yeates
Word count: 857
