Progressive gelding can make amends RACE 1 How the race will be run: Plenty of first starters, so anyone’s guess who will lead. Ranveer did show blistering speed in a 650m jumpout, so should be handy. Profiteer was also on pace throughout his recent trial.
My view: Think the value is with the Godolphin colt Alegron. He contested a recent jumpout here and tracked very wide the entire trip and was a strong hold throughout. Liked the way he ran through the line at the end and no doubt he could have won the heat if allowed rein. Looks to have talent and he’ll be charging late.Profiteer won as he liked in a trial at Traralgon last month and the time was there too. Looks a readymade speedster. The Art Of Flying has the runs on the board and is going well but does have the 61kg. Yulong Turbo was pushed out to win his recent jumpout but reckon he’ll be better for it and he is well bred.
Suggested bet: Alegron eachway.
RACE 2 How the race will be run: Narvaez will probably set the tempo but Rock The Ring won’t be far away. Ilovethegame will use inside draw to be just off the leaders and Free To Move likewise. Still Be Friends will try to slot in behind the speed.
My view: Still Be Friends looked to hang a little most of the way at the Valley last start and still boxed on well behind a smart one in Seb Song. Has atricky draw here and expect Damien Oliver will try to settle midfield instead of engaging in a speed battle. Think that will suit him and he can be saved for a last shot at them. Rock The Ring was forced to lead in the Eureka Stockade race at Ballarat three weeks ago and not beaten far. He’ll be on pace again here and helped by the claim. Free To Move is very honest and will get the run of the race. He was beaten by Rock The Ring in June and meets that horse 2.5kg worse. Beltoro was good winning a weaker race at Bendigo on debut and can figure.
Suggested bet: Still Be Friends to win.
RACE 3: How the race will be run: Lord Bouzeron will lead unchallenged and set his own tempo. Expect Winsome Voyage to cross over from wide draw and Highland Jakk and Hasseltoff won’t be far away.
My view: I’ve got some time for Coolth, who is still only lightly-raced and still learning his craft. Always thought he was a big track horse and welcome his return to Flemington here. Drew the rails and had his momentum halted a few times before he finally got clear and produced best closing 200m of the race when resuming in a leader-dominated event at the Valley. Kept fresh since and don’t forget he twice started favourite against Persan here in June and that form reads pretty well for this. Drawn the pole again here but just needs even luck at the right time to be awfully hard to stop. Lord Bouzeron looks over the odds to me as he is the only pace in the race and can dictate terms. This may be a little short of his best but helped by the claim and he’ll take running down. Chief Altony won like an odds-on pop should at the midweeks and can measure up here. Independent Road doesn’t win often but he does go well here and can show up.
Suggested bet: Coolth to win.
RACE 4: How the race will be run: Charossa and Brilliant Venture look the two to take up the running. Tralee Rose will use inside draw to sit handy, along with Miyake. Yulong Rising won’t be far away.
My view: On face value, you may think Tralee Rose will struggle at the trip here as she only just held on to win at Sandown last start. But the win was full of merit given she was flushed out from behind the leaders a little sooner than hoped and then left in front at the top of the long straight. She did a great job to tough it out and defy all challengers. She did run a solid 4th this trip in Adelaide in May and is a better horse now. Drawn to get the run of the race again. Reflect The Stars is at his top now and he ran on well at Ballarat last start. Placed only start this track/trip. Miyake comes down from Sydney on the back of a soft win at Warwick Farm and is a big threat here. Liked the way Saint Eustace attacked the line to win last start and is a chance this harder race.
Suggested bet: Tralee Rose to win.
RACE 5: How the race will be run: Pace will come from Fabergino, Grandview Avenue and Sartorial Splendor. Human Nature, Prezado and Shamino will tuck just in behind.
My view: Thought Prezado was pretty good when resuming at the Valley last start even though he wasn’t suited by the tighter track. His last three runs this course and distance have resulted in strong wins. Loves this track and Jamie Kah knows him well. Think he can finish too well for them. Fabergino is a Listed winner this track/trip. She was very brave behind Graff at Caulfield and outclassed in the Darley Classic but this is infinitely easier. The logical danger. Shamino was good winning at Sandown in Listed grade and kept fresh since. Grandview Avenue is in career best form.
Suggested bet: Prezado to win.
RACE 6: How the race will be run: Memphis Rock, Moor Wanted, Aten, Sir Mask and Sealed will all roll forward. Alburq, Evening Glory and Excelida will sit off speed.
My view: Alburq doesn’t win out of turn but he has been contesting stronger races than this. Last two tries in this grade have resulted in a win this course and distance beating That Girl and a second to the smart Final Man at Sandown. Liked his recent jumpout and he can take beating here. Evening Glory is also resuming and has also jumped out very well for her return. Think she has talent and will be finishing hard. Like the fact Tan Tat Harmony has drawn out and she’ll come down the grandstand side. Lightly raced but improving mare. Excelida came home fastest last 200m of the day at Ballarat last staty and right at her top now.
Suggested bet: Alburq to win.
RACE 7: How the race will be run: Expecting Left Hand Man to roll forward and take up the running. From the inside draw, Bandersnatch will be much closer. Sondelon and Wicklow Town will be on speed.
My view: Think Viral is great value here. Thought he was excellent coming from the back of the field and clocked second fastest 400-200 and last 200m splits when 4th to Outrageous here. That horse has confirmed the form by winning again in Sydney. Think he was a victim of circumstances at Ballarat last start. Back to this track suits, he’s right at his peak and can finish hard. Beehunter looks well suited in this grade and at the weights. Just beaten by Power Scheme here two runs back and forget he went around at Ballarat last start. Big chance. Bandersnatch was impressive on resuming and carries same weight in this harder grade. Drawn to get run of the race. Left Hand Man has been good in Adelaide and can measure up here.
Suggested bet: Viral eachway.
RACE 8: How the race will be run: Should be genuine speed on here. Portland Jimmy, Tough Vic and Somerset Maugham look the leaders. Starouz will be handy from good draw, as will Shepard, Caffrey and Kaplumpich.
My view: Star Missile was very good in the greys race here when just pipped by Berdibek and then had things go against him but still made late ground at Ballarat last start. He’ll get a cosy run in midfield from the rails draw and will just need a bit of of luck to extricate himself and charge home. Big chance. Sikorsky has needed racing to bring him to his top and he gets the run of the race from his draw here. Ready to improve sharply. Rainbow Thief showed a glimpse of his best last start behind Pancho in the Kilmore Cup and he’ll welcome a return to this track. Kaplumpich is a model of consistency and has to be included.
Suggested bet: Star Missile to win.
RACE 9: How the race will be run: Lady Brook, Princess Flagrant, High Risk and Uptown Lola look the pace in the race. Kalkarni Royale will be up there with Sassy Salitage and Paul’s Regret.
My view: Sticking with Kalkarni Royale, who was brave at the Valley last start up against a pretty handy type in All Banter. Only has the one start down the straight and was without luck in Listed grade behind Front Page. She looks ready to win. Standoff resumed and did well at Ballarat behind Sisstar, finishing alongside the smart The Astrologist. She gets to come down the grandstand side. Macroura has been good at Rosehill and Kembla last start two and can measure up to this grade. Paul’s Regret won with a leg in the air at Warrnambool when resuming and can threaten these. Suggested bet: Kalkarni Royale to win.
CREDIT: FLEMINGTON PREVIEW WITH TONY THOMAS
Word count: 1579
