This year’s Top 20 Under 40 entrepreneurs all come from different backgrounds and industries but have a common drive to succeed, write Chris Herde and Glen Norris
JASON DANIEL, 34 LSKD founder IT took a leap of faith for Jason Daniel to steer his active lifestyle clothing brand away from a wholesale business to focus solely online.
But it has paid dividends. LSKD’s revenue has jumped from $3.3m in 2018-19, and will pass the $65m mark in 2021-22, and there are expectations the company will break the $100m barrier in 2022-23.
Mr Daniel is ramping up LSKD’s infrastructure with plans for swift expansion next year into the US.
CHRIS SEATON, 30, LAWRENCE SEATON, 27 Origin Tea, co-founders CHRIS and Lawrence Seaton started Origin Tea in their Logan garage in 2012 and they now supply more than 3000 businesses around Australia.
With an annual Australian revenue of about $3m and a focus on the conscious consumer, they plan to grow through selling direct to customers online, offering innovative product lines and overseas expansion.
DANIEL WESSELS, 33 Jacaranda Finance founder DANIEL Wessels started Jacaranda Finance, one of Australia’s the fastest-growing consumer finance firms, at his parents’ house in 2014.
The company now has an impressive loan book of $50m and annual revenue of $30m which it plans to grow in 2022.
TIFFANY HENRY, 33 Petal & Pup founder PETAL & Pup has become one of Australia’s biggest online fashion retailing success stories and it all began seven years ago in Tiffany Henry’s parents’ home in Brisbane. This year Henry and her family received more than $22m after US-based a.k.a Brands bought out the remaining 27 per cent stake in the business it did not already own. It took a majority stake in 2019.
Henry remains the brand’s creative director.
PETER HULL, 34, REBECCA HULL, 33 Fitstop founder, franchise recruitment manager BRISBANE-BASED Fitstop currently has 68 locations and is in the process of opening another 75 across Australia and New Zealand.
With US-based global fitness and wellness giant Lift Brands taking a 30 per cent stake in the company this year, Fitstop now has the muscle to expand further internationally.
Fitstop has grown with network revenue rising from $14.6m in 2020-21 to an expected $28.2m this financial year.
EDDIE KOCWA, 34, STEVEN DAVISON, 34 SCD Remanufactured Vehicles co-owners OLD schoolmates Eddie Kocwa and Steven Davison have big plans to rebuild our defunct national car manufacturing sector.
Their SCD Remanufactured Vehicles imports US pickups, installs right-hand drives and other accessories, and sells them through a dealership network. The holding company Boss Capital, which includes the manufacturing, distribution and related businesses, will turn over more than $100m this year.
CLAIRE O’ROURKE, 37, RIYA ARAI-COUPE, 36 Bluebird Property Partners founders RIYA Arai-Coupe and Claire O’Rourke were experienced development managers when they spotted a gap in the market.
Bluebird, established in 2018, effectively operates as an extension of a developer’s in-house team.
Since 2018, Bluebird has built 210 dwellings with a total project value of $136m. Their operating income grew 150 per cent in 2020-21.
SAM RICHARDS, 15 Bellaforte founder SAM Richards. Remember the name. He has just finished year 10 and is already a millionaire.
The teenager sold his reusable plastic glassware company Bellaforte a few months ago to Una Brands. He will stay on as a consultant for the next two years while he also completes his schooling.
JEFF YEW, 27 Monochrome founder JEFF Yew, the founder of Brisbane-based Monochrome Asset Management, launched a fund in June allowing people to benefit from the rise of cryptocurrencies such as Bitcoin. The fund tracks the price of Bitcoin, which uses blockchain as a trading platform, via a conventional investment vehicle. Mr Yew said he planned to expand the fund to $10bn over the next three years.
CARA GIOVINAZZO, 32 Borro founder JUST 18 months after going out on her own in one of the most competitive sectors of the financial services industry, Cara Giovinazzo is starting to see big numbers emerge from her brokerage business.
Armed with cutting edge technology and updated systems Borro went from lodging about $2m to $3m in loans a month to $26m in November.
BRAD MORAN, 35 CitrusAd founder FORMER Adelaide Crows ruckman Brad Moran sold his Brisbane-based start-up CitrusAd for $205m in October to French firm Publicis Groupe. Mr Moran continues to work at the advertising technology start-up as CEO.
PAUL STOVELL, 34 Octopus Deploy founder SOFTWARE developer Paul Stovell never thought the side hustle he started from his kitchen bench would become such a success, with NASA and Microsoft among clients.
The company this year received a $US172.5m ($232m) investment from US-based Insight Partners.
According to industry sources, that investment valued Octopus Deploy at $1bn. Mr Stovell runs the business with wife Sonia.
IAN PARKE, 34 FIN-PAY founder BRISBANE entrepreneur Ian Parke is on the fast track with his fintech start-up FIN-PAY.
The company last month landed one of the biggest seed funding rounds for the year, raising $10m. Mr Parke, who started the company in 2019, is aiming to replace Eftpos terminals across Australia, the US, Asia and Europe with his unified payments platform.
NATHANIEL ANTHONY, 31, CHRIS ANASTASI, 37 Muscle Nation co-founders DESPITE launching Muscle Nation five years ago, good mates Nathaniel Anthony and Chris Anastasi still feel like they’re just getting started.
They turned over $51m in 2020-21, up from $27m the previous year, and their online activewear, supplements and snacks business is expecting to easily pass that figure this financial year. “We’re putting our heart and soul into our target of around the $70m mark for this coming financial year,” Mr Anthony said.
JAMES GILMOUR, 37 Gilmour Space Technologies director JAMES Gilmour’s ambitions are literally out of this world.
Mr Gilmour is a director and head of launch operations at Gold Coast-based rocket company Gilmour Space Technologies, which he started with his older brother Adam in 2013. The company has so far raised $87m from investors, including $61m in June. Mr Gilmour is currently working on the proposed Bowen Orbital Spaceport at Abbot Point in Bowen.
SIMON BEARD, 36, TAHNEE BEARD, 33 Culture Kings founders THE Beards have been successful entrepreneurs who have largely flown under the radar for more than a decade but their media profile exploded in 2021.
They sold a majority stake in the Australian streetwear and sneaker retailer this year to US-based a.k.a Brands for $600m, catapulting them into the ranks of Australia’s richest people. This year Ms Beard bought a $15.25m Soul penthouse in Surfers Paradise.
DAN ALLEN, 32, ED ROSS, 28 TradeMutt founders DAN Allen and Ed Ross are taking on the big boys in the $2bn workwear sector. Their TradeMutt business sells thousands of items every month that are worn by tradies working for Rio Tinto, Hutchinson, BHP, Brisbane City Council and Bretts. The success of TradeMutt has allowed the duo to fund TIACS.org (This Is a Conversation Starter), a free mental-health support service offering access to trained psychologists and support workers to all Australians.
TRENT REDMAN, 34 Luna Hospitality director TRENT Redman has five venues under his control, three of which – Ivy Blu Rooftop Bar and the Mexican inspired La Carmela on Caxton St and Su Cas Nightclub and Rooftop in Fortitude Valley – have opened in the last few months.
months. Mr Redman, who started out as a nightclub DJ, said Luna is all “about offering a different experience”.
Cameron DOUGLAS, 36 Videopro Group chief executive CAMERON Douglas took the reins of Videopro in May.
Mr Douglas started with the Brisbane-based audiovisual and computer products retailer on the sales floor 15 years ago and now owns 25 per cent of the business which currently has about 100 staff and an annual turnover of around $65m.
MATT BAKER, 27 Shift Buddies founder MATT Baker’s moving company in Brisbane is so booked-out weeks in advance he spends a good bit of each day turning down new business from prospective clients. A lack of workers is hamstringing his expansion plans. His team operates five trucks from a depot at Brendale and service around 1000 customers a year.
CREDIT: Chris Herde; Glen Norris
Word count: 1354
