3YO hardest to beat for Team Hayes RACE 1 How the race will be run: Rail is back in true spot for first time in a while, so watch for pattern as he day pans out. Some rain predicted today but track should stake in soft 5-6 range. Power Crunch probably leads but don’t know if they will go overly quick here.
My view: Think Stalking is a sound chance and good value too. She was a bit all over the place on debut but still hit the line with gusto at Wangaratta. Kept fresh since but also noticed her doing some good late work in a junmpout here last week, hitting the line strongly under her own steam. Think she will derive a lot of experience from the debut run and the jumpout and she gets the winkers on to keep her mind on the job. Worth the gamble. The Art Of Flying got too far back and had to go very wide on the turn but still ran on nicely when resuming at Sale three weeks ago. He’s already a Listed placegetter when only 3 lens behind Anamoe at Sandown last spring, so he has some talent. Can threaten here. Mennea cruised to a comfortable win at Donald on debut after being heavily backed. And his sectional splits were comparable to the best of the day. Looks to have ability. Regulus is well bred. He was only fair in a recent jumpout but does get Jamie Kah on board.
Suggested bet: Stalking eachway.
RACE 2 How the race will be run: Should be genuine tempo with Bengal Bandit and Fac the likely leaders. Next Step Berrima and Merle The Pearl won’t be far away.
My view: Prepared to gamble on the talent of Seiner’s Express. He got the blinkers on the first time at Geelong last month and looked a little unlucky when a close 3rd to the handy Muswellbrook. Then well supported to starr favourite but was eased out of the race at Hillside and found to have cardiac arrhythmia. That was the race Reliable Dude and Seb Song both contested. Stays down in the weights here, will settle back in the field and then unleash late. Reliable Dude is very honest and he has beaten Seb Song home his last two starts. Strong win at Cranbourne last time. Seb Song will relish this big track and did have to sustain a long run at Cranbourne last start. Rathlin draws to get the run of the race and is very honest.
Suggested bet: Seiner’s Express each way.
RACE 3 How the race will be run: Grand Promenade is drawn to lead but could have Runaway for company now he has the blinkers back on. Tolemac will roll forward from a wide draw. Not Usual Glorious won’t be far away.
My view Does look Grand Promenade’s race to lose. Don’t think he has to lead either, especially if Runaway and Tolemac take him on. That’s the beauty of the draw he has. He can lead or box seat. Either way will suit him. He was dominant beating most of these here a month ago. The only negative is he rises 4kg in weight but not enough to stop him I’d suggest. Royal Crown appreciated the step up in distance at Werribee last start and won well in weaker grade. He drops 2kg here in this tougher grade and he can threaten. On the improve. Not Usual Glorious has been impressive winning three on the trot in SA and beat a smart horse in Lord Bouzeron last time. Cam measure up. Master Chum ran on well behind Lunar Flare here last start and looks like he wants this distance.
Suggested bet: Grand Promenade as a standout in all exotics.
RACE 4 How the race will be run: Not a lot of pace on paper. Pretty Little Lass may take up the running and expect Celestial Fury, Cardigan Queen, Turn It Up Tommy and Whatafox to be prominent.
My view: I’ve always had some time for Tatsuro. On face value, you would look at his form and suggest he needs to find a lot of improvement to test these. But in almost every one of his six starts to date, he has shown something in each to suggest that when the penny drops, he can make a handy horse. Maybe that’s just me but I’m prepared to stick with him here and he’s great odds too. He resumed against the older horses and started favourite at Donald two weeks ago, running on strongly after getting too far back. Think he is looking for this trip and the big track and he can upset these. Royalzel comes down from Sydney and was impressive winning at Rosehill two weeks ago. The only negative is his two wins, and best efforts, have been on genuine heavy ground and he was disappointing as favourite on soft 6 ground before his last win. Still, he has talent and clearly a big threat. Bon Vivant was a bit stirred up prior to his debut and he did catch the eye running on strongly late here. He gets ear muffs on pre-race to help keep him calm and he is bred to welcome this distance. Can improve sharply. Celestial Fury won that race Bon Vivant was in and did in well enough to think he has to rate a chance again here.
Suggested bet: Tatsuro each way.
RACE 5 How the race will be run: Star Of Uma will have to do a bit of work from wide draw to race on speed. Comica and Countess Tessa will also be handy, with Aidensfield and Foxy Frida dropping in behind the speed battle.
My view: I’m sticking with Aidensfield, who was far from disgraced in that blanket finish in the Listed Creswick Stakes here two weeks ago behind Free To Move. Only beat a length on the line and she was still coming at the end, running through the line well. Had jumped out very nicely prior to that and at her peak now. Has a big weight but back against the fillies and the positive is she has drawn to do very little work in the run and just be saved for a final effort in the straight. The one to beat. Comica sat on speed, and was favored by the pattern, and proved too good at Sandown three weeks back. Did beat home subsequent winners Bubbly Lass and Divine Diosa comfortably. Will sit on speed again here and take tossing. Loved the way Foxy Frida attacked the line last 200m to win well here a month ago and she is a genuine threat again. Star Of Uma faced harder opposition here and has drawn badly but did win with authority at Morphettville last start.
Suggested bet: Aidensfield to win.
RACE 6 How the race will be run: Zero speed on here which could make tempo interesting. By virtue of their good draws, perhaps Odeon and Mongolian Marshal share the lead with Biometric and Adelaide Ace like to slide across from their draws.
My view: Could be a slowly run affair without a natural leader but that shouldn’t bother Dice Roll, who has been so impressive and so professional since coming from Hong Kong. He was just simply superior to his rivals here two weeks ago and you would have to think he will be further improved given that was his first run in seven weeks. He possesses that big sprint at the end of his races, which he can do off a slow or strong tempo. Should get a nice run in clear air behind the speed and be hard to hold out at the finish. I admit to being scared of Buckhurst. He twice beat home Sir Dragonet in Ireland last year. He was very brave in the Caulfield Cup before failing in the Cox Plate. He’s been gelded since, in a powerful stable and he probably only needs to be half right to give this a big shake. Adelaide Ace has always promised to be a good horse and he was strong winning the Swan Hill Cup last start. Odeon is very honest and at his peak for this.
Suggested bet: Take Dice Roll and Buckhurst in quinealls/exactas.
RACE 7 How the race will be run: Literati and Eco Warrior look the leaders. Don Arcangelo and Trust But Verify should be handy.
My view: Distance could trouble a few of these but not Token Spirit. Thought he was very good late, running way from his rivals pover 2400 at Lakeside two weeks back. Does go up in class here but looks a decent stayer and don’t forget he was only 2.5 lens off Johnny Get Angry in the VRC Derby here last spring. Draws to get the gun run too. Reuber missed the kick and got into a bad spot but still ran on okay behind Unique Artist here two weeks ago. He is so honest in this grade and he does draw to get the run of the race here. Cakewalk Baby missed the start by a few lengths and still made good ground late, finishing alongside Reuber in that Unique Artist race. Gets the soft track conditions she likes and rates a chance. Unique Artist was strong through the line to win here last start but did have a cosy run and has an awkward draw this time.
Suggested bet: Token Spirit to win.
RACE 8 How the race will be run: Again, not a lot of natural speed here. The Astrologist and Chicago Cub should hold sway in front at a moderate tempo.
My view: Banquo had an incident before the start and was fired up a bit when resuming here two weeks ago. He loomed up at the 300m mark as if he would challenge but just ran out of puff behind The Astrologist. All the better for the run and don’t forget he was beaten a head by Zoutori (and beat home home Tofane) over this course and distance in the spring last year. A return to that form sees him winning this. The Astrologist just may be able to dictate from in front and and he was so tough defying all challengers to win here last start. In peak form and the danger again. Isaurian has won 5 of 6 first-up appearances and given a soft trial in Sydney to be ready for this. Does have some quality about him. Hi Stranger resumed from a break to just fail behind The Astrologist and rates highly again.
Suggested bet: Banquo to win.
RACE 9 How the race will be run: Leale can lead from the inside draw and will have Galgani, Stravain and Zimowy for company.
My view: I want to give Parmie another chance to strike her best here. Just did not handle the heavy conditions at Sandown three weeks back and she’s much better suited is the track stays in soft 5-6 range. She does tend to race best third-up from a break, as evidenced last campaign when beaten a lip by Fabric at Caulfield. Love the draw here. She can box seat behind Leale and be saved for a last crack at them. Big chance. Did well in a jumpout here last week. Lindhout is talented and found the line well behind Don’ttelltheboss last start here. Will get back from the draw but be charging late. Leale lumped a big weight but won with authority at Sandown last start. Up in class but down in weight and will make own luck on speed. One at big odds to run a race is Kiss And Cry. Can sprint well fresh and scored an amazing win in a recent jumpout. Suggested bet: Parmie to win.
CREDIT: Flemington Preview WITH TONY THOMAS
Word count: 1974
