Bordertown's Industrial Estate is celebrating 25 years of operation following upgrades and expansion, restrictive pandemics and growth to the Tatiara District region and cross border communities.
Launched in 1997, the Bordertown Industrial Estate's incorporated growing business Tatiara Truck and Trailers (TTT), which expanded from a workshop space to a multi-workshop facility with office spaces and reception and the original space has been moved to the new premises.
TTT shareholder and founder, John Jenkin moved his 1983 family business from Seventh Street in Bordertown to the Industrial Estate and said the move provided the business with more freedoms in noise and movement outside of the main part of town and solved the issue of inadequate space for increasing demand in town.
"Tatiara Truck and Trailers has definitely grown from the original space with the larger shed space which we've added to over time," Mr Jenkin said.
"We are looking forward to continue growth with Stage 3 at the industrial estate."
Bordertown hosts eight trucking companies with fleets of up to 25, and TTT's closest competitors are in Mount Gambier, Adelaide and Horsham.
The main shed services freight transportation and agriculture trucks and vehicles and grew from the original motto of "Just wanted to fix a few trucks and a couple of air-conditioners" to completing services with up to 20 call-outs per day.
Jaime Virgin, Office and Finance Manager as well as daughter of Mr Jenkin has been involved with the company for most of her adult life, and began her career at TTT within the year of the move to the Industrial Estate.
"Tatiara Truck and Trailers is definitely bigger than anyone expected, and has had the option to expand... four times within the 25 years," Ms Virgin said.
"It is great to have so many businesses start up around us."
Ms Virgin said that the interest in the company from shareholders including Mr Jenkin, Anne Jenkin, Dylan Jenkin, Reilly Sanders and herself as well as the focus and drive of staff over the 39 years has allowed the business to thrive in the new space.
Ms Virgin also said that there were many bumps in the road, challenges from local council and developments, but was proud of the achievements and growth of TTT.
"There are currently 57 staff members at TTT, and when we first started out here, we had about 12," Ms Virgin said.
The COVID-19 pandemic did not limit the function of the Industrial Estate, in particular TTT and with the grown facilities the business was able to continue to support essential interstate travel and freight.
TTT Service Advisor, Shane Neale has been involved with the business since before the move to the Industrial Estate and said he welcomed the growth of the business, as unexpected as it was.
"I've worked with different areas of Tatiara Truck and Trailers and it has been good to watch it grow over the years to what it is now," Mr Neale said.
Paul Diment, Assistant Parts Manager, has been watching TTT grow for 33 years and has been involved in that department for his working career.
Both Mr Neale and Mr Diment said they were happy to see the business grow and the availability of space in the Industrial Estate was essential to the development.
Tatiara Truck and Trailers has been had a gradual development over 25 years, including demolishing spaces and expanding, similar to other businesses in Bordertown's Industrial Estate.
Tatiara District Council Chief Executive Officer, Anne Champness said she wanted to highlight the expansion of the Industrial Estate on it's birthday and anniversary, despite not being in her current position when the movement was carried through Council.
The Industrial Estate was proposed and reviewed by the Tatiara District Council in 1994, land was sold and built on in 1996 and the official launch was in 1997.
The Industrial Estate 's location has provided access to Adelaide-Mount Gambier routes and South Australia-Victorian travel for heavy transport vehicles.
.
Our journalists work hard to provide local, up-to-date news to the community. This is how you can continue to access our trusted content:
Bookmark borderchronicle.com.au Register to the Border Chronicle Make sure you are signed up for our breaking headlines newsletter Follow us on Twitter: @borderchronicle Got a story tip or a letter to the editor? Contact us at editor@borderchronhicle.com.au
CREDIT: Neave Moore
Word count: 721
