IF you’re looking for the right ingredients to add to a fledgling catering business or bakery – or just keen to update your own kitchen – Mason Gray Strange can have you creating culinary delights in no time.
From assorted kitchen utensils, crockery and bread tins to specialised equipment such as a wine fridge, a cappuccino-maker and a doughnut machine, Tuesday’s Restaurant, Catering and Bakery sale could be your recipe for cooking contentment.
Mason Gray Strange valuer Justin Valente said the mix of items – being sold on behalf of a range of vendors, including one landlord in distraint of rent – could appeal to anyone taking their first steps into the industry. He said standout items included a Belshaw dough­nut machine and two Belshaw proofers, which are used to keep dough warm and humid.
“The Belshaw equipment should attract a lot of interest as it’s a high-end brand,” Mr Valente said. “And with the doughnut machine, it will also be of wide appeal as it has the potential to be the central part of an easy start-up business.” He expected other highlights of the auction to include a charcoal spit roaster and a range of other bakery-related items, including a baker’s oven, dough moulders, a bun divider and planetary mixers.
Hold and cold food displays, a chest freezer, milkshake makers, digital scales, deep fryers and a combination oven range could all be invaluable to someone looking to start up a business from scratch. There is even an electronic cash register, a couple of A-frame signboards and a wet floor sign going under the hammer.
“All of the lots for sale appear to be in good condition, and should be able to be put into immediate use by the new owners,” Mr Valente said. The auction will be at the Mason Gray Strange rooms at 370-378 Torrens Rd, Kilkenny, from 10.30am on Tuesday, and live online at interbid.com.au/mgs. Inspection is available on Monday from 10am to 4pm and the morning of the sale from 9am. Details: mgs.net.au
CREDIT: Auctions with DAVID GOLDSMITH
Word count: 343
