INVESTMENT BILLIONAIRE Scott Farquhar has joined with Tour de France champion and cycling legend Chris Froome to invest more than $US10m ($14m) in a fast-growing manufacturer of premium bikes that sell for $15,000 or more.
Farquhar’s investment firm Skip Capital is joining an investment consortium with Sam McKay’s Point King Capital and Froome to buy a large minority stake in bike brand Factor and its parts and accessories subsidiary Black Inc.
Started by American Rob Gitelis as an offshoot from a design and engineering firm working for brands like Lamborghini, Maserati and Ferrari, Factor bikes are now manufactured in Taiwan and mostly sold in Europe, North America and Asia-Pacific, including Australia.
The investment is the first in a bike company for Mr Farquhar, a keen cyclist, and Froome, a four-time Tour de France winner currently riding for professional cycling team Israel Start-Up Nation, which uses Factor bikes.
“I love cycling, so it’s a dream to be able to play a small part in one of the most innovative companies in this space,” Mr Farquhar, the co-founder of Atlassian, said about the deal. “Rob is a wizard when it comes to building bicycles, and the team behind Factor are truly building something special.” Factor is the second investment by Mr McKay’s Point King Capital and Mr Farquhar’s Skip Capital. Mr Farquhar runs Skip with his wife Kim Jackson.
Skip Capital and Point King also have a stake in Zero Co, a sustainable packaging start-up that Skip Capital led a $2m seed funding round in, last November.
“Scott and I share a passion for innovation, technology and smart design and Factor is a brand that we have admired for some time,” said Mr McKay, a long-time retail executive for James Packer’s Consolidated Press Holdings.
Mr McKay will join the Factor board with Froome.
“Helping consumer brands accelerate growth in global markets is what we do at Point King Capital, and we see huge potential for Factor. I am excited to … support Factor in executing the ambitious global growth plan ahead.” Skip Capital is among Australia’s most successful private technology investors, having poured $100m into a string of start-ups this year, while planning similar investments throughout 2022. Point King’s Factor investment comes after it was part of a $US60m investment from a group of venture capital firms and celebrities including Gwyneth Paltrow and Don Cheadle in US over-the-­counter medicine firm Genexa in July.
CREDIT: JOHN STENSHOLT
Word count: 405
