Can we visit Vanuatu?
My husband and I are keen to return to Vanuatu for a holiday, but what’s the situation regarding Covid-19? Would we need to isolate upon arrival?
According to the World Health Organization, there have only been seven confirmed cases of Covid-19 in Vanuatu since the start of the pandemic and they’ve only been at the border. The key reason for this? The island nation closed its borders in early 2020 and remains closed while the local government focuses on getting its citizens vaccinated.
Travel exemptions exist, but all travellers must receive approval to enter Vanuatu from the Vanuatu Ministry of Foreign Affairs and priority is currently being given to citizens and residents of the country.
All Vanuatu-bound travellers (assuming you’ve been given a travel exemption) must be fully vaccinated, produce evidence of a negative Covid-19 test within 72 hours of travel and spend 14 days in a hotel quarantine facility approved by the Vanuatu government. The two-week quarantine would, of course, be at your own expense.
Flights are also a little difficult to come by. Under the current State of Emergency situation, Air Vanuatu (airvanuatu.com) is operating a limited service – mainly for repatriation – between Brisbane (and occasionally Sydney) and Port Vila.
If this all sounds a little dire, take heart; the Vanuatu government has set a vaccination target of having 70 per cent of the adult population double vaccinated by the end of March 2022 for the country to begin a staged reopening of its borders. In the meantime, tourism businesses are getting ready to welcome back visitors with a “Clean, Caring and Checked” Covid safety training program modelled on our own enhanced cleaning and protection program. My advice? Continue checking Vanuatu’s official source for Covid-19 information at covid19.gov.vu and watch this space.
Could you give me advice on car hire in Tasmania? We’ve always hired cars on airport arrival, but I’ve heard it’s best to pre-book, and hire from places other than direct with the hire company.
The last time I looked at car hire prices in Tasmania I almost had a seizure. I’m not sure why I was so shocked; we know the state has been struggling with rental-car shortages since local car-hire companies sold off a significant portion of their fleet when the pandemic took hold.
The good news, of course, is that you can save a bundle by becoming a little crafty in your approach to hiring.
While airport hire cars are convenient, they’re always going to be the most expensive option because not only does it cost the company big bucks to rent space at the airport, there’s strong demand for the service. If you’re keen to stick with one of the major car companies (Tassie has all the big operators, with pick-ups available at the airports and city centres), opt to pick up your car from another location, but be sure to check the opening times of that particular kiosk and book your car well in advance. Some close early so, depending on what time your flight comes in, you could be left in the lurch.
Share economy car hire from the likes of Car Next Door (carnextdoor.com.au) and DriveMyCar (drivemycar.com.au) has become hugely popular and can often be a far more affordable option. One thing to keep in mind with peer-to-peer rentals, however, is how much the owner charges for each kilometre you drive. With Car Next Door, it can run between 21 cents and 45 cents per kilometre after a certain distance. This is on top of the daily rental fee, which starts from $25.
Be sure, too, to check out aggregators such as Kayak (kayak.com.au) and Vroom Vroom Vroom (vroomvroomvroom.com.au), but also compare the prices against a quick Google of the destination and “car rental”. The latter can often yield a lower price.
NEED HELP?
Doc Holiday is still on duty during the Covid-19 crisis. Send your questions to docholiday@news.com.au or keep up with Doc at escape.com.au/doc-holiday Personal replies are unfortunately not possible
Travel updates BA RETURNS Following the news that Australia will reopen to fully vaccinated tourists and visa holders from February 21, British Airways will resume its Sydney to London route with the first flight set to touch down in Sydney on March 29. Routes will be serviced by a Boeing 787-9 or a Boeing 777-300ER.
RAIL START-UP Looking for an international rail adventure? New Australian travel start-up Rail Online has launched with a booking platform that allows travellers to compare and book a plethora of European rail passes and point-to-point tickets across the UK. Rail networks across Europe and North America will be added soon.
CREDIT: Dilvin Yasa
Word count: 777
