COST OF LIVING FROM LITTLE THINGS BIG THINGS GROW – SO CASH IN ON WHAT YOU DO BEST
If you are budgeting all the ways you know how and are still short on funds, it is time to start a small business.
And yes it is hard work, but if it was easy, everyone would be doing it. You can start these five businesses for $100or under.
CREATING UNIQUE TEA BLENDS Purchase gourmet tea from wholesale tea suppliers and mix your own unique blend. Sell your tea in a canister or even buy disposable tea bags, and then do up a logo and branding using programs like Canva.
Sell your creation to family and friends, then try setting up a stall at your local markets and offer free samples of your tea. You can upsell by offering tea accessories that you can purchase wholesale. Costs: ● At least two or three tea blends: approximately $45.
● Tea packaging such as canisters or disposable tea bags: $30. ● Pre-made labelling: $25.
● Check with your council regarding food handling requirements. How much can you expect to make? You could turn that $100 into $300 easily. Just get the right blend of tea and get people talking about it.
UPCYCLE SECOND-HAND TIMBER FURNITURE Keep an eye out on Facebook Buy Swap and Sell Pages, your local paper and garage sales for small pieces of timber furniture.
Bedside tables or lamp tables work well and can usually be picked up cheaply. Buy some chalk paint and a brush, and start upcycling timber furniture and turn it into something beautiful and new.
Chalk paint is great as you don’t need to sand the timber furniture first, so you save quite a bit of time. This paint can be bought from your local hardware store for about $20 per small tin. If you have any money left in the budget, replace any knobs with something prettier – you can grab them from the hardware store for about $5 each.
Spend the remaining $75-$80 on your first piece of timber furniture. Style your finished piece of furniture using bright backgrounds and a few home decor items you already have and use Instagram to edit the photograph so it looks clear and beautiful. Sell your upcycled furniture on eBay or Gumtree for double or even triple the price.
How much can you expect to make? You can double your money easily. Then use that to purchase a larger piece of furniture or two smaller pieces or more chalk paint colours and work up from there.
FREELANCE WRITER If you already have a computer at home and are clever with words, consider writing freelance articles. There are websites you can join such as Upwork, FlexJobs or even Fiverr (not just $5 jobs any more) where you can advertise your writing skills and find clients right away seeking articles for their websites.
You will need a good attention to detail, be able to listen to a brief and have a flair for writing.
The more writing jobs you have, the more positive reviews you receive, the more you can charge.
How much can you expect to make? The average writer doing a 600 word article can make $100 per article. If you can write to a specific niche, you can charge more and there are no real start-up costs involved.
HOME ORGANISER If your filing cabinet is a work of art, your pantry is “Instagram-worthy” and your walk-in wardrobe is freakishly neat then why not advertise your services as a home organiser? Set up an Instagram account and start posting images of your beautiful organising work to get noticed. Your only start-up cost will be any insurance that you might need in case you break something in your client’s home.
How much can you expect to make? You can charge from $50 per hour for small organising jobs. If they go well, you can get accredited - professional organisers can make as much as $150 an hour.
FLAT LAY PHOTOGRAPHY If you can take beautiful photographs and have an eye for styling, you can become a flat lay photographer and find work taking product photos for brands. These days your phone is capable of taking amazing photographs. All you will need is good lighting (you can use a bright sunny window) and a few different “backgrounds” for the photograph.
Grab vinyl offcuts from your local carpet and flooring store to use as the backdrop. They will cost you a few dollars each and you can re-use them.
Start an Instagram account and post your photographs to give potential clients an idea of what you can do. How much can you expect to make? You can earn $100 for each fully edited and styled image.
Most of these businesses can be classed as hobbies until you start to make real money – then you will need to outlay the costs of registering it. But they are a great way to dip your toe in the water – and you never know where it might take you. Jody Allen is the founder of mothers’ network Stay At Home Mum. Find her at @StayHomeMum on Facebook, @jodyallen.stayathomemum on Instagram, @JodyAllen_SAHM on Twitter
CREDIT: Jody Allen
Word count: 874
