SMARTdaily FEMALE MANAGER NUMBERS RISING FAST AS CAPABILITY TRUMPS EXPERIENCE GIRL POWER Australia may be winning the war for gender equality in management roles, with five times more women being hired as managers in the past 10 years as men.
Australian Bureau of Statistics figures show 156,000 of the 185,300 new managers employed in the decade to November 2020 were women.
It equals a growth rate for female managers of 32 per cent in the 10 years compared to 3 per cent (29,300) for male managers. The proportion of men still outnumbers women 3-2, but the divide has reduced from 2-1 in November 2010.
AN EPIPHANY Financial Executive Women founder Judith Beck says women’s capability for the role has been realised – not just by employers, but women themselves. Beck, author of No Sex at Work, says women increasingly are encouraged by mentors to apply, so do not stay in their comfort zone or doubt their ability.
She says women should seek career champions, such as through mentoring organisations or champions in workplaces, to give them guidance and intel to be placed in management roles.
“The problem is, guys have had advocates and people in their corner – maybe their uncle, father, brother – who would say to get in there and ask for more,” she says.
“They’ve had 7-12 advisers or mentors in their corners, it’s a huge advantage for them. When I would call (women) up (when headhunting), I would have to push the female candidates. I’d say I’m searching for a general manager role, and their name’s come through a referral network, and the first thing they would say is, ‘Thanks but I’m not interested, I’m happy where I’m at’. How would you know you’re not interested? I haven’t told you about the role.” Advisers also are urging women to consider roles they previously would not have, as they mistakenly believe they do not have all the required skills and experience – an issue men do not typically worry about.
Employment Hero chief people officer Alex Hattingh says initiatives such as International Women’s Day, to be held next Monday, March 8, had raised awareness of gender inequality.
“Of course, the struggle and the fight has been long enduring, well before the millennium but it’s gained enormous momentum since the turn of the century – enough so it’s driving companies to wake up to gender inequalities in the workplace,” she says.
BEST PERSON FOR THE JOB Beck says that in her experience of recruiting staff, she never felt clients discriminated against women and always asked for the best person for the role. But the attributes they outlined often would rule out female applicants, she says.
For example, position descriptions may call for 10 years’ experience, but no or too few women have accumulated that level of experience because they have taken time out of the workforce for children.
“Companies (now) are having more focus for hiring for capabilities, rather than years experience,” she says.
“What you want is the best person and years of experience doesn’t necessarily equate to capability – some people with years of experience are not as capable as someone with one year. That’s been an ‘aha’ moment for lots of companies over the past 10 years.” National careers mentor and SMARTdaily #bosslady columnist, businesswoman Amanda Rose, says sometimes it takes women who’ve been there before to debunk the theory that the higher level roles are impossible or very difficult.
“No they’re not.,” Rose says. “I guarantee once a woman gets promoted or walks into her first board meeting she will soon realise that the ‘fear’ of the role or position outweighs the reality of it and soon she will then open the door for another woman and so on. No wonder the boys are a little worried.”
CASE IN POINT Skill, rather than experience, is what led to Hannah Milligan, 23, being employed as a project manager at events firm The Company We Keep. She was hired by the start-up company about three years ago while in the last year of her Bachelor of Business degree.
“When the opportunity came up, I decided to see where it would take me,” she says. “Being (employed) at a start-up was a good experience. I probably wouldn’t (get that experience) if I was at a larger organisation, I got exposed to a lot more and that really helped with my development.” The Company We Keep director Nigel Ruffell says workers should be hired based on their individual strengths, transferable skills and work ethic.
“Hannah had no experience in the events industry but she had a positive can-do attitude and a willingness to learn so I hired her and it is one of the best decisions I have made.”
How to stop categorising yourself via your gender BECOME AN INDIVIDUAL When you walk into a new job, think of yourself as a business person and what you need to do to get from A to B. You are not a gender at work, you are an individual.
DON’T SECOND GUESS Do not allow barriers to be put in front of you, real or perceived. If you think the role looks good and you would enjoy it, do not second guess yourself or think about the reasons why it would not work.
BE PREPARED Build the soft skills (for example, assertiveness or empathy) you need to handle certain situations in the work environment.
UPSKILL Develop the business skills you need to help progress your career.
HIGHLIGHT YOUR CAPABILITIES Voice your achievements and be confident about them. A professional, updated profile on LinkedIn can help. Source: Author Judith Beck
CREDIT: Cara Jenkin
Word count: 943
