SCIENCE AUSSIE KIT TESTS NUTRITION, FITNESS AND GENERAL WELLBEING BASED ON YOUR GENETIC MARKERS You can tell a lot about a person from their DNA.
For Debbie Rivers, that included the revelation she was following the wrong kind of diet.
The Perth-based relationship coach uncovered the hurdle after taking a test from Australian start-up MyDNA, and immediately ditched her meal plan.
“I had been doing the keto diet and I think it messed up my metabolism,” she says. “There’s so much confusion about diet – do you do keto or do you cut out carbs – and this gives you a really clear path. I didn’t always follow the meal plan (from MyDNA) but I followed the guidelines that go with the typical Mediterranean diet.” Rivers says she lost 6kg following the app’s advice for her genetic make-up and made other discoveries, too, such as having a lower level of flexibility but an aptitude for endurance exercise – “something I’d never done”.
“It was fascinating and scarily accurate,” she says.
MyDNA, an Australian start-up founded in 2010, offers a $55 DNA-testing kit that gives insights into nutrition, fitness and general wellbeing based on genetic markers.
Each kit comes with a cotton swab for customers’ cheeks and a test tube to send to a Melbourne lab, with results appearing in an app within 15 business days.
Geneticist and MyDNA scientific director Dr Carlotta Petti says the DNA samples are investigated for “snips,” also known as “single nucleotide polymorphisms,” that indicate common genetic variations.
MyDNA scientists compare these snips to established research findings to determine what they might mean at a practical level; whether that’s a resistance to low-carb diets or a tendency to get wrinkles earlier in life, for example.
Petti says the company maintains a focus on what findings could be useful for its users, rather than identify disease risks that have proved controversial for other DNA-testing firms.
“We don’t test for genes that predict a disease or something you can’t change,” she says.
“You cannot change DNA but with these genetic variations we look for ways you can change your lifestyle.
“For appetite, you may be born with a gene that makes you always feel hungry – so you can blame that a little bit – but the evidence also tells you what works for you. For example, eating a diet high in protein could help curb your appetite rather than a low-carb diet.” Each finding also comes with a “scientific evidence rating” scored out of five, she says, and references users can follow to look up papers and evaluate them for themselves. Only findings rated three stars and above are included in the results.
Current findings range from how users process caffeine to how they store fat, their bone and heart health, and even how they process vitamins and how their skin may age.
Genes can also indicate how much sleep you need each night, Petti says. “Depending on the genes, some people may function quite well after a bad night’s sleep or, for some, their brain doesn’t work well the next day,” she says.
“Whether you are a morning or a night person, it’s all written in your DNA. We can tell you, based on those results, what kind of activities are better to plan for your morning or evening.” Petti says feedback shows that the scientific recommendations often give people motivation to improve their diet and fitness, and “enhanced confidence” that they’re taking the right steps.
And while some potential customers may be reticent to provide a private company with their DNA, Petti says the firm de-identifies samples when they arrive in the lab, only tests for genetic markers, encrypts its findings, will not “sell data without consent” and will destroy data upon a customer’s request.
Users also get access to their DNA test findings permanently with the kit, but must pay a monthly subscription after 60 days to maintain access to MyDNA meal plans and fitness routines.
Rivers says she has just one regret – she wishes she had made these findings earlier in life.
“In my 20s, I did the no-fat-more-sugar diet that was a fad at the time and it’s probably the worst thing I could have done,” she says. “If you can uncover this kind of stuff earlier, you could make better choices.”
What my genes told me by Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson YOU might know yourself pretty well but can science tell you more? It’s the question that makes a DNA test so compelling.
You may have lived for more than 30 years and not realised you’re doing the wrong exercise, taking the wrong vitamins or keeping a poor sleep schedule.
For me, the MyDNA test confirmed some things I’d long suspected and raised questions I hadn’t considered.
According to the test results, my genes make me well suited to power and endurance exercises in equal measure, for example. This explains why I prefer lifting weights to sprinting and that news didn’t arrive as a surprise.
What did shock me was that my genes stop me from increasing my fat-burning rate and make me more suited to a Mediterranean diet (which sounds delightful). And there were more surprises.
I need more vitamin B as I burn through it quickly (hand me a Berocca), I have a gene to keep cholesterol in check (thanks, ancestors), and I respond well to calcium and caffeine (so well that I shouldn’t consume the latter before sleep).
As DNA results roll out one at a time, I’m still eagerly awaiting findings on my skin as well as my reaction to over-the-counter medicines.
There was just one thing on which MyDNA and I did not agree. I have an uncommon gene, it says, that “suggests” I am a morning person. Anyone who has tried to wake me before 8am would dare not suggest this (and the research only has a three-star rating). Overall, though, the test proved insightful and thought-provoking, and will stick with me whenever I make choices on food and exercise.
CREDIT: Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 1007
