THERE are many unknowns that come with a start-up basketball team, but you can be certain of one thing with the Darwin Salties men’s outfit this NBL1 season: they have a strict “no d**khead policy”.
Speaking before the team’s inaugural match against Brisbane-based Red City Roar on Saturday night at Marrara, new coach Matt Flinn said the squad had already set several non-negotiables and values to live and play by.
Flinn, who describes himself as “24/7 hoops”, said they were essential for the players to hold each other to account, while creating an environment where players want to come to “get better”. “We have a no d**khead policy, No.1,” Flinn said. “We want to be first and foremost, good people.” Flinn is also a man of vision who wants to create a “linear pathway” for the 15-year-old Darwinite currently dreaming of playing at a higher level, and not be a place for players looking to have some fun at the tail end of their careers.
He said processes and building blocks were essential to retaining Territory talent and not losing it to other sports, from that key time period between year 11 and the traditional “gap year”.
“The vision is to start a Salties Academy,” he said. “If they’re any good, they’ll have a few different paths now. I wouldn’t be sitting here without that pathway available.
“So many kids I grew up with just turned away from the sport in year 11 and 12. They can have a legitimate pathway and opportunity.” To instil the new team’s core beliefs, a three-man leadership group has been announced, including a familiar face in Jerron Jamerson, who has been embraced by the Darwin community after living and playing here for several years with Ansett and Tracy Village.
“He’s had success in NBL1 both as a team and also personally,” Flinn said. “He just ticked a lot of boxes.
“We ultimately want to make sure we’re walking the walk in the community.” The trio is rounded out by Ambros Eugster from Hobart Chargers, who has a “good understanding” of what is required at the level, and Josh Spiers from Townsville Heat, who Flinn has watched closely for years.
“They’ve all got different skill sets, they’ve all got different leadership styles,” he said.
However, the former Illawarra Hawks mentor and player said the new franchise was facing multiple challenges with the NBL1 season opener looming.
For starters, it had been difficult to build team chemistry at this early stage with some of his key players late arrivals in the Territory, including Adelaide 36er Tad Dufelmeier.
Essentially, this team has never hit the floor before in a competitive match and there are plenty of rough edges to smooth down.
“You’re going to stub your toe a couple of times,” he said.
“It’s not all smooth sailing (for a new team) and we’ll be no different.” Dufelmeier will arrive on game day on Saturday but is unlikely to play, even though the Salties are fighting it out in what Flinn believes is the toughest conference, with each team having at least one “legitimate star”.
“I just think it will be unfair on him to fly in on game day and we go, ‘OK mate, out you go, you’re our star signing … give us 20 and 10,” he said.
“I view it as a great opportunity for some of these guys we’ve signed … we’ve got a core group of guys who are all scrapping for minutes and roles within the team.” Flinn said the shape of the team was still a work in progress, including the roles of Donovan Russell, Jarrod Molnar, Daniel Babb, Ben Wright and Shaq Hohipa-Wilson.
“We don’t know where they’re going to sit,” he said of that five-man group. “I’ve seen a lot of good training players in my career … (however) when the lights come on it’s a different beast.” He also said the squad lacked a genuine barometer at this early stage. “We still don’t have everyone here yet,” he said. “We haven’t been able to have any litmus test on where we’re at as a group.
“I don’t know where we are in terms of our conditioning, in terms of our development as a team.
“It’s been a challenging task, especially when everything is so new. A whole new roster who have never played together before.” Flinn was used to having several months to build towards an NBL season, but was mindful of not “over complicating the system”.
“I’m just trying to be comfortable with the mess and not worry too much,” he said.
“I’m confident the guys coming in, they’re pros. It’s a matter of everyone getting on the same page.” Despite being a start-up, Flinn has set the bar high for the Salties in season 2022. “We definitely want to make the play-offs and make the top four,” he said.
CREDIT: BEN CAMERON
Word count: 817
