Since his "messy and un-Hawthorn-like" split with the Hawks, Alastair Clarkson has joined a company backing medicinal cannabis, researched options for a start-up team in Tasmania to "right a wrong" and declared the first AFL team "really, really good on offence" will steal a march on the competition.
So busy is Clarkson, who is also trying to get a gin brand to market, he is uncertain if he will coach next year.
"I want to spend 12 months doing that and right now I don't know where it is going to take me. I might come back to coaching, but I might not either. I love my coaching, but there is part of me that says I have had my day in the sun and I have enjoyed it, but there are some other things I am doing that I am enjoying. The stuff I am doing outside of footy, I am just loving," Clarkson said.
"We will let the next six months materialise and see what transpires."
While few people will believe him when he says that - and it has been reported that he has had conversations with some players telling them he plans to coach next year and not to commit to new contracts - Clarkson said his busy post-Hawthorn life has turned his head to interests outside of coaching.
Since he left football, Clarkson has gone to San Francisco to study start-up sports franchises and the business lessons to be learned in forming a 19th team in Tasmania.
He has joined senior AFL figures - Dr Michael Makdissi, Dr Peter Brukner, former North Melbourne doctor Harry Unglik and close friend and former club and AFL Coaches Association CEO Mark Brayshaw - in a company that is researching medicinal cannabis' impact in managing chronic pain.
Clarkson said evidence also pointed to potential benefits not only in treating chronic pain but in management of concussion and stress and anxiety among current and post-career athletes.
"These are reputable sports physicians and medical physicians in our country, and they are saying, 'I wonder if medicinal cannabis could have an impact in terms of the relief of chronic pain in athletes'.
"They are also exploring if it can provide assistance post-concussion and wondering if it can provide assistance with mental health, with reducing stress and anxiety and improved sleep patterns. This isn't smoking a bong on a Saturday night or puffing on a joint, this is prescribed by a doctor, at the minute mainly around pain relief, for people at their wits' end to manage pain."
Clarkson has reflected on the game and feels intervention is needed to redress the defensiveness in the AFL. Admitting culpability for the continuing defensiveness of modern football, he said rules needed to change to punish backmen.
"What we have seen from the women's game, and it's true in the men's, is if you can't get a consistent chain of possession in terms of your skill level, then just park the bus at the back end of the ground and you will get the ball back at some point in time," he said.
"The men's game, and dare I say it because I was part of the direction of it going this way with zoning, the men's game is defensive-minded.
"All coaches say it every year, 'we are going to attack more,' and I haven't seen a team be able to attack the goal front and put teams to the sword offensively. They have been able to do it for a quarter - there was an onslaught by the Demons in the grand final - but it is so few and far between in AFL footy.
"By and large games are being won on defence and those that can be really, really good on offence can steal a march on others.
"The rules of the game suit a defensive-minded team. They are trying to make adjustments in that space but [nothing will change] until they allow forwards to genuinely jump at the ball without being impeded by a defender in terms of blocking them or holding them down and umpires saying they were both competing for the ball.
"Defenders have very little reason to want to compete for the ball, all they want is to stop their opponent getting access to the ball. So they will make whatever body contact they can. They use their arms really well, they are uncanny at being able to keep their opponent at ground level so he can't jump.
"I would just penalise those guys in a heartbeat and say, 'you want to defend you defend the ball, don't defend your opponent, you defend the ball'. That's what David Dench used to do, Gary Malarkey, all these great full-backs. Matty Scarlett played that way, Dustin Fletcher played that way, they defended the ball.
"The great players of the last century have defended the ball, they have not defended the opponent necessarily, and I think if we can get away from defending the opponent then scoring would open up. High marking would come back, higher scoring by key forwards would become an attraction.
"At the end of the day we have to get the game back to a more offensive pattern, but I am not sure just coaching methodology is going to do that because the coaches will fall back to what they know is successful."
Clarkson said he got involved in the Tasmanian bid for a 19th AFL licence because he was committed to a national competition and "righting a wrong" of not having a team in the state already.
"People talk about if Tasmania can support this new venture and new team in a national competition? Have they got enough industry down there? Well, let's make our own industry. Our industry will heave around sport."
Clarkson said the evidence was clear of the profound effect for clubs of new or upgraded stadia, not just overseas but in Australia with Perth Stadium and at Adelaide Oval.
He said a team in the Northern Territory was also essential in the longer term.
CREDIT: Michael Gleeson
Word count: 1014
