PROPERTY HIGH profile real estate identity John McGrath is back running his ASX-listed agency McGrath Ltd in the wake of a turnaround in its performance.
The agency was rocked by its poor float seven years ago and the company founder stood down from the top job in 2016, but remained a major shareholder with a 22 per cent stake and stayed on as an executive director focused on sales and marketing.
The company’s lagging shares and Mr McGrath’s woes were once the talk of the investment community and he shunned the spotlight. But he now steps back into the limelight and became chief executive effective on Friday, with a remuneration package worth up to $746,000 a year including short-term incentives.
McGrath chair Peter Lewis said in a statement that after much consideration, the board believed the celebrity agent was the “ideal choice” to successfully lead the company into its “next growth phase with continued earnings for the group”.
“John’s passion for the business and understanding of the real estate industry is unparalleled, as is his vision and commitment to excellence in marketing, technology, customer service and transparency,” Mr Lewis said.
Exiting chief executive Eddie Law brought forward his planned departure. Mr Lewis acknowledged that Mr Law had guided McGrath during some challenging times.
The returning chief said he had “never been more excited about our business”. “We have an extraordinary platform and team to continue our path towards being the best residential real estate company in the country,” Mr McGrath said. “With unparalleled talent and our upcoming technology advancements, I could not be more enthusiastic about our future. My plan is to continue to grow our agent productivity within our current footprint and also expand our office numbers across the east coast,” he said.
Despite the company’s travails Mr McGrath is considered one of the most influential figures in the Australian property industry.
He took McGrath Estate Agents from a lounge room start-up in 1988 to one of Australia’s most successful residential real estate groups.
But his illustrious career was almost derailed in the wake of the company’s disastrous float in 2015.
The investment flop and cold residential market prompted years of corporate turmoil with the listed company facing board and management ructions. The stock dipped as low as 16c two years ago. McGrath shares fell 2c to 47c on Friday but are still well short of the float price of $2.10.
CREDIT: BEN WILMOT
Word count: 405
