AN Adelaide company is considering legal action against a global gambling giant for a second time over what it says is blatant rip-off of a slogan at the heart of its brand.
PuntClub.com, which offers a platform for thousands of users to create punters clubs or social betting syndicates, has used the slogan “Bet With Your Mates” since before its 2015 app launch.
The founders of the small Kent Town-based start-up have taken umbrage with the liberal use of the similar slogan “Bet With Mates” by Sportsbet, which is owned by Flutter Entertainment, a global bookmaking empire based in Dublin, Ireland.
Punt Club chief executive Jason Neave said it was “impossible” that Sportsbet did not know his company’s tagline.
“It is disappointing at best and I think it needs to be called out,” Mr Neave, pictured, said.
“We are considering our legal options because we’ve trademarked our brand name and used the tagline from the get go. Those two phrases have always gone hand-in-hand.” The Advertiser has seen numerous images of advertising linked to Punt Club using the tagline “Bet With Your Mates” dating back to 2014.
Punt Club has yet to file any claim in the state or federal courts. Sportsbet declined to comment.
“I thought corporates behaving badly was a thing of the past. They simply didn’t need to do this and it’s wrong,” Mr Neave said.
Punt Club has more than 20,000 users and serves thousands of punters clubs across the nation, helping members organise and manage their own syndicates.
A punt club is a group of people who pool their money and then use the funds to bet on sports.
“We first did it as a side hustle to solve our own spreadsheet trauma back in 2012,” Mr Neave said.
“We built it, we didn’t like it very much, so we built it again. We started to let some other people use it and then it started to get traction and grow.
“We raised some money in 2015 and rebuilt it again and it’s been growing pretty steadily since then.
The two companies have previously engaged in a legal dispute after Punt Club accused Sportsbet of “business espionage” over the launch of a similar online platform in 2015.
That case was settled out of court with the outcome details sealed. “We knew they were going to have another crack but we can’t get over the fact that their product name is essentially our tagline, which we’ve used since we launched,” Mr Neave said.
CREDIT: MITCH MOTT
Word count: 421
