A REVOLUTIONARY new Australian-made medical device is helping save some of the smallest and most vulnerable babies.
Successfully used in about 75 premature babies at the Melbourne’s Royal Women’s Hospital, the world-first “smart catheter” allows powerful medications to be delivered directly into the tiniest of hearts with increased precision.
Currently, highly trained doctors and nurses around the world must estimate the length of the flexible tubes that are placed deep into the bodies of tiny babies to ensure their vital medications reach the correct areas.
But fitted with sensors able to interpret the electrical signals from a baby’s heart, the Navi Medical Technologies device can be guided along the smallest of veins with pinpoint accuracy, allowing drugs to be delivered next to the heart so they are immediately distributed throughout the bodies of tiny patients.
With almost 10,000 Australian newborns receiving lifesaving treatment through central venous catheters each year – but about 40 per cent inserted incorrectly or moving, placing patients at risk – Navi chief executive Alex Newton said the device could make a huge difference to the most vulnerable lives around the world. “This actually measures the electrical signals of the heart through the catheter. We are turning standard catheters into smart catheters,” Mr Newton said.
“It’s a little bit like parking sensors for a car, but it is on the tip of the catheter.” The next generation catheters are already in use at the Royal Women’s Hospital, but the start-up company has been awarded a $50,000 grant from the Victorian government to advance the prototype for wider clinical trials.
Born at just 28 weeks, Nash Constable, pictured, was one of the first babies to benefit from the new technology. Needing surgery on his first day of life, Nash’s 738 gram body was also fitted with one the Navi central venous catheters to deliver his medication during a 10-week stay in neonatal intensive care. “For us, it was anything that was going to make things less traumatic for Nash and us,” his mother Jacinta Constable said. “It was a lot less invasive for Nash to have procedures done via that route.”
CREDIT: GRANT McARTHUR
Word count: 357
