APPOINTMENTS ASX-listed transport and tourism company Kelsian has ­appointed Rashveen Maini to the newly created role of group sustainability manager.
She was most recently senior sustainability adviser at Beach Energy. Ms Maini, pictured, said sustainability was becoming a key priority for companies as investors and customers looked beyond financial performance when making investment decisions.
Ryan Millar has been appointed chief executive of ASX-listed advanced manufacturer AML3D, with the company’s founder and managing director Andrew Sales transitioning to a new role as chief technical officer. Mr Millar was most recently chief executive of environmental science organisa-tion EESI Group.
AML3D chairman Sean Ebert said Mr Millar would support the company’s next stage of growth.
“His deep experience and proven track record of success in working with start-up and scale-up companies, both ­locally and internationally, is a perfect fit for the company,” Mr Ebert said.
Mr Sales will remain an executive director and significant shareholder.
Lawyer Peter Varacalli, pictured, has returned to South Australia, joining DMAW Lawyers as a principal in the firm’s transactions group. Mr Varacalli has more than a decade of experience in real estate, construction, infrastructure and development law.
He completed a clerkship with DMAW Lawyers in 2009 and returns to Adelaide after holding senior roles with Herbert Smith Freehills in Melbourne and London.
Gillman-based Stärke Advanced Manufacturing Group (Stärke-AMG) has appointed Al Jawhari as group chief executive.
Mr Jawhari, pictured, joins Stärke-AMG from Lightforce Group, where he was previously chief executive.
He has co-founded and led businesses across the the Middle East and North Africa, the US, ­Europe and Australasia.
Stärke-AMG founder and chairman Grant Tinney said Mr Jawhari’s experience as an aeronautical and mechanical engineer, and his expertise in the defence sector, would make him “a tremendous asset to our business”.
“His diversified career has spanned innovation in aeronautics, mechanical engineering and precision manufactur-ing across various technology niches,” he said. “Additionally he is well versed in the commercialisation of transformative technologies.”
Social housing and community services provider Junction has appointed Alisa Willis as head of service impact.
Dr Willis, pictured, will take on the position following her role with Human Services SA, where she is currently director of the Early Intervention Research Directorate.
Junction chief executive Maria Palulmbo said Dr Willis was a highly regarded leader with a 20-year career in social work, policy and senior management in Australia, Britain and the Philippines. “Alisa has a strong focus on early intervention, child protection, domestic and family violence, Aboriginal culture competency as well as service modelling, training, research and practice reform,” she said.
Word count: 424
