AN Australian-first Indigenous racing academy in Port Lincoln will provide young at-risk community members with a pathway into the industry.
Racing SA is seeking up to $500,000 funding to establish the school, which will be based at Port Lincoln Racing Club, and offer training for jobs including trackwork riders, stable hands and eventually, apprentice jockeys.
Racing SA chief executive Nick Redin said the proposed academy would assist with Indigenous youth unemployment in the region and help the thoroughbred racing industry, which was experiencing staff shortages.
“SA has a strong tradition of some very good Indigenous riders,” he said. “But we need more riders so by establishing this program, it will showcase some of the opportunities available within racing and provide a pathway to those careers. We believe it’s a win for all parties.” The academy has already received support from local horse racing identities and members of the Indigenous community. Port Lincoln trainer Byron J Cozamanis, who has Indigenous heritage, has been trying to get a similar program off the ground for a couple of years. He said a racing academy would be a “great way” to keep more Indigenous teenagers in school.
“When you’re with a horse, that can bring out the best in kids. You can have a lot of empathy with an animal. As far as an Indigenous kid goes, they might be shy but with a horse they can be themselves,” he said.
“I’m pretty confident it will work. There’s plenty of kids here in the local community that will have a crack at it. It’s just about getting something rolling but that it definitely will help.” Mr Redin said Racing SA was looking for a “philanthropic partner” to help establish the initial academy, with much of the start-up costs to build new horse stables at Port Lincoln Racing Club. “The program is ready. Funding constraints at the moment are stopping us from progressing and now we’re seeking expressions from other bodies or large companies who might want to get involved with this sort of project,” he said.
CREDIT: ANTIMO IANNELLA
Word count: 346
