SPACE, defence and cyber security will underpin growth in the state’s economy, but more support is needed for start-ups and small businesses looking to tap into hi-tech industries, Flinders University’s Melissa de Zwart says.
Professor de Zwart said many start-ups struggled to navigate the onerous regulatory regimes and compliance requirements of working in those industries.
“In terms of innovators, it’s actually very difficult and expensive for them to get legal advice and help on intellectual property, and when we talk to start-ups that’s exactly what they need help on – sometimes it’s just in navigating those fundamentals,” she said. “Some of the projects I’ve been involved in have been doing open-access explainers.
“If I’m a space start-up, what are the fundamental legal and regulatory things that I need to know?
“That should be available to them for free ... those sorts of things are really ‘public good’ things that everybody needs to know.” Professor de Zwart, pictured, joined Flinders University last month as professor in digital technology, security and governance at the Jeff Bleich Centre.
The centre, named after the former US Ambassador, was established in June 2019 to investigate the challenges posed by digital technology and its regulation, and provide advice through research.
In light of the new AUKUS defence and technology alliance between Australia, the US and UK, the centre will also address technology and information sharing between alliance members.
“Information exchange between different countries is actually a very complicated matter and so part of what the Jeff Bleich Centre will be doing is to assist in making those relationships more accessible to people further down the chain,” Professor de Zwart said.
“We know that defence is really interested in procuring innovative technology and that’s the case in the three members of AUKUS. “Understanding what those relationships are at the high strategic level, but also being able to translate them down to Australian educators, Australian businesses, to help defence work through those things is really important.”
CREDIT: giuseppe tauriello
Word count: 332
