ADELAIDE sports drink start-up PREPD is forging ahead with its US expansion plans after raising more than $700,000 from investors.
The company closed an ­equity crowdfunding campaign via the Birchal platform last week, securing close to $713,000 from 255 investors.
PREPD has also impressed the state’s chief entrepreneur Andrew Nunn, who in recent days indicated that he too would put his money behind the company’s expansion plans.
Chief executive Andrew Perry said the latest capital raise, and Mr Nunn’s backing, were further endorsements of the product following its launch in 2018.
“We had about a dozen wholesale investors in this raise, which is really cool, and from that point of view it’s starting to get some real momentum behind it in terms of being the real deal,” he said.
“It’s further proof that the product is a really innovative product, and it’s changing the way people hydrate, changing the way the sports industry thinks about allowing athletes to present to the start line in a better hydrated manner. It’s certainly raised the awareness of the product – our brand awareness has gone through the roof.” After a soft launch in the US at the end of last year, PREPD will accelerate its move into the lucrative sports nutrition market, where it will engage with sports dietitians and ­colleges including Yale University.
PREPD was developed after 20 years of medical research between Yale and Flinders University.
“We’ve done a lot of work with them (Yale) over the years, through the science, but to collaborate in terms of commercialising the science that they created into a product, which their sporting teams can use, is pretty exciting,” Mr Perry said.
“And we need to get over to the US for the Collegiate and Professional Sports Dietitians Association’s conference in Arizona in May. “Dietitians are the gatekeepers to elite sport – elite sports people, elite sports teams, and off the back of that we’ll do another Strava challenge and do some sort of activation in California at the same time.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 340
