BUSINESSES desperate to reopen are demanding the federal government remove a “crazy” ban on Australian-made home Covid-19 tests that are widely used overseas.
Brisbane start-up Ellume’s DIY tests give results in 15 minutes. They are sold in pharmacies across the US as part of a $312m order from the Biden administration.
But the rapid-antigen kits, which are approved by the US Food and Drug Administration and are up to 96 per cent accurate, can’t be sold in Australia because home-use tests have been banned by the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) since 2010.
Exceptions have previously been made for HIV tests in 2014 and for other diseases, including flu in 2019.
Ellume founder Sean Parsons said the ban was the only barrier to selling in Australia.
“I don’t have line of sight as to why the federal government isn’t looking to make these changes,” he said of a potential TGA exemption.
Lockdown-shattered industries say Health Minister Greg Hunt needs to ensure the same happens for home Covid tests.
“Something like this could alleviate the need for closing down businesses,” Falls Creek Chamber of Commerce secretary Steve Bond said.
“One would ­imagine that the US would have done as thorough testing as we would do to get sign-off.” Mr Bond said he had shuttered his ski lodge and restaurant and stood down eight full-time staff due to restrictions.
Transport company boss Paul Freestone is paying a pathology lab $160 a test for each driver in his 100-truck fleet that services NSW, Victoria and Queensland.
“I support the need for testing but the system is becoming very, very frustrating,” he said.
Some of his drivers were losing necessary sleep time queuing for tests, which could take four days to return results.
“At the end of the day, the most important thing here, not only for our industry, but for Australia, is that we can open,” Mr Freestone said.
“With something like this (home tests), you can imagine our drivers can pull up before the borders and do the test, or pull up and have the officers do the test while they’re waiting.
“We could be opening up and we can have open transport systems. It’s crazy – who would not want to take it up?” The Health Department said Covid tests should be processed only by “accredited pathology laboratories”.
CREDIT: SARAH BLAKE
Word count: 390
