SMARThacks SHOPPING LEFT it too late for Christmas presents? Here are a range of online gifts to snap up or send online even on December 25.
GIFT CARDS Melbourne start-up GIFTA kickstarted in 2019 and co-founder Adam De Pasquale says electronic gift cards are a great present to give someone if you’ve left shopping to the very last minute.
“You can jump on the app and schedule a gift card to arrive on Christmas morning to make it look like you haven’t forgotten,” he says.
“That person can then choose from more than 100 different stores of where they want to go in the Boxing Day sales and spend up.” He says even if “you’re heading to your parents on Christmas Day” you can still jump online and send them a gift card.
EXPERIENCES Everyone loves an adventure so consider buying your loved one exactly that – a day out somewhere or a special experience they won’t forget. Popular websites such as Red Balloon have thousands of experiences on offer and these can be locked, loaded and delivered electronically within a few minutes.
CHOCOLATES If the recipient has a sweet tooth you can never go wrong with a delicious box of chocolates.
While most stores are shut on Christmas Day, petrol stations, some supermarkets and convenience stores will still be operating so you can quickly pick up something on the day.
SECOND-HAND SELLING SITES Once retailers have closed and Christmas Day arrives the stress can set in for those who haven’t completed their purchases.
Second-hand selling website Gumtree’s spokeswoman Eleni Gavalas says check out online sites as many people will have goods up for sale and some are even brand new.
“For those looking for a last minute gift in the final hours before Christmas or on Christmas Day, Gumtree provides a safe, inexpensive means to find Christmas gifts at an affordable price and they can be picked up from sellers in your local community,” she says. “Our recent research revealed 62 per cent of Australians would be happy to receive a unique second hand gift at Christmas, so with over 2.6 million listings on site you’ll have a great chance of finding something special.”
CREDIT: Sophie Elsworth
Word count: 369
