ADELAIDE software start-up Splose’s journey, which started with its founder’s digital aspirations behind a Woolworths checkout, has been given a significant boost by local investors.
Nick Chigwidden from PhysioXtra, Robert Bowden of Zenitas Healthcare, Garry Winter from WRP Legal/W Sports & Media, Travis Steventon from ASPECT Studios and Roberto Cardone of Momentarily are among those investors backing Splose with $128,000 in capital funding.
The capital was finalised in March and led to the launch of Splose’s first software program for practice management in late August and further work is ongoing. Some of the early investors are among the first users of the allied health software, which helps manage internal and external data and communications.
Splose’s founder Nicholas Sanderson quit his job as a cashier at Woolworths in 2016 to become an entrepreneur.
The business started life as a website builder, but further problem-solving for some of those early supportive clients led to the creation of the allied health software program.
“I couldn’t see any system that was the holy grail for practice-management software,” Mr Sanderson said.
“Not only were these products clunky and expensive, but they were created on average 11 years ago which is the same time the iPhone 3 came out.” He turned to investors to raise money and was introduced to Mr Bowden and Mr Chigwidden, owners of PhysioXtra, which operates seven physiotherapy clinics and has more than 100 staff.
“They had the same frustrations to the problem we were solving,” Mr Sanderson said.
“Outdated and clunky software was slowing down their teams’ productivity and affecting client experience and there simply were not any better options available. They validated everything we had been working on for a year and a half and decided to invest in Splose.” Now based at Lot Fourteen, Splose recently launched integrations for Medicare (bulk-bill and patient claims), Department of Veterans’ Affairs, HICAPS and credit card payments, which enables providers to process claims and payments without a terminal. Outdated and clunky software was slowing down teams
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 337
