SOUTH Australian biopharma Bionomics has secured close to $16m in new funds to get its post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) drug candidate “on track” for clinical trials this year.
The company yesterday said it had received commitments from investors, mostly overseas life-sciences investment funds, for its BNC210 drug trials.
The ASX-listed business, valued at $172m, used its 15 per cent placement capacity under listing rules to issue 110.3m shares at 14.5c each for the $15.9m placement, supported by major investor Apeiron Investment Group.
Malta-based Apeiron, founded by 42-year-old entrepreneur Christian Angermayer, became an investor in Bionomics last June.
Bionomics secured from Aperion a $22m subscription agreement to recapitalise the company and support future capital raisings.
In September, Mr Angermayer brought in PayPal co-founder Peter Thiel, and cryptocurrency-focused investor and CEO of Galaxy Investment Partners Michael Novogratz to invest in Bionomics.
Both are investors in Mr Angermayer’s drug development start-up, ATAI Life Sciences, which targets the use of hallucinogens for the treatment of mental health disorders.
Bionomics’ latest capital boost has brought significant participation from North American and European institutional and sophisticated investors, executive chair Dr Errol De Souza said. “We were pleased that a number of well-known specialist life-sciences investment funds participated, adding to a very strong shareholder base which includes Apeiron Investments, Biotech Value Fund, Merck, Peter Thiel and Mike Novagratz,” Mr De Souza said.
Bionomics was on track in the first quarter of this year to complete its seven-day dosing pharmacokinetic study of the BNC210 tablet formulation and start the phase-2b PTSD trial mid-year, he said.
Mr Angermayer said: “We are pleased to support Bionomics both as an underwriter in this placement and as a long-term shareholder of the company. PTSD and other mental health disorders are enormous burdens for those that live with them.
“Bionomics’ lead drug, BNC210, has already received fast track designation from the FDA and I am confident of the strong potential of the upcoming phase-2b PTSD trial to drive value for both patients and shareholders.” Bionomics shares closed 7 per cent higher at 23.5c yesterday.
CREDIT: BIOTECHNOLOGY VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 346
