STAFF numbers at Business SA fell by a third and revenue by more than 15 per cent last ­financial year, but chief executive Martin Haese has his sights set on a “remarkable turnaround” this year.
The organisation’s financial report for 2019-20 shows the loss of a key training contract and a restructure led to staff being cut from about 75 to 50.
Mr Haese, pictured, said staff numbers were back to 60 and members up about 860, aided by a new membership structure launched in September.
The organisation, “largely privately funded” by member fees, had proven to be responsive to members when COVID-driven demand was enormous, he said.
“Business SA is not driven by profit for profit’s sake, but it must be more driven by financial sustainability otherwise it’s not in a position to service its members, and we’re on that path,’’ he said.
“In so many ways last financial year was planning and implementation. We put a new strategic plan in place, we put a number of new governance protocols in place. We’ve done a lot in terms of looking at the strength of our team and aligning our team’s competencies with that strategic plan.’’ Mr Haese said “the pendulum has shifted materially’’.
“Last year was a real coalface year because the need was so acute, for both our advocacy services and also for our commercial services,’’ he said.
The report shows the business lobby group’s revenue fell $1.7 million to $8.67 million.
The wind-down of a training contract with Apprenticeship Support Australia, worth $2.24 million in 2018-19 and about $1 million less the following year had a large impact. The contract has now ended.
Business SA made an operational loss of $34,000, compared to a $98,000 loss in 2018-19. The loss increases to $527,000 with depreciation.
The report says it is now “on an improved financial trajectory”. Its strategic plan lays the foundation for a “leaner, more agile and more relevant ­organisation’’ with the new membership model aiming to offer varied services aligned with the life stage of a company, such as being a start-up, scale-up, in a mature phase or approaching succession.
Business SA has also launched a business broking joint venture with Ray White. Staff costs fell from $7.89m to $6.63m. Key management remuneration lifted from $1.22m to $1.32m.
Business SA refused to reveal what its senior executives, including Mr Haese, are paid. It received $540,000 in government stimulus income, including JobKeeper.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 410
