STATE government agencies will need to seek at least one bid from local suppliers or ­justify in writing why they didn’t, under a new procurement framework being introduced immediately.
The Department of Treasury and Finance will also ­publish a Forward Procurement Plan on behalf of all ­public authorities, setting out a two-year timeline of proposed contracts worth more than $55,000.
The measures are designed to increase local industry’s share of the $11bn a year the government spends on goods, services and construction.
Industry Advocate Ian Nightingale said agencies would have to consider and sign off on whether a local bid had been sought, whether tenders considered opportunities for local small and start-up businesses, and also whether the tender specifications were an obstacle to SA suppliers.
A checklist to be considered at the start of the process, and another to be signed off as part of the “purchase recommendation’’ by agency heads would ensure local procurement was both accountable, and top of mind for agencies, he said.
The government announcement fulfils Business SA’s recent call in its pre-election submission for a forward-looking procurement plan, while stopping short of the lobby group’s desire to have agency heads publish a ­publicly accessible “exception notice” when non-local companies won bids.
Under the new rules, while agency heads will have to explain their reasoning if a local bid is not sought, that information will not be automatically made public.
Business SA also wants agencies to explain to local businesses why they missed out on bids.
Premier Steven Marshall said it would also require public authorities to consider the economic benefit to the SA economy, in addition to “value for money” considerations.
Seeley International group managing director Jon Seeley (inset), who was part of the 17-member group consulted on the new framework, said the changes were welcome.
“These changes are great as it will mean government agencies will now be required to investigate what the local market has to offer before making procurement decisions,” he said.
“It will also mean the Office of the Industry Advocate will have the ability to monitor public authorities’ performance against these recommendations.” Spending locally created jobs and boosted the whole economy, he said.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 367
