AGED-CARE staff will get two cash bonuses of up to $400 each to stay in the job in an effort to ease workforce pressure fuelled by Covid-19.
The incentive payments, which are designed to reduce staff shortages and recognise the hard work of those in the sector, will be announced by Scott Morrison on Tuesday during his National Press Club address setting out his government’s plan to build “resilience” as the nation recovers from the pandemic.
The scheme is expected to cost $209m, with all workers in government-subsidised home-care and residential facilities eligible for up to $400 in February and again in early May.
The Prime Minister said Australia’s comparatively strong health outcomes during the pandemic would not have been possible without the “hard work, long hours and dedicated care offered by our frontline health and aged-care workforce”.
“Their resilience over the past two years has been inspiring,” Mr Morrison will say in the speech.
He will also announce the government is enlisting the help of universities to boost Australia’s sovereign manufacturing capacity with a $2.2bn Research Commercialisation Action Plan.
More than half of the fund will go towards a three-stage program to help bridge the so-called “valley of death” where early-stage research does not progress due to higher levels of risk and uncertainty.
Mr Morrison said this problem was “not insurmountable”, and Australia would learn the lessons of other countries that have managed to get projects through this riskier period.
“The fund will allow Australian innovators to access funding opportunities for each stage of their project, provided they can continue to prove project viability and commercial potential. Industry involvement and engagement is required at every stage,” Mr Morrison will say.
There is also $296m for 1800 industry-focused PhDs and 800 fellowships, and $150m to boost a CSIRO program backing start-up companies.
“We need to find and develop a new breed of researcher entrepreneurs in Australia,” Mr Morrison will say.
“At the moment, only 40 per cent of Australia’s researchers work in private industry – well below the OECD average.
“This, together with low mobility between industry and the university sectors, leads to culture and capability gaps that reduce the ability of Australian businesses to be innovative.” Mr Morrison will announce the latest aged-care and research funding is already accounted for in the federal budget and that the initiatives are not election promises.
CREDIT: CLARE ARMSTRONG
Word count: 397
