STRONG growth has been a hallmark of Outside Ideas since its germination in Adelaide in 2003, fuelled by a fierce commitment to finding the right people for the job and giving them a career path to write home about.
Director Aaron Superina initially set up Outside Ideas as a residential landscaping business, but quickly recognised the opportunity to expand its reach, winning its first commercial project in 2006.
Since then, the company has focused on structural concreting, commercial landscaping and civil engineering projects, and made its first acquisition of Melbourne’s Landscape Plus in 2019.
Its workforce has mushroomed from six people to 270 this year, many of them trained through the company’s new apprentice program, an ethos that helped the business win Medium Employer of the Year in the 2020 Australian Training Awards.
“We put on our first apprentices in 2012 because one of the biggest challenges we’ve had, as we were growing, was being able to find the right kind of people,” Superina (right) said.
“We hire equally on someone’s character as someone’s ability, making sure they are the kind of person you want to be spending 40 hours a week with.” Superina found the talent rising through the ranks tended to be the people they had hired straight out of school, who had learned the company’s ways from the ground up.
“We’ve had 22-year-olds running $2m projects on site and they are more than capable of doing things like that,” he said.
Meanwhile, there were growing concerns about the quality of training of some apprentices coming on board, posing a potential drag on future growth.
“In 2019 I came up with the idea that we would start up our own registered training organisation,” Superina said.
Working with the industry and educators brought accreditation to the new Construction Training Academy a year later, an RTO able to train apprentices in landscape and civil construction.
“We get a lot of applications for every intake, but we do have a very low turnover rate once we on-board them; we are very selective about the apprentices we take on,” Superina said.
The CTA also trains company apprentices in Melbourne as well as those of industry competitors.
“If you are looking for your child to have a really good career, people don’t think of them becoming a landscaper or a civil worker,” he said.
“We are trying to change that so people think of it as a good, stable career path that provides good opportunities.” So, did forming the RTO help it win the training award? “It was a contributing factor, but Outside Ideas won the award,” he said. “I think they liked the idea that we are so passionate about training.”
CREDIT: JENNIFER HULLICK
Word count: 453
