SHANE Warne was battling Covid-19 and sick in isolation, but it didn’t stop London Spirit from going ahead with Sunday’s match or Australian star Josh Inglis from scoring an impressive half century.
Warne, who is fully vaccinated, had been feeling unwell, then returned a positive lateral flow test before the match.
Management said the 51-year-old was feeling “pretty sick” but his team is getting on with a competition that has embraced the freedom recently granted England’s population. The new Hundred competition has no biosecurity protocols but some franchises have instructed players to keep exposure to the public to a minimum.
“I had the Pfizer, I had to wait til they released it for over 50s so I could get it done,” Warne said recently.
London Spirit has not won a game in the fledgling tournament and still lost, despite Inglis’s efforts.
Warne said he was interested to see England, where the majority of the country is vaccinated, open up and attempt a normal life.
There were conflicting reports about another member of staff from London Spirit also testing positive but the game continued and none of the players were affected, according to the franchise.
“London Spirit men’s head coach Shane Warne will be absent from today’s match against Southern Brave at Lord’s,” the club said in a statement. “After feeling unwell this morning, Shane returned a positive lateral flow test and will isolate from the squad and support staff whilst he awaits PCR results.
“A second member of the team management is self-isolating after also returning a positive test. No players have been impacted.” Warne is the second senior coach to test positive in the competition, which has been running for 10 days.
Trent Rockets coach Andy Flower has missed the past three matches because of the virus. A large group of Australian players, staff and commentators had to leave India and find accommodation in the Maldives after the IPL was postponed because of the virus at a time when the government had closed the door on travel from India.
Former Test star Michael Hussey was left behind in India with Covid-19 but has returned and recovered.
The small Australian contingent at the Hundred includes Simon Katich, Georgia Redmayne, D’Arcy Short, Josh Inglis and Amanda Jade Wellington. A large group, including Glenn Maxwell, David Warner, Ellyse Perry and Meg Lanning withdrew from the tournament. Katich and Darren Lehmann are also coaching in the start-up competition, which features 100 balls a side and considerable marketing hype.
CREDIT: PETER LALOR
Word count: 419
