I DON’T know about you, but I seem to have all sorts of odd things stored in my mental attic, and they’re liable to pop out without warning at any time. Mostly this happens when we’re working in the kitchen, and I’m doing something not very mind-engaging, like peeling vegetables, or waiting for something to boil. Suddenly out comes a fragment of song, or a scrap of long-ago-learned poetry.
I hold my mother responsible for this. Her family were great ones for gathering round the piano and singing. She said everyone had their “party piece” and usually didn’t need much persuading to perform. She told me about her father, Will, usually a mild-mannered photographer, who did those rather solemn-looking 1920s and ’30s studio portraits. When fortified with a Christmas drink or two, he became an enthusiastic singer of popular music hall songs. She must have sung some of these to me when I was quite young, and somehow bits and pieces stayed in my memory.
It’s quite disconcerting for my husband when I suddenly pipe up with a tuneful: “They’ve got such nice habits, they keep rabbits, but got no money at all”. That’s all I remember, and I have no idea of the song title or who sang it. Another one that surfaces is: “I walk down the Strand with my gloves on my hand, then I walk down again with them off”. I do know that one was Burlington Bertie (a young man with upper-class tastes and no money).
There’s a lovely vegie song with some fragments I remember: “My dear old uncle Russell shouts for brussels sprouts” and ending with “And if you like beetroot I’ll be-true to you”. This song had a revival in 2010, and was a hit for the Barron Knights.
This is a good one to start up during vegie preparation, and guaranteed to make anyone present think you’re richly eccentric/bonkers.
Some of these old songs have had a whole new incarnation. The World War I soldiers’ song “The Bells of Hell go ting-a-ling-a-ling, for you but not for me, the little devils sing-a-ling-a-ling, for you but not for me” was used to great effect in the 1969 film Oh! What a Lovely War. This is huge fun to warble at random, and quite disconcerting for those around. There was a famous romantic music hall song The Boy I Love is up in the Gallery sung by Marie Lloyd, which was given a new run by the Muppets when Miss Piggy serenaded her beloved Kermit.
I was going to mention the snippets of long remembered poetry I suddenly declaim at odd moments, but I’ll have to save that for another edition.
Meanwhile I’d love to know about what’s in your mental attic. carole.whitelock@bigpond.com
CREDIT: CAROLE WHITELOCK
Word count: 464
