PROPERTY SA Pathology’s city laboratory will relocate to a new purpose-built facility closer to the health and biomedical precinct in the CBD.
The new facility of at least 14,000sq m will feature state-of-the-art laboratories and will consolidate a range of existing pathology services. It will be built by 2026.
Early details of the requirements of the facility have been released in a tender notice issued by the state government, ahead of the launch of a formal request for proposal campaign seeking interest from developers. According to the tender notice, the new laboratory is to be located within about 500 metres of the Royal Adelaide Hospital and new Women’s and Children’s Hospital, with the site “fully accessible” from both facilities.
The government would enter a long-term lease of 30 years or more, and the laboratory would need to be built by 2026 to enable the relocation of SA Pathology services currently delivered at the Women’s and Children’s Hospital ahead of the decommissioning of the hospital.
SA Pathology conducts more than 15 million tests each year in laboratories throughout the state’s hospital system and at the current central laboratory on Frome Rd, which will make way for technology and start-up businesses.
SA Pathology clinical services director Dr Tom Dodd said the new facility would bring together services to promote further innovation. “The new central laboratory will provide the opportunity to enhance existing clinical and research partnerships and ultimately achieve a more responsive and efficient pathology service,” he said. A formal request for proposal seeking submissions from developers will be released in early October, with a preferred developer expected to be named by February.
Several developers have already been positioning their projects to bid for the laboratory requirement, including Australasian Property Developments, which last year unveiled plans for a $350m biomedical precinct at the former Coca-Cola bottling plant at Thebarton. They included plans for a pneumatic tube system, which works similar to a vacuum, and is required to transport samples between hospitals and the laboratory. Health and Wellbeing Minister Stephen Wade said SA Pathology had played a critical role during the Covid-19 crisis, and the new facility would support improved services into the future. “SA Pathology has shown its nimbleness and creativity during the pandemic and this new facility will be a platform to support further innovation,” he said.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 390
