MEDIBANK has extended its foray into hospital ownership to Melbourne, signing a joint venture with 42 doctors to build a $64m short-stay hospital in an apparent effort to rein in spiralling out-of-pocket medical costs.
The hospital, which will be built on the site of a former Healthscope facility – Cotham Private – in Key is expected to be completed in 2023 and will feature no “gap” fees – the bugbear of many Australians with private health insurance.
It comes after Medibank ­secured a 49 per cent stake of East Sydney Private Hospital at Woolloomooloo last August.
Like East Sydney, Medibank will acquire a minority stake in the Melbourne hospital, with the group of 42 doctors, led by vascular surgeon Michael Grigg, controlling 51 per cent of the joint venture.
Outgoing Medibank chief executive Craig Drummond signalled further hospital investments at the insurer’s half-year earnings results last month. But he stipulated they would be doctor-led in an ­attempt to stave off criticism that Medibank is pursuing a US-style managed care model – where insurers have a greater say on patient care, including which hospital they are treated at.
Medibank and the group of doctors will invest about $22m initially to support start-up operations and equipment, with Medibank’s contribution totalling about $10.7m.
Listed real estate group Centuria will acquire the site, demolish the former Cotham Private buildings and develop the new hospital, with the ­venture committing to a long-term 15-year lease.
The 30-bed hospital is expected to offer four operating theatres and a procedure room, radiology, and an infusion chemotherapy clinic.
Professor Grigg said the ­development had progressed quickly from an idea from a “small group of doctors” discussing the rising costs of renting rooms at private hospitals.
“If you’re a VMO (visiting medical officer) at a private hospital, there are all kinds of pressures at work at the moment and affording consulting rooms, affording secretaries, affording insurance, affording other things that are rising faster than CPI has been one of the reasons why out-of-pocket costs have got completely out of hand,” he said.
“Even doctors who traditionally never charge an out-of-pocket cost have been forced into a fairly difficult economic situation, and not one that they particularly like and certainly the patients don’t like. And so, this whole cost of being in practice, particularly if you’re a young doctor starting off, is becoming extremely difficult. “It’s just sort of a symptom that the whole private health care industry is in a state of disharmony at the moment.”
CREDIT: JARED LYNCH; BEN WILMOT
Word count: 422
