THE world’s first mini personal defibrillator will soon be available in Australia to potentially save thousands of lives from cardiac arrest.
The CellAED, a small, portable Automatic External Defibrillator (AED) unit designed for home use, has now been approved by regulators.
Donovan Casey designed it after his wife Sarah had a cardiac arrest at their Sydney home seven years ago.
Sudden cardiac arrest is the world’s biggest cause of premature death and 80 per cent happen in the home. Only one in 10 survive.
Sarah Walke was only 39 when she had a cardiac arrest in 2014. All she remembers is having a sore shoulder.
“You think it will never happen to you,” she said.
After shaking off the initial shock, Mr Casey started CPR and called an ambulance, which luckily arrived swiftly.
“I was exhausted, good CPR, two minutes and you’re done, it’s significant exertion, but when they arrived, they used a defibrillator to bring her heart back into rhythm,” he said.
After two weeks in a coma, she pulled through.
“When I got out of hospital I was shocked how small the chances of survival are and we started thinking about how to improve the survival rate,” Ms Walke, now 48, said.
Rapid defibrillation is the only effective treatment for sudden cardiac arrest, an event that affects as many as 33,000 Australians a year. “What we realised is if there had been an AED downstairs in our block of units, Donovan could not have got to it anyway, it had to be in reach, accessible within the house,” she said.
With a background in engineering and science, Mr Casey set about making existing technology accessible to everyone through his start-up Rapid Response Revival, designing a miniaturised AED that is easy to use and, at about $299, affordable to have in every home.
“I knew it would have to be one-tenth of the price (of a standard AED) to get it into people’s homes,” he said.
Ian Hutchinson suffered a cardiac arrest while riding his bike around Narrabeen Lake in 2018. His friend Don MacKee and bystanders gave CPR but it was not until the ambulance arrived that a defibrillator got his heart going again. “I was clinically dead for 18 minutes,” the 58-year-old said, adding a portable defibrillator was a great idea. “It’s brilliant because 80 per cent of the time a cardiac arrest happens at home and to have access to a defibrillator on the fridge, in your handbag or in the car that only costs a couple of hundred dollars is brilliant.”
CREDIT: JANE HANSEN
Word count: 430
