BANNED football club Salisbury West wants to re-enter the Adelaide Footy League – but a new regulation has stopped the bid in its tracks.
The Tigers, who were thrown out of the competition in 2018 for bad on-field behaviour, approached the league earlier this month about applying to play in 2022.
It follows the club’s unsuccessful attempts to re-join in 2019 and last year. However, the league introduced a new regulation at the end of last season, which stated it would only consider applications for new clubs which had competed in an affiliated league within the previous 12 months.
It would also prohibit clubs under “any form of suspension, disbarment or moratorium” in another competition.
The league has since advised Salisbury West its only option for re-entry is to merge with a nearby club already in the competition.
Salisbury West committee member Matthew Slack said the club was “between a rock and a hard place”.
“I got in contact with the league to see what we would be required to do so we could then go and try to do that throughout this year,” Mr Slack said.
“But we basically got told we need to merge or forget about it. It’s not looking too good for us, that’s for sure.” Salisbury West was banned from the competition in 2018 after its captain, Adam Jones, was suspended for 28 weeks following four separate incidents in the qualifying final.
The Tigers had previously received warnings from the league for poor on-field behaviour. Mr Slack said the club would approach other northern suburbs teams in coming months to discuss potential mergers. Salisbury West still fields teams in the SANFL juniors competition.
League chief executive John Kernahan, pictured, said it regularly received applications for start-up clubs, but was open to interest from clubs in neighbouring competitions which had an existing player and volunteer base.
“We are also well aware of the challenges of our current clubs and we need to offer them some protection under the guise of sustainability, which is a key pillar to our charter,” Mr Kernahan said.  “However, relative to this particular case, we can’t in all conscience accept a new club when we have a neighbouring club in Smithfield who has gone into recess in 2021 due to lack of playing numbers.
“We want our 67 clubs to be not only surviving, but thriving, not diluted by an over population.” Smithfield withdrew from the competition in March due to a lack of players, volunteers and sponsors.
CREDIT: PATRICK KEAM
Word count: 420
