ANDROMEDA Metals has been granted “new mine” status for its Great White Kaolin Project on the Eyre Peninsula and says it is on schedule to submit a mining lease application this month.
The State Government approval means the project will pay a concessional royalty rate from the start of operations until June 30, 2026, which Andromeda says represents a saving of about $9m.
The company’s prefeasibility study for the project envisages a production rate of 12.7 million tonnes of halloysite-kaolin a year, with a 26-year mine life.
The company has estimated a start-up cost of $28m, with a $56m onsite processing plant – funded out of export revenues – to be built in the second year of operations.
The company told the ASX that “substantial effort is being directed towards the completion of the definitive feasibility study during the second quarter of 2021 with a number of options being considered to provide the optimal return while minimising key risks’’.
Halloysite kaolin is used in several industrial processes such as the production of ceramics, medical products and paints and coatings.
It is also used in the production of high-purity alumina that is used in lithium ion batteries. There is also growing interest in its use in the nano­technology field due to its nano­tube structure, as opposed to kaolin’s usual plate-like structure.
Andromeda has formed a 50:50 joint venture with Minotaur Exploration, which also holds a 25 per cent interest in the mining project, to progress nanotech commercialisation plans. Andromeda said the Natural nanotech JV had doubled funding into a search for new applications for halloysite-kaolin at the University of Newcastle’s Global Innovative Center for Advanced Nanomaterials.
“The program will now incorporate 18 research areas including batteries, super­capacitors and semiconductor technologies, peroxidase and antimicrobial agents in water treatment, and for selective gaseous capture-storage-transport conversion,’’ the company told the ASX.
“Construction of a pilot plant to manufacture a halloysite composite for CO2 capture is under way.
“The patent applications pro­cess is ongoing for the unique nanotechnologies inv­olved in producing carbon nanomaterials from halloysite kao­­lin precursors and the subsequent processing routes for their specific environmental uses.’’ On the mining front, the company said it had awarded the engineering, procurement and construction contract to Primero Group engineering company. Origin Capital had been engaged to assist with the bankable feasibility study from a financing perspective.
“Advanced discussions are currently in progress with a number of potential customers to lock in binding offtake agreements,’’ the company said.
“Conrad Partners are on the ground following up all current opportunities in China, along with Andromeda staff who are working with a number of other customers targeted throughout Asia and Europe.’’ Since the PFS was released in June, Andromeda shares have more than quadrupled from 6c to 27c, valuing the company at $592m.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 467
