SAVVY SHOPPER COST OF LIVING Marco Pierre White wants to see more everyday Australians enjoying quality restaurant meals at prices they can afford.
The world-famous chef, pictured, understands diners’ desire to save while not compromising on quality, which is why he helped develop the EatClub app four years ago with Aussie friends and industry colleagues, Pan Koutlakis and Ben Tyler.
The app also helps restaurants with empty tables by allowing them to instantly upload last-minute deals of up to 50 per cent off for diners, including drinks, to enjoy in-house or as takeaway.
White says he helped found the food tech start-up, which uses AI dynamic pricing, to help restaurants push back against the big delivery companies that are taking over the restaurant industry, and entice customers back into dining establishments. More than 1500 Australian restaurants are now involved with the free app and connecting directly with diners.
“Thousands of people use EatClub every day to enjoy amazing food, and with offers of up to 50 per cent off, there is no sign that these numbers will lessen, even as the sector continues to be impacted by the pandemic. In fact, we expect that orders will only increase, with diners wanting to enjoy restaurant-quality food both out and at home,” co-founder Koutlakis says.
With ABS data showing Australians spend about one quarter of their weekly food budget on eating out, check out these other discount apps to help your dollar go further.
LIVEN This app gives savvy diners thousands of participating venues to choose from and, when they simply dine or pay for their meals or drinks, they are rewarded with 15-25 per cent of their bill back in Liven digital currency into their account.
Each restaurant has a different reward system.
FIRST TABLE You can receive 50 per cent discount deals after paying a $10 booking fee. You then get half-price meals for two to four people when locking in the restaurant’s first table of each meal service for breakfast, lunch or dinner.
STUDENT EDGE Exclusive membership for high school, TAFE, VET and university students. This service can save you money on food at student hot spots – mainly fast food outlets, but Woolies and UberEats also have regular deals.
THE FORK This restaurant booking and review site has a specials tab that lists top restaurants offering 50 per cent discount deals in each major city.
GROUPON Great for bargain hunters, Groupon offers a range of coupon deals on food and drink near you, as well as other things such as travel, hotels and concert tickets. In addition to nearby restaurants and bars, Groupon extends its coupons to cover cafes, groceries and markets, as well as breweries, wineries and distilleries.
CUDO A free app that offers daily dining discounts with up to 80 per cent off your meal at participating venues in most capital cities.
ENTERTAINMENT BOOK The printed version of this money saver has been around for a long time, but now you can get meal discounts (and much more) via the app.
Single city or multi-city memberships are available from $69.99. You will be giving back, too, with 20 per cent of each membership sale going directly to a fundraiser.
Y WASTE The donation platform allows food insecure people to work with a charity, such as Foodbank, to receive a donation of leftover food from restaurants, cafes and bakeries. It can be anything left over from the menu. Customers are provided a special code to place an order before picking up food at a designated time.
CREDIT: TONI HETHERINGTON
Word count: 593
