Bordertown's Industrial Estate is celebrating 25 years of operation following upgrades and expansion, restrictive pandemics and growth to the Tatiara District region and cross border communities.
Tatiara District Council chief executive officer Anne Champness said she wanted to highlight the expansion of the Industrial Estate on it's anniversary, despite not being in her current position when the movement was carried through council.
The Industrial Estate was proposed and reviewed by the Tatiara District Council in 1994, land was sold and built on in 1996 and the official launch was in 1997.
The estate's location has provided access to Adelaide-Mount Gambier routes and South Australia-Victorian travel for heavy transport vehicles.
In 1997, the estate incorporated growing business Tatiara Truck and Trailers (TTT), which expanded from a workshop space to a multi-workshop facility with office spaces and reception.
TTT shareholder and founder John Jenkin, who moved his 1983 family business from Seventh Street in Bordertown to the estate, said the move provided the business with more freedoms in noise and movement outside of the main part of town and solved the issue of inadequate space for increasing demand.
"Tatiara Truck and Trailers has definitely grown from the original space with the larger shed space which we've added to over time," Mr Jenkin said.
"We are looking forward to continue growth with stage three at the industrial estate."
TTT's main shed services freight transportation and agriculture trucks and vehicles and grew from the original motto of "just wanted to fix a few trucks and a couple of air-conditioners" to completing services with up to 20 call-outs per day.
Office and finance manager Jaime Virgin, who is the daughter of Mr Jenkin, has been involved with the company for most of her adult life, and began her career within the year of the move to the Industrial Estate.
"Tatiara Truck and Trailers is definitely bigger than anyone expected, and has had the option to expand... four times within the 25 years," Ms Virgin said.
"It is great to have so many businesses start up around us."
Ms Virgin said the interest in the company from shareholders as well as the focus and drive of staff over 39 years had allowed the business to thrive.
She said there were many bumps in the road but she was proud of the achievements and growth of TTT.
"There are currently 57 staff members at TTT, and when we first started out here, we had about 12," Ms Virgin said.
CREDIT: Neave Moore
Word count: 415
