Investigative journalist Sharri Markson writes the story behind the pandemic Why did you start investigating what really happened in Wuhan? How the first pandemic in 100 years started intrigued me. When I asked a confidential source, who was tapped into our intelligence agencies, about it he told me they were investigating whether it began in a Wuhan laboratory. This really surprised me because a lab-leak was officially considered a conspiracy theory. The more I delved into it, the more the evidence unravelled and the more fascinated I became.
Is the process of writing a book very different from journalism? What really happened in Wuhan is an investigative book so the process for uncovering information is the same. It was an intense investigation and covered many countries and many sources, including whistleblowers, highly-placed politicians, intelligence officials and scientists. The difference is, with a newspaper the articles you produce are limited in space and you can break the news immediately. The added complexity in writing a book of this sort is that you need to try and keep your powder dry, keep your information close to your chest and try and keep it exclusive for months and months.
Is there a book that made you want to write your own?
I had actually never aspired to write a book. But this topic was so incredibly important that I felt compelled to write a book to explain to everyone the extent of the cover-ups that had taken place at the highest levels of politics and within the scientific community, to try and prevent anyone from probing whether the Wuhan Institute of Virology was the source of the outbreak.
What is a book that had a pivotal impact on your life?
Tess of the d’Urbervilles by Thomas Hardy, written in 1891, had a huge impact on me. The need to fight against gender inequality, injustice and just sheer female helplessness resonated with me.
What is the best book you’ve read?
Woodward and Bernstein’s All the President’s Men. It is journalism at its finest and I was hooked.
Is there a book you wish you had read but haven’t got to?
I desperately want to read The Happiest Man On Earth by Holocaust survivor Eddie Jaku. I have the book and now I need to find time to read it amidst writing a book, creating a documentary and looking after my toddler.
Is there a book that you would like to re-read when you have time? Start up Nation by Dan Senor and Saul Singer also Catch and Kill by Ronan Farrow. Loved them both.
What books are on your bedside table?
There’s a revolving stack of at least a dozen children’s books. Currently this includes Finding Francois, Bluey, Dinosaurs Love Underpants, Old Hat New Hat, Now and Then, The Duck who Didn’t Like Water, and Who Sank the Boat?
What are you writing next?
The process of an in-depth investigative book was so intense, time-consuming and all-encompassing not to mention the book was written during lockdown whilst looking after my child. I need to catch my breath! What really happened in Wuhan by Sharri Markson (HarperCollins, $29)
CREDIT: Sharri Markson
Word count: 527
