Finding it hard to get into the market? Australia’s parents are partly to blame, writes Jonathan Chancellor One of the key drivers of the residential price surge has been the Bank of Mum and Dad.
There has been a record rise in financial assistance from the so-called Bank of Mum and Dad (BoMD), which is helping to fuel the boom in first homebuyer demand and working its way through costlier homes too. Around 60 per cent of first homebuyers are getting money from mum and dad, compared to just a decade ago when less than five per cent had struck a rich family vein.
I sense there has also been an escalation in the trend of ageing parents dipping into their pre-pension savings to help their middle-aged children into better homes, and if time permits, to also assist their grandchildren get a foothold on the property ladder.
This living intergenerational transfer of money has long been a pillar supporting educational fees and also business start-up opportunities.
But policymakers haven’t really heeded the consequences for housing wealth. Of course, keeping the savings under the mattress isn’t done these days despite banks paying next to nothing for term deposit holders. The last big research on the issue was in 2017 on behalf of the Australian Housing and Urban Research Institute (AHURI). They noted that booming house prices boosted the amount young Australians received via inherited wealth and parental cash.
And that is certainly the case now, whereby parents reckon they are sitting on (or have already crystallised) a fortune from their own property purchases, be it the family home, the weekender or the investment apartment.
There are pros and cons and it would be dreadful for the BoMD to become the main way to realise the ‘great Australian dream.’ The BoMD does support the overall pricing the parents will eventually obtain when they sell their own biggest asset.
Saving for that 10 per cent or higher deposit is a tough task. Just a couple of decades ago it was not possible to own property with no cash and no evidence of genuine savings. But now the BoMD has about $34 billion in loans, making it the nation’s ninth-largest residential mortgage lender, according to Digital Finance Analytics.
Some lenders seemingly consider a genuine five per cent savings plus costs is all that’s required. The Australian Prudential Regulatory Authority does provide warning for parental lending, but banks will often just seek a statutory declaration confirming it is a non-rebate gift.
Of course, sometimes it’s not an outright payment, but a parental guarantee which comes with risks to the family and the banking system.
It seems that as long as the bank is satisfied the borrower can meet the ongoing loan repayments, they don’t worry enough about the borrower defaulting on the loan, as the bank will readily come after the ageing parents for any losses and costs that the bank incurs. Hopefully that is to be avoided.
CREDIT: Jonathan Chancellor
Word count: 497
