DAVID Inderias describes it as going from code to cows.
This is vastly oversimplifying the revolution that is taking place but the Brisbane-based start-up Fresh Supply Co is eyeing the potential to unlock billions of dollars in cryptocurrency funding such as bitcoin or ethereum which can then be used to provide financing for farmers and agribusiness exporters.
Inderias, a former medical student and one-time engineer, is the co-founder of Fresh Supply and sees his role as matching all the data generated in production of agriculture with the deep pools of emerging crypto financing.
Essentially Inderias is helping putting lazy cryptocurrencies to work. Think about how banks operate: They use savings sitting in the deposit accounts and lend it out on the other side to homeowners or business.
Savers are barely aware of the activity going on in the background but they are being paid for their funds in the form of interest.
Importantly, Fresh Supply is not a bank. But it takes information that exists in the real world and puts this into so-called smart contracts. Not only is provenance of the products produced on the farm tracked through the crypto-backed technology, producers get automatic payments akin to trade financing when certain preconditions are met.
In the agri-space these conditions might be specific such as the level of protein in grain, the weight of shellfish, or the fat scoring of beef. All this information can be used to attract export financing. Fresh Supply uses this data to secure the funding from a “DeFi”, or decentralised finance partner, which acts like the bank to source crypto-based financing, which for Fresh Supply’s case is a US stablecoin pegged to the US dollar.
Fresh Supply financing partners include MasterCard Provenance blockchain to help cross-border funding and this month secured a funding arrangement from a Berlin-based DeFi called Centrifuge which oversees a crypto “liquidity pool” accessible by the smart contracts.
“It’s difficult to get funding for agribusiness,” Inderias says. “We’re experts are getting that information to show the business is in a healthy functioning state, or this specific consignment of cows or grains is high quality”.
For producers it’s a way of using their product to tap cheaper funds. It also enables them to borrow against assets that banks often shy away from – such as livestock or production. Producers don’t take on the massive volatility risk of the crypto assets because that is secured at the DeFi stage. Currently Inderias has about 30 agribusiness clients across Australia and through Asia tapping into his technology.
The push comes as banking regulators are grappling with how digital currencies will evolve.
While the prospect of unsecured cryptocurrencies such as bitcoin being used for day to day transactions is not on the horizon, the Reserve Bank of Australia sees a possibility of a retail central bank digital currency or an eAUD.
Depending on how the technology evolves here it sees digital tokens used potentially to speed up or provide lower-cost payments than currently available for large transactions.
A recent report into crypto currency by consultancy EY and tech company Mawson and released by Liberal Senator Andrew Bragg outlined the potential for cryptocurrencies to become a key part of the Australian economy.
These blockchain-enabled financial instruments can make payments cheaper and faster, open up new forms of ownership and financing, and spur investment in crypto related infrastructure. Under the right policy settings and accelerated adoption, Australia’s digital asset economy could grow to $68.4bn by the end of this decade.
CREDIT: ERIC JOHNSTON
Word count: 585
