WHEN customers such as the US Department of Homeland Security and the Australian Department of Defence come knocking to see if you can help them out, you know you’re on to a good thing.
ASX-listed advanced manufacturing company Micro-X, which is based at the Tonsley innovation hub, is expecting 2022 to be a pivotal year, as it expands from one product stream to eventually at least four across areas such as mobile X-rays, bomb detection, baggage screening and stroke detection.
The company has had its Rover mobile X-ray machines in several markets around the world for some time, but has recently changed strategy moving away from a sole-distributor model, which managing director Peter Rowland anticipates will bolster sales.
The company has also had to employ bomb-disposal experts, as the development of new products such as the Argus IED (improvised explosive device) X-Ray Camera move into the sales phase.
Micro-X is targeting a global product launch of the Argus by mid-year, with sales expected to start shortly after.
Work is also progressing on how the company’s backscatter X-ray technology can be used in self-service kiosks for airport check-ins, with Micro-X receiving up to $US4m in non-dilutive funding from the Department of Homeland Security to progress that project.
The application of Micro-X’s cold cathode-ray technology in stroke detection is also being progressed, with the company having struck agreements with Johns Hopkins University in the US and Japan’s Fujifilm to develop a lightweight brain CT scanner. Across all of the applications, the modest size of the company’s imaging technology is key, with bulky and expensive traditional imaging systems often not fit for purpose.
The backscatter technology does away with the need for a detection plate behind the object being scanned, meaning that it has many more possible applications.
Mr Rowland said the company was moving fast across what could eventually be four large businesses in their own right, to solidify its first-mover advantage.
“We’re in a position that we’ve got this globally unique technology that everyone has been talking about for years, and we’re looking at how we monetise that,’’ he said.
Mr Rowland said each of the business units had a “start-up mentality’’. With customers such as Homeland Security funding them to come up with solutions, they were in the box seat.
Mr Rowland said Micro-X’s X-ray technology was not about “building a better mousetrap’’, it was about a revolution in imaging technology.
For example, the company’s brain CT scanner – once fully developed and signed off by regulators – would weigh about 40kg and be affordable enough at about $100,000 to put one in every ambulance.
This compared with current mobile stroke imaging units that cost $1.5m and weighed three-quarters of a tonne.
Micro-X has attracted funding from the Australian Government’s Medical Research Future Fund to develop the stroke scanning technology, with up to $8m available over three years.
The Argus is also set to be a game-changer in the bomb-detection field, Mr Rowland said.
The Argus, which will be the company’s second revenue-generating product line, has been demonstrated to the US, UK and Australian governments, with one senior bomb technician from the US telling the company: “This product is what we have been looking, and waiting for, for years.’’ Micro-X recently established an office in Seattle as a base for its US operations.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 557
