Reportage THE CULT OF WE Eliot Brown and Maureen Farrell: HarperCollins $34.99 On the face of it, WeWork was a good idea. The company supplied jazzy office space to small and medium businesses and encouraged the synergies that resulted. Founder Adam Neumann was a charismatic salesman who convinced venture capitalists to pour billions of dollars into the start-up. With some added celebrity glitz, Neumann spread his ideas about “making the world a better place”, staged lavish corporate worship sessions and massively rewarded himself – all with other people’s money. Journalists Eliot Brown and Maureen Farrell have unravelled a cracker morality tale about big banks and private companies, and they tell it well. Those “disruptors” aren’t geniuses, just sharks out to pinch other people’s lunch.
ROBYN DOUGLASS * * * * *
Fiction THE NEWCOMER Laura Elizabeth Woollett: Scribe $32.99 As Woollett’s new novel opens, Judy has flown from Sydney to Norfolk Island to visit her daughter Paulina, and to celebrate her 30th. She waits impatiently for her return but discovers while out walking Paulina was brutally murdered. Told in alternating voices, the novel moves into the future as Judy negotiates her grief and looks for her daughter’s killer, while Paulina tells the story of why she left Sydney and moved to the remote island. What is revealed is a portrait of a troubled young woman, one both damaged by her own behaviour and betrayed by the locals. Paulina is beautiful and reckless, but not unkind, easy to judge but with a mother who loves her. This gritty thriller is really a story about the dangers of sex, small places and careless youth.
LAURA KROETSCH * * * *
Fiction THE SNOW LINE Tessa McWatt: Scribe $29.99 Four diverse characters come together in India for a wedding. The octogenarian white man, Jackson, lived his happiest years as a hydraulics engineer in India and is carrying the ashes of his adored wife to scatter. Despite being repulsed by Jackson’s nose hairs, Reema, an Indian expat and singer, establishes a profound bond with the frail old man. This provides the poignant centre piece to the novel. Yoga teacher Yosh and photographer Monica are fellow expats seeking their cultural origins amid the spiritual mysteries and harsh contrasts of India as they pilgrimage towards the Himalayan snowline. McWatt’s narrative is densely, nay immersively detailed, both bleak and rich. Overarching is an intimate understanding of India with a nod to the magnanimity of Sikhs.
SAMELA HARRIS * * * *
Fiction PEOPLE LIKE THEM Samira Sedira (Trans. By Lara Vergnaud): Raven Books $29.99 This is intense and very French in the way it deconstructs the psychology of a brutal murder. The motive is entitlement and envy on the part of Constant Guillot who lives quietly with his wife, Anna, and their daughters but becomes unhinged by the arrival of Bakary and Sylvia Langlois and their three perfect children. Guillot’s hatred slowly builds: Bakary is very wealthy, self-assured and – worse – black, while Guillot is struggling to the point where Anna takes a job cleaning the Langlois house. Guillot describes in court how he was inflamed with rage, not intending to kill, but mercilessly beat and shot them anyway. Based on an actual slaughter, this injects fiction into what the French love to do – showcase the banality of evil. PENELOPE DEBELLE * * * *
CREDIT: ROBYN DOUGLASS LAURA KROETSCH SAMELA HARRIS PENELOPE DEBELLE
Word count: 570
