SWIMMING THERE will be little rest for Australia’s new golden crop of swimmers when they get out of quarantine after returning to Australia because planning is already well advanced for the 2024 Paris Olympics.
Normally, in the year immediately after an Olympics, national federations take a moment to reflect on what went right and what went wrong but with just three years until Paris, there’s no time to waste.
Sources have said that two British coaches — including Adam Peaty’s coach Mel Marshal — have already been approached about moving to Australia but have turned down the offers.
Swimming Australia president Kieren Perkins, in an interview during the Australian championships, said that he wanted more women in coaching and leadership roles.
National head coach Rohan Taylor has also talked about fast-­tracking the development of more female coaches, particularly with the emergence of so many talented young female swimmers in the national team.
The future for the Dolphins team already looks brighter than ever. Middle-distance freestyler Ariarne Titmus and backstroke sensation Kaylee McKeown each won two individual gold medals in Tokyo and rising teenagers Mollie O’Callaghan and Meg Harris both emerged as future stars, although there is still work to be done with the male swimmers.
The year 2022 is already shaping to be a critical one for the Dolphins. The world championships, which were originally due to be held this year, will now take place in Fukuoka in May.
They will be followed by the Commonwealth Games, in Birmingham, England, while another world championships will be scheduled for late 2023, in Doha.
To help prepare the Australians for the busy road ahead, Swimming Australia has also announced the start up of a new domestic competition. Details are to be released after the Olympics.
“Part of the things we’ve been talking about is our pathways program, development of our youth, development of their coaches, and really focusing on how we can bring them through,” Taylor said.
“Competitions are another one. We need to develop more competition opportunities for our athletes so that they can become more resilient.
“How we do that with Covid is quite challenging.
“But domestically, we need to look at the way we can do that; how can we make our competitions more meaningful?
“We’re moving to a training hub model ... because what we want to do is have all of our best athletes and coaches and our pathways programs moving in and out of the hub to have exposure to our best people and centralising that so we can do that across the country.
“We feel like we can create, continue that uplift and find those extra talented kids and bring them through, but also develop their coaches and really develop their knowledge.”
A SEA OF SWIMMING MEDALS Men’s 4x100m IM Brendon Smith ● SILVER Men’s 400m freestyle Jack McLoughlin ● SILVER Women’s 4x100m freestyle relay Bronte Campbell, Meg Harris, Emma McKeon, Mollie O’Callaghan, Madi Wilson ● GOLD Women’s 100m butterfly Emma McKeon ● BRONZE Women’s 400m freestyle Ariarne Titmus ● GOLD Men’s 4x100m freestyle relay Alexander Graham, Kyle Chalmers, Zac Incerti, Thomas Neill, Mack Horton, Elijah Winnington ● BRONZE Women’s 100m backstroke Kaylee McKeown ● GOLD Women’s 200m freestyle Ariarne Titmus ● GOLD Men’s 4x200m freestyle relay Matthew Temple, Zac Incerti, Alexander Graham, Kyle Chalmers, Cameron McEvoy ● BRONZE Men’s 200m breaststroke Zac Stubblety-Cook ● GOLD Men’s 100m freestyle Kyle Chalmers ● SILVER Women’s 4x200m freestyle relay Ariarne Titmus, Emma McKeon, Madi Wilson, Leah Neale, Tamsin Cook, Meg Harris, Mollie O’Callaghan, Brianne Throssell ● BRONZE Women’s 100m freestyle Emma McKeon ● GOLD Cate Campbell ● BRONZE Women’s 200m backstroke Kaylee McKeown ● GOLD Emily Seebohm ● BRONZE Women’s 800m freestyle Ariarne Titmus ● SILVER Mixed 4x100m relay Kaylee McKewon, Zac Stubblety-Cook, Matthew Temple, Emma McKeon, Bronte Campbell, Isaac Cooper, Brianna Throssell ● BRONZE Women’s 50m freestyle Emma McKeon ● GOLD Women’s 4x100m medley relay Kaylee McKeown, Chelsea Hodges, Emma McKeon, Cate Campbell, Emily Seebohm, Brianna Throssell, Mollie O’Callaghan ● GOLD
CREDIT: JULIAN LINDEN
Word count: 669
