LOT Fourteen, the innovation precinct built on the site of the old Royal Adelaide Hospital, opened in 2018 with the aim of providing a lightning rod for entrepreneurship around the city.
One of the most exciting parts of the plan – aside from the attraction of the Australian Space Agency and global companies such as Google, Microsoft and Amazon – was its potential to be an incubator for start-up businesses which had, for the most part, operated out of the spotlight.
National company Stone & Chalk was brought on board in 2019 to help build that culture; to develop, nurture and mentor start-ups and connect them with the wider business and academic community. Three years on and the progress is certainly displaying more than a few green shoots. To date, start-ups at the site have raised about $90m in capital and, by the end of this year, will employ more than 600 people across 55 companies.
Several are in the process of expanding their premises into the city and returning to mentor the next generation.
Beyond the numbers, the energy and sense of community at the site is palpable and some of the ideas being generated are inspiring, ranging from health care, to the environment, to outer space.
It’s worth noting this all started from scratch just a few years ago and was, in the meantime, forced to endure the pandemic.
Still, there remains much work still to be done for the start-up community and, more generally, Lot Fourteen to realise its potential. There are still too few women founders. More school-age children need to be engaged. There remains a lack of cut-through in the regions. There are also significant headwinds on the horizon which will impact on raising capital. Ongoing political and community leadership and energy will be needed.
SA’s Chief Entrepreneur says the foundations being laid should prompt the state to position itself as “The Innovation State”, where global companies come to test their latest project. There would be worse things to be known for. Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Paul Ashenden, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 355
