THE GREAT AUSTRALIAN BAKE OFF SEASON FINALE, 8.30PM, THURSDAY, FOXTEL AFTER weeks of bakes, sweat and tears, it all comes down to this. The three finalists – the impeccably moustached Nurman, impossibly perky Ella and trendy teacher Aaron (all pictured) – have one last day in the tent in which to prove they can out-whisk, sift and cream the competition. Although Ella has more wins under her apron than the other two, judges Matt Moran and Maggie Beer say it’s one of the closest finales in the popular show’s history, with very little separating the top three in their hugely challenging and emotional bakes. It all kicks off with a batch of iced fancies, before the group try their hand at recreating one of Beer’s lavish pear and hazelnut tortes. But it’s the final round, for which the bakers are asked to create a cake in the shape of their dream home (while their friends and family proudly watch on), that we really see each of the contestants come into their own. Your stomach is sure to be rumbling and your eyes glistening with tears when the winner is crowned.
SHINING VALE NEW EPISODE STREAMING FROM MONDAY, BINGE AUTHOR Pat (Courteney Cox) has been reaping the benefits of her ghostwriter Rosemary (Mira Sorvino, pictured) since moving into a run-down mansion. But now that she’s realised Rosemary isn’t simply a muse for her trashy novel, but the tormented spirit of a previous resident, Pat starts having second thoughts about their arrangement. Making a stressful situation worse, Pat’s troubled mother Joan (Judith Light) shows up unexpectedly. Her plans to bond with her granddaughter Gaynor (Gus Birney) by dredging up ghosts from Pat’s wild past only prompt Gaynor to see her mother in a new light.
DEEP WATER STREAMING, PRIME VIDEO ANA de Armas and Ben Affleck (both pictured) were dating in real life when they filmed this erotic thriller about a couple caught in a toxic marriage. And just like Nicole Kidman and Tom Cruise (whose union unravelled after they shot Stanley Kubrick’s 1999 psychological drama Eyes Wide Shut), de Armas and Affleck broke up after filming wrapped. De Armas (Knives Out) plays Melinda, a bored housewife who enjoys flaunting her steamy affairs in front of her obsessive husband Vic (Affleck). While Melinda is beautiful, she is so thoroughly unlikeable that it’s hard to understand why Vic would go to such absurd lengths to keep her.
DRAMA WE CRASHED STREAMING, APPLE TV+ THIS series charts the real-life story of the egotistical couple who founded co-working space concept WeWork. Adam Neumann (Jared Leto) is a fast-talking con man, while his wife Rebekah (Anne Hathaway, pictured with Leto) is a failed actor tired of living in her cousin Gwyneth Paltrow’s shadow. The pair join forces to create the successful start-up, before an almighty fall from grace.
DRAMA FIRST DAY 5PM, THURSDAY, ABC ME HANNAH (Evie Macdonald, pictured) is staring down the barrel of another first day at school. Unlike last year, her classmates know she is trans and she has supportive friends. But when Hannah considers running for class captain, she questions whether she has truly been accepted. This poignant and insightful series is one that all children and their parents would benefit from watching.
REAL TO REEL THE WEEK IN DOCUMENTARIES CAROLINE FLACK: HER LIFE AND DEATH 7.30PM, FRIDAY, FOX DOCOS BEAUTIFUL, funny and hugely popular, British TV host Caroline Flack (pictured) left viewers in shock when she took her own life in 2020. The bubbly host of Love Island and The X Factor had been a tabloid darling, known for a tumultuous love-life that saw her date reality stars, sportsmen and even Prince Harry. But behind the smiles and jokes, Flack was a woman who struggled to cope with the unrelenting glare of the spotlight. In this documentary, those closest to her – including her oldest friends, family and celebrity pals such as TV host Dermot O’Leary and singer Olly Murs – talk about Flack’s meteoric rise and heartbreaking downward spiral. Lifeline 13 11 14
CREDIT: WITH SIOBHAN DUCK
Word count: 678
