This week there are significant meetings on the delivery of mental health care to South Australians. Today, a Minister’s workshop on South Australian mental health and, tomorrow, health national Cabinet will consider responses to recent national reports.
The Mental Health Services Plan (MHSP) 2020-25, prepared by my office and the Mental Health Commission, was released in November 2019. It reshapes how SA services are delivered and is transparent in identifying gaps in the sector.
A new crisis response system requires changes to telephone and mobile responses; and there are new crisis beds, new beds for people with behavioural disturbance and forensic beds.
The MHSP recognises the needs of our population change with time. The plan identifies priorities for services for children, older people, country areas, non-government organisations (NGOs) as well as metropolitan services. There is an emphasis on youth, and joint mental health and drug and alcohol services.
People with lived experience, sector leaders, clinicians and academics were extensively involved in the plan’s development.
This year the estimated mental health expenditure for the state is $578m, most of which will be overseen by the Local Health Networks.
There are good examples of service redesign which address the changes in our SA mental health needs. At the same time, the response to the ICAC Oakden inquiry has led to a focus on standards of care and inspections of SA Health services which provide mental health care. A number of outdated wards have had modifications or are planned to be replaced and many operating models are being revised.
In 2020, new funding was directed at mental health responses after bushfires and COVID. Use of the extra funds was informed by the MHSP.
The Urgent Mental Health Care Centre (UMHCC) began service in March, and the Mental Health Ambulance Co-response program has expanded its hours.
A mental health “Hospital in the Home” has begun in central Adelaide, and new mental health units have been built. The neuro-behavioural unit for older persons’ mental health has opened at the Repatriation precinct and the Mallee Ward for child and adolescent mental health at the Women’s and Children’s Hospital (WCHN) is being replaced. These are only the start of improvements being made.
Reducing over-reliance on emergency departments (ED) for the care of mental health patients is a key outcome of a more effective system. There has been much discussion about the data for February 2021 at the RAH for 18-65 year olds, a 41 per cent increase in presentations compared with the same month in 2019 (up from an average of 12.3 patients a day to 17.3).
This increase was on top of a traditionally busy period for our CBD hospital. Some other parts of the mental health system had a decrease, and the metropolitan activity increased by 8 per cent for that month compared with February 2019.
Similar comparisons show January presentations were down 1.8 per cent, and in March there was a decrease metro wide of 6.5 per cent for 18-65 year olds. RAH presentations increased 2 per cent that month, compared with the same time in 2019.
The UMHCC has operated since March under start-up conditions (referrals limited to ambulance, police and the mental health triage line). It saw 194 people up to April 15 for assessment and support. While it is still too early to draw conclusions, initial figures show 11 per cent of people seen require further hospital referral for mental health, and 6 per cent for physical health. For most of the people supported, this avoids the need to go to an ED.
COVID-19 has had a disproportionate effect on mental health presentations of younger people. The WCHN in particular has had a sustained increase in recent months. Investment in Child and Adolescent Services is important for our younger population.
While we have made progress, we acknowledge there is more work to be done, particularly addressing ED waits for adult mental health patients.
We have a plan that is flexible, which encourages innovations with a focus on delivering high quality mental health care for South Australians.
DR JOHN BRAYLEY IS CHIEF PSYCHIATRIST, SA HEALTH FOR HELP, CALL LIFELINE 13 11 14 OR BEYONDBLUE 1300 224 636
CREDIT: John Brayley
Word count: 699
