OUR SAVVY EXPERT JODY ALLEN’S GUIDE REVEALS WHAT TO DO AND HOW TO DO IT
SMALL BUSINESS LOUISE ROBERTS
IT IS 10 years of mistakes and critical lessons learned the hard way that SMARTdaily Savvy Shopper columnist Jody Allen says gave her the idea for her new book Earn At Home Mum.
And now she’s offering readers her insights on how to make a regular, well-paid living without ever setting foot in a traditional workplace again.
The mum of two sons, Nate, 13, and Flynn, 12, Allen – with the support of husband Brendan – gives what she calls a “warts and all” guide in light of COVID-related job losses hitting women, and many households looking for new streams of income to support themselves.
“I have been scammed and done so many wrong things but it’s a matter of keep trying and finding what works,” Allen says. “I don’t do courses or anything – I’ve got to learn the hard way. If you’re looking for a flexible way to boost your income, start your own business, or work from home effectively but if you don’t know how to start, I can show you how to make it happen.” Allen, known as the Stay at Home Mum, has been there and done it herself. Made redundant a decade ago while pregnant with Flynn and inspired by necessity, she built a money-saving blog from her kitchen table that has grown to become Australia’s biggest mothers’ network, which has more than 500,000 Facebook followers, 31,000 Instagram followers, 2.5 million website users and 6.3 million monthly unique visitors on Pinterest.
Here Allen shares her key advice:
HOW TO START “Identify your passion (trimming dogs for example), set up a Facebook page with your name and face and see what interest you get.
“It is critical to address this issue: Can you work alone? I’m naturally an introvert, can do up to 100 hours a week and would be happy to never leave the house again but some people need others around them. I start work at 4am, doing a few hours before the boys get to school, put on my active wear uniform at 8.30am, go for a bike ride, get back to my home office just after 9am and work right through until 3 pmwhen I alternate pick up with Brendan. I have an exercise bike in my home office and ride this during staff Zoom meets and we have regular Zoom coffee breaks. It works really well for us.”
ONES THAT PAY THE MOST “The top three are writing content for businesses (I know a mum who earns $1000 a week doing this), graphic design including templates for start-up businesses (It’s a boom industry – I know because I am also buying them so a similar earning) and baking from home ($750 a week).
“Others to consider: ● Online: Paid online surveys, podcasting, buy/sell items, rent what you own, create downloadable products.
● Offline: Mystery shopping, tutoring, Uber driving, upcycle second-hand products, or start a market stall.”
ONES THAT DO NOT “There are so many that don’t pay well. Anything that you import from China – there is a glut of that product. I’m sure it might be good if you have something unique but you’re likely selling the same things from China that everyone else has got. Also E books – where you become an instant author by adding your name to a private label book and on-selling the rights. Anything that is multi-level marketing or the old pyramid selling, you will lose money on product outlay and destroy your relationships with friends and family.” In the book, Allen also addresses: ● Finding your niche ● Setting up the branding, packaging ● How to select suppliers for your product ● Registering your ABN, domain name • Marketing and strategies and digital tools to use Research, prep and plan is also obvious but something mums can skimp on in their excitement to be a business owner, she says.
“You should also identify your financial non-negotiables and consider upskilling when necessary.
“Running a business from home is not for everyone. Figure that out and you will be on your way – that is what I can help you with.” Earn At Home Mum by Jody Allen, Ebury Australia, RRP $24.99 is out on May 4
CREDIT: LOUISE ROBERTS
Word count: 726
