Fashion and interiors have always run along parallel lines, but you know the two have truly merged when you can buy your throw cushions at the same place you buy a new dress.
It’s not just about one or the other now, it’s about lifestyle and buying pieces that complement your overall aesthetic.
Mainstream brands such as Country Road have been doing homewares for nearly three decades and younger brands are catching on. Alex and Trahanas, which launched in 2017, won’t be classified as either a fashion or homewares label. “We’re both. We’ve always done our own clothes and tabletop pieces, envisaging this long table lunch scene and dreaming up what you would wear, what’s on the table, what you’re serving things in. It’s the full entertaining scenario,” saysco-designer Alexandra Heard Lisa Gorman, of Gorman, agrees.
“Fashion takes its form across many different categories. Homewares are cross-demographic so they are not designed with specific genders, size or age in mind, which makes them incredibly inclusive,” she says..
ALEX AND TRAHANAS This is a one-stop shop if you want to dress yourself as well as the table. Think breezy white frocks printed with sunshiny-yellow lemons, the print mirrored on Italian-made ceramic serving platters.
“We’re really drawn to the warmth, hospitality and relaxed nature of Mediterranean culture,” co-designer Heleena Trahanas says. “It’s the quintessential long-lunch culture – it all comes back to the table. It’s about food and family and friends, and bringing people together, making them feel really welcome and bringing joy with colour and shape, whether that’s wearing a bold stripe or a colourful ceramic dish in a fun shape.”
THE ICONIC This Aussie start-up built its reputation as one of our leading fashion e-tailers and in September it expanded into the homewares category. It stocks more than 130 home brands and plans to add more. Customers have embraced the offering and are dressing their homes as they would their wardrobes, says Joshua Nunan, The Iconic’s head of home and beauty.
“As we head into the warmer months and for many, return to the new normal after spending more time at home, this is the perfect time for shoppers to refresh their living spaces,” says Joshua.
“From linen bedsheets to mesh produce bags, we’re seeing customers giving all spaces and functions of their home a facelift.”
BONITA COLLECTIVE Colour is what this brand is all about and last year it introduced a homewares line on the basis that the chic customer who celebrated colour in her wardrobe would want to extend it into her home as well.
Bonita Collective’s hand-painted designs lend themselves to big canvases, so it makes sense that tablecloths are one of their signature pieces. A best-seller piece includes splashes of red mixed with deep blue and green shades in a floral pattern.
“The beauty of a brightly coloured tablecloth as a base is that you can pare it back with simple flatware or ham it up with colours and metallics. Either way, it will look striking and certainly creates a festive mood for your guests,” says director Stephanie Rooke.
GORMAN Lifestyle products were always part of Gorman’s fashion collections and a dedicated line launched five years ago. Designer Lisa Gorman believes statement homewares have as much longevity as minimalist styles.
“It’s nice to create a bit of action around the home, layer it up a bit, put your stamp on it with colour and print. We’ve seen some pretty interesting movements in coloured and printed homewares over the ages. The Scandinavians have a long history of big and bold furnishings and homewares that continue to be as relevant today as they were in the ’60s which tells me that print and colour in the home is not leaving us anytime soon,” she says.
COUNTRY ROAD This popular Australian mainstream brand was one of the first to step into interiors. Its homewares line launched in 1989 and standalone Country Road Home stores followed in 1991. “While we know that a successful women’s apparel collection increases the success of our Home collection, we are increasingly becoming the first destination and entry point for a growing number of customers,” says Ty Symonds, head of design (home). “Google Trends has reported a 200 per cent increase during the past year in people specifically searching for Country Road mugs. As we’ve spent more time at home over the past 18 months, our lifestyle categories, including outdoor dining and picnic, have experienced incredible growth with our customers.”
CREDIT: Words; Renata Gortan
Word count: 750
