Connecticut, US You’ve got to love it where you find a place where the freakin’ pet goat lives better than you do … To be honest, I’d expect nothing less in this incredible home owned by Tommy Hilfiger’s ex-wife Susie Hilfiger. She was known as Susie Cirona when she met Hilfiger in 1976, taking a job in his small clothing store People’s Place in Ithaca, New York. The couple married in 1980 and she went on to help her husband grow the Hilfiger brand from an obscure start-up into a world-class conglomerate that sold in 2006 for $1.6 billion. They produced four children throughout their 20-year marriage, but were divorced in 2000.
In case this Dream Homes feature seems a departure from my usual style, it’s been brought to my attention I have a tendency to not include enough detail and exposition in these pieces, so I thought I’d give you the full back story before I go into the home’s features and then inevitably go off the rails … The couple bought the 17-acre family home Denbigh Farm in Greenwith, Connecticut in 1995 and enjoyed many happy years there before the marriage went belly up.
The property has seven bedrooms, nine bathrooms, four partial bathrooms, and rooms for just about every interest, from a ballroom for dancing, to a flower arranging room, a silver storage room (yes, you read that right, an actual room for storing silver – talk about your first world problems …) and an original meat locker. The property has two paddocks, a six-stall stable and an outdoor riding ring. The goats get their own home too, which has more character than mine. And don’t those goats just look super chuffed with themselves! Actually, on second thought, it’s kind of hard to tell. They’re goats.
Price not disclosed
Yarralumla, ACT Got a thing for cars? Because the way the selling agent has marketed this Yarralumla property you’d thing this was a case of “Car for sale, house adjacent”. Apparently the garage will fit 10 cars, although there’s only six pictured here – one on the turntable ready to roar out of the Batcave and the other five sitting there with their headlights on. As you do. Good thing the photographer got them to do that too, as I’d have otherwise not noticed all of those luxury cars there. Well done ... This one’s in beautiful ACT, a territory home to some of the country’s most impressive tourist attractions, the National pretty much everything, and Parliament House – a place you might have read a bit about of late. It’s been making the news a bit … Anyway, this six-bedroom 14 Musgrave St home is a cracking property (the “Richie Benaud” kind of cracking, not the “this place will fall on you in the night” kind) and the perfect place to play out a kind of high roller version of The Castle. You know, the one where you have to get the keys to the McLaren to move the Bentley, to shift the Porsche, to get the Jaguar out. You rich people and your money … Price not disclosed
Long Island, US I’ve always loved it in comedy shows where a writer writes a gag much longer than it needs to be, really dragging it out to the point where it almost overstays its welcome. Family Guy does it really well, and HBO’s Barry, written by the great Bill Hader, has some fantastic examples. Sorry, I got distracted again. I’m not really sure why I’m telling you this … The Bee Gees once said: “Well, you can tell by the way I use my walk I’m a woman’s man, no time to talk. Music loud and women warm, I’ve been kicked around since I was born. And now it’s alright, it’s OK, and you may look the other way. We can try to understand the New York Times’ effect on man. Whether you’re a brother or whether you’re a mother, you’re stayin’ alive, stayin’ alive. Feel the city breakin’ and everybody shakin’ and we’re stayin’ alive, stayin’ alive. Ah, ha, ha, ha, stayin’ alive, stayin’ alive. Ah, ha, ha, ha, stayin’aliiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiive . Well now, I get low and I get high, and if I can’t get either, I really try. Got the wings of heaven on my shoes, I’m a dancin’ man and I just can’t lose. You know it’s alright, it’s OK, I’ll live to see another day. We can try to understand the New York Times’ effect on man. Whether you’re a brother or whether you’re a mother, you’re stayin’ alive, stayin’ alive. Feel the city breakin’ and everybody shakin’ and we’re stayin’ alive, stayin’ alive. Ah, ha, ha, ha, stayin’ alive, stayin’ alive … ” Anyway, this stunning Long Island property was once home to Robin Gibb ...
Price not disclosed All overseas properties for sale through TopTenRealEstateDeals.com
CREDIT: COMPILED BY TOM BOWDEN
Word count: 819
