BOOMER LETTERS
I AND six of my mates from our church group did exactly the same thing as Bob Henderson (Boomer, February 22), not in the 1960s but back in 1945, and I have no memory of first and second waterfalls at that time.
We rode our bikes from Alberton out past Gepps Cross (the end of civilisation in those days) and up Main North Road past Parafield, where we turned off past the chick hatchery and headed up into the hills on what is now McIntyre Road.
A mile or so on, we left our bikes in a disused barn and walked over several hills into a gully with a creek running through and a rock pool.
I don’t remember any waterfall at that time but if there was one, it was likely only a couple of feet.
We camped there over a long weekend and had a ball. One lad had a .22 rifle and I recall got a couple of rabbits.
We dipped in the rock pool (no bathers) and one mate made up a crude bow and arrow and for a joke did a Cupid pose on a large rock.
The photo became famous when somehow it leaked at the church and some of the elders were less than impressed.
I’ve often wondered what happened to the creek, with development right through to Golden Grove and beyond, and recently when I checked the relevant road map I was pleasantly surprised to see the creek and a reserve shown there.
I’m 91 but am contemplating a trip back there to see if the famous rock is still there.
Ron Burchett Blackwood
Virtually useless CALL centres excel in giving people the run-around; these days you are really lucky to find a human being.
I have found it so much easier to visit an actual store e.g. Telstra shop and deal with a real person. Maybe that is why I struggle with Zoom sessions — it is hard to make a meaningful connection on a screen.
Jenny Esots Willunga
Exam flashbacks BOB Byrne’s fine account of Adelaide’s Centennial Hall (Boomer, March 15) brought back mixed memories of my high school and university early summer exam experiences there in the 1960s.
I recall the stifling heat in that vast interior, the exam papers sticking to my palms, the smell of body odour and deodorant, desperate swat-vac cramming, the escapism of Roger Moore as The Saint on TV during study breaks, delightful church tennis between examination bouts.
I remember a wizened little man at the front of the hall standing under a clock starting the exam with the words: “Candidates may … COMMENCE WRITING!” He paused in the middle while he waited for the exact moment when the second hand of the clock above him passed the moment of exam start up.
On the last two words, he pitched his voice theatrically upwards with great emphasis.
The same gnome-like figure ended the exam with a similar clock ritual with the words: “Candidates MUST (pause) STOP WRITING!” On the whole, it was a traumatic experience for me. Success or failure for a whole year’s study dependent on a three-hour exam.
No wonder this nightmare experience is indelibly etched into my memory. Terry Hewton Henley Beach South
Retail recollections I WAS employed for five years at Miller Anderson as an assistant merchandise manager in the 1960s.
In the Boomer article (February 15), there was a photo of the fashion buyer Mrs J Hood.
She was the wife of John Hood, the merchandise manager of Miller Anderson, my direct boss, and a person who guided my professional career when I was 18.
The other person in a photo of interest was the soft furnishing buyer Mr D.N. Colsey, a long-time employee. There were three or four buyers that every 18 months to 24 months travelled to London to buy goods for their departments.
They used to travel by ship and were away from three to six months at a time. In the late 1950s, the company introduced travel by plane but Mr D.N. Colsey would have no part of the plane transport. He continued to go overseas by ship until his retirement.
The saddest thing I remember was the Theatre Royal being demolished for the car park. In the 1950s, I saw a few shows at the Theatre Royal with my parents, including Salads Days and Vienna Boys Choir.
I have had the privilege to work for two of the oldest businesses, Miller Anderson and Sands & McDougall.
John Cuch Oakden THE WAY WE WERE AND AD HOC ARE ON PAGE 40
Word count: 769
