It’s the online craze that’s taken the world by storm, but its creator is completely uninterested in cashing in. CAMERON ENGLAND takes a look at the Wordle phenomenon IF you solved Wordle in two guesses and didn’t share it on social media, did it really even happen?
Over the Australian summer, something odd started to creep into social media streams on platforms such as Twitter and Facebook.
People bragging, by sharing an initially cryptic array of coloured squares, about solving Wordle in 2/6 or 3/6, or lamenting a five or six, or, perhaps that they had crashed and burned entirely.
Some responded by declaring they’d never join this emerging cult of word nerds. Others downloaded an app of the same name and wondered what all the fuss was about.
But by the end of December, a reported three million people or so, many for some reason from Australia and New Zealand, had become hooked on a simple word game created by New York-based engineer Josh Wardle.
In short, Wordle is a web-based word game which gives you six chances to guess that day’s word.
Guess a letter correctly and it shows up in green, guess it correctly but in the wrong place and it shows up in yellow. Solving the puzzle in three guesses is very good, two elevates you to a higher plane than most of your peers, and failure to guess it at all will bring shame upon your family.
From a standing start in October 2021, Wordle has gone on to attain viral status, spawning numerous imitators – and a surprising financial windfall for the creator of the app of the same name, who has said he’ll donate the proceeds to charity – and it prompts some important questions, these being: ■ What is the best starting word?■ How much might Wordle be worth, and ■ What on God’s green earth is a “rebus”?
We’ll ignore the first question and without further adieu(wink wink)move on to the second – with three million users and counting, what would tech companies or venture capitalists, always eager to capture highly-engaged audiences, pay for such an asset?
Nick Crocker, general partner at Blackbird Ventures and former chief executive of start-up accelerator Startmate, says Wordle definitely ticks the box for user engagement.
“Right now, Wordle has cracked the magical balance of not too easy, not too hard, and just fun enough that people tell other people about it. It’s an easy gift to give,’’ Mr Crocker said.
“Gift” being the operative word here. Wardle, a software engineer, created Wordle as a gift for his partner, and it is explicitly not designed with any intent but to entertain.
Mr Crocker says trying to exploit its popularity for commercial gain would likely erode its simple charm.
“If you were going to set up a company that just owned the Wordle game, you’d be limited to charging people to play, selling premium features, or showing ads, and they’d all probably spoil the magic of it,’’ Mr Crocker said.
Pushed to put a value on it, Mr Crocker says it’s “probably worth one times the total ad dollars you could suck out of it before it died ... which would be a sad way to ruin something sweet, and simple.
“I think Wordle is best left as art and not commerce for now.’’ Rachael Neumann, founding partner at Flying Fox Ventures, says Wordle breaks one of the key rules of games design, which is to keep users playing for as long as possible.
“Having the same word for everybody at the same time gives it a fun competitive edge,’' she said. “It bucks the trend of continuous play though – where games usually want users to get hooked for hours, and instead makes you wait impatiently for the next puzzle and doesn’t let you play the back catalogues.
“The developer has said he only wants three minutes of your day and no more. Somehow that’s working but I never would have predicted it.’’ Wardle has himself showed no interest in profiting from the game, rather expressing his desire that it remain free and ad-free.
“I don’t understand why something can’t just be fun,” Wardle told the BBC. “I don’t have to charge people money for this and ideally would like to keep it that way.
“There are also no ads and I am not doing anything with your data – and that is also quite deliberate.” Wardle did not respond to requests for comment before press time. Perhaps he’s busy making a rebus, which for the record, is a puzzle which combines pictures and letters. But if you play Wordle, you probably already knew that.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 783
