WORKLIFE STARTING A FRANCHISE CAN MEAN MORE TIME WITH THE KIDS, ESPECIALLY FOR DADS A RISING number of Australian parents are ditching their nine-to-five jobs in favour of owning their own franchise business as they seek greater work-life flexibility and wealth.
With the coronavirus crisis forcing more Australians to work from home, the bonus was extra time to spend with families as multiple hours were saved not commuting.
New research has found that more than a third of fathers say they are missing out on valuable family time because of their jobs and wish they had a more flexible schedule. And 16 per cent of men want to be their own boss but don’t know where to start, according to a survey by franchise business Fantastic Services Group.
So what are the steps to take to check if buying a business, that is part of a chain, is right for you?
SEE IF IT WILL DELIVER WORK-LIFE BALANCE Dads particularly are benefiting from home services franchises such as pest control, lawn mowing and rubbish removal, allowing them to schedule jobs and plan their days better.
Fantastic Services Group CEO Rune Sovndahl expects his Australian franchise network to double to 280 over the next year as people look to change jobs.
He says running a franchise gives people greater flexibility and more time with their family. Plus, a franchise owner has the support of a large network of fellow small businesses owners, unlike someone running their independent business.
“Right now the opportunity is so big and there’s a number of labour skills shortages and a number of other things going on,” Sovndahl says.
CLEANING, LAWN MOWING AND GARDENING POPULAR Sovndahl says local businesses like these are successful because owners understand the community and want to be a part of it.
For a franchisee to succeed, they must be ready for the career change and have excellent people-management skills, he adds.
During the coronavirus pandemic, franchises managed to navigate through the crisis because of the big support network available to them, compared to privately-owned small businesses, according to Sovndahl.
Neel Patel bought a pest control franchise last year so he could take his two young children to daycare and school and spend more time with them.
“I bought a franchise because I wanted a better work-life balance and so I could especially spend more time with my young children,” he says.
“I chose a pest control franchise because ever since I was a child, I’ve always hated bugs and I’ve always been interested in home improvement.
KEEP YOUR INCOME STEADY DURING PANDEMIC “People still needed pest control especially as they were spending more time at home,” Patel says.
“A lot of the initial start-up costs that come with starting a business are taken care of and there is no need to worry about starting from scratch.
“All the bookings and payments are done through the office, which makes everything easier for me and I can properly concentrate on the jobs at hand,” he says.
“I also have much more flexibility with my schedule and can plan my time around my family, which is most important to me.
“I have so much more time to spend with my kids, which I’m very happy about because they are growing up so fast and I don’t want to miss even a minute of it.”
UNDERTAKE DUE DILIGENCE Franchise Council of Australia chief executive Mary Aldred says its members are telling them that the biggest growth is in inquiries from people considering franchises in the services sector, such as home maintenance and gardening.
“We’ve heard of a number of single parents taking up franchises such as dog grooming because of the flexible hours and control over your own work-life balance.” There are around 96,000 individual franchise outlets across Australia, employing just under 600,000 people, according to IBISWorld Research.
But before jumping into a franchise business, the FCA “strongly recommends proper due diligence before buying any business, franchised or non-franchised”, Aldred says. “This includes getting expert legal and financial advice, to understand your obligations and rights,” she says, adding it offers free educational resources for prospective franchisees.
CREDIT: Lilly Vitorovich
Word count: 694
