What’s your opinion of the Volkswagen MK5 Golf R32? Are they a good car? Any issues with them?
Kristian Edgcumbe, email Now you’re talking my language. These 2006-2009 all-wheel-drive hot hatches are excellent performance buys . I drove a friend’s example recently and its grip, noise and acceleration had me itching for one. A 3.2-litre VR6 engine, 184kW/320Nm and 0-100km/h in 6.2 seconds, all from about $15,000. Manuals are rare, but VW’s DSG auto problems were mainly sorted by this time. Even so, prioritise one with an impeccable service history. R32s were built to be driven, so most will have had a hard life. The Mk5 Golf GTI is worth a try too. $10,000 buys a good one with three pedals: those prices will soon climb as it’s now being recognised as a GTI high point.
LIFE SAVER?
Re your comment on roll bars (sports bars) fitted to dual cab utes. Are they “only cosmetic”? My son was driving his Toyota HiLux fitted with one, he was run off the road and rolled down a gully. It was deemed the roll bar was effective and he only sustained minor injuries.
Malcolm Mackenzie If accident investigators deemed a sports bar protected the cabin in any way, it’s hard to be anything but very happy about that. But people mustn’t confuse these steel sports bar accessories with proper rollover protection bars. The likes of Safety Devices make multi-point bolt-in roll cages for dual cabs to protect all passengers, typically for oil, gas and mining fleets. I haven’t seen any manufacturers claim that sports bars improve rollover safety.
UNBREAKABLE Re Jim Reynolds’s Toyota HiLux only needing a couple of replacement clutches after 535,000km, my 2013 Toyota HiAce is still on its original clutch after 340,000km and I drive it like I stole it.
Steve Gorton, email Of all the vehicles I wouldn’t drive “like I stole it” the HiAce would be up there. I’d be into a hedge with a burnt-out clutch in no time.
SAFE OR UNSAFE?
Re autonomous emergency braking (AEB) happening at the wrong time, I’ve experienced this many times. I wonder how many so-called “brake-check” incidents are initiated by AEB? Unwanted braking has led to the usual pumped-up ute blokes tailgating me thinking I’ve brake-tested them, but it’s been the AEB at work. No wonder they overtake me enraged.
Ross F, email Not only AEB, but also radar cruise control. If a car suddenly pulls in front on the highway, the radar cruise jabs the brakes and can look like you’re brake-testing the car (or angry ute driver) behind. If people just left a safe distance to the car in front, so much road rage – and so many accidents – could be avoided.
CRACKING UP My 2019 Subaru Forester driver’s leather seat has two splits on the side. It’s only done 40,000km. The dealer was of the opinion it wouldn’t be covered under warranty as it’s wear and tear. I’m perplexed as the splits are on spots I don’t sit. Should I pursue this with Subaru or am I flogging a dead horse?
Silvio Iadarola, email Absolutely you should pursue this issue with Subaru Australia. Other Forester owners have reported cracking seats, and if they can’t show any accidental damage on your part has caused them, it surely must be a warranty repair. I don’t think anyone would think split seats is fair wear and tear on a car that’s less than three years old. If you’ve had no joy with the dealer, call Subaru customer care on 1800 226643, get a case number from them and tell them you’re looking for a repair under warranty.
REV HEAD At my 2019 MG3’s first service the dealership asked if there were any issues. I said yes, it does 2000rpm on start-up first thing in the morning. I was told this is normal. Things must have changed since I was an apprentice and taught never to rev a cold engine.
Denys Elder, email I wouldn’t worry, 2000rpm won’t be stretching a cold engine. If it stays at 2000rpm at idle there is a problem and the dealer must diagnose and remedy this. MG offers a seven-year warranty, so make good use of it. But really, the 82kW 1.5-litre four-cylinder in your MG3 isn’t an engineering marvel. If a few revs get it started on a cold morning I’d forgive it that.
FUEL MISER Re Jeep fuel economy, I have a 2015 Cherokee Limited 2.0-litre diesel. On a 9000km trip towing a 2000kg camper trailer I recorded 10.2L/100km. On a 450km highway leg I saw 8.1L/100km. I was the happiest camper and it tows beautifully.
Ian Murley, email You’re a miracle worker if your figures are accurate, Ian. Previous letter writers were towing with heavier Grand Cherokees, so your smaller Cherokee does have an advantage. Its official economy is 5.8L/100km with no trailer, but my test saw closer to 8L/100km. For the sake of the planet, and your wallet, I hope your numbers are accurate!
IAIN CURRY GETS ANSWERS WRITE TO MOTORING AT CARS@NEWS.COM.AU OR PO BOX 2808, GPO SYDNEY, 2001
CREDIT: IAIN CURRY
Word count: 854
