Talking about suicide on-air started a conversation that is still going for radio host Gus Worland. He has since hosted documentary Man Up and started suicide-prevention foundation Gotcha4Life. His next step is focusing on education. The 52-year-old father of three aims to empower men and women to open up about their mental health – in turn sparking conversations with their children
You’re not only a radio presenter but also a fierce advocate for mental health. How did this start? One day [on radio show The Grill Team] I was sitting with Matty Johns and MG [Mark Geyer], two boofy footy players, and I said, “We’re in our 40s, married, we’ve got bits of our bodies that don’t work like they used to. Perhaps we can talk about what it actually takes to be a man today?” I told the story of my friend, a father figure who took his own life, and it absolutely rocked me. We were flooded with callers pouring their hearts out; suddenly we’d given them permission to chat about things outside of the Foo Fighters.
Did that inspire you to start up your foundation for suicide prevention, Gotcha4Life? After hosting Man Up [a 2016 ABC documentary series], I was charged up. I realised I had this soap box and started Gotcha. Our focus is zero suicides; one is too many. We’ve given nearly $7 million for suicide prevention. The focus should now be on education of children to have conversations of gravity.
How can parents get better at doing this with their own kids? [Cricketer] Steve Smith did his 100 hours of community service with Gotcha. We went to my old school, Knox [Grammar School], and he was like, “I’ll get booed.” He spoke with vulnerability, and you know what? Ten days later, 11 boys left the school; Smithy had given them permission to have conversations of gravity. It showed me that if you scrape under the surface, kids know what they want – what school to go to, what sport to play and what’s best for them. I say to other parents, “When was the last time you asked them, ‘How are you really going?’” So, go for a walk or drive, no phones, and have a proper conversation. Also as parents, we have to show vulnerability; then it’s normalised.
What has working with men and mental health taught you? It’s not just men; even though 75 per cent of suicides are men, we have 65,000 attempts each year and most are women. I’ve spent the past couple of years talking to people who’ve tried to take their own life. They have two things in common: they were exhausted putting on the mask and armour every day, and a numbness and darkness they couldn’t escape. So, how do we give them the words to have a conversation? If we’re vulnerable, we’re better at dealing with the stuff life throws at us. It’s getting the balance of when I need to step up, I’ll do it, but I’m going to love my wife and children – I’m not going to play up – and that’s what it takes to be a man. You need to let your loved ones know all your creases. I say to my wife and children, “I’ve had a really tough month, I’ve cried a lot, I’ve been overwhelmed.” If you’re vulnerable, you’re more likely to be yourself. If you’re more likely to be yourself, you’ll share how you truly feel.
What is your mental-fitness nonnegotiable? I meditate daily. Jacko [best friend Hugh Jackman] started meditating about 25 years ago and I remember when we were in his trailer on a movie set and he was lying on the floor with his feet on the chair. He meditated for 10 minutes and he was recharged. He taught me something then and I didn’t pick up on it. Then my wife, Vicky, was pestering me, so I did a five-week meditation course, and now I do it every day.
For more information or support, visit gotcha4life.org or call Lifeline on 13 11 14.
Gus Worland will co-host radio show The Rush Hour with Gus, Jude and Wendell on Triple M Sydney in 2022.
The one thing you should do right NOW One of Worland’s most effective mental-health-boosting exercises, particularly one he gets his corporate clients to do, is “write a village list” – that is, make a list of people you can’t imagine living without. “For me, it’s my wife, kids, mum, best mates and some mentors,” Worland explains. “When was the last time you told them you loved them and why? Go on, do it now.” This simple message, he tips, boosts connection and can trigger deeper conversations. “It’s extremely powerful not just for me to send it, but also for the people who receive it knowing they’re not alone.”
CREDIT: STORY FELICITY HARLEY
Word count: 813
