HOW TO STOP MAKING EXCUSES AND START YOUR OWN BUSINESS INSTEAD ENTREPRENEUR When I look back to my Year 12 yearbook where all students had to write what they wanted to be when they grew up, mine was “to start my own business”.
So I, like many thousands of others, knew that’s exactly what I wanted to do. I wanted to be a master of my own destiny – my own boss. “You don’t get rich working for other people,” was what my father told me again and again.
But it took me another nearly 20 years to start one. Those 20 years were full of excuses of why I couldn’t or wouldn’t do it. Excuses I’m going to discuss below. Probably the same excuses you are using right now: ● I don’t have any money to start a business ● I don’t have enough hours in the day ● I don’t know what to sell ● Who will buy stuff from me?
● I’m not good enough ● There’s too much competition out there ● I don’t know how Let’s talk about each of them:
I DON’T HAVE ENOUGH MONEY TO START A BUSINESS There is no better time in history thanright now to start a business. If you don’t have any money – just start small and grow it as you go. If you want to start selling a product, try drop shipping instead. That is where you sell a product from a Facebook page or a small website and the product is shipped directly from the manufacturer or stockist and it is delivered straight to the customer – and you take the difference in price. This means you don’t need stock or storage and don’t need to worry about postage and handling.
I DON’T HAVE ENOUGH HOURS IN THE DAY This is a really common excuse. Let’s put it in perspective. You have exactly the same amount of hours in the day as Beyonce does – and look what she gets done. If you want something, you will make time for it. Get off Netflix, get up earlier in the morning. Use your lunch hour. Take your laptop to your hair appointment. Multi-task. If it was easy, everyone would do it.
I DON’T KNOW WHAT TO SELL Well, what is selling already? I like to go on to sales platform sites such as Etsy or eBay and see the products that are in the bestsellers range. These are what is selling right now. How can you make this product better? Or can this product be used in a different way. Think about your own life and what could possibly make your life easier? Brainstorming is free to do and the best way to come up with the perfect product.
WHO WILL BUY STUFF FROM ME?
If you build it, they will come. I was speaking with a graphic artist this week who wanted to work with small business start-ups making them logos and business cards and branding in a “start-up package”. But she didn’t know who would buy it from her. She didn’t have an example of what she could do or a package to sell. Her reason was “I need a customer first so I can see what they want”. But customers don’t always know what they want. So if you have a few packages and you put it together and show people, then they can see exactly what they are getting and they are more likely to buy. Give your customers something to buy.
I’M NOT GOOD ENOUGH This is a very common excuse, particularly for mums who are wanting to start their own business. And it’s a shame they feel that way because they are good enough. Always remember no one else is you and you have something to offer. Mums are fantastic business owners, as they can prioritise, multitask, deal with stressful situations and never give up. So get over yourself and have no regrets.
THERE IS TOO MUCH COMPETITION OUT THERE There is always going to be competition but use it to your advantage. A challenge will make you strive to be better, to make your product or service more awesome. Think about what your competitor is currently offering, and just make yours better, different, and unique.
I DON’T KNOW HOW One word: YouTube. I have been in business for 10 years and I still use YouTube all the time. There is nothing you cannot learn on YouTube. Borrow books from the library, ask people who are already doing it. You should remove the words “I don’t know” from your vocabulary. Business owners may not know how but they find out how and that thinking makes the difference. Jody Allen is the founder of mothers’ network Stay At Home Mum. Find her at @StayHomeMum on Facebook, @jodyallen.stayathomemum on Instagram, @JodyAllen_SAHM on Twitter
CREDIT: JODY ALLEN
Word count: 814
