THE digital retail revolution which in the US and UK delivers a seamless and hyper-convenient experience for consumers is coming soon to Australia, and retailers need to be ready according to Chad Hetherington, chief executive of Minneapolis-based consumer brand agency The Stable.
The Adelaide expat and his co-founders, Nik Larsen and Kate Hetherington, have grown the business from a start-up in 2015 to now employing more than 500 people across the US and internationally, bolstered by funding rounds from venture capital firms Gen7 and Growth Capital Partners (GCP).
The Stable’s client roster includes names such as Ring, quip, General Mills, Red Bull and Netflix and it also has deals with Walmart, Target, Amazon and Shopify.
Mr Hetherington said the agency provided a full-service retail offering, helping clients build online stores, market within sites such as Amazon and design and run direct-to-consumer campaigns on platforms such as TikTok.
The Stable is now considering Australia as one of its next markets for expansion, with Mr Hetherington on the ground over the past couple of weeks taking meetings.
He said Australian consumers and retailers had been quick to adapt to the digital realm, but a new era of convenience and an uplift in the user experience, which already existed in the US, was on the way.
“I think the retailers here have done a fair job, especially over the pandemic, pulling together a lot of the initiatives we’ve seen in the other markets such as the US and UK,’’ Mr Hetherington said. “I think perhaps where it falls a little short is the consistency in experience between in-store and online.’’ Mr Hetherington said there was still occasionally a disconnect between inventories in-store and online, which needed to be smoothed out.
With retailers in the US in some markets offering delivery times as low as an hour, and numerous different delivery or pick-up options, inventory management was crucial.
This offers high-level convenience for customers, Mr Hetherington said, but it meant that digital advertising for example, needed to be geographically aligned to inventory levels.
“It can be a little out of touch between what’s happening in store and online, so how do you bring together a true seamless experience that covers brand, value, offers, delivery and all of those things.
“I don’t think it’s far off (in Australia) though.’’ The company has a strong international focus, now providing translation services and advice on issues such as value added tax, GST and logistics, and is “seriously considering” Australia as one of its next regions for expansion.
The Stable already does client work in the local market, but Mr Hetherington said he was hoping that by June next year they’d have “boots fully on the ground’’.
“How we do that is part of my trip. Do we partner up with a company and do an acquisition, do we hire up people, that’s probably what we’re still trying to figure out,” he said.
“My board’s very excited about the market down here.
“Amazon and Shopify continue to invest in other markets … and we want to follow that and make sure we’re in the same markets they are and that we’re showing up aggressively.
“Every big client of ours is looking for help digitally. If you can then deploy that globally, that puts us in a really good spot if we’ve got experts that can do that.
“We’re in maybe 12 countries now that we’re doing work in.’’ The company’s most recent VC investment, from GCP in April 2020, coincided with a merger with Arkansas-based retail agency Kreative Sales & Marketing, and late last year The Stable also acquired Shopify agencies BVA Commerce and Zehner.
Mr Hetherington said The Stable was now “a true cross-functional agency’’. An example of the functionality they offer is increasing the sophistication of social media marketing.
“When you get served up an ad on Facebook we make it shoppable, we tie it back to retail partners so you never leave the ad, it’s really frictionless, it ties in to real-time inventories.
“If you were advertising in Florida but you didn’t have any stock on the floor there’s no point in advertising there – it’s really dynamic.” He said retail and direct-to-consumer were the two main platforms of the business.
“Retail is still very much Target, Walmart and Amazon. Direct-to-consumer is very much media and social. It’s really evolved into true omni-channel platform,” Mr Hetherington said. “Any brand can come to us at any stage of the journey and say ‘ I’m trying to reach the consumer through this channel, can you help us out?’.’’ He said the power of platforms such as TikTok was phenomenal, with successful product launches able to sell out lines within hours. “The phone is the new retailer,” he said.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 794
