html>
Max Allen Melbourne-based wine scribe Max Allen has written a new book about the drinks that shaped Australia. He spoke to Katie Spain.
In the beginning I grew up in England and was good at writing and visual art at school. When you’re at school, there’s the guy who is going to go on to be the footie champion, the guy who’s going to go on to cure cancer, and the class clown. I was the artist. My stepfather is Australian so we came on trips to Australia when I was young. I fell in love with wine on a trip to Australia when I was 22. A family friend took us on a cellar door visit and it completely, totally, blew me away. Within a week I was drinking Grange in Bilson’s restaurant in Circular Quay and buying half a bottle of Wolf Blass Black Label in a pizza joint in Melbourne because it was only 15 bucks back then.
A new path After this amazing wine experience in Australia, I went back to England and started working in bottle shops. I worked on a wine competition (as a grunt, opening and pouring bottles) and got to meet a bunch of wine writers like Oz Clarke. When Robert Joseph (British wine expert and the man behind Wine Internationalmagazine) knew that I was moving to Australia permanently in 1992, he said, “If you come across any stories, let us know”. So that planted the seed. When I got here, I met a photographer at start-up desktop published magazine Divine who worked at The Age and literally put a typewritten story on the editor’s desk that got published. That’s how it started.
My latest chapter I’ve always been interested in history. I’ve been writing about the history of drinking since the very beginning of my time in Australia. I wrote Intoxicating: Ten Drinks that Shaped Australia because I thought it would be great for somebody to go a bit deeper – to write a history of alcohol in Australia, because nobody’s done it. Remarkably, there’s history of wine, the history of beer, the history of places like wineries and pubs, and lots of academic stuff … but nothing about the history of drinking in Australia. Rather than trying to do everything, I decided to focus on 10 stories that mean something to me.
Beautiful moments During the writing process, I researched indigenous fermentation and tasted the fermented sap of the Tasmanian cider gum (enjoyed by Indigenous people long before European invasion). The realisation that these indigenous drinks existed was definitely one the most important things I learned. What does it taste like? It’s fresh, it’s not really a sap, it’s more of an exudate. It tastes like a kind of lemony sugar syrup. It’s a really delicious light delicate flavour. The final chapter became a story about going into the bush with an Aboriginal elder at his invitation, to see if we could make wine out of native grapes. That was an incredible experience. If you just read one chapter, I’d probably suggest you go straight to the end.
Aussie as I also spent a day brewing VB in the Abbotsford brewery. I wanted to do that because I thought it would be a good narrative to the story about beer and I knew that they used Australian grains and hops. By the end of the day I honestly felt so proud of the “Australianness” of it. It was like, “What are you doing? You don’t even like this beer, and you’re feeling this kind of brand loyalty.” It’s easy to pooh-pooh beer like that but if you want to find a drink that has terroir written all over it, it’s bloody VB.
The way I write I imagine the language coming to life in the reader’s mind. People tell me I write in a conversational way – that’s how I’ve always written. I wrote this book in 10 episodes thinking that this would make a good radio show. So, I’m writing in a way that lends itself to the spoken word. The book hopefully appeals to people who have never had a drink in their life. It’s not just the product, it’s not just what’s in the glass, it’s what’s behind it that’s the most interesting thing. Every corner of Australia features in the book somewhere.
These COVID times Releasing a book during a global pandemic has been really challenging. Normally, I’d be in Adelaide during the release week at a bar somewhere doing a tasting and a talk. Of course, online has made up for it. I’ve done heaps of radio and Instagram live and website Q&As. That’s good in terms of the message getting out there. You’ll probably see a lot more online presence from me that I’m comfortable with, or am used to doing. Most of the time I’m not really a people person.
This challenging year Here in Melbourne, we were all in lockdown, then went back into lockdown. There’s no doubt that this brought how we drink and what we’re drinking to the fore. Also, how we relate to the people who produce the drink and how it’s distributed; all the weaknesses in the system that have been exposed by the pandemic. In some ways it’s kind of ironic. And ironically, unwittingly, a topic that people are quite interested in now. Intoxicating: Ten Drinks that Shaped Australia,by Max Allen (Thames & Hudson, $32.99).
CREDIT: Katie Spain
Word count: 912
