Astrologer Natasha Weber determines what’s in store for you in 2021, from love and career to health and home – while a certain well-known Gemini, Abbie Chatfield, reveals which star signs are on her romance radar
If there’s one thing Australia knows about Abbie Chatfield, it’s her star sign. Those who watched Matt Agnew’s season of The Bachelor in 2019 – and quite a few who didn’t – will remember her first meeting with him in the mansion’s driveway, where she famously mistook his career as an astrophysicist for that of astrologer, and endeared herself to audiences (and spawned a plethora of memes) by proudly replying, “OK, I’m a Gemini.” A year on, it’s a moment she still gets asked about. “Literally all the time,” she tells Body+Soul. “People even say it back to me when I introduce myself.” Chatfield was dumped by Agnew (a Leo) in the season finale, and didn’t have much more luck on this year’s series of Bachelor In Paradise. So she’s heading into the new year single and, as someone who grew up reading horoscopes with her mum (also a Gemini), is eager to know what 2021 has in store. “I just want to settle down and not have such a crazy love life,” she admits. “I’d like to meet a stable guy who’s either a Taurian, Libran, Leo or Sagittarian; definitely not a Capricorn.” Chatfield, who admits she convinces first dates to contact their mums and ask for their exact birth time so she can see if they’re compatible, says the sexiest signs are “Leos and Scorpios... they’re feisty and powerful”. Astrologer Natasha Weber says 2021 looks promising for Geminis and marriage proposals, so perhaps Chatfield will find true love, after all.
Also on the cards for next year? It will come as a relief to learn the turbulence of 2020 will pass. “Astrologers predicted the challenges of this difficult year due to the cosmic dance between Jupiter, Pluto and Saturn,” Weber explains. “Pluto rules viruses and the last time we had these planets interacting was in 1918, the year of the Spanish flu. These three planets are heavyweights and they create lasting change, but we’ve got Saturn moving out of the picture so that trio will no longer be interacting at that level.” Weber adds that the forthcoming planet movements spell out a time of prosperity. “We have what I call a ‘Jupiter story’. [That planet] represents freedom and travel, and it’s how we find our bliss. It’s been caged in during 2020, but Jupiter will move into Pisces around May, which is where it truly flourishes, and then right at the end of December 2021, it will shift back into Pisces for a very long spell, meaning 2022 will be even brighter and lighter.” To find out what next year holds for you and your loved ones, turn the page for a full rundown by star sign.
HOROSCOPES BY ASTROLOGER NATASHA WEBER ARIES (Mar 21–Apr 20) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: Rams embrace a new love chapter, thanks to August’s new moon. That said, greener pastures don’t guarantee happiness. In September, Mercury’s retrograde craves intimacy. Independent singles let down their walls, while couples smash a mutual goal.
CAREER AND FINANCES: At work, January is a pressure cooker, but Rams thrive in the heat. A power struggle between the sun and Pluto sees you come out on top. Still, you may question what you’ve had to sacrifice.
HEALTH AND HOME: February’s full moon brings a glow-up, as you’re motivated to get into tip-top shape. Watch out for stress in April, when family commitments test you. A clever coping strategy saves your sanity.
POWER MONTH: August
TAURUS (Apr 21–May 21) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: Cupid hits his target in July, thanks to amorous Venus. Single Bulls make a deep and meaningful connection that ticks all the boxes. Make fun your number-one priority, because couples who play together stay together in 2021.
CAREER AND FINANCES: Mercury’s retrograde brings a career reassessment in May, as your ambitions shift. A list of pros and cons, written in black and white, clarifies your next step.
HEALTH AND HOME: Mid-year, a female relative needs a helping hand. Lend your support but think twice before opening your wallet. November’s eclipse inspires an image overhaul. Your personal presentation reflects your self-worth, so invest in yourself. Splurge on a radical new look that makes you feel a million bucks.
POWER MONTH: November
GEMINI (May 22–Jun 22) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: May’s eclipse rocks relationships – it’s make or break time! See this as a positive step in clearing out deadwood. Strong couples survive and thrive as commitment steps up. A marriage proposal may be on the cards for loved-up Twins.
CAREER AND FINANCES: In June, Jupiter grants a preview of what’s to come work-wise. The lucky planet prepares you for success and by December, your efforts are rewarded. You deserve to be remunerated for your expertise, so don’t settle for peanuts.
HEALTH AND HOME: The new moon brings a health issue to light around your birthday. A little time out gets you back on track, provided you’re not burning the candle at both ends. Parents dish out tough love in July, for the sake of family peace.
POWER MONTH: June
CANCER (Jun 23–Jul 23) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: The year begins on a romantic high, but in April, Pluto’s retrograde demands that you take back your power. Love is a two-way street, after all. By October, relationships flourish once your give-and-take ratio has been tweaked.
CAREER AND FINANCES: A glowing recommendation from a female team leader or co-worker is the boost your career craves. March brims with golden opportunities, but you’ll have to walk your talk. Back yourself and you’ll go far.
HEALTH AND HOME: This year, a double whammy of eclipses begs you to ditch an unhealthy vice. You’ll make fantastic progress once you lift your wellbeing game. As 2021 wraps up, you’ll be at your sparkly best.
POWER MONTH: December
LEO (Jul 24–Aug 23) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: What good are boundaries if you don’t stick to them? In May, Saturn’s retrograde demands that you stand firm. The topic of children arises mid-year for Lions keen to start a family. August’s full moon brings a love epiphany.
CAREER AND FINANCES: January loosens your purse strings, tempting you to splurge. Reward yourself with some retail therapy, but by August, it’s time to get serious. Mercury alerts you to a crucial financial detail that’s easily missed. Examine your credit-card statements with a fine-toothed comb.
HEALTH AND HOME: 2021 inspires you to spruce up your home with beautiful artwork and sentimental favourites. Go easy on yourself in December, when there’s a risk of burnout. Recharge your batteries surrounded by trees, sunshine and blue skies.
POWER MONTH: January
VIRGO (Aug 24–Sep 23) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: Venus re-evaluates love goals in 2021. Couples needn’t part ways, but an honest heart-to-heart is called for. Single? Enjoy your freedom while it lasts. Chances are, you’ll be blissed out in coupledom by year’s end thanks to Jupiter’s happy dance in your relationship zone.
CAREER AND FINANCES: By September, Mercury’s retrograde reviews a legal document. If possible, hold off from signing until October. December’s full moon confirms a property sale or purchase.
HEALTH AND HOME: Saturn pushes you hard, so more nourishing broths, sleep and extra TLC, please! You’d be wise to adopt a wellbeing strategy that balances work and play. May’s eclipse tightens family bonds.
POWER MONTH: December
LIBRA (Sep 24–Oct 23) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: A love hiccup kicks off January, but Mercury’s retrograde helps iron out misunderstandings. Honest communication is the key to happy, healthy relationships in 2021. By March, Venus blesses you with a romantic gesture that means the world to you.
CAREER AND FINANCES: Financial freedom stems from making more money – it’s that’s simple. And November’s new moon gives you the chance to do just that. Say yes to extra hours at work. Or develop a side hustle in April.
HEALTH AND HOME: In 2021, a family tug-of-war questions loyalties. Stand your ground and have your own back, Libra. Jupiter protects your health in winter, but don’t neglect the basics. Eat sensibly and, above all, don’t skimp on sleep from May until July.
POWER MONTH: April
SCORPIO (Oct 24–Nov 22) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: 2021 begins with a bang as Uranus shifts gears in your relationship zone. Ditch draining relationships, and claim “out with the old, in with the new” as your motto. Power couples plan a once-in-a-lifetime experience.
CAREER AND FINANCES: Avoid get-rich-quick schemes throughout the year. August sees you on top of your finances. And by October, a golden career opportunity pops up out of the blue.
HEALTH AND HOME: Jupiter blesses your home zone, making October perfect for throwing a lavish party. Go all out to celebrate a special milestone with loved ones. Make your health a priority, and ease tension in April, when the new moon triggers your wellbeing sector.
POWER MONTH: October
SAGITTARIUS (Nov 23–Dec 21) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: When it comes to merging love and money, keep your head in the game and leave emotions at the door. By mid-year, you’ll have a more balanced perspective, and the green light to join forces. May tantalises single Archers with a plethora of romantic options.
CAREER AND FINANCES: It’s crunch time! Pluto forces a financial issue to a head in April. You’re set to profit, provided you’re realistic. By May, you’ll forge a powerful alliance with an inspirational female.
HEALTH AND HOME: 2021 is a game-changer for Archers. Your sign hosts two eclipses, bringing twists and turns throughout the year. There’s potential for fantastic progress, provided you roll with the punches. No easy task, but then again, neither is achieving greatness.
POWER MONTHS: May and December
CAPRICORN (Dec 22–Jan 20) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: Mars encourages a pragmatic approach to love at the start of the year. By November’s eclipse, opt for cool logic over being emotionally led. 2021 doesn’t put out your romantic spark, you’re just ready to get real.
CAREER AND FINANCES: Clean up your financial act in May. Saturn’s retrograde suggests you cut down on unused credit cards and inactive bank accounts. Check direct debits, too. You don’t want to be charged for a service you’re not using. A professional accolade or promotion wraps up your year.
HEALTH AND HOME: 2021 welcomes Venus to your sign, getting you glowing from the inside out. As a result, you kiss January goodbye as the best version of yourself. December’s full moon reminds you that you’re not in competition with anyone else – it’s your PB that counts.
POWER MONTH: January
AQUARIUS (Jan 21–Feb 19) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: The first full moon of 2021 reminds you that your relationships mirror your self-worth, so be discerning about who you team up with. June’s eclipse brings a valuable love lesson. Work on dismantling your emotional walls, Aquarius.
CAREER AND FINANCES: As 2021 unfolds, your career blossoms. Venus boosts your reputation in September, and by year’s end, your boss sings your praises. Jupiter activates your money zone – ask for a raise!
HEALTH AND HOME: Common sense kicks in when it comes to a family matter. Putting your foot down does the trick, so don’t be afraid to show some tough love in the first half of 2021. Watch out for minor mishaps around April, when Mars makes you more accident-prone than usual.
POWER MONTH: September
PISCES (Feb 20–Mar 20) LOVE AND RELATIONSHIPS: Mars sets your love life alight in April. Couples reignite their spark, while singles make a connection that could last the distance. Passion burns bright, but by September’s new moon, you’ll want to get off the roller-coaster. By then, stability is the most attractive option.
CAREER AND FINANCES: Your earning potential is on the rise as March wraps up. Turn a creative talent into a start-up or a hobby into a career. December’s eclipse brings professional opportunities galore.
HEALTH AND HOME: By mid-year, you’ll step in to support a parent. July sees you quit a habit that’s to your detriment. Defrizz your soul as you wave goodbye to 2021. Escape to an idyllic spot where you can hear, smell and see the ocean. POWER MONTH: March
CREDIT: STORY BREE PLAYER
Word count: 2043
