T-Ports has expanded its leadership team and appointed a new chief executive officer to continue the company's focus on strategic growth initiatives into 2022-23.
Current CEO Kieran Carvill will take on a specialised role to fast-track a range of business growth opportunities in planning, leading a new business development strategy within the company.
Experienced consultant and business executive Scott McKay will step into the CEO role to continue the management of T-Ports' core business and day-to-day activities as well as engagement with stakeholders.
T-Ports chairman Rob Chapman said the Board was looking forward to accelerating its growth plans with such an experienced combination of leaders at the helm.
"As a business, we're proud of the significant achievements made over the past five years in completing our supply chain development at Kimba, Lock and Lucky Bay on the Eyre Peninsula, and having commenced the construction of the Wallaroo port," he said.
RELATED READING: T-Ports consults community on Kingscote timber export plan
RELATED READING: Biochar project to transform timber plantation waste on KI
"Kieran has successfully led the company through its initial start-up phase and now, as the company has matured, will be able to focus on an area of the business he is particularly passionate about - further diversification opportunities in transhipment to drive future company growth.
"Scott comes to the role with extensive experience in leading businesses across the supply chain. His previous experience as a principal at Aurecon and CEO of Bowmans Rail, as well as his extensive consulting experience across the mining and agricultural sectors, will prove valuable to the company."
Mr McKay said he was excited at the opportunity to lead the company into the next phase.
"The key point of difference with T-Ports is the ability to deliver from concept and approvals to design to construction and operation of a port and collection system in only a few years, which brings to life an integrated grain supply chain," he said.
"That is a really exciting concept and not possible with other port infrastructure models.
"I'm looking forward to working with our stakeholders to drive the business forward."
CREDIT:
Word count: 352
