More than 50 people were in attendance for the launch of start-up company Eyre Business in Kimba late last month.
Local business personnel and visitors were on hand for the launch of business that was founded by Kimba's Kerri Cliff and Kathleen Tierney of Perth to create employment opportunities for underutilised rural and regional Australians.
Among those in attendance were mayor Dean Johnson and Member for Flinders Peter Treloar.
Eyre Business will provide virtual administration services to businesses of all sizes and needs, and is based in a former Kimba hardware store.
The founders have been friends for a long time and combined their respective resources and skills into the business, from Mrs Cliff's local knowledge and rural connections to Ms Tierney's executive and professional background.
Mrs Cliff thanked all those who attended and those who helped to put the event together.
"The building has so much potential and we are planning shared office and co-working spaces for multiple businesses and professionals," she said.
"We are pleased to reopen an empty space in the main street."
Eyre Business had been working to attain its Social Trader certification, which was granted in December, meaning it must have a social purpose and have at least 50 per cent of profits generated reinvested back into the company.
Mrs Cliff said its social purpose was to create new employment opportunities for rural and regional people in virtual business administration.
Eyre Business is currently working with the state and federal governments, and training organisations, to implement a training and upskilling program for potential employees.
"We have a number of local women keen to start with Eyre Business and are working towards a skilled team based on Eyre Peninsula to provide the services but have plans to expand that further as our business grows," Ms Tierney said.
"The response to our business concept and the building plans has been overwhelmingly positive and we are excited to work with the other businesses in Kimba to create a great space for business activities."
Eyre Business will be hosting a breakfast for International Women's Day on Friday, March 5, with guest speaker who will be Sarah Prime, of Champions Academy.
The Adelaide breakfast hosted by Senator Penny Wong will also be live streamed at Kimba.
The breakfast is a fundraiser supporting United Nations Women - Australia, with tickets costing $25.
They are available to purchase from Eyre Business at 38 High Street, Kimba, or by calling 0477 890 122.
CREDIT:
Word count: 411
