Barrington's young beef cattle producer, Liam Mowbray has been chosen to take part in the GenAngus Future Leader's Program.
He was among a group of 10 cattle enthusiasts from across the country to attend a three day online intensive workshop earlier this month before embarking on a 12 month leadership journey with a face-to-face conference to be held in Adelaide in 2022.
The program is targeted at people looking to start up their own business in the beef industry or take that next step in their existing business and works to aid them in increasing their knowledge and confidence.
Liam has been building an Angus cow-calf operation over the past six years with both registered and commercial branches, while working as a veterinarian in Gloucester.
"I have no formal agribusiness training for administration or how to run and market a business," Liam said.
He hopes to gain better marketing skills, better business direction and motivation from the program.
"I enjoy being active in the agricultural and beef cattle industries and I'm keen to take our own farming business to the next level," he said.
The purpose of the program is to support the next generation of beef industry leaders to help future-proof their businesses so that they can feed the world's growing population while navigating challenges such as COVID-19 and ongoing catastrophic weather events.
For young, emerging farmers like Liam, it's an important part of learning how to be successful in the industry.
"I think young leadership programs in the agricultural industry are important for improving not only our own businesses but also improving advocacy and shifting paradigms on the wider national and international stage to improve social license to operate and education of the wider public," he said.
Angus Australia Breed development officer, Jake Phillips looks forward to engaging with Liam as part of the group of driven individuals and assisting them in advancing their personal and professional development.
"The calibre of applicants for the 2021 GenAngus Future Leaders Program have been outstanding. It was a difficult process to narrow the field, however the successful applicants submitted high-quality applications, which they should be very proud of. It is clear, the future of the Angus breed is in good hands with these young members coming through," Jake said.
The GenAngus Future Leaders Program provides 12 members aged 18-40 with the opportunity to participate. For further information regarding the 2021 GenAngus Future Leaders Program, visit the Angus Australia website or contact Jake Phillips at youth@angusaustralia.com.au.
CREDIT: Anne Keen
Word count: 417
