The Cowell Community and Sporting Complex has been booked for the public auction of Chilly's farm on the Eyre Peninsula.
Chilly's, as you might expect, is owned by the Chilman family who haven't yet disclosed how much they reckon their 1320 hectare (3262 acre) mixed farm is worth.
There have not been many recent sales in the region to take as a guide.
An indication, say the agents, farms in the region are well held and rarely come onto the market.
The vendors have told their Elders Real Estate agents they would need a "substantial" offer to consider selling it before their date on September 6 at the footy ground.
The sheer size of the farm land offered in this tightly held coastal area is expected to attract a lot of local interest.
It has been looked after by the vendor's family for generations and is ready to go.
Similar farms sold well even before the latest price spike and this comes with all the necessary infrastructure for cropping and grazing.
Plus it has a reasonable home on the block as well.
Chilly's is on two titles and is located 13 kilometres from the Lincoln Highway and 20km from Cowell.
Cowell itself has a lot of history with its natural Franklin Harbor, which had ships loaded with the wheat and wool the area still grows in abundance more than 150 years later.
The world's largest known deposit of jade is also near Cowell.
Chilly's consists of 12 fenced paddocks presently leased on a three-year rotation to accommodate the owner's livestock requirements.
Four main water meters are located along the road boundary, which supplies all divided sections of the property.
Farm improvements include a six-bay 47x14x5m machinery shed and another shed, which has been used to store fertiliser.
It has a two-stand shearing shed, which can hold about 200 sheep with working yards and loading ramp.
As well there are various other storage and workshop structures such as silos, fuel tanks plus assorted shedding located across this working property.
The owners estimate about half the farm's fences are either new or recently repaired.
The "functional" four-bedroom home with a renovated kitchen and bathroom can accommodate new owners or be rented out.
Agents say Chilly's at Mitchellville offers both a start up farming opportunity or an increase in acreage opportunity.
The public auction at Cowell Community and Sporting Complex on September 6 is scheduled to begin at 11am.
For more information contact the Elders Real Estate agents Nick Schumann on 0428 383 833 or Phil Cook on 0428 158 282.
CREDIT: Chris McLennan
Word count: 431
