DEPARTING AFL Coaches’ Association chief executive Mark Brayshaw has warned the stress and pressure levels on the league’s senior coaches are at an “all-time high”.
As he prepares to depart the role he has held for six years, Brayshaw predicted that the “balance and wellbeing” of coaches would prove to be the biggest issue facing the men in the hot seats.
Brayshaw’s comments come after a year when North Melbourne coach Rhyce Shaw parted ways with his club for personal reasons and the personal lives of several senior coaches were thrust into the spotlight.
Tigers leader Damien Hardwick, Collingwood’s Nathan Buckley and Melbourne coach Simon Goodwin were reported to have had marriage break-ups.
Four-time premiership coach Alastair Clarkson said last year he was “a bit concerned for our profession” due to the stress of the job in the AFL “fishbowl”.
“I think the stress levels and the pressure levels on the senior (coaches) — the first 18 I call it — are at all-time highs,” Brayshaw said.
“I don’t think that is always healthy. It is a tough job, they all know that when they come in.
“But across the balance of coaches, even in COVID, we surveyed 120-odd members last year and generally speaking they were in a good place and job satisfaction is off the charts … there is no question the coaches still enjoy doing it.
“It’s a highly regarded job and very rewarding, but the stress levels last year — and I suspect this year again with the impact of COVID — are enormous.” Brayshaw described the end of Shaw’s short tenure as coach of the Kangaroos as a “very sad circumstance” but said it was great news he was “back on his feet” in another role.
Shaw has moved to Queensland with his family to take on the position as the Gold Coast Suns’ head of ­development.
“Rhyce was a very sad circumstance but the feedback I got across the board — even from the most experienced coaches — suggested this was the hardest year they had ever had,” Brayshaw said.
“So it particularly must have been very difficult for the first-time coaches and Rhyce and (Adelaide coach) Matty Nicks lost lots of games in a row and that’s just a really tough place to be.’’ Brayshaw is departing the AFLCA to take up the chief executive role at a medicinal cannabis start-up.
rebecca.williams@news.com.au
READ THE FULL FEATURE HERALDSUN.COM.AU
CREDIT: REBECCA WILLIAMS
Word count: 408
