A FINGER prick blood test may soon be able to show whether a person has concussion within minutes of an injury.
The Australian development is hoped to clear the way for sports players to return to the field within minutes of a head knock, or identify those suffering brain injuries so they can be safely managed.
Following the discovery of telltale biomarkers that can be detected in the blood of concussion victims, Melbourne’s The Alfred hospital has undertaken early trials as proof of concept for a finger prick test similar to those used to measure blood sugar.
As well as potential to revolutionise concussion management for AFL and other sports codes, the high-level research is being funded by the Australian Defence Force in the hope it can help injured soldiers return to the battlefield.
The US military is also trialling the technology being developed by The Alfred, Sydney-based biotech start-up GLIA Diagnostic, and the Adelaide-based CSIRO.
The Alfred’s director of emergency medicine research Professor Biswadev Mitra said the blood test had potential to be the first objective way to diagnose concussion, ending the need to sit out all head-knock victims for weeks without being sure of their injuries.
“It is quite advanced and we are to the level of building a small machine that can detect concussion,” Prof Mitra said.
“(Currently) when somebody hits their head and presents to their doctors, a lot of it is very subjective, sometimes guesswork.
“Our aim is to develop a screening tool where we can say at the point of care – whether that be on the playing field, the battlefield or wherever someone has had an injury – that you do not have a severe head injury or chance of concussion.
“We think it will take 5-10 minutes to run at the max. We are trying to shorten that time as we go.” An early prototype of the PCR test was able to detect concussion during a trial of 60 patients at The Alfred, but it has so far taken several hours to analyse each test.
A CSIRO team led by Dr Helmut Thissen is now adapting its testing technology to run The Alfred’s biomarkers, and GLIA Diagnostics director Edmond Sorich believes a handheld, fast prototype will be ready for large-scale trials by mid-2022.
“The gold standard is a 4-6-hour chemistry … we are taking that into a technology that will produce the same result in less than 15 minutes,” he said. After University of Montana scientists discovered a class of molecules called microRNA involved in brain healing, Mr Sorich licensed the discovery and brought it to Australia for further development.
CREDIT: GRANT McARTHUR
Word count: 442
