Local farmer, Amber Clarke has been chosen as Kempsey's beef industry representative to participate in the GenAngus Future Leaders program.
The specialist farm insurer have selected 10 individuals from around the country to attend a three-day intensive workshop hosted online November 2nd to 4th.
Following the workshop, the participants will embark on a 12-month leadership journey.
The program is targeted at people who are looking to start up their own business in the beef industry or take that next step in their existing business and works to aid them in increasing their knowledge and confidence.
Amber is currently working part time in the dairy industry gaining information on nutrition, pasture management and breeding, with the aim to continue to build her own Angus stud line with sustainability and performance in mind.
"I believe it is a fantastic opportunity for growth as a person and as a business. Personally, I look forward to gaining a wealth of knowledge from the variety of guest speakers and from the opportunity to network with experienced professionals as well as new and like-minded farmers," said Amber.
"From a business point of view, it would give me the skills to take home to turn the dream of a sustainable and profitable Angus stud into reality as our calves begin to hit the ground.
"The workshop will help solidify our target market, gain a business mindset, help develop plans for succession as a family business and learn new skills to market our dream."
Angus Australia Breed Development Officer, Jake Phillips, looks forward to seeing what the program can do for these candidates.
"The calibre of applicants for the 2021 GenAngus Future Leaders Program have been outstanding. It was a difficult process to narrow the field, however the successful applicants submitted high-quality applications, which they should be very proud of." Mr Phillips said.
The workshop was scheduled to take place in person in Adelaide will now take place via online webinars from 2-4 November 2021 due to the ongoing COVID-19 restrictions.
"The GenAngus Program is shaping up to be a significant opportunity for attendees to network and gain knowledge from a diverse range of speakers from Australia. Each speaker will deliver presentations relevant to young agriculturalists trying to spread their wings in business and in life more generally," Mr Phillips said.
"It is going to be really exciting to think what ambitions this program might spark in the attendees."
Also making the news: Macleay cricket sets a return date Jordan Brady selected as Sportsperson of the Month Kempsey's Phil Dotti features on Sydney Opera House in celebration of 80% vaccination target Our journalists work hard to provide local, up-to-date news to the community. This is how you can continue to access our trusted content:
Bookmark our website Make sure you are signed up for our breaking and regular headlines newsletters Follow us on Twitter: @macleayargus Follow us on Instagram: @macleayargus
CREDIT:
Word count: 483
