The elegant beauty therapist and owner of On Point Brow and Lash Artistry, now 20, is smashing her goals.
But she credits her accomplishments to her parents’ support and the way she was raised.
“They’ve just made this all happen for me. Everything is just a credit to them,” Ms Zammit said.
She always had an interest in the beauty industry, even from a very young age when she would accompany her mother to a salon.
“I would just sit there and I loved getting my toes done and I just thought all the girls are so beautiful,” she recalled.
“I just wanted to be like them.
“From that moment I knew that was something I wanted to do.”
Ms Zammit left school after Year 10 and at 15 moved with her mother to the Gold Coast so she could study for her diploma at The French Beauty Academy.
“I studied … while she somehow still helped run the family business,” she said.
Although Ms Zammit was not allowed on the campus grounds until she was 16 – “I had to do all my theory beforehand,” she said.
After three years working in salons first in Mackay, then Adelaide, then back to Mackay, Ms Zammit said she had reached a bit of a crossroads.
“I was about to move into my house when I left my previous job … it was at a point where I (thought) do I go and work somewhere else or do I start up my own thing because it’s something I would like to do,” she said.
And with that a space at her new home initially designed to house her dad’s cars was transformed into her salon.
“I just felt like it was the right time for me. I’ve always wanted to step out on my own, being someone who’s quite independent,” she said.
“But as exciting as everything has been, it’s been so stressful, building a house and then leaving a stable wage to do something you’re passionate about.
“I have a really close connection with all my clients.
“Some of these people started off as strangers and are now friends.”
But Ms Zammit said she was overwhelmed by the support she had received from old and new clients, other businesses and the community.
“My clients have referred so many other people,” she said.
And in the five months since she opened her doors, Ms Zammit said On Point was already smashing six and 12 months goals had already expanded its services.
When it comes to what women focused on – “brows have definitely become a big thing over the past few years”, she said, adding lashes were another popular service.
As for the future Ms Zammit has a few plans for 2022, but for the moment she was keeping them close to her chest.
Word count: 451
