PLASTIC FANTASTIC FOR BYRON COMPANY BYRON BAY A BYRON Bay company raised $5m in less than seven hours in their latest fundraising effort and broke the internet in the process.
Zero Co is “fishing” plastic out of the ocean and turning it into reusable containers for their own brand of household cleaning products.
The eco-start-up raised $5m in just six hours and 27 minutes on Tuesday, smashing the Australian record for the largest crowd fund in Australian history.
The fundraiser hit $1m in under five minutes, and reached $3m in just 47 minutes, as confirmed by their fundraiser platform Birchal.
The fundraising campaign also attracted more than 3000 investors – the highest number ever for that platform.
Zero Co is the business venture of founder Mike Smith and his team. They take plastic from the ocean, turn it into plastic pellets, and make them into recycled plastic bottles that they then send to consumers who refill with cleaning products.
Customers receive refillable recycled plastic bottles and pouches with cleaning products.
The delivery is already carbon neutral and the pouches reusable, meaning if 14,000 Australians take up the service, one million single-use plastic bottles will not be required to be created.
Since launching in November 2020 off the back of running Australia’s most funded Kickstarter in 2019, Zero Co has signed up more than 44,000 households, and grown from a team of three to 18 employees.
The new shareholders will join the company’s list of current investors, including Koala founders Dany Milham and Mitch Taylor, former St George Bank CEO Rob Chapman, and Atlassian co-founders Kim Jackson and Scott Farquhar’s venture capital firm, Skip Capital.
The business just raised an additional $2m from existing shareholders and signed a $6m deal with venture capital investor Square Peg.
Mr Smith, believes that asking customers to become shareholders is the solution to building a powerful community that will help Zero Co solve the global single-use plastic problem.
“Zero Co’s mission has inspired action by 10s of thousands of Aussies so far, who have snapped up its incredible range of planet-friendly personal care and home cleaning products,” he said.
73 per cent of investors in the first $1m raised were pre-existing customers, he said.
Gold Coast Suns AFL player Rory Atkins (inset) is one of the company’s investors, and said he used the products daily.
He said he became aware of the company while playing for the Adelaide Crows, when the team’s chairman, Rob Chapman, became one of Zero Co’s first investors.
“We have a close relationship so I managed to grab a spot there,” he said. “I think we are doing it the best out of all our competitors, I think Zero Co is leading the way,” he said.
“As a consumer, the product truly is really easy to use, there is no compromise in quality but we know that we are doing the right thing for the environment. “The crowd fund reaching $5m shows how much people believe in the problem and also in the solution, and this is the best way to go about it.”
CREDIT: Javier Encalada
Word count: 517
