The Australian head of global automobile giant BMW says the federal government can play a greater role in influencing the public about the benefits of electrified vehicles as the world's leading carmakers vow to phase out petrol cars.
BMW Group Australia chief executive Vikram Pawah said incentives announced for businesses to invest in electric car fleets would mark a "line in the sand" for manufacturers and would supercharge the local market's adoption of electrified vehicles.
Major car companies around the world are focusing their efforts on building new EV models and industry predicts the next 12 months will be a "tipping point" for electric vehicle adoption in Australia.
But a study of Australia's fleet marketplace on electric vehicle adoption, released last week, found that limited action from federal government, high purchase costs and limited availability were the leading causes for the slow adoption within Australia.
Mr Pawah said investing in electro-mobility technology development for business should be a given in Australia. Countries such as the US, Norway and China had invested in a strong charging network and had offered monetary incentives to both commercial and private buyers of plug-in hybrid or fully electric vehicles.
"However, the cost benefit of electrified vehicles is just one of the challenges facing uptake in Australia," Mr Pawah said.
"Sustainable alternatives to electric vehicles are also in the dark, meaning concerns such as range anxiety are present among buyers despite viable options such as plug-in hybrid electric vehicles (being) available in the market."
The Morrison government announced a $74.5 million Future Fuels Fund in last month's budget to help business and country towns take advantage of opportunities offered by hydrogen, electric, and bio-fuelled vehicles, and to enable infrastructure for the growth of commercial electric vehicles.
Mr Pawah said BMW would continue to introduce new technology vehicles into its local product line-up and the government had an "important" role to play in influencing the public about the benefits.
"While these incentives are focused on business, they are a positive step in enlightening the wider public around electro-mobility and addressing the lack of knowledge about electric vehicles," he said.
The government's electric cars policy, to be called the Future Fuels Strategy, will be released in the coming months. It will focus on practical actions to allow the private sector to commercially deploy these technologies.
Electric vehicle charging network Chargefox will this week announce the completion of the 18th of its 21 planned ultra-rapid stations across Australia in a project with the taxpayer-funded Australian Renewable Energy Agency.
Chargefox's network now enables drivers to travel the east coast of Australia and from Melbourne to Adelaide through ultra-rapid stations in Horsham, Murray Bridge and Keith. It also has a station in Perth.
The company estimates the use of its network of chargers is reducing carbon emissions by 50 tonnes every month.
Chargefox chief executive Marty Andrew claimed the start-up had so far powered more than 140,000 electric vehicle charging sessions.
CREDIT: Rob Harris National affairs editor
Word count: 496
