The past two years have been tumultuous for Australian wineries, and no region has been spared. Vineyards across southeast Australia lost entire crops to smoke taint from the 2020 Black Summer bushfires. Lockdowns shut out customers from cellar doors and killed the restaurant trade.
Then last November, Australia’s biggest export market in China collapsed after prohibitive tariffs were slapped on Australian wine, wiping out more than $400m in export value. More ­recent lockdowns in NSW and Victoria exacerbated the pain just when recovery was in sight. But against all odds, wineries have still found a way to not just survive but thrive, riding a wave of innovation they hope will future-proof the industry. And they say the best is still to come.
Pooley Wines 2020 Jack Denis Pinot Noir features in James Halliday’s Top 100 wines published in The Weekend Australian Magazine, with a score of 99 points out of 100. Halliday praised the wine as being “world class’’. “It’s full-on forest floor, full-on savoury spices, and tannins made to measure, but all bow down to the primacy of the dark berry fruit of the impossibly long finish,’’ he said.
Gosden says moving to ­direct-to-consumer sales through its strong database and wine club membership allowed it to connect with customers while borders were closed. “It was an opportunity for self-assessment, and then when borders finally opened, the cellar door went ballistic.”
She says last summer was their best on record, and this summer could top that. But many wineries have turned their focus online in their search for untapped customers. A new “match-making” direct-to-consumer marketplace called Entertainment Wine Community is set to launch in early 2022.
A collaboration between wine technology start-up Junovate and the Entertainment Group, the website will be a one-stop shop where customers can browse and order wine from wineries around Australia and join a digital community to share recommendations and access online events. It allows remote, boutique wineries to be paraded in front of a huge audience who might never have stumbled upon their story.
Clever technical innovation has also allowed wineries to engage directly with customers through virtual tasting sessions. Adelaide company Trust in Taste developed patented technology to decanter wine from 750ml bottles to 60ml tasting bottles without exposing it to oxygen and spoiling the wine, giving a shelf life of up to 35 days while retaining the wine’s aromatics.
Founder Peter Evans says it works with wineries all over the globe now to provide online tastings in the home, handling everything from decanting to packaging and postage, to running the online event and even providing analytics for the winery afterwards.
Hunter Valley winemaker ­Andrew Thomas was able to send out sample bottles of six different vintages of his Thomas Wines ­“Elenay” shiraz to customers to try at home, something that would have previously been impossible. “I think online tastings are here to stay,” Thomas says. “We’re getting feedback from customers who have moved away and are pleading with us to keep doing these events.”
Evans says revenue is up 750 per cent in the past four months and the company has just established a plant in Texas to help Australian wineries break into the US market.
Suddenly the world is feeling connected again.
“It might be a while before you feel safe to travel to France, but you can do a Bordeaux tasting in your house this Saturday,” he says.
Word count: 556
