THE digital retail revolution that delivers a seamless and hyper-convenient experience for consumers in the US and UK is coming soon to Aus­tralia, and retailers need to be ready, Minneapolis-based ­consumer brand agency The Stable chief executive Chad Hetherington.
The Adelaide-ex-pat and his co-founders Nik Larsen and Kate Hetherington have grown the business from a start-up in 2015 to now employing more than 500 people across the US and internationally, bolstered by funding rounds from venture capital firms Gen7 and Growth Capital Partners (GCP). The Stable’s client roster includes names such as Ring, quip, ­General Mills, Red Bull and Netflix and it also has deals with Walmart, Target, Amazon and Shopify.
Mr Hetherington said the agency provided a full-service retail offering, helping clients build online stores, market within sites, such as Amazon, and design and run direct-to-consumer campaigns on platforms, such as TikTok.
The Stable is now considering Australia as one of its next markets for expansion, with Mr Hetherington on the ground over the past couple of weeks taking meetings.
Mr Hetherington said that Australian consumers and retailers had been quick to adapt to the digital realm, but a new era of convenience and an ­uplift in the user experience, which already existed in the US, was on the way.
“I think the retailers here have done a fair job, especially over the pandemic, pulling ­together a lot of the initiatives we’ve seen in the other ­markets, such as the US and UK,’’ Mr Hetherington said. “I think perhaps where it falls a little short is the consistency in experience between in-store and online.’’ Mr Hetherington said there was still occasionally a disconnect between inventories in-store and online, which needed to be smoothed out.
With retailers in the US in some markets offering delivery times as low as an hour, and numerous different delivery or pick-up options, inventory management was crucial.
This offered high-level convenience for customers, but it meant that digital advertising for example, needed to be geographically aligned to inventory levels,” Mr Hetherington said. “It can be a little out of touch between what’s happening in store and online, so how do you bring together a true seamless experience that covers brand, value, offers, delivery and all of those things.
“I don’t think it’s far off (In Australia) though.’’ The company has a strong international focus, now providing translation services and advice on issues, such as value-added tax, GST and logistics, and is “seriously considering” Australia as one of its next ­regions for expansion.
The Stable already does ­client work in the local market, but Mr Hetherington said he was hoping that by June next year they would have “boots fully on the ground’’. “How we do that is part of my trip,” Mr Hetherington said.
“Do we partner up with a company and do an acquisition, do we hire up people, that’s probably what we’re still trying to figure out.
“My board’s very excited about the market down here.
“Amazon and Shopify continue to invest in other markets ... and we want to follow that and make sure we’re in the same markets they are and that we’re showing up aggressively.
“Every big client of ours is looking for help digitally. “If you can then deploy that globally, that puts us in a really good spot if we’ve got experts that can do that.”
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 561
