Qualifying test for KiwiMotor Sport: Kiwi driver Scott McLaughlin admits qualifying is an early Achilles heel for him in Indycar. The Penske rookie is racing in this weekend’s double-header at Texas Motor Speedway. He’s finished 14th and 11th in his two races this season but says it’s before the race that is proving an issue.
Lee best placed of NZ pair Golf: Danny Lee is the best of the two Kiwis, six shots off the pace after the first round of the latest PGA Tour event in Florida. Lee has carded a one under par 70 and is one shot ahead of Tim Wilkinson on oven par. American Keegan Bradley has a two-shot lead on seven under.
Breakers eye home gamesBasketball: The Breakers will make tracks for New Plymouth and Christchurch when they return to New Zealand. The Australian NBL club will play the Sydney Kings in New Plymouth on May 22, then head to Christchurch to face South East Melbourne three days later. Two home games have yet to have locations confirmed, with games on May 28 against Illawarra and Adelaide 36ers on June 2.
Matera wants to play here Rugby: Argentina captain Pablo Matera wants to return to Super Rugby next year — in New Zealand. Matera has made his desire known to newspaper Midi Olympique in France, where he is currently playing for Stade Francais. Matera still has a year to run on his contract with the club, but he would plan to play between campaigns. He says South Africa was his first choice but they’ve now left Super Rugby so he has moved to his second choice in New Zealand. Matera, who was briefly suspended last year after racist tweets from a decade ago resurfaced, says it’s not easy to join a franchise here, given the quota on foreign players.
Bevin pipped on line Cycling: Kiwi Patrick Bevin’s shot up to second on the general classification standings but has been denied a stage win again on cycling’s Tour of Romandie. The Israel Start Up Nation rider was pipped at the finish line on stage two and finished second in a sprint finish behind Italian Sonny Colbrelli. The Team Bahrain Victorious rider was relieved to hold off the flying Kiwi.
United trounce Roma Football: Manchester United demolished Roma 6-2 at Old Trafford to have one foot in the Europa League final. The Red Devils scored five second-half goals after they’d gone into the sheds down 2-1. Manager Ole Gunnar Solskjaer believes the tie is still live heading back to Italy.
Nix coming homeFootball:
The Wellington Phoenix have confirmed details of their home A-League matches on their return to New Zealand next month. Their first match at home in 14 months will be on Saturday, May 22, at Wellington’s Sky Stadium. After returning to Australia for a mid-week match against Western Sydney, the Phoenix will travel back and play Perth Glory on Sunday, May 30, at Eden Park in Auckland.
Rival coaches both angryLeague: There were two grumpy coaches after South Sydney’s 34-20 NRL win over the Raiders in Canberra on Thursday. The Rabbitohs claimed a seventh straight victory while the Raiders slumped to a fourth straight defeat. Bunnies coach Wayne Bennett says there was not much to like about the performance. Canberra coach Ricky Stuart was filthy with the 8-1 penalty count.
Word count: 555
