Next Science last week received approval from the US Food and Drug Administration to sell its XPerience product, which is used to irrigate the area where a patient has surgery to protect from chronic infections from bacteria lurking in biofilm.
So-called surgical site infection is the second largest cause of hospital acquired infection, Next Science says, and a major cause of surgical complications. Next Science’s technology is used to treat chronic infections, including those caused by antibiotic resistant bacteria.
The XPerience approval sent a jolt into Next Science’s share price, which rose about 20 per cent in a week to give it its highest value in a year. The company says it will target the US orthopaedic surgery market, where more than 5.3 million surgeries take place every year.
Name: Lang Walker
Age: 75
Lives: Sydney
Estimated wealth: $4.5bn
Sector: Property, biotech investing
Secrets of success: building large urban renewal projects in fast-growing locations such as Parramatta and Docklands
Source:The List – Australia’s Richest 250
“If there has ever been any doubt about the ability of the company to convert the science to revenue this will now be removed. I believe Xperience is a real winner, a great example of the Next Science technology put into the medical field,” Walker told The Australian.
That US market is worth at least $1bn in revenue, Next Science claims. Globally, the potential market is more than $15bn per annum. Next Science believes there is a huge unmet need for its product worldwide, with 110 million surgeries globally each year, including 48 million in the US and 2.2 million in Australia.
Walker first invested in what was then a private company in 2012, one of a string of holdings he has in the biotech sector. He now holds about 39 per cent of Next Science, which listed on the ASX in 2019. Walker’s stake is worth about $130m.
Best known for being a property developer and having huge projects such as the $3.2bn Parramatta Square project in western Sydney under construction by his Walker Group, Walker also has a penchant for biotech stocks and pre-IPO opportunities.
Last year he emerged with a stake in a start-up seeking to improve treatment of vulnerable premature babies in intensive care. He was among a group providing seed funding of $1.25m to Melbourne technology firm Ventora Medical, which has developed a non-invasive neonatal respiratory care monitor.
Walker is also a key shareholder of Atomo Diagnostics, which listed on the ASX after raising $30m from investors in April 2020. Other shareholders include former Macquarie executive Bill Moss and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation social impact investment fund.
Atomo shares have fallen about 50 per cent in value since its float last year though and about 27 per cent since the beginning of 2021. Walker holds a 6.7 per cent stake in Atomo, worth about $8m.
His Walker Corporation has a whopping $4.85bn in investment property on its balance sheet, including the four-tower Parramatta Square.
Walker owns big projects in Melbourne and Adelaide, and the $100m Kokomo luxury resort in Fiji.
But it is Next Science that has Walker excited at the moment, in the belief that the company is poised for a big breakthrough.“ My long-term investment in Next Science has always been about believing in the science and the platform technology it represents,” says Walker.
“Investing isn’t only just about returns for me – it’s about a company’s vision to help our global population prosper, with intelligent solutions to long-term problems.
“I have huge confidence in Next Science and their ambition to deliver XPerience in a surgical world. It has taken longer than I would have liked for the FDA clearance to come through but as a consumer one can only take comfort in the thoroughness of that process.”
Word count: 611
