SMARTdaily HEALTH WORKERS ARE RUSHING TO RENT UNUSED CAR PARKS TO AVOID CATCHING COVID ON THEIR DAILY COMMUTE
For less than $10 per day, Australian commuters are avoiding catching Covid by renting unused car spaces from residents and businesses near their workplace.
Workers wary of being infected when travelling to the office are turning to peer-to-peer parking apps to stay safe.
Crowdsourced parking companies are reporting a huge increase in interest from urban workers who want to rent inner-city parking spaces enabling them to drive their own car to work.
The Share with Oscar app recorded a 223 per cent increase in customer inquiries heading into January, while the Parkhound App recorded significant increases in Sydney (78 per cent), Melbourne, (83 per cent), Brisbane (67 per cent) and Adelaide (48 per cent).
Share with Oscar co-founder Lisa Qi says customers are “definitely driving rather than catching public transport”.
“We’ve definitely seen an increase due to the safety and health concerns,” she says.
“People are opting to drive private vehicles as opposed to ride sharing or carpooling.
“As people are returning to work they might want to park in town two days per week, so the costs are balanced out.
“If they’re paying to park $30 per day and parking twice a week, that might be less than they were spending on public transport.” Qi says many inner-city residents are choosing not to own a car, and many more people are making car spaces available to folks who commute from the suburbs.
Prices vary according to demand and features – spaces are more expensive if they offer privacy, 24-hour access, security cameras or protection from the elements.
Residents can make cash on the side by renting out their own spaces, earning up to $50 per day for the perfect spot.
Mike Rosenbaum, chief executive of Parkhound, says “there are hundreds of thousands of under-utilised driveways and car spaces that sit idle”.
Parkhound customer Shannon Micallef found a parking space near her office capable of accepting her modified four-wheel-drive – a car that would be a tight squeeze in underground car parks.
“I’ve got a Jeep Wrangler. She’s lifted and she’s on big 33-inch tyres and needs a bit of space,” she says.
“Anything less than 1.8 metres tall is a no go.” The Sydney office manager says she started renting a car space last year. “Firstly it was the Covid situation – not wanting to be on public transport,” she says. “But it’s also the price and flexibility. If you use the bus and train to commute it’s not that much more.
“If you go to a secure car park, even with early bird parking, you have to be there at a certain time and leave at a certain time.
“The space is mine. I can come and go whenever I want.” Micallef pays $55 per week for a space in Pyrmont, where “there’s a bit of a price war” from people looking to loan out car spaces.
Qi says Share with Oscar is popular with a wide range of customers. “People are also opting to share their parking garages, too – to make a little bit of extra money on the side,” she says.
“It can really help if things are a bit tight.”
Top five parking apps Parkhound A popular app that caters to drivers and residents, Parkhound lets you find and book parking for less than commercial rates – or loan out your space to motorists.
Share with Oscar A Sydney start-up geared toward casual parking, Share with Oscar finds driveways and garages near your desired location, and arranges payment to the property owner.
Parkopedia This clever app displays almost all the parking options at any given location – free street parking, secure corporate parking or timed council areas, helping you plan journeys.
Wilson Parking A dominant player in the paid parking industry, Wilson Parking’s app lets you find, book and pay for parking in a Covid-safe, contactless manner.
Parkable Pitched toward commercial properties and workplaces, Parkable is a way for businesses to manage casual or rostered access to parking, making the most of scarce spaces.
CREDIT: DAVID McCOWEN
Word count: 692
