The world’s biggest fund manager BlackRock expects to “scale up” its investment in Australia’s electric vehicles market to several hundred million dollars after an initial $100m-plus equity and loan deal with Sydney start-up Jolt Charge.
After nearly 12 months of talks, BlackRock has acquired a “substantial minority” stake in former advertising executive Doug McNamee’s Jolt, which wants to install EV charging stations around the country.
BlackRock’s deal includes a $100m loan to Jolt to install the first 1000 of the 5000 stations it wants to set up in the next three to four years.
The investment, through BlackRock Real Assets, marks the first investment in the EV- charging sector in the Asia-Pacific and is designed to support Jolt's expansion plans to build essential infrastructure to enable the transition to EVs in a market lagging behind other developed countries.
“What cut it for Jolt is their business model and their team,” said Charlie Reid, BlackRock’s managing director of BlackRock Renewable Power.
“They have a unique approach of combining outdoor advertising with EV charging and they also have a high funding requirement in order to install their units.
“We see it as a partnership that delivers attractive yield for our investors, but also the opportunity to scale (investment) up to several hundred million dollars.
“The circa $100m of capital … will fund around 1000 chargers and given the scale of their pipeline where they want to install 5000 chargers, they would have a funding requirement of $500m over time and given the scale of capital we have at our disposal on behalf of our clients – that kind of scale is attractive to us.” Mr Reid said BlackRock was a “firm believer” in the transition to EVs. “Australia is a laggard, but it will follow the trajectory of other markets,” he said.
“We felt that this was a good opportunity to get in early.
“We want to scale the Jolt opportunity and Jolt will be our platform for EVs.” BlackRock said it believed the electrification of transport played a pivotal role in advancing Australia’s energy transition. Mr McNamee, who started the business to realise his dream of owning an EV without the cost burden of charging infrastructure, said he and the Jolt team were “exceptionally excited”.
“Having BlackRock, the largest investor in the world, be able to come and join us is a huge validation of both the EV charging industry in Australia, but also Jolt’s management team and how we go about scaling EV charging infrastructure,” he said.
He said the business had an “infrastructure mindset” and had developed an asset-heavy business with the right partnerships and contractual arrangements.
By the end of September, Jolt will have 21 charging stations in Adelaide, funded partly by $2m from the Australian Renewable Energy Agency. Its first charging station in Sydney, in partnership with Ausgrid, will open to customers next month.
“I think those sort frameworks and networks brought us into BlackRock’s sphere,” Mr McNamee said. “I think the nature of this industry and this type of investment is that you need to take a longer term view.
“Looking through the pandemic and saying this is going to be a need and an opportunity … helped us get there (with BlackRock).” Established in 2018, Jolt declined to disclose its valuation, but said it had other high net worth families and individuals supporting the business.
Mr McNamee said Australia and Jolt were “just at the start of the EV journey”. “We take the approach that we are building charging networks that solves a consumer need, making it easier for people to transition to EVs,” he said.
“Australia has a critical role to play in advancing towards a net zero emissions future.” Global annual passenger EV sales are expected to increase sharply from 3.1 million in 2020 to 14 million by 2025.
So far in 2021, 8688 EVs have been sold in Australia, representing 1.57 per cent of the total light vehicle market, according to the Electric Vehicle Council’s annual report, released on Monday. The report criticised the “lack of leadership at a federal level” on a national EV strategy and warned it would continue to have a negative effect on future uptake.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 701
