THE Vuelta a Espana (Tour of Spain) starts on Saturday with a 7.1km time trial in Burgos, northern Spain.
This year’s edition is brutal, with seven mountain stages and four hilly challenges, eight flat stages for the sprinters and all bookended with Saturday’s short individual time trial and finishing with a 33km individual time trial in Santiago de Compostela on September 5.
Ten Australians will face the starter in Burgos. Team BikeExchange has five Aussies: CANBERRA’S Michael Matthews, 30, will be out to take the sprinters points jersey after finishing second in that competition to the reinvigorated Mark Cavendish at the Tour de France; ARARAT’S Lucas Hamilton, 25, is out for redemption after crashing out of the Tour de France in the first week; ADELAIDE’S Damien Howson, 28, will also be chasing overall glory. The 2017 Herald Sun Tour winner showed he was back to top form with his win in the Tour of Hungary before this, his ninth grand tour; BRISBANE’S Nick Schulz, 26, is riding his fifth Vuelta and will be out to snatch a stage in a breakaway; SYDNEY’S Rob Stannard, 22, is riding his second Vuelta and will also be on the hunt for stage victories; BENDIGO’S Chris Hamilton, 26, (Team DSM) will tackle his fifth Vuelta and will be trying to get into breakaways to snare a victory; SYDNEY’S Michael Storer, 22, has also ridden five grand tours, and his fine form in the recent Tour de l’Ain, winning overall and the points and king of the mountain jerseys, shows he will be a big chance for a stage victory; BENDIGO’S Jack Haig, 27 (Bahrain Victorious), will be chasing a spot on the podium as his form this year has been outstanding and he will be super keen to put the terrible crash in this year’s Tour de France behind him.
BRISBANE’S Seb Berwick, 21 (Israel Start-Up Nation), finished second in last year’s Herald Sun Tour and this is his first grand tour; and TOWNSVILLE’S Jay Vine, 25 (Alpecin Fenix), is also riding his first grand tour and is the fairytale story of this season. Snapped up by his Belgian team after winning a Zwift Academy program. He travelled to Europe and met his teammates on the eve of his first race the Tour of Turkey and went on to finish second overall.
We will not have to wait long for the real action to start as stage 3 on Monday is definitely one for the general classification contenders.
The 202.8km race has a 7.8km summit finish.
Defending champion Primoz Roglic is the race favourite and, like last year, he is out for revenge after a disappointing Tour de France.
His recent dominating gold medal performance in the time trial at the Tokyo Olympic Games shows he is fully recovered and his Jumbo-Visma squad looks primed for the task to be the first to win three in a row.
Team Ineos Grenadiers is the strongest on paper, but it is going in with a multi-pronged attack for the overall, which did not go so well for it at the Tour.
Giro winner Colombian Egan Bernal looks the strongest, but Ecuadorean Richard Carapaz, who won the Giro two years ago as well as finishing a solid third in Le Tour this year, must be on a super high after his impressive gold medal win in the Olympics road race. He also finished second in the Vuelta last year.
Englishman Adam Yates was set for this race earlier in the year and did not race the Giro or the Tour.
It also has two other riders capable of climbing on to the podium. Russian Pavel Sivakov and English sensation Tom Pidcock, who won the gold medal in the mountain bikes in Tokyo.
Next strongest team is Bahrain Victorious, led by Spaniard Mikel Landa, who is back in form after crashing out of the Giro.
It also has Italian Damiano Caruso, who finished second in this year’s Giro, and Dutchman Wout Poels, who was sixth in last year’s Vuelta. Even with riders of this pedigree, Aussie Haig will start as a co-leader and Monday should show who has the best form.
CREDIT: JOHN TREVORROW EXPERT ANALYSIS OF THE VUELTA ESPANA
Word count: 703
