In a move that will further shake up the changing digital banking sector, Volt on Wednesday announced AFG was tipping in $15m to an expanded $85m Series E capital raising.
The investment sees AFG take a 7.6 per cent stake in Volt, with the latter providing banking as a service products to the group’s almost 3000 mortgage brokers.
Volt also said well-known company chairman and former HSBC Australia chair Mr Bradley would join its board this month, subject to regulatory approval.
Volt co-founder and chief Steve Weston said Volt wanted to rule off the latest capital raising in July, and would likely tap investors again later this year ahead of an initial public offering in late 2022.
“What we are doing now we are in this transitionary phase of moving from a start up business to a bank,” he said. Volt is anticipating it will break even in the latter half of next year to coincide with a mooted ASX listing.
AFG chief executive David Bailey said as the banking and mortgage broking sectors navigated a “perfect storm” of bumper activity levels and cheap funding, the partnership with Volt made sense.
He also highlighted that as Covid-19 had prompted some banks to bring processing and call centres back onshore, customers were demanding faster and smoother home loan applications and digital banking.
“We probably saw Covid as being the watershed in terms of increasing expectations about how customers want to interact,” Mr Bailey said.
He said AFG had upgraded its broker technology platform and partnering with Volt, for digital banking and home loan technology, meant it could fast-track that investment rather than attempting to do it all in-house.
Amid growing angst at prolonged big bank mortgage turnaround times, Volt and AFG also see scope for efficient digital products to attract attention.
The digital banking sector has been a hive of activity in the past seven months, with Westpac partnering on banking services with instalments giant Afterpay and personal lender SocietyOne and National Australia Bank buying 86 400.
But a shadow was cast over the industry after counterpart Xinja in January ended its short-lived banking foray, returning final deposits to customers in a managed exit.
Xinja had rolled out deposit products but had yet to launch mortgages, which put immense pressure on the business model.
The Volt partnership with AFG – which needs to satisfy a number of conditions but doesn’t require Australian Prudential Regulation Authority approval – involves Volt providing digital white labelled mortgage products to AFG’s broker network. That comes as AFG looks to ramp up its own-branded mortgages, which are also funded via players including Bendigo and Adelaide Bank, Pepper Australia and a unit of NAB.
The Volt tie-up sees AFG draw on Volt’s personal finance manager banking app, which helps with things like budgeting. The pair will also work together on products such as personal and business loans.
The alliance already has Volt piloting its app and mortgages with AFG brokers, and a broader rollout is expected in 2022.
The Volt Series E raising was expanded from about $35m to $85m, and is being done at a discounted valuation of $150m or 32.5 cents per share for the digital bank. AFG’s $15m investment is included in the $85m being sought.
As part of Mr Bradley’s appointment, Volt’s current chairman John Masters moves to a deputy role and will chair the audit committee. Mr Bradley is well known in boardroom circles having chaired companies including Stockland, GrainCorp and Virgin Australia International.
Before that, he was managing director of Perpetual from 1996 to 2003.
“The Volt team has successfully navigated the Covid disruptions of 2020 with their banking as a service strategy intact,” Mr Bradley said in Wednesday’s statement. “With the new strategic partnership with AFG and additional capital funding, Volt is well-positioned to scale up quickly.”
Separately on the acquisition front, AFG is still waiting for a court to rule on whether it can complete a takeover of broking network Connective.
Mr Weston said Volt expected to have about 20 partnership deals in place by mid-2022, not including customer relationships via alliance partner UK-based Railsbank.
Some of those new Volt partnerships will seek “sticky deposits”, across areas such as trading exchanges, he added.
“As we work through the rest of this year, we’ll bring on partners that will have access to corporate, retail and self managed superannuation fund cash management accounts.”
The banking regulator granted Volt a full banking licence more than two years ago. It had about $88m in household deposits as at April 30.
Word count: 733
