PLAYING sport can help build the life skills necessary to build multimillion-dollar franchises, just ask these bigwigs who went from being players on the field to being players in the business world.
Aaron Finn From sending the footy skyward to sending helicopters, Finn’s journey from Aussie rules to managing director of North Australia’s most prominent helicopter operation is quite impressive.
The Nautilus Aviation head honcho started his playing days for St Augustine’s College in Kyabram, regional Victoria.
He also played club footy for Kyabram and Lancaster football clubs before making the move up to FNQ about 21 years ago.
“We started with Nautilus back in 2012, back then we had one helicopter and I was the entire workforce,” Finn said.
“Pre-Covid, we had 54 helicopters and 118 staff.” Recently adding five more helicopters valued at $20m, you could say things are looking up from Finn’s days hitting the turf in Kyabram.
A broken pelvis after falling from a roof saw Finn hang up the boots a while back, but he hasn’t forgotten his roots in local footy.
He coached colts teams for the Centrals Trinity Beach Bulldogs and serves as their current treasurer.
“In some respects they’re [sport and business] are very similar – they’re team-oriented and in any workplace you need a great team to make things happen,” Finn said.
Mark Dalle Cort With the aim to always go into owning an aquatic centre, Dalle Cort picked the opportune time and location to get his operation off the ground.
After moving to Cairns in 2010 to play for the Northern Pride, the 39-year-old knew it was time get into the “family business”.
“I grew up in swim school, my mum’s always owned aquatic centres and that’s why I continued with my sporting career, it was always something I’d transition into when I retire,” Dalle Cort said. “My brother has a swimschool in Bentley Park … when I moved back from overseas, I started teaching swimming for him.” Prior to his playing days with the Pride, the centre back rower/winger played footy for the Cowboys and Knights in the NRL, as well as the Celtic Crusaders in the UK-based Super League.
Dalle Cort founded Little Snappers Swim School – which has separately owned centres across Queensland, including Cairns, Townsville and the Gold Coast.
“We’ve sort of adjusted the model a bit where it’s not franchising anymore, we’re doing more corporate and commercial facilities across outer suburbs in south east Queensland,” Dalle Cort said.
Zenon Caravella The A-League star has taken his finesse on the pitch far and wide for clubs both in Australia and Europe.
Playing centre midfield for the New Zealand Knights, Gold Coast United, Newcastle Jets and Adelaide United among others, Caravella has more than 250 professional games to his name. The 38-year-old founded the Caravella Football Academy in Cairns.
Bob Manning The Cairns Mayor does not hide it, he’s a mad league fan.
The 76-year-old has two Foley Shield victories for Cairns to his name from 1966 and 1971.
Darren Halpin The Halpin Partners head honcho is a well-known figure when it comes to big-brand developments in the Far North, but his passions weren’t always in that realm.
While growing up in Innisfail, Halpin played his fair share of cricket for the club during the early stages of his life.
Marie Eribo The seasoned World Cycling Championships veteran competed in races across Europe and the United States, including the Tour de France in the 1980s.
She also has four gold medals from the Irish National Cycling Championships from 1990 and 1992 at Baltinglass and Cork respectively.
Eribo lives in Cairns, having owned and operated Cairns Bicycle Works in Earlville for 18 years.
Mark Beecroft The Cairns Taipans CEO started his days in FNQ basketball with the Cairns Marlins in the NBL1.
There, he played and helped lead the team to win a state title in their 1996-97 season, which ultimately ended with a loss in the national final.
Shane Knuth Before being the outspoken Member for Hill, Knuth was a force on the rugby league field.
The Tully-born and raised politician played 97 1st grade games for Redcliffe. Knuth also represented North Queensland in 13 games, and was named to the Queensland under-15s, under-18s and under-21s teams as well as Australia’s under-19s squad.
Wayne Mawer The Cairns-raised water skier has a collection of World Championship skiing medals to his name.
Mawer hung up the wetsuit in favour of the hammer and measuring tape to start up construction business – Elite Home Builders with his wife Natalie.
Melody Ward The skilled boxer who has an Australian title to her name ultimately pivoted into the realm of personal training, with focuses on using fitness to help manage chronic illness.
Nate Myles The Cairns-born, Gordonvale-raised NRL journeyman suited up to play for the Canterbury Bulldogs, Sydney Roosters, Gold Coast Titans, Manly Sea Eagles and capped his career with the Melbourne Storm.
Myles has continued his love for fitness after his playing days, owning multiple F45 gyms including in Cairns.
Michael Thwaite The former Edge Hill defensive midfielder has an esteemed soccer resume that’s highlighted by 24 games for Australia including under-20 and under-23 level.
Thwaite started up player mentoring company That’s Football on the Gold Coast. Max O’Halloran The Division 7 Cairns Regional councillor and Tidal Seafood Traders owner played Aussie rules initially for Ulverstone in Tasmania, before getting the call-up to play for Footscray in the VFL in the early 70s before joining up with Carlton for five games. Check out the full list at cairnspost.com.au
CREDIT: HARRY MURTOUGH
Word count: 931
