Moreton bytb
As one of the fastest growing regions in the country, Moreton Bay is rapidly becoming an engine room for economic growth and an attractive destination for business.
Growing at an average rate of 3 per cent every year (2006-2020), its economy is predicted to hit $40 billion by 2041, equal to the state of Tasmania.
A key advantage of the Moreton Bay region is its strategic location in South East Queensland with Brisbane Airport just 20 minutes away, and access to the Port of Brisbane and Brisbane’s CBD in under half an hour.
In fact, Moreton Bay provides all the urban infrastructure a business needs without the big-city price tag, making it an attractive destination for business owners. More businesses keep being drawn in by its incredible capital city capacities, infrastructure, logistics and lifestyle assets.
This could be the secret ingredient to the region being home to more businesses with a $2 million or more turnover than New South Wales’ northern beaches, Parramatta, Sunshine Coast and Gold Coast. And on average, Moreton Bay businesses have a combined annual sales value ($27.5 billion) higher than Hobart, Adelaide, North Sydney and Darwin.
“Investors seeking to grow their business have an unrivalled opportunity to take advantage of one of the fastest growing business ecosystems in Australia, and a Council dedicated to supporting business and industry flourish,” says Moreton Bay Regional Council Mayor Peter Flannery.
“Particularly if you look at a precinct like The Mill Priority Development Area in Petrie which offers a unique investment opportunity with 460 hectares of potential on the doorstep of Brisbane. It’s ripe for digital technology investment, medical research facilities, and advanced manufacturing operations.”
Moreton Bay also offers significant benefits to employees. Peaceful seaside towns and picturesque hinterland villages that enjoy 300 days of sunny skies and a mean annual temperature of 23.4 degrees Celsius. Median house prices are $510,000, almost half the Australian average and up to $1 million lower than some capital cities.
Moreton Bay BR
These work-life balance attributes have seen the labour force reach 241,000, expanding alongside a population that is growing at an average annual rate of 2.7 per cent, higher than the national growth rate, while employers benefit from a lower staff turnover and access to more than 110,000 family households in the region (representing 75 per cent of all households).
At 479,639 local residents, the region is home to 1 in 11 Queenslanders while more than 3.6 million residents live within a two-hour drive.
The region’s diverse natural landscape attracts residents, investors, and tourists alike, with over 284km of pristine coastline, 330 square kilometres of world-renowned national parks, 400 kilometres of cycling infrastructure, 16 beaches and 14 per cent of land devoted to nature conservation.
For investors, a positive lifestyle equates to a greater ability to attract the finest talent, increase employee morale, improve productivity and boost staff retention.
Operational cost savings also support investment in innovation and growth thanks to Queensland’s status as the state with the lowest taxes and charges.
Moreton Bay boasts a growth and innovation-based business landscape thanks to well-developed infrastructure and multi-billion dollar region-building projects are underway across tech, education, tourism, food and agribusiness, maritime, advanced manufacturing and transport sectors creating growth momentum and offering more opportunities than other metropolitan and regional areas.
To support growth, Moreton Bay Regional Council has a 20-year economic vision to systematically empower key emerging industries with cutting edge education facilities, collaborative innovation hubs, and logistics and infrastructure that will streamline processes and reduce costs.
“Our new Regional Economic Development Strategy took out Economic Development Australia’s national award for strategic thinking for outlining a blueprint to create a $40 billion economy, with an additional 240,000 people and create 100,000 more local jobs by 2041,” Flannery says.
“We are about to embark on a massive economic reinvention supported by this year’s record budget of $743 million, including $245 million in capital expenditure in 2021-2022 and an unequalled spend on economic development programs and initiatives.
“We’re more than just a beautiful place to live, we’re the smart place to be.”
Moreton Bay is fully prepared to take advantage of growth opportunities such as being part of Brisbane’s Olympic hosting duties. Leading advisory firm KPMG, has estimated economic and social benefits from the Brisbane 2032 Olympics at $8.1 billion for Queensland. The Olympic Games will be a huge catalyst for a bigger, bolder, and brighter future for Moreton Bay also, and investors have an outstanding opportunity to take advantage of rapid growth, unlimited support and a collaborative approach.
As a growing region and business ecosystem, Moreton Bay has the size and credentials to boast national and international leaders of their industries. Its existing business community creates a culture of collaboration that accelerates growth and Moreton Bay Regional Council is actively involved in working closely with businesses to identify means of breaking down barriers and facilitating growth.
There is a particular interest in working with inbound investors including fund managers considering capital investment in either infrastructure or property, private corporations wishing to relocate to a growth ecosystem, entrepreneurs looking to establish a start-up, business developers seeking to diversify their portfolios and business operators requiring purpose-built industrial precincts to accommodate a diversified range of industries.
Investors will find support services available to assist their journey at every stage through a single, dedicated contact point able to assist with identifying suitable commercial or industrial sites and connections with council services, key influencers, industry bodies and local business networks.
Moreton Bay is committed to more innovation, more space and more collaboration to help your business think bigger, be bolder and build brighter.
Word count: 911
