Daylight saving - wrong idea for Queensland In the sunshine state at the level of political leadership - at the Premier and opposition leader level - it's a subject that transcends partisanship.
On the ground though there are few issues so fundamentally divisive, pitting country against city, north against south, and east against west.
Mayors from Brisbane and the Gold Coast are strong advocates for it.
But go to Boulia and you will get a very different opposing view as you will from most regional centres. On talk back radio in Cairns recently the locals were overwhelmingly negative about it. The issue they are talking about is daylight saving.
Each year when the clocks are put forward an hour down south, the Brisbane media and others who don't like summer mornings start up their campaign to join the southern states in having daylight saving.
Out roll the old lines about Queensland 'catching up' with Sydney and Melbourne and the sarcastic references to curtains fading and hillbilly farmers.
Since the end of the Second World War, Queensland has trialled daylight saving - in 1971 and then again between 1989 and 1992.
A referendum held in February 1992 saw a majority (54 per cent) say "no" to daylight saving with the negative vote understandably strongest in the north and west of the State.
If daylight saving was to be re-introduced in Queensland, it would be an unfair imposition on Queenslanders living in western and northern regions of the state.
The simple fact about daylight saving is that Queensland is too large a state and geographically in the wrong place to make daylight saving work for all.
The state is big enough for both longitude and latitude to play a part in making the concept impractical.
So on any morning of the year irrespective of whether we have daylight saving or not the sun is going to rise nearly an hour earlier in Brisbane than it will in Boulia.
Because the state has a single time zone, it means far western Queensland under daylight saving would get an extra hour of darkness in the morning and an extra hour of daylight in the evening - or school days ending at the height of incredibly hot afternoons.
The negative impact of daylight saving would be felt most by families and school children.
In far northern Queensland, longitude and latitude get to play together to make daylight saving impractical.
In much of summertime Australia, it is the twilight time of day when things begin to cool and it is possible to enjoy time outdoors.
Any earlier and the heat can be stifling and that means places with shorter twilights experience the afternoon heat proportionately longer during their sunlight hours.
Daylight in Cairns varies in a narrow two-hour range between 11 hours in June and just over 13 hours in December. There's never much twilight in Cairns.
Much further south in Brisbane the same figures are 10 hours and 24 minutes and seven minutes just short of 14 hours - a range of over three and a half hours - and even there the twilight is relatively abrupt when compared to Hobart or Melbourne.
And way down south at 37.8136° S in Melbourne the range between winter and summer daylight is as much as five hours and 15 minutes.
It follows that if you must have daylight saving, move to one of the smaller southern states.
The alternative is imposing two time zones within the same state and with that a Pandora's Box of other issues is unleased.
Where would the line be made? North of Noosa, west of Toowoomba?
For regional and rural Queenslanders already feeling neglected by their city dominated State Government, that could be the last straw.
And for those northern Queenslanders already clamouring for local self-determination and their own state, it could be fuel to the fire for realising their ambition of a separate state.
But that's another story.
- Professor John Cole OAM
Daylight saving need to be fixed on north-south axis not east-west The Queensland state government has done a terrific job on keeping COVID out of our state but now is faced with the difficult job of how to open it up.
I hope the Palaszczuk government does not squib the task but the government's record on difficult decisions is not good.
Consider the annual daylight saving debacle, where for six months of the year Brisbane is in the ludicrous situation of being a half hour behind Adelaide.
The cost to business in the south-east due to the change is huge with economic losses to Queensland costed at over $4 billion.
The 2032 Olympics will put further pressure to change but whenever pressed on the matter the Premier falls back on the hoary old line that the other states should follow Queensland's lead.
The premier is understandably wary of the strong opposition to daylight saving outside the south-east corner and does not want the bitter divisiveness a referendum on changing the time zone would bring with opponents like Robbie Katter ready to go on the warpath against it..
But that does not mean she can blithely ignore the problem.
A well-considered opinion piece by Brisbane man David Jones last week says the the timeline determination should be based on a north-south line not the east-west one of the Qld-NSW border.
We need to fix this problem before it is fixed for us. Ignoring it won't make it go away much as Ms Palaszczuk hopes.
- Derek Barry, North West Star editor.
CREDIT:
Word count: 923
