MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY WHEN ResMed founder Peter Farrell was contacted by friend Peter Carre to invest in a new med tech start-up it struck a chord.
Mr Farrell did not know much about the laser technology that Mr Carre was proposing to be used to help reduce the symptoms of Parkinson’s through his new company Symbyx Biome.
But Mr Farrell had seen first hand the tragedy of how Parkinson’s affected people. His grandfather, an entrepreneur with his own electrical company, struggled as he dealt with its symptoms of shaking hands.
“It was hugely inconvenient for him, dealing with electric circuits and having the shakes,” he said, He had watched another of his friends in the US, where he now lives, also suffer with Parkinson’s. “The symptoms – the shaking – are very serious,” Mr Farrell said. “This is one of the reasons I became interested in Symbyx.” He admits he still does not fully understand the laser technology behind Symbyx, which works on stimulating the production of dopamine and serotonin in the stomach which helps stimulate the brain of Parkinson’s sufferers, reducing its symptoms which include shaking, speech problems and depression.
But he is no ordinary investor. The sleep apnoea tech company ResMed, of which he is chair, turns over more than $3bn a year and has a market capitalisation of $46bn.
The CEO is his son Mick Farrell who has been running ResMed since 2013. “At the time Mick took over, we had 5000 employees,” he said. “We now have 8500 employees in 140 cities.” Mr Farrell was introduced to the Symbyx technology on a visit back to Sydney when he met up with his friend Mr Carre, an American lawyer and med tech entrepreneur who now lives in Australia.
Mr Farrell says the initial data from Symbyx’s trials has been “quite promising”.
“The patients have reported a significant reduction in the shaking,” he said. The company has just announced new trials of its laser technology in South Australia and Toronto. Its products are on sale commercially – it has a website where people can buy its product directly – but the issue will be whether it can become a commercially viable global business.
Mr Farrell reckons his experience investing in the med tech businesses has made him “hard to fool”. Other Symbyx investors include former Business Council of Australia president Graham Bradley and the ASX-listed Gowing Brothers. Symbyx’s next round of fundraising, expected later this year, will be heavily focused on US investors.
CREDIT: GLENDA KORPORAAL
Word count: 418
