A couple from Sydney’s north shore have spent $16m off the plan to secure the priciest penthouse in the Queensgate, Potts Point apartment project, which is being credited for hastening the renaissance of seedy Kings Cross.
The views from Sam Arnout’s luxury Darlinghurst Rd project will stretch across the CBD skyline, the harbour and Rushcutters Bay.
The penthouse was among the 18 sales secured on Saturday morning amid the 48 offerings in Iris Capital’s redevelopment of the site, which stretches from the Bourbon & Beefsteak to the ­former Les Girls nightclub ­premises.
Prices started from $1.8m for a one-bedroom apartment sold through CBRE agent Ben Stewart, who also negotiated the sale of two $10m penthouses.
The project’s name is a nifty reference to the strip being originally named Queen’s Cross to celebrate Queen Victoria’s 1897 diamond jubilee. It was renamed as Kings Cross after King Edward VII’s accession.
Construction of the seven-level project, set near the corner of Macleay St, is scheduled for 2024 completion. Each of the five buildings, designed by architects Panov Scott and Tonkin Zulaikha Greer, will have their own lobby and fewer than 10 apartments. They will be known as Sovereign, Regent, Monarch, Consort and Empress.
The interiors are by local designer Iain Halliday from BKH, along with TZG. The acclaimed project will also come with a 50-room hotel and a collection of bars, restaurants, bakeries and cafes on the ground floor.
Six years ago Arnout amalgamated four buildings to create the 2500sq m site costing $66m. Arnout ran into planning issues when his advisers unwisely suggested its delightful Italianate terrace frontage was not ­heritage.
Fervent local activists have now turned their attention to ­developer Central Element’s plans to convert the nearby Minerva Theatre into a hotel.
They have succeeded in getting architectural critics Elizabeth Farrelly and Andrew Andersons to slam the plans for the 1938 heritage-listed building, considered one of the finest Moderne buildings in Sydney. It is the theatre where Harry M. Miller launched the Hair musical in 1969.
The locals hope the Sydney City Council will block the development by the Shane Smollen-backed development group, and that NSW Arts Minister Don Harwin will secure and return the premises as a theatre.
Hutton still waiting The marketing of the Bronte home of celebrity homewares guru Deborah Hutton has again stalled, with bidding at its weekend auction petering out at $9.7m.
After hitting the listing sites in July, it has now had 140 days on market, much more than the current 23 day Sydney average, according to CoreLogic. And Hutton has been thinking about selling for even longer since its drone marketing video was filmed in April.
Hutton initially had the agents suggest a $12m guidance, but then adjusted it in November to $10m.
The agents are hoping for a sale before Christmas.
Bronte has been one of the hot spots of what was the escalating residential property boom, including a record $23.5m Bronte Marine Drive sale in October by the Colinton Capital Partners boss Simon Moore to returning Singaporean expats and blockchain start-up founders Joanne Way Yee Huynh and Dorjee Sun.
Still no sign of Hutton’s next buy, which is set to be on the Illawarra coast. The homewares guru bought the old-style Bronte home, on a 318sq m block with views from the beach to the cemetery, for $3.8m in 2015, when it sold within 15 days of listing. Its transformation came two years later with an $870,000 rebuild into a bespoke one-bedroom abode with Ann Carin interiors.
Strathfield shines Strathfield saw Sydney’s top auction price when $10.9m was paid for a five-bedroom 1920s house set on 1700sq m on Strathfield Ave.
There had been over 4000 views on realestate.com.au. Belle Property agents Norman So and Michael Murphy had given an $8m buyers’ guide.
“It sold to a developer but he hasn’t made a decision to build on the two lots or to build his dream home on the large lot,” So told Competing Bids.
It was among the busiest weeks on record for Sydney auction volumes, with 1797 auctions, overtaking the late November 2014 record. Of the 1496 results collected so far, 63 per cent sold, down from last week’s preliminary 67 per cent.
“It is possible that the final clearance rate may fall below 60 per cent for the first time since August 2020 as the remaining results are collected, “ CoreLogic’s Tim Lawless advised.
South Yarra stalls A newly built South Yarra home was passed in at its onsite auction at $3.775m, with the bidding opening on a $3.75m vendor bid. It was marketed as “spectacular” by Richard Mackinnon of Marshall White who’d given a price guide of $3.6m to $3.9m. Its guide had been slashed from its initial $8m owner-builder expectations in October last year.
This time it was offered by the mortgagee in possession, Millbrook Funds. Auctioneer Justin Long reckoned the bidding price reflected construction cost, without land value. The building block had been the car park for the 34-room octagonal Hotel Saville which was the venue of the Channel 9 series, The Block in 2015. The redundant two-home building block was sold off to developers by Julian Cress’s Watercress Productions for $1.225m in 2016.
It took three years to build the three-bedroom luxury home set on busy Punt Rd. It spans six levels with an indoor and outdoor pool, lift, walled garden, BBQ kitchen, yoga room, rooftop terrace and garaging.
Melbourne’s priciest home sale was in Canterbury when $6.5m was paid on The Ridge. The price guide had been $5.5m to $6m for the five-bedroom house through Kay & Burton.
It was among Melbourne’s record 2309 auctions, overtaking the March 2018 record. Of the 1922 results so far, 65 per cent sold.
Still on the block A $17.7m bid was not enough to sell a Brisbane riverfront building block at its Ray White auction. The 65 Moray St, New Farm property drew “robust bidding” from three parties. The 1030sq m block has approval for a Bureau Proberts-designed block of six whole floor apartments. The developer Spyre secured the block after negotiations with the 10 strata apartment owners. No word on what the developer offered the owners, whose dearest entry price had been $650,000. Brisbane saw a 72 per cent success rate, with Adelaide’s 83 per cent the highest across the smaller auction markets.
Word count: 1056
