ROADSIDE ASSIST I own a 141,000km 2011 Toyota Aurion. I’m a pensioner and only average around 5000km per year. It’s garaged and well-maintained, but how long should I expect it to last? I’m not in a financial position to upgrade.
Paul Pearson, email Absolutely no need to upgrade. Those aren’t high kilometres and the Aurion’s a great, comfy cruiser. With annual services and check-ups that Toyota should outlive you, me and possibly a nuclear apocalypse.
FUTURE PROOF?
I’m seriously considering buying a Haval Jolion Lux for $28,990 drive-away. It’s a good size, has plenty of features, seven-year warranty and five years roadside assist. I know it’s Chinese but do you know how reliable they are compared to other makes?
Greg Agosta, email We motoring journalists pretend we know everything, but stop short at seeing into the future. Will it be reliable? I’d need a crystal ball. But a seven-year warranty brings huge reassurance. I’ve seen improvements in Chinese car engineering and quality in recent years, including Haval’s. Motoring’s David McCowen tested the Jolion and praised its roominess, tech and price, but criticised its overall drive and efficiency. I understand the value appeal, but please also test a Kia Seltos Sport and Mazda CX-30 G20 Pure. They’re only a few grand more, hold their value better, and are my small SUV benchmarks. Don’t just compare spec inclusions. Thoroughly check fit and finish, functionality and quality of the drive.
NOT FOR EVERYONE You carry on about electric cars but I think they’re a total waste of money. I drive from Adelaide to Alice Springs in 16 hours. It’d take me a week with an electric car.
Chris Donald, email Quite right Chris. I’d not recommend you buy an electric car. Same as I wouldn’t advise someone in Sydney’s CBD to own a six-metre long RAM 2500 pickup with 6.7-litre diesel engine and 8000kg towing capacity.
BIKING GANG My 2010 Subaru Impreza hatch has been the best car I’ve owned, but it’s getting too small for my teenagers and their mountain bikes. It’s a good time to sell as the second-hand market booms, but is it a good time to buy used? I’d like a car for around $25,000 that comfortably fits three people, two large bikes, plus some camping gear for long trips around the NT. I’d like to be environmentally friendly and get a hybrid of electric car. Suggestions please?
Lyrella Couzens, email Sadly, nothing exists to tick all your boxes. Only old, small electric cars like the Nissan Leaf meet your budget, and there’s not charging infrastructure for long NT trips. Hybrids only prove their efficiency in town, so aren’t your ideal either. It’s a good time to sell, but a buoyant market obviously means buying used is expensive. Your biggest problem is those two bikes. With front wheels removed you’ll be able to fit them in something like a 2016 Skoda Superb wagon (from $25,000) with one rear seat up, but it won’t be comfy. I’d buy a high-quality roof rack or hitch mounted rear bike rack and keep the interior for people and kit. For comfort, space and economy, consider a 2017 Toyota Camry Hybrid, 2018 Skoda Octavia or 2017 Mazda6. You love your Impreza hatch. How about a brand new one (from $26,850 drive-away) with bikes carried outside?
TWO BECOME ONE My partner and I are in our seventies and own a 2016 Mazda6 and 2015 Toyota Corolla Levin. We want to sell both and get one car, either privately or through a car yard. How much should we ask for each? We want a medium SUV as they’re much easier for us to alight from. I’ve heard the Kia Sportage or Hyundai Tucson is good and my partner likes the Mazda CX-5. We’ll probably have to buy second hand.
Sue Drought, email It’s a seller’s market so list your cars privately. You may get some idiots and chancers, but there are many genuine buyers out there. According to your details, I’d list the Mazda for about $23,000 and the Toyota for $18,000. If you get close to those, buy a new medium SUV: high used prices make buying new with a full warranty a smarter move. With about $40,000 to spend I’d sample a Mazda CX-5 Maxx (about $37k drive-away), the all-new Hyundai Tucson (about $38k drive-away) and slightly smaller Kia Seltos Sport + (about $35,300 drive-away) as the new Sportage hasn’t arrived yet. Toyota’s RAV4 is in high demand, but is a great SUV and ex-demos are out there for under $40k.
CHRISTMAS COMES EARLY In 2014 I bought a new Nissan Pulsar sedan with CVT auto gearbox. A month ago the gearbox gave up, despite being only 80,000km old. My mechanic quoted $6000 for a reconditioned one or $9000 for a new one. He suggested I contact Nissan Australia for assistance and after two emails and one phone call we were booked in for a complimentary new gearbox at our Nissan dealer. All we paid for was the tow. Exceptional service by Nissan.
Luke Middleton, email Agreed. Brilliant from Nissan as you were long out of warranty. That CVT gearbox has always been a bit whingey, and I’ve heard of other instances of its catastrophic failure. The bill to repair it yourself wouldn’t be economically smart as $9000 is about the value of a healthy 2014 Pulsar.
CHAIN MAIL I own a 13,900km 2011 Skoda Yeti. At what point should I be concerned about the timing chain?
Kevin Willson, email In about 2086 with your minimal use! Seriously though, timing chain failure is a known issue in early Yeti 1.2-litre turbo petrol engines. Failure means a new engine. Replacement chains and tensioners are apparently of more reliable design, so it’s worth having yours checked. Have them quote for a replacement and weigh up if it’s worth it for peace of mind. Listen for rattles on cold start-up and act if any, act fast.
IAIN CURRY GETS ANSWERS WRITE TO MOTORING AT CARS@NEWS.COM.AU OR PO BOX 2808, GPO SYDNEY, 2001
CREDIT: IAIN CURRY
Word count: 1009
