2021 HAS BEEN ONE OF THE BIGGEST YEARS IN HISTORY FOR THE STATE’S HOUSING MARKET. ELIZABETH TILLEY REVEALS THE SECRET BUYERS BEHIND THE TOP SALES
THE secret buyers of Queensland’s richest real estate in 2021 have been revealed, with tech whizzes, local property developers, mining executives and farmers among those behind the 50 biggest buys of the year.
In one of the biggest years in history for the state’s housing market, mega mansions changed hands for staggering sums as Covid restrictions saw local families spend their savings on a home instead of a holiday – some going to great lengths to hide their pricey purchases.
Mining tycoon Gina Rinehart is understood to be the buyer behind Queensland’s biggest ever residential sale – the eye-watering $34m purchase of a Sunshine Beach mansion in Webb Rd.
Land sales records for the beachfront property still haven’t been updated, but numerous sources have since whispered that the Hancock Prospecting boss is the new owner.
The off-market sale of the fan-shaped house on a 2015sq m block was a huge win for the owners, Margie and Murray Charlton, who weren’t even considering selling when they received the unbelievable offer.
Just down the road, Luke Anear, the founder of tech start-up, SafetyCulture, forked out $21m for another beachfront mansion in Belmore Terrace.
Mr Anear, whose company is valued at $2.2bn, bought the property in March from Sonya Evans, the wife of David Evans, the former AFL Bombers chairman. They had paid $14m for it in 2018.
But the second biggest sale of the year was by Amir Mian of Amir Prestige on the Gold Coast, where transport tycoon Peter Smith sold a chateau-style mansion at 5 McMillan Crt for $23.75m.
The property is now home to a former Adelaide businessman, who was reportedly granted a rare identity suppression by the Queensland government. More than half of the top sales of 2021 were on the Gold Coast, including a futuristic-looking Sovereign Islands mega mansion that Clive Palmer spent $20m on in August.
Mr Palmer, the richest man in the country, has a residential property portfolio of more than $50m statewide, including many on the Gold Coast.
The purchase of 13-17 King Arthurs Crt gives him a string of nine consecutive blocks along the Sovereign Islands’ promontory, making him the owner of the largest residential landholding on the Gold Coast.
In nearby Sanctuary Cove, Gold Coast business tycoon and property developer Tony Quinn paid $17.7m just last month for an opulent five-bedroom, 11-bathroom waterfront home.
MrQuinn made more than $400m from the sale of VIP Pet Foods, which he founded, and $200m selling most of his stake in confectionary giant Darrell Lea.
Big money changed hands this year on Hedges Avenue – ‘maire’s row’ – in Mermaid Beach.
Construction industry veteran Mick Power, founder of BMD Group, splashed $15.5m on a home there, while wagering king Andrew Fahey paid $17.5m for an oceanfront block on the same street.
And in an usual twist, a property in Riverbend Avenue, Carrara, sold twice in the same year – both times for over $10m.
The co-founder of jobs website, SEEK, has been revealed as the buyer of a $12.8m waterfront property at Broadbeach Waters.
Company searches show Melbourne-based Andrew Bassat bought the 1813 sq m site at 139-141 Monaco St.
On the Sunshine Coast, a new Queensland auction record was set in October with the sale of a Noosa Heads property for $16.45m.
The house at 39-41 Picture Point Cres sold under-the-hammer to local property developer and designer, Heidi Meyer, after hitting the market for the first time in more than 40 years.
Ms Meyer sold her luxurious hinterland estate in Buderim for $17.1m only a month earlier to Cairns property tycoon Alex Sekler. Another record was smashed when a luxury Noosa apartment fetched $16.1m under-the-hammer, surpassing the previous apartment auction sale benchmark.
Four phone bidders sought the keys to the three-level Hastings Street apartment owned by Melbourne financier, Mark Suhr.
The biggest sale of the calendar year in Brisbane was the cliffside mansion at 1 Leopard Street that Broncos chairman and Ord Minnett CEO Karl Morris purchased for $15m in March.
Coming a close second was the sale of a huge site in Bardon owned by the Sisters of Mercy, which richlister and mining executive Brian Flannery secretly snapped up for charity purposes for $14.5m in August.
Historic Lamb House, perched on the Kangaroo Point cliffs overlooking the Brisbane River, is set for major restoration works after selling to well-known local businessman, Steve Wilson, for $12.75m in May.
The founder of Queensland video editing startup Clipchamp has been revealed as the buyer of a riverfront mansion at 78 Jilba St, Indooroopilly, previously owned by the founder of Brisbane development giant Citimark, Robert Pullar, and his fashion designer wife.
Records show Alex Dreiling paid $12m for the property in a pre-auction deal last month.
Newly cashed-up, Mr Dreiling sold Clipchamp to global software giant Microsoft in September for an undisclosed sum.
Ray White chief economist Nerida Conisbee said demand for luxury property hit record highs in 2021, with the pandemic allowing many people to choose to buy where they had always dreamed of living.
“Freed from the constraints of an office commute, cashed up with high savings rates and able to access cheap finance... culminated in very strong conditions in southeast Queensland, as well as northern New South Wales”,” Ms Conisbee said. “Add to this positivity off the back of employment growth and the Olympics, as well as tougher economic conditions in Melbourne particularly, and this part of Australia is looking particularly positive.” Ray White’s Christine Rudolph said Brisbane had come a long way in 12 months, with $3m rapidly becoming the entry level to the city’s prestige property market.
“What is also interesting to note, is that many of this year’s highest sales have been in the majority of cases, driven by local buyers who are confident in securing their long term aspirational home,” she said.
$34m 17 Webb Rd, Sunshine Beach Buyer: Mining magnate Gina Rinehart, Hancock Prospecting
$21m 2-2A Belmore Tce, Sunshine Beach Buyer: Luke Anear, SafetyCulture founder and CEO
$20m 15-17 King Arthurs Court, Sovereign Islands Buyer: Clive Palmer
$15.5m 95-97 Hedges Ave, Mermaid Beach Buyer: Mick Power, BMD Group founder
$17.7m 7354-7356 Marine Dr East, Sanctuary Cove Buyer: Anthony Quinn, Gold Coast business identity
$12.75m 9 Leopard St, Kangaroo Point Buyer: Steve Wilson, former head of Wilson HTM
$15m 1 Leopard St, Kangaroo Point Buyer: Broncos chairman and Ord Minnett CEO Karl Morris
$17.1m 24 Box St, Buderim Buyer: Alex Sekler, entrepreneur/property developer
CREDIT: ELIZABETH TILLEY
Word count: 1101
