There are plenty of players with ability at Carlton, but they remain a long way behind the league's best teams.
Carlton have been a mediocre team for the best part of 20 years, except for a Chris Judd-inspired two to three years, after a long period as an AFL/VFL powerhouse on and off the field. How has this happened? It's a combination of poor leadership from the board down, with coaches, CEOs, football managers, recruiting and other football department staff all sharing a portion of the blame.
Great clubs may be down for four or five years but it shouldn't be two decades. The Blues are one example of not having the right people in the right positions, not having enough people who are completely selfless, who challenge each other and want to make everyone at the club the best they can be. Hawthorn, Geelong and Richmond are examples of clubs that have had very stable administrations for a long time, Geelong in particular.
After hitting rock bottom again the Blues appointed Stephen Silvagni as their recruiting boss a few years ago. It takes a few years to build your list solely off the draft, so the club believed some prudent trades were required and SOS had a very good track record at Greater Western Sydney, where many players came and went with the start-up club.
History shows it is so important when you are at the bottom to select wisely with two consecutive drafts, where you can introduce upwards
of 10 quality players. We have seen this with Geelong, Hawthorn and
St Kilda in the 2000s and it requires trading out some players with currency to attract higher draft selections. It means you are going to suffer some pain for two to three years and Carlton have gone down this path, the trading out of Bryce Gibbs being one example.
Jacob Weitering, Sam Walsh, Charlie Curnow, Harry McKay, Patrick Dow, Liam Stocker, Brodie Kemp, Zac Fisher, Sam Philp, Lochie O'Brien, Tom De Koning, Sam Petrevski-Seton and David Cuningham have all arrived through the draft over the past five years. Not all of these players are near their best yet but they all have plenty of ability and can be strong players for Carlton for a long time.
Some players take five minutes to adjust (Walsh), some take four years, and it is often based around their level of maturity, which is hard to assess at 18. Of these players only O'Brien has disappointed to this stage but I suggest he was taken way too high in the draft.
To develop a really strong list you also need to trade for players to fill your needs that weren't attainable through the draft, and all strong clubs have traded to stay viable over the years. History again tells us that about seven traded players in your best 22 is a good number and Silvagni and his successor have been able to do this.
Jack Martin, Adam Saad, Sam Docherty, Mitch McGovern, Marc Pittonet, Lachie Plowman, Matthew Kennedy, Will Setterfield, Caleb Marchbank and Zac Williams are in or close to their best team, with really only Saad costing a high draft pick (No.8) and some arriving very cheaply, Martin for nothing.
While some would say some of these players are not that good, I will disagree. As a recruiter I always liked to rate a player off their best, not their worst, and if they aren't near their best find out why. As a great recruiter once told me,
"Every player drafted is capable
of playing AFL football", and we have seen many a player written
off only to thrive in another environment. Carlton have one
such player: Ed Curnow.
Carlton have selected 12 to 15 players over the past seven years who at their best should be good to great AFL players, and they traded for about 10, so that is the basis of a very good team. They have three very good key forwards (McKay, Curnow and De Koning), 12 or so midfielders, three key defenders, of which one is outstanding (Weitering), running backs, versatility and depth. Their ruck is honest but no star (Pittonet) and Eddie Betts is their best and only small forward.
They have the basis of a very good football team but there is a big hole in their list, which only time will heal.
Where the top teams over the past four years - Richmond and Geelong - have numerous gun players who are aged 28 and above, Carlton have few and this is why they are three years off challenging the top teams.
Marc Murphy has been a great servant but is in his last year. Ed Curnow, Betts and Levi Casboult are also late in their careers, which leaves Liam Jones, Jack Newnes and Nic Newman. Of these players Ed Curnow is the only one who can claim to be in their top 10 players and he should be used as a tagger more often.
In comparison, Patrick Dangerfield, Joel Selwood, Tom Hawkins and Mitch Duncan are easily in Geelong's top 10 and Richmond have Trent Cotchin, Dustin Martin, Jack Riewoldt, Dylan Grimes and Tom Lynch. Now you see why Carlton are behind the top teams. Hindsight has demonstrated that this has been the result of poor recruiting over the years and, by inference, you can throw in development and coaching. Mitch Robinson, a heart and soul player, was written off too easily.
The fallout of not having enough quality among players older than 27 is that the Blues are lacking in their leadership, crucial in today's footy, which comes from mature players and takes time to develop. Based on their performance, of the younger brigade, Walsh and Cripps provide that in spades and Setterfield and Weitering are developing those qualities but there is precious little else. Of the older group, there is Ed Curnow definitely and maybe Betts.
This needs to be rectified quickly through drafting, trading, coaching and leadership programs because they have a list that is just about ready to go and challenge but too many of their players have gone backwards this year. Petrevski-Seton, Setterfield, Martin, Plowman, Docherty, Kennedy and McGovern are all capable of much more and that is why they are having a football department review.
From a recruiting, trading point of view they need to find a gun small forward to replace Betts (Corey Durdin, who they selected last year, might be one), two if they can. They also need a small back so Saad doesn't have to play that role and a ruck who can contribute more than Pittonet, who is honest but not in the top 12 ruckmen in the competition. It might be Alex Mirkov, who they took in the mid-season draft.
They desperately need Charlie Curnow and Marchbank fit, Dow, Petrevski-Seton, Martin, Williams and Setterfield contributing more in the midfield to help Walsh, Cripps and Ed Curnow, and with that they should comfortably make the eight next year.
Matt Rendell is a former Collingwood and Adelaide recruiter and assistant coach at multiple AFL clubs.
CREDIT: Matt Rendell
Word count: 1185
