Leap into lentils for Lameroo operation
A RECORD year could be on the cards for one Mallee grower, with their decision to head in a new direction set to pay dividends.
Traditionally a mixed property with cropping and sheep, Lameroo's Craig Needs will cease sheep production by the end of this year, putting the sole focus on crops.
This comes after the Needs family have bred from Lines Gum Hill bloodlines for about 80 years, with decades of Merino history in the family.
Although not an easy decision, Mr Needs said it was one necessary for their operation, with the cons of sheep outweighing the pros for their property.
"Agronomically it just made sense to move out of sheep," he said.
"We constantly found we were taking from cropping to give to the sheep or vice versa, and with sheep taking up 70 per cent of our time but only 25pc of our profit, it was a natural move."
It wasn't a rushed decision for Mr Needs either, with more than five years of research conducted before putting a plan into action this year.
The Lameroo property is home to 1650 hectares of crops.
This includes barley, vetch, beans, lentils, oaten hay and small amount of medics for the sheep still remaining on-property.
Although cropping is second-nature to the Needs family, lentils was a new addition to the rotation this year, after discussions with growers in other regions across the state and nitrogen prices prompted the move.
"I've had a chat with a few mates who grow lentils on the West Coast and on Yorke Peninsula who gave me some solid advice about branching out into lentils," he said.
"Nitrogen was getting pretty expensive and getting out of sheep, we had to replace our medic pastures with a grain legume so we diversified into lentils instead of just putting more beans in."
Mr Needs said the property's heavy clay soils made for an extra challenge growing lentils, but previous experience in similar crops proved handy.
"Obviously we've got different soil types and a different climate to other regions so we couldn't make the complete decision based on what we'd been told by others," he said.
"But we've been growing beans for a long time and agronomically, lentils are quite similar so we were confident we could make it work.
"The difference will be at harvest as lentils are a bit more complicated than beans, but it's all part of the learning curve."
Never without an extra challenge, this year has also brought the worst year for fungus since he has been on the farm, according to Mr Needs, but he said the threat had been manageable.
"We're chasing powdery mildew and stripe rust at the moment," he said.
"Getting fungicides out early is the key not to be behind and chasing your tail.
"I'm doing a few of our early wheat crops that are quite advanced and thick to pre-empt the rain coming.
"They're getting their second fungicide, which is the first time we've ever done that on this property so it's a bit of a headache."
Mr Needs said the "headache" was attributed to overcast, cool conditions with two millimetre to 3mm rainfalls throughout the past six weeks.
"That's perfect for fungus to start up with a bit of humidity," he said.
"But it's not the end of the world and we're keeping it under control at the moment."
RELATED READING:
Hefty slide in pulse price but demand remains Herbicide tolerance catalyst for pulse revolution The property also had rainfall of up to 80mm during seeding, and follow-up tallies of 32mm in June, 32mm in July and 40mm in August.
Looking at the season ahead, Mr Needs said he expected to begin harvest in early November, dependent on how the season finished.
"At this stage we'll be around November 10," he said.
"We'll be desiccating lentil around the end of October, but they're predicting a cool, wet finish so that might push harvest out again.
"At the moment we're looking at an above average year if we get our finishing rains in the next few weeks.
"It's hard to track for sure, but we're hopeful for a strong finish."
CREDIT: Katie Jackson
Word count: 703
