Despite a rocky start, Macarthur FC have cause for optimism, writes Vince Rugari.
Starting a professional soccer club from scratch is hard enough. At this stage of the A-League's evolution - after several seasons of declining interest, midway through a never-ending "unbundling" saga, and towards the end of a broadcast deal with a seemingly uninterested television partner - it's even tougher.
Throw in a global pandemic and it's a recipe for sporting disaster.
Have Macarthur FC done enough to steer clear? It's one of the biggest questions of the new A-League season - and like anything in the Australian soccer universe, the answer depends almost entirely upon who you ask and how you look at it.
It's been a difficult journey for the Bulls, one of the two teams given the nod to join the A-League in December 2018 by then-chief executive David Gallop's FFA administration.
For a club that's still yet to play an official match, the sheer amount of upheaval has been concerning. They've already gone through a major investor (Lang Walker), a chairman (Rabieh Krayem), a CEO, a training venue, a host of front-office and backroom staff and a planned Indigenous academy that never got off the ground.
That was all before COVID-19, which has presented its own challenges. For many months, Macarthur had no idea when their first season would actually begin. Then, a few days out from their historic showdown with the Western Sydney Wanderers, the match was pushed back three days because of Sydney's latest outbreak.
"You name it, we've had it thrown at us," chairman Gino Marra said.
On the field, there can be no debate: Macarthur have assembled one of the A-League's best squads on paper, defying what Sam Krslovic, the club's sporting and operations director, says were "fear-mongering" predictions that recruitment would suffer because of the reduced salary cap.
There is a quiet buzz building around key signing and probable Johnny Warren Medal contender Benat Etxebarria, the former Real Betis and Athletic Bilbao midfielder who is one of the best-credentialled foreigners Australia has seen.
But there's plenty to be excited about beyond him and fellow Spaniard Markel Susaeta - including Socceroos goalkeeper Adam Federici, imposing defenders Aleks Susnjar and Aleks Jovanovic, young guns Jake Hollman and Denis Genreau, and ex-English Premier League striker Matt Derbyshire.
In captain Mark Milligan, they have a true leader and a textbook professional whose invaluable A-League experience will show them all the way. And coach Ante Milicic heads up what feels like a fully formed soccer department - not a start-up - with a crystal-clear idea of the type of game they want to play.
Most of Macarthur's question marks lie off the field. There doesn't seem to be a visible groundswell of support for this new club. But that doesn't mean it's not there.
The Bulls say they've done their work by stealth, speaking directly to the grassroots soccer community of Sydney's blue-collar south-west.
"I don't care about the guy in the eastern suburbs who puts shit on the south-west," Marra said. "I'm not interested in all the fancy stuff in the papers. I'm interested in meeting as many people as I can and selling the virtues of our club.
"We understand the area. People want to see results. That's why the first thing we concentrated on was building a team that the region would be proud of. There are 10 NPL clubs within half an hour of our stadium. That's how much people follow and believe in football here. They're not idiots, they're people that understand football. We had to get our football right."
Membership sales sit at about 3500 - on par with pre-pandemic tallies for clubs such as Adelaide and Central Coast, but well clear of expansion contemporaries Western United. Most members are young families, reflective of the growing demographic in the south-west who are flocking there for affordable housing.
"We know there's a lot of new immigrants coming to those areas, coming from countries where our code of football is the most popular," said A-League chief Greg O'Rourke, one of the FFA decision-makers who opted for Macarthur over the well-funded Southern Expansion bid headed by former NSW premier Morris Iemma.
No other sport has planted its flag in Sydney's south-west. Only the Wests Tigers play there, and that's just three times a year. The 20,000-capacity stadium in Leumeah - a 45-minute drive on a traffic-free day from Wanderers' Bankwest Stadium - sits otherwise disused. "Rugby league's abandoned the area. We're the only sport who harnesses the area," said Krslovic, a Cabramatta boy.
"I have no doubt that if the club continues along the way that we've started, especially in the last six to 12 months, we'll be one of the biggest clubs in Australia."
Marra and Krslovic are the men with their hands on the club's levers of power. Marra is a director of the Southern Districts association who previously sat on the board of the Association of Australian Football Clubs - the cage-rattling lobby group of NPL clubs determined to introduce promotion and relegation with the A-League.
Krslovic is a well-known and sometimes outspoken NSW soccer identity, a former president of Sydney United 58 and close confidant of many of the game's biggest stars from Sydney's west, most notably former Socceroos skipper Mile Jedinak.
They've done things their way, and that hasn't always made them popular with rival clubs, or even their own would-be fans.
Take, for instance, Macarthur's recent affiliation with NSW NPL1 outfit Northbridge FC, who are based on the north shore - an hour away from Campbelltown. Or their very public pursuit of Milos Ninkovic, which rubbed Sydney FC the wrong way. Or their steep pricing of tickets and memberships for a traditionally working-class area. Or their failure to fully embrace media coverage at times during pre-season. Or their move to register the name of their active supporter group, the Bullpen, which outraged their independently minded fans.
But behind every decision that might seem strange from the periphery, Marra and Krslovic say, lies a very specific motivation, and they're happy to be judged by the outcome of their actions.
O'Rourke said: "I had my eyes wide open. If we were to give Macarthur a licence under the stewardship of Gino and Sam, I knew exactly what I'd be getting - I knew they would be different, if you like, from some of the other clubs in the way they approached it. But I thought that was also actually part of the charm."
Krslovic said: "We come from an entrepreneurial type of mindset, which is totally different and at times conflicts with the establishment. But as we've found over time - and with a lot of examples - we've actually helped them on commercial grounds, given them different ideas, things that haven't been picked up before, things that can be done differently. We can't all be the same, because if we're all the same it breeds complacency."
CREDIT: Vince Rugari
Word count: 1162
