Over the past week the Port Lincoln Times has had the chance to shine a light on people and groups giving back to the community, whether its serving the needs of book and movie lovers, or creating a team to allow a couple of passionate players some time on the netball court.
We start up at Cummins where local resident Paul Whillas has been sharing his love of books and films through the community swap fridge in front of his home.
Mr Whillas has kept the fridge stocked with books and DVDs for people to take, borrow or swap, and it has come in handy for people during recent restrictions and lockdowns, as facilities such as libraries were closed temprorarily.
An initiative to provide a service to the town, Mr Whillas has kept the fridge going through his own efforts, and plenty of support from the community including from his local op shop and library.
We love bringing you stories like this, someone passionate about giving back in their own way.
While Mr Whillas has been providing material to read, West Coast Youth and Community Support has been working to provide material for youth to read as they prepare for the move to independent living and the next stage of their lives, whether it's employment or further study.
The project 'Adulting Post 2020' was put together after a need was identified to provide young people with information they need when moving away from home to work or study.
Making the move away from the region you have grown up in can be stressful, and can be made even more so if you are not equipped with the knowledge of how to handle things like bills, car maintenance or even cooking.
Sport has been a way to bring people together and a local netball identity has stepped back onto the netball court, organising a team to provide the chance for a couple of passionate players to play in 2021.
Nell McRostie organised for St Mary's Netball Club to have an A3 reserves team in 2021 which has featured players Nadia Rusden and Savannah Mundy, who have previously taken part in the Port Lincoln Netball Associaton's Gems Program which provides the chance for girls with disabilities to learn about netball.
With support from the netball association, umpires and other clubs, this has been a great showcase of inclusivity and a fantastic opportunity to provide a chance for a pair of 'Gems' to play in competition.
Hopefully there will be more displays like this, not just in netball but in all local sports in the future.
Speaking of the future, the last two stories we focus on relate to local councils trying to address the needs of residents, one with providing up-to-date open spaces and another with ensuring local health needs are met.
Port Lincoln City Council has released its draft Open Space Strategy 2021-2026 for public consultation which details planning and delivery of upgrades for the city's open spaces during the next five years.
This includes plans for a dog park at Nelson Square, which has been something many people in the local community have called for in recent years.
This will provide a chance for Port Lincoln residents to have a say on what they feel are priorities with their open spaces so hopefully there will be plenty of submissions from the public to help guide the council's direction in this area.
Finally, Kimba District Council is applying for a grant through the Rural Health Workforce Strategy Steering Committee as it tries to draw general practitioners to the area.
Kimba, like many areas on Eyre Peninsula or even rural South Australia, has faced the same issues with retaining GPs to meet community needs.
Hopefully more than just grant funding can be done to bring GPs to the region and help maintain a strong medical workforce on Eyre Peninsula.
Look for these and other stories coming your way on the Port Lincoln Times website, including results from last weekend's sport.
Happy reading!
Jarrad Delaney - Port Lincoln Times senior journalist
CREDIT:
Word count: 679
