Sanjeev Gupta’s GFG Alliance is understood to have brought in accounting and insolvency advisers at EY, along with restructuring experts at law firm Clayton Utz, to assist with matters relating to its major lender Greensill.
The Lex Greensill-founded business has shocked the global financial industry with its spectacular collapse this week.
Law firms working with Greensill globally are Herbert Smith Freehills and Allen & Overy, while Credit Suisse has hired McGrath Nicol in the local market to provide advice in relation to a $140m loan owing to the Swiss investment bank.
Grant Thornton was appointed as the administrator of Greensill’s operations in recent days after being hit by defaults from GFG Alliance, and GFG is in talks with Greensill over a temporary repayments standstill.
The Australian reported on Tuesday that court documents indicate that Greensill has about $US5bn ($6.5bn) worth of exposure to GFG.
The appointment of McGrath Nicol was made by Credit Suisse out of London because the security of the loan is tied to an Australian entity that has a stake in Greensill, sources say.
EY is an expert in providing insolvency advice and, with the collapse of Virgin Australia last year, it landed a role assisting the federal government.
Typically, such groups enter the frame at the request of a group’s lenders or to offer a company insight as to whether it could be trading while insolvent.
Most of Mr Gupta’s business interests related to GFG are based offshore. In Australia, Mr Gupta owns Infrabuild, which manufactures steel at its mini mills domestically and sells construction materials and, separately, the Whyalla steelworks in South Australia, for which maintaining profitability has historically been a battle.
Infrabuild is considered to be a strong performer at a time when steel prices are high. An initial public offering of the business has been mooted for later in the year.
But should other parts of Mr Gupta’s empire come under financial pressure, advisers and lenders may insist on a sale of some of GFG’s strongest-performing assets in a hurry in an effort to secure new bank funding to fill the gap left by Greensill.
It is worth remembering that when retail empire Steinhoff International unravelled in 2017 and came near to a collapse, it later came under pressure from its bond holders to sell assets, including those in Australia.
Australian subsidiary Greenlit Brands sold Harris Scarfe and Best and Less, and efforts have been made to sell or float its Fantastic Furniture brand.
Global rental car company Hertz, which underwent Chapter 11 bankruptcy, considered a sale of its strongly performing Hertz Australia arm, but it has been retained for now.
Few parties provide similar supply chain financing to Greensill, where suppliers receive a discount in return for early payment, although some such as HSBC in Australia do offer such loans to its customers.
Most expect that the likely buyer of Infrabuild is Brookfield should a sale be on the cards, given that it has been a keen buyer in the past of its assets — some of which were previously under the control of now-collapsed company Arrium.
Global buyout fund Apollo remains in talks to buy parts of Greensill, with Melbourne-based lawyer Leon Zwier of law firm Arnold Bloch Leibler on the ticket for the buyout fund.
As reported by The Wall Street Journal, Greensill’s operations were seized last week, when Credit Suisse stopped investors from moving money in or out of the $US10bn in supply-chain investment funds.
The Credit Suisse move was triggered after Greensill lost coverage from a set of credit insurers that provided protection in case the start-up’s clients defaulted.
The insurance was crucial because it made Greensill’s assets appear safer to Credit Suisse’s institutional investors. Now the thinking is that insurers could also seek advice should they be on the hook for funds owed by Greensill’s clients that have defaulted on their loans.
CREDIT: EDITED BY BRIDGET CARTER
Word count: 651
