There are challenges to being a 12-year-old entrepreneur.
In August, Myla Tucker had just psyched herself up to cold-call a manufacturer, hoping they might be interested in producing the tween swimsuits that she and her best friend, Olivia Lorenz, 11, had conceptualised during Newcastle's lockdown.
But when the grown-up on the other end of the line heard her high-pitched voice and asked, "How old are you? Is your mother there?" Myla thought of doing one thing: she hung up. She called back a few minutes later and apologised, saying "we're still learning".
The duo's brand, Cinnamon Cove, began when the pair could not find any swimsuits they loved. "The two-year-olds were virtually wearing the same prints and patterns as [the ones made for] our age, and they were a bit childish, while all the elder [read: teenagers] people were wearing things that were a bit too mature and not practical for our age," Myla says.
After watching a TV show one night about entrepreneurs, Myla ran over to Olivia's house. "This is what we need to do!"
They were a complementary match with their own skill sets. Olivia loves fashion; Myla had longed for her own business. Or, as Olivia puts it: "Myla's got all the drive and is really creative, and I guess I'm the thinker." What they didn't like: prints with rainbows, suns and too much pink. What they wanted: "Something that we could wear confidently," Myla says. "That was vintage and classy ... like Audrey Hepburn." Um, how do these girls even know who Hepburn is? "Through my mum!" Myla says.
But getting Cinnamon Cove off the ground was not straightforward. "We thought the hardest bit was going to be getting customers or getting the designs done," Olivia says. "But actually the hardest bit was the manufacturing process and trying to find fabric that was sustainable. There's a lot of greenwash out there, so we had to do quite a bit of research." Myla adds that "because we're young, we know that we're that generation that's going to help the planet".
Conducting Zoom business meetings was easy; online school had taught them how to be tech savvy that way. And they soon gathered a list of willing mentors, one of whom - courtesy of Olivia's grandmother, a journalist - introduced them to former Louis Vuitton Australia chief executive Julia King. "We've had quite a few meetings with her, and she told us if our ideas were good or bad," Olivia says. Was that tricky? "No, we kind of just took her advice."
More than anything, they've learnt how to push through the challenges of a start-up. "We have to keep going, we have to keep persevering," Olivia says. And some small-won battles have been the sweetest, such as when South Australia-based influencer Elise Cook began following them on Instagram. "We were jumping up and down in the lounge room, [saying]: 'Oh my god, she's really following us!"'
Speaking of social media, does being a tween give them an advantage? Nope: their parents put restrictions on those.
For this reason, both say that they're not being bombarded with images of how they should look, but still share the same goal: "We didn't have any [swimwear] we felt comfortable in," Myla says. "We just want to be comfortable in our own bodies."
But when you're a tween, life isn't all about work. When they're not thinking about Cinnamon Cove, they're at the beach or playing at the park. "We kind of forget about the business when we're hanging out with friends," Myla says. "We're still kids and we want to have fun."
CREDIT: Rachelle Unreich
Word count: 606
