TOM Dabernig wrestled with the question: would there be a right or wrong time to leave Lindsay Park?
There were pros and cons, but the proud long-time custodian of one of the best pedigrees in racing needed to be selfish, for the greater good.
The biggest motivation was close to home, as the new Warrnambool start-up trainer wanted the option, at the very least, to enact a succession plan.
Late legendary grandfather Colin Hayes had one, as does uncle and past co-trainer David Hayes.
“I’ve got three sons of my own, Hugo, 13, Teddy, 10, and George, nearly 5 … they’ll have complete freedom to do what they want to do,” Dabernig said.
“But it (his Warrnambool set-up), if one or multiple of them are interested, gives them a pathway.
“There’d never be any pressure from my wife Cassi and I to go into that direction. It will be up to them.
“It’s something (succession) I can really ­relate to. Our family, Lindsay Park, has been such a family business and my grandfather was always strong on that.
“I guess I would like to do the same for my children, and through Lindsay Park that wasn’t able to really happen, to be honest with it all. That’s what I want to do for my kids.” The alternative reality was this.
Ben Hayes is ready to lead generation next at Lindsay Park, along with brother JD and eventually Western Bulldogs-listed Will, an ­accomplished horseman.
The Hayes siblings have skin in the game, whereas Dabernig, the son of Jan, David Hayes’ older sister, had none.
“It felt to me like David’s kids were ready and, rightfully, it’s going to be their business and theirs to run and I was ready to do what I wanted to do,” Dabernig said.
“Lindsay Park has been a massive part of my life. My parents were involved in the business and I was born and raised at the original Lindsay Park. Lindsay Park was a magnificent opportunity for me. I learnt a hell of a lot, we were able to win premierships, and be involved in 19 Group 1 wins.
“It was certainly sad to go, but one door closes, another one opens.” Besides, how many co-trainers would be too many? Two or three works, but four? “I had total freedom to do things as I wanted, which I’ll be forever grateful to David Hayes for,” Dabernig said.
“I was looking for a bit of ­independence and my own identity, so I think this allows me to do that.
“At 45 I wanted a business of my own, more so to get back to grassroots racing and interaction with the horse.
“Doing it on a bigger scale, you get heavily involved in the logistics of the business and planning, and don’t do a lot of the actual hands-on with horses, which as a young person I did a lot of.
“I’m probably more horse trainer than business person.” If deciding to leave and telling the Hayeses was the hardest part, the easiest was settling on Warrnambool as the new home of Dabernig Racing.
A new 48-box complex will be built on-course, close to Lindsey Smith’s barn. In the meantime, local trainer Matthew Williams has kindly leased Dabernig 11 boxes to get him started until the build is finished in December.
Dabernig will be “light on” for runners to start, with a view to being “raring and ready” later in the year.
Settling into Warrnambool and its passionate racing ­community is the priority. “I’ve never been able to have access to working horses at the beach,” Dabernig said.
“My grandfather and I ­always had a close relationship … he often spoke to me about his time training on the beach, and as I’ve matured or got older it’s a bit of an itch I wanted to scratch.
“The environment here I consider to be as good, if not better, than anywhere else in Victoria, and the added bonus it’s a great racing community.
“I’ve been quite surprised how many people you bump into have a share in a horse.
“The Western District gives you access to good country tracks, access to South Australia, a slight downside is the ­distance to Melbourne, but Warrnambool trainers do it and perform. I don’t see any disadvantage.
“We want to fit in with all the local trainers here … certainly haven’t come here ­trying to edge in on any of the established trainers’ businesses. We want to fit in with the community and do the best we can.” Dabernig was in Warrnambool less than a week before the first truckload of horses ­arrived last Friday.
Melbourne Cup and multiple Group 1-winning owner Gerry Ryan and prolific owner-breeder Robert Crabtree are among the first to send, or pledge, horses.
The inaugural haul has ­included Lindsay Park Group 1 winner Fifty Stars and two-year-old filly Spinning. gilbert.gardiner@news.com.au
CREDIT: Gilbert Gardiner
Word count: 818
