Stylish new start-up has the style and performance to take the fight to Tesla When Volvo’s Polestar offshoot originally arrived in Australia it was pitched as an alternative to the likes of BMW’s M3. Now reborn as an electric-only concern, it has been positioned as a Tesla rival, promising attractive and capable machines sold directly to customers over the web.
The first offering is a four-door liftback known as the Polestar 2. Priced from $64,900 plus on-road costs (about $65,000 drive-away with EV incentives in NSW, Victoria and South Australia), the China-sourced sedan is roughly on par with Tesla’s Model 3, costlier than humble hatchbacks such as the Nissan Leaf and cheaper than bigger electric machines such as Hyundai’s Ioniq 5.
The line-up starts with a two-wheel-drive, “standard range, single motor” model delivering 165kW of power and a claimed 440 kilometres of range. A mid-spec “long range, single motor” model priced just shy of $69,900 (about $70,000 drive-away in EV states with incentives) has a bigger battery offering 540km of range, along with an extra 5kW of power. The top-of-the-range “long range, dual motor” versions combine the big battery with another motor for 480km range and 300kW of power at $69,900 plus on-roads (about $75,000 drive-away). All three variants can be had with two key options. A $6000 “Plus” pack delivers luxuries such as a seriously impressive 13-speaker Harman Kardon stereo, panoramic sunroof, wireless phone charging and a heated rear seat and steering wheel.
The $5000 “Pilot” pack serves up matrix LED headlights, a 360-degree camera and – somewhat controversially – driver aids such as active cruise control, blind-spot monitoring and rear cross-traffic alert. Some significantly cheaper mainstream petrol machines offer that tech for free. But the Polestar 2 will never be confused for a mainstream model. Handsome exterior styling gives way to a truly beautiful cabin bereft of the endless plastic found in modern cars.
Our test model looked magnificent with open-pore wood, blonde-coloured leather and intricate cloth covers on the armrests and speakers. Much of what you see is sustainable, including textiles woven from thread created using recycled plastic bottles.
But Polestar bucks the modern reliance on smartphone mirroring such as Apple CarPlay with a beautiful 15-inch touchscreen powered by Google, delivering high-resolution maps, music and clever integration with the American giant’s digital ecosystem. It works seamlessly, integrating cleverly with a digital dashboard positioned in front of seats seemingly plucked from the Volvo parts bin. Although you won’t find Volvo logos anywhere, the link between Polestar and its parent company pays dividends with supportive chairs, sound ergonomics and well-calibrated driver aids. While some electric cars maximise the cabin space offered by flat floors and smaller motors, the Polestar takes a more traditional approach with high window sills, a fulsome centre console and a prominent hump in the rear floor tied to a platform shared with Volvo’s XC40.
Space in the rear is decent but not decadent, and head room is compromised by an optional glass sunroof that can make the cabin a touch too warm in summer.
Polestar’s decision to fit 19-inch wheels results in confidence-inspiring cornering grip, helped by a surprising lack of body roll given the car’s two-tonne mass. The trade off is a busy low-speed ride exacerbated by somewhat noisy suspension that settles down at speed. You can use the conventional brakes or tap into a single-pedal mode, where the car slows dramatically when you lift off the accelerator, at the same time recharging the battery. The steering is accurate but lacks feel and can sometimes be overwhelmed by the need to send 170kW through the front tyres. Road noise from the Continental tyres is hushed for the most part, but coarse-chip surfaces can return an unseemly racket. Carefully measured power delivery returns effortless if not brutal acceleration, making for swift and silent progress in urban and country environments.
VERDICT **** Peerless presentation, impressive electric range and polished driving manners work in the Polestar’s favour, though costly extras and a bumpy ride cost it.
AT A GLANCE POLESTAR 2 LONG RANGE About $70,000 drive-away 5-year/ unlimited km, free for 5 years Electric, 170kW and 330Nm 510km range Inflator kit 405 litres 8 airbags, auto emergency braking, lane-keep assist, driver attention alert
CREDIT: DAVID McCOWEN
Word count: 710
