The three BHP chiefs who masterminded the company’s entry into Pilbara iron ore and Chilean copper — the late Ian McLennan, the late James McNeill and Brian Loton — would never have dreamed that one day those investments would be the main forces in generating BHP’s 2020-21 free cashflow of well over $20bn.
And they would never have conceived that a tailings dam failure in Brazil, combined with a thrust in Chinese steel production and the electrification of the globe, would be among the forces that boosted BHP’s profitability, leaving it awash with cash. They would be equally stunned that their cherished BHP tradition of looking ahead to the next major development would be set aside by BHP managers in favour of massive dividends to shareholders.
The BHP shareholders of 2021 are enjoying the rewards of the McLennan-McNeill-Loton decisions plus those who later enhanced them. But the present managers are not investing for the future on the scale that was the BHP tradition. Of course some of those “future” investments failed.
This change is not widely debated because shareholders are enjoying the share price rise that comes with the current strategy.
But given that part of the iron ore boom was created by highly unusual events there is controversy about the 2021 strategy, particularly as BHP is sitting on one of the world’s greatest copper deposits at a time when global electrification may boost the copper price in the same way that iron ore has taken off.
While the giant Olympic Dam in South Australia is increasing production from its relatively small underground operation, the massive copper reserves BHP purchased from Western Mining are untouched.
And because much of the cash bonanza will not be retained by the company, the huge reserves may never be developed because of the high start-up expenditures. But it is conceivable that in a copper-deficient world Australia may demand the copper be extracted by BHP or someone else.
BHP CEO Mike Henry is proud of the fact that the company’s iron ore production costs are well below those of Rio Tinto. In decades gone by the cost position was reversed, but Rio managing iron ore from St James Square in London was never a good idea and The Big Australian has become much more skilled in its iron ore production techniques.
Accordingly, whatever happened to the iron ore price, BHP was set to make good money given its low cost levels. Indeed, the company would have been happy with an iron ore price around $US90 a tonne, but around double that is over the top.
There is no doubt that the biggest forces driving prices is the fact that China has a major infrastructure program to deliver its recovery and that requires steel, and the US — as it pump-primes its economy — is boosting demand for Chinese goods. The US abandoned manufacturing many years ago and the attempts to revive it by former president Donald Trump are yet to bear fruit.
BHP originally had plans to increase its iron ore production but when the slump took place many years ago those plans were put on hold. Then came the tragic 2019 tailings dam collapse in Brazil. Whereas the Brazilian producer Vale was looking at a 400 million tonne production rate it fell back to not much above 300 million tonnes and has stayed there for some years. While Vale expects production to come back to 400 million tonnes in 2022, this is proving difficult.
Some of the Vale production disappointments are a result of COVID-19 but the major force has been the tailings dam failure. When that dam broke no one could have foreseen that not only would Australian iron ore producers be the major beneficiaries but so would Canberra’s tax revenue via the consequent higher price. It also offset the Chinese actions against Australia.
But China is now committed to producing large quantities of iron ore from Guinea in Africa and Australia will face long-term competition particularly as scrap becomes more important. And the iron ore/steel trade will need to adapt to lower carbon methods which could easily depress prices.
It is possible the iron ore price will fall sharply later this year or in 2022, but it is still likely to remain high. The longer-term outlook is less certain. In other words, this cash bonanza gives BHP the chance to insulate itself from a major change in the iron ore market either via higher copper production or of other minerals that will benefit from electrification.
And BHP still has its potash development. Although potash may be accelerated in the next year or so a major strategic change from BHP is not on the horizon and the short-term-thinking institutions do not want any change in the high-dividend policy.
And to be fair to BHP, there are problems with Olympic Dam that were not originally foreseen.
The ore has a substantial quantity of uranium and that makes transporting the concentrates to a smelter a hazardous exercise.
Former BHP CEO Marius Kloppers planned to remove the overburden on top of the deposit and make it an open cut mine. When the copper price fell, like the iron ore plans, it was shelved. But if copper keeps rising in price the economics of such a big development may be greatly improved. Meanwhile, shareholders are going to be showered with cash.
CREDIT: Robert Gottliebsen
Word count: 898
