Here on the Fraser Coast however, the people bringing you the news not only live and work locally but also genuinely want the best future for our region.
So, as we prepare for the Chronicle to find its new home with its own dedicated landing page on the Courier Mail, I'd like to reintroduce you to the people on the ground and encourage you to reach out if you see common interests and story subjects you'd like to see covered.
Jessica Grewal, Editor
For those who aren't familiar with my background, I was a Hervey Bay High girl, lucky enough to score a full cadetship back when regional newsrooms still offered accredited four-year on-the-ground training stints without requiring you to ever step foot in a university lecture theatre.
A bustling newsroom led by the legendary Nancy Bates was an enviable training ground for budding journos.
Wise sub-editors weren't afraid to tell you when something didn't cut it but were also there to help guide you through confronting crimes and car accidents, including one where a former classmate had been killed, and a series on the ice epidemic in local high schools which resulted in a Clarion Award for Queensland Young Journalist of the Year.
I was able to repay this debt in a small way with a nomination for my mentor who ended up taking home a well-deserved honour - Most Outstanding Contribution to Journalism - at last year's Clarions.
Like most young reporters I had my eyes set on the city and, in 2011, I was selected to launch APN's Sydney Newsdesk, reporting on the court cases and political debates which were shaping the regions where the company had NSW titles from Coffs Harbour to the Queensland border.
Among these were articles which scored nominations in the Kennedy Awards for NSW Court Reporter of the Year, Most Outstanding Indigenous Affairs Reporting and Young Journalist of the Year.
I went on to become the Business & Regional Affairs Reporter for the Australian - a role which took me around Queensland covering everything from the collapse of Clive Palmer's Queensland Nickel in Townsville to the search for the elusive night parrot on a cattle station in the outback.
But amid all the career craziness, the love of my life had been here on Fraser Coast the whole time and it soon became clear my heart and future was back in my home patch which despite its many challenges, is still the best place to live and work in this country.
Like many of you, I was devastated by last year's closure of our print titles including the Fraser Coast Chronicle, and while there's still print ink flowing in these veins, we must look to the future.
No one in their right mind would still be sitting in a regional newsroom if they didn't truly believe they still had an essential role to play in reporting on and advocating for the community.
There simply isn't another organisation in this region providing scrutiny of the local council, courts etc and while it has undoubtedly been a bumpy road during the digital transition, I am wholly committed to ensuring our small but dedicated team rises to the challenge buoyed by a faster, easier to navigate website and user-friendly app.
A snapshot of some of the top topics tackled in opinion pieces in recent months is below. I welcome your feedback on whether you want to see more of these editorials, even if you vehemently disagree with the subject matter. May we always live in a world where we can speak freely about opposing views. Email jessica.grewal1@news.com.au
1. Why 16-storey vote will set tone for Coast's future
2. Small hospital wins shouldn't distract from bigger battle
3. Most important council feedback you can give
4. When the smoke clears, we must have answers
5. Dismissing drug trends does more damage
Carlie Walker, Senior Reporter
Our Senior reporter Carlie Walker is part of the furniture here.
She's based in Granville on the banks of the Mary River. Her passion topics include social issues reporting including on the Cashless Debit Card, youth suicide, Butchulla history and Fraser Island's dingoes.
In the past week she brought you rolling coverage of the dingo attack on Fraser Island and two major fires which broke out in Maryborough within an hour.
On Mondays and Tuesdays she spends much of her time at the Maryborough court house where she's covered everything from high-profile murder and child predator cases to issues related to the Maryborough jail.
A big supporter of local events and milestones, she brought you coverage of every high school formal on the Fraser Coast in 2020 and can be counted on to be there, camera in hand at bridal expos, antique markets, festivals and the country show.
Carlie's also a diehard support of the Newcastle Knights and locally, the Maryborough Wallaroos.
Carlie is known for the care and empathy she shows when people let her into their lives to tell their stories and while she's broken some of the biggest stories in the Chronicle's recent history, she's determined local news, even in the digital world, will still be the home of old-fashioned births, deaths and marriages news so if you'd like to see more of these stories and have an idea for a tribute/wedding piece or anything along these lines, Carlie would love to hear from you. Email carlie.walker@news.com.au
Stuart Fast, Reporter
Regional newsrooms are still invaluable training grounds for budding young reporters and last year we welcomed Stuart Fast to our team.
Stuart lives at Maaroom, right on the Great Sandy Strait so it's probably no surprise that he's a keen fisherman and has quickly become a correspondent for our outer-lying communities not only in his nearby patches of Poona and Boonooroo but also for Tiaro, Howard, Burrum Heads and Torbanlea
He's big on Maryborough's manufacturing industry, historic military pieces and development.
He's also responsible for bringing you the latest on the $2b wind farm that's set to be built in the Tuan Forest.
Stuart holds a Bachelor of Arts in History and Film and TV and a Diploma of Art in Journalism/Mass Communication.
Outside work he also enjoys, target sports, gaming, tennis and spending time with his three basset hounds.
Email: stuart.fast@news.com.au
Isabella Magee, Reporter
Isabella Magee is a Diabetes Queensland Ambassador and JDRF Mentor and Advocate.
She's turned her own healthy journey into an educational one, helping people and raising awareness.
Isabella grew up in Brisbane and recently transferred to the Fraser Coast Chronicle team after completing a year with the Courier Mail's graduates program.
She's enjoying exploring all the region has to offer with her beloved pooch Henry.
Isabella recently took you behind the scenes of the Coast's hottest new dining destination Banksia and is keen to promote local businesses whether it's a new start-up, renovation, special milestone or new service.
Email isabella.magee1@news.com.au
PART OF A POWERFUL TEAM
Just as we are committed, so too are our colleagues across Queensland who deliver the latest breaking news to keep you in the know.
And the best part is your local news subscription gets you access to the best reporting on local, state, national and international affairs.
Yes, your digital subscription to the Fraser Coast Chronicle gives you unlimited access to all our online content and stories as well as premium access to The Courier Mail.
Here is the best way to maximise the benefits of your local news subscription.
To activate your complimentary access to The Courier Mail follow the steps below:
Click here, then follow these prompts:
- Go to My Profile and log in
- Go to My Rewards
- Click the activate now button or copy activation hyperlink
Sign up on The Courier Mail website - we recommend you use the same email address and password as you've used for our website to avoid confusion.
Activating your complimentary Courier Mail subscription also gives you access to Sydney's Daily Telegraph, Melbourne's Herald Sun, the NT News, The Mercury in Hobart and the Adelaide Advertiser whenever you like.
You can also access all of our regional titles.
This same login for The Courier Mail will also work on other News sites.
GREAT REWARDS ON OFFER
By activating your Courier Mail subscription, you also have access to News' tremendous +Rewards program.
It includes exclusive offers, tickets, eBooks and unique experiences. The offers are updated regularly and are worth hundreds of dollars each year, so make sure you make the most of them. You can check them out here.
THE COURIER MAIL APP
Once you've activated your Courier Mail subscription, make sure to also download The Courier Mail app - click here for Apple or here for Android.
Once you've downloaded and logged in you can access the digital print edition of The Courier Mail, personalise your news feed and follow your favourite sections, topics and columnists.
How to get help
Still unsure or want more information? Contact our Customer Service team on 1300 361 604.
Word count: 1435
