Demanding a product recall Recently I went shopping in Armidale.
I was able to purchase cans of corned beef from three major supermarkets, all 100 per cent Brazilian beef.
There has been recent Bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) outbreaks in countries such as Brazil and England and that disease has the ability to transfer to humans with dire consequences.
Cooking, salting and canning will not kill the BSE prion.
Canberra's trade policies have been destroying manufacturing and agriculture in this country for 40 years.
But when the government's misguided trade ideology puts the lives of its citizens at risk, it has reached a whole new level of insanity.
For voters, the choice is clear.
Labor banned the BSE beef imports and the Liberal/National coalition allowed them in.
I request that the federal government immediately recall all products on our shelves that contain beef products from Brazil and England.
BRAD BELLINGER, Australian Beef Association, chairman.
Latte tax to help farmers? I have an apartment in Canberra City to live in as well as farms and houses around Griffith.
When living in Canberra, I see how easily people to get caught up with buying electric cars to "save the environment".
For city people, life and status revolves around shopping, dinning out, paying mortgages, body corporate fees and holidays, etcetera.
City people are disconnected from the environment, other than looking at it, or bushwalking.
In the country, I'm left paying the bills to fence, spray weeds, plant trees and all the maintenance costs of environmental management.
Yet it seems more and more city people, with their green ideology and their own illogical views about what farmers should be doing for the environment, are writing the legislation which controls us.
I call on the state and federal governments to start making city people pay farmers a wage, as well as cover the machine and consumables costs associated to the environment protection work and maintenance being leveling on the rural sector.
I simply cannot see a future without increased green tape.
We need reforms, as rural people should not have to carry environment protection costs uncompensated.
GREG ADAMSON, Griffith.
Mining towards net zero At the present time there is a lot of media comment about both coal having a future in Australia and setting a target date to reach net zero greenhouse emissions.
As the burning of coal to create energy produces a huge amount of greenhouse gases, logic dictates that surely as long as coal continues to be used in substantial quantities to produce energy, reaching net zero greenhouse emissions is not at all likely to be possible.
Is having a future for coal and also a net zero greenhouse gas future in Australia merely a pipe dream? It is difficult indeed to see them both being able to co-exist.
BRIAN MEASDAY, Myrtle Bank, South Australia.
My grand final team I can't believe that clubs executives, scouts, and coaches missed seeing the "X factor" in the Panther's win in the Rugby League grand final.
Why chase after high profile, solo players worth big money, when that is not what wins grand finals in Rugby League.
I would let go as many first grade players as possible and fill the side with under 20s from the same club, all with a two year contract. One year to make the finals and the second year to win the grand final.
The 2021 high profile solo players were not worth the money they were paid from a spectator perspective and spectators finance the game.
IAN DONALD, Spring Hill.
Daylight saving, wrong idea In the sunshine state at the level of political leadership - at the Premier and opposition leader level - it's a subject that transcends partisanship.
On the ground though there are few issues so fundamentally divisive, pitting country against city, north against south, and east against west. Each year when the clocks are put forward an hour down south, the Brisbane media and others who don't like summer mornings start up their campaign to join the southern states in having daylight saving. Out roll the old lines about Queensland 'catching up' with Sydney and Melbourne and the sarcastic references to curtains fading and hillbilly farmers.
Since the end of the Second World War, Queensland has trialled daylight saving - in 1971 and then again between 1989 and 1992. A referendum held in February 1992 saw a majority (54 per cent) say "no" to daylight saving with the negative vote understandably strongest in the north and west of the State.
If daylight saving was to be re-introduced in Queensland, it would be an unfair imposition on Queenslanders living in western and northern regions of the state.
The simple fact about daylight saving is that Queensland is too large a state and geographically in the wrong place to make daylight saving work for all.
In much of summertime Australia, it is the twilight time of day when things begin to cool and it is possible to enjoy time outdoors. It follows that if you must have daylight saving, move to one of the smaller southern states.
Professor John Cole OAM
CREDIT: Andrew Norris
Word count: 855
