START-UP founders, entrepreneurs and investors will come together for a week of talks, networking events and masterclasses in Adelaide next month as part of a new annual event to coincide with Global Entrepreneurs Week.
The organisers of the annual SouthStart conference have partnered with the Adelaide Economic Development Agency to host the first Start-up Week event as a precursor to the flagship SouthStart festival in March.
Speakers will include Sweat co-founder Tobi Pearce, Fleet Space Technologies co-founder Flavia Tata Nardini and IAG’s Firemark Ventures director Rebecca Schot-Guppy.
SouthStart director Danielle Seymour said the event would provide an opportunity for the start-up community to reconnect following the disruptions caused by Covid-19.
“Global Entrepreneurs Week is an ideal opportunity to connect the local community in a citywide celebration of all things start-up and entrepreneurship,” she said.
“It’s a unique opportunity to take the pulse of our local start-up scene (and) discover what’s working and what’s needed to continue to grow.
“Capturing momentum, energy and people within a single moment in the year, while it’s amazing, it also leads to a missed opportunity to engage with our local community more consistently.
“And so by convening Start-up Week we’re able to actually host a dedicated calendar of events for South Australia, whereas our festival is very much national in focus and form.” Events during Start-up Week will be held across the city, including at Stone & Chalk, the Flinders New Venture Institute and the University of Adelaide’s ThincLab.
SouthStart director Craig Swann said that while many established and early-stage businesses had shown great innovation throughout the pandemic period, Covid-19 had also created challenges for local start-ups seeking access to venture capital and other investor groups.
“What we’re seeing across the country is the investment space has certainly taken a hit from where it was a year or two ago, and that’s created a little bit of gap in the market with regards to all the innovation that’s happening and the required investment,” he said.
“There’s been a challenge of unlocking some of the high net worth and the capital that’s here into the earlier stage stuff.
“And I think what we’re seeing, more on a macro lens here in Australia, is that valuations generally have taken quite a dip, so companies that may have been raising money as a result of things picking up have now found themselves in the next round of funding being faced with the valuation of the company maybe being 30 per cent hit.
“This is forcing a lot of companies that would be at that next level of raise to have to bootstrap and work through to not have to give up so much of their company.” AEDA will contribute $120,000 in funding to go towards Start-up Week, the upcoming SouthStart festival and two more events planned in May and July next year.
AEDA managing director Ian Hill said the partnership would enable more start-up events to be held during the year. “This new partnership will support the festival in expanding its core activities across the calendar year to foster innovative ideas and investment connections within Adelaide CBD,” he said.
“It is all about creating opportunities for connection at a local level and knowledge sharing amongst the start-up community.” Start-up Week will run from November 14-19, ahead of next year’s SouthStart festival on March 7-11.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 559
