There has been an impressive array of second row talent from the tough fields of North Queensland make their way to the Origin arena.
And we need to cut that list down to just three players to fill out the remaining spots in our already impressive line-up.
Make sure you have your say on who should be inducted into the best NQ Origin team of history by voting in our poll below.
The full team will be revealed on Origin eve.
Chris Phelan (Townsville)
Origins: 5
The Irish-born hard man grew up on the tough footy fields of Townsville which helped shape his career at the top level. He was part of Southern Suburbs team of the century after winning two Brisbane Rugby League premierships with the club in 1981 and 1985. The versatile forward signed for Parramatta in 1982 and was part of their back-to-back premiership efforts in 1982-83 playing in the front row.
Mike McLean (Bowen)
Origins: 5
The Bowen junior made his first foray into the top grade for the Easts Tigers in the Brisbane Rugby League in the early 1980s before making the move to Eastern Suburbs in the NSWRL. McLean made his debut for the Roosters in 1985 but did not cement himself in their starting side until the 1988 season when he nine consecutive games in the backrow before injury forced him off the field. McLean’s influence in his breakthrough season could not be understated after he finished second to Gavin Miller for the Dally M medal. McLean had to wait until the 1991 season, after making a move to Newcastle, before making his first appearance for the Maroons playing in the backrow for all three games of Queensland’s win. He returned for two games the following year before he retired from the game.
Gorden Tallis (Cairns)
Origins: 17 (SL 3)
A hard-running forward, Tallis moved to St George from Townsville in 1992. A reserve in St George’s grand final loss to Brisbane in 1993 Tallis was used to good effect off the interchange bench during the 1994 season and represented Queensland in the final two State of Origin matches. Tallis sat out the final year of his contract at St George after a legal battle over his contract. He returned to the game for the Broncos Super League outfit in 1997 and proved to be the most dominant forward in the renegade competition. Tallis used his imposing frame to terrorise opposition players as the Broncos dominated the late 1990s. Tallis captained a rookie Queensland team in the 34-16 win over NSW in the opening State of Origin match in 2001. Soon after, he suffered a career-threatening neck injury in a match which revealed a spinal condition that required corrective surgery. While Tallis’ season was over he made a strong return to football in 2002. That year he was fired up by the taunts of the NSW crowd in the deciding State of Origin match in Sydney and inspired Queensland to a series draw after losing the opening match of the series. At the end of 2003 he announced his retirement from representative football. In 2004 Tallis started to feel the effects of his neck injury and took heed of the warning signs his body was emitting and retired for good after the Broncos’ 10-0 loss to the North Queensland in the semi-final – ironically, played in Townsville, where the career of the champion forward started all those years ago.
Russell Bawden (Ingham)
Origins: 3
A fiery forward from the Herbert River, Bawden spent the 1996-97 seasons with the London Broncos before joining start-up outfit Melbourne in 1998. Bawden was used as an interchange player in Melbourne’s grand final victory in 1999, before making his State of Origin debut the following year playing three games over two seasons. Surprisingly mobile for his size and skilful with the ball, Bawden nevertheless struggled during the club’s disappointing 2001 season and was released at the end of the year. Bawden returned to the English Super League with the Broncos in 2002 before he moved to France to play in the nation’s top league.
Travis Norton (Moranbah)
Origins: 5
A tough as nails lock forward from mining country, Norton made his ARL debut for new outfit South Queensland Crushers, before entrenching himself in the Bulldogs system over a seven-season stint. Norton made his Origin debut on the bench for Queensland playing two games in the 2002 and 2003 series before he made the club switch to North Queensland. Norton was sensationally elected Cowboys captain by coach Graham Murray at the time, and he showed his leadership immediately taking the club to their first finals series before backing up with a maiden grand final appearance the following season. Norton played five games for the Maroons off the bench finishing with an even record of two wins, two losses and a draw.
Kevin Campion (Sarina)
Origins: 4 (SL 2)
Born among the cane fields of Sarina, Campion was a rough and tumble forward who kick started his career with Gold Coast Seagulls in 1992. After four years Campion moved to St George where he was a member of the Dragons’ team that went down to Manly in the 1996 grand final. He played a season with the Adelaide Rams in the Super League in 1997, and was picked for the Queensland side, before he was handed an opportunity by then Broncos coach Wayne Bennett. Campion was an interchange player in the club’s 1998 grand final win over Canterbury before his work ethic and dedication in doing the hard yards helped him to secure the lock forward role in the Broncos’ grand final team that beat the Roosters in 2000. Campion moved to the Warriors in 2002, but not before he made his belated State of Origin debut for Queensland in their stunning 2001 series win. He helped the Warriors to the club’s first grand final in 2002 before finishing out his career at the Cowboys.
Neville Costigan (Mackay)
Origins: 6
The Papua New Guinea native was brought up on the fields of Mackay and made his NRL debut for the Broncos at just 18 going on to play two games in the 2003 season. It would take a move to the nation’s capital before Costigan was recognised with his first Maroons jersey during the 2007 season. Costigan played as a utility off the bench in the opening two wins of the series, but it would not be until the 2009 dead rubber that Costigan was recalled to the Origin arena. After a strong season for the Dragons in 2010, Costigan played in all three games as Queensland whitewashed the Blues. The same year he was part of the Dragons grand final winning side playing in the front row against the Roosters.
Dallas Johnson (Atherton)
Origins: 12
The 222-game veteran epitomises the spirit of North Queensland. The Atherton junior was not afraid of doing the hard yards and rarely shirked the workload which made him a crucial cog in the Melbourne Storm’s dominance through the 2000s. Johnson also had a resilience unlike any other in the game, rarely missing a game through injury. A tireless tackler, Johnson made his debut for the Maroons in 2006 and became a crucial member of the state’s decade of dominance. Johnson played every game of four straight Origin series victories at lock for the Maroons before he made the move overseas to join French side Les Catalans. Johnson returned to Australia the following year linking up with boyhood club North Queensland where he helped the club to its first finals series in more than five seasons.
Sam Thaiday (Townsville)
Origins: 29
The jovial Townsville junior was a crucial part of Queensland’s dominance through the 2000s. He made his first grade debut for the Broncos in 2003 but it took the mobile prop several seasons to cement a first grade position. In 2006 he converted his bullocking style to the back row which proved a masterstroke as he made his debut for Queensland in the same year. He played all three games as an interchange player and following Brisbane’s grand final win against Melbourne, Thaiday made his Test debut in Australia’s 20-15 win over NZ in Melbourne. Thaiday would have to wait until 2008 before making his return to the State of Origin arena but it was worth the wait with the second rower not missing another Origin until the 2012 series when injury struck. The 304-game NRL veteran remained a key face in the Maroons set-up until the 2017 season and finished his career the following year.
Aidan Guerra (Townsville)
Origins: 10
The no-nonsense Ignatius Park College alumni made his NRL debut for the Sydney Roosters in the 2010 season after being involved in the Melbourne system as a junior. Guerra cemented his spot in the Roosters backrow the following season and was scored a try in their 2013 grand final victory over the Sea Eagles. He played nearly every game of the successful campaign and made his international debut for Italy in the post-season. Guerra’s efforts were finally be recognised with Origin selection in the 2014 Origin series, replacing the injured Sam Thaiday in the backrow. Guerra was a consistent presence in the Maroons for the next two series before he was dropped after the opening game of the 2017 series following a shock defeat to NSW. Guerra made the switch to Newcastle the following season to be an experienced head among their young forward pack but injuries cruelled his time in the steel city before he announced his retirement at the end of last season.
Nate Myles (Cairns)
Origins: 32
The hard hitting kid from Cairns joined the Bulldogs junior ranks sharing a house with fellow future NRL stars Sonny Bill-Williams and Johnathan Thurston. Myles made his debut for the Bulldogs in 2005 and his brutal running style was immediately recognised across the game. He made his Origin debut for Queensland the following season and would not relinquish his spot for the next decade. Myles was a key part of the Maroons eight-straight series wins playing between the backrow and the bench. In club land Myles steered the Roosters from a wooden spoon finish in 2009 to the grand final in 2010 which they lost to the Dragons. He joined the Gold Coast Titans as a marquee player at the start of the 2012 season, the same year he won the Wally Lewis Medal for player of the series in Origin. Myles moved to Manly Sea Eagles and the Melbourne Storm, making a final appearance in the Queensland front row in 2017 before announcing his retirement at the end of that season.
WHO SHOULD BE IN THE NQ STATE OF ORIGIN BACKROW?
Word count: 1765
