FOR a man who notoriously has always hated meetings, Damien Hardwick knew he needed to call one.
It was day one of Richmond’s pre-season campaign last month, and the triple premiership Richmond coach gathered his players at its Punt Rd headquarters.
There were the usual pleasantries, but everyone was well aware of the elephant in the room.
Over the festive period it had become public that Hardwick’s marriage with Danielle — whom he jestingly referred to as “Mrs Hardwick” in media conferences for many years — had ended.
That in itself is sad but it was no one’s business, not until it had become a club issue following the revelation Hardwick had started a relationship with a Richmond staffer.
It needed to be addressed.
Leading sports psychologist Dr Noel Blundell, who has consulted with 10 AFL teams and helped 15 Olympic and world champions, said these types of situations had the ability to upset team success if not handled well.
“Once you get different perceptions and opinions in a locker room and it starts to fester, then even winning is not going to cover up that type of issue or situation,” Dr Blundell said.
Hardwick knew this, which is why he was upfront and honest with the players in explaining the delicate situation.
The owning of vulnerability has become a strong Richmond trait, and Hardwick needed to lead by example by getting out in front of it.
“It was important the first time they saw me I spoke about it openly and honestly,” Hardwick said on SEN this week.
“That’s something we do at the club and it was important we did that so we could get on with the business of preparing for Round 1.” Whether it has caused any kind of friction at Tigerland remains to be seen, but a big part of whether Richmond can navigate this sensitive matter will be how successfully Hardwick can separate his personal and professional life.
Dr Blundell said the ability to compartmentalise varied for people. “Working with AFL teams, I’ve known a player who had a business outside of football that was just about to be totally wiped out,” he said.
“But he would walk through to the doors to the locker room on a Saturday afternoon and be totally involved in football and that was his haven.
“And I’ve seen others with different personality traits, where if there is something minor going on outside their world, they walk into that locker room and they’re not as totally absorbed and they can perform very poorly accordingly.
“Some have a better capacity to generally turn off, and I’m talking generalisations but from a fair bit of experience having seen a lot of different examples.” The way Hardwick has addressed the matter with his players, and in some ways put it to bed, means that he is in a strong position to this year join a very exclusive club.
If the Tigers can salute again in 2021, Hardwick will join the likes of his former Essendon coach Kevin Sheedy and his long-term friend Alastair Clarkson (Hawthorn) as a four-time premiership coach.
That is rarefied air, and it is still surprises some who remember him well before taking the helm at Punt Rd.
THE BOMBER YEARS Sheedy was fed up.
It was the mid-1990s at Windy Hill and a young, strongly built defender from Upwey — at the foot of the Dandenongs — was testing the coach’s patience.
It came to a head one day when some Hardwick skylarking in a park the day before a game resulted in a month’s layoff.
“I’d known Sheeds had been riding him pretty hard around that time because I think he did his hamstring having a kick in a park with some mates the day before a game,” then teammate and Essendon great Matthew Lloyd recalled.
“I’ll never forget Sheeds really challenging him on his professionalism at that point … saying, ‘You won’t have a career if you keep missing games through stupidity.’ “Sheeds I think questioned his commitment a bit in the early days, but I could see the hard side to him straight away.
“It was more the consistency in his preparation that I don’t think he’d found yet.” Lloyd said he never imagined Hardwick would go on to forge such a successful coaching career.
“Damien hated meetings and the little things you had to do in footy,” he said. “He didn’t love training, but when he did train he trained hard. “He just wanted to play and that’s what he loved to do … the strategy part of him is not something I really saw as a teammate.” Hardwick’s professionalism got better with time, which saw him become the club champion in 1998 before playing a key role in Essendon’s 2000 premiership side.
He was one of a number of Bombers forced out for salary cap reasons at the end of 2001, landing at Port Adelaide.
Lloyd said it was not until Grand Final day in 2004, when Hardwick became a two-time premiership player, that he truly understood the loss of Hardwick.
“I’ll never forget watching that Grand Final,” he said.
“That first half when maybe there would be a few Port players doubting whether they could conquer the almighty Brisbane Lions, his attack on the ball and the man and his ferocity … it hit me that day that we just didn’t lose a player but we lost probably what Essendon had stood for.” It was the last game Hardwick would play, but Clarkson — an assistant at Port who’d just been appointed Hawthorn coach — had him in his sights.
BECOMING A COACH The new Hawthorn assistant coach was not happy.
Back in Melbourne in 2005, the reluctant trainer couldn’t believe it when he was being forced onto the track by the new coach.
“One of the main things that Clarko emphasised for all the coaches was that they had to compete and train like we did,” former premiership Hawk Campbell Brown said.
“I remember Dimma was filthy in the early days.
“He’d be saying, ‘I’ve retired so I don’t have to do a pre-season and here I am having to do one as a bloody coach.’ “We’d have a laugh, but it was great from a player’s perspective too because if they’re doing training with you, you very quickly build that rapport.” Hardwick, who worked with the Hawks’ forwards, was loved by the players. He was big on relationships and was a bit unconventional, which appealed to the players.
They could also relate to him well as he was only just out of the playing ranks. “He hated meetings in his early days,” Brown said.
“He was a great coach in terms of relationships and obviously he had a great footy brain, but those early days the training and the meetings would do Dimma’s head in a little bit.
“The first few years if you’d asked me whether he’d go on to be a senior coach, I probably would have said no. But he got the coaching bug, though, the longer he coached.” THE NEAR MISS DID Hawthorn, perhaps inadvertently, cost Hardwick the Essendon coaching job at the end of 2007?
In the 2009 book Glory & Fame: the Rise and Rise of the Essendon Football Club, then Bombers chief executive Peter Jackson claimed Hawthorn, which was in the middle of a finals campaign, made Hardwick surrender the computer on which he had compiled his presentation and notes.
Down to the final interview with one other applicant — former Tigers skipper Matthew Knights — Hardwick faltered during the interview owing to a borrowed laptop.
This was due to Hawthorn’s fear of the potential leaking of sensitive information.
“I got the impression he was burning the candle at both ends trying to get it going, then on the day, he wasn’t familiar with the computer, and it didn’t start up properly, and Damien can get a bit annoyed with himself,” Jackson wrote.
“His final performance was probably not as good as his second one, whereas Matthew’s was terrific, and on the day, that’s what the full board saw.” He missed out, and also on the Melbourne job to Dean Bailey, and was still at Hawthorn when it won the 2008 flag. Less than a year later, he would take the helm at Punt Rd.
BECOMING A TIGER When Brendon Gale was appointed Richmond’s new chief executive in 2009, the hunt for a new coach to succeed the sacked Terry Wallace was well under way.
By the time Gale came on board, it was down to four.
He threw himself into the process, and said Hardwick possessed many traits the club was looking for.
“We felt like he had a passion for coaching and teaching and he had gotten great experience at Hawthorn, who had gone from pretty much the bottom to the premiership in 2008,” Gale said.
“He’d been a part of the transformation of a club, and for that reason we felt like he had the ability to address the needs of our list and our club now at that point in time.
“We also felt like he had a real passion for learning and a curiosity, which meant that as our list and the game evolved he would be able to meet those needs.” He won the job, narrowly beating Ken Hinkley, but by 2016 there were plenty who thought Hardwick should be shown the door.
He’d taken his side to three elimination finals, but no further, and patience was waning.
“There was a lot of external noise and that’s legitimate noise,” Gale said. “It can be quite distracting, but within the club there was a strong sense of what success looked like.
“The mere fact we were making finals showed progress, and we weren’t getting far but we were playing finals after coming from a long way back.
“So we thought as a board that Damien had all the attributes to be a really good coach. That guarantees nothing, but we felt strongly … he and the program were doing a whole lot right.” Just over a year later the Tigers would win their first flag since 1980 and this year will shoot for a three-peat.
When Hardwick and Gale started together in the same month in 2009, the Tigers were a basket case.
Almost 12 years later they are the benchmark of the competition, on and off the field.
“I feel proud but it’s funny, the pressure never abates as once you’re reigning premier you’ve got to defend,” Gale said.
“But I’m proud of the collective buy-in as it’s a program and the coach is a very important part of it, but I’m really proud of the way we’ve all committed to it.
“And I’m really happy for Damien as it’s a tough role coaching Richmond. It’s historically tough, and also I’m happy for our fans.” nick.smart@news.com.au
CREDIT: NICK SMART
Word count: 1823
