Former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins has lodged a formal complaint with Scott Morrison’s chief of staff about apparent backgrounding by the Prime Minister’s office against her partner and wants to give evidence as part of the Gaetjens review.
Victoria’s hotel quarantine system will be put to the test once again, with the state government declaring the program will start accepting international arrivals in two weeks time.
A reshuffle will most likely see Attorney-General Christian Porter and Defence Minister Linda Reynolds make way for Peter Dutton and Michaelia Cash — but both Mr Porter and Ms Reynolds are likely to remain in Cabinet.
Paige Taylor, Greg Brown9.25pm: Indigenous leaders accuse PM of breaking voice vow
Two of the most senior Indigenous supporters of the Uluru Statement from the Heart have accused Scott Morrison of going back on his word not to pre-empt what legal form the Indigenous voice will take.
Roy Ah See and Pat Anderson — co-chairs of the Uluru Dialogue, a campaign by First Nations leaders — say the Prime Minister is “walking back” a promise he made before the 2019 election to delay any decision on whether the voice would get constitutional protection until after Australians had a chance to see what the voice would look like.
The Morrison government is funding the “co-design” of the voice, first with a senior advisory group of mostly Indigenous Australians and currently through consultations with the public. That design work, overseen by Indigenous leaders Marcia Langton and Tom Calma, is unfinished.
“When PM Morrison committed to a two-stage process at the 2019 election and in the 2020 Closing the Gap speech, we took his words in good faith,” Mr Ah See and Ms Anderson said. “Now he is walking back the commitments he made to First Nations people despite publicly committing to a two-stage process.”
Mr Morrison told parliament in February last year the Coalition would consider what legal form the voice should take — whether legislated or constitutionally enshrined — after its design was ­finalised. He said this was in keeping with the recommendations of a joint select committee on the voice. “And that’s what we are doing. We support finalising co-design first,” he said.
But Mr Morrison’s public comments on the voice have been closely examined by supporters of the landmark 2017 Uluru Statement from the Heart, which calls for an Indigenous voice to be enshrined in the Constitution.
FULL STORY
Tim Dodd 8.40pm:Uni chiefs consider board changes
The university peak body will consider widening representat­ion on its board and possibly ­appointing a independent chair after a major external review of its functions and structures.
A key reason for the review, initiated last year, was growing tension between peak body Universities Australia and chancel­lors who lead university govern­ing bodies (a similar role to chairmen of corporate boards).
In a statement on Thursday, UA said the review’s recommendations include considering a switch to an independent, non-executive chair, appointing independent directors to the UA board, and enhancing the role of the chief executive.
FULL STORY
Greg Brown8pm: We must support miners, ALP told
Paterson MP Meryl Swanson has urged Labor MPs, union leaders and the party’s environmental activists not to “scare the shit” out of coal industry workers by preaching to them about the need to transition out of their mining jobs.
Ms Swanson, the daughter of a coalminer, spoke out at a private caucus briefing on Wednesday from the Hunter Jobs Alliance, which was attended by more than a dozen Labor MPs, including ­Anthony Albanese and energy spokesman Chris Bowen.
The Hunter Jobs Alliance is a partnership between the Labor Environment Action Network, the Australian Manufacturing Workers Union and the Elec­trical Trades Union and is aimed at transforming coal comm­unities into regions that help ­Australia become a “renewables superpower”.
Ms Swanson, a NSW Right MP who represents a coal seat in the Hunter Valley, urged MPs and members of the alliance to be careful about the way they talked about taking action on climate change, arguing that coal workers should not feel demonised as Australia transitions to a low-emissions future.
She said miners wanted Labor to be “on their side” and the party could both support the coal industry while talking to communities about the need to prepare for the future, according to people in the room.
Ms Swanson warned AMWU national secretary Steve Murphy that the language used by members of the Hunter Jobs Alliance gave the appearance that they were demonising the coal sector, after the union leader denied that was what the group was doing.
FULL STORY
Richard Ferguson7.25pm: A woman should take my seat: Morrison
Scott Morrison has declared he wants a woman to replace him in his seat of Cook when he leaves politics.
The Australian spoke this week to a dozen Liberal backbenchers who said quotas must be on the table, joining the Prime Minister and many of his senior ministers.
Mr Morrison said he wanted more women in parliament.
“I would love to see a woman follow me as the member for Cook when I choose to retire from politics,” he told Nine News on Thursday.
READ MORE: Airlines exodus a risk for tourism recovery
Richard Ferguson7.15pm:Porter, Reynolds will stay in my cabinet: PM
Scott Morrison has confirmed Attorney-General Christian Porter and Defence Minister Linda Reynolds will remain in his cabinet after a looming ministerial reshuffle.
The Australian revealed on Wednesday that Mr Porter and Senator Reynolds were due to be moved into less high-profile portfolios.
On Thursday night, the Prime Minister would not deny he planned to move both ministers but he said they would “continue to play a very important role in my cabinet”.
“When I make judgments about those things I will announce them,” he told Nine News.
“I am working through those issues now. One is on mental health leave and the other is on physical health leave. Linda in particular, had a very serious coronary condition.”
READ MORE: Health experts confirm PNG variant of Covid
David Charter 6.15pm:Rebel senator dashes US gun reform hopes
Democrat leaders vowed to force a Senate vote on tighter background checks for gun buyers after 10 people died in a Colorado mass shooting but the move appeared doomed by opposition in their own ranks.
Despite renewed calls from President Joe Biden for action, Joe Manchin, a conservative Democrat from West Virginia, said on Thursday AEDT he could not back either of two bills aimed at regulating private weapons sales that were passed by the House of Representatives.
Senator Manchin’s opposition, combined with resistance to gun ownership curbs by Republicans, makes the chances of passing legislation remote in the evenly divided Senate, where 60 of the 100 votes are needed to avoid it being blocked.
Ahmad Al Aliwi Alissa, 21, who has been charged with 10 counts of first degree murder after a shooting rampage in a supermarket in Boulder, had two high-powered weapons with him. Court papers show he bought a Ruger AR-556 semi-automatic rifle on March 16, six days before the attack. A ban on the sale of similar assault-style weapons by Boulder had been lifted by a state judge on March 12, although local officials could not say whether the ban would have prevented Alissa’s purchase.
FULL STORY
David Penberthy5.25pm: Anger grows ahead of Chinese consulate opening
The formal opening of Adelaide’s Chinese consulate is becoming a flashpoint against Beijing, with no fewer than six ethnic community groups denouncing next Tuesday’s launch by South Australian Premier Steven Marshall.
It comes as Australia’s most senior diplomat said national ­security concerns over the controversial consulate were a matter of “active consideration” for the federal government.
The campaign against the consulate is being led by SA’s 1500-strong Uighur community who are bombarding the Premier with letters urging him to pull out of the official opening and documenting the suffering their families endured under Chinese rule before seeking refuge in SA.
The Uighurs are being joined by members of SA’s Hong Kong, Tibetan, Nepalese, Vietnamese and Taiwanese communities, and a picket is planned for the launch of the consulate, controversially located on a 5600sq m block spread across two streets in the quiet suburb of Joslin.
It comes as the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade faced questioning in Senate estimates on Thursday over whether it had examined or should examine the size and purpose of the large Chinese consulate in a smaller city such as Adelaide.
Liberal senator Alex Antic asked DFAT chiefs if the department had concerns about having such a large Chinese consular presence in Australia’s defence capital and among Australia’s largest Uighur community, who claim they have been spied on.
FULL STORY
Olivia Caisley4.55pm: Whistleblower briefs Keneally on PM’s claims
Labor Senator Kristina Keneally has received a “verbal briefing” from the whistleblower who revealed a coalition adviser performing a lewd act on the parliament house desk of a female MP.
The man at the centre of the allegations left his job this week after The Australian and Network Ten reported a group of Coalition staff had swapped graphic videos of their sexual encounters in parliamentary offices.
The whistleblower, who is known as “Tom the Whistleblower”, has admitted to some of the conduct he revealed and said parliamentarians often had sex in a Parliament House room reserved for meditation or prayer.
Tom took to Twitter on Thursday to Scott Morrison’s claim that the lewd sexual acts had not occurred under his leadership.
This whistleblower tweeted earlier on Thursday that he had provided information to Senator Keneally and Finance Minister Simon Birmingham regarding the allegations.
Senator Keneally confirmed someone in her office had spoken with the whistleblower.
“During a phone call yesterday, my office was verbally provided detailed information in response to what the person described as misleading statements by the Prime Minister in Question Time about the allegations that sex workers had been procured for Coalition members of parliament and other disturbing conduct revealed on Network Ten,” Senator Keneally tweeted.
“We have not been provided any documents, videos or photos. Today @BlowingTom (the whistleblower) says he has also provided information to Senator @Birmo (Finance Minister Simon Birmingham’s) office. We stand ready to assist the Government as they examine these serious allegations.
READ MORE:Credlin reveals details of orgies, prostitutes
Ben Packham4.30pm:Record daily Covid cases in PNG
Papua New Guinea has reported a record number of daily COVID-19 cases, with 560 new positive tests lifting its total caseload to 4660.
The new cases were detected in just 749 tests, suggesting a 75 per cent positive test rate.
Positive cases are expected to surge in the coming week, following mourning ceremonies for former prime minister Sir Michael Somare this month.
PNG Opposition leader Belden Namah sought to make political mileage on Thursday from widespread vaccine hesitancy in the country, calling for the rollout of Australian-donated vaccines to be suspended until there was “scientific proof about the benefits and the effects”.
“Unless the Prime Minister James Marape has independent scientific verification that these AstraZeneca vaccines are 100 per cent safe for our citizens, for our people, he cannot risk our citizens,” Mr Namah said.
“The numbers of our deaths are not sufficient or significant to press the panic button in our country.”
Australia delivered nearly 8500 COVID vaccines for frontline Papua New Guinea health workers this week.
But Senate estimates heard the shipment fell far short of what was required to vaccinate the nation’s 30,000 health and ancillary workers.
DFAT secretary Frances Adamson said the 8480 vaccines was an initial contribution.
She said the figure was decided upon as “a sensible number to start with, and by no means the last word”.
Australian diplomats and their families based in Port Moresby have received their first COVID-19 jabs, but expatriate Australians in the country have been refused priority access to the vaccine.
One Australian citizen who has lived in the country for a decade, who asked to speak anonymously, said the expat community felt abandoned.
“We just want to know if and when the Aussie High Commission might offer the other Australian families in PNG the same treatment as diplomats are getting,” he said.
DFAT also revealed Australia’s aid-delivery partners in PNG are not slated to receive early doses of Australian-provided vaccines.
READ MORE: Queensland scrambles to test for emergence of PNG COVID-19 variant
AFP 3.45pm:PNG shuts border to Torres Strait Islanders
Papua New Guinea has ordered the snap closure of borders used by Torres Strait Islanders to cross to and from Australia, as fears grew about the spread of COVID-19 to remote communities.
Travel between small islands that straddle the two countries’ maritime border in the Torres Strait would be closed “with immediate effect”, Police Commissioner David Manning said on Thursday.
Under a 1978 agreement, Indigenous inhabitants of the islands can pass between Australia and Papua New Guinea without passports or visas.
The announcement comes as Papua New Guinea struggles to contain a wave of coronavirus infections, which officials fear could enter largely cornavirus-free Australia and decimate vulnerable Indigenous communities in the far north of the country.
“Those borders will remain closed for an indefinite period, and cross-border travel will not be allowed until further notice,” said Mr Manning, who is leading Papua New Guinea’s COVID-19 response effort.
READ MORE:US attacks China’s economic bullying of Australia
Nicholas Jensen 3.12pm:ADF begins aerial search and rescue ops of flood zone
The Australian Defence Force has commenced its aerial search and rescue operations across the mid-north coast in a bid to support State Emergency Services in the aftermath of the floods.
As of this afternoon, the ADF has deployed hundreds of troops, combining the NSW-based 5th Brigade, the Brisbane-based 7th Brigade and the Brisbane-based 6th Engineer Support Regiment. The units will be supported by two helicopters capable of conducting winch recovery operations through the day and night.
The ADF also plans to transfer additional aircraft from Queensland to NSW, including four MRH-90 helicopters, to sustain its support of the region. Currently the aircraft are operating from the Naval Air Station at HMAS Albatross, Nowra.
While the RAAF base at Richmond has supported evacuated communities in the Colo River region, the ADF says it remains in a “staging phase” and will begin its full deployment in the coming days as the clean up from the floods begins.
To date, 290 ADF troops have been deployed, with plans to double forces by the end of the week. They are currently stationed in Taree, Kempsey and Port Macquarie.
READ MORE: Drowning victim identified
Adeshola Ore 2.49pm: PM says he’ll respond to Higgins’ latest complaint
Scott Morrison says he will respond to the complaint former Liberal Party staffer Brittany Higgins has made to his chief of staff alleging staff in the Prime Minister office provided negative information about her loved ones to the media.
The Prime Minister also announced his chief of staff will commence a process to deal with complaints against staff members.
Former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins has asked to speak with Mr Morrison’s chief of staff John Kunkel about alleged backgrounding by the Prime Minister’s office against her partner. Mr Morrison had previously told the ABC nothing had been raised with his office about the complaint.
Mr Morrison told parliament that Mr Kunkel had received the letter from Ms Higgins.
He also told parliament his chief of staff received “confidential information” after his interview on the ABC this morning from a “primary source” regarding the issue, but not directly related to Ms Higgins’ complaint.
“I have asked my chief of staff to commence a process with advice from the Department of Finance to deal with complaints against staff members,” he said.
READ MORE: Men rule when it comes to power at play
Ellie Dudley2.39pm: Labor leader attacks Premier over rape allegation
NSW Opposition Leader Jodi McKay has taken a swipe at Premier Gladys Berejiklian over her limited knowledge of a rape accusation against Liberal MP Michael Johnsen.
Labor Blue Mountains MP Trish Doyle on Wednesday told NSW parliament police were investigating an alleged rape of a sex worker by a member of the ­government.
Upper Hunter MP Mr Johnsen, who firmly denied the accusations, later revealed himself as the accused, and chose to step down from his position “without admission.”
Ms Berejiklian on Thursday morning said she was “shocked” to hear the allegations, and Ms McKay said her surprise pointed to incompetence in the Berejiklian government.
“You looked the other way on Daryl Maguire’s corruption and hid what you knew for years. You chose to ignore the fact that ICAC was investigating John Sidoti and left him in Liberal Party for almost as long,” Ms McKay wrote on Twitter.
“Given members of your government can get away with absolutely anything; are you really surprised that Michael Johnsen didn’t tell you that he was being investigated by police for rape?”
Mr Johnsen will not sit in the Nationals Party Room nor Joint Party Room while the police investigation is underway.
READ MORE:Nationals MP denies rape allegation
Lachlan Moffet Gray 2.16pm:Economist predicts lower job hit as JobKeeper ends
KPMG Chief Economist Brendan Rynne believes the strength of Australia’s economic recovery will result in just 100,000 jobs being lost after Jobkeeper expires this Sunday, compared to the 150,000 forecast by Treasury.
“We assess that the risk of job losses associated with the cessation of JobKeeper is closer to 100,000, which, while still significant, is much more manageable in a strengthening economy from a macro labour market perspective,” Dr Rynne said.
Liberal MP Jason Falinski says the JobKeeper stimulus must come to an end in favour of sector specific solutions which come at a lower cost to the taxpayer. “We need to move from a general stimulus package that has broad based approach to now getting down to specific sectorial help,” he told Sky News. “We can’t continue with a situation where half of Australia is paying for the other half to be at work, we need to get back to normal, we need to be generating new jobs, and we need to be expanding our economy as we normally would.”
“We don’t see a cliff as JobKeeper runs off but expect that as the stimulus in the economy slows, insolvencies will naturally cycle back to pre-covid levels.”
Dr Rynne also said the time was right to wind up the flagship wage subsidy program.
“Ultimately the decision to stop JobKeeper now looks to be the right one,” he said.
“Good businesses will survive and businesses operating at the margin today have the benefit of an improving economy and support through other channels, like a lower cost of debt and a range of State and Federal government grants.
“While that is the case, KPMG also appreciates that not every business and not every job in place today will necessarily be in place tomorrow or in a month’s time.
“But this is also normal. The government has supported the population and the economy very well during this global pandemic, and we remain optimistic that while JobKeeper finishes shortly, better times are ahead of us.”
READ MORE: JobKeeper becomes JobLoser
Michael McKenna2.11pm: New PNG Covid variant proven
Queensland Health has confirmed the existence of a Papua New Guinea variant of COVID.
As the rapidly spreading outbreak of the virus this week reached villages a few kilometres from Australia’s northernmost islands, testing of COVID positive arrivals from PNG has shown a new variant.
Deakin University Chair of Epidemiology Professor Catherine Bennett says she hopes the federal government will look at sending more COVID vaccines over for Papua New Guinea frontline workers if required. The Australian government has sent over 8,000 vaccine doses to PNG, but it is estimated the country has around 30,000 frontline workers. “This isn’t just about donating money or donating vaccine, it’s actually also about the rollout of the vaccine,” Professor Bennett said. “It’s absolutely important to protect frontline workers or else they won’t be in a position to manage the health consequences of infection, let alone be involved in the prevention campaign. “So, we have actually sent people as well as vaccines over to try and facilitate this. “But I think that assessment must be made on the ground and if they’re coming back and saying, ‘we need more vaccine’ then hopefully our government will be looking at that."
It is believed the new strain, the most commonly detected in COVID cases from PNG, is less contagious than the super-virulent UK strain that swept across Europe this year.
The new strain was confirmed through genomic testing conducted on COVID cases that had already arrived in Queensland and were detected in quarantine.
There are now 67 active cases of COVID-19 in Queensland hospitals, 42 of which are from PNG.
READ the full story here
Ellie Dudley2.08pm: NSW residents offered $100 accommodation vouchers
The NSW government will offer hundreds of thousands of $100 accommodation vouchers to state residents in the hopes of rebuilding the economy.
A total of 200,000 vouchers will be allocated on a first in first served basis to be used at accomodation in the Sydney CBD. The program will commence in June.
“Thousands of businesses in the Sydney CBD lost significant revenue with so many people working from home, when you add in almost no overseas or interstate travel, it’s been a tough 12 months for them,” Treasurer Dominic Perrottet said.
Labor MP Peter Khalil says the government’s additional $135 million of funding for the arts sector is “too little, too late,” and looks like an “afterthought”. The government’s RISE fund - which is designed to ensure venues can put on shows - will receive $125 million while the additional $10 million will go towards crisis support for artists and other workers in the sector. “We’re talking about a sector that’s lost estimated $24 billion, according to Live Performance Australia … $125 million, part of which is made up of loans, not just grants, does not cut it,” Mr Khalil said. “I mean the arts sector isn’t going to be fooled by this announcement which looks like an afterthought. “We have been banging on as an opposition for the last 12 months for the need for the government to support the arts sector". Mr Kahlil said while large musicals such as Hamilton are making a return, small businesses in the arts sector will be “hurt the most” when JobKeeper finishes on March 28. “Small businesses make up 87 per cent of employment in our sector - or did pre-COVID - they are the engine room of Australia and employment in Australia and they drive the Australian economy," he said. “There is no reason that they cannot tailor and target the support to sectors. “They should do this in extending JobKeeper to certain sectors, whether it be tourism, hospitality or the arts”.
“This scheme will encourage people to explore more of what the Sydney CBD has to offer, and spend a little bit more on the way through, and support local jobs.”
The vouchers are a part of a $51.5 million economic package, which also dedicates $24 million for live music, $5.5 million for business events and $2 million for tourism marketing.
READ MORE: Virgin offers new flight menu
Nicholas Jensen2.04pm: Revised data says AstraZeneca 76pc effective
The pharmaceutical giant AstraZeneca has said its vaccine is 76 per cent effective in combating COVID-19, after citing new analysis from its US trials.
The new figure marks a 3 per cent reduction in the vaccine’s efficacy, after the company issued a preliminary report on Monday saying it was 79 per cent effective against the virus.
Earlier in the week US health officials criticised the drugmaker for using outdated data when calculating the vaccine efficacy.
Deputy Chief Medical Officer Professor Michael Kidd is confident the local production of the AstraZeneca vaccine will allow the government to hit its rollout targets. The first four batches of the CSL produced AstraZeneca vaccine - which totalled more than 800,000 doses - were approved by the TGA on Wednesday. “The challenge of course that we’ve had during the first three to four weeks of rolling out the vaccine has been the challenges of supply from overseas,” Professor Kidd said. “And our dependence on shipments from overseas and countries overseas being willing to release those shipments to us. “Now of course with the locally produced AstraZeneca vaccine we no longer have these challenges here in Australia, we’re in a very fortunate position". Professor Kidd told Sky News 250,000 doses were distributed this week but that number is expected to rise to 400,000 over the next two to three weeks. "But then we'll be rapidly scaling up as CSL comes into full production, and as you know we're expecting CSL to deliver a minimum of a million doses a week over the coming weeks," he said.
On Tuesday, the US National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases said that it had received an “incomplete view of the efficacy data” from the UK-based company.
US chief medical advisor, Dr Anthony Fauci, described the situation as “unfortunate”.
However, AstraZeneca insists its vaccine is still “well tolerated” among participants and “no safety concerns can be identified”.
READ MORE:Australia’s 3.8m AstraZeneca jabs at risk
ROSIE LEWIS 1.56pm:PM’s claim Higgins offered job back in dispute
Scott Morrison’s claim that former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins was offered her job back after she quit over the government’s handling of her rape allegation has been disputed.
The Prime Minister said on Thursday that an “offer has been there” when asked if he had attempted to personally call Ms Higgins, apologise and offer her job back.
“That offer has been there,” Mr Morrison told ABC radio.
“I made that statement a month ago and the apology was there. And in fact, after these terrible incidents that took place, which weren’t known to certainly me at the time, and she was re-employed after the election.
“She did a great job when she was working for the Coalition and I thank her for all the great work she did. I can understand that why she wanted to leave and particularly because of the physical building that she was working in. And one of the more traumatic, as there were many, experiences that she relayed was just the sheer physical act of coming into this building was just too much. I totally understand that.”
Mr Morrison clarified that he had not had any direct contact with her.
David Sharaz, Ms Higgins’ partner, said Mr Morrison had not contacted her or offered her job back.
Sources close to Ms Higgins also said no one from the Liberal Party had made any such offer.
Ms Higgins went public with her story on February 15. She was allegedly raped in then defence industry minister Linda Reynolds’ ministerial office in March 2019.
Geoff Chambers 1.52pm: Blinken calls out China’s coercion of Australia
US Secretary of State Antony Blinken has called-out China’s “blatant economic coercion of Australia” and urged allies to stand together in signalling to Beijing that “bullying” doesn’t work.
In a major speech at NATO headquarters in Brussels, Mr Blinken warned “Beijing’s military ambitions are growing by the year” and outlined the need for democratic nations to work more closely in the areas of cyber security and critical resources, markets and technologies.
Identifying the three key threats facing democratic nations and allies, Mr Blinken said the first was the growing military capabilities of China and Russia.
“We see this in China’s efforts to threaten freedom of navigation, to militarise the South China Sea, to target countries throughout the Indo-Pacific with increasingly sophisticated military capabilities,” Mr Blinken said.
“We also see this in the new military capabilities and strategies Russia has developed to challenge our alliances and undermine the rules based order that ensures our collective security.
“These include Moscow’s aggression in the eastern Ukraine. It’s build-up of forces, large scale exercises, and acts of intimidation in the Baltic and Black Sea, the eastern Mediterranean, the high north. It’s modernisation of nuclear capabilities, and its use of chemical weapons against critics on NATO soil.”
Beyond China and Russia, Mr Blinken singled out Iran and North Korea over their pursuit of nuclear and missile capabilities “that threaten US allies and partners”.
READ MORE: China calls on west to impose sanctions on Australia
Ben Packham 1.24pm:Foreign Minister presses PM on Magnitsky law
Foreign Minister Marise Payne has signalled she is lobbying Scott Morrison to introduce new Magnitsky-style laws allowing targeted economic sanctions against human rights abusers and corrupt officials abroad.
Senator Payne told Senate estimates she had written to the Prime Minister recommending a course of action on the proposed sanctions regime, “and the government will progress that”.
Liberal Senator David Fawcett, who chairs a parliamentary committee that urged the government to pass Magnitsky-style laws, said the government’s response to his committee’s report was now overdue.
“Particularly with what is happening with Myanmar at the moment as well as other parts of the world, we do need to have some levers that we can use to actually do more than issue statements,” he said.
Senator Payne said: “Senator, I agree and that is why we are progressing these matters.”
On Tuesday, the US, Canadian and EU governments imposed targeted sanctions against Chinese officials involved in the repression of Uighurs in Xinjiang.
An initial version of a March 22 joint statement issued by US Secretary of State Antony Blinken said Australia was part of the joint sanctions decision.
Senator Payne said Australia supported the statement but did not sign onto it because it did not yet have “the same sanction application capacity, in the Magnitsky sense”.
Greens Senator Janet Rice said there was widespread support for the plight of the Uighurs, but “the issue is us having the ability to implement those sanctions”.
Payne: “That is exactly why I made the referral to the joint standing committee last year. It is exactly why I have considered that comprehensive report. And exactly why I have written to the Prime Minister with my views on that matter, and the government will progres that.”
The original Magnitsky Act was passed in the US with bipartisan support in 2012. It was initially aimed at punishing Putin regime officials responsible for the death of Russian tax accountant Sergei Magnitsky in a Moscow prison.
Other nations have since enacted mirror legislation, allowing the imposition of visa and property-related sanctions on offshore human rights abusers and those involved in corruption.
READ MORE:Laws could cut off Uighur abusers
Angelica Snowden1.35pm: Hoping for ‘fourth time lucky’ on Vic quarantine
Victoria’s opposition leader Michael O’Brien says he hopes the state government will be “fourth time lucky” after announcing it will start up hotel quarantine again in two weeks.
Mr O’Brien said Victorians were relying on Daniel Andrews’ government to have “learnt the lessons” from recent outbreaks in the hotel quarantine program.
“Let’s hope the government gets it right on hotel quarantine this time because we know the last three times they got it wrong Victorians were locked down,” Mr O’Brien said.
“The government cannot afford to get it wrong this time,” he said.
“They just need to do what NSW has done… NSW has been able to run hotel quarantine, keep the virus contained and keep their state open and that is exactly where Victoria needs to be as well.”
The state’s Acting Premier James Merlino announced today that international visitors would be accepted in Victoria from April 8 after the program was shut down for six weeks.
Initially 800 returned travellers per week will be permitted to come back, followed by 1120 from April 15.
A small portion of those spaces will be allocated to “economic cohorts”, which could include international students or skilled workers.
The state’s hotel quarantine program was shut down for the third time on February 14 after staff at the Holiday Inn contracted COVID-19 from returned travellers.
Three different reviews were conducted to improve hotel ventilation and reduce the risk of transmission, to reduce the spread of more transmissible COVID-19 variants and to understand how the virus was contracted by staff.
READ MORE: Victoria resumes quarantine program
Adeshola Ore 1.24pm:Pete Evans struts Parliament’s corridors with Craig Kelly
Controversial celebrity chef and known anti-vaxxer Pete Evans has been spotted with former Liberal MP Craig Kelly in Parliament House.
Last month, Mr Evans announced he would run for the Senate at the next federal election with former One Nation senator Rod Culleton’s The Great Australian Party.
Mr Kelly, who recently appeared on Mr Evans’ podcast, resigned from the Liberal Party last month to sit on the crossbench, leaving the Morrison government with a one-seat majority in the House of Representatives. He said he wanted more freedom to pursue the issues his constituents had elected him to represent.
Scott Morrison had begun distancing himself from Mr Kelly and his support of unproven COVID treatments in the weeks leading up to his resignation. Mr Morrison had also raised concerns with Mr Kelly about a senior staffer of his who had been accused of workplace harassment.
Mr Evans is banned from Instagram after he spread false information about coronavirus.
He was also dropped by Pan Macmillan, which published 17 of his books, before Channel 10 dumped him from I’m A Celebrity … Get Me Out Of Here!
READ MORE: Kelly’s ant-vax stance is foohardy and dangerous
ROSIE LEWIS 12.56pm:Higgins files new complaint to PM
Former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins has lodged a formal complaint with Scott Morrison’s chief of staff about apparent backgrounding by the Prime Minister’s office against her partner.
She also wants to give evidence as part of the Gaetjens review, which was until recently investigating who in Mr Morrison’s office knew what and when about her alleged rape at Parliament House in March 2019. The review was “paused” on March 9 after Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet secretary Philip Gaetjens received advice from Australian Federal Police Commissioner Reece Kershaw.
There is a criminal investigation afoot but no charges have been laid.
Writing to Mr Morrison’s chief of staff John Kunkel on Thursday after the Prime Minister’s ABC radio interview, she revealed that journalists from three media outlets – news.com.au, The Daily Telegraph and Ten Network – had “reported to me personally” there had been backgrounding “happening against my partner”.
“To my knowledge, this was being done by staff within the Prime Minister’s media team,” she writes.
Labor has repeatedly questioned Mr Morrison over the claim.
-
Higgins letter
PDF: Brittany Higgins’ letter to John Kunkel
Asked by the ABC on Thursday if he could “categorically say that your office hasn’t been background against one of her loved ones”, Mr Morrison said: “There has been no one in the gallery, nothing has been raised with my office from anyone in the gallery making any of those accusations or any discomfort about anything that my office has done.
“People make allegations all the time second, third-hand. But there’s no one who has raised that with my chief of staff out of the gallery, no.”
Those comments helped prompt Ms Higgins’ letter to Mr Kunkel.
“I believe in giving people the benefit of the doubt. It is entirely plausible the Prime Minister did not know that this was happening, however the more relevant point is that it did occur,” she writes.
Ms Higgins asked to participate in Mr Gaetjens’ review.
“It is my express desire to present my evidence to Mr Gaetjens at the appropriate time once the review recommences,” she says.
Ms Higgins said she would be “happy to discuss any of the aforementioned items at length” with Mr Kunkel.
Ben Packham 11.53am: PNG vaccine pledge ‘well short of what’s needed’
A foreign affairs official has revealed Australia’s delivery of 8480 COVID vaccines for frontline Papua New Guinea health workers falls far short of the number required.
DFAT first assistant secretary Gerald Thomson told Senate estimates that PNG had 30,000 frontline health and ancillary workers who were most at risk of infection.
DFAT secretary Frances Adamson said the 8000 vaccines was an initial contribution.
She said the figure was decided upon as “a sensible number to start with, and by no means the last word”.
Officials also revealed Australia’s aid-delivery partners in PNG are not slated to receive early doses of Australian-provided vaccines.
Mr Thomson said it looked like PNG was a “serious situation”, but declined to offer any predictions on how high the country’s COVID numbers could go.
He also claimed, despite reports from Port Moresby, that the city’s hospitals were still able to take patients.
“Whilst the health system is under a lot of strain, the health system is not yet completely overwhelmed,” Mr Thomson said.
READ MORE: State scrambles to test for PNG variant
Ellie Dudley11.25am:Zero local COVID cases for NSW, Queensland, Victoria
NSW, Queensland and Victoria have recorded no new cases of locally transmitted COVID-19.
NSW recorded five positive cases in overseas arrivals, Queensland had three and Victoria none.
Adeshola Ore11.10am:Lewd sex acts ‘tarnish’ staffer reputations: Dutton
Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton says an exposé that revealed lewd sex acts were performed in Parliament House has “tarnished” the reputation of political staffers.
A report by The Australian and Channel 10 revealed that a group of Coalition male staffers had swapped graphic videos and photos of them performing solo sexual acts on the desks of female MPs over a two-year period. A man at the centre of the behaviour has been sacked and the Morrison government is searching for the names of other staffers involved.
Mr Dutton said he was “shocked” and “revolted” by the report.
He also said the people involved in the behaviour had “tarnished” the reputation of other staff who work in parliament.
“We’ve got to set a standard in this place … it certainly shouldn’t be acceptable in Parliament House but obviously there’s a small clique of people who believe this is OK,” he told 2GB radio.
“I feel for our staff who a lot of people view them suspiciously as well when they are hard working people.”
The media report also published allegations that staffers were tasked with bringing sex workers into the building for MPs. It also alleged staff and parliamentarians often had sex in a Parliament House room reserved for meditation or prayer.
Sky News Host and former federal parliamentary staffer Peta Credlin revealed she sacked a Coalition staffer featured in one of the videos.
READ MORE: Coalition staffer sacked over sex acts
Ben Packham11.05am:No answers on when stranded Australians will be home
Foreign affairs officials have been unable to say when all stranded Australians will be returned home.
Department of Foriegn Affairs and Trade secretary Frances Adamson told Senate estimates: “The answer is as soon as we can manage it.”
DFAT first assistant secretary Lynette Wood said on Thursday there were currently 36,206 Australians stuck overseas, including 4860 classified as “vulnerable”, who had registered as wishing to return to home.
The top five countries where they are stranded are India, the United Kingdom, the United States, the Philippines, and Thailand.
Officials said 12 of 20 government-facilitated flights announced in January had occurred, with the remaining eight to be completed by April 17.
Ms Wood said more Australians were registering to come home as time went on.
But she said some of those who said they wanted to come home had refused places on flights.
“Even between September and December, the ones who are registered don’t necessarily take up the seats on the flights, so it’s difficult to draw a linear line about, if flights are available, who might come home when,” she said.
Labor Senator Penny Wong noted the number of vulnerable Australians wanting to come home had risen from about 4000 when Scott Morrison promised in September last year to get stranded Australians home by Christmas.
Senator Payne said passenger arrival caps would soon rise, with the support of the states. The number of places at the Northern Territory’s Howard Springs quarantine facility would increase from 850 to fortnight to 2000 per fortnight in late April.
Geoff Chambers 10.20am:Canberra lacks accountability on ‘war crimes’: China
China has launched a fresh assault against the Morrison government with senior Foreign Ministry and embassy officials accusing Canberra of lacking “accountability” over alleged war crimes in Afghanistan and suggesting the US, Britain and European Union should “consider sanctions” against Australia.
Beijing on Wednesday ramped-up its targeting of Australia after Foreign Minister Marise Payne this week released a statement reiterating the Morrison government’s grave concerns about the “severe human rights abuses against ethnic Uighurs and other Muslim minorities in Xinjiang”.
Chinese Foreign Ministry spokeswoman Hua Chunying on Wednesday used alleged war crimes in Afghanistan, the White Australia policy, the Stolen Generation and treatment of indigenous people to criticise Australia.
“Speaking of “accountability”, I wonder how is Australia doing with those investigations into their soldiers’ grave crimes in Afghanistan that were exposed not long ago,” Ms Hua said.
“Have they held the perpetrators accountable and punished them to do justice to the innocent victims? Will Five Eyes countries including the US and the UK, and the EU consider sanctions on Australia?
“Besides, in Australia, there was the infamous White Australia policy, under which genocide was committed against aboriginal people and 100,000 aboriginal children were forcibly taken away from their families. Did the Australian side hold accountable those who caused pain to the Stolen Generation?”
Ms Hua said “our position is very clear in Canberra and in Beijing”.
“The Australian side should know very well what problems they have in history and now. They should also be clear about what concrete actions they need to take to put things right,” she said.
READ the full story here
Angelica Snowden10.06am: Victoria to resume accepting international arrivals
Victoria’s hotel quarantine system will be put to the test once again, with the state government declaring the program will start accepting international arrivals in two weeks time.
A host of changes have been made to the program to reduce the chance of COVID-19 transmission, including that returning travellers will now be tested on four separate occasions in quarantine and there will be reduced room capacity for family groups.
Off the back of three separate reviews into the hotel quarantine system – including inquiries into ventilation, variants of concern and a Safer Care Victoria review – the state government reiterated their commitment to developing a purpose built quarantine accommodation.
Ten sites are being considered, which will eventually be narrowed down to one stand alone accommodation hub based on the Howard Springs model.
As part of the revamped hotel quarantine program, guests will now be COVID tested on days zero, four, 12 and 14. They will also be contacted two days after they leave for a “symptom check” and will be encouraged to get tested again on days 17 and 21.
READ MORE: Victoria pays double for hotel quarantine
Adeshola Ore9.45am: ‘Lead by example’: Turnbull’s swipe at Morrison
Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull has taken another swipe at Scott Morrison, as the Prime Minister faces scrutiny over his government’s handling of sexual assault allegations and the filming of vulgar sex acts in parliament.
The Australian has reported that has reported that Christian Porter is set to be shifted out of his role as Attorney-General due to legal advice that his defamation against the ABC over its reporting of a historic rape allegation could result in perceived conflict of interest. Defence Minister Linda Reynolds, who is on extended sick leave in the wake of the Brittany Higgins rape claim, is also set to be moved out of her portfolio.
This morning, Mr Turnbull tweeted: “Accountability. Leadership. Responsibility. Ministers must lead by example and live the values they espouse.”
“They should be held responsible for their conduct and for ensuring their staff behave respectfully to others.”
READ MORE: Letters — Cut the PM some slack
Adeshola Ore9.06am: PM tight-lipped on cabinet reshuffle
Scott Morrison has refused to comment on reports of an impending cabinet reshuffle.
The Australian has reported that Christian Porter is set to be shifted out of his role as Attorney-General due to legal advice that his defamation against the ABC over its reporting of a historic rape allegation could result in perceived conflict of interest. Defence Minister Linda Reynolds, who is on extended sick leave in the wake of the Brittany Higgins rape claim, is also set to be moved out of her portfolio.
Speculation is growing around an upcoming Cabinet reshuffle with Prime Minister Scott Morrison under pressure to replace embattled Ministers Christian Porter and Linda Reynolds. Mr Morrison is examining the ministerial guidelines surrounding Christian Porter's position as Attorney-General amid concerns of a conflict of interest between being first law officer while suing the ABC for defamation. The Australian is also reporting Peter Dutton could take the coveted Defence portfolio from Linda Reynolds who has been on medical leave since her former staffer Brittany Higgins aired rape allegations.
The Prime Minister is expected to swap Mr Porter’s roles of Attorney-General and Industrial Relations Minister with Michaelia Cash’s role as Employment Minister. Peter Dutton is expected to replace Senator Reynolds as Defence Minister.
“In relation to Mr Porter’s return to the cabinet, I’ve been considering the advice of the Solicitor-General about conflicts of interest that may arise in relation to that defamation action against the ABC and the way that they’ve handled these matters,” Mr Morrison told the ABC.
“I’ll consider that. Also in terms of the ministerial code of conduct which also deals with perceived conflicts of interest.”
“I’m working through those issues with the lawyer at the moment.”
Asked if his leadership was safe, Mr Morrison said “our party has never been more united.”
READ MORE: Niki Savva — Floundering PM stumbles over his own bag of tricks
Adeshola Ore 8.53am:Frydenberg joins chorus on opening mind to quotas
Josh Frydenberg has signalled he is open to gender quotas to boost female representation in the Liberal Party.
The Australian has reported that a record number of federal Liberal MPs support quotas after weeks of sexual assault and harassment allegations have triggered a conversation on the treatment of women in politics.
The Australian's Editor-at-Large Paul Kelly says having higher representation of women in senior roles in parliament will not necessarily grant the Liberal Party "immunity from all sorts of political mistakes". "The Coalition and prime minister are under really intense pressure … while the prime minister's normally got a really deft political touch, he seems to have lost it over the last four to five weeks," he told Sky News host Peta Credlin. "Scott Morrison has put quotas on the agenda … this could break a number of ways. "There will be a number of people who think we've got to start looking at this given the situation we're in, but there will be a number of Liberals as a matter of principle who say no quotas are terribly unacceptable. "Having women in senior positions doesn't grant you immunity from all sorts of political mistakes." Sky News host Peta Credlin said in the early days of the case of Brittany Higgins, all who dealt with her case "were all women" and gender quotas would not have helped. Mr Kelly said however, it was difficult to get away from the central argument the Liberal Party would be a lot better off with a higher proportion of women in their ranks.
Asked about if gender quotas should be implemented, the Treasurer said “all options” should be considered.
READ MORE:Liberal women line up to back quotas
Adeshola Ore 8.44am:Tasmanian Premier adds no further info on Abetz: PM
Scott Morrison says Tasmanian Premier Peter Gutwein has not added “any further information” in his plea for the Prime Minister to consider allegations that Liberal senator Eric Abetz “slut-shamed” an alleged rape victim.
Tasmanian Speaker Sue Hickey, under parliamentary privilege, claimed Senator Abetz had slurred former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins and questioned how drunk she was on the night of the alleged rape. Senator Abetz has denied the claim.
“The Premier has not added any further information,” Mr Morrison told the ABC.
“Senator Abetz has absolutely denied this completely. And, and he’s made that statement and these other statements I understand were made under privilege in the Tasmanian parliament, and so I mean I would find those sorts of comments as I’m sure anyone would be completely appalling.
Mr Gutwein faces questions about his own conduct in the matter, after admitting he knew of the allegation against Senator Abetz weeks ago but failed to act.
Mr Morrison said Mr Gutwein had merely “raised the matter” with him.
“He has no additional information and he doesn’t corroborate or confirm any of these things,” he said.
Mr Morrison said it would be “unfair to draw a conclusion” because the facts were in “such dispute.”
READ MORE: Schools to act as one on crisis of consent
Ellie Dudley8.38am:Raised dam wall would mitigate floods: Premier
Premier Gladys Berejiklian has admitted policy changes must be made to prohibit “extreme weather conditions” taking their toll on NSW, including potentially raising the Warragamba Dam wall.
In order to prevent the current flood crisis, Ms Berejiklian said the only solution would have been to raise the wall.
“The only thing you can do is raise the dam wall … but to do that also has challenges, engineering challenges and a range of other issues.” she told a press conference.
“That wouldn’t of course change the capacity for the dam at all, but it would mitigate floods into the future.”
NED-3488-Western Sydney flood emergency
Ms Berejiklian said water would have had to start being released 230 days ago to prevent the flooding the area has seen.
“I don’t know who could have foreseen that,” she said.
“We need to consider the extreme weather conditions and what that means for government policy.”
READ MORE: Dam not to blame for this latest inundation
Ellie Dudley 8.32am:Berejiklian ‘shocked’ at Nats MP rape allegations
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian has said she was “shocked’ about rape allegations made against Upper Hunter MP Michael Johnsen.
Labor Blue Mountains MP Trish Doyle on Wednesday told NSW parliament police were investigating an alleged rape of a sex worker by a member of the ­government.
Mr Johnsen, who firmly denies the accusations, later revealed himself as the accused, and chose to step down “without admission.”
NSW Nationals MP Michael Johnsen says he is devastated after he was accused by a Labor MP of raping a sex worker in the Blue Mountains 18 months ago. NSW Shadow Minister for Women Trish Doyle dropped a bombshell last night when she made the claim under parliamentary privilege but did not name the alleged perpetrator. NSW Police are now investigating the alleged incident and Mr Johnson has self-identified as the man in question and claims he is innocent but has promised authorities full co-operation. While the alleged victim said she agreed to initially meet with the Upper Hunter MP Michael Johnsen, Trish Doyle says the encounter progressed beyond a consensual act. Mr Johnsen will take a short period of leave and released a statement which read “I am confident any investigation will conclude that I am an innocent party". “Without admission I have chosen to step aside from my Parliamentary Secretary Role and will not sit in the Nationals Party Room nor the Joint Party Room." NSW Nationals Leader John Barilaro has released a statement saying “I sought Mr Johnsen's resignation from his role as Parliamentary Secretary and he duly resigned”.
“I joined everyone else about being shocked at the serious allegation made,” Ms Berejiklian told a press conference.
She said she was “somewhat relieved it is subject to police investigations” which prohibits her from answering questions in detail.
“I think all of us want to make sure justice is served well and properly,” she said. “The alleged victim needs a period where nothing is prejudiced.”
READ MORE: Affirmative action smartest move Labor ever made
Adeshola Ore 8.24am:Lambie would welcome Dutton in defence portfolio
Tasmanian Senator Jacqui Lambie says reports that Peter Dutton will be shifted to the defence portfolio as part of an impending cabinet reshuffle is welcome news.
The Australian has reported that Christian Porter is set to be shifted out of his role as Attorney-General due to legal advice that his defamation against the ABC over its reporting of a historic rape allegation could result in perceived conflict of interest. Defence Minister Linda Reynolds, who is on extended sick leave in the wake of the Brittany Higgins rape claim, is also set to be moved out of her portfolio.
The Prime Minister is expected to swap Mr Porter’s roles of Attorney-General and Industrial Relations Minister with Michaelia Cash’s role as Employment Minister. Mr Dutton is expected to replace Senator Reynolds as Defence Minister.
“That certainly needs to shake up there in defence And I’m sure that’s certainly what he will give it in there. There’s no doubt about that,” she told Sky News.
Senator Lambie has previously called for Mr Dutton to replace Senator Reynolds.
READ MORE: Editorial — MPs should reflect the community they serve
Ellie Dudley 8.19am: Warning: Do not drive into floodwaters
Premier Gladys Berejiklian has urged people in flood affected areas to stay out of the water, as strong currents continue to flow today.
Most of the river systems across NSW have peaked and are set to drop over the coming days, however, Ms Berejiklian warned against complacency as the tides recede.
“Just because you may have heard your local river has peaked or that the worst of the rising waters may have ceased, the currents underneath the surface are very strong,” she said
“The flows are doing things they don’t normally do, so please stay out of those floodwaters.”
Around 3000 evacuated people were able to return to their houses on Wednesday, but 20,000 are still evacuated, unclear of when they will be permitted to go home.
Ms Berejiklian assured evacuated people that when they do return “our teams are in place to support you in the clean-up efforts.”
SES Deputy Commissioner Sean Kearns earlier issued a stern warning to those in flood affected areas not to act “dangerously.”
The SES has conducted over 1000 flood rescues since the crisis commenced on the weekend, most of which were acting recklessly around flood waters, Mr Kearns told Sky News.
“We are still finding that people are trying to drive through flood waters,” Mr Kearns said. “We are asking people to listen to our warnings.”
Currently, NSW has 17 evacuation orders in place and 21 evacuation warnings.
The rivers around Moree are expected to peak today, as well as slight rises along the Clarence River, particularly affecting communities near Macleay, Mr Kearns said.
“We are asking people to be aware of that,” he said.
“And we’re going to continue our work to help people toward recovery.”
READ MORE:Man drowns while on phone to rescuers
Ellie Dudley 8.14am:Orgies, prostitutes: Credlin reveals sickening behaviour
Tony Abbott’s former chief-of-staff and now Sky News host, Peta Credlin, has revealed new details of “sickening” behaviour at Parliament House, saying she will participate in the government’s review of workplace culture.
Sky News host Peta Credlin has spoken publicly for the first time about incidents which occurred during her 16 years working in Parliament House Canberra. “I'm not alone amongst staff who have worked there, or who are working there right now tonight, to say I regard it as one of the great privileges of my life, to have been a political staffer,” Ms Credlin said. “I know there are a lot of staff in the building at the moment, I know they feel ashamed by recent events even though they have never been anything other than professional – Liberal staffers, Labor staffers, National Party and crossbench staff. “I have never dealt with allegations of rape inside Parliament House, and if I had – the lawyer in me, the woman in me – I can guarantee you I would have dealt with it very differently. But the filthy behaviour of some male staff masturbating over the desks of their MP employers, because it is reported, some of those MP’s voted against same sex marriage did not surprise me. “It sickened me, as I am sure it sickened you, but it did not surprise me. “I will tell you something now that I have never said publicly.” Ms Credlin spoke of her time in the Leader of the Opposition’s office, during which she “had reason to recommend” the sacking of a staff member for “lying and disloyalty”. “When the MP cleaned out the former staffer’s desk, and the computer, that MP uncovered evidence that for many months, that staffer had regularly met with other men during the middle of the day – while the MP was in Question Time – for orgies in political offices,” she said. “Labor staffers, not just this Coalition man, and a number of others too.” Ms Credlin said she asked the leader of the then-Opposition to “reinstate the old Howard government staff committee to vet appointments from here on in”, but he refused. “The man sacked by the Morrison government this week for his disgusting acts on his MP's desk and its distribution on a little chat group – I mean how do you even think about doing that sort of crap at work – that bloke I demanded to be sacked years earlier for disloyalty, for lying, for leaking against his boss,” she said. “That bloke is not the same as the man I told you about in the orgies – that was another circumstance. “But the bloke that was sacked this week was someone I sacked many years earlier, he never forgave me for it … but you never heard my side of it did you?” Ms Credlin said that after Malcolm Turnbull “rolled Abbott” and she was gone, “he was back”. “He is not the only one. The other three that Peter Van Onselen broke in his story earlier this week, I know who you are. I see you,” she said. “The former minister who it is alleged had his male prostitutes delivered to Parliament House by this spiteful gang – signed in and all kept quiet, former minister I see you too.” Ms Credlin said she “copped hit after hit” for years from unnamed sources about “staff being vetted” and “complaints that I had knocked back applicants from some ministers”. “Yes I did, and I stand by every decision I made to knock them back. And I would do it all again,” she said. “What you have seen in recent weeks is why I did it, and as a woman – boy I made some enemies. “I have never publicly spoken about my side before, but given where we are, given the recent issues regarding women, given the anger so many good staff feel today about the poor reputations they are copping over the behaviour of a few, I am not going to stand silent anymore.”
Ms Credlin worked at Parliament House over a period of 16 years, during which she alleged she knew of staffer orgies occurring in offices while MPs were in Question Time.
During her time in the Leader of the Opposition’s office, she said she had “reason to recommend” the sacking of a staff member for “lying and disloyalty”.
READ the full story here
Ellie Dudley8.03am:Frydenberg says he backs Abetz over slut shaming claim
Josh Frydenberg says he backs senator Eric Abetz, after the Liberal senator denied accusations of slurs he made towards alleged rape victim and former staffer Brittany Higgins.
On Wednesday, Tasmanian Speaker Sue Hickey, under parliamentary privilege, claimed Senator Abetz had said: “As for that Higgins girl, anybody so disgustingly drunk who would have slept with anybody could have slept with one of our spies and put the security of the nation at risk.”
Liberal Senator Eric Abetz has labelled the allegations made against him regarding offensive comments about Brittany Higgins as “disgraceful”. Speaker of the Tasmanian Parliament Sue Hickey was effectively sacked from the Liberal Party over the weekend when Premier Peter Gutwein informed her of the decision not to endorse her pre-selection for the upcoming state election. The now independent speaker told parliament under parliamentary privilege that the federal Senator spoke to her on March 1 and said Ms Higgins could have jeopardised Australia’s national security by being “so disgustingly drunk”. “As for that Higgins girl, anybody so disgustingly drunk who would sleep with anybody could have slept with one of our spies and put the security of the nation at risk,” Mr Abetz allegedly said. In an exclusive interview with Sky News host Andrew Bolt, Senator Abetz “categorically denied” the assertions. “Given my history in these matters, I would never have said words that have now been escribed to me by Ms Hickey, they are repulsive,” he said. “One can expect or suspect that the only reason is that she’s brought this up three weeks later because the premier on Sunday showed her the door from the Liberal Party because of her gross disloyalty and lack of teamsmanship.”
Senator Abetz since issued a statement flatly denying the accusation, and has the support of the Treasurer.
“I can only go on the bases of what Eric Abetz has said, and he’s put out a statement saying he emphatically denied that,” Mr Frydenberg told Sky News.
“Any comments of that kind are abhorrent, but we can only go off the basis of what eric’s statement said.”
Mr Frydenberg would not reveal any information regarding an upcoming cabinet reshuffle led by Scott Morrison, but said he “looked forward to welcoming” Attorney-General Christian Porter and Defence Minister Linda Reynolds back to work.
Mr Porter has been on medical leave after accusations of a historic rape were made against him.
Ms Reynolds has also been on medical leave, which she took shortly after Brittany Higgins revealed she was raped in her office.
READ MORE: Tasmanian Premier urges PM to act on Abetz slur claim
Ellie Dudley 7.49am: Labor asking to ‘change law’ on JobKeeper: Treasurer
Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has condemned the Labor Party’s request for profitable businesses to pay back their JobKeeper, claiming the government would have “to change the law.”
“What JobKeeper did was it prevented those job losses, provided an economic lifeline for those who needed it,” Mr Frydenberg told Sky News.
Treasurer Josh Frydenberg says it is “appropriate” for JobKeeper to end for the economy to adjust and to remove “adverse incentives” as noted in a JobKeeper review. “The program has a number of features that create adverse incentive which are likely to become more pronounced, in particular it distorts wage relativities, it dampens incentives to work, it hampers labour mobility and the re-allocation of workers to more productive roles,” he said in parliament. Mr Frydenberg said JobKeeper had delivered jobs and had helped “cushion the blow from the biggest economic shock" but the scheme could not continue. “In our view, it is appropriate for the program that is JobKeeper to end as other support measures take effect and allow the economy to continue adjusting.”
“What the Labor Party is asking is for us to effectively change the law.”
“When it comes to businesses decisions they make around dividend and bonuses are the matter of the individual business.”
He added: “But if businesses are in the position to pay back JobKeeper, then they should.”
JobKeeper will end for Australians on March 28.
READ MORE: Smiggle niggle — Lew, ALP in JobKeeper war
Ellie Dudley7.39am: Another minister joins PM with open mind to quotas
Arts and Communications Minister Paul Fletcher said he has an “open-mind” towards instigating gender quotas in Parliament House, as the federal government considers ways to have more female representation in their midst.
Scott Morrison opened up the conversation of quotas earlier this week, in a teary press conference in which he admitted the government must see a cultural change in the treatment of women.
Mr Fletcher said he was open to quotas, but also “other human resources tools.”
“I want to make sure that we are looking at appropriate human resources tools,” Mr Fletcher told ABC News Breakfast. “These are matters for the state divisions, but I’ve certainly got an open mind on the various tools available, including quotas.”
Mr Fletcher also spoke to an additional $125 million has been committed into the Australian arts sector RISE (Restart Investment to Sustain and Expand) fund, which he said would “support new shows, tours festivals and events.”
“What we want to do is get Australia’s talented creatives back out on stage, we want backstage crew back at work, we want the front-of-house, the ushers, the ticketers, all those jobs,” he said.
When asked about the Prime Minister’s cabinet reshuffle, during which it is understood Attorney-General Christian Porter and Defence Minister Linda Reynolds will receive new portfolios, Mr Fletcher said: “the only shuffles I’m interested in are the soft-shoe shuffles.”
“I want to see our artists performing on stage in great musicals funded by the RISE program.”
READ MORE: Nick Cater — Quotas betray the Menzian legacy
Ellie Dudley6.25am:Barilaro called for rape-accused MP to stand down
Deputy Premier John Barilaro has confirmed he requested the resignation of Upper Hunter MP Michael Johnsen upon hearing the rape allegations against the Nationals member.
Labor Blue Mountains MP Trish Doyle on Wednesday told NSW parliament that police were investigating the alleged rape of a sex worker by a member of the ­government.
Mr Johnsen, who firmly denies the accusations, later revealed himself as the accused and chose to step down “without admission.”
Mr Barilaro released a statement on Thursday morning outlining his request for Mr Johnsen to step down.
“In light of the police investigation and upon learning of allegations against the Member for Upper Hunter Michael Johnsen, I sought Mr Johnsen’s resignation from his role as Parliamentary Secretary and he duly resigned,” the statement read.
“Mr Johnsen also agreed to no longer sit in Nationals Party Room nor Joint Party Room while the police investigation is underway.”
READ MORE:Nationals MP Michael Johnsen denies rape allegation
Jacquelin Magnay6.10am:Australia’s 3.8m AstraZeneca jabs may be lost
Delayed AstraZeneca vaccine exports to Australia are unlikely to resume, with European leaders planning even tougher controls on future shipments of the vaccine outside the bloc.
Australia has already had one international shipment of 250,000 doses cancelled by the Italian government, and future supplies to fulfil Australia’s international order of 3.8 million doses are set to be abandoned for several months, if not permanently.
The EU is set to introduce tougher controls at a Brussels summit on Thursday which assesses a country’s vaccination rates and access to vaccines before any approval will be given for any shipment. The new export authorisation mechanism is based on “proportionality” of what the EU considers to be appropriate, rather than AstraZeneca’s contractual deals.
The new rules, if adopted, look at reciprocity of vaccines, the epidemiological situation in the non-EU country, its vaccination rate and existing availability of COVID-19 vaccines.
Read the full story here.
Simon Benson5.10am:Porter, Reynolds to switch portfolios in reshuffle
Christian Porter is set to be shifted out of his role as Attorney-General following advice that his defamation action against the ABC over historical sexual assault allegations could create the perception of a conflict of interest as the nation’s first law officer.
Defence Minister Linda Reynolds is also set to be moved out of her portfolio after taking extended sick leave in the wake of the Brittany Higgins rape claims.
The Australian understands that both ministers, however, will remain in cabinet.
Scott Morrison is expected to announce the changes as early as the weekend, having received advice from the Solicitor-General earlier this week that while there might not be an immediate conflict of interest in regards to Mr Porter under the ministerial standards, there could be a “perception” of a conflict.
The Prime Minister is expected to swap Mr Porter’s roles of Attorney-General and Industrial Relations Minister with Michaelia Cash’s role as Employment Minister. Mr Morrison is expected to promote his former leadership rival, Peter Dutton, to replace Senator Reynolds as Defence Minister.
Mr Porter’s role as the government leader in the House of Representatives is also expected to go to Mr Dutton, who has been acting leader of the House during Mr Porter’s two weeks’ leave.
Stuart Robert, a long-term supporter of the Prime Minister and currently Minister for the NDIS and Government Services, could be promoted to the home affairs portfolio if Mr Dutton is moved.
The straight swap between Mr Porter and Senator Cash, as well as moves for Mr Dutton and Mr Robert, would leave open the portfolio of government services for Senator Reynolds.
Sky News Political Editor Andrew Clennell says the prime minister has sent a “clear signal” that Christian Porter won’t be returning to his role as Attorney-General when he returns from leave.
Read the full story, by Simon Benson and Dennis Shanahan, here.
Rosie Lewis5am:Liberal MPs line up to back quotas for women
A record number of federal Liberal MPs say the party must consider quotas to boost female representation, after weeks of sexual assault allegations and misbehaviour against women forced the party’s leadership to publicly declare its support.
The Australian has spoken to a dozen Liberal backbenchers who said quotas must be on the table, joining Scott Morrison and cabinet ministers including Foreign Minister Marise Payne, Health Minister Greg Hunt, Environment Minister Sussan Ley, Industry Minister Karen Andrews, Education Minister Alan Tudge, Defence Industry Minister Melissa Price and Financial Services Minister Jane Hume.
Victorian Liberal senator Sarah Henderson, who lost her seat of Corangamite at the 2019 election, said just six of the party’s 39 safe or reasonably safe seats (15 per cent) were held by women and there was 26 per cent female representation at a federal level. “That is not good enough and strong action is required, in particular to ensure more women are preselected in safe seats,” she said.
The Australian's Editor-at-Large Paul Kelly says having higher representation of women in senior roles in parliament will not necessarily grant the Liberal Party "immunity from all sorts of political mistakes".
Read the full story, by Rosie Lewis, Richard Ferguson and Adeshola Ore, here.
Adam Creighton4.45am:JobKeeper morphs into JobLoser as scheme ends
Up to 150,000 jobs and 110,000 small businesses are at risk after the $90bn JobKeeper scheme ends on Sunday according to Treasury secretary Steven Kennedy, with Josh Frydenberg unveiling a $135m government lifeline to help support thousands of workers in the arts sector.
Revealing official estimates around likely job losses for the first time, Dr Kennedy said about 1.1 million workers would lose their wage subsidy of up to $1000 a fortnight when the scheme ends on 28 March. He said he remained confident the bulk of recipients would remain in jobs and the ­labour market recovery would not be derailed.
“The unemployment rate could rise a little in coming months before resuming (a) downward trajectory,” he said.
Treasury’s December forecasts predicted the jobless rate would peak at 7.5 per cent in the March quarter, but instead Dr Kennedy noted the unexpectedly rapid fall in unemployment to 5.8 per cent in February.
Treasurer Josh Frydenberg says it is “appropriate” for JobKeeper to end for the economy to adjust and to remove “adverse incentives” as noted in a JobKeeper review.
Read the full story, by Adam Creighton and Matthew Westwood, here.
Word count: 11478
