Nicholas Jensen 10.45pm: Kelly defies PM on Covid treatments
Less than a week after his corridor clash with Labor frontbencher Tanya Plibersek, Liberal MP Craig Kelly has again taken to ­social media to endorse ivermectin as an effective treatment against COVID-19, despite its rejection by Australia’s Chief Medical Officer.
Mr Kelly’s most recent Facebook posts concerning the drug come days after Scott Morrison reportedly reprimanded him for spruiking bogus theories about the treatment of COVID-19.
“It is true that the views expressed by the member for ­Hughes do not align with my views, or the views of the advice that has been provided to me by the Chief Medical Officer,” the Prime Minister told parliament on Wednesday.
“(He) and I discussed these matters, and I made it very clear that was the view of me as Prime Minister and of course the views of the government.”
Following their meeting, Mr Kelly affirmed his support for the vaccine rollout, saying the spread of misinformation was wrong and dangerous: “I have always sought to support the success of our nation’s public health response during the pandemic.”
FULL STORY
Nicholas Jensen 10.10pm: Wollongong exposure sites
Following the detection of the Wollongong case, NSW Health have provided a list of exposure sites, saying anyone who has attended these venues should immediately present for testing and then self-isolate until further advice is provided by health officials.
Tuesday, February 2
● Mootch&Me, 313 Bay St, Brighton-Le-Sands NSW, 2216, from 10.50am to 12pm
● Headland’s Hotel, Headland Ave & Yuruga St, Austinmer NSW, 2515, from 1pm to 3pm
Wednesday, February 3
●Woolworths, 5-9 Molloy St, Bulli NSW 2516, from 9.15am to 10am
● Corrimal Memorial Park, Wilga St, Corrimal NSW, 2518, from 12pm to 1pm
● Thirroul Beach, from 3pm to 4.30pm
Thursday, February 4
● Sublime Point Walking Track, 661 Princes Hwy, Maddens Plains, NSW, 2508, from 8.30am to 10am
● Figtree Grove Shopping Centre, 19 Princes Hwy, Figtree NSW, 2525, from 2pm to 3.30pm
● Optus, 17 Flinders St, Wollongong, NSW, 2500, from 1pm to 1.15pm
● Officeworks, 145 Princes Hwy, Fairy Meadow, NSW, 2519, from 3.45pm to 4.05pm
Friday, February 5
● Officeworks, 145 Princes Hwy, Fairy Meadow, NSW, 2519, from 3pm to 3.25pm
Saturday, February 6
● Bulli Beach Cafe, 68 Trinity Row, Bulli NSW 2516, from 1.30pm to 4pm
Nicholas Jensen 9.50pm: Traveller tests positive after leaving quarantine
NSW Health is carrying out an urgent follow-up in relation to a returned overseas traveller who tested positive to COVID-19 on day 16, after leaving their 14-day quarantine period in Wollongong.
The individual returned two negative tests during their quarantine period.
The individual did not have any symptoms, NSW Health said in a statement, but underwent testing as part of the recently enhanced day-16 follow-up procedure.
As an additional cautionary measure, NSW Health has introduced a system of symptom checking and day-16 COVID-19 tests for overseas travellers who have been released from hotel quarantine.
Results indicate the individual has a low level of infection and their household contacts have all since returned negatives tests.
Investigations currently suggest that case was acquired overseas.
As well as urging anyone with the mildest of symptoms to come forward for testing, NSW Health has re-published their 350 testing locations, saying many are open seven days a week.
NSW recorded zero locally acquired COVID-19 cases on Sunday, with one new infection detected in hotel quarantine, marking three weeks since an infection was found in the community.
READ MORE: Fake Covid test results spread around world
Yoni Bashan 9.30pm: Disaster agency’s output ‘a disaster’
The NSW government’s leading disaster response agency has been criticised for spending nearly $1m on external consultants and ­embarking on a hiring spree of executive-level managers as jobs are being cut and wages frozen across the public service.
Resilience NSW, led by former Rural Fire Service commissioner Shane Fitzsimmons, awarded an $873,000 contract to multinational accounting firm PricewaterhouseCoopers to design and establish the newly formed organisation, announced by Premier Gladys Berejiklian last April.
Numerous government MPs have criticised its lack of output since forming nine months ago, saying the agency had provided no briefings, advisories or reports to government, despite commanding a substantial budget and large numbers of staff on substantial ­salaries. “Other agencies are cutting public servants under the wage cap and Treasury efficiency dividend,” said one government official familiar with the matter.
“No one knows what they’re actually doing.”
FULL STORY
Nicholas Jensen 8.45pm: Myanmar internet restored
Internet access has been temporarily restored in Myanmar as a nationwide web barrier failed to ease anger over the coup.
“Partial restoration of internet connectivity confirmed in #Myanmar from 2PM local time on multiple providers following information blackout,” the monitoring service Netblocks said on Sunday.
Myanmar was plunged into a cyber blackout on Saturday on order of its military.
Netblocks reported that social media platforms remained off limits on Sunday afternoon. But mobile customers using services with MPT, Ooredoo, Telenor and Mytel are now able to access mobile internet data and Wi-Fi.
Earlier on Sunday Netblocks said connectivity in Myanmar was at 14 per cent of standard levels.
Despite the internet blackout several live feeds were broadcast of thousands of protesters marching in Yangon.
READ MORE: Australian academic faces charges in Myanmar
Peter Conradi, Nick Gutteridge 8pm: Vaccine row brings EU struggles into the open
Towards the end of an interview last week about the European Commission’s struggle to secure sufficient supplies of COVID-19 vaccines, Ursula von der Leyen, its beleaguered president, was asked a personal question: when did the 62-year-old expect to be given her own jab?
Not for the first time in a crisis that has laid bare the shortcomings of the Brussels bureaucracy and its German leader, she ­appeared unsure.
“This is a good question … I do not know at the moment,” she laughed, according to the news website Politico, among 10 news organisations invited to grill her. “We are in the scheme of the Belgian authorities. So I would have to ask, honestly.”
Many other people living not just in Belgium but elsewhere across the continent are as much in the dark as the commission president as to when they will be immunised — except they know that for most it is unlikely to be any time soon.
After a week in which Britain administered its 10-millionth vaccination, the 27 EU countries — with almost seven times as many people — have only just passed the 15.5 million mark. While most British adults are expected to have received the jab by the end of May, those in Europe will have to wait longer, with supply shortages meaning only 88 million doses are due to arrive this month and next.
With the finger of blame pointing at the commission, von der Leyen has fought back, rejecting calls to resign and insisting the time to “make a final assessment” of her performance will be at the end of her term in 2024.
Member states are also rallying behind her, in public at least — not least because they agreed a pan-European approach to vaccination with Brussels in charge.
FULL STORY
Nicholas Jensen 7.15pm: No local cases in WA
Western Australia has recorded zero locally acquired cases and zero hotel quarantine cases.
The state has 11 active cases.
In total, Western Australia has recorded nine COVID-19 deaths and conducted 779,033 tests, with 887 patients recovering from the virus.
READ MORE: Fake Covid test results spread around world
Nick Tabakoff 6.20pm: Age editor ditches Twitter after death threats
Age editor Gay Alcorn has stormed off Twitter after the newspaper received “death threats” over a feature about an infected quarantine worker’s visit to a kebab shop, Kmart and Bunnings.
The Mlebourne newspaper’s story traced every after-hours footstep of the COVID-positive hotel worker through Spencer Street institution Kebab Kingz (even publishing its “4.5 star” reviews on Google) and other locations.
But after Alcorn tweeted the story on Thursday, along with a tongue-in-cheek message about the worker’s “busy” social schedule, Twitter erupted in fury and abuse.
Some of the milder tweets accused The Age of “snobbery” and of blaming the worker for the outbreak. ABC News Breakfast host Michael Rowland asked: “What are you trying to get at with this story?”
Author and former Age columnist Marieke Hardy sarcastically tweeted: “Fantastic. Great move. Well done Gay.
FULL STORY
Jon Emont 5.45pm: Fake tests results spark global alarm
In many parts of the world, travellers must show a negative COVID-19 test before catching a flight, but a number of recent arrests suggest the results won’t all be authentic.
Authorities in Indonesia, France and Britain say they have arrested the purveyors of falsified coronavirus tests.
“As long as travel restrictions remain in place due to the COVID-19 situation, it is highly likely that production and sales of fake test certificates will prevail,” Europol, the European Union’s law-enforcement agency, said this month.
Allegations of COVID-19 testing fraud have been cropping up around the world. A man was arrested outside of London Luton Airport in late January in connection with the sale of bogus COVID-19 test certificates.
FULL STORY
Staff Reporters 4.50pm: SA has zero new cases, two active cases
South Australia has reported zero new Covid cases after 6143 tests were conducted in the previous 24 hours. The state’s two active cases are overseas-acquired in medi-hotel. SA has conducted almost one million COVID-19 tests.
Ewin Hannan 4.10pm: Workers challenge Christmas Eve sacking
Weet-Bix manufacturer Sanitarium had been accused of the “appalling” Christmas Eve sacking of two workers, with the duo claiming they were made redundant after nominating to be workplace health and safety representatives.
Ayah Buenaflor and Peter Dening, who worked for Sanitarium for a combined 17 years, allege they were targeted by the company because it did not want unsafe work conditions exposed by them.
They said the unsafe practices included obstructed fire exits, stacks of pallets collapsing after being stacked too high, and pallets being stacked to the ceiling, leading to sprinklers being blocked.
Mr Dening said Sanitarium, which is wholly owned by the Seventh Day Adventist church, required employees to “follows Christian values” while at work but went ahead and made the duo redundant on Christmas Eve.
Victoria Laurie 3.30pm: WA refuses to ease quarantine limits for NSW, Victoria
People travelling from NSW to Western Australia will continue to be required to undergo 14 days home quarantine and take Covid tests, after the WA chief health officer advised that the border remain controlled for now.
NSW has recorded no new cases for three weeks.
NED-2170 How Coronavirus mutates
Victoria will also remain in the same category, requiring anyone arriving to complete 14-day quarantine and testing, but Premier Mark McGowan indicated on Sunday both situations would be reviewed “in coming days.”
He restated his commitment to imposing state border controls where needed. He said both the Federal and High Courts found locking borders was a verifiable option for states.
“If we need them, we’ll instal them.”
“It stands to reason. The other week when New Zealand had an outbreak, the federal government closed a border to New Zealand. We closed our border to Britain and America because they have outbreaks. It stands to reason that borders work.”
Health minister Roger Cook said entry from Victoria will remain paused until the WA chief health officer gives further advice. He said Victoria is making good progress “but we’re proceeding cautiously.”
He said the arrival of the UK strain had made WA health authorities more cautious.
He said 528 people who had contact with the security guard who tested positive for the UK variant and caused WA’s five-day lockdown, and 522 had tested negative so far, some having taken several tests.
High school students and teachers will be required to wear a mask when they return to school next week in Perth and the South West, a new requirement that Mr McGowan says is a ‘transitional restriction’ coming out of lockdown. Primary school pupils are not required to wear masks.
Courtney Walsh 2.40pm: Barty ends Covid-enforced break in style
Ash Barty has capped her return to competitive tennis after almost a year off the scene by claiming the Yarra Valley Classic in superb style.
Pitted against dual-major champion Garbine Muguruza, who had dropped just 10 games to make the final, the Australian showed great poise to win 7-6 (3) 6-4 in 1hr 49m on Margaret Court Arena. Full story here
Glen Norris 2.15pm: Brisbane Broncos forecast financial loss due to Covid
Brisbane Broncos has flagged it suffered a loss last year as reduced crowd attendance due to the COVID-19 pandemic hit ticket sales and commercial sponsorship.
The NRL team forecast a loss before tax of $470,000 in the year to December 31, 2020 compared a profit before tax of $3.36m in 2019.
The Broncos said the entire NRL competition had been negatively impacted by COVID-19, with only the first round of the 2020 premiership played to regular crowd attendance. The season was suspended on March 24 before recommencing in May. Read more here
Anthony Lloyd 1.30pm: Desperate Afghans rush for opium ‘Covid cure’
Salvation lay in a vial of brown liquid in the palm of the gate guard’s hand. “I was cured of coronavirus in just three minutes when I took this,” the man said, with the calm-eyed certainty of a distributer who knows the product will deliver. “And since that day I have given it to many of my family, young and old.”
He added: “There is enough here for 15 people,” extending his palm in offer. “It will vaccinate against the virus and cure the sick too. Here, take it.”
The bitter liquid handed out at a compound on the outskirts of Kabul is Afghanistan’s most popular coronavirus “vaccine-cure” to date. Thousands of people, including infected patients carried on stretchers and still attached to oxygen tanks, have queued all day at clinics in three big cities waiting for their chance to acquire a dose.
Last year the queues caused such traffic chaos in Kabul that the vaccine’s manufacturer, Hakim Alokozay, a businessman from Kandahar, considered using the city’s stadium as a distribution centre. “I am in touch with everyone,” he said. “Political leaders, tribal elders, the Taliban, Afghan security forces: they all allow me to distribute among the people for free. I am not in need of money. Many donors offer to my foundation but even those I refuse.”
There is one problem: the brown liquid has no known ability to treat or prevent COVID-19.
Laboratory tests by the ministry of public health suggest that the liquid is a combination of opiates, including morphine and codeine, that have no preventive or curative qualities other than giving a transient dreamy sense wellbeing. Many Afghans do not appear to care.
Ehsanullah Hakimi, a doctor who has treated COVID-19 patients in hospitals and clinics across Kabul, said: “Many Afghans lost faith in the government’s ability to treat them for a virus. At the start of the pandemic we neither had the know-how nor equipment to treat the infected.”
In April he lost 42 hospital patients in a single shift. It was mayhem, he said, as staff, lacking protective equipment and many sick themselves, struggled and failed to save patients.
READ MORE: Doctors condemn ‘crackpot ideas’
Staff Reporters 1pm: Another day of zero Covid cases for NSW
NSW recorded zero new COVID-19 cases in the 24 hours to 8pm on Saturday, and one new case in hotel quarantine.
It is the state’s 21st straight day of zero community-spread Covid cases.
Mackenzie Scott 12.30pm: Auction clearance rate soars in property blitz
CoreLogic’s preliminary auction clearance rates rose to 83.8 per cent last week on the back of heightened demand from buyers. Read more here
Agencies 12.05pm: US football stadiums to become vaccination centres
The National Football League has offered to transform each of the league’s 30 stadiums into mass vaccination centres to boost rollout of the Covid-19 vaccine across the United States, AFP reports.
NFL Commissioner Roger Goodell made the offer in a letter sent to President Joe Biden on Thursday.
“The NFL and our 32 member clubs are committed to doing our part to ensure that vaccines are as widely accessible in our communities as possible,” Goodell wrote in the letter.
“To that end, each NFL team will make its stadium available for mass vaccinations of the general public in co-ordination with local, state, and federal health officials.” Seven NFL teams — Arizona Cardinals, Atlanta Falcons, Baltimore Ravens, Carolina Panthers, Houston Texans, Miami Dolphins and New England Patriots — have already made their stadiums available as vaccination sites.
“We can expand our efforts to stadiums across the nation more effectively because many of our clubs have offered their facilities previously as Covid testing centres as well as election sites over the past several months,” Goodell added.
The NFL offer comes ahead of Sunday’s Super Bowl in Tampa, where 7,500 vaccinated frontline healthcare workers will attend as guests of the league in recognition of their work during the pandemic.
— AFP
READ MORE: Chaos threat to Australian Open
Jess Malcolm 11.35am: Victoria’s Covid restrictions won’t ease yet
Victoria’s testing chief Jeroen Weimar flagged there will not be any changes to restrictions for at least a week, as health authorities watch to see if there are any further cases in the coming days.
The Netherlands has reached a grim pandemic milestone passing one million COVID-19 cases since the start of the pandemic.
Mr Weirmar also said testing stations will move back to a 9am to 5pm schedule, and thanked everyone for coming forward for testing over the weekend.
“It is only right as we see the demand reduce we will start to contract those hours from nine to five,” Mr Weirmar said.
“We will review again tomorrow afternoon that we need to keep that beyond there. That is an ongoing response and as the minister said that is part of our agile response, stand up quickly and we will continue to watch the numbers as we go through.”
READ MORE: Being a landlord shouldn’t be this hard
Jess Malcolm 11.20am: Zero Victorian cases from more than 50,000 tests
Victoria has once again recorded zero cases of community transmission, following 14,862 tests.
Over 50,000 tests were carried out in the last few days, with 90 per cent of these tests being returned within less than 24 hours.
Victorian Health Minister Martin Foley said there are currently 645 workplace contacts still in self isolation following the 26-year-old worker linked to the Australian open infected with the UK strain.
Health authorities have expanded the man’s original 17 primary close contacts by another four. This comes after news that all 17 original contacts all tested negative late Friday night.
There were 1151 casual close contacts associated with the case, with 72 per cent of those already testing negative, but still remain in isolation for 14 days.
“That has been a huge collective effort, particularly in the southern and south-eastern suburbs, when we have established further pop-up testing sites, expanded hours, expanded capacity,” Mr Foley said.
“I want to thank public health professionals for their outstanding efforts, contact tracing teams, all of those who have responded in these circumstances to make sure that we stay ahead of this one.”
Kathryn Bermingham 11.05am: PM ‘has failed to unite states’ on Covid
Scott Morrison has been accused of “going missing” during the coronavirus pandemic, as the federal opposition continues to question his leadership on issues including state borders and national quarantine.
Deputy Labor leader Richard Marles said the prime minister has failed to unite the states during the crisis.
“When the states have disagreed, the ability of this prime minister to get consistency at a national level, across the states, has been essentially zero,” he told the ABC’s Insiders program on Sunday.
“He has gone missing when the going has got tough.”
Mr Morrison has no legal powers to override state leaders closing their borders for health reasons.
But Mr Marles said the federal government had “relegated itself to the sidelines” and should be part of the decision-making process around closures.
“I think we would have had much greater consistency” he said. “In crises before, what you’ve actually seen is national governments which have led within our federation.”
— NCA NewsWire
READ MORE: How overreach hammered the nation
Christine Kellett 10.40am: Certificates raise prospects of international travel
Government Services Minister Stuart Robert says it is “highly likely” vaccination certificates will be required for international travel.
Outlining the government’s plan to roll out the certificates in tandem with the Pfizer vaccine, Mr Robert said the document would be “widely accepted”.
“There is still a range of decisions for governments to make, it’s highly likely that a certificate will be required for international visitors to Australia and we will continue to work with our international counterparts on our framework for vaccination certificates.
“Australians can have assurance the certificate they will have will be robust, it will be anchored to them, so they will know it’s there certificate, and it will be widely accepted.”
However, he would not say whether the certificates would lead to a faster opening or international borders.
“I will leave any commentary on international borders to the Prime Minister, but any requirement for borders to open up will require vaccination and it will require the widespread use of a certificate and that is what we are talking about today.
“Australians can have enormous confidence that the digital certificate or the paper-based certificate they have will be robust.”
READ MORE: Let’s refine Covid quarantine
Christine Kellett 10.30am: States will make call on vaccination freedoms
State Premiers will be left to set public health orders over what vaccination will entitle citizens to do.
COVID-19 vaccine rollout
Australians who receive the vaccine will be issued immunisation certificates via GPs and the Medicare app.
But Government Services Minister Stuart Robert said while the federal government would be issuing the certificates, it would not be making decisions over what immunisation would allow people to do, such as cross borders, enter nursing homes, restaurants or go to work.
“When it comes to workplace laws they are the purview of the states and territories. We would be expecting them to issue public health orders if they see fit so I will leave that to the states and territories,” Mr Robert told a press conference on Sunday.
“What the Federal Government does is provide a record of vaccination to Australians should the need to be there for Australians to use it. And
Australians need to have that record, especially, depending on state public health orders but also when travelling and borders open up again.”
He said the certificates would be ready to go as soon as people were immunised.
READ MORE: Politicians a plague on common sense
Kathryn Bermingham 10.05am: ‘Proof of vaccine’ certificates set to operate
Digital “proof of vaccination” certificates will be stored and displayed on phone apps as part of the federal government’s plans for the national coronavirus vaccine rollout. Read more here
Agencies 9.35am: Biden revives ‘fireside chats’ with modern twist
US President Joe Biden on Saturday launched a series of conversations with ordinary Americans by calling a woman who lost her job due to the pandemic, in an effort to showcase his direct contact with his fellow citizens.
“The White House will launch a new effort for the president to regularly communicate directly with the American people,” White House spokeswoman Jen Psaki said.
Due to COVID-19, the conversation was held via telephone from the Oval Office in Washington to Michele, a mother from Roseville, California who lost her job at a start-up company because of the economic crisis sparked by the pandemic.
She had written to Mr Biden to tell him about her struggles and her search for a new job.
“Like my dad used to say, a job is about a lot more than a paycheck. It’s about your dignity, it’s about your respect, it’s about your place in the community,” the 78-year-old president told Michele, in a video of the call posted online by the White House.
United States President Joe Biden has delivered his first address on foreign policy – signalling his plans to chart a course away from Donald Trump’s ‘America First’ approach.
Biden also took the opportunity to promote his $1.9 trillion stimulus package that his Democratic party is preparing to adopt in Congress, despite the lack of Republican support, as well as the massive vaccination campaign he has promised.
With this new conversation series, Mr Biden is seeking to show his empathy — and to mark a break from his predecessor Donald Trump
The phone calls are meant to be a modern-day iteration, in the era of social media, of the radio fireside chats held by President Franklin Delano Roosevelt in the 1930s as a way to invite himself into American homes.
READ MORE: Biden reclaims America’s place on the world stage
Christine Kellett 9.10am: Vaccination certificate plan before cabinet: report
A government plan for “proof of vaccination” certificates to be distributed to Australians as part of the national vaccine rollout has been put to cabinet, according to a report.
The certificates may be stored on the Express Plus Medicare app and Australians’ MyGov websites and could be carried and displayed via mobile phone under the government’s plan, Nine Newspapers reports.
The certificates are expected to give Australians easy access to nursing homes, hospitals and other high-risk settings, and may be used to make crossing state borders easier in the future.
READ MORE: John Durie — Just Google ‘self-interest’
Christine Kellett 8.50am: Victoria records another day of zero
Victoria recorded no new cases of coronavirus yesterday, from nearly 15,000 tests.
There remain 21 active cases in the state.
READ MORE: Angela Shanahan — Pollies a plague on Covid common sense
Christine Kellett 8.30am: Victoria may increase CCTV to trace outbreaks
The Victorian government may install more CCTV cameras in quarantine hotels to help trace outbreaks, the Herald Sun reports.
Police Minister Lisa Neville yesterday announced a tightening of controls in hotels for returned travellers amid the spread of a virulent new strain of the virus in the Park Royal hotel that left a staff member infected.
Security guards and staff will be required to wear face shields as well as masks, meal deliveries will be staggered and buffer zones established around family groups. Hotel ventilation systems are also being reviewed.
Deakin University epidemiologist Professor Catherine Bennett said the evidence from Victoria suggested the UK strain was airborne.
“It does suggest these hallways or coridoors are risk areas,” she told the ABC on Sunday.
“I think these are really good changes.”
READ MORE: Nikki Gemmell — Tennis prima donnas must show some gratitude
Dow Jones 8am: Vaccine queue jumpers plague the US
Board members of a Rhode Island medical system were invited to get vaccinated, regardless of their age or occupations. Judges and their staff received vaccines ahead of schedule at a Nevada medical center. And a SoulCycle fitness instructor in New York got a shot after saying she was an educator.
While millions of Americans await their turn during the Covid-19 vaccine rollout, some people are securing the coveted injections before they are eligible by tapping connections or circumventing their states’ rules. Government officials have criticised the line-cutters, prosecutors in at least two states have launched reviews and some hospitals have had their vaccine allotments curtailed by health authorities as punishment for questionable vaccination practices.
Each state — and even some local jurisdictions — have set up different rules for who gets vaccinated first and where they are distributed. In addition to vaccine supply shortages, the lack of a centralised registration system in many areas has set off a scramble for doses.
As of Thursday, about 35.2 million doses had been administered in the U.S., out of about 57.5 million doses delivered, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Distribution roadblocks have caused a slower-than-expected pace of vaccinations.
In Rhode Island, Attorney-General Peter Neronha is investigating whether two health-care networks vaccinated employees and others in accordance with state eligibility rules. “There has been particular concern regarding the vaccination of board members, trustees and administrative employees who primarily telework,” he wrote to executives of Lifespan and Care New England in a letter viewed by The Wall Street Journal.
READ MORE: ‘Scared Putin’s mafia state is failing’
Steve Zemek 7.20am: NSW makes changes to hotel quarantine
NSW Health officials have stepped up hotel quarantine testing procedures despite the state bringing up its 20th straight day without a positive case yesterday.
The zero local case result came after 12,521 tests in 24 hours, with an additional two cases also detected in returning international travellers.
NSW Health said they would be ramping up checks on people after they left hotel quarantine and asking them to get tested two days after they departed.
Contact tracers will call the returned traveller 48 hours after their quarantine period ends and ask them to attend their local testing clinic.
“If travellers being tested on day 16 are asymptomatic, they will not have to isolate further due to the lower risk of them returning a positive result,” NSW Health said.
Authorities are also targeting people who have recently been in Victoria.
Those entering NSW via Victoria via air and rail are required to complete a passenger declaration form.
Providing false information could result in an on-the-spot fine, NSW Health said.
Non-NSW residents who have visited the public exposure sites listed by the Victorian Department of Health and Human Services are banned from entering the state.
“NSW Health continues to urge people to come forward for testing with even the mildest of cold-like symptoms that could signal COVID-19, such as a sore throat, cough, fever or runny nose,” NSW Health said.
“After testing, you must remain in isolation until a negative result is received.”
Meanwhile, additional cleaning squads have been rolled out across the Sydney CBD transport network.
READ MORE: Chris Kenny — Why have we rolled over and let this happen to us?
Dow Jones 7am: AstraZeneca vaccine effective against UK strain
A COVID-19 vaccine developed by the University of Oxford and AstraZeneca PLC is effective against a variant of coronavirus that is spreading rapidly in the US and around the world, according to a new study, a reassuring sign for governments banking on mass vaccination to bring the pandemic to an end.
The preliminary findings, published in a study online Friday that hasn’t yet been formally reviewed by other scientists, follow similarly positive results from other manufacturers.
Preliminary studies from Pfizer Inc. and Moderna Inc. found their COVID-19 shots continued to offer protection against new virus variants that have contributed to a fresh surge in cases in the U.K., Europe, South Africa and elsewhere.
Oxford University's AstraZeneca vaccine is proving successful against the highly contagious COVID-19 strain originating in the United Kingdom.
Vaccine makers are nevertheless readying new shots that zero in on the new variants more precisely, underlining how mutations in the virus risk morphing the year-old pandemic into a long-running cat-and-mouse game between scientists and a shifting enemy. The virus behind COVID-19 has so far been linked to almost 2.3 million deaths worldwide and more than 100 million cases.
The study published Friday looked at the AstraZeneca vaccine’s effectiveness against a new variant of coronavirus first identified in the U.K. last year.
READ MORE: PM cracks down as vaccine debate turns feral
Tom Whipple 6.30am: Britain’s ‘secret weapon’ against viral evolution
Global medical revolutions rarely arrive with a knock on a Maidstone front door, but this week, with all the banality of an Amazon delivery, that’s exactly what has been happening.
In eight postcodes in the southeast, the northwest and the West Midlands of England, home swab kits are being delivered to 80,000 people as part of Operation Eagle, a surge testing program.
Its goal is to rapidly identify and isolate people infected with the South African variant of coronavirus. In doing so, though, it is reinforcing a global view that it is not just the vaccine procurement that Britain got right.
This is a program that at first many thought pointless but which has in past months risen in prominence. The UK is, as TheWallStreet Journal put it this week, the “world leader in sequencing the coronavirus genome”.
Eventually, some of those Maidstone swab kits will find their way to one of the most famous genetics laboratories in the world: the Sanger, named in honour of Fred Sanger, who won the Nobel prize (his second) for work on decoding DNA. Twenty years ago this laboratory used that technology to help fully sequence the first human genome. That took years of work and hundreds of millions of pounds.
Read the full story here.
Jade Gailberger 6am: Experts schooled in vaccine plan
Almost 150 experts have been hauled into coronavirus vaccine education sessions following fears their public commentary could undermine Australian’s confidence to get the jab.
Two government-run webinars have been held in the past month for epidemiologists and infectious diseases experts.
The first was prompted by joint concerns about the efficacy of the AstraZeneca vaccine and calls to stop it from being used in Australia’s immunisation strategy.
The AstraZeneca jab has an efficacy rate of between 62-90 per cent depending on the doses.
Opinions about the coronavirus vaccines and the government’s plan from at least 140 experts that have attended the sessions – the latest which was held on Thursday – are understood to have been diverse.
But top government advisers have deemed the webinars highly successful with some experts acknowledging they had got the ‘wrong end of the stick’ and felt reassured by the discussion.
The approach to prevent the spread of misinformation through education comes as the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) on Friday finished its work on the imported AstraZeneca vaccine, sending a report back to the company to answer its questions.
The process is expected to take at least a week before a regulatory decision about the vaccine is made.
The majority of Australians will receive the AstraZeneca vaccine, which is expected to be approved for all age groups and administered in two doses.
However, the AstraZeneca doses made at CSL in Melbourne will also need to be checked to ensure that the batches are high quality and the same as the global sources.
That data is not expected to be available until mid-March but the TGA is expected to process it within a few days.
READ MORE: Hotel quarantine rules under scrutiny
Word count: 5504
