AN Adelaide start-up that links travellers with wellness resorts and hotels across the world is on the hunt for funding to scale its online booking platform.
The founders of the platform – In This Life Wellness Travel – will travel to London next month to network with potential partners, while also competing for an international travel industry award.
The company is a finalist in the “best in wellness” category at this year’s International Travel and Tourism Awards hosted by World Travel Market, competing head to head with companies from Greece, Sri Lanka and the US.
Director Joanne Vomiero began her career in the travel industry more than 20 years ago and is also a practising wellness therapist.
She said In This Life Wellness Travel was the world’s first online booking site dedicated to wellness travellers, and had more than 350 resort, retreat, hotel and spa listings across the world.
“My experience in wellness and travel led me to begin researching this new genre of the travel industry,” she said.
“After initial research I discovered a gaping hole in the market, with no existing wellness travel wholesalers selling B2B within the industry, nor any online travel companies anywhere in the world selling directly B2C with instant purchase capabilities, as is standard in every other genre of travel.
The discovery of this giant vacant space in the market was a very big light bulb moment.
“We personally vetted and hand-picked hundreds of wellness properties, and have the largest selection of wellness properties to choose from, with already over 350 wellness resorts, hotels, retreats and spas listed from right across the world.” Ms Vomiero, who will also present at the World Travel Market conference next month, said after five years of self-funded research and development, investment was now needed to promote the platform.
“We are being contacted by wellness resorts who want to list their property with us every week now, so we are gaining traction and respect in the industry,” she said.
“However, we now need investment to scale our business model and market our brand more widely.
“And that’s part of the reason we’re going to London - to network with our industry.
“It’s an amazing opportunity for exposure on a world stage, with world leaders in tourism, world-leading journalists, magazines, newspapers and potential investors in the room.
“Wellness tourism is already a $639 billion industry and is growing twice as fast as general tourism.
“It’s absolutely booming, like the cruise industry did in the last 15 years.“I watched the cruise industry grow, and this time I want to be in front of the wave.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 440
