A YEAR on from the launch of the State Government’s entrepreneurship strategy, chief entrepreneur Jim Whalley says there’s plenty of runs on the board, but he’s determined to increase the flow of “risk capital” into the state, to supercharge our bright ideas.
The FIXE (Future Industries Exchange for Entrepreneurship) strategy was launched in June last year, and since then a number of the tangible goals in the 22-point action plan have been met.
These include launching the start-up hub at Lot Fourteen, where several hundred workspaces are now available for businesses and individuals, the recent launch of the Australian Cyber Collaboration Centre (A3C), and just last week, the launch of a “government as a customer” pilot program titled Go2Gov which will help local start-ups partner with government on projects and service delivery.
Under this program, the state government will issue public sector challenges and start-ups will be supported to submit proposals to address them.
“The challenges will be innovation friendly, require the development of novel solutions and have the potential to scale beyond government,’’ the government says. “Multiple start-ups may be funded to work with a state government agency to prove the viability of their proposals.
“After the pilot, an agency may directly contract the most successful start-up for the provision of that product or service for up to three years.’’ A mentorship program was also launched in April specifically in response to the challenges posed by the COVID pandemic, with more than 70 organisations now partnered with mentors.
“In broad terms I think we’re going pretty well,’’ Mr Whalley said. “We’ve had an interruption due to COVID ... but we’ve got Lot Fourteen up with a serious presence, we’ve got Stone & Chalk in there, the Australian Space Agency in there and the SmartSat CRC, along with several space companies.
“If you go down to Lot Fourteen and other areas now I think you can visibly see what’s happening ... I think it’s pretty clear that things are moving in the right direction.’’ Mr Whalley said the Stone & Chalk coworking hub had achieved good occupancy rates and good rates of investor funding were also flowing, with the SA Venture Capital Fund again on a forward-looking footing, following Artesian being brought in as manager earlier this year.
Innovation and Entrepreneurship Minister David Pisoni said A3C had been seed-funded by the government to the tune of $8.9m, with a view to be self-sustaining beyond the four year funding horizon.
CONTINUED PAGE 25 Push for more capital FROM PAGE 23 The centre can be used to stress-test business systems for cyber attack and will develop cyber security training programs. A number of companies have also been funded through the South Australian Landing Pad, which provides up to $80,000 to companies setting up in SA with the funding split between accommodation support and professional services support. The government has also relaxed the co-funding requirements under the Research, Commercialisation and Start-up Fund (RCSF) in a bid to provide more support to early-stage companies through the COVID crisis, when funding may be difficult to come by. Mr Whalley said the program had disbursed almost $8m in funding to 17 start-ups with about $10m in matched investment. Mr Whalley said he was confident SA now had “one of Australia’s greatest start-up ecosystems and I have full confidence it will be one of the world’s greatest, right here in South Australia’’. Over the next 12 months he’d continue to focus on bolstering the flow of risk capital into SA. “That’s one of the things we're working hard on,’' Mr Whalley said. “I’d like to see other venture capital organisations moving into South Australia or at least having an office here and looking at opportunities. “We’re seeing more east coast VCs turning up and looking at the opportunities.’’ Mr Whalley said the space sector, with companies such as Myriota, Fleet and Inovor, was clearly doing well, but he thought there were also great opportunities in areas such as health and agtech. “And defence is obviously going great guns,’’ he said. “And I think the synergies between defence and space will make us a genuine technology hub for Australia.’’
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 695
