THE world’s biggest pre-seed start-up accelerator, run by Elon Musk’s former college roommate, Adeo Ressi, has set up a new chapter in Adelaide.
Based in Silicon Valley, the Founder Institute delivers its program in more than 180 cities, targeting early-stage entrepreneurs and start-ups.
Participants take part in a 14-week program, covering topics including customer development, revenue generation, branding, product development and fundraising. Mentors, including developer Theo Ma­r­as, Rising Sun Pictures managing director Tony Clark and Sweat co-foun­der Tobi Pearce have signed on to offer guidance to local cohorts.
The Adelaide chapter is being led by Echelon One founder Luke Lombe, Cryptocate director Callan Sarre, MYNTD co-founder James Scott and Bchain founder Salomon Sverdlov. Mr Lombe said sessions would be held across the CBD, including at Adelaide University, Carnegie Mellon and Lot Fourteen, where he was in talks about securing a permanent space.
“They’ve (Founder Institute) raised over $1 billion for a bunch of different start-ups and they’ve been fine-tuning the course as they go,” he said.
“We find that the Founder Institute is not competitive to a lot of the accelerators and programs because we’re pre-seed, we’re very early.
“It can be anyone who’s thinking about being an entrepreneur, who doesn’t have a well-formed idea, to someone who already has a company and has very early traction, but is looking to really package their project a little better so they can take it to the next stage.” To be accepted into the program, applicants are required to pass a series of psychometric tests to determine if they have “Entrepreneur DNA”.
Graduates need to contribute 4 per cent of their company’s equity in the form of options to a combination of the Foun­der Institute, local directors, mentors and other members of their cohort.
“Once you’re a graduate of the program you become a part of the Founder Institute network, where you’re able to pitch your ideas to the network – there are investors always looking in,” Mr Lombe said.
Mr Clark said the program would fast-track development of local entrepreneurs. “The founders of Rising Sun have been doing this for 25 years,” he said. “We got well supported along the way and we had a bunch of people pick us up and help us. Anything that we can do to pay that forward and give onto the next generation, we’re really supportive of that.”Applications for the first intake close on November 24.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 407
