BLOCKCHAIN experts have backed plans to make Adelaide a hub for the fledgling technology ahead of a high profile conference next month.
As part of the inaugural ADC Global Blockchain Summit, hundreds of entrepreneurs, financiers, regulators and business leaders from around the world will converge on Adelaide for three days of talks on the emerging technology.
The event will be hosted by the ADC Forum and is backed by the State Government, which is seeking to lure blockchain and other tech start-ups to Lot Fourteen at the old Royal Adelaide Hospital site.
Piper Alderman partner Michael Bacina, who will speak at next month’s event, is encouraged by the momentum building in Adelaide’s tech start-up community.
“Over the last couple of years, with the space agency and the Tesla battery, I think Adelaide and SA have really been put on the innovation map,” he said.
“The decline of heavy industry over time creates an opportunity with sites for innovation workers and this is a rising industry with huge demand for skills.
“The demographics are good, there’s an amazing resource of young bright people, supported by incubators and government.” Mr Bacina says blockchain can be applied in a number of the state’s key industries.
“Supply chain and proof of provenance are the best use cases for existing businesses that are looking for return on investment – this is especially so in the mining, construction and agriculture industries,” he said.
Adelaide start-up T-Provenance is currently piloting its blockchain platform, tracking batches of mangoes produced in Northern Territory and far north Queensland.
Andrew Grant, whose company Availer is helping commercialise the technology, says it will provide a new level of quality assurance and trust in how fruits and vegetables travel from farm to table.
“We follow the pallet of mangoes throughout the journey, essentially quality assuring the fruit through the use of blockchain to secure data points as it moves through the supply chain,” he said.
“Perishability coupled with a fragmented supply chain means there’s a real opportunity – everyone can see it and no one can change it, and that’s one of the underlying values of blockchain. If you look at any industry and start distilling out the process, seeing where there are grey areas or black-spots in the supply chain, there’s really no industry that couldn’t benefit from blockchain.
“The other thing is there’s no reason we can’t build these services in South Australia and service the world from here.” University of Adelaide student Paul Pounendis became “obsessed” with blockchain after first dabbling in Bitcoin in 2013. Last year he established Adelaide Blockchain – a community of around 300 members who meet regularly to discuss the latest trends. “The focus for this year is to start developing blockchain developer talent – to see if we can actually get people to build and design products for start-ups or provide services for companies,” he said.
“I think Adelaide has potential, we just need to develop the talent.”ADC Forum vice-chair Stephen Roux says next month’s summit will help local businesses realise the opportunities presented by blockchain. The summit will be held at the Convention Centre on March 18-20.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 527
