AFL chief executive Gillon McLachlan will give all 18 club presidents an update on Tasmania’s big league push on Tuesday in what is yet another pivotal day in the campaign.
It comes as it is revealed not one of the club presidents has officially accepted an invitation from Tasmanian Premier Jeremy Rockliff to head south to see the state.
Tuesday’s meeting will be the first opportunity for the AFL and club leaders to discuss the issue since Mr McLachlan’s first face-to-face contact with Mr Rockliff in Hobart last Thursday.
In that meeting, not only did Mr McLachlan confirm a new licence must include a commitment to a new roofed stadium in Hobart, but that the AFL would also commit its resources and expertise in designing, building and sourcing funding for such a project.
Several presidents have voiced some concerns about the financial sustainability and the impact of another club on the league, and Tuesday’s update is seen as a vital step in getting them back in the room for a 19th club.
The state government has an offer of $10m annually on the table for 10 years to help fund the club, plus a $50m start-up grant for a high-performance centre. Hawthorn president Jeff Kennett – who has a vested interest given the Hawks are the biggest beneficiary of playing home games in the state – believes it needs to be a $20m commitment each season for at least 15 years for a Tasmanian club.
Several presidents, including Adelaide’s John Olsen and Port Adelaide’s David Koch, have indicated they will accept the invitation south, but they are yet to officially do so, Mr Rockliff said.
“The purpose of the letter sent to presidents was to outline Tasmania’s offer to the AFL, which is at the top range of the recommendations made in the independent (Colin) Carter report,” he said.
“The letter also invited presidents seeking any further detail to discuss the merits of the offer, because there is no doubt that the AFL and its clubs will benefit as a result of admitting Tasmania to the AFL and AFLW.
“While no one is yet to confirm travel to Tasmania, early responses to the letter have been positive.” For Tasmania to enter the league, it must gain approval from the AFL Commission before going to club presidents for a final vote in August. brett.stubbs@news.com.au
CREDIT: BRETT STUBBS
Word count: 396
