Hot on the heels of the launch of the new Innovation and Collaboration Centre at UniSA Whyalla, students at Edward John Eyre High School were given an insight into the world of start-ups on Thursday.
The presentation featured speeches from two pairs of start-up founders, Bez Mohammadi and Kosta Canatselis who own Wright Technologies, and Simon Cullen and Kelly Carpenter, who own lookinglass.
Wright Technologies uses blockchain technology to securely track and identify drones. The start-up were co-winners of the South Australia's Blockchain Innovation Challenge in March and received $50,000 in grant funding.
Lookinglass is a smart mirror platform which is able to detect the symptoms and progression of degenerative health conditions such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease.
ICC Community Manager Peter Borda, Entreprenuer in Residence Terry Gold and Associate Professor Jasmine Vreugdenburg also presented at the event, with Ms Vreugdenburg jargon-busting terms used in the world of start-ups.
"We're trying to let people who may be thinking about starting a business know that we're here and that if they're looking to get some support they can come in and talk to us," Ms Veugdenburg said.
"It's important for these students to identify with people who have gone through that journey - they can see that their journeys were never straight-forward.
"Each of these founders had a different journey...you don't need to be a computer scientist or an engineer to start a technical company.
"If we can inspire just one person who wants to take that leap but doesn't know where to start, then that's massive success for us."
The session also promoted the upcoming Techstars Start-Up Weekend, an event that challenges teams to develop business models that will be held at the UniSA Whyalla ICC on September 6 and 7.
Participants will have one-on-one access to global expert entrepreneurs who will help them develop their ideas before teams pitch their final concepts to the judges to decide a winner.
CREDIT: Louis Mayfield
Word count: 323
