THE last major demolition contract at Lot Fourteen, the former Royal Adelaide Hospital site, is now up for tender.
Lot Fourteen is a $550 million State and Federal investment to help grow the state’s future industries and jobs.
The demolition of the North Wing and Residential Wing buildings will take up to two years and create 100 new jobs on site – adding to the 500 contractors already on site.
Final plans are still evolving with the sites expected to host new buildings and civic spaces designed to foster innovation, entrepreneurship and knowledge-intensive jobs for SA’s future industries.
Work is also set to begin on the heritage-listed Bice building by lead architect Hassell, which will have contemporary office spaces for hi-tech industries.
The Allied Health Building is due to be completed in the coming months, and will be home to start-up hub operator Stone & Chalk and the MIT Big Data Living Lab.
The former Women’s Health Centre is being refitted for the University of Adelaide’s Australian Institute for Machine Learning.
The McEwin Building will be home to the Australian Space Agency, Mission Control and the Space Discovery Centre, and its refurbishment will also be completed later this year.
Renewal’s SA acting chief executive Mark Devine said the Stage 3A Demolition Program and the start of refurbishment of Bice were significant milestones.
“Defence, space, cyber security, big data and creative industries will continue to cement Lot Fourteen, as the driving force in South Australia’s vision to be the leading centre for future industries and entrepreneurship in the Southern Hemisphere.” “The design vision for Lot Fourteen is to create a seamless digital and physical environment spanning the repurposed heritage and future buildings to allow occupants to productively move freely, work effectively and collaborate,” he said.
The total demolition project at Lot Fourteen being delivered over a series of stages has a price tag of $150 million.FURTHER DETAILS OF THE STAGE 3A DEMOLITION PROGRAM ARE TENDER AVAILABLE ONLINE AT SA TENDERS AND CONTRACTS AT TENDERS.SA.GOV.AU/TENDER.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 337
