SOUTH Australian business leaders with an eye on the future have received about $372,000 towards their choice of local and international professional education courses.
A record 36 grants were awarded to scholars by the Industry Leaders Fund at a ceremony at the Adelaide Convention Centre last night.
Now in its tenth year, the ILF program has awarded 178 grants totalling $2.1 million and provides a platform for the state’s entrepreneurs and leaders to fast-track their careers.
Companies creating intellectual property, rather than physical goods, were among the successful applicants in this year’s grants program, according to ILF chief executive Geoff Vogt.
More than one third work in “new economy” businesses with intellectual property driving growth in sectors such as space, IT, aeronautics, systems engineering and marketing research. “This year’s list reflects the state’s exposure to the new economy with companies producing intangible IP or innovative products which are internationally known,” Mr Vogt said.
“These leaders will be integral to boosting South Australia’s economy with the grant scheme demonstrating a creation of 1657 new jobs in scholars’ businesses in the state and another 1754 interstate at January 2019.
“The scheme is an efficient job creator on international standards with the average grant cost per job created calculated to be less than $1000 since the scheme began in 2009.” The new scholars will attend programs offered by Harvard Business School, INSEAD, Oxford’s Said Business School, Melbourne Business School, the University of Adelaide, Stanford Graduate School of Business, the University of South Australia and IMD (Switzerland).
Neumann Space chief executive Herve Astier received $12,000 towards a US Harvard Business School course on launching new ventures and jump-starting innovation for entrepreneurs and business owners. Lot Fourteen-based Neumann Space this year won $850,000 in funding to support its growth and development through the state innovation and skills department’s Research, Commercialisation and Start-up Fund. The company, which is working on an ion thruster to move satellites around in space, also raised $2 million in seed funding for its research and development and is among the local companies underpinning SA’s ambitions for space research and technology initiatives.
“The course is perfectly suited to the plans we have for Neumann with our space initiatives. I also volunteer my time with start-ups and entrepreneurs in SA, where I could apply some of the knowledge,” Mr Astier said.
WINNERS LIST: ADELAIDENOW.COM.AU/BUSINESS
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 395
