PORT Adelaide coach Lauren Arnell couldn’t have been more succinct in dismissing criticism of the “elite” nature of the AFLW this week, commentary which was howled down by more than only those involved in the five-year-old competition Arnell’s outfit was one of two teams who couldn’t manage a goal in their games last week, another first-year side in Sydney being the other, which moved one nationally known, non-football commentator to try to question the “attention and funding it gets”.
The pile-on which followed hit columnist Steve Price like a ton of bricks and Arnell made her thoughts clear without saying much before her team returns to the field against Hawthorn on Saturday.
“I will say I am interested in providing oxygen to worthwhile conversations,” Arnell, an AFLW pioneer and the first former player to become a senior coach, said on Thursday.
The wider AFLW community hit back with facts as well with Sydney coach Scott ­Gowans, who has also been involved with the competition since its inception, declaring the quality would compare ­favourably to the start-up days of the men’s league in the late 19th century.
“The growth I have seen, and I was involved in the inaugural year at Carlton, there’s lots to go … but to say it’s not elite, I disagree with that,” he said.
“To be an elite sport you need to have followers and the girls definitely have a following to inspire others to play the sport which itself makes it elite.
“I don’t even want to go back to when the men’s game started but I am sure there are similarities there with scoring. I just think it’s been a sport that has grown and grown and give it another three years it will be better than it is today.” There’s little doubt the two South Australian teams have a following with more 20,652 fans turning up for last week’s Showdown, a match dominated by the Crows.
Arnell was adamant her team was “better than not kicking a goal” against the reigning premiers, but that taking on another expansion side in the Hawks would be a better indication of where they sat in the competition.
“You can be judged on every result that you have and for us you take as much as you possibly can out of each game. But I don’t think the scoreboard completely reflects where we are at,” she said.
“We have 16 out of our 30 are first-year AFLW players and so a big part my role and our coaching staff is teaching our young group how to be elite athletes and how to perform consistently at training and in games. I’m looking for some consistency and more development from a team perspective.” Port has also been hit with two season-ending injuries to Maggie MacLachlan and Liz McGrath.
HAWTHORN V PORT ADELAIDE SKYBUS STADIUM, SATURDAY, 6.40PM
CREDIT: RUSSELL GOULD
Word count: 480
