IT will go down as one hell of a missed opportunity for Port. There was Richmond coming into the game devoid of its big-name stars, while the Power were at home in perfect conditions.
But after trading the lead with the Tigers throughout the last term, they lost by seven points to a big-kicking Richmond, led by their star recruit Tom Lynch who booted six goals in his best game so far in the yellow and black.
After the 15.9 (99) to 14.8 (92) loss, Port suddenly finds itself on a two-game losing streak and the remarkable start to the season has been all but erased.
Port got off to a great start in the game, playing its favoured free-flowing style of possession football. The Power showed why they went into the match ranked No.1 in the league for uncontested possessions: by quarter-time, they had 40 more uncontested possessions than the Tigers and had clocked up 43 short kicks to Richmond’s 19.
Port was eight points up at quarter-time as Richmond’s inaccuracy hurt the visitors, but the Tigers got on top of Port around the stoppages in the second quarter and came back to be only one point down at half-time, despite having more scoring shots.
The second half was an arm-wrestle and momentum swung from one side to the other.
The third term was an impressive display for Richmond, in which the Tigers booted four unanswered goals and found themselves 15 points up before Port was able to keep in touch thanks to an appalling lack of judgment by Tiger Kamdyn McIntosh, who mucked up a kick inside Port’s forward 50, and Sam Gray capitalised with a goal.
In the end, Richmond won with better composure in the final term. GIVING UP THE LEAD DEJA vu is not fun in football particularly when it involves losing. This is the second consecutive game where Port has given up a lead in the fourth quarter, to end up losing.
Last week, the Power gave up a 10-point lead to Brisbane with only five minutes to go.
This week, they gave up a four-point lead midway through the last. They put themselves back in front after Dan Houston kicked his first for the game at the 22-minute mark, but when Richmond’s McIntosh slotted his first for the game to put the Tigers two points up, they didn’t relinquish their lead.
STARLESS TIGERS THIS was the first time Tigers coach Damien Hardwick had been without any of his quartet of big names — Dustin Martin, Trent Cotchin, Alex Rance, Jack Riewoldt — since Martin debuted in 2010.
But there was still plenty of talent out there and more than a dozen 2017 premiership players were running around.
However it was the Tigers new star — Tom Lynch, fresh from the Gold Coast — who really stood out.
After a quiet first term in which he touched the ball only once, he upped his game in the second and third quarters, piling on six goals. He took six big marks and ended the game with 10 disposals, including nine kicks. Dylan Grimes was a pillar in defence and also stood up in the final minutes, taking a mark in Port’s goal-square and effectively ending the Power’s chances.
REALITY BITES HOT one week, not the next. Port’s young brigade of Connor Rozee and Zak Butters felt the full force of the reality of AFL football after blistering starts in their debut seasons.
In particular, Rozee — a match-hero last week when he booted five goals against Brisbane and earned himself a Rising Star nod — had only three touches until half time. He finished with 12. Butters was equally quiet and finished the game with nine disposals.
But the Power’s other youngsters duo of Xavier Duursma and Willem Drew were exceptions to this.
Drew had an important smother late in the third quarter just as Port Adelaide had wrestled back momentum and then at the six-minute mark in the final term, he kicked his first goal at AFL level.
Sure, Duursma missed a goal to put the Power in front in the dying minutes of the game, but that’s not the reason they lost.
However the two young kids weren’t the only ones who seemed lost for form. Steven Motlop was particularly quiet and had only three disposals — one of those a kick — at three-quarter time and finished with seven.
Westhoff spent a lot of time forward but did not have the usual impact he would and was forced to work his way up the ground to get involved.
THE OLD(ER) GUARD WHILE Port’s kids were quiet, the likes of Tom Rockliff, Brad Ebert, Tom Jonas and Travis Boak led the team from end to end. Rockliff had 32 disposals to three-quarter time and ended the game with 37 — the most for anyone on the Oval. Rockliff had come into the game under a huge concussion cloud after suffering a head-knock in his side’s loss to Brisbane last week, but he showed no signs of it during the game.
He was a disposal-getting machine, laying on five tackles.
Boak also continued his dominance after finding Zen in the midfield and he finished up with 33 disposals (18 kicks and 15 handballs).
Ebert was critical in the fourth quarter: by the 20-minute mark he had had a quarter-high eight disposals as well as four contested possessions, two each for score-involvements, inside-50s and clearances.
RICHMOND 99 2.5 6.8 12.9 15.9 PORT ADELAIDE 92 4.1 7.3 11.6 14.8 BEST Richmond: Grimes, Lynch, Ellis, Caddy, Nankervis.
Port Adelaide: Rockliff, Houston, Boak, Ebert.
GOALS Richmond: Lynch 6, Caddy 3, Prestia, Bolton, Ellis, Baker, Nankervis, McIntosh. Port Adelaide: S. Gray 3, Ebert, Wines, R. Gray 2, Houston, Ryder, Burton, Powell-Pepper, Drew.
UMPIRES Meredith, Fleer, Gavine.
CROWD38,864 at Adelaide Oval.
CREDIT: LIZ WALSH
Word count: 975
