AN ADELAIDE start-up’s digital ideas to help the city’s hospitality sector businesses survive and thrive are being backed by beverages giant Coca-Cola Amatil.
Using their experience of working in bars and venues around Adelaide, Mitchell Stapleton-Coory and Matthew Giorgio set up Bellr.
Bellr has been designed as a platform for the hospitality industry to help venues and brands attract and retain customers through promotions and loyalty programs.
Coca-Cola Amatil recently announced a partnership with Bellr as one of three great Australian scale-ups with “‘ready-to go” ideas to improve delivery efficiency and consumer experience.
“Being a small market in Adelaide, we watched a lot of venues close and others try and fit into the delivery models to cater to the arrival of the likes of Deliveroo and Uber Eats,” Mr Mitchell Stapleton-Coory told The Advertiser.
“We saw revenue being taken away from pubs and hotels every year given the fees charged to businesses just to be on the delivery apps besides other costs to offer unsustainable deals.” Mr Stapleton-Coory said Bellr was set up to compliment how venues wanted to promote themselves.
“We wouldn’t tell them what products to offer, or at what price point, and at what time they have to make it.” Bellr now offers venues an autonomous customised channel as a free one-month trial before a flat monthly fee and a sales transaction charge kicks in along with options to get more detailed analytics and other information.
Venue customers download the Bellr app for free.
“The tech revolution is happening, disruption is going to occur and hospitality is the most ripe target because they are least digitised and very adverse to technology,” Mr Stapleton-Coory said.
Bellr, currently available in 80 venues across Adelaide, Melbourne and Sydney, also offers venues the option to run staff and exclusive customer loyalty programs through its Hospo club services.
The business, held 80 per cent by the two founders, raised $160,000 in capital and a near-equivalent amount in in-kind and equity support from other investors, including the Intermedia group. Bellr, along with interstate start-ups Snooper and Staybil, are being supported by Coca-Cola Amatil through its Xcelerate program.
“CCA hired Bellr as a fee-for-service essentially but keeping an eye for us for potential investment down the track.” CCA group director of partners and growth Chris Sullivan said the pilots were designed to test whether combining emerging businesses with Amatil’s established customer base and supply chain footprint would deliver shared value.
“Xcelerate is a great opportunity for us to support the start-up and scale-up sectors,” Mr Sullivan said. “We look for the best and brightest new talent in the areas of sustainable futures, customer experience and route-to-market. We then work together to build or grow their concepts into outcomes which delight our shared customers and deliver timely, creative solutions for business.
“Working with Bellr, Snooper and Staybil offers them the chance to pilot products and services in conjunction with an established business. And it gives us the opportunity to test ourselves on how we engage with the start-up community to quickly test new solutions.”Mr Stapleton-Coory said CCA’s involvement brought in “brand alignment” and helped in getting to the decision makers within the hospitality groups. Bellr will look to raise another $400,000 to $600,000 in the first half of next year to grow its reach.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 553
