SOUTH Australian start-ups are the most likely to survive in Australia, according to a new report.
The Xero’s Boss Insights 2020 analysis says new businesses in the Barossa Valley and Yorke Peninsula have the best survival rate nationally.
Out of the start-ups that began in 2015-2018, businesses in the Barossa had a survival rate of 66 per cent, exceeding the national average of 54 per cent.
There is a downside, however, with new business growth in Greater Adelaide slower than other Australian cities.
From 2009 to 2018, there were 9000 new businesses in Greater Adelaide, representing an increase of 8 per cent – lower than the national average of 13 per cent.
Nationally, the picture is upbeat with around 2.2 million business owners now operating in Australia, a spike of 700,000 since 1991.
Forestville bakery owner Timothy Darlings opened Cherry Darlings, which specialises in vegan products, in May 2014. It initially was a two-person outfit and now has eight staff.
Adelaide can be a very good environment for start-ups he said, but to get ahead it is essential to differentiate.
“Niche is always good – you need to be better, cheaper or different to succeed,” he said.
“I try and do all three. I am a body piercer by trade, so this was a side hobby to start with.
“I realised people wanted an out-of-the-box product.” Mr Darlings, who has been a vegan for 20 years, said it had always been his desire to make quality products that matched his cleaner, greener, ethos.
“Our food is a treat; it still has fats and sugars but they are not negative fats,” he said. A clever approach to location has been fundamental, too.
“We operate from a suburb, and people go out of their way to come to us, so we don’t need a shopfront on a high street,” Mr Darlings said.
An extension to the premises has recently happened, while an additional outlet is on the cards shortly.
Demographer and report author Bernard Salt said there was a relentless energy and determination by Australians to build a business and thrive.
“Not all businesses survive but there is no shortage of Australians putting their hands up in pursuit of what is perhaps the ultimate Australian dream – being your own boss.”.
CREDIT: RICHARD EVANS
Word count: 383
