But Adelaide warned to earn its new agency or we could have a problem
ADELAIDE could become a “Space City” such as Houston, Texas, but the new Australian Space Agency must prove its stripes or it will be “taken away” from Adelaide, former NASA astronaut Andy Thomas has warned.
Dr Thomas, an enthusiastic supporter of the agency and of its Adelaide location, says specific goals must be outlined and met “to show the rest of the country why it was a good decision to put the agency in Adelaide”.
After the Federal Government announced the creation of the agency last year, a fledgling office was created in Canberra and many expected Space HQ to remain in the nation’s capital.
But after intensive lobbying from South Australia, Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced late last year it would be based at Lot Fourteen, the former Royal Adelaide Hospital site.
Not all interstaters were impressed and federal Labor’s policy had been to base it in Canberra.
The Sunday Mail asked Dr Thomas if he thought Adelaide would become more of a “Space City” such as Houston, which is home to NASA’s manned flight centre, and where the Adelaide-born astronaut spends the majority of his time.
“We can hope,” he said. “Specific success goals for the new agency need to be defined and then the focus must be toward meeting those goals.
“Otherwise, it will be taken away.” Another former NASA astronaut who splits her time between Adelaide and Houston is space shuttle pilot Pam Melroy. She says the key will be ensuring the agency maintains a “vibrant connection” to the space industry in other cities.
“I do think Adelaide will become a ‘Space City’ with events and eventually infrastructure building up around industry capabilities,” Ms Melroy said.
“Who knows? Someday there might be a footy team named the Rockets. “To me, the risk of having the agency in Adelaide is (of) becoming disconnected to the rest of the country – this would have been a risk anywhere, including Canberra.” Space start-up rock star Flavia Tata Nardini, of Fleet Space Technologies, says hosting Space HQ “gives us credibility on the world stage”.
Fleet recently registered a million Internet of Things to their satellite network in the space of 24 hours.
“Just like Houston before it, Adelaide is emerging as a global space hub, thanks to a growing abundance of talent, a thriving space start-up ecosystem, tenacious academics and strong support from the public sector,” she said.
The agency expects to be fully operational by the middle of the year. Its deputy head Anthony Murfett said they “haven’t wasted any time getting up and running” and chief Dr Megan Clark is working from the AusIndustry offices with support staff.
He outlined a range of agreements and partnerships the agency had already formed, and said they were working on an investment plan.“While based in Adelaide, the agency continues to have a national focus, and all states and territories have a vital role to play in growing our space sector and opening doors internationally,” he said.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD
Word count: 513
