INNOVATION
A leading construction service provider has taken a fresh approach to sourcing skilled workers for one of South Australia’s most innovative redevelopments.
The inaugural McMahon Services Demolition Pre-employment program was launched earlier this year in partnership with Renewal SA and with funding from the Department for Innovation and Skills.
Offering students four weeks of demolition training, the program included aspects of the Certificate III in Demolition, such as white card, work-zone traffic management, working at heights, and work placement at one of McMahon Services’ numerous demolition sites. One such site is Lot Fourteen, one of the world’s most exciting urban redevelopments based on the site of the old Royal Adelaide Hospital.
Sixty-five hopefuls applied for the program, with a lucky 13 making the final cut. At the end of the four weeks, eight participants were invited back to become full-time employees with McMahon Services on a 24-month traineeship, while completing their Certificate III in Demolition. “Some of our participants are working on Lot Fourteen; the rest are on other project sites,” says Lynda Joslin, McMahon Services divisional administrator for demolition division.
“Lot Fourteen was the driver to get this initiative in place but we have to have a multi-skilled, variable workforce who can go to different sites and do different things.” For those who complete their traineeship, the career opportunities are as big as some of the projects they can be working on. “There’s so much opportunity and all we’re looking for is young people who want to stay and grow within the company,” Joslin says. “Career pathways from here include site supervisors, project managers, plant operators, crane operators, safety advisers and operators on large heavy machinery and excavators, which you can only use on big commercial sites like Lot Fourteen, AAMI Stadium demolition and other industrial demolition projects.” Spread across 7ha, Lot Fourteen encompasses the future of creation and innovation in South Australia, bringing together corporations, start-ups, researchers, investors and more to nurture new talent and explore exciting new technologies.
Minister for Innovation and Skills David Pisoni says The Office of the Chief Entrepreneur, located at Lot Fourteen, is establishing a new model for entrepreneurship in South Australia called FIXE - the Future Industries Exchange for Entrepreneurship, which will connect and build the entrepreneurship ecosystem, and showcase South Australian talent, businesses and ideas. “For example, a local medical diagnostics software company based at Lot Fourteen, Presagen, will be taking its life-changing technology to global markets, thanks to the Government’s $28 million Research, Commercialisation and Startup Fund (RCSF),” Pisoni says.
Jim Whalley, South Australia’s first Chief Entrepreneur, says: “Lot Fourteen is going to have a strong focus on people wanting to start up companies in SA. It will give start-up businesses, entrepreneurs, the support, skills and networks they need to start their businesses.
“We’re going to have a real emphasis on space, defence, digital and creative industries. Cyber is going to be a great opportunity to take traineeships. We already have some prominent companies lined up to come in, everything from medium-size established companies to large multinationals.”
Government of South AustraliaDepartment for Innovation and Skills
Word count: 517
