THE University of Adelaide is already shaping the future of the state. Now it wants to awaken its full potential for making a difference to life in South Australia by taking more of its research smarts to industry and the world.
“We’re the No.1-rated university in the state for research and we’ve got thousands of researchers doing work that is making the world a better place,” says Professor Anton Middelberg, the University of Adelaide’s new Deputy Vice Chancellor for Research. He says the university is already working with industry, doing research on about 400 projects a year. “But it could be much more,” he says. “We’ve set up industry advisory boards so we can listen closely to stakeholders and make it easier to do business with us. We have world-leading expertise and technology to provide innovative solutions for business.” In the push to include industry, the website has been redesigned to provide users with a single point of contact into the university. “Traditionally, (for business) it has been ‘who do I talk to?’,” the professor says. “This way there is a person to talk to. You can be guided through that process of connecting with the world-class research capability we have.” The university’s research capabilities are being offered around seven key themes: ■ Agriculture, Food, Wine ■ Energy, Mining, Resources ■ Defence, Cyber Space ■ Creativity, Culture ■ Environment Sustainability, Climate Change ■ Health, Biotech ■ Societal Wellbeing
“We’ve had a long history of contribution to the state, for example at Waite campus, all the great work we’ve done in food, agriculture and wine, both in terms of plant varieties that feed the world and wine that helps social conversations,” he says. “University of Adelaide research touches almost every area of life, from the way we power our city to the way we manage our resources, and our world-class healthcare.
“Some people know but we think industry has an opportunity to come and increase the bandwidth of communication.” He says the objective is to bring together some multidisciplinary teams around new industry-related research opportunities. Industry will be encouraged to visit the university’s campuses and researchers will be urged to engage more with industry. Other benefits include graduates more likely to be industry-ready after working on research projects and new start-up companies generated by successful research, providing jobs and economic activity.
“We’ve generated many start-up companies by translating the research we do,” Prof Middelberg says. “In addition to making the jobs of the future, we are creating the employers of the future. The value being created through the cutting-edge research we do for South Australia is phenomenal.” For more visit: adelaide.edu.au/research/
CREDIT: JENNIFER HULLICK
Word count: 444
