Australians poured $86m into growing companies last year Equity crowd-funding has had another stellar year with the amount of money flowing into new offers almost doubling over the past 12 months, as investors pile into businesses ranging from crypto to cannabis and everything in between.
Figures compiled by industry leader Birchal show that there were 98 successful offers in Australia in the past financial year, raising $86m, up from about $47m the previous year.
Birchal even ran an offer to provide growth capital for itself, closing off its $3m offer early with about $2m worth of extra commitments joining the waiting list for equity, co-founder and managing director Matt Vitale told The Australian this week.
And the sophistication of the businesses raising money continues to develop. While craft brewers continue to be crowd favourites, with eight of the top 30 raises by value in the alcohol game (albeit including Sobah Beverages, which has a non-alcohol focus), the companies that raised more than $1m over the past year come from a wide range of sectors.
At the top of the list is Zero Co, which hit the legislated cap of $5m on the first day of its fundraising campaign, with founder and chief executive Mike Smith scaling back the cap on individual investments to allow as many investors to get a piece of the pie as possible.
Square Peg Capital announced it had tipped $6m into the Byron Bay company the previous day, also highlighting a trend for venture capital money to invest alongside crowd-funding offers.
Zero Co, chaired by Adelaide businessman Rob Chapman, sells cleaning products in reusable packaging, with customers sent refills with the goal of reducing single-use packaging.
Medicinal cannabis company Montu raised the second-largest amount during the year, pulling in $3.5m, while Birchal was equal third.
South Australian fertiliser company Neutrog also raised $3m, and is indicative of the maturation of the sector, in that rather than being a start-up, it is a longstanding and profitable business, but one that sees an opportunity to accelerate its growth with investor capital.
Managing director and majority owner Angus Irwin told The Weekend Australian that the company had been batting away offers from venture capital firms for years and, when it did decide to raise capital, it preferred to give loyal customers the opportunity to come along for the ride.
Mr Vitale said this week that the preconception when the industry came into being a few short years ago was that it would be predominantly funding start-ups. However, in reality a wide range of businesses were now turning to crowd-funding as an option.
“What we’ve found is that food and beverage, consumer products, all these things that large VC funds will typically not invest in have done really, really well with crowd-funding,’’ Mr Vitale said.
Professional investors typically looked for scalable, high-growth companies with very large addressable markets, Mr Vitale said, which tended to overlook plenty of great businesses that were also looking for capital. “We’re in the business of supporting people in business to ­pursue an opportunity, start generating profits, and the ‘what’s next’, that is the exciting part,’’ he said.
Legislation to enable equity crowd-funding came into force in 2017 and 2018, enabling companies to raise equity from investors who were not considered wholesale or sophisticated investors, and with lower reporting and regulatory requirements for ­companies.
Unlisted public companies with less than $25m in assets and annual turnover are able to raise up to $5m through this method in any 12-month period.
The industry continues to ­mature, with one of the next steps – part of the “what’s next” referred to by Mr Vitale – likely to be the creation of a secondary market for stock, to give investors liquidity.
Some of the capital raised by Birchal itself is going towards ­developing the tools to create a secondary market trading platform, and other market participants are also moving in this direction.
In terms of the people investing in the companies raising money, Mr Vitale said it was often the ­audiences and stakeholders they had built up already who were then excited to own a piece of the business.
He said the demographics of investors were fairly broad, but “the loose term is early adopters’’.
In terms of the companies raising capital, Mr Vitale said there was a fair bit of hand-holding, both in the documents they presented to investors, and on the marketing side, with social media playing a big part.
“It’s all about just telling your story to an audience and then inviting people to make the first move and say, ‘Yes, I’m interested’,’’ Mr Vitale said. “And then what we find is that the companies are then able to engage with those interested investors and bring them along to a point of investing in the company, and we do it all in a very short time frame.
“For a lot of (the companies) it’s the first time they’ve done something like this, so it’s about helping them with how to tell their story and getting comfortable speaking to investors.
“The other point that I’d make, though, is that it’s a regulated platform. “We’re the intermediary. ASIC doesn’t review these documents, that’s our job and we take that very seriously.
“So we’re not making recommendations to investors. We’re trying to empower companies to present their opportunity in a fair and accurate way.’’ Birchal is also using the money it raised to develop stakeholder reporting tools, to enable companies to communicate effectively with their new investors.
In terms of Australian equity crowd-funding platforms, Birchal is dominant, with Mr Vitale saying that it accounted for 68 of the 98 successful raises in the past financial year.
The other major platforms are OnMarket, which hosted the Neutrog offer, and Equitise, which hosted raises including Spinifex Brewing Co and Hero Packaging.
Adelaide-based platform Swarmer is also soon to launch.
Globally, the largest equity crowd-funding raise to date has been UK beer brand Brewdog, which has reportedly raised more than Â£70m ($123m) over several rounds. The company says it is now more than 25 per cent-owned by its staff and its “Equity Punk” investor community. But it did come under fire last year for arguably giving venture capital investors better terms than its retail shareholders.
The company in May reported 2021 revenues of Â£286m, up 21 per cent, with an adjusted EBITDA of Â£14m and an operating loss of Â£5.5m. The UK market has been active since 2011, four years ahead of the US, which has allowed equity crowd-funding since 2012 – although it only opened to all investors in 2015 – and the market in the UK has grown from eight offers in 2011 to 573 last year, according to analysts Beauhurst.
CREDIT: Cameron England
Word count: 1124
