DIDIER Elzinga – a pioneer of the Adelaide start-up scene – has created Australia’s newest unicorn, with his company, Culture Amp, raising $US82 million from some of the world’s most-feted investors.
The Series E funding round values the company at $US700 million ($1.03 billion) and includes new investor Sequoia Capital China as well as participation from existing investors Sapphire Ventures, Felicis Ventures, Index Ventures, Blackbird Ventures, Hostplus, Skip Capital and Grok Ventures.
Mr Elzinga, now based in Melbourne, was chief executive of Adelaide-based visual effects company Rising Sun Pictures – which has done work for Hollywood blockbusters – from 1995-2009 before starting Culture Amp. Culture Amp claims to have more than 2500 customers globally, and helps companies measure employee engagement and performance data to improve staff retention and boost productivity.
“The financing, which brings the total funds raised by the company to over $US158million, will be used to accelerate Culture Amp’s global expansion and the development of innovative products and offerings that enable companies to build a better world of work,’’ the company said in a statement.
“To date, Culture Amp has amassed collective intelligence from more than three million employee surveys and has built the largest independent dataset in the industry.’’ Last month, Culture Amp hosted its second annual global conference, Culture First, in San Francisco, bringing together 1200 HR practitioners.
Sequoia Capital China partner Steven Ji said Culture Amp had “carved out a dominant niche in the global market’’.
“Sequoia Capital China’s investment in this stage of Culture Amp’s growth underscores our confidence that they have the vision and the leadership team in place to help companies take action on complex workplace issues,’’ Mr Ji said.
Mr Elzinga said the funding would allow the company to fire up its growth plans. “It also underpins the sophistication of one of our core com­petitive differentiators – our plat­form’s ability not only to pin­point what’s going on, and what to do about it, but to also drive the change necessary to bridge the knowledge to action-gap at all levels of the organisation.”Culture Amp said it planned to expand more deeply within industries and geographic regions that were tackling seismic changes in workplace culture, including Europe, the Middle East and Africa, Latin America and Asia. It currently has an active community of 100,000 people from 147 countries.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 389
