SOUTH Australia outperforms most other developed economies on indicators relating to the quality and economic impact of business start-ups, according to a new report from the University of Adelaide.
The university’s Entrepreneurship, Commercialisation and Innovation Centre’s (ECIC) 2017/18 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) report estimates that 9.1 per cent of adult South Australians (aged 18-64) were actively engaged in starting or running new businesses.
The report’s lead author, University of Adelaide Professor Paul Steffens, said South Australia ranked ninth in the list of 24 developed economies studied, higher than the UK (8.4 per cent), but lower than the rest of Australia (13.1 per cent) and the US (13.6 per cent).
“For South Australia, a few areas stand out as particularly strong,” he said. “Youth entrepreneurship (18-24) is 9.6 per cent across SA compared with only 7.6 per cent across Australia.
“Senior entrepreneurship (55-64) is also relatively strong – 7.8 per cent in SA compared with 9.3 per cent across Australia. SA also compares well with the average across all GEM developed economies, which sits at 5.9 per cent.” However, Prof Steffens said while South Australia rates well on many indicators, there was still work to be done.
“The lower level of entrepreneurship compared with Australia appears to be driven by a poorer perception of entrepreneurial opportunities – 43.1 per cent in SA compared with 51.4 per cent across Australia,” he said. “The rate of female participation in entrepreneurship is particularly low, at only 5.6 per cent in SA, compared with 9.2 per cent across Australia.
“SA entrepreneurs also appear on average less educated in some key areas compared to those across Australia. Only 29 per cent of SA entrepreneurs have studied STEM (science, ICT, engineering or mathematics) compared with 52 per cent across Australia.” Despite the local challenges, Bellr chief executive and co-founder Mitchell Stapleton-Coory believes living in South Australia offers many advantages for entrepreneurs.
“My impression is that SA is a great launch pad for young founders,’’ he said. “The cost of living is manageable and there are many great initiatives that are geared towards supporting young people to start a business. But, most importantly, I believe we’re seeing a shift in the Zeitgeist that has brought start-up culture into the mainstream.”Innovation Minister David Pisoni said the report confirmed the importance of State Government support for entrepreneurship.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 391
