THIS time next week Premier Steven Marshall is likely to wake up without a federal Coalition government in Canberra. Labor, with a little help from its friends, will be preparing to occupy the Treasury benches if the polls are correct. Bill Shorten will be Prime Minister-elect.
At first blush that all looks pretty grim for Mr Marshall. No federal mates to call on for small favours, no mates to help push projects in South Australia to the top of the queue, no mates to add presence and authority to high-profile events.
Instead, state Labor will claim the plaudits for the initiatives of the new federal government.
That’s first blush. But perhaps a Labor government in Canberra will not be such an albatross around Mr Marshall’s shoulders. He may benefit from Labor’s rise to power.
The first problem for Labor will be the 2022 election. Under SA’s fixed-term election arrangements, the next state election must be held on March 19, 2022.
The next federal election is also due in the first half of 2022. Federal Labor must decide whether the election is before March 19 (or indeed on March 19) and annoys and confuses SA voters by clashing with the state campaign, whether it waits and brings down a new Budget in April before a May election, or whether it brings forward the election to late 2021.
Mr Shorten has promised an ambitious, high-spending program in the next three years, supported by a rise in taxes. He may be reluctant to bring down a Budget in 2022 with increased debt, a reminder of higher taxes, and the suggestion of economic mismanagement immediately before an election.
It’s a conundrum federal Labor would have to grapple with in government but whatever the outcome, Mr Marshall could benefit.
A federal Labor government will not cut back on promised defence spending in SA. Work will begin on upgrading the Osborne site for the construction of new submarines and also on the building of new patrol vessels.
The result? New jobs, additional money in the economy and a revitalisation of the northwestern suburbs. It might be federal money but Mr Marshall can claim some credit.
By 2022, substantial work will have been undertaken at the old Royal Adelaide Hospital site, known as Lot 14, including an innovation hub for start-up industries, a space agency, hospitality training and an Aboriginal heritage museum. More jobs.
The South Rd upgrade, including the complex Darlington redevelopment, will be taking shape and the widening of Main South Rd to Aldinga will be nearly finished.
And there are many other transport improvements on the drawing board. They all mean jobs and a smoother flow of traffic. Another tick for Mr Marshall.
He is unlikely to adopt the tactic of former Labor premier Jay Weatherill and blame a hostile Federal Government for any problems in SA. He is more likely to avoid confrontation and adopt a co-operative position.
A Labor Federal Government will have its share of problems. Almost certainly it will battle a hostile Senate controlled by opportunist independents and small party members. SA, with only one disputed seat, Boothby, in the House of Representatives, will largely fly under the radar of the Canberra skirmishes.
So, Mr Marshall, while publicly pessimistic about a likely rise to power by Labor in Canberra, may privately welcome the change. He could benefit from Labor’s largesse and no longer have to worry about unpopular Coalition decisions.
But a note of caution, a dark cloud. If, as expected, the Scott Morrison Government is defeated on Saturday, will the Coalition turn on itself and begin a bitter game of blame and accusation? Will Mr Morrison be dumped for losing the unwinnable election?
The Coalition has a recent history of internal factional warfare and self-destruction. If it begins tearing itself apart after next Saturday’s poll, Mr Marshall and the state Liberals would indirectly be involved.A new Labor government would be able to press ahead with its ambitious mandate largely unchallenged and unquestioned by a warring Opposition. That wouldn’t suit Mr Marshall.
CREDIT: Rex Jory
Word count: 676
