ADELAIDE start-up Fleet Space Technologies has caught the eye of billionaire venture capitalists, who have poured more than $10 million into the nanosatellite business.
Fleet’s current satellites are the size of a shoebox, or dachshund, and much cheaper than traditional satellites. The first four were launched last year.
The investment will result in the Bowden-based firm expanding its constellations of satellites to cover the globe, including remote areas such as mining sites.
Horizon Ventures is owned by Hong Kong-based Li Ka-Shing, one of the world’s richest men. Horizon has helped fund Spotify and Siri, and Mr Ka-Shing is a majority owner of SA Power Networks.
Other investors include Momenta Ventures and Atlassian co-founder Mike Cannon-Brookes.
Fleet chief executive officer Flavia Tata Nardini said the investments would give the company the confidence to hire more people, work on bigger satellites, mass-produce the spacecraft, launch more into orbit, and keep improving the technology.
“Every giant leap of human progress stemmed from a communications breakthrough,” she said. “That’s why we started Fleet.” The company offers worldwide connectivity to the Internet of Things, the system that connects everyday devices to the internet. A total of 14 billion objects are expected to be connected in the next five years.
The IoT can be used to monitor crops and flocks, watch for bushfires or floods, and track just about anything.
For example, Kennards’ Hire use it to connect everything they rent out. That means equipment doesn’t go missing, and they can even monitor fuel usage in rental generators.
Ms Nardini said these big fish investors were happy for the company to remain in Adelaide.
“It makes me proud that this calibre of investors are investing in us,” she said.
“(And) because of the space agency, people are happy to come and work here.” The Australian Space Agency has been running for just over a year. One of its next milestones might be to see an Australian rocket launch; Southern Launch is already planning a mobile launch site for Eyre Peninsula. Ms Nardini said she’d be happy to use an Australian rocket to get her satellites into orbit.
“I’ll do it anywhere, as long as someone can get me into space,” she said. Horizons Ventures director Patrick Poon said nanosatellites along with the 5G network allowed “massive worldwide adoption of IoT devices globally for the first time”.“We are excited to see how Fleet’s technology and constellation of satellites can become crucial to bringing the possibilities of the IoT to the far reaches of the globe,” he said.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD STATE EDITOR
Word count: 426
