RYE farms in the Riverland are helping South Australian-based French entrepreneur Marion Vigot realise her dream of producing an organic alternative to plastic straws.
Travelling around Australia in a campervan with business partner Alexis Branlard first gave Ms Vigot, 28, an insight into the amount of plastic waste, including straws, threatening local ecosystems.
“We found no beach that was not littered with plastic, and decided there had to be a better way,” Ms Vigot said. “Our research led us to find out that rye was the original straw, used hundreds of years before plastic.” Then on a working holiday visa, the couple applied to have their start-up business, Mister Rye, included under the State Government’s Supporting Innovation in South Australia (SISA) temporary migration program.
Now, as recipients of the first visa under the SISA program, they have three years to develop a successful business built, for starters, on the sale of rye straws. Mister Rye is launching a ReadyFundGo crowd-funding campaign on October 25 with a commitment to start producing one million organic, biodegradable drinking straws before Christmas.
The two collected their first lot of rye stalks from several farmers in the Riverland for prototypes and will begin production once the harvest season finishes in a couple of weeks.
Funding supporters will be shipped orders in the new year, the crowd-funding page states.
Ms Vigot was living in Vietnam for five years before arriving in Australia in 2017.
She set up a beauty box subscription business, Ma Belle Box, employing seven people, before selling it and moving to Adelaide.
“I’m confident the straws are just the start. We’ll next look into what else we can do with something as sturdy as rye and the Waite Campus (University of Adelaide) researchers are helping us with that,” she said.
“The straw is nothing but the hollow stalk, but we’re using a third-party business to sterilise and package it, so there’s not much manufacturing. That will be our point of difference to others in Australia (who are) importing biodegradable straws into Australia.
“We’ll aim to be a zero carbon footprint business.” Mister Rye is part of ThincLab, the University of Adelaide’s international incubator with locations in Australia, Singapore and France.
“That’s how we met Kath Cooper, a highly respected researcher and plant breeder for more than 25 years,” Ms Vigot said.
“Kath gave us different varieties of crops from 2005 and 2016, showing us rye was a strong and biodegradable product with a long shelf life.” The Government earlier this year committed to introducing laws in 2020 to become the first state to ban plastic straws and cutlery with takeaway polystyrene containers and cups to follow.
Draft legislation will be released for consultation.SA was the first state to ban lightweight plastic bags in 2009 and also the first to introduce the container deposit scheme.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 475
