THERE’S nothing quite like a Whopper, made with hand-cut tomato, fresh lettuce, onion, pickles, mayo and tomato sauce on a toasted sesame seed bun, and of course topped off with some juicy, flame-grilled … plant.
That’s becaue there’s a not-so-quiet revolution brewing in the eating habits of the Western world.
Long dominated by meal options that revolved around meat as the protein of choice, more consumers are searching for plant-based options. And companies such as Australia’s Hungry Jack’s burger chain are coming to the party. Hungry Jack’s this month rolled out its “Rebel Whopper”, which claims to replicate, in its flame-grilled plant-based patty, the same smoky, meaty taste as its traditional burger.
Hungry Jack’s founder Jack Cowin also recently announced a collaboration with the CSIRO launching plant-based meat start-up v2food, which claims to make a product that “looks like meat, cooks like meat and tastes like meat’’.
South Australia was also this year the testbed for McDonald’s McVeggie burger – a second run at producing a vegetarian burger, this time with a new recipe, after the initial trial in 2016 didn’t take off.
There are many reasons cited for people turning to plant-based diets – animal welfare, health-conscious eating, and climate-change concerns among others. But there is also a concerted push on behalf of businesses aiming to not just provide plant-based alternatives but products that look, taste and feel like meat.
Anecdotally, this is not what a lot of current vegetarians want but for meat eaters who may be looking for a healthier alternative or a way to swap out one or two meat protein meals a week for plant-based alternatives, it fits the bill. And the new movement has been careful to avoid the “v” word – veganism.
Not surprisingly, with a new, potentially large market to be had, Silicon Valley venture capitalists have jumped on board, piling money into companies such as Impossible Foods (with investors such as Jay-Z and Katy Perry) and the stock exchange-listed Beyond Meat having valuations ranging from $US5 billion to $US8.6 billion. Impossible Foods declares its mission as “Making meat from plants so that we never have to use animals again’’.
But the real picture is not quite so straightforward.
PROFESSOR Andy Lowe, the inaugural director of food innovation at the University of Adelaide, says while in the Western world many of us could do with cutting down on meat consumption, getting rid of meat-eating entirely was unlikely – indeed it’s forecast to rise – and is probably unnecessary from an environmental standpoint.
Prof Lowe spoke this year at the Womadelaide music festival on the topic “Less meat, less heat? Is the elephant in the room really a cow?”, talking in part about whether bovines’ impact on carbon emissions was a good reason to give up eating meat.
“It’s a great title and we got a massive audience,’’ he said. “But the audience was pretty split.
“I don’t think we’re going to see a future where it’s totally meat free. But what has happened, probably in Australia, is that we probably eat too much meat.’’ Prof Lowe said Australians ate the second largest amount of meat per capita globally, behind the US, and would do well to bring this back to World Health Organisation guidelines for the sake of our health.
“We should probably be eating about a quarter to a fifth of the meat that we’re currently eating,’’ he said.
Prof Lowe said the new plant-based products actually tasted good, which meant there was no “cost’’ to switching in terms of enjoyment.
He also pointed out that Australia’s multi-billion-dollar meat industry was not at risk, and indeed was likely to continue to grow.
“We know that in China and India you have a massive middle class coming through, who traditionally consumed a very low amount of meat,” Prof Lowe said, explaining that as people became more wealthy, they demonstrated their position in society by consuming meat. “The best way to demonstrate that would be to buy premium Australian beef.’’ He said beef could easily be made carbon-neutral by using land-management techniques, which would also allay some of the environmental concerns of consumers.
“The market for premium beef is international and that’s going to be there for the next 50 years, so Australian producers need to be thinking about how to get into those markets,’’ he said. While some new products are plant-based, there has also been research into “cultured meat”, which is meat grown from stem cells into strips of muscle.
ENTREPRENEUR, runner and plant-based food proponent Kate Abraham recently launched her new business, Plant B Life, providing prepared meals for pick up, cooking classes, catering and will soon offer retail sales of plant-based meals.
Ms Abraham has transitioned in recent years from a vegetarian to an almost fully plant-based diet but said she was not on a mission to convert people.
“We’re not telling people to be vegan, and we’re not fully vegan; we are saying that we think there are a lot of ways people are not aware of to enhance their health by being more plant-based,” she said.
Ms Abraham said this was by substituting a few meals a week for plant-based alternatives, rather than deferring to meat proteins.
The cooking classes were also about teaching people who may have grown up being taught how to cook based around solely meat proteins to now learn to make tasty and nutritious plant-based meals.
Ms Abraham said there had already been interest from corporate clients and the catering business was already well under way.
“As long as the food’s awesome and tasty, does it have to have animal products in it?,” she asked. “The thing that we’ve focused on is flavour.’’ Importantly, as a runner herself, who recently completed the Berlin Marathon, Ms Abraham was keen to debunk myths that sportspeople could not go plant-based.
Feted ultra-marathon runner Scott Jurek documented his journey to veganism, and several international ultra marathon titles, in his best-selling book Eat and Run.
And Ms Abraham said there was no reason other athletes could not do the same, as long as they knew what they’re doing.
Ms Abraham said she did pay close attention to getting adequate nutrients but it was curious there was also the assumption that people on a plant-based diet would be missing out on vital nutrients.“My argument is the opposite, which is why is it that because you are eating animal products no one questions you about your nutrition?’,” she said. What really inspired her to start the business was the opportunity to fill the gap in our knowledge that had come about from a generational shift towards more processed foods.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 1113
