Securing leading start-up ecosystem builder Stone & Chalk as our strategic innovation partner at Lot Fourteen was a real coup for South Australia.
This was another major step in our plan to transform the former Royal Adelaide Hospital site into an innovation hub.
Stone & Chalk has a track record of helping innovators and entrepreneurs bring their ideas to life, successfully creating new business that can survive and grow.
In the very near future, the startup hub at Lot Fourteen will feature up to 650 workspaces as well as conference rooms, event facilities and meeting spaces designed to promote collaboration.
A big part of this work is to encourage more locals to build their careers and pursue their ambitions right here in South Australia – and we believe that our state provides an ideal environment to do exactly that.
South Australia is rapidly diversifying into new and emerging industries, which are driving economic growth and creating new, knowledge-intensive jobs.
Our challenge is not only to create environments, such as Lot Fourteen, but to also build a workforce with the right skills to fill these future jobs.
And that’s a big part of my job.
What we know is that many careers in our future industries will require a strong entrepreneurial mindset and strong technology, digital and cybersecurity skills.
Last month, we announced a new partnership with Microsoft Australia to deliver a new traineeship in information technology.
We have also designed a new apprenticeship, which delivers a diploma in advance technology through a paid apprenticeship and is a direct pathway into hi-tech manufacturing.
And a new traineeship that will see people paid as they train directly within industry as they undertake the Certificate IV in Cybersecurity.
These are among almost 70 Skilling South Australia projects, worth more than $13 million that have been funded by government and co-designed with business and industry to drive apprenticeship and traineeship growth.
Applications are now open for Skilling South Australia Projects funding for 2019-20 to develop innovative and strategic approaches to increase apprenticeship commencements in South Australia.
I encourage you to think outside the box and talk to us about your ideas for training our future workforce.
For more informationvisit skills.sa.gov.au/projects
CREDIT: DAVID PISONI Minister Innovation; Skills
Word count: 373
