Business SA is a perennial champion of local firms, but is evolving to adapt to a rapidly changing world, says GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
SOUTH Australia has never been an easy place to do business. The tyranny of distance, an arid environment, a low population and state taxes have posed major challenges for the economy throughout the state’s history.
But from historic companies like Elders through to the tech start-ups converging on the old Royal Adelaide Hospital site, businesses of all sizes have found ways to overcome the barriers and contribute to the state’s progress.
And for 180 years, the country’s oldest chamber of commerce has been championing their cause.
Recognising the importance of working together for common goals, the state’s earliest entrepreneurs formed the Adelaide Chamber of Commerce in 1839, just two years and 12 days after SA was proclaimed.
After a series of mergers, the state’s peak employer group became known as Business SA in 2000, and continues to act as a voice for business across the state. Nigel McBride, who will step down as chief executive in June, says the group’s commitment to improving business conditions in the state has remained unwavering over the years – from helping early settlers find their commercial feet to supporting today’s start-up community.
“We are proud of the work the chamber has done over its 180 years and there have been many highlights, such as having taxes levied on auctions in the 1840s removed to help early settlers run businesses, to more recent wins including the fight against the proposed bank tax and cuts to payroll tax,” Mr McBride said.
“If we can continue to help cut the costs for business as we have done for 180 years, we will ensure South Australian operators remain profitable, become more successful, and boost the local economy, which in turn benefits the entire state.” When the Adelaide Chamber was formed in 1839, there were only a few businesses operating in South Australia, including Elder, Smith & Co (now Elders) and Bickford and Sons (now Bickford’s).
Other industry groups followed, with the creation of the South Australian Chamber of Manufactures in 1869 – representing the state’s early shift from agriculture to manufacturing – and the South Australian Employers’ Federation in 1889.
One of the leaders in establishing the Chamber of Manufactures – which in 1972 merged with the Adelaide Chamber to create the Chamber of Commerce and Industry SA – was saddler James Alexander Holden. His grandson, Sir Edward Holden, went on to form General Motors Holden.
The Chamber of Manufactures was instrumental in the late 1880s in arguing for water rights on the Murray River, and around 60 years later began offering advice to employers on industrial awards – a precursor to Business SA’s current business advice hotline. The Chamber of Commerce and Industry joined forces with the SA Employers’ Federation in 1993, with the combined group known as the SA Employers’ Chamber of Commerce and Industry until a brand and name change in 2000. As well as being home to the country’s first chamber of commerce, South Australia in 1876 became the first place in the British Empire outside the United Kingdom to legalise trade unions.
Historically, employer organisations in Australia formed as a counter balance to the industrial relations influence of the union movement and became increasingly relevant as more aggressive union tactics made it harder for individual employers to deal with their employees. With the changes to trade resulting from Federation in 1901 – including the abolition of border duties, the loss of local industry protection and increased competition in key industries including winemaking, a national body was formed to enable employers across the nation to speak with one voice.
The Associated Chamber of Commerce of the Commonwealth of Australia – now the Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry – brought together the chambers that had previously been established in Adelaide, Sydney, Melbourne, Hobart, Brisbane and Perth.
Business SA, which remains a member of the country’s peak business advocacy body, continues to support employers in industrial relations matters. But it has also broadened its remit, becoming an influential lobby group for the state’s business community.
It offers a range of products, services, events and training to help businesses expand and reach growing export markets.
Premier Steven Marshall says Business SA remains a passionate advocacy body for its members.
“It’s amazing to think that just three years after South Australia’s proclamation, our entrepreneurial forebears established a business chamber of commerce that 180 years later would still be going strong,” he said.
“They’ve long campaigned for reform on issues such as payroll tax, population growth, increasing skills, growing high tech manufacturing and entrepreneurship in South Australia.
“Business SA was also a staunch ally in the defeat of Labor’s proposed bank tax in 2017, which would have had a devastating impact on the South Australian economy.” The business group played a pivotal role in shaping the current shop trading regime, following its landmark deal with the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees’ Association in 2011, which allowed CBD stores to open on seven extra public holidays.
It has shifted its focus as the state’s economic landscape has evolved, Mr McBride says, but some perennial challenges remain, including stagnant population growth.
In 1851, up to 20,000 people left the state for the goldfields in NSW and Victoria, but within 18 months many failed prospectors returned to their farms and the state began to recover.
“SA faces a similar problem today with interstate migration, and Business SA is pushing to ensure our best and brightest return and our businesses can access global talent to enable them to grow,” Mr McBride says.
As the state continues its economic transition to new and innovative industries, including defence, space and technology, Mr McBride is bullish about the future. “Our state has an amazing history of agricultural exports, we’ve led the nation in manufacturing and our mining industries have thrived,” he said. “Our business confidence is growing and we have a bright economic future.”
Business SAChamber of Commerce and Industry South Australia
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 1013
