ADELAIDE start-up Mogo has kicked off a $1 million national advertising campaign after securing backing from a News Corp Australia-backed investment fund.
A trade media campaign started last week, while the company will begin advertising in print, digital, audio and TV from tomorrow.
The campaign follows Mogo’s deal with Scaleup Med­iafund (SUMF), which has agreed to provide in-kind advertising and other contributions in exchange for a stake in the company.
SUMF is Australia’s only dedicated media-for-equity fund, backed by companies including News Corp Australia, Nova Entertainment, Network Ten, REA Group, Foxtel and Fox Sports.
Mogo co-founder Vanya Andropov said the launch capped off several years of research and development.
“After a three-year build and significant in-market testing, it’s very exciting to finally be at the stage to launch Mogo via a robust mainstream media campaign to the entire Australian market,” he said.
“Like any start-up, once the product is complete and tested, the path to market requires a very different set of skills.
“Having partners like SUMF and News Corp Australia providing advice, resourcing, marketing expertise and an audience reach that’s second-to-none has really completed Mogo.” The Mogo platform allows prospective car buyers to submit the model and other specifications they’re looking for, which are then sent anonymously to dealers in their local area.
If a dealer has the car the buyer wants, they can respond with their price, paying $7 for the lead. The buyer and seller can then connect, chat and negotiate the details of a potential deal.
SUMF was established in 2017 and has so far provided more than $30 million in advertising and marketing to start-ups across the country.
Other investments have included bookmaker PointsBet, which recently listed on the ASX after entering the US market, fast-growing pet-boarding and dog-walking business Mad Paws, and Spacer, a marketplace for self-storage and parking spaces.
SUMF fund manager Michael Lamont said the fund generally worked with start-ups who were seeking to establish a national presence.
“We’re talking to about 15 businesses at the moment and we hope to invest in three or four businesses each year,” Mr Lamont said.
“Mogo was the first start-up from Adelaide that we’ve invested in but there are a couple of other businesses there that we’re speaking at length with at the moment.”START-UP AND GROWTH COMPANIES ARE INVITED TO APPLY FOR SUPPORT VIA WWW.SCALEUPMEDIAFUND.COM
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 394
