THE Adelaide start-up behind sports drink PREPD is seeking to raise $1.5m ahead of a planned US expansion later this year.
Since launching in 2018, PREPD has been used by elite cricketers, AFL teams, professional cyclists and A-League soccer teams.
The product is a two-step hydration enhancer consumed 6-12 hours before, and then after exertion, and is designed to boost the absorption of electrolyte drinks or water.
Preserve Health, the company behind the ready-to-drink and powdered range, has launched an equity crowd-funding campaign to raise up to $1.5m in a bid to expand overseas. The campaign, which closes on September 9, has already secured close to $400,000 from 160 investors.
Chief executive Andrew Perry said the drink had a loyal following and hoped consumers would become investors.
“Our customers are typically triathletes or cyclists - they’ve got reasonable levels of disposable income,” he said.
“Our goal is $1.5m which would be extraordinary. Speaking to Birchal (equity crowd-funding platform) we’re the second fastest start they’ve ever seen – certainly there’s lots of interest in the product.
“We want to expand our tentacles as best we can in the next 12-to-18 months so that we’re in a strong position to maximise the business’s scope.
“We have an e-commerce site that talks to the distribution centre in Dudley Park, which then sends the product out – we’d look to replicate that in the US.” PREPD is sold online and is stocked in more than 100 specialty retailers across the country, with distribution networks in Singapore and Hong Kong.
Six AFL clubs and two A-League clubs currently use the product while a group of NFL players is currently trialling the drink as part of pre-season preparations. Preserve Health has also secured a partnership with Fitness Vending to distribute sachets in gym vending machines across the country.
In addition to its international expansion plans, the company hopes to secure a partnership with a large sporting, chemist or nutrition chain by the end of the year.
“We know the numbers in Australia – people who exercise more than three times a week for more than an hour - that’s 3.5 million people,” Mr Perry said. “Our target market is for 1 per cent of that group to consume PREPD at least twice a week - we know that if we get that then we have an amazing business. “It’s arguably the biggest change in hydration products since Gatorade which was launched in 1965.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 411
