TRAVELLING the world with his wife, Mike Smith saw first-hand the sobering reality of the globe’s plastic waste problem.
In far-flung places such as the Himalayas, he said the pollution was rampant. So when the pair came back home to Australia they got straight down to business: Mike used his ‘life savings’ to invest in an eco start-up - with the lofty goal of eliminating single-use plastic waste in Aussie households.
The former Toormina High School captain, who had recently sold his boutique wine brand Cake Wines, moved back in with his parents in Sawtell and converted his sister’s old bedroom into the headquarters for the start-up dubbed Zero Co.
“My wife and I took 18 months off and travelled the world, and we saw plastic in places where there shouldn’t be any,” he said.
“You’d be in an incredibly amazing valley with no humans around, you’d get to the top and look down to a beautiful lake - and it’s full of plastic rubbish.” It’s a unique idea which has attracted $500,000 in pre-seed funding from heavyweight investors, who have become board members for Zero Co.
These include former CEO of St George Bank and Adelaide Crows chairman Rob Chapman, South Australian businessman Raymond Spencer and former KPMG director Jennifer Ma.
Mike himself has put in $100,000 into the start-up, and a Kickstarter campaign launched recently raised an incredible $100,000 in 24 hours.
Mike said the goal for the Kickstarter campaign is to reach $250,000 in funding within six weeks to fund the first production run.
At the time of publishing, about $220,000 has been pledged.
The concept for Zero Co is based on a circular delivery system. Customers can buy a range of planet-friendly household products delivered to their door in re-usable and resealable packaging.
Customers will also receive dispensers made from ­recycled plastic waste from the ocean, refill pouches made from recycled plastic ­diverted from landfill and also a postage-paid return envelope.
Once the refill pouches have been used they can then be simply dropped into the post office, or a pick up can be booked with Zero Co.
Zero Co then cleans and refills the pouches and sends them out to Aussie homes, over and over again.
Current products available include laundry liquid, ­dishwashing detergent, hand wash, toilet cleaner, ­multipurpose spray, air ­freshener, body wash and more.
The first lot of products will be delivered in June and Mike is hoping to expand the product range at about that time.
According to a report released earlier this year by the University of Technology Sydney and the Australian Packaging Covenant Organisation, only a third of Australia’s plastic waste ends up getting recycled. The study, which tracked packaging waste in the 2017-2018 financial year, found more than 600,000 tonnes of plastic packaging of the 900,000 used during the year was not recycled.
CREDIT: Jasmine Minhas
Word count: 478
