ADELAIDE start-up Team-gage has been awarded a $350,000 research and development grant to support an international expansion.
The company, which develops software to improve workplace culture, wellbeing and performance, has also released a new platform to support organisations that have transitioned to remote working environments during the coronavirus crisis.
The “ready to use” software has been developed to measure and report, in real-time, how organisations are performing in terms of communication with staff, leadership support, collaboration and employee engagement.
Teamgage chief executive Ben Smit said the company had seen an increase in requests for support in recent weeks, from organisations adapting to remote working environments.
“We’ve been supporting many of our existing clients like Hearing Australia and DXC at this time, as many are rapidly adjusting to new ways of working,” he said.
“We’ve also seen an increase in organisations looking to gather data quickly and effectively to ensure they’re able to maximise engagement and staff wellbeing during this time, while maintaining productivity.” Teamgage was established by Mr Smit and wife Noelle in 2016. In October, the company relocated its headquarters to the Lot Fourteen start-up hub on North Tce.
Mr Smit said the company would invest the State Government grant in adapting its technology for use in international markets and for major clients dealing with large data sets.
“We’ve seen increased interest from companies, both inside and outside Australia, looking to replace traditional ‘survey and analysis’ tools with a simpler, more intuitive way to gain accurate and timely feedback from teams and drive improvement,” Mr Smit said.
“With this grant we can explore further how to adapt our technology for global companies, as well as those with more complicated structures and working environments.”Teamgage has worked with major organisations including Santos, SA Water, Evolution Mining and the CSIRO.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 302
