THE founding director of a successful entrepreneurship platform at Flinders University will move to a Melbourne university to support its start-ups in August.
Matthew Salier, who has been driving the innovation and entrepreneurial focus for Flinders University, will leave New Venture Institute in mid-August after accepting a position with the RMIT University in Victoria.
The New Venture Institute was founded in 2013, and was one of just three initiatives of its kind within an Australian university, and was named Asia Pacific’s top university-based business incubator in 2018.
Mr Salier said he would leave with mixed feelings, having set up a globally-recognised support program for start-ups.
“It is rare to have the opportunity to build something so visionary from the ground up and I feel fortunate. But I get back to more of the building role in the new position with RMIT looking to revitalise its own start-up program.” Dividing his time between Adelaide and Melbourne, Mr Salier will support RMIT to take its program, which comes with a $7 million seed fund, to its international campuses.
“That seed fund is key to a university program like NVI. It’s is regrettable that we were not able to achieve that here at Flinders or through broader support.
“It’s a definite gap that needs to be filled.” The seed fund helps start-ups with early-stage loans, helping universities to offer more support.
Vice-chancellor Professor Colin Stirling said NVI has created more than 350 start-ups and upskilled thousands of students through to executives in entrepreneurship and innovation under Mr Salier’sleadership.
“The Asia Pacific’s top university-based business incubator, our New Venture Institute has in some six years established itself as an enterprise entity to which others aspire. Matt has done an exceptional job.” Over the past six and a half years the activities of the Institute have grown to deliver accredited topics to degree programs across Flinders, now covering 70 per cent of the University. The entrepreneurship program has already expanded to the Limestone Coast, Barossa Valley and surrounds, and Northern NSW regions.Professor Stirling said the University will undertake a search for NVI’s next director in due course.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 356
