On a recent Friday, eight strangers met for dinner in Surry Hills. A veteran and her friend came together; another duo - one working in IT, one in sales - recognised each other from a previous event. Wine and dishes circled the table. Conversation traversed world crises; religion in one's childhood; and if the new Queer Eye made for quality viewing.
It was the fourth such dinner Sanyu Mugambwa, a senior international adviser at a Sydney university, attended. Organised by start-up SocialTable, the dinners are a way for strangers seeking connection to meet and - potentially - leave as friends.
"You show up and get past that messy, 'Do you want to be my friend?' thing and just chat," Ms Mugambwa says. "The people I have connected with are in a similar situation: I tend to assume that everyone who comes is interested in the program because it offers a way to meet new people, which is not an easy thing to do in Sydney."
Despite an abundance of social media, one in four Australians feel lonely, according to a 2018 study by the Australian Psychological Society and Swinburne University. A quarter of respondents said they "do not feel they have a lot in common with the people around them". Nearly 55 per cent lack companionship "at least sometimes".
Dr Michelle Lim, the study's chief researcher and the scientific chair of the Australian Coalition to End Loneliness, says loneliness can lead to negative physical health outcomes.
"It is important people take active steps to connect. It can benefit their wellbeing," she says. "Perhaps it is to focus on working on a relationship they already hold. Or to make an acquaintance into a friend."
Jennifer Douglas, a counsellor with Relationships NSW, recommends at least "three face-to-face interactions with other people a week".
"The notion of mateship has always been held up as a highly-valued quality [in Australia] ... but I suspect that we have fallen victim to the same elements any other modern Western society has," she says.
Ben Stokes' struggle to find his tribe - after working across Australia, the US and the UK - led him to create SocialTable, which hosts 10-15 dinners of 8-10 diners per month. What began with an impromptu dinner in Sydney in January 2018 has since expanded to Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, Adelaide, San Francisco and New York.
"People don't know how to do anything about it. They don't realise they have options," Mr Stokes says. "My mission is that if you don't want to eat dinner alone, you shouldn't have to."
A seat costs between $35 and $165. The oldest diner to date was a 75-year-old male retiree and the youngest was a 20-year-old female blogger.
Using food as a social springboard is not new. The US-based Table of Plenty and Australia's The Welcome Dinner Project use meals as a way to bring together disparate communities;
A Table For Six uses dinner as the starting point for singles looking for "friendship" (and love) but requires a membership. Dating app Bumble now has a tool - Bumble BFF - for women
to connect.
Carey Furze, the founder of an education start-up, has attended seven dinners. Like Ms Mugambwa and Mr Stokes, she has lived across the world.
"It's really difficult to meet people socially for friendship outside of work and family, or your peer or uni group. Opportunities like this are fantastic."
In partnership with Sydney Film Festival, SocialTable will host seven dinners, at Platform 818, Azuma, Lotus Dining and Mejico.
It starts with showing up, Mr Stokes says. "It takes courage. If you know everyone else is in the same situation, you lose that fear."
CREDIT: Riley Wilson
Word count: 614
