TECHNOLOGY BLACKBIRD, the nation’s largest venture capital firm, has slashed its valuation of start-up darling Canva by 36 per cent – or about $14bn – but the tech company is adamant that now is a “unique opportunity to double down on growth”.
Sydney-based Canva became Australia’s fastest-growing company in September last year, with co-founders Melanie Perkins, Cliff Obrecht and Cameron Adams growing their start-up to be more valuable than the likes of Telstra and Woolworths in a $US200m capital raise.
The company’s valuation has now tumbled by more than a third amid what key investor Blackbird says has been a brutal period for public and private tech companies.
“While the overall market landscape has changed, our growth trajectory is unaffected. As a profitable company with large cash reserves, we see this period as a unique opportunity to double down on growth,” a Canva spokesman said.
“We continue to see unprecedented growth in teams and workplaces as they look to tighten budgets by consolidating their marketing and visual communication tools into Canva, and we’re confident that no matter the market conditions, we’ll exceed our current valuation in the not-too-distant future.
“We’ve only achieved 1 per cent of what we set out to do and remain as excited as ever about the 99 per cent ahead.” A Blackbird spokeswoman said Canva’s holding value had been reduced by 36 per cent from the capital raise completed in the second half of last year.
At least $5bn would be wiped off the value of co-founders Ms Perkins and Mr Obrecht’s stake in Canva based on Blackbird’s revaluation. The company’s new valuation of $25.6bn was the result of an independent valuation process completed by a big four accounting firm and adopted by Blackbird’s valuation committee, the spokeswoman said.
“Canva remains one of the very best software companies in the world. What’s become clear in benchmarking Canva’s progress is that Canva is growing faster and with greater efficiency than almost all its top listed peers.
“You don’t need to look far on the horizon to see Canva’s valuation once again passing $US40bn and we’re confident it will emerge from this period as an even stronger business.
“The new holding valuation reflects this public market decline. It doesn’t reflect any reduction in Blackbird’s enthusiasm for Canva.” Canva, which produces online design software, has long been one of Australia’s fastest-growing tech companies and has made billionaires out of its co-founders. A June 2020 raising put its value at $US6bn. By April last year, another raising saw it hit $US15bn. In September, Canva hit a record $US40bn. The spokeswoman said the value of some Blackbird funds had fallen by up to 30 per cent compared to the prior quarter, and blamed the sharp ­decline in public ­markets.
CREDIT: DAVID SWAN
Word count: 461
