SUCCESSFUL SA entrepreneur Richard Turner will join the University of South Australia as industry professor of practice and entrepreneur-in-residence next month to “play a part” in growing the state’s economy.
The founder of four successful organisations – Regency Food Services, Regency Staffing, Entrepreneurs’ Organisation and Zen Energy will take up the position on November 4.
“It is now my chance to give back and share my experience over 35 years of running businesses in SA.
“It’s time to play a part in the next phase of economic success of South Australia through leading-edge industries like space, renewables, medical research and defence, among others,” Mr Turner told The Advertiser.
Mr Turner, who remains a significant shareholder in Zen Energy – now called SIMEC Zen Energy under UK billionaire Sanjeev Gupta’s SIMEC Group – said the role would also crystallise his growing involvement in mentoring and entrepreneurial support.
“EO, which I founded in 1998, recently completed 20 years, so in a way it’s going back to what I have always done, which is fostering entrepreneurs.” At the university, he will work across undergraduates and graduates of the business school, start-ups that work with the Innovation & Collaboration Centre, and with businesses working with the Australian Centre for Business Growth.
“More than 80 per cent of the businesses in Australia have just five employees. “Imagine what can be achieved if we could help accelerate those businesses to take on a few more employees and urge more growth.” He said there was a “gap” currently in the support systems for companies to accelerate once they had created the start-up hurdle. “We’ll be looking to introduce those accelerator programs. We want to send a clear message to government the university is open for business”.
He will help foster connections, commercialise innovation, inspire future entrepreneurs and supercharge the development of new and established businesses, the university said.
UniSA vice-chancellor Professor David Lloyd says having a leading business figure like Prof Turner join the university is an exciting opportunity.
“Richard has done it all – started with an idea and developed a whole enterprise – and he has done that successfully four times over,” Prof Lloyd said.“His experience is priceless and will be a huge advantage.”
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 373
