Innovative businessmen such as Jim Whalley sit alongside down-to-earth straight-talkers such as Liberal senator Anne Ruston, in the third instalment of The Advertiser’s 50 Most Influential People 30 DAVID EDWARDSON, QC One of Adelaide’s top criminal lawyers, Edwardson attracts big clients when they need one of the best in the business. The QC is a formidable barrister of national renown who represented BioSA chief executive Dr Jurgen Michaelis in his court victory over allegations lodged against him by the Independent Commissioner Against Corruption. Interstate, he has acted for Perth barrister Lloyd Rayney, found not guilty in 2012 of murdering his wife Corryn, and defending controversial MasterChef host George Calombaris, whose conviction for assaulting a teenager at an A-League grand final was overturned by a Sydney court in January. Edwardson has been engaged by NT police officer Zach Rolfe, who has been charged with the murder of an Aboriginal man in a remote settlement. The outcome of the case will have profound ramifications for law enforcement.
29 JAMES MUECKE Named Australian of the Year last month, Adelaide doctor James Muecke aims to use his 12 months in the spotlight to campaign for better eye health across the country. Part of that will be to advocate for greater recognition of the threat of type 2 diabetes, a leading cause of blindness, to build “greater awareness of the detrimental role sugar plays in our society and how it’s as toxic and addictive as nicotine’’. He believes a sugar tax is a must. Dr Muecke, who studied at Adelaide University and started his medical career in Kenya, has long helped developing countries combat blindness. He has worked extensively in Myanmar and in remote Aboriginal communities. Dr Muecke co-founded the organisation Vision Myanmar in 2000 and another not-for-profit, Sight For All, in 2007.
28 GEOFF ROHRSHEIM From a business perspective, if we could clone Geoff Rohrsheim, we would. He’s the definitive tech entrepreneur, with a suite of successes under his belt, including building Kloud Solutions from a start-up to a business acquired by Telstra in under six years. These days he sits on four of the most influential boards in the state – RAA, ASC, Business SA and the Premier’s Economic Advisory Council – while ensconced in Lot Fourteen, on the old RAH site, where his bundle of start-ups appear to be going from strength to strength. He’s also very close to the Premier, and other mates include chief entrepreneur Jim Whalley and mover and shaker Mark Butcher, who previously headed up Ernst & Young and remains well-connected.
27 JIM WHALLEY The chief entrepreneur, employed by Premier Steven Marshall on a grand salary of zero, has been an energetic advocate of the state’s start-up and scale-up ecosystem. The former fighter jet test pilot-turned successful entrepreneur was perhaps the perfect fit as SA sits on the cusp of a boom in defence and space industry spending. As well as having the business chops, Whalley’s personal network is extensive, with a soiree at his house last year a who’s who of figures from both sides of politics and across the business spectrum. He famously turned up just on time after a bit of a bingle in his Italian-made jet. Replacing him with a suitably qualified person with the time and energy to devote to the role could be a challenge once his term is up.
26 ADRIAN TEMBEL The chief executive partner of one of Australia’s 10 largest law firms, Adelaide-headquartered Thomson Geer, which employs more than 560 people in five capital city offices. Guests at Tembel’s 50th birthday celebrations last October included former defence industry minister Christopher Pyne, SA parliamentary Speaker Vincent Tarzia (whose wife Charissa Duffy is an associate in Thomson Geer’s dispute resolution team), and Internode founder and Base 64 owner Simon Hackett. Annabel West, the wife of state Labor leader Peter Malinauskas, is a special counsel at Tembel’s firm. Tembel lives among Adelaide’s establishment, with his family in 2016 paying $7 million (still a state residential record) for a landmark mansion in the inner-northern suburbs. He was appointed to the newly formed South Australian Productivity Commission in November 2018.
25 WARREN RANDALL Don’t be surprised if “Wazza” turns up to your business meeting in thongs and shorts. The biggest owner of vineyards in the Barossa – and increasingly across our other wine regions – is a whirlwind of energy who doesn’t stand on airs and graces. Randall made some big bets years ago, and made his bank pretty nervous, but they’ve paid off in spades and the massive Chinese thirst for Australian reds has made him a very successful man. His transformation of the previously tired Seppeltsfield winery has turned it into a world-class tourist attraction, and with 3300ha of vineyards – including a recent 86ha acquisition in the Riverland – he’s the undisputed king of independent winemakers in SA. He’s also a backer of craft beer and spirits investment group Founders First, run by former Port Adelaide Football Club CEO Mark Haysman, and also has a fair chunk of Tasmania-focused Australian Whisky Holdings.
24 MICHAEL HICKINBOTHAM Managing director of the state’s top home builder, former corporate lawyer Hickinbotham has a tight, family-oriented network and almost never chooses to deploy his significant influence. This makes it all the more powerful when he does. He won plaudits from the Liberals after sticking with them as a consistent and important supporter through their dark years, in the wake of an electoral crushing in 2006. He was an important behind-the-scenes player in the land-tax debate that preoccupied the Liberals in the second half of last year. Hickinbotham has branched out to pursue his passion for gin making, creating and marketing the Adelaide Gin label, pitched as “a celebration of a city that adores craftsmanship, culture and lifestyle”.
23 ANNE RUSTON One of only two federal Cabinet ministers from SA, Ruston was promoted after last year’s election victory into the families and social services portfolio. This includes overseeing disaster recovery payments for bushfire victims and income for more than 1.2 million welfare recipients. Ruston, from the Riverland, was the inaugural chief executive of the National Wine Centre before owning and operating Ruston’s Roses, the largest commercial rose garden in Australia. Her role as the state’s only regional-based senator, living at the frontline of River Murray issues – combined with a plain-speaking, down-to-earth manner – help her cut through in Canberra and with constituents.
22 ROB CHAPMAN One of the state’s most notable behind-the-scenes players, while at the same time holding the high-profile position of Adelaide Crows chairman. A financier who ran BankSA and St George, he is chair of Adelaide Airport and a director of Coopers. Chapman last year survived widespread enmity from Crows’ fans fuelled by a perilous form slump and the aftermath of a controversial 2018 pre-season camp. Last August, he signalled he would stand down within a year but the lack of obvious successors, coupled with the intricacies of establishing a planned North Adelaide headquarters, makes another extension of his 11-year reign more than possible.
21 ERIN PHILLIPS An inspirational sporting champion whose down-to-earth determination is a driving force behind the ex-traordinary success of the AFLW competition and the Adelaide Crows’ dual-premiership team. Phillips and wife Tracy Gahan unwittingly became poster girls for same-sex relationships when a picture of their celebratory kiss after Phillips’s 2017 AFLW best and fairest win hit front pages across the country. But her power for social change has been to empower girls and women to take up football in droves, while also helping forge greater equality within the sport. The code-hopping WNBA basketballer is also the AFLW’s most outstanding player. She has won the competition’s best and fairest last year as well. Not coincidentally, the Crows won the AFLW premiership in 2017 and 2019.
TOMORROWGet your copy of The Advertiser to find out who else has the power to make the list.
Word count: 1314
