The sports mad Harvard graduate who owns Adelaide 36ers on why he risks his cash (and blood pressure) giving SA a team to cheer for
Next time you’re at an Adelaide 36ers’ home game keep an eye out for the guy in the front row just behind the ring at one end going crazy.
He’ll be smartly dressed, wearing glasses and with both hands in the air riding every pass, shot and referee call like it’s life or death.
The 55-year-old cheering for the team with childlike enthusiasm is also a Harvard graduate, chief executive of an ASX50 company, Fleurieu sheep farmer, winemaker and Adelaide 36ers owner.
And Grant Kelley is an unashamedly passionate basketball fan. “Tragic,” he happily admits. “You see me sitting there being ridiculous, right? There’s actually a photo of me at the end of one game going like this (at this point of our interview Kelley stands up in the cafe and stretches both arms towards the ceiling).” He admits he struggles walking the line between owner and fan. “Because I love the team so much I get a bit carried away,” he says. “I’ve always taken two things seriously in basketball and business – off the court be a gentleman but once you go across the line compete like hell to win, and of course that requires emotion.
“But I also feel a quest for South Australia. I like to think I’m community minded and this is a small way I can make a difference to people’s lives, by giving them a sporting team to cheer for.” Kelley describes himself as a “turnaround guy” who loves sport and especially basketball.
The interest was born at school, Pulteney Grammar, of which he now sits on the board. He won the school 3000m in track and field, “which people looking at me now would find very hard to believe”, and was fringe first five for a basketball team that included future stars Peter Sexton and Andy Simons.
In the 1970s he would go to the old Apollo Stadium with his father to cheer for Glenelg in the state league, but his passion for basketball peaked in the US where he took an MBA at Harvard Business School in Boston then worked on Wall Street in New York.
“I would go down every Friday night with a bunch of guys from Wall Street and watch the New York Knicks,” he says. “I went to a few Celtics games in Boston but never quite connected with them like I did the Knicks.
“Understanding the professionalism of sport in the United States had a big influence on me and I always felt it was better than the English Premier League because even though I loved soccer when I was in the UK, these NBA, NFL, hockey and baseball franchises are run on a very similar model to what works in Australia.
“That is, the owners of the franchises collaborate and communicate, and are treated as pieces of a bigger picture.” Kelley speaks of basketball like a romantic. “It requires the most aggressive elements of human nature to win the ball. There’s few things more primal in sport than getting a physically contested rebound,” he says, again raising his hands to make his point.
“But the act of shooting the ball is one of enormous gentility and grace. So basketball is the most extraordinary combination of things. That’s why in basketball I think you get such interesting characters.” Kelley is now one of those characters.
A smart and generous owner according to those who know him best, but also described as ruthless, competitive and demanding.
At the time of this interview, Kelley was in off-season mode. He’s done dwelling on a disappointing season in which the Sixers slipped from grand finalist to missing the finals altogether, and they’re now looking to the future, which includes a new home at the Adelaide Entertainment Centre.
The decision to leave the Adelaide Arena – formerly the Power House – was all about the fans and maximising the team’s reach.
“It wasn’t easy because there was an existing contract (at Titanium Security Arena) but I felt the product we were offering our fans was, respectfully, not world class,” he says.
“The Entertainment Centre has accessibility to the city, the tramline stops out the front, the railway line is a street away, there’s a 1400-space car park and it’s on everyone’s radar because of where it is – in a business precinct surrounded by restaurants and Coopers Stadium.
“South Australians are used to going there for concerts so people are quite familiar with it, hence we are appealing to a larger group of people, many of whom might not have gone to basketball before. Findon was only 2km further down the road but the nature of the facility was not what we can get at the Entertainment Centre.” On top of the move, there are ambitious plans to double the club’s membership from 2500 to 5000 and the strategy is being driven by a new advisory board which is headed by former Crows chief executive Steven Trigg.
“The 36ers is one of the great under-leveraged brands and organisations in South Australia, despite its national profile,” Kelley says. “These (NBL clubs) are big businesses, they access international player and media markets, and particularly with a guy like (coach) Joey (Wright) at the helm, and his connections to the NBA, we always have an opportunity to recruit players from that system, so we need to mirror the excellence of the NBA clubs.
“And we also have to prepare our players for maybe an eventual career in the NBA, so they’ve got to come from an organisation and on-court system that works.” Like the league, Adelaide’s links to the NBA have never been stronger. Two years ago American Terrance Ferguson was drafted from the 36ers to the Oklahoma City Thunder, Mitch Creek went from winning its MVP to playing for Brooklyn and Minnesota last season, and this month the Sixers went back to Salt Lake City to play the Utah Jazz in an NBA pre-season game for the second year in a row.
On top of that, Kelley has former business partners Josh Harris and David Blitzer – who own the Philadelphia 76ers – on speed-dial if he needs advice.
He describes himself as a hands-on owner but who trusts the people he’s put in place to run the team.
“It’s a really good alignment between myself, Steven, Ben (Kavenagh, 36ers CEO) and Joey, and one of the things you realise in life is you don’t have to be perfect at everything, so surround yourself by good people,” he says.
He knows all of the players by name and will go into the rooms post-game but rarely before and only if invited by Wright.
“That’s Joey’s domain. You obviously get involved in discussions around recruitment and things like that but unless I’m invited by Joey I never go in the rooms before a game,” he says.
“He asked me to address the team before Game 5 of the 2018 Grand Final Series. I just said to the team, ‘Look, you’re not on the court with four other guys, you’re on the court representing 1.3 million people. Let their hopes and dreams carry you’.
“What you learn as you get closer to professional athletes is they are human, and they have frailties like the rest of us.
“They’ve got emotions, partners, they have good days and bad days. And, like talented people in other walks of life, they often have extraordinary gifts.” Kelley got another chance to address the players while on a Philippines pre-season trip in August where he said he shared “some personal stuff” and so did the players and coaches in the hope it would help grow their connection.
Kelley’s business career has taken him all over the world but he has never shed South Australia from his DNA.
Even while working in New York he found a bar called ‘Ginger Man’ that served Coopers Pale Ale and would proudly take his clients there.
His SA roots go back to the mid-1800s when his great-great-great-grandfather started a clothing store in Hindley St and was also instrumental in opening the Adelaide Central Market.
Kelley was born in Glenelg and had two siblings, and describes himself as a good student at Pulteney but still remembers being caned twice in Year 8. He started studying law at the University of Adelaide when he was 17 and was finished by 21.
After university he borrowed money to go overseas and do a masters in international relations at the London School of Economics, then came back to Australia to work as a strategy consultant for Booz Allen from 1989-92.
From 1992-94 he won a scholarship to do an MBA at Harvard Business School in Boston and was then posted to London, Sydney and Singapore.
By 2000 he started working in private equity with Colony Capital based in Los Angeles as a partner in the firm’s Asian business and after two years (2002-2004) on Wall Street, became CEO of Colony Capital Asia in 2004 at the age of 39.
“I found the experience at Colony unbelievable, certainly more important in the formation of my business philosophy than even Harvard,” he says.
His biggest achievement at that time was the acquisition of Raffles Hotels and Resorts, which Colony completed in 2005.
“It is still to this day one of the most interesting things I’ve done,” he says. As part of the deal, Colony bought a chain of hotels in Switzerland, Germany, Australia and the flagship in Singapore.
“We were doing a lot of due diligence and I had all these young MBA type guys going to interview the Singaporean ownership, and I knew there were a couple of other groups bidding and everyone wanted this asset,” he says.
“I said to the team the night before, ‘I don’t want to hear about anyone staying up late tonight, going out, and being off their game tomorrow, because we are the ones being interviewed here, not the other way around’.
“‘The Singaporean ownership want to make sure we are decent people doing the right thing and we have to give certain covenants over how we will treat the brand’, and that’s how we approached the deal.
“And that’s how I feel about the 36ers. OK, you’re an owner now, but, more importantly, you’re a custodian.” In 2008 he left Colony and launched a start-up company called Holdfast Capital in Hong Kong. Just weeks later was the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy crisis.
“So there was no money to be raised anywhere,” he says. “But we positioned ourselves as an asset manager and my philosophy was ‘what threatens you is actually a weapon if you see it through a different lens’, just like judo in martial arts in that you can use the force of the opponent if you pull it towards you.
“There’s no capital to be raised, what does that mean? It means that people have real trouble managing assets for value and that’s something I know how to do.” Learning to swim through a storm is what has allowed Kelley to survive, but he has also made some tough and unpopular decisions along the way, including last year handing back the licence for WNBL team the Adelaide Lightning after it cost him $500,000 a season.
Since taking over both the 36ers and Lightning licences, Kelley has invested an estimated $7m and letting go of the Lightning – despite it making this year’s WNBL Grand Final – followed a strategic review which recommended refocusing on the 36ers.
“I think we’re turning the corner with the Sixers, and while over the past three years it’s been a very heavy lift for the family, I believe we are building momentum all the time” he says.
“There were two issues with the Lightning licence – one, it was costing a lot of money without revenue, so that on a stand-alone basis we could not make it work, even though we wanted to provide a pathway for elite women in basketball.
“But a more compelling reason was that we found very few synergies with the men’s team, given different fan bases, schedules, and TV deals. By contrast, I think the AFL and AFLW have combined their membership and supporter bases really well, but unfortunately I don’t think that’s yet the case with the WNBL and NBL clubs.
“So as difficult as it was from an emotional or basketball context it was the right one to make from a business perspective. In hindsight, and given the fantastic run the Lightning had to the 2019 grand final series, I think we had more than done our part.”
When Kelley sold Holdfast Capital, he started Apollo in February 2010, staying until early 2014 when he joined a $20 billion Asian-based global real estate company, City Developments, as its chief executive.
He was based in Singapore before returning to Adelaide at the end of 2017 to be closer to his immediate family, especially his mum who is in her eighties and still goes to all 36ers home games. She even caught a wayward basketball last season. “She’s the only person in our box who’s more passionate than me,” Kelley says.
He now runs Vicinity Group, which owns and runs 62 retail shopping centres including Colonnades in Adelaide, Chadstone, Bourke Street Mall and The Emporium in Melbourne, the Myer Centre in Brisbane and Queen Victoria Building in Sydney.
A logical next step beyond business for Kelley may be politics but he says it won’t be in the “foreseeable future”.
“Partially because I think I’m hard to categorise and I don’t know which pocket I fit into best,” he says. “I do feel a very acute sense of a need to give back at some point in my life. I’ve been around politics and politicians enough to know that my nature, which is very can-do, might not be best suited to politics, but I also have a burning desire to contribute so it’s weighing those things up.” Kelley came to own the 36ers and subsequently start ‘Adelaide Basketball’ in 2016. Still living in Singapore he would hook the computer up to his TV to watch 36ers games and towards the end of the season was approached by the team that was looking to recapitalise. Kelley decided to invest and acquired 100 per cent ownership in two stages for an undisclosed sum.
Everyone knows you don’t buy a sports team to make money and for such a successful businessman the logic behind it didn’t always add up but his heart overruled his head.
“You’ve got to go into it hoping and praying you might make money but there has to be more noble reasons and in life there’s not a lot of romance left, so I was really motivated by that,” he says.
“I’m very socially motivated and I felt the club could do with a reboot, but we had to move quickly as a turnaround was clearly required. But you’ve got to be in it for the long haul … “Other clubs are spending more and we are lucky we have Joey (as coach) who, like Brad Pitt in the Moneyball movie, produces the best investment-adjusted team in the competition. I don’t think you can be short-termist about this. Every business has a J-curve where you’ve got to be prepared to invest and back your judgment.” With the NBL back on free-to-air TV last season, the standard ever improving and expansion of a second club in Melbourne this year, Kelley is bullish about the growth and future of the sport in Australia.
“I think the future is very, very bright,” he says. “The big difference between now and the ’90s is the Australians who have gone into the NBA who are superstars, so the NBA looks at our clubs as essentially feeding clubs.
“The second thing is the ownership group, which is unbelievably collaborative and deep. Larry Kestelman has done a great job, he’s a great guy, and he gets the owners together all the time to talk.
“Australians don’t necessarily like their sporting teams being owned privately, and I get that, but unfortunately there’s really no alternative because unless you get a huge TV deal like the AFL, every other sport that has relied on a members’ base model has suffered.” That’s not to say everything has been smooth sailing since Kelley took over. The 2018 off-season was marred by a public stand-off with its best player Creek who requested a clearance to NBA team Brooklyn and the 36ers took out a court injunction to stop any move until they were financially compensated.
“I think the narrative initially went badly for us on social media as well as on traditional media, prior to turning around as people understood what was at stake. There are two sides to every story, which was not initially appreciated, and why I decided to intervene personally with the media.
“But I always had a good relationship with Mitch, I still respect his talent enormously. He did a lot for this club so I’m happy to see him be successful and wish him all the best – even playing against him.” As the Sixers prepare for a season at the Entertainment Centre, Kelley believes it is a crucial step towards possibly playing games in a new purpose-built stadium in the city, like AFL football at Adelaide Oval.
“Basketball has become as much about entertainment as it is sport, and there is talk about an indoor arena over the railway tracks by 2025, which we would thoroughly support,” he says.
He says he saw how successful the concept could be in Perth three years ago watching a game at an inner city 14,000 seat arena behind the train line.
“The future for basketball in Adelaide once that happens would be absolutely extraordinary,” he says.The 36ers first official game at their new home, the Adelaide Entertainment Centre, is on October 19 against Brisbane. Visit adelaide36ers.com
CREDIT: WORDS REECE HOMFRAY MAIN PHOTOGRAPHS SARAH REED
Word count: 3020
