WITH her perfectly coiffed hair, long twiggy legs, bronzed skin and fire-engine red top, it's hard to ignore Brooke Clark. And that's exactly what she wants.
Clark, along with 30 mums and dads and 100 volunteer models, make up the Army of Autism Awareness Angels. It's an Adelaide-based not-forprofi t organisation spreading the word on autism - which affects more than 4600 children in South Australia, according to Austim SA.
The former swimsuit model and South Australian Miss Universe finalist launched the organisation last year after struggling to find information on the disorder after her son Aiden was diagnosed with mild autism. "I noticed there was something different about my little boy," Clark says. "I thought he may have autism but everyone, including my GP, told me he didn't."
Aiden, now five, was diagnosed when he was two. "My issue was that there was never anything in the media about autism. I wanted to change it so that people started talking about it," she says.
"Early intervention is key."
So Clark gathered up her gorgeous friends and formed her army of angels who attend and organise events aimed at changing people's views on autism and helping families with children who live with it.
The angels pose for photos, hand out information fliers and hold signs which read "I'm Autism Aware" at the events.
Despite her intentions, the group has been accused of doing the good deeds for personal gain.
"People say to me, 'what have you got to do with autism? People judge you like you're bad parents," she says. "They think that you're trying to promote yourself, but that's not it. We had to do something different and it has got people talking."
The group is being noticed - upstaging grid girls at the Clipsal 500 - and they have organised beach volleyball competitions and catwalk shows.
At last year's Credit Union Christmas Pageant, the angels organised a quiet, separate area for families with autistic children so the kids could experience the day even if they were feeling overwhelmed by the crowds and noise. "It was quite beautiful that they got to experience that," says Clark.
She says anything that helps raise awareness of the developmental disorder is a positive move. "Autism isn't something that we should hide," she says.
facebook.com armyofautismawarenessangels For more information on autism ph Autism SA on 8379 6976, or autismsa.org.au
Credit: KATRINA STOKES
Word count: 409
