FRENCH autonomous vehicle manufacturer Navya has promised Adelaide’s first driverless shuttle will arrive in time for Christmas ahead of its use in a five-year trial starting early next year.
Navya’s chief business development officer Henri Coron is in Adelaide for the two-day International Driverless Vehicle Summit starting today.
“It’s sentimental to be back in Adelaide which is really where we started our Australian journey,” he told The Advertiser.
The company signed its first Australian contract to run shuttles in Perth on the sidelines of the first driverless summit in Adelaide in 2015, which also saw a modified Volvo demonstrate its autonomous technology on a closed Southern Expressway.
Navya has since won the tender to supply its Autonom Shuttle for the Flinders Autonomous Shuttle Trial (FAST), which includes multiple partners such as Flinders University and RAA.
It will provide “last mile” public transport from Tonsley train station, South Rd and other points in the Tonsley site from early next year, said Professor Rocco Zito, who is part of the scientific research group at Australian New Zealand Driverless Initiave and head of civil engineering at Flinders University.
Navya is also setting up a presence in Adelaide, the scale of which is yet to be determined. “We are still finalising our Asia-Pacific headquarters, which will be based here, but if that market continues to grow as well as it is now, we’ll be having a strong presence here soon,” Mr Coron said.
The company, which has 60 shuttles in operation globally, makes 33 per cent of its money in the Asia-Pacific region.
“In the meantime, I am looking forward to fulfilling my promise of a Christmas present to Adelaide in the lead up to the trials,” he said.
FAST is one of four projects supported by the state government’s $10 million Future Mobility Lab fund, designed to win the state a share of the global autonomous technology industry expected to be worth $90 billion by 2030.
UK group RDM’s subsidiary Aurrigo begins its Zero Pod trial within the Tonsley precinct’s MAB area later this month.
The other trials are an shuttle Adelaide Airport shuttle, which is still in the feasibility stage, and one by SA company Cohda Wireless which specialises in vehicle-to-everything technology, including warnings about a possible collision and traffic snarls.Navya, Aurrigo and EasyMile’s EZ10 are offering conference delegates a 12km/h ride along Adelaide Oval’s footbridge. The conference will showcase vehicles from Volvo, BMW and Tesla.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 408
