DRIVERLESS pods for the Asia Pacific market could be manufactured in South Australia by 2020, says the United Kingdom company trialling the technology at Tonsley this month.
Aurrigo, part of the RDM Group, is receiving $1 million towards testing four of its innovative four-seater Pod Zeros within the Main Assembly Building at the precinct.
RDM’s trial was one of four projects to win funding from the state’s $10 million Future Mobility Lab Fund, designed to position SA to win a share of the global autonomous technology industry expected to be worth $90 billion by 2030.
While initially targeted at cargo deliveries, the trial using four pods will expand to ferrying people.
Roger van der Lee, Aurrigo’s autonomous programs director — Australia & Asia Pacific, said the trial from mid November will be the first of a three-staged plan for South Australia.
“The Tonsley precinct will first test the efficiency and adaptability of our first mile-last mile service,” he said.
“We’ll be importing the pods that will be used on off-road areas within the precinct. The next stage is to bring in a knocked-down version and assemble it here.
“We already have a very important local partner in SAGE Automation.
“Subsequently, though, we want to move to bringing in just the smarts and using local suppliers to manufacture the pods here, possibly by 2020, should businesses here want the technology.” Aurrigo expects there will be demand within the precinct and other innovation districts as well as from the aged care sector.
The four-seater Pod Zero, which is equipped with only emergency stop buttons on the inside and outside of the pod, will be on show at the International Driverless Vehicle Summit in Adelaide on tomorrow doing a demonstration run on the Oval bridge.
Mr van der Lee said Aurrigo chose Tonsley as its Asia-Pacific home to partner with other innovators like Flinders University and local companies.
“We are open to others wanting to trial andtest their own ideas on the pods,” he said.
CREDIT: Words Valerina Changarathil
Word count: 337
