Negotiating Mooloolaba Esplanade is the first mile in a long journey ahead for autonomous driving.
The $320,000 EasyMile EZ10 electric, driverless shuttle is operating beach-side again today as part of a six-month road show around the country.
Mooloolaba’s demonstration follows trials in Darwin and Canberra. The 12-seater people-mover uses GPS, radar, lasers and cameras to monitor its surrounds.
EasyMile say it’s designed for “first-mile, last-mile” journeys connecting train stations, business parks and campuses at up to 45km/h.
Mooloolaba’s demonstration was restricted to 7km/h for safety reasons.
This week’s showcase follows an international convention staged in Adelaide last month, where driverless vehicles were put to the test.
Passengers were transported from Adelaide Oval to the Convention Centre in the EasyMile shuttle, along with vehicles from Navya and Aurrigo. Also on show were cars from BMW, Tesla and Volvo equipped with level-two autonomy, which enables “hands-off” highway driving for limited periods.
Many who attended the Second International Driverless Vehicle Summit believe Australia could be one of the first countries with autonomous vehicles and the summit was an opportunity to promote the technology.
“Australia is positioning itself to adopt this technology quickly and there are huge opportunities for Australian companies and businesses,” Rita Excell said.
Economic benefits could be as much as $95 billion a year, with savings possible from reduced congestion and fewer road injuries.
Yet lawmakers need to keep pace with technology.
EasyMile head of Asia Pacific Simon Pearce said there “has been zero accidents around the world” with his company’s technology but road rules must change.
Currently, laws assume humans are in control of vehicles.
Work is under way to have an autonomous regulatory system in place by 2020.
A six-month study by NSW motoring club NRMA estimates one million steering-wheel-free “fully autonomous” vehicles will be on Australian roads by 2035.
“About 94 per cent of accidents are caused by human error,” report co-author RobGiltinan said.
“At some point in the future, that will reduce to nearly zero because of driverless cars.”
AT A GLANCE
EasyMile EZ10
WHAT A people-mover for up to 12 people, manufactured by French car maker Ligier. The shuttle runs back and forth on a single traffic lane
PRICE $320,000
SPEED Cruising speed is 20km/h, maximum 45km/h
MOTOR Electric asynchronous
BATTERY Up to 14 hours of operation, 8kWh lithium-ion battery
Word count: 385
