TONSLEY would be the epicentre for Australia’s electric and autonomous vehicle industry under a new Flinders University-led plan.
The university’s Australian Industrial Transformation Institute has proposed to a high-level Senate inquiry into the electric vehicle industry that Tonsley become Australia’s first “Future Mobility Centre”.
In a submission to the inquiry, the university claims that it would be the first electric vehicle centre of its type in Australia.
“The establishment of a FMC in Australia represents an opportunity to deliver a world-first form of experiential EV centre, whereby its key tenets focus on providing opportunities for all levels of government, not-for-profits, commercial and private sectors to access an independent experiential learning centre,” says the submission, co-authored by Professor John Spoehr, Professor Rocco Zito and Dr Mark Dean.
“The Tonsley Innovation District in Adelaide is an ideal location for a FMC. “It is a thriving innovation ecosystem designed strategically to encourage engagement and collaboration between entrepreneurs, enterprises, researchers and students.” The proposal includes a range of electric and autonomous vehicles – such as a 100 per cent electric autonomous FLEX shuttle by Flinders, the 100 per cent autonomous Aurrigo Pod, Mitsubishi’s Outlander PHEV and Tesla’s mycar options – being based out of the innovation precinct.
This would be the centrepiece of a national network of centres in each state and territory that would be branches of Tonsley’s FMC.
“The main outcome of this design would be to accelerate the uptake of EVs and renewable energy in Australia for the purpose of reducing (greenhouse gas) emissions,” the submission says.
SA Transport Minister Stephan Knoll threw his support behind the concept, saying it would build on SA’s first driverless shuttle hitting the road last month.
“We want to cement South Australia’s position as an ideal location to demonstrate, develop and contribute to the applied research of Future Mobility technologies that provide real benefits to our communities,” he said.Independent Senator Tim Storer has been given control of the inquiry, which will hold a public hearing on August 10 in St Marys.
CREDIT: SIMEON THOMAS-WILSON URBAN AFFAIRS REPORTER
Word count: 343
