Just 11 weeks later, Ismail and wife Shahila are standing in a park in Adelaide’s northern suburbs watching their children learn how to play Aussie rules football.
“I still can’t believe we are here,” Ismail tells The Weekend Australian. “This is paradise.”
Ismail and his family watched the horror and chaos of those first few days as the Taliban waltzed into an abandoned Kabul, with ­civilians mobbing planes and dropping from their wings as they tried to flee the capital.
“I know people expect you to say how horrible it was, and it was horrible,” Ismail says. “But we are happy now, brother. The main thing we feel is relief. Relief and happiness.”
The Zabair family – Ismail, Shahila, sons Sahel, 12, Saleh, 10, and daughters Bano, 8, and Diana, 4 – were among the 89 Afghans on a RAAF rescue flight that flew them to Adelaide on August 25, the day before the Kabul airport terrorist attack.
For the Zabairs, getting out of Afghanistan was genuinely a matter of life or death.
Ismail, 34, studied law, journalism and pharmacy, and worked as a pharmacist before spending the past seven years as a security guard defending consular staff and civilians at the Australian ­embassy compound in Kabul.
Ismail, a fit and strapping bloke with a black belt in taekwondo, says he loved the job.
“No one would mess with us,” he says. “We had body armour, AKs, all the best gear. We used to do target practice every weekend to make sure we could respond to any threat.
“With the job I did, like so many other people who worked for countries like Australia or for the former government, the Taliban would kill us all if they had the chance. We had to get out of there.”
Ismail had his own home, a new car and a decent amount of savings in the bank but in the hurry to flee he left everything ­behind. His parents and mother-in-law are still in Kabul.
“I went to the bank and tried to withdraw my money before we left for the airport but it was total chaos,” he says.
“Everyone was trying to get their money out but the bank had run out of cash. I tried the ATMs. There was nothing in the ATMs anywhere. All the money had gone.
“When we were saying goodbye to my mother-in-law she gave us all the money she had – 5000 ­Afghani – which is about 100 Australian dollars. We arrived in Australia with $100. That’s all we have.”
The welcome the Zabairs have received in Adelaide befits a city where the 6000-strong Afghan community is per capita one of the largest in Australia and demonstrably giving back to its adoptive home.
Many of the city’s Afghans live in the northern suburbs of Kilburn and Blair Athol, and have played a positive role transforming northern Prospect Rd from a tawdry area marred by drugs, crime and welfare dependency to a buzzy high street filled with bakeries, butcher stores, charcoal kebab and curry houses.
Charity groups, churches and established Afghan-Australian businesses such as the legendary restaurant Parwana raised hundreds of thousands of dollars to help the Afghans who have settled here over the past three months.
Premier Steven Marshall has a close relationship with the Afghan community as Multicultural ­Affairs Minister and says his government has allocated $100,000 to the Migrant Resource Centre to hire staff specifically tasked with resettling Afghan evacuees.
“We are proud to play our part in resettling these families who have experienced unimaginable hardship,” Marshall says. “I know all South Australians will welcome them with open arms.”
Staff and players at the Adelaide Football Club banded together to donate goods for the families, and this week senior Crows AFLW players Anne Hatchard and Sarah Allan met the Zabair children to give them a special one-on-one clinic in Aussie rules.
“Footy is such a great way to bring people together,” Hatchard, who is also the AFC community programs officer, says.
“We spent some time teaching the kids how to kick and handball, and even though we don’t speak the same language, we were still able to communicate through football and have a laugh with them. It was amazing to see how quickly they picked up the skills.
“They are a loving family who have been through a lot and we are lucky to have had the chance to meet them and help them on their new journey.”
The poignancy of watching his daughters learning the national game from two professional ­female athletes is not lost on ­Ismail. “We are so glad we got our kids out of there, I cannot tell you,” he says.
“My son, Sahel, is only 12 but he is wise. He was more worried than me about the Taliban. He kept saying to me: ‘Dad, if they find you they will kill you. How will I care for all of us all then?’
“Seeing my girls playing in this beautiful park with these lady footballers is very special. Imagine this in Kabul. Here, my daughters can play sport. They are going to school. They are learning English. They can go to university. They can get a job.”
More than 2300 Afghans have arrived in South Australia and Victoria since the return of the Taliban, with the statutory body AMES overseeing their education, employment and settlement.
Chief executive Cath Scarth says the key challenge in these early weeks is giving families the building blocks to start afresh.
“We have been providing short-term accommodation as well as support to find permanent housing,” she says.
“Clothing, shoes, nappies, baby formula, toiletries and other necessities have been provided. Connections with health services, including for Covid vaccines, have been organised. We are working with refugee clients to obtain relevant identity documents as well as to register them with Centrelink and set up bank accounts.”
There was positive news for the Afghan evacuees on Friday, with the Morrison government announcing further measures to help Afghan nationals evacuated since the Taliban’s return.
The evacuees will have their existing visas extended for 12 months, ensuring continued access to the full range of government support services as they undertake the process of transitioning on to Australian permanent visas.
In addition, Afghan evacuees will now be able to transition to offshore permanent protection visas rather than onshore visas that would normally apply to ­applicants already in Australia.
SA Afghan Cultural Association public officer Behishta Anwar is urging the federal government to do more. “There are so many people still in Afghanistan who are in danger; we hear stories every day of people being hanged for working for the former government or working for the coalition,” she says.
“We have only had about 3500 people come and that is within the existing allocation. We need an extra allocation like Tony Abbott did for Syria or Bob Hawke did after Tiananmen.”
If all these people are like ­Ismail Zabair, Australia could do worse than say yes.
“I am on Centrelink now just to survive while I settle in but it is not much money and I want to get off it as fast as possible,” he says.
“There is so much I can do. I want to see if I can get my pharmacy studies recognised or maybe study some more here so I can work as a pharmacist. But I will do anything. I can work as a cleaner or a security guard or a taxi driver for all I care. I just want to get on with this new life this country has been so kind to give us. We are truly blessed.”
Word count: 1237
