FROM the ashes of the Mitsubishi car manufacturing business, former employee John Azzollini has adapted his skills to build a thriving enterprise helping companies to significantly cut their energy bills.
His firm AZZO Automation has grown from start-up in 2005 to become a significant business with a fast-growing turnover due to its unique skills in helping companies tackle soaring energy prices.
When he was made redundant in 2005, he saw an opportunity to start a business providing the same electrical automation services at his old company to external industrial manufacturing customers.
He hit the ground running and with no government support at all, started working as an automation consultant, soon taking on his first employee.
He has been one of the few former Mitsubishi workers to start their own business and built AZZO up to seven employees with a significant and fast-growing turnover due to the substantial demand for its energy solutions integration services from around Australia. Mr Azzollini had spent most of his time at Mitsubishi's Lonsdale plant working as an electrician and electrical engineer and ended as a senior section manager for maintenance and engineering in September 2005.
"The skills I gained at Mitsubishi were excellent and they equipped me to get out and start my own company," he said.
"Our solutions are helping hundreds of customers reduce their energy bills and become more energy efficient by delivering innovative energy metering and energy management software products and solutions."
The company's customers range from large commercial, government and industrial companies and organisations to various medium and small enterprises.
Savings for some organisations have been more than $100,000 a year, with one major customer saving 30 per cent in power use.
The demand for AZZO's services is so great that it expects to double its turnover this financial year, after enjoying rapid growth since starting.
Mr Azzollini said AZZO focused on helping its rapidly growing range of customers to reduce their energy use and discover opportunities for sustainable savings in energy and greenhouse gas emissions.
"Our energy management solutions allow users to easily turn their energy data into actionable and reportable information, easily accessible via a standard web browser," he said.
Engineering manager James DiLiberto said its core business was delivering innovative and cost-effective energy management solutions.
"Our focus is to bring together the latest technology for the best solution for our customers," he said.
Credit: NIGEL AUSTIN
Word count: 408
