Wondering what’s going to be hot next season? Fashion editor Anna Vlach shares her favourite trends from the Mercedes-Benz Fashion Week Australia collections, where SA models and designs were a run-a-way success.
ROCK THE TREND: Yes, the higher the platform the closer to God, but for heaven’s sake could all of you tall goddesses step off this trend to give us vertically-challenged types a go!
ROCK THE TREND: Save this one for when you want someone else to shout you drinks because there’s barely room for a lippy in these little babies. Oops, I forgot my credit card!
FEELING BOARD?: The “Prints Charming” of swimwear, Port Pirie-born Michael Azzollini, made his mark with AZZO’spatterned board shorts and budgie smugglers.
SAME, SAME, BUT DIFFERENT: Mismatched earrings were everywhere, but what really stood out on the runway were the odd boots at Bec + Bridge, pictured.
YELLOW FEVER: Brightening up our winter, this sunny shade will be popping up again for summer, as seen at Aje, Carla Zampatti and We Are Kindred, pictured.
I WANT CANDY: Alice McCall, Bec + Bridge and Lee Mathews, pictured, were all tickled shocking pink by Barbie’s signature colour.
GET REAL: Are we there yet? Maybe not, but MBFWA has come a long way when it comes to showcasing diversity. The models reflected Australia’s multicultural society more than ever. Curvy and mature models are also getting a look in, as seen at P.E. Nation, Tigerlily and Karla Spetic, above left, and Aje, where 49-year-old Adelaide model Emma Balfour was chosen to wear the showstopper, above right.
WET WET WET: Water on the runway is now a thing ... along with dancing in the rain at P.E. Nation.
IN THE BAG: Forget about less is more when it comes to handbags. AtTigerlily, this model got hold of three itty-bitty ones.
CLIP ART:Multiple hair pins and clasps are in, as seen at Bec + Bridge.CHUNKY:The platform sandal, as worn by Baby Spice, is all grown up. See Adelaide’s Akiima walking for Ten Pieces.
CREDIT: ANNA VLACH
Word count: 338
