By the time you read this, Buzz will likely be lost somewhere along the east coast of Tasmania. Hopefully that will be by choice and a desire to go off grid rather than an inability to read a map. But given a notoriously shocking internal GPS (here’s hoping my travel chum is a dab hand at Google maps and we have reception), either could be the reality.
All of which is a roundabout way of saying we’ve come to the end of the line, 2017. It’s time to put feet up, get our house in order and reflect on the year that was. And while a snapshot of the global situation is covered to your right, there has been much to report at home.
Buzz proudly has been watching our designers take on the world, and there certainly is an increased appetite for our designers internationally. Zimmermann seems hellbent on global domination and there is nothing standing in its way, with covetable product, great backers and seven stores already open across the US and in London.
And Dion Lee may have decamped to New York, but if this year showed us anything it’s that his Australian sensibilities are melding seamlessly with those of his new home.
Buzz was front row when Toni Maticevski made his Paris catwalk debut in July, one of a handful of international ready-to-wear designers taking to the haute couture schedule for the first time, and while the Australians in the audience may have been biased, it was rapturously received by one Suzy Menkes, who took to Instagram numerous times from the show: “Congratulations to Toni Maticevski for bringing his Australian elegance to Paris and making the complex workmanship seem internationally chic.” Adelaide’s Paul Vasileff showcased his couture garments that same week in a Paris ballroom, with spellbinding results, and it’s no wonder he is gaining an international reputation from Dubai to Berlin for his exquisitely delicate gowns. His Disney-inspired collection shown during the Adelaide Fashion Festival in October was another fairytale affair.
Paris-based Kym Ellery continues to expand her Ellery label (pictured, spring 2018) apace, and has just announced that she also will show during haute couture week from next month, and is restructuring her business to create two main collections each year, which will each be revealed in two lots.
Only the third Australian to be invited to join the renamed Federation de la haute Couture et de la Mode (after Martin Grant and Collette Dinnigan), Ellery says: “I want to rediscover the feeling that I had 10 years ago when I started Ellery. I want to bring back the dream. As an independent, self-financed growing brand, it is too difficult to chase after a schedule determined by vertical super brands.”
On our shores, we said farewell to two veteran labels this year through the personal choice of their designers rather than market difficulties.
Perth-based Aurelio Costarella decided to close shop after 34 years, to concentrate on his wellbeing and his long battle with depression. And just weeks after a 30-year celebration for fellow West Australian label Wheels & Dollbaby, designer Melanie Greensmith decided “it was time” to step back and enjoy life.
But along with closures came renewal, and there have been some good news stories this year.
Designer Mira Vukovic revived her much-missed label Mad Cortes, stylist Michael Azzollini has resurrected his design career with a new men’s swimwear label, Azzo Swim, and Magdalena Velevska has launched a new label, Alys, four years after closing her namesake brand.
And just last week Sydney label Lover was given a lifeline after going into administration, with a local company buying the brand and keeping the entire team on board. Which is great news for all, including their many fans.
And so, a final thank you to all of you for reading, and for flying the fashion flag this year. Wishing you all a sequin-filled festive season and a new year bursting with champagne, friends and frivolity. See you next month!
CREDIT: GLYNIS TRAILL-NASH; THE BUZZ
Word count: 671
