Speedway racing returns to Whyalla this Saturday night with the speedway club presenting a quality program for their opening meeting of the 2016/17 season. Speedway fans are in for a night of classic entertainment featuring sidecar racing, modlites and a demolition derby.
The meeting has attracted some of the state's finest sidecar riders and their fearless passengers with some 17 nominations for the Steel City Sidecar Spectacular. Leading the star-studded lineup is former world champion and number one rider in South Australia in Mick Headland who will be eager to show bike fans why he is still longing to keep the number one ranking for this season. Returning also are former Whyalla residents Damien Niesche and former Oceania champion in Mark Plaisted. Both staged a memorable race final at last season's corresponding meeting. The race had several lead changes before Plaisted crossed the finish line the winner.
The silky smooth skills of Justin Plaisted, brother of Mark, is a winner of this event in 2014 and is also the winner of the 2015 Australian title. Trent Headland is traveling down from Roxby Downs together with Broken Hill brothers Rick and Darren Howse and are some of the standout nominations. Whyalla winning chances rests with Darryll Woods, who will be keen to give his local supporters something to cheer about as he takes on the might of the visiting riders.
The Whyalla Speedway Circuit is the only venue in South Australia that caters for both bike and car racing which will give race fans a rare opportunity to witness the skills of bike racing at its best outside of Adelaide. In keeping with the bike theme a good number of quadbike and flat-track m.x bike riders are taking to the track to test their skills on the oval shaped track.
Supporting the bike program are a large field of modlites, with Michael Brown one of twelve drivers preparing to take on the visiting drivers which include Brian Chadwick, Graham Knuckey, Cory Hodgson, Danny Prada and Todd Bennett. Joining them are rookie drivers having their first drive in a modlite; Brook Alexander and Chris Fergusson are among the names nominated.
The track maintenance crew are in for a busy night ahead, as the modlites are to follow the bikes to complete a round at which point the track will have a makeover to give the bike riders the best track conditions. The action track-side will be full on all night with the night to finish up with the crowd favourite in the "crash and bash" of the demolition derby. The club is thrilled with the response by the entries of 20 nominations vying for the $2,000 prizemoney on offer.
Led by Adelaide driver Geoff Flack, the winner of the event last season, trying for back-to-back success. Robert Kemp is also traveling all the way from Broken Hill for the event. Some of the local drivers keen to keep the prizemoney in local hands include Chris Klieck, Ray Marshall, Ian Ellis, Jake Hamilton, Dennis Knowles, and Anthony Grillett to name some of the nominated drivers in what will be a great way to end the first of seven meetings for the club this season. The club will be drawing its monster raffle during the night, in which has been selling tickets since the Whyalla Show, with 10 valuable prizes to be won. The gates on the Iron Road complex will open at 4pm, with racing from 5:30pm. Admission prices are the same as last season, with a family ticket great value at $50.00 for a huge night's entertainment for all the family.
TWILIGHT GOLF RESULTS
October 21, 17 players. Winner: Rod Smith 19pts, 2nd Pat Walker 18pts, 3rd Di Slater 17pts. Birdies Pat Walker and Geoff Hawes. Nearest to the pin: 7th Pat Walker. Encouragement award Christine Brown 6pts. Mystery pairs addition Val Callaghan & Rod Smith, Di Slater & Alan Slater. Twilight golf open to all players stableford comp starting 4.30
October 28, 26 players. Winner: Bruce Rogers 18pts, 2nd Greg Coulter 18 pts, 3rd Pat Walker 18 pts. Birdies S.Main,G.Stanton, T.Callary, B.Rogers. Nearest to the pin 7th T.Callary. Encouragment award M.Wingfield -Hill 7pts. Lucky pairs subtraction G.Rogers & M.Wingfield Hill
LADIES GOLF RESULTS
October 25, Quota Event. Colleen Howell c/b Marge Herbert 23pts, runner-up Robyn Phillis c/b Marg Dunn. Nearest to the pin 7th: Helma Bambridge. Lucky Balls Glenda Davies and Di Thorpe
October 27, 18 Hole Stroke. Winner: Gelske Rogers 75nett, runner-up Colleen Howel c/b Marge Nicholls 76 nett. Ball Winners: Marge Nicholls 76 nett and Maree Farr 77nett. Lucky Balls: M.Farr & M.Nicholls
From back page
With 3 wins from 3 games, Central Whyalla go into their bye clear on top of the ladder. North, Roopena and South all sit on 1 win and 1 loss, with Westlands last on 3 losses. Any team can win on their day, the competition is looking fairly even and with two important games (North vs South) and (Westlands vs Roopena) to be played this weekend, we are starting to see the top 4 take shape. North Whyalla fall short in Upper North T20 champs. North Whyalla have gone down to Quorn in a gripping 'round of 16' match in the Country Living Homes T20 competition on Sunday in Quorn. Playing Wanderah (Pt Pirie) in the first match, both sides were faced with a tricky pitch and struggled to get going. David Dekuijer made things look easy with 33* to help the Magpies to 4/99 of their 20 overs. Looking to defend their low total, bowlers Sam Lewis, Gary Branford and Dave Miller kept things tight early, Lewis unfortunately 'nicking up' the Ram's opening batsman off a no-ball which resulted in a free-hit. Spinners Matt Quist and David Atkinson were able to squeeze the batsmen through overs 10-15, picking up 4 crucial wickets which exposed Wanderah's in-experienced lower order, eventually being dismissed for 82. Quorn were always going to be a strong opposition, having quality players like Tom and Corey Findlay, Simon George, Liam Bury and Alex Hosking who have all played some high levels of cricket. Bowling first, North really hit their lines and lengths early, particularly Gary Branford who got some life out of the pitch. Quist and Miller aided Branford picking up quick wickets which reduced potential damage in the last few overs. Chasing 98 for the win, the scene was all to familiar for the Magpies batsmen, in what resembled last year's grand final collapse, North were quickly without a top order. Leaving it to the lower order, Dave Miller put up some late resistance with Matt Kirchner, to see North limp to 84 all out. In what turned out to be a disappointing game, it was great to see North Whyalla provide an alternative for Whyalla Cricket, which has been dominated by Central and Roopena over the last 10 years.
Rosewalls 2 rubbers 3 sets 41 games lost to Lavers 10 rubbers 13 sets 95 games. The 2016-17 Summer Tennis Season continued on Saturday with round 2 taking place. The weather was the total opposite from round 1, with hot temperatures and gusty winds making play problematic. The doubles rubbers were the first matches to take place. In what was a relatively straight forward victory, top Lavers pair Andrew Smoker and David Green defeated Tyrone 'Bones' Harris and Glenn 'Ferret' Clayton 6-3 6-1. Smoker and Green just got better and better as the match went on and Bones and Ferret had no answers. The match will be remembered for a memorable incident, with Green hitting the ball into the net post only for the ball to ricochet 90 degrees into the opposing side of the court and claim the winning shot. The second doubles rubber saw Rosewalls pick up a win with Mark Azzopardi and Leigh Brereton accounting for Craig McLeod and Jamie Homes 6-4 6-4. Brereton was deadly at the net which was probably the deciding factor of the match as all players found form during the game. The third doubles rubber wasn't pretty for Rosewalls pairing Ian Yendall and Taylor Anninos going down 6-0 6-0 to Christian Riebling and Stephano Mason Moya. Reibling and Moya were simply untouchable and couldn't put a foot wrong. The final doubles rubber saw Lavers pairing Darren Phillips and Neil Smit get over the line against Rosewalls pairing Alicia Green and Liz Ward 6-2 7-5. The first set was smooth sailing for Phillips and Smith, however Green and Ward lifted the intensity in the second set and almost got back into the match but just fell short. So, Lavers had a relatively comfortable 3-1 lead after the doubles fixtures; attention now turned to the singles. First up was Lavers Andrew Smoker against Rosewalls Tyrone 'Bones' Harris. Bones found some better form here compared to his earlier doubles fixture, managing to make Smoker work extremely hard for each point. However, Smoker proved too much for Bones in the end, holding his nerve to win 7-3. In the second singles rubber, Lavers David Green was looking to settle a score against Glenn 'Ferret' Clayton as these two had only met once in the past with Ferret getting the win on that occasion. And indeed the score was settled, with Green coming out on top 7-2. Lavers Craig McLeod showed very impressive form in the third singles rubber, defeating Mark Azzopardi 7-0. The score line doesn't tell the whole story, as Azzo definitely deserved a game or two, he should consider himself very unlucky. In what was to be their second and last rubber win of the day, Rosewalls Leigh Brereton continued his hot form in the fourth singles rubber doing the business against Jamie Homes 7-2. Brereton kept his foot on Home's throat throughout the match and never let up, forcing Homes into making forced errors. Christian Riebling made light work of Rosewalls Ian Yendall winning 7-0. Riebling did very well not to lose a game, as in one game he served four double faults but still held his nerve to not give up a single to Yendall. The sixth rubber was a battle of young guns with Rosewalls Taylor Anninos taking on Stephano Mason Moya. This was an interesting contest with both players hitting jaw dropping winners but also making costly mistakes at times. This wasn't helped by the wind which decided to blow one of the player's tennis racquet cover onto the court midway through a point! Both players did well to avoid the debris! In the end, Moya won 7-3. The penultimate singles rubber saw Lavers Darren Phillips dig deep to beat Alicia Green 7-3. Both players exchanged long baseline rallies, but the unforced error count cost Green in the end. The final rubber was unfortunately a walkover for Lavers Neil Smit as Rosewalls Liz Ward injured her right arm during her doubles fixture and could not compete. So Smit was the declared the winner 7-0.
Word count: 1817
