WATER-SAVING device maker AquaSpy and green-building design specialist Hames Sharley were named winners of the inaugural CleverGreen Innovators to Watch awards last night.
The winners were among eight finalists recognised at the close of the two-day CleverGreen Conference and Showcase, organised by the Department of Trade and Economic Development.
It followed a search to identify and reward companies with "innovations that have the potential to change our world for the better".
The awards were all about drawing attention to the outstanding work being done in the cleantech sector right here in South Australia, Environment Minister Jay Weatherill said.
"With the winners crossing areas as diverse as water technologies for food and beverage production to architecture and interior design, it shows the breadth of skills we have at our doorstep," he said.
Judging panel chief Brenton Leitch said it was "uplifting to see so many South Australian innovators working with a sense of urgency on solutions for the challenges that lie ahead".
"With regard to the winners, both scored highly against all criteria including innovation, commercialisation and future impact," Mr Leitch said.
CleverGreen Product Innovator AquaSpy's has demonstrated a global marketing approach for its precision irrigation sensors that use soil moisture monitoring technology to allow plants to grow using up to 70 per cent less water, helping growers to save water and improve yield.
About 60 per cent of AquaSpy's business is concentrated in the US, with more than 100,000 sensors in operation worldwide.
In Australia, AquaSpy has teamed up with HR Products and Rain Bird Corporation for distribution of its sensors, and is also part of the $2 billion Northern Victoria Irrigation Renewal Project.
CleverGreen Service Innovator Hames Sharley was recognised for its leadership initiatives in Adelaide in using a design tool to help existing buildings and shopping centres boost their environmental credentials.
The company redesigned 70 Light Square, South Australia's first four-star green building refurbishment, with the help of an in-house green matrix, or design tool.
Other finalists in the product category were Embertec, Berryessa and Papyrus.
The service finalists were Cyclopic Energy, AZZO Automation and Intelligent Software Development.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 363
