The Carlton coach vows to stick with his job at the Blues
CARLTON coach Mick Malthouse insists he has no plans for an early retirement after the departure from the club of his friend and colleague Greg Swann.
The second-year Carlton coach -- and oldest in the competition -- said he was staying put despite the sweep of senior positions at Princes Park, which is set to claim more scalps.
After The Australian exclusively reported in April that chief executive Swann would be a casualty of Carlton's poor early-season form, combined with a lack of support for him within a splintered board, he announced on Wednesday that his departure date was set for June 23 after a mutual arrangement was brokered with the club.
Malthouse was clearly not happy yesterday at losing a working relationship with Swann that stretches back to when he joined Collingwood from West Coast.
Swann was Collingwood chief executive for seven years before spending almost eight years in the same role at Carlton.
The multiple premiership coach said he would never have joined Carlton if not for Swann running the club.
"I'm bitterly disappointed," Malthouse said. "I'm really dis appointed that he is going.
"He's certainly one of the best, if not the best, CEO that I've ever encountered in the last 20-odd years -- he's streets ahead." But he insisted he would remain as senior coach with his fourth club despite Swann's departure, which came as no surprise within the industry. "You just get on with your job," Malthouse said. "I'm a servant of the board." Under the strong leadership of Collingwood president Eddie McGuire, Swann and Malthouse helped build the foundations that eventually led to the Magpies' latest premiership, in 2010.
Malthouse praised Swann for his efforts in building the business side of Carlton, despite Swann's lack of premiership success during his stints with the Blues and the Magpies.
"He's come here and the numbers speak for themselves -- three times the membership, three times the turnover and a football club that's got these rooms (new training facility) and heading in the right direction," Malthouse said.
He backed Swann's ability to take over at another AFL club or even another code. "Greg's got the capabilities of being a CEO at a number of sports," he said.
Sections of the Carlton board have been calling for Swann's head for several years, but he remained at the Blues mainly due to strong support from outgoing president Stephen Kernahan.
Following the club's official 150th-year celebration next month, the pair leave their administration positions at Carlton on the same day.
The Blues, who play Brisbane at the Gabba tomorrow, made two enforced changes to the team that defeated Adelaide by five points on Sunday. Andrew Walker (knee) and Dennis Armfield (calf) could not be considered and have been replaced by Andrew Carr azzo and Mitch Robinson, who has completed a suspension.Carrazzo has not played since Carlton's win over the Western Bulldogs in round five, while Dylan Buckley has recovered from a hip problem that threatened to keep him sidelined this weekend.
Credit: Greg Denham, Australian football
Word count: 529
