The thirteenth day of the public inquiry into the issues plaguing the suspended Wingecarribee Shire Council heard evidence from a suspended councillor and a former mayor, who defended themselves against allegations of wrongdoing.
The first witness was suspended Wingecarribee Shire Councillor Peter Nelson, who worked at council as a staff member for 15 years before serving his first term on council in 2016.
Similarly to former staff and suspended councillor who have previously testified to the public inquiry, Mr Nelson identified former Councillor Garry Turland and suspended Councillor Ian Scandrett as the main forces fanning the flames of dysfunction in the council.
Mr Nelson told the inquiry Cr Turland disrupted council proceedings by attacking councillors and staff during council meetings and briefings.
“The way Councillor Turland would conduct his business was that, whatever the item was before council, he could use it as a way of being aggressive towards the chair or to the council or to the staff,” he said.
“Berrima Bypass, because of the problems with that project … he was able to use that item to create dysfunction.”
Mr Nelson said Cr Turland submitted a large volume of notices of motion and questions on notice to council in order to create dysfunction.
He noted Cr Scandrett also tried to use tactics to disrupt council meetings, such as his constant attempts to destabilise then-Mayor Duncan Gair.
“Cr Scandrett could always keep a calm demeanour mostly but keep niggling away underneath to get at you, in my opinion,” Mr Nelson said.
“Possibly the Mayor would then raise his voice and be more aggrieved.”
Mr Nelson, who ran as Cr Gair’s number two, condemned the “bullying and harassment” which he believed was targeted at unsettling the mayor.
Mr Nelson admitted he was not above the turmoil and had been involved in a heated exchange in the middle of the briefing room with former Councillor Turland. When it came to staff, however, he said the “argy-bargy” from councillors was restricted to the senior staff.
Documents tendered to the inquiry revealed his communications with the community were not as restrained. They include a number of emails in which Mr Nelson makes what he accepts as inappropriate comments which he concedes could have contributed to the perception that the councillors were adversaries to the public.
One of the exchanges was in the context of community backlash to the proposed Station St bypass when the suspended councillor said “emotions were running high”. He told the inquiry he had received an onslaught of emails from concerned community members, which felt like an attack.
In response to a detailed query about Station St from Jan Wilson, the President of Friends of Bowral, Mr Nelson claimed “and I’m the one with the vote, so you don’t count.”
Ms Wilson told the inquiry earlier the email was “unparliamentary”, and she felt a little intimidated by Mr Nelson’s action of hand-delivering a letter to her home. On the typed letter, he had written “What game are you playing at? Happy to reply again, now STOP.”
While he told the inquiry he felt the Wilsons were playing games with what he termed persistent communications, Mr Nelson regretted his comments.
He told the inquiry he didn’t send that kind of correspondence regularly, but was reminded of an email he sent about Paul Samulski in response to a letter critical of the councillors.
The inquiry heard Mr Nelson sent an email to the Southern Highlands Chamber of Commerce, where Mr Samulski held the position of council liaison director, to demand action.
He called Mr Samulski’s letter about council “inappropriate and disgusting” and effectively directed he be sacked from his role. Mr Nelson stood by the email and said he thought he showed civic leadership because Mr Samulski “was lying” about a local development.
Mr Nelson told the inquiry he wasn’t the only councillor to have communicated inappropriately, and pointed to former Mayor Ken Halstead. He gave two examples of Mr Halstead making requests of staff that he thought were improper, and named Mr Halstead as a lesser disrupting force within the council.
The suspended councillor also asserted the former mayor directed an engineer to stop his work to come to the briefing session to confirm some details about a project which could have properly been delivered by the senior staff.
In the latter half of the hearings, Mr Halstead said he didn’t recall the incident but acknowledged it was possible. He similarly said “I don‘t think I admonished anybody” in response to evidence given by Friends of Bowral President, John Barrett, about the former mayor’s words to him about the Station St project.
However, Mr Halstead did confirm his apology to former town planner Laurel Cheetham after he accused her of erroneous claims about the proposed bypass.
He said he understood the community feeling that the council had stopping listening in regards to Station St.
“The general feeling was that anybody that I spoke to … it was all about the fact that they were not being treated, in their opinion, properly or appropriately by staff,” he said.
His relationship with staff was highlighted in the inquiry when he was asked about a letter to the editor in which he and Cr Turland called for executive staff to take a 25 per cent pay cut during the pandemic.
“In our opinion it is obscene that the residents and ratepayers of the shire are expected to carry the load whilst suffering financial losses … whilst the administrative staff of the council collect their full wages,” the letter read.
Despite signing the letter as a councillor, Mr Halstead maintained it was a personal opinion and not representative of the councillors.
In another expression of his views, the inquiry was shown a clip of Mr Halstead threatening to take action against council staff and Mayor Gair after a notice of motion was not included in the business paper.
“I have no confidence in your ruling. I am not going to be hoodwinked … by any of you … All you want to do is shut us down,” he said in the video.
The former mayor told the inquiry he didn’t believe his successor knew all the procedures of how to effectively chair a meeting.
“It struck me that he seemed to lose control of the meeting on a number of occasions,” he said.
Mr Halstead asserted Cr Turland and Cr Scandrett were “treated in a different way” during meetings due to their ability to attract attention.
He claimed then-Mayor Gair inflamed existing tensions in the chambers by liberally using the mute button to silence councillors.
“I think it was inappropriate … and, in my view, provocative,” he said.
“And I just wonder whether that had the effect of annoying other councillors, I don‘t know, or stirring them up”.
Word count: 1097
