THERE is one significant difference between Adelaide and Port Adelaide fans, and it has been accentuated this season.
In their worst start to a season, the Crows were defeated by three points against Essendon on Sunday. But observing the team on the changeroom cameras, you couldn’t tell.
I watched Adelaide coach Matthew Nicks comfort his players with a reassuring tap on the back as they walked past him to the briefing room to gather behind closed doors away from the prying cameras.
It didn’t look like a shattered coach whose team just coughed up a gold-clad opportunity to secure its first win against an injury-riddled Essendon side which was missing seven of its best 22 players.
There were no visible signs of anger, frustration or disappointment from the coach or the players over the club’s worsening plight.
My suspicion was reinforced later that night while scrolling through hundreds of comments from Adelaide fans on Facebook. In response to the club’s usual post-game wrap on social media, there were 570 comments predominantly from proud Crows supporters.
Here’s a snapshot of the tone of the comments.
“So extremely proud of their efforts today. Well done boys ...” “That last quarter was so exciting, that was a great game to watch, a few more minutes and I think the win was ours. It was a win in my eyes, well done Crows.” “Really proud to be a Crows supporter, great effort boys a win is not too far away.” Despite Adelaide being winless after eight rounds and succumbing to its worst start to a season in the club’s history, the overwhelming emotion from the fans wasn’t frustration, embarrassment or anger; it was pride.
As deep and bitter as the rivalry is between the two South Australian teams is, one supporter group accepts losing as we witnessed by the satisfied Adelaide group last Sunday and the other doesn’t.
That’s the difference between Adelaide and Port Adelaide supporters. You only need to cast your mind back to 2012 when Port Adelaide coach Matthew Primus was into his second year as coach. Similarly, he was trying to rebuild a fractured playing group as Nicks is trying to do at the Crows.
Heading into round 18 against Fremantle at Football Park the Power possessed a record of five wins and 11 loses.
The impatient Power fans had already voted with their feet with a season-low 14,000 fans in attendance. While at the game, Power supporters were audibly irate with the style of play their team was producing, it was noticeable as a player and off-putting.
Port Adelaide lost by 27 points and had you checked Facebook that night, despite the club having already recorded five wins for the year and being only 18 months into a significant rebuild, there would have been no pats on the back nor any understanding from the fans. There certainly wouldn’t have been pride in that performance.
The following week the Power lost to GWS and Primus was removed as coach. Port Adelaide’s mantra is “we exist to win premierships”, a catchcry that is embraced by the old school supporter base, which had become accustomed to winning premierships in the SANFL.
That attitude filters down from the top. Club chairman David Koch has said any time his side misses the finals it is a failed season.
Coach Ken Hinkley also embraces the expectations of winning: “I love this club, and I love the history of this club and this club’s history is premierships, so that’s what we’re starting out to try and do. We’re going to start this year wanting to win the premiership in our 150th year,” he declared in February this year.
Had Port Adelaide started the season at zero and eight, just as Adelaide has done, its fans would be demanding answers and an extensive review. There would be anger and venom directed towards the players, coach and administrators. They would be demanding change just as they did in 2012.
It’s a stark difference to the attitude we are seeing coming out of the following at West Lakes. There would be no pride in honourable losses or small improvements from a handful of players. Embarrassment would be the prominent emotion. That’s the difference between the two supporter groups in this state. One accepts losing, the other doesn’t.
CREDIT: KANE CORNES
Word count: 722
