DON'S PARTY A YEAR ago Phil Walsh started his AFL coaching story at the Adelaide Football Club extremely confident of his vision for the Crows and preparation to command a football program. But he also knew his weaknesses, in particular in "selling" the club in the corporate boardrooms and with the media.
But Walsh was phenomenal in crossing that bridge. His presentation was immaculate. He wore the club blazer and tie, even though he was more of the T-shirt and tracksuit guy. He went to "meet and greet" breakfasts with the members. He delivered specialised videos on the club's website.
And - most powerfully, as highlighted in his pre-Showdown press conference with Ken Hinkley at Adelaide Oval in early May - Walsh overcame his media phobia to become one of the most-quoted and most-appreciated speakers in AFL football. His messages were clear. They almost became slogans - and remain strongly embedded. The echo of such descriptive quotes as "AFL football is like Formula One" does not fade.
This is all a hard act to follow for new Crows coach Don Pyke. How does he respectfully put forward his vision at West Lakes without overshadowing the memories of Walsh? And at the same time, how does he make the Adelaide Football Club move on - as the Crows so much want to do?
Inaugural Crows coach Graham Cornes noted - while annoying some executives at West Lakes - that the Adelaide Football Club and Pyke in particular have virtually become anonymous in the summer. If - as happened on Tuesday - the Crows chief executive, Andrew Fagan, is still being asked on Adelaide radio what Pyke stands for, what he is bringing to the football club and what he has been doing in the pre-season, there is an overdue need for the coach to fill in the gaps ... and not the suits in the front office.
Fagan talking about Pyke in October when he is appointed to the Crows job is fine. But if the questions are still there in February ... well, extraordinary circumstances considered at Adelaide, something is not quite right.
Pyke was on Melbourne radio 3AW this week explaining his reluctance on arriving in Adelaide to walk Media Street. He said he declined media interviews because he did not want to be pushing out his message before he delivered it to the players, face-to-face in the briefing room at West Lakes.
But this does not add up. Pyke did two media interviews - with commercial partners FIVEaa and Channel Seven - before he gathered his group for the first time at the clubhouse. He compromised to the commercial clauses in the club's corporate contracts.
Pyke is described by Fagan as "smart" and "driven". He carries outstanding and far-ranging endorsements, not only as a coach but also as a man. There are many who want him to succeed as an AFL coach, just as he did as a player and in business.
But AFL coaching today is - as Walsh accepted last year - about more than picking the match 22 and finding a game-winning strategy week after week. There are enormous demands to also be the face and voice of the football club.
Pyke now has to deliver. After all, he has had that team meeting. Now he has to do the same with the Crows members, the Adelaide faithful and the game's large community of fans. It is now five months without a memorable Pyke quote.
EMPEROR LOOMS NOMINATIONS for the SA Football Commission close with the SANFL next week. The league can start printing ballot papers with the names of former Glenelg president, "The Emperor" Gary Metcalf; probably former Crows, Western Bulldogs and Hawthorn football staffer James Fantasia and possibly former South Adelaide chief executive Ben Kavenagh.
QUICK CHANGE AFL House continues to writes rules - and quickly amend them, as highlighted by last week's verdict to contradict the "top-up" policy at Essendon by not granting the same relief to Port Adelaide, the Western Bulldogs, St Kilda and Melbourne.
And so it is with jumpers this season too. Adelaide is changing its away strip for the second consecutive year. So much for the AFL rule demanding all clubs keep a jumper for at least two seasons.
TIPS OF THE WEEK QATAR Airways is to start daily flights to Adelaide on May 2. Will the big launch in the preceding week include a sponsorship deal with the Adelaide Football Club?
WHO is the next "Essendon recruit" to join the Port Adelaide Football Club very soon?
QUESTION OF THE WEEK WILL Essendon hold its "top-up" signings to eight rather than the allocated 10 so that it has salary cap room to cover the payments it will have to make to former Bombers such as Patrick Ryder and Angus Monfries at Port Adelaide and Jake Carlisle at St Kilda?michelangelo.rucci@news.com.au
Credit: MICHELANGELO RUCCI
Word count: 825
