HAWTHORN has no fear of going to Perth in the first week of the finals if that's the way the schedule falls, according to three-time premiership player Jarryd Roughead.
After Friday night's shock 22-point loss to Port Adelaide, the Hawks are looking increasingly likely to have to travel interstate, and potentially twice to WA during the finals, in order to chase a third successive flag.
But Roughead maintained the club's solid record in Perth and its win over West Coast a fortnight ago at Subiaco will hold it in good stead if that is what is required next month.
"There are two games to go (Brisbane Lions and Carlton) and all we can do is win (those games) and hope that the Eagles lose," Roughead said. " Asked if there was concern about playing its first interstate final since 2010, Roughead was emphatic: "Obviously not, because we beat them (West Coast) a couple of weeks ago." He said there was no cause for panic in the Hawthorn camp after the club's second loss in the past month, given it won 10 of its previous 11.
And he insisted the Hawks would learn from the loss, saying there was no issue with wear and tear on the players, and clearly no issue with hunger after so much recent success.
"After the Richmond game, you were probably asking the same question, and we go across to Perth and win, and obviously we beat Geelong, too, so I don't think it is wear and tear," he said. "It is Round 21, and Port Adelaide has got nothing to play for, and they have got the freedom to try new things and play with a free spirit. You saw that tonight with blokes like (Brendon) Ah Chee and (Sam) Gray.
"We had a kick in the pants against Richmond three weeks ago. But we came into this game with a bit of confidence and a bit of momentum, So you have to give full credit to Port Adelaide." Hawks coach Alastair Clarkson had his team locked in a briefing room in the Etihad Stadium for more than 25 minutes after the match. But Roughead said it was a positive meeting about what lay ahead."(Clarko) was pretty reserved," he said. "He just went through a number of things and then we broke up into groups and spoke about the positives and negatives."
Credit: GLENN McFARLANE
Word count: 411
