Selected items from The Advertiser, published during the past 100 years. Compiled by CHRIS BRICE.
1905 (December 5)
IN the Anglican churches of the Adelaide diocese yesterday a pastoral letter was read . . . The pastoral dealt with several of the burning social questions of the day. With reference to "betting and gambling", the clerical heads of the church said: "Without discussing the question of the essential immorality of betting and gambling, we would direct attention to the obvious and undeniable fact that these practices have now grown to be a menace to the national character. The gambling spirit tends to encourage the hope of wealth without the price of steady persistent effort: it is the cause of unhappiness and estrangement in the family; it frequently drives to crime and suicide; and upon the individual character it leaves the mark of selfishness, hardness, and heartless cruelty. Under these circumstances it is a small thing to ask that the law, so far as it is deals with the question, may be strenuously enforced and loyally supported by all sections of the community".
1930 (December 5)
THE respect and admiration of the citizens will accompany Mr and Mrs Lavington Bonython in their retirement today as Lord Mayor and Lady Mayoress of Adelaide. Mr Bonython has filled the chair twice as Mayor and three times as Lord Mayor during periods noteworthy in the city records. He has left a mark upon the city by schemes of public improvement, effected or inaugurated under his auspices, which will not be readily effaced, and he has lent, wherever possible, the prestige of his high office to movements worthy of all respect. Mr Bonython has been aided by the co-operation of a Lady Mayoress of rare intelligence and kindly feeling . . .
1955 (December 7)
THE new terminal building at Adelaide Airport was expected to be completed in November next year, the Minister for Air (Mr Townley) said in Adelaide last night. Mr Townley . . . said the building would have two floors, surmounted by a modern control tower. On the ground floor there would be a passenger waiting area, dining facilities, kitchen and airline office space. The first floor would contain office space, a pilots' briefing room, and meteorological offices. The plans provided for a long observation deck, from which as many as 500 people could watch airport operations.
Word count: 413
