Space. The final frontier. The one place every human being looks to almost every day when they stretch their chins towards the sky. And yet outer space is the one place few of us think we could ever actually get to.
Well, if the likes of entrepreneurs Jeff Bezos, Richard Branson and Elon Musk have anything to do with it, we’ll all have access to space in ways we never imagined possible.
Futurist Morris Miselowski says that, in as short a time as a decade, space will open up as a job-generating industry, with space transport, space hotels and more.
“Branson is secretly training to go into orbit either this year or next, so we’re likely to see space become more and more common over the next decade or so,” Miselowski says. “And we’re not just going to have astronauts going up there … a whole new industry will be opened up that we can’t even imagine right now.” Down the track, he says, expect to see further space exploration and even space mining become valid job descriptions.
And it’s for this reason that Australian schools are also embracing space. The Mike Roach Space Education Centre was officially opened at Hamilton Secondary College last year, and is currently the only school in SA with a designated facility and specialist curriculum to lead space education.
The college’s Space Centre has three main areas – a simulated Martian crater with seven different geological zones, a Mission Control Room and a Briefing Room. “The briefing room is an audiovisual experience where students watch an introductory video about some of the issues that they need to overcome in moving humans to Mars,” the school’s website says. “Teams (take) turns to operate as astronauts dressed in full space suits collecting samples on the Mars surface, and scientists monitoring data and problem solving in Mission Control. The design simulates real-life Martian explorations in the same way that NASA sends space probes to land in craters, as they are prime locations to gather samples. The Space program is supported by a growing number of industry partners who share our vision and goal to be aglobal leader in space education.”
CREDIT: LIZ WALSH
Word count: 366
