IN ALL the impenetrable haze of polite diplomatic language swirling behind the security fence in Sydney we can bring you one definitive fact: Australia's Foreign Minister, Alexander Downer, does not want to be a panda.
As enthusiastic as Mr Downer is about a looming transfer of two rare and endangered giant pandas to delight punters at the Adelaide Zoo, he's perturbed by their short annual breeding cycle.
Learning yesterday from zoo director Chris West that pandas could only go at it successfully four days a year Mr Downer blurted, "Glad I wasn't born a panda," before blushing to the roots of his wavy hair and giggling at his own risque hilarity.
Two-year-old male panda Wangwang and his betrothed/beloved/intended/object of desire, one-year-old Funi, will come to the zoo for a 10-year visit under one of several agreements announced by Prime Minister John Howard and Chinese President Hu Jintao at the APEC summit.
Mr Downer's penetrating observation on the secret life of the panda came at the end of the Howard-Hu joint press conference, which was a study in contrasts with the well-oiled White House-George Bush operation in evidence the day before. Where the Bush show was hushed and controlled and seamless and mighty, the Chinese performance was defiant in its natural exuberance, the noise was on full volume, the chaos only just under control.
Mr Howard's small press briefing room in his Sydney offices was transformed into a bustling mini Beijing as the enormous and loquacious Chinese delegation squashed into the room. Officials spilled out of small rooms and down the hallways of the Commonwealth offices in Phillip Street.
There weren't enough seats and there was a slightly tense moment between Australian journalists and Chinese officials about who was supposed to be occupying them.
The chatter in the room was so loud Mr Howard and his staff had to beg for quiet during the signing of the new bilateral agreements, where normally you can hear a pin drop, and during the subsequent press conference.
Mr Hu, meanwhile, stood at the front of the room, a picture of serenity and absolute control, with his gold glasses and perfect black hair, listening carefully to the translations, his eyes fixed over the heads of the journalists. Off to his right, the hands of his interpreter trembled slightly as she made notes. A member of Mr Howard's staff encouraged her to make her remarks a bit closer to the microphone.
At the end of the news conference Mr Hu turned to his Australian counterpart and held out his arms for an embrace. Mr Howard went into the arms of China smiling, but looking slightly nervous at the intimacy of the encounter.
Illustration
Caption: PHOTO: Funi the female panda is bound for Adelaide Zoo from China. PICTURE: AFP
Word count: 481
