WASHINGTON: A day after accepting a top White House job, President Donald Trump’s new communications adviser has announced that he’s deleting old tweets, saying his own views have evolved and that what he said in the past shouldn’t be a distraction.
Mr Trump last week announced that he’d hired Wall St financier Anthony Scaramucci to help the White House sharpen its public message.
Social media users quickly did a deep dive and recirculated past tweets by Mr Scaramucci that were at odds with Mr Trump’s views, including one that praised Hillary Clinton’s competence.
Mr Trump beat Mrs Clinton for presidency last year and continues to criticise her.
Other repurposed Scaramucci tweets expressed support for stronger gun laws. In May 2016 he expressed displeasure with individuals who believe climate change is a hoax. Mr Trump has at times referred to global warming as a hoax.
“Full transparency: I’m deleting old tweets. Past views evolved & shouldn’t be a distraction. I serve POTUS agenda & that’s all that matters,” Mr Scaramucci said yesterday in the first of a pair of messages on the subject.
“The politics of ‘gotcha’ are over. I have a thick skin and we’re moving on to POTUS agenda,” he added.
Mr Scaramucci served Mr Trump as a campaign fundraiser and adviser during the transition.
He made his first appearance before reporters in the White House briefing room on Friday and quickly apologised for referring to Mr Trump as a “hack politician” during an August 2015 TV appearance.
Meanwhile, Mr Trump said yesterday he has “complete power” to issue pardons, an assertion that comes amid probes into Russian interference in last year’s election.In an early morning flurry of 10 tweets, he commented about pardons, former rival Mrs Clinton, son Don Jr., health care, the USS Gerald Ford, the Attorney-General and other issues. Mr Trump said in one of his messages: “While all agree the US President has the complete power to pardon, why think of that when only crime so far is LEAKS against us. FAKE NEWS.”
Word count: 331
