AUSTRALIA'S first Iraq war briefing yesterday was more like the information control seen from the dictatorship we are fighting. Obvious snippets of detail about Australia's troops that they had started fighting were handed out at the morning briefing at Canberra's Defence headquarters.
A ridiculous amount of information was suppressed, with most legitimate questions fended off by a refusal to discuss "current operations". This even extended to completed escort flights by Australia's F/A-18 Hornet aircraft.
These were described by Defence spokesman Brigadier Mike Hannan as "continuing" operations.
The military hamfistedness obscures the message defence should be trying to get across - pride in our troops. The military briefings should be about giving clear and concise details on Australian operations to the public. Britain and the US are allowing news cameras to ride with their infantry as they storm towards Baghdad, showing pictures of the troops and clearly identifying them. British and American newspapers are given almost unfettered access to military personnel.
Their stories are told with feeling and pride. Such as yesterday, when American Sandy Lyle watched her husband Clay charge through southern Iraq in a tank live on CNN. This is because television journalists are allowed to beam back live images using satellite videophones.
Australians cannot feel personal empathy with their own soldiers if they see only a neatly dressed officer standing in a clinical briefing room. The military argues we do not have infantry in Iraq and our troops are involved in easily compromised "niche" operations.
But surely a better effort can be made to explain why security could be compromised, rather than just blocking questions and imposing a virtual censorship regime.
Australia has restricted publication of surnames of personnel serving in the Iraq campaign. From the evidence of yesterday's briefing, this restriction on information extends to anything beyond the most basic detail about operations.
Frontline farce
Keeping secret the movements of SAS troops deep behind enemy lines is understandable. Nobody would seriously expect details of their operations to be revealed, because their security obviously would be compromised.
But the farcical briefing raised questions about what information would be given out in the future. When do "continuing operations" end? At the end of the war? Will failures as well as successes be revealed?
As Dan Rather, news anchor for US television network CBS, says: "The essence of a free and democratic country is that citizens are entitled to information, even information that might irritate them".
Truth is said to be the first casualty of war but one expects better from a proud democracy like Australia, particularly when this is one of the freedoms for which we are supposed to be fighting.
-KEYS- iraq
Middle East - War
Censorship - Australia
Freedom of the press
Australia - Armed forces
Word count: 487
