POLICE in Georgia used handcuffs to restrain a six-year-old girl who threw a tantrum at school, saying they did it in the interest of the child's safety.
Police in the town of Milledgeville were called to Creekside Elementary on Friday "to assist with an unruly juvenile who had damaged other students' property, school property and had injured the principal", interim police chief Dray Swicord said yesterday.
The principal told the officer Salecia Johnson had caused damage to school property and had tried several times to run away from the premises.
The child was accused of tearing items off the walls and throwing books and toys.
Police said she also threw a small shelf that struck the principal in the leg, jumped on a paper shredder and tried to break a glass frame.
When an officer tried to calm the child in the principal's office, she resisted, authorities said.
"The officer noticed all the damage, placed the student in handcuffs for the student's safety as well as others." .
When police and school officials were unable to contact the child's parents, "the officer transported the student, handcuffed, to the police station".
Baldwin County schools Superintendent Geneva Braziel called the student's behaviour "violent and disruptive".
Interim Police Chief Dray Swicord said the department's policy is to handcuff people when they are taken to the police station, regardless of their age, "for the safety of themselves as well as the officer".
However, police said the handcuffs were removed when they reached the station. "The student was never placed in a holding cell or jail cell," their statement read.
Instead she was taken to a briefing room and given a drink and eventually an aunt came to pick her up.
"She might have misbehaved, but I don't think she misbehaved to the point where she should have been handcuffed and taken to the police department," the girl's aunt, Candace Ruff, told TV station WMAZ-13.
She said Salecia complained about the handcuffs. "She said they were really tight. She said they really hurt her wrists," Ms Ruff said. "She was so shaken up."
The child's mother, Constance Ruff, said her daughter has been suspended and cannot return until August when the new school year begins. She blamed the bad behaviour on mood swings.
"She has mood swings some days," she said. "I guess that was just one of her bad days that day."
Civil rights advocates and criminal justice experts say frustrated teachers and principals across the country are calling in police to deal with even minor disruptions.
"Kids are being arrested for being kids," said Shannon Kennedy, a civil rights attorney.
Credit: JEFF MARTIN, ATLANTA, GEORGIA; AFP/AP
Word count: 453
