The great detective is back but not as you know him in the hands of funnymen Will Ferrell and John C. Reilly, writes JAMES WIGNEY
THERE is a running joke in Will Ferrell’s new comedy, Holmes and Watson, that might get a bigger laugh in Australia than anywhere else in the world.
In his absurdist take on Sir Arthur Conan Doyle’s much loved and much filmed detective, Ferrell took delight in sending up some of the ridiculous “scientific beliefs and misbeliefs” of the Victorian era and decided that Sherlock Holmes and his partner, John Watson, would use their famous intellects to do very stupid things.
“The comedy comes from not using the best judgment even though they are so smart — like trying to shoot down an infestation of bees with a pistol,” says Ferrell. “Or Holmes’ insistence on eating raw onions all the time and trying to get Watson to do the same. So while they are making stupid decisions they are coming at it from a place of science and academia.” Given Holmes’ peculiar tastes, it seems remiss not to share with master of the madcap Ferrell the indelible memory of the time then Australian Prime Minister Tony Abbott chowed down on a raw onion in 2015.
“Oh, interesting,” he says after a pause, utterly flummoxed. “Was that on a dare?” On hearing that the bizarre incident the PM would later regret was in full view of TV cameras, for no apparent reason, and the video footage rapidly went viral, Ferrell’s confusion turns to delight as he lets out a roar of laughter.
“Well then, we’ll get at least one laugh,” he chuckles. “That’s hilarious.” Since making his first appearance in print in 1887, Sherlock Holmes has become one of the most beloved fictional figures whose fame and popularity have led some to believe he is in fact a historical figure. He’s also listed by the Guinness Book of World Records as the most portrayed movie character in history, with the likes of Basil Rathbone, Jeremy Brett, Benedict Cumberbatch, Michael Caine, Jonny Lee Miller, Robert Downey Jr and Ian McKellen having donned the deerstalker cap and cracked the impossible cases on the big or small screen.
This new version has been in and out of development for years, stalled by Guy Ritchie’s action-heavy films with Downey Jr in the role, but Ferrell was tickled not just by the prospect of doing a “full-on comedic take”, but also the opportunity to reunite with regular collaborator John C. Reilly, who plays loyal sidekick Watson.
After starring together in the 2006 racing comedy Talladega Nights: The Ballad Of Ricky Bobby, then Step Brothers two years later, the pair discovered they had a uniquely ridiculous chemistry, becoming fast friends, and remained in touch and on the lookout for another opportunity to work together.
“I think we are always thinking of each other for things and this was just the right place at the right time,” Ferrell says. “So it was just a great opportunity – and then to get to really dive in with the period costumes and shoot the entire thing on location in London, we would just giggle every day going, ‘Are we actually doing this’?” Ferrell says the key to their success together is that each of them utterly commits to their character, regardless of how out-there, misguided or downright dopey they might be.
“I just love that we are always on the same page in terms of the level of commitment, in the sense that we are never ironically playing to get a laugh. In those moments, it’s full conviction to whatever are saying or doing.” And while they might be aiming to play their characters with a straight face, both Ferrell and Reilly relish the badge of honour that comes with cracking the other up during a take, even if it comes at the expense of the rest of the cast and crew. Ferrell recalls a running joke that arose during the filming of Step Brothers – dismissed on release 10 years ago and now revered as a cult classic – where he and Reilly tried to put each other off their game by strategically farting during scenes.
“Oh, yeah,” recalls Ferrell with a laugh. “I think that happened in the scene where we were falling asleep and taunting each other. I believe it was John who just happened to have some opportunistic gas that day, so it became a recurring theme.
“Especially after lunch, if there was a scene … and now I feel bad for the other cast members because we wouldn’t alert them to our little game and they would be like, ‘It stinks in here, what’s going on?’.” There have long been rumours about a possible sequel to Step Brothers, but while Ferrell and director Adam McKay, whose Dick Cheney biopic Vice will be going head to head with Holmes and Watson on Boxing Day, have discussed a few different scenarios, nothing ever came to fruition. Ferrell and McKay also collaborated on the cult comedy Anchorman: The Legend Of Ron Burgundy and its sequel Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues, which also featured a cameo from Reilly.
While we sadly might never see another full-length feature of the further adventures of San Diego’s finest newscaster, Ferrell thinks the time could be right for the return of Ron in a slightly different scenario. The staunch Democrat and Hillary Clinton supporter, who campaigned in the recent US midterm elections, would love to see Burgundy tackle the “fake news” era and the toxic relations between the current administration and the White House press corps, which saw CNN reporter Jim Acosta briefly banned from media briefings for asking President Donald Trump tough questions.
“Ron would probably live in mortal fear of being thrown out of the press room so he would just be the king of the softball question,” Ferrell says, with a laugh. “He’d probably get thrown out for asking the questions that were just too stupid. It’s kind of crazy what’s happening here, but it feels like the press is doing a good job of fighting back.
“But you’re right – maybe Ron needs to make an appearance. In fact nothing would tickle me more than to sneak in to that White House press briefing room as Ron Burgundy. You have given me a great idea. I wonder if I could get the credentials — that would be incredible.” Stay classy, Washington.NOW SCREENING
CREDIT: JAMES WIGNEY
Word count: 1081
