Andy McNab served with the British SAS regiment in Iraq during the 1991 Gulf War. He commanded an eight-man squad on a mission far behind enemy lines to destroy communication links and mobile Scud missile launchers - a mission that went horribly wrong. After the war he wrote about his exploits in the best-selling book Bravo Two Zero. As the world prepares to wage war against terrorism following the attacks on the World Trade Centre in New York and the Pentagon in Washington, the SAS are already operating deep in Afghanistan hunting for terror leader Osama bin Laden. This excerpt from Bravo Two Zero gives some insight into the planning, stealth and courage needed to survive alone in enemy territory.
WE were told we were going in that night. It was quite a relief. We'd got to the airfield with only what we stood up in. In the afternoon, I gave a formal set of orders. Everybody who was involved in the task was present - all members of the patrol; the squadron OC; the OPS officer who oversees all the squadron's operations.
After I had delivered them verbally, the orders would be handed over to the operations centre. They would stay there until the mission was completed, so that if anything went wrong everybody would know what I wanted to happen.
If we ought to have been at point A by day 4, for example, and we weren't, they'd know that I wanted a fast jet flying over so I could make contact by TACBE.
The top of each orders sheet is overprinted with the words Remember Need to Know to remind you of OPSEC. It's critically important that nobody should know anything that does not concern him directly. The pilots, for example, would not attend the orders.
I started by describing the ground we were going to cover. You have to explain your orders as if nobody's got a clue what's going on - so in this case I started by pointing out where Iraq was and which countries bordered it. Then you go into the area in detail, which for us was the bend in the MSR. I described the lie of the ground and the little topographical information I had. Everything that I knew, they had to know. Next I gave times of first and last light, the moon states and the weather forecast. I had been confidently informed by the met blokes that the weather should be cool and dry. Weather information is important because if, for example, you have been briefed in the orders that the prevailing wind is from the north-east, you can use that information to help you with your navigation.
Since the weather was still forecast as fairly clement for the duration of our mission, we had again elected to leave our sleeping bags behind. Not that there would have been any room to take them anyway.
I now gave the Situation phase of the orders. I would normally tell at this point everything I knew about the enemy that concerned us - weapons, morale, composition and strengths, and so on - but the intelligence was very scanty. I would also normally mention the location of any friendly forces and how they could help us, but for our op there was nothing to tell.
Next was the mission statement, which I repeated twice. It was just as the OC had given it to us in the briefing room: one, to locate and destroy the landline in the area of the northern MSR, and two, to find and destroy Scuds.
Now came Execution, the real meat of the orders - how we were actually going to carry out the mission. I gave a general outline, broken down into phases, a bit like telling a story.
"Phase 1 will be the infiltration, which will be by the Chinook. Phase 2 will be moving up to the LUP-cum-cache area. Phase 3 will be LUP routine. Phase 4 will be the recce then target attack on the landline. Phase 5 will be the actions on Scud location. Phase 6 will be the exfiltration, or resupply and retasking."
Then, for each phase, I would go into the detail of how we were going to do it. This has to be as detailed as possible to eliminate grey areas. After every phase I then gave the "actions on" - for instance, actions on compromise during the drop-off, if the patrol came under fire just as the heli took off again. Then people would know what I wanted to happen when there was no drama, and they'd also know what needed to happen if there was.
That was all very fine in theory, of course, but for each of these actions on you also need to describe every detail of how you want things to be done. All of this had to be talked about and worked out beforehand and then given in the formal orders. Forward planning saves time and energy on the ground because people then know what is required of them. For example, what happens if the heli is required to return to the patrol at some stage to replace a damaged radio? When the heli lands do we go around to the back of the aircraft? Do we take the new radio out of the loadmaster's side door? How do we actually call the heli in? What is the authentification code? The answer to this one was that we'd give a phonetic code, the letter Bravo, as recognition. The heli pilot would know that at a certain grid, or in a certain area within that grid, he was going to see us flashing Bravo on infrared. He'd be looking through his PNG (passive night goggles), and because I'd told him so he'd know, he would land five metres to the left-hand side of the B when he saw it.
Then, because he was landing on my right-hand side, all I'd have to do was walk past the cockpit to the loadmaster's door, which is behind the cockpit on the left-hand side on the Chinook, throw a radio in and catch the radio that they threw out.
If there were any messages they'd grab my arm and give them to me on a bit of paper. The exchange would be all over in a minute.
It took about an hour and a half to go through all the details of each phase. Next were co-ordinating instructions, the nitty-gritty details like timings, grid references, RVs, locations of interest. These had already been given but would be said again to confirm. This stage also included actions on capture, and details of the E&E plan.
I covered service support, which was an inventory of the stores and equipment we were taking with us.
And finally I described the chain of command and signals - types of radio, frequencies, schedules, codes and codewords, and any field signals that were unique to the task.
"As I'm sure you all know by now," I said, "our callsign is Bravo Two Zero. The chain of command is myself as patrol commander and Vince as 2I/C. The rest of you can fight for it."
It was now the patrol's chance to ask questions, after which we synchronised watches.
The air brief was given by the pilot, since he would be in command during the infil and exfil phases. He showed us a map of the route we were going to take, and talked at some length about the likely difficulty of anti-aircraft sites and attack by Roland ground- to-air missiles. He told us what he wanted to happen in the back of the aircraft, and the actions on crashing. I had talked to him about this before and was secretly glad that he wanted us to split up, with the aircrew and the patrol taking their own chances.
To be honest, we wouldn't have wanted a bunch of aircrew with us, and for some reason they were not particularly keen to come with us anyway. He spoke, too, about deconfliction, because there were going to be air-raids going in on surrounding targets - a number of fixed- launch sites were going to be hosed down within 10km of our drop- off point.
Our deconfliction was arranged to enable us to slip in under these air strikes and use them for cover. The orders group ended at about 1100. Everybody now knew what they had to do, where they were doing it, and how they were going to do it.
GLOSSARY
LUP - lying-up point
MSR - main supply route
OC - officer commanding
OPSEC - operational security
RV - rendezvous point
TACBE - tactical beacon
From Bravo Two Zero by Andy McNab
Copyright 1993 Andy McNab
Reprinted by permission of Random House Australia
All rights reserved Random House Australia $19.40
available now from all bookshops
Great Britain - Special Air Service
Middle East - War
Illustration
Caption: Andy McNab; Photo: Photo: badge symbol who dares winsPhoto: soldiers embarking from helicopterPhoto: andy mcnab
Word count: 1565
