RACE THE CLOCK, Meet the crew, MORTALS IN and Jungle juice joined to story.
Sunday's Australian GP opens the Formula One season. Bob Jennings, the only Australian motoring writer to drive a current F1 car, charts the rarified territory where motor sport and global business meet.
The last time I drove a Formula One car, I didn't crash. For which everybody concerned was duly thankful - after all, the regular driver was renowned for his ability to do so.
I piloted the 3.5-litre V8 Tyrrell for a few kilometres through the streets of Adelaide, tucked in behind a fast-moving police escort car whose wailing siren was drowned by the engine's piercing howl.
It was snug, bordering on uncomfortable, inside the car. It would not suit the claustrophobic, especially when the cacaphonic howl of the engine assaults the senses, which are forced to be focused, with every little twitch of hands and feet resulting in an instant, uncompromising reaction.
Top speed on the journey was a modest 100 km/h, or about one-third of the car's potential - but not a bad rate of progress for the main street of the City of Churches. I returned the Tyrrell in good working order ...
"First time this year," the crew chief ventured. The regular driver, after all, had been Andrea "De-Crasheris" De Cesaris, one of the most crash-prone drivers of the decade in F1. But at least I was his size, and therefore could fit in the car.
Nothing, but nothing, is done casually in Formula One. Even the seemingly casual offer to have a brief, demonstration drive in the Tyrrell involved seat fittings at two circuits, numerous out-of-car and in-cockpit briefings and, on the day, a "skeleton" crew of eight.
The crew from Tyrrell - subsequently bought by British American Tobacco to form the British American Racing team - brought up the rear, grinning with relief.
At that stage, it was estimated that the cost of running a Formula One car was about $5,000 a kilometre, whether in practice, a race - or in a promotional blast along the road. Call it a 10-grand outing, give or take ...
For a start, in an F1 car every last nut and bolt has a carefully detailed "life", and it is thrown out before it could be expected to break under the strain.
The car is never started without a complement of engineers who need to plug their laptops into the vehicle's electronic black boxes. Every burp, bump and squeak, stationary or moving, of engine or suspension or steering, is recorded and analysed.
This was just a microcosm of Formula One, the high-flying, big-spending circus which this week has moved into Melbourne to the accompanying roar of half a dozen Jumbo jets, three of them alone carrying TV equipment for F1's own multi-channel, interactive, digital TV show - which is not available in Australia.
Most of the drivers arrived by commercial Jumbo as well, which is a bit of a novelty for them. In Europe, where the Grand Prix drivers are based, a high proportion of them either own or lease their own aircraft. Nearly all of them - naturally - are business jets such as Falcons and Lears. Some learn to fly them, some just pay others to do the hard work. And, of course, these status symbols are tax deductible ...
Still, even comparatively lesser drivers are pulling in the odd million or two per driving year, and the more successful collect more than $10 million, so it's all a matter of proportion.
The trouble is the proportions we're talking about here are disproportionate to any other sport. Top team budgets run into hundreds of millions of dollars a year, with the teams sometimes running headquarters in their home country and a manufacturing base in the UK, which is still the hardware home of Formula One.
Nothing is too much trouble if it is seen as giving an edge, in any area at all of what is undoubtedly one of the most competitive areas of sport, and where money is the common lubricant.
Benetton, for instance, has just opened in the UK what is in effect a $10 million gymnasium for its drivers, Giancarlo Fisichella and Alexendar Wurz, and other members of the team.
The "Human Performance Centre" includes a testing laboratory and performance studio, physiotherapy clinic and briefing room. It is managed by ex-international triathlete and British cross-country ski champion, Bernie Shrosbree, who is assisted by a team of physiotherapists and sports scientists.
Increasingly, automotive manufactuers are entering partnerships with F1 teams as a means of exploiting the promotional activites of what is touted as one of the biggest TV events in the world; second only, according to the Federation International de
l'Automobile (motor sport's ruling body), to the Olympics and World Cup soccer.
The free-to-air TV is claimed to go to 206 countries with total viewers over the year (the number of times a program is seen, not necessarily by different individuals, the FIA says helpfully) of an astonishing 57.7 billion, with 1.34 million minutes of broadcast.
It's not so much a sport for vehicles now as a vehicle for worldwide promotion.
Already in the system are Fiat, owner of Ferrari; Ford, previously an engine supplier and now owner of the Jaguar team (relabelled and re-liveried after the buy-out of the Jackie Stewart team); DaimlerChrysler through Mercedes, which is now a 40 per cent stake-holder in McLaren.
BMW is returning to F1, after an absence of 12 years, in partnership with Williams. Peugeot - patriotically - is engine supplier to former champion Alain Prost's team, Renault still supplies engines to a couple of teams and Honda is back as engine supplier to British American Racing, as well as supporting Jordan through its affiliate, Mugen-Honda.
Toyota is poised to enter with a complete team of its own in 2002, having bought a five per cent stake in Yamaha (recently an engine supplier to Tyrrell and Arrows).
These promotional opportunities form the backbone of race organisers' income. Every team has major and minor sponsors. Each of these sponsor companies takes the opportunity at the 17 races of the season for locally based promotional programs, which involve hospitality at the circuit.
The hospitality in turn means inviting guests and clients to be ultra-impressed as they view proceedings from corporate suites at prime positions around the circuit.
The poor bloody paying punters either buy expensive grandstand seats or poke their noses between the corporate facilities for a glimpse of the action. That means high-speed mobile billboards flashing past, with only the tops of the drivers' helmets showing.
It's frequently been ventured that one of the reasons for retaining the big wings on the backs of the cars is that they are ideal signboards for the bigger-paying sponsors ...
Such sponsors are desperately needed to maintain the critical mass of F1. The bigger teams employ 300 or 400 people - in addition to a couple of hundred-odd in the engine development departments back at Mercedes, BMW, Ford, Peugeot and Honda.
Separate "test" teams travel European F1 circuits to develop the racing cars. There are separate squads of mechanics, transporters and aspiring F1 drivers, who pay the teams anything up to $2 million or $3 million a year for the privilege of pounding around deserted circuits for hour after hour in front of no-one in the hope that maybe one day the experience they have gained will earn them a seat on race day.
The cars are incredibly high-tech, which is simultaneously a major strength and a major weakness of F1. The weakness is that if you can't keep up with the cost of the technology, you're so far behind the game it isn't funny.
Designers are poached from the aeronautics industry; major information technology companies and providers of exotic materials are leaned on heavily too.
The IT companies provide both the computer and communications hardware and the software for the sophisticated programs relaying real-time information from the cars to the backroom squad buried in the middle section of the massive pit garage.
These internal areas of the pit garage are increasingly off-limits. Not so many years ago a keen spectator could go on a "pit walk" past the front of the garages and pretty much see what was going on.
Now, office-type partitions behind the F1 cars hide the real nerve centres from casual view.
The IT people and their banks of equipment fill one section. Engine and gearbox people use another. And there are stores of essential spares which can be zipped on to the car at a moment's notice, or if a driver smacks a wall while exploring the limits of adhesion.
There's a debriefing room where the drivers and engineers talk through every practice and qualifying session; offices for admin and PR people.
Rearmost, and open to view for the select few who make it into the F1 paddock, is the team catering, where clever chefs prepare three meals a day for the team and special meals for the drivers.
So is it sport or business? There's no doubt it's a major industry involving thousands of people and millions of dollars.
Despite the carefully honed presentation, at the end of it all there are still people driving their hearts out and putting their lives on the line simply to beat the next bloke. That's sport.
RACE THE CLOCK
Wheel nuts off.
Fuelling begins.
Wheels removed.
New wheels fitted.
Wheelmen signal
all-clear.
Car is lowered.
Driver selects gear. Fuelling completed.
Lollipop pulled clear.
Car exits pit.
Meet the crew
Crewmen at each end hoist the car off the ground with jacks. Three mechanics are assigned to each wheel. Wheel nuts are often too damaged to be re-used, so each tyre crew carries a spare. Spare air tools are also located around the car. Crews have been timed to change all four tyres in less than 5 seconds.
The refueller pumps fuel into the car from a reservoir tank in the pits.
A red light inside his helmet indicates that fuel is flowing. A green light indicates that all the fuel is delivered. An assistant steadies the fuel hose.
A crew member steadies the car against the force of the refuelling process, preventing the car being pushed off the jacks. He might also make sure the side radiator ducts are free of debris. The visor wiper cleans the driver's helmet visor.
A good pitstop should take no longer than 10 seconds. A 10-second "stop-go" penalty applies for drivers who speed in the pit lane. As many as 18 people participate in a pitstop, each with a specific duty to ensure a smooth and rapid return to the race.
The lollipop man holds a sign that shows the driver where to stop, when to keep the brakes on (to prevent the wheels spinning) and when to rejoin the race. Using an air-jack at the front makes lifting quicker and gives the driver a more accurate idea of where to stop.
MORTALS IN
Jacques Villeneuve describes F1 driving: "Imagine holding a 30 kg weight around your neck and then dropping it. That's what it's like every time you hit the brakes." McLaren's two-seater car enables mere mortals to experience F1. Kieran Perkins and Emma George will be among the passengers at the Albert Park circuit.
JUNGLE JUICE
After exotic - and sometimes toxic - fuels were banned a few years ago, the fuel used in F1 is unleaded and "similar" to that available at petrol stations. It must comply with strict emissions standards. Specifications meet this year's European standards for petrol used in road cars.
VOGUE VEES
Engine suppliers to F1 refuse to divulge details of engine power, but educated guesses say it "easily exceeds" 520 kW and in some cases tops 600 kW. Engines in F1 have a maximum capacity of 3.5 litres, and the
current fashion is for V8s and V10s.
WEB LINKS
www.grandprix.com.au
Official Qantas Australian GP site.
www.ten-tenths.com
English on-line magazine.
www.autosport.com
Authoritative UK magazine, Autosport.
www.ferrari.it
Official Ferrari site.
www.mclaren.co.uk
Official McLaren-Mercedes site.
www.dailyf1.com
Multilingual site with games, live reports.
Also: www.f1racing.net www.f1today.com www. f1central.net
Illustration
Caption: TWO ILLUS: Photography courtesy F1 Racing magazine. Graphic by Jamie Brown.
Word count: 2057
