Jake Kovco was the first Australian soldier to die in Iraq, killed by a single shot to the head from his army-issue pistol on April 21, 2006. In an exclusive reconstruction, Dan Box describes the day of his mystery death, officially by misadventure while skylarking. Kovco's family disputes this finding
AT 6.15am, Private Ray Johnson woke, pushed back his camouflage-print doona and got up. It was already hot, despite the constant, noisy work of the airconditioner above his bed. He showered and, when he got back to the room, woke the other two men sleeping in the bunks beside the door. They went quickly through their morning routine: wash, dress, webbing, weapons, helmet, out.
Sharing a space this small with two other blokes, each learned to live without getting on the others' nerves. It was just another day.
Another eight hours of guard duty, rotating around different positions at the Australian embassy in Baghdad, either singly or in pairs. There were no breaks, not even for lunch. Those men off duty would bring food for those standing guard. Wherever you got your food, you ate. Officially, everything was organised according to a weekly roster, but that wasn't set in concrete. Things got changed as soldiers were rotated back to Australia or to Rome for their 10 days' leave, or to bolster numbers for missions into the Red Zone. According to the roster, Private Jacob (Jake) Kovco should have been shadowing Johnson from point to point that day, but instead he ended up working with another soldier, Private Stephen Carr.
The two men saw each other a few times during the day. At 10am they were on duty together at the checkpoint on the road outside, where any approaching driver would stop while the soldiers searched him and his vehicle before waving him through.
After an hour, Carr moved on to the next position and Kovco remained, staring at the pale, dusty walls of the buildings outside. For the next few hours they worked alone, sharing a joke each time they met while crossing the car park or in the corridors. Carr's roommate, Private Stephen Volkofsky, was rotating around the same positions behind Kovco, who would always take the time to say "hi" as they passed. He seemed his normal self. Pretty relaxed.
At 2pm, Kovco joined Carr at the observation post on the northeast corner of the embassy roof, overlooking the street in front of the building. The work at this location mainly revolved around keeping the road beneath them clear. If a car or truck tried to park, one of the soldiers would give them a blast of the siren, pick up the megaphone and shout a few words, telling the driver to move on. As the end of the shift approached, the men relaxed and began joking around. At 3pm, they knocked off. Tired and sweating under their heavy body armour, the soldiers headed straight back to their bedrooms to get changed.
Room allocation had been done on a first-in, best-dressed basis, with the section commanders happy to let the men sort it out. Johnson, Kovco and another of their mates, Private Rob Shore, had decided to share, even though it was a small room and would have been more comfortable with just two people. Each bed had army-issue purple sheets and pink pillows. The room itself was a little over 2m high, about the same in width and twice that long. The soldiers had a bar fridge on the floor to the right of the door.
Despite its faults -- the mattresses were about 40cm too short for the frame of the bunks -- the room was still the only place they could relax. By now, their routine was established: come back from duty, change, check their email, listen to music, sing along. They would switch off as soon as they got inside. Johnson and Shore talked about going to the gym, but each was pretty comfortable for now and this got delayed. Instead, they turned on Johnson's iPod, which was sitting on the fridge. It had to be pretty loud over the noise of the airconditioning and the regular roar of helicopters arriving outside with wounded for the US-run 10 Combat Support Hospital next door.
The three men talked about bush trips, forced marches, old friends and a Charlie company lieutenant they used to call Smoking Joe; they joked that he was a pothead because they'd seen a photo of him with a head full of dreadlocked hair. Kovco took part in the conversation off and on, while he read his emails from his wife, Shelley. He'd sent her a webcam he bought from an Iraqi but she couldn't find it.
For a moment he thought he mustn't have checked the box to make sure it was in there, in which case he'd been ripped off. But as he read on, Kovco found Shelley had looked again and discovered it. He laughed.
Lying on his bunk, Shore put down his photo album and sat up, took off his boots and carried them over to his locker at the far end of the room. Walking back, he went to the bar fridge and bent down to get a drink. He had his back to Kovco, who was still standing at the bunk. Johnson, sitting on his bed with his feet on the floor, was looking at the laptop resting on his knees and couldn't see Kovco either, even when Kovco turned towards him. Shore later said he heard Kovco say something, but could not make out the exact words. Neither of Kovco's room-mates heard the sound of a gun being cocked.
Next door, the sounds of music and men laughing penetrated the thin wooden wall and was keeping Volkofsky awake. Twisting in his bed, trying to sleep, his temper snapped. Furious -- he needed his sleep -- he shouted at them to shut up, but with no luck. The voices continued. Reluctant to leave his bunk, Volkofsky looked up at his roommate Carr who was sitting at the desk. "Mate, can you get them to shut the f..k up?" he asked.
"Shut the f..k up!" Carr shouted through the thin panelling between the rooms. This time, the voices fell silent.
In the corridor, Corporal Christopher Saunders headed for Kovco's room. He too had come to tell them to keep the noise down. As section commander, it was his job to maintain some kind of order among the bored soldiers, especially when there were others heading out on guard duty that night who needed their sleep. As Saunders got to the door of the room, he saw the piece of paper pinned there with the room number, eight, and beneath it the names of the room's occupants -- "Johno, Shore, Kovco" -- in large, untidy handwriting. Reaching out to touch the door handle, he heard the shot. It sounded like someone punching a steel locker.
The 9mm Browning pistol is a loud, old-fashioned gun and the noise it makes can be heard clearly from 50m or even 100m away. Inside the room, Johnson and Shore were only a few metres from the pistol when it fired but they don't remember a loud noise. To Johnson it sounded like a firecracker, to Shore a cap-gun.
The bullet, a 9mm Parabellum round, is short, heavy and relatively slow moving. It entered Kovco's head just in front of his right ear and exited through the top left-hand side of his skull on its way to leaving a neat hole in the ceiling. The force of the impact spun Kovco around, he stumbled, his body crumpled and he fell, landing with his legs twisted and flung out towards the far end of the room and his head at the foot of Johnson's bed.
Standing at the fridge, Shore turned in time to see him fall. "F..k!" He tried to comprehend what he was seeing. At the same time, Johnson's eyes snapped up from his laptop screen to see Kovco's head at his feet, blood gushing out. He jumped up, throwing the computer on to the bed, and clamped his hand to the side of his mate's face, trying with fingers alone to stop the blood pouring on to the brown carpet. He could not see the entry wound.
"Medic! Get a medic!" he yelled as loudly as he could, again and again. Shore grabbed a shell dressing from his webbing in the pile under his bed, tore open the plastic packing and threw the thick gauze pad to his friend. Catching it, Johnson held it tight against Kovco's head, then another and another but the blood kept flowing. Saunders has said he opened the door to see Johnson cradling Kovco's head on his knees and asking him, desperately, "What have you done?" Johnson, however, has denied saying this. By his account, as he tried to halt the blood, he repeated over and over, "Stay with me, Jake. Stay with me, Jake."
Hearing the shot, the soldiers on guard duty outside sprinted towards the barracks, carrying a stretcher. There was a lot of movement at the doorway, a lot of voices and a lot of shouting but the men inside the room couldn't make out exactly what was said or by whom. Johnson tried to find a pulse in Kovco's neck. It was there, but only a very faint beat.
Lance Corporal Kristien Cook ran down the corridor, smashing his way through bodies to get in. Now there were two trained combat first-aiders, Cook and Shore. In the chaos the platoon sergeant, Colin Hoekstra, saw the pistol lying on the floor and moved it towards Kovco's bunk, out of harm's way. Carr ran towards the hospital to get help.
Shore, Johnson and Cook lifted Kovco and carried him through the door, where the stretcher was waiting. Shore had Kovco's head, Johnson his body and Cook his legs. Kovco was a big bloke, taller than his roommates and heavier, at 88kg.
Outside the room they turned right, headed down the passageway and out through the gap in the concrete barrier. A four-wheel-drive gator, like those used to carry injured sportsmen from the field, was waiting, driven by two US medics. The hospital was only a few hundred metres from the embassy.
The adrenalin started to leave Johnson's system and he headed back to the room. Hoekstra was already there. It was only then Johnson saw the pistol lying on the floor.
At 4.20pm the Australian detachment commander, Major Kyle Tyrrell, was wrapping up the day's events with his junior officers in a briefing room. Suddenly, Captain Garth Callender entered the room, unexpected and uncomfortable. Moving too quickly, Callender's actions betrayed a sense of urgency, though force of habit made him steel his message with the cold jargon of military communication. Notification had come through of a "Priority one no duff", meaning a real emergency, not an exercise. A soldier had sustained a gunshot wound to the head in his accommodation room.
Tyrrell ordered a vehicle and driver. He told Lieutenant Simon Croft, Kovco's platoon commander, to grab his combat armour and weapons and go on ahead. Tyrrell made sure his headquarters knew there had been a casualty, then followed Croft about five minutes later. The armoured SUVs drove fast, covering the few kilometres in minutes. At the embassy, Croft stopped the first person he saw. "People heard a shot ring out, it looks like Kov shot himself," the soldier told him. "The round's gone in the bottom side of his face and come out the top, he's hurt pretty bad."
"How the f..k did he do that?" Croft demanded.
"I don't know, he had the pistol in his hand, he fired it, there's blood everywhere, he's hurt pretty bad."
At the hospital Shore and Cook took the stretcher inside, where a nurse told them to carry Kovco to the emergency room. They were not allowed to follow and, left to wait outside in the sudden quiet of the hospital corridor, they quickly became upset. "What the f..k happened?" Cook asked. "I don't know, we were in the room laughing and carrying on, I didn't even see his pistol and bang, it went off," Shore answered.
News of the shooting was already flying back through the night: to Camp Victory, to Joint Operations Command in Sydney and from there to the Grand Chancellor Hotel in Hobart, where Chief of the Defence Force, Air Chief Marshal Angus Houston, was staying with his wife. Houston took the call at 11.45pm, then called the then defence minister, Brendan Nelson, at home to tell him a soldier had been shot and it was likely he would die.
At the hospital in Baghdad, Croft handed Shore an Australian flag and maroon beret. Standing by the bed, Shore lay the flag over his friend and placed the beret on Kovco's chest. Another soldier stepped forward and put a small koala toy on Kovco too. His body had been washed clean, but it was still hard to see their friend underneath the medical equipment strapped around his head and the bruising as blood pooled under his skin. Almost the entire platoon was there, about 25 people, and the padre returned to lead them, again, through the words "Our Father, who art in heaven ..."
After the prayer, Tyrrell spoke quietly to his men. He told them to each hold Kovco, to place a hand on him somewhere and to say their final goodbye. When his turn came, Tyrrell gave Kovco a kiss on the cheek and told the soldier his wife and children loved him. The machine keeping Kovco alive was turned off. Standing by the bed, Carr grabbed Kovco's hand. Other men were in tears. Kovco died at 6.52pm.
No one could remember later who started it, but someone began to sing the unofficial unit song, which dates back to the time before the 3rd Battalion, Royal Australian Regiment moved to Holsworthy on Sydney's outskirts from Adelaide and became a parachute regiment.
The others joined in:
"We're a pack of bastards,
Bastards are we,
We come from Woodside,
The arsehole of the Royal Australian infantry,
We're a pack of bastards,
Bastards are we,
We'd rather f..k than fight for liberty."
At first, the padre and US medical personnel looked stunned, although their expressions soon softened into smiles. The song was crude, but at least it brought the men closer together.
Outside, Tyrrell gathered his men once more. He told them they had lost a great mate, but that Kovco would want them to be strong, to stay focused, not to drop their bundle. That Kovco died doing what he loved, with brothers he loved. That the rest of them would more than likely fade away, lonely, in old age. The return to their barracks was met with silence. The soldiers waiting there didn't come up and say "What happened, what happened?" The blokes were broken. They were missing their mate.
Edited extract from Carry Me Home: The Life and Death of Private Jake Kovco by Dan Box, published by Allen & Unwin, $29.95.
Box covered the military inquiry and
coronial inquest into Jake Kovco's death
for The Australian.
Credit: Dan Box
Word count: 2541
