While the coronavirus recession has shattered much of the Australian economy, agriculture's performance continues at pace, with big agribusiness player Elders posting an 80 per cent profit jump to almost $123 million.
Bolstered by a rain-revived turnaround in cropping activity and restocking demand, and strong flow-on benefits from its recent takeover of Australian Independent Rural Retailers, the farm services company has tipped earnings growth of up to 10pc for another three years, starting with much improved crop prospects this summer.
"Coronavirus has had no material impact on us so far," Elders managing director Mark Allison said.
Although some specific business categories experienced market price shocks, notably the wool market, Elders had not needed to tap any government JobKeeper funding, or cut staff or working hours across its 220 branch sites, or draw on a $50m working capital facility it established to provide emergency trading headroom when the pandemic hit.
Mr Allison said rural property vendors were experiencing high demand for their farmland, which was expected to continue well into 2021.
Elders also grew its branch and wholesale rural supplies member network as reverberations continue across the sector after last year's Nutrien amalgamation of rivals Landmark and Ruralco.
Revenue rose 29pc to $2.09 billion, underlying earnings before interest and tax jumped 60pc to $119.4m and underlying earnings per share grew 35pc on 2018-19 results to 70.7 cents.
Gross margin growth was recorded across all state geographies and products.
"Our solid business foundations and strict financial discipline, and a commitment to ensuring the safety and prosperity of clients, communities and staff, allowed us to succeed despite challenging operating conditions in FY20," Mr Allison said.
"We now have a business that can make good money in a bad year and great money in a good year."
Elders shareholders reap a 22c a share full-year dividend - up from 18c a year ago.
A standout performer in the year to September 30 was the company's rural products division, where crop protection product sales were fuelled by the return of better seasonal conditions.
Retail sales grew 18pc despite a slow, droughty start to the financial year.
Elders' 10-month ownership of rural supplies wholesaler AIRR added $44m in wholesale gross margin - well in excess of projections.
AIRR's big portfolio of house brand crop protection and veterinary products, combined with growth in Elders' Titan chemical product sales, were expected to make even more impact as the farm supplies division bedded down and attracted more new retailer members in 2020-21.
Elders' agency business made up for the softer wool market values and trading volumes with higher revenues from strong livestock prices.
Financial services delivered better-than-expected returns from the new Livestock in Transit delivery warranty product and a newly-launched $100,000 working capital finance offer to clients needing short-term funds.
The company's Eight Point Plan to guide its business priorities for the next three years has targeted earnings growth of five-10pc and return on capital of 15pc - down from 20pc during the past six years.
Other priorities include expanding the company's product and services footprint with strategic acquisitions, but also increasing reliance on organic business growth based around providing greater and stronger services to livestock, wool real estate and technical services clients.
More: stockjournal.com.au
CREDIT: Andrew Marshall
Word count: 539
