RECENTLY I was asked to deliver a half-day workshop in the cosmetics industry working in that sector is as far away from agriculture I have been in my professional life.
The day before this I delivered a cost of production workshop for lamb and wool where participants comprised 14 men and one woman. The cosmetics group comprised a similar number but the ratio of the sexes was reversed.
Teaching business planning to the cosmetics industry appeared rather straightforward at first but when it came to context I believe I was left a little wanting.
Knowing this I tended to seek examples from the group and gave them ownership for the focus of the discussion.
It is not until you work in a totally unrelated industry that you fully realise the fundamentals of business remain the same regardless of the trade.
In every business it is important to have vision, a mission, values and goals. Operationally you have inputs, outputs, expenses, income and cash flow management. All this culminates in a balance sheet which is the ultimate scoreboard for any business.
Sales, marketing, people and risk management also remain common requirements regardless of the trade and the importance of recruiting and developing the right people should never be underestimated.
Everything is driven and controlled by the attitude of the staff.
This was a real standout of the cosmetic salespeople.
They were highly focused and driven because the rewards were substantial if they got things right.
Having this stimulus, response and reward cycle revolving at a fast pace can lead to an outstanding result, but can come at a huge personal cost if not managed appropriately.
Farmers tend to have most of their attention on the production function because they have less control on the sales side.
The cosmetics team do not have to worry about the production of the product, their focus tends to be on building relationships with clients and then working as hard they can on throughputs and margins.
Again these concepts are alive and well in agriculture, it is just a case of how much emphasis is placed on each.
When I explained how farmers dealt with many of the business planning concepts it was greeted with surprise.
I indicated that I believed that less than 10 per cent of farmers had written down a business plan. This raised the ladies eyebrows, as did the low return on capital that farmers accept to stay farming.
I did say that many farmers had a reasonable plan formulated in their mind but generally this is an overall weakness in rural industries. The cosmetics industry is very much a cash economy and the concept of capital growth on assets was less of a focus.
Preparing to work in a totally unrelated industry to what I am used to did bring with it some challenges. The night before I had very little sleep and a degree of anxiety was present throughout the night.
All introverts tend to suffer this in the same way. I have always been a believer that the real gains in life are when you work outside of your comfort zone.
In reading my audience I think I did quite well with my presentation but later that afternoon I found a motel and flopped onto the bed feeling rather drained. Until you have done such a thing you have very little appreciation of how much mental energy you actually use.
Would I do it again? Yes I would, but I think I may be selective on certain opportunities. And did I get a jar of anti-ageing cream at the end of the session, no I did not use it, but I think I did age a bit as a result of my experience.
Details: kensolly@rbm.com.au or 0427 620 895
Word count: 631
