SUPPORTING the state’s promising business leaders with funds to explore learning opportunities has helped create more than 1500 new jobs in SA since 2009, says the Industry Leaders Fund.
“This equates to an average grant dollar cost per South Australian job generated at less than $1000, down from $4000 last year,’’ ILF chief executive Geoff Vogt said.
“This supports our aim to grow employment and generate wealth in South Australia and we’ve seen significant success among many of our scholars’ enterprises,’’ he said.
The ILF is a non-government organisation funded by the private sector. It has awarded $1.73 million to 142 scholars to the end of September 2018. The Fund surveyed its scholars to arrive at the jobs data.
The survey did not include the last cohort of 20 recipients, who received close to $200,000 in September and will be completing their studies this year.
Mr Vogt is again calling on industry leaders to apply for 2019 grants worth up to $50,000 each to develop their professional potential and join an influential member scholar network.
“The best way to build a strong South Australian economy is to provide financial support for the development of current and potential business leaders.” Last year’s grants included courses at Harvard Business School, INSEAD, Melbourne Business School, the University of Adelaide, Stanford Graduate School of Business, the University of South Australia and IMD (Switzerland).
Australian Clean and Green general manager Charlie Aykroyd received $4000 towards a Professional Management Program with the University of Adelaide.
As manager of an SA-owned, national cleaning and waste manager company with active commercial and events contracts, Ms Aykroyd said she was looking at building strong and holistic business foundations.
“I was really looking to do something that could help me learn different skills, including accounting and finances, which I can bring back to the company.
“The ILF grant application was an interesting process because it helped to be more introspective about my professional growth and pathway,” she said.
Past ILF scholars include Supashock’s Oscar Fiorinotto, Sage Automation’s Andrew Downs, Woodside Cheese Wrights founder Kris Lloyd and Redarc managing director Anthony Kittel.
Information can be found at www.industryleaders.com.auApplications close on May 31.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 365
