PROFESSIONAL growth that drives fast-growing SA businesses forward, including in the regions, will again be fostered through this year’s Industry Leaders Fund grants.
The 20 recipients of close to $200,000 from the ILF grants program were named last night.
Australian Clean and Green general manager Charlie Aykroyd received $4000 towards a Professional Management Program with the University of Adelaide.
As manager of an SA-owned, national cleaning and waste manager company with active commercial and events contracts, Ms Aykroyd said she was looking at building strong and holistic business foundations.
“I was really looking to do something that could help me learn different skills, including accounting and finances, which I can bring back to the company.
“The ILF grant application was an interesting process because it helped to be more introspective about my professional growth and pathway,” she said.
The defence industry was a big winner this year with PMB Defence chief executive Stephen Faulkner and ASC Shipbuilding’s project manager Matt Sinnett-Jones both receiving $20,000 to study at the Harvard Business School and IMD Switzerland, respectively. This year’s grant winners also include leaders in Booleroo Centre, Penola, Cowell and Port Lincoln, ILF chief executive Geoff Vogt said. “Achieving success for regional leaders can have massive benefits for their communities and has the potential to slow down or arrest the population drain from regions to cities.
“We have been trying to get scholars from regions and hopefully next year will see a further wave of future leaders apply to advance their professional development.’’ Cowell-based powerline construction and electrical company Cowell Electric’s chief executive Cameron Thompson will use his $10,000 grant to undertake the Melbourne Business School’s Advanced Management Program.
The new scholars were chosen from 53 applicants, and will attend programs offered by Harvard Business School, INSEAD, Melbourne Business School, the University of Adelaide, Stanford Graduate School of Business, the University of SA and IMD (Switzerland).
Now in its ninth year, the ILF program has awarded 142 scholars totalling $1.73 million and provides a platform for the state’s business entrepreneurs and leaders to fast-track their careers through the knowledge and experience gained from their educational opportunities.
Past ILF scholars include Supashock’s Oscar Fiorinotto, Sage Automation’s Andrew Downs, Woodside Cheese Wrights founder Kris Lloyd and Redarc managing director Anthonly Kittel. The ILF is a non-government organisation funded by the private sector.
2018 SCHOLARS AND GRANTS■Cowell Electric CEO Cameron Thompson: $10,000■ Lincoln Minerals chief geologist Dwayne Povey: $11,000■ Australian Clean Green general manager Charlotte Aykroyd: $4000■ Joule Energy general manager Matthew Falzon: $4000■ PMB Defence CEO Stephen Faulkner: $20,000■ Myriota chief technology officer David Haley: $9000■ Cobham Aviation Services operations manager Kara Jerman: $12,000■ Openbook Howden Design and Print general manager Sarah Leo: $7000■ Mumme Toole managing director Greg Lowe: $5000■ Thomas Foods International group engineering projects manager Nektarios Nicolaou: $9000■ ElectraNet’s Ann Perriam: $10,000■MOO Premium Foods founder Mick Sanders: $5000■ASC Shipbuilding’s project manager Matt Sinnett-Jones: $20,000■CPIE Pharmacy Services and Infusion Innovations chief pharmacist Andrew Sluggett: $15,000■Nova Systems capability development and MSBE Lead Bradley Spencer: $5000■Kelly Engineering chief executive Calvin Stead: $10,000■TriCal Australia general manager Matthew Stein: $4000■Consilium Technology CEO Seth Thuraisingham: $15,000■Beach Energy regional manager Glenn Toogood: $15,000■Hot Melt Packaging Services chief executive Shaun Westcott: $9000
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 537
