South Melbourne is poised to break its sponsorship drought after clinching a one-year deal with an international banking and financial services group.
Details are expected to be announced today and the board will be hoping the deal will head off criticism from a voluble supporter group that has threatened to campaign for a spill of positions at the next annual meeting.
South, despite being a recent dual premiership winner and Australia's first representative in the world club championship, has struggled for corporate backing and began this season without a major sponsor.
It has found the going tough in a market where the Olympics have soaked up a lot of corporate cash. It has also struggled to develop business networks in the broader commercial world, not just within the ethnic business community that has traditionally backed NSL clubs.
Soccer Australia's lack of marketing initiative for the start of the season has not helped. Administrators are planning a long-awaited revamp of the league next season, and have been reluctant to spend much money on promotion ahead of the reforms.
Several clubs have been critical of SA, nowhere more so than at last month's season launch, when the talk was not of how exciting the soccer could be, but of how several clubs were on their last chance and would face the axe at season's end as the league was cut back to 12 fully professional clubs.
The poor coverage on free-to-air television by the Seven network has also made it harder for clubs to sell themselves. Seven has not passed on the coverage rights to the ABC (as it did in recent years), so there is now no live coverage of NSL games except on the Optus pay channel, C7.
Instead, the network is showing a one-hour highlights package of weekend matches. While the program itself is fine, its timing - 12.10am on a Wednesday - is terrible. Only the committed will stay up for it, and the sport has little chance of attracting new audiences.
South's sponsorship announcement is just part of a package of measures the club is putting in place to drive its business development and ensure it meets the new criteria for league membership that Soccer Australia unveiled earlier this week.
South, which has this season set up a junior academy to try to nurture its own talent, will use former Socceroo coach Jim Shoulder, now technical director of the Football Association of Wales, as a consultant with its youth program.
And it plans to appoint an experienced sports administrator to work alongside general manager Damien Phillips on programs to strengthen its business foundations.
AUCKLAND'S Football Kingz get the chance to take over (at least for 24 hours) at the top of the NSL ladder tonight when they entertain struggling Adelaide City at Ericsson Stadium.
The New Zealanders have continued their Jekyll and Hyde form of last season, with home wins over strugglers Eastern Pride and Newcastle, and away losses to Sydney Olympic and Northern Spirit.
In keeping with their inconsistent form, the Kingz slammed five past Newcastle a fortnight ago, and then conceded four last weekend when beaten by the Spirit.
Adelaide, which had lost its first three games and was looking on the verge of a crisis, bought itself temporary relief last Friday night with an amazing 4-3 home win over Eastern Pride. The South Australians came back from a 2-0 half-time deficit to grab the points after the Pride played most of the second half with 10 men.
Word count: 593
