IF you've been in business for yourself for any length of time, the chances are you've experienced the feast-or-famine scenario - busy and feeling successful one minute, quiet and feeling a failure the next.
It's an uncomfortable place to be, so what can we do about it?
To answer this, let's look at the basic components of a good feast.
1. We need lots of food.
The food of feasts comes from fruit and vegetables and the livestock that eat them.
It all starts with a seed in the ground. If we are to enjoy a feast, we must be sowing seeds all the time and starting a long way in advance.
Too often business famine is as a consequence of zero seed- sowing. Even when you're busy - no, especially when busy - you must be sowing seeds.
Sowing seeds means regular, consistent marketing. It's essential.
Consider also that seeds only take hold in good, fertile ground.
Fertile ground is your marketplace.
When we're busy, we tend to drop out of our marketplace.
Common dropout indicators are comments like: "I'm too busy to attend networking events", "My diary won't allow me to spend two days at a conference", "I can't meet for lunch this week, let's talk in a month's time".
Next, remember that healthy plants need to be nurtured. Leave them alone and they'll wither and die.
In business, this translates to relationship building, which requires work. If we allow a relationship to slip, it's like telling a prospect he or she is not really terribly important.
Think of someone you know who is pursuing your custom - a supplier with whom you deal perhaps. If they call, are you pleased to speak or do you wonder what they're trying to sell?
The difference in your reaction can be the difference between a relationship that is demonstrably valued and one where only the sale is valued.
2. We need a relaxed environment.
Whenever a feast is portrayed in film or on the stage, there is much merriment - music, laughter, colour and warmth. Such ambience relaxes people and accelerates feelings of comfort and well-being.
In business, this is all about being fully equipped to deliver the best product or service and to do so with integrity and honesty.
We must be able to model a professional and efficient business if we are to create an environment that can continually host a feast.
3. We need a big, sturdy table.
One thing's for sure, you'll not see a feast taking place without the presence of a large, robust table.
In business, we can only build success on strong foundations. If our foundations are not in place, any feast will be short-lived or it may never feel like a feast.
Business foundations manifest in our systems and procedures - those things that are the difference between a business that's built to last against one that is `just passing through'.
So are you prepared to work for your next feast and avoid famine?
Start sowing.
Robert Gerrish is a small business writer, presenter and coach. For a free download of 101 tips visit: www.flyingsolo.com.au
Word count: 560
