Keeping the right company can help hatch your business on a global scale, writes Russell Emmerson
MOVING from a garage to an office shows a new level of business maturity but moving into a business incubator can break open a global market with links to investors, grants and basic business lessons.
The industry has come a long way since the first incubator, thought to have had a previous life as a poultry warehouse, opened in New York in 1959.
There are now an estimated 7000 incubators around the world, and an estimated 80 around Australia, and some believe that a $14.6 million Federal Government investment in a new project in Melbourne's west may signal a new era for start-up support.
What to expect
Incubators charge low rents and offer an "easy-in, easy-out" strategy to help start-ups bridge the gap to commerciality. But the better ones provide much more than a receptionist and a board room.
Investor Kerwin Rae says ideas and networks of like-minded businesses make the difference but a new breed of venture capital-backed incubators offer a win-win situation.
"They are looking at it as a way of cornering the market but they are also linking them into a service contract," Rae says.
"I think that's going to catch a few people by surprise until the market is educated as to what to expect."
The rise of these seed or venture accelerators has been noted in the US and is being reflected here, the US-based National Business Incubation Association says.
"They operate as for-profits designed to bring a return on investment to their sponsors by providing a fast-test validation of business ideas, typically in fields such as mobile applications, gaming and related areas," the NBIA says.
They may also be backed by universities looking to commercialise technology or big names looking for synergies think Microsoft, Telstra, Optus and ANZ, to name a few.
Not-for-profits, originally aimed at creating jobs, now only account for 7 per cent of the US market.
But the chief executive of Melbourne's Darebin Enterprise Centre (DECL), Bob Waite, says the centre's not-for-profit status allows it to
be more flexible about collecting expenses.
Game developer Pub Games started as a collection of university friends with disparate skills but gained a business structure and plan upon entering DECL.
The centre also set up coding contracts to help bridge cash-flow shortages as they worked towards releasing their first product, space combat game Blast Points, which is set to be approved by Apple for international launch.
Director Chris Murphy says access to years of experience and opportunities for synergy with related businesses were also factors for success.
"You can go to someone who has been in the industry for 20 or 30 years in the next office," he says.
"Also, we wouldn't have had the connections to chase down government grants."
Where to start
Business Innovation and Incubation Australia (business incubation.com.au) represents about 30 co-working spaces that foster new businesses.
Chairman Phillip Kemp says start-ups should interview the managers especially where they are joining you as an owner of the business.
"Talk to the management team about their experience, the success they have had, what firms have graduated and if there is an opportunity to walk around the building."
Kemp is the executive director of Business Foundations, which runs Perth-based incubator Innovation Centre WA.
Analysing costs is also important to ensure your new business is not counting the cost of every photocopy when cashflow is scarce.
What will sell?
Kemp says the interview process goes both ways as incubators look for the best opportunities to invest in.
"The venture capital-backed incubators are looking for deals because they need to generate a rate of return," he says.
"They are skewed to opportunities that are scaleable, that can rapidly grow into a global market from day one."
While the structure of deals will differ, an initial 5 per cent equity stake may underpin start-up costs with additional investments for subsequent development stages.
WHYIT PAYS OFF
Help with business basics
High-speed internet access
Marketing and grant assistance
Links to venture capital and
investment groups
Access to specialised resources
Access to mentors and advisory boards
Peer networking
Specialist legal advice
HOTHOUSES FLOWERING
Australia has no formal data on the incubation industry but looks to the US for early trends.
North America has about 1400 incubators, up from 1100 in 2006.
Only 7 per cent are not-for-profit, while 32 per cent are university-backed.
Businesses are moving out sooner -- 28 months, down from 33 months.
Only 18 per cent take an equity stake.
More than half are mixed-use, while 37 per cent have a tech focus.
Incubators are getting smaller in size.
The industry believes that 80 per cent of incubated businesses survive three years compared to the 80 per cent of non-incubated businesses that fail.
North American incubators have helped almost 50,000 businesses.
Source: 2012 State of the Incubation Industry Survey, National Business Incubation Association
Credit: Russell Emmerson
Word count: 836
