The first 120 budding software engineers, of the more than 600 applicants, have been selected for the initial four-week coding bootcamp at 42 Adelaide, starting June 21.
More than 60 per cent of the applicants are aged 16-24 years old, a quarter of whom have never finished school.
A launch event on Wednesday marks a pivotal moment for the team led by social enterprise organisation KIK Innovation’s founder Louise Nobes.
Ms Nobes has spent months rounding up key partners to bring home an idea first introduced in 2013 in France by tech billionaire Xavier Niel, founder of telco Groupe Iliad.
42 is a fee-free computer programming school with peer-to-peer learning that doesn’t involve teachers and lectures, but has internship opportunities and ongoing assessments towards personal best benchmarking.
“KIK has always been about breaking down barriers to growth and opportunity and when I first heard about 42, I knew it was something I wanted to bring home,” Ms Nobes said.
“There is so much innovation around us now with technology, but education has been slow to change.
“With 42, we want to not just build talent and skills, but also transfer hope and confidence.”
42 Adelaide is particularly open to applications from women and disadvantaged youth.
“We know more needs to be done for certain sections of our society and we are committed to being the change we want to see,” Ms Nobes said, also highlighting her all-women team of Mel Stirling in operations, Jazz Stone in partnerships, Annette Reid in programming and Natalie Renna in marketing.
Helping with the space set-up last week, student Ben Griffiths, 23, said he was excited to get into the bootcamp and couldn’t wait to get started on the tech journey.
Open to those aged 16 years and above, the admission process at 42 Adelaide starts with a two-hour online test involving two games, an introduction session, followed by a four-week coding challenge before final selection.
A second bootcamp will be held in July ahead of the final selections for the one to three-year, self-paced 42 degree in software engineering, which starts in September.
Eligible students will also be able to complete a diploma of Information Technology, ICT50220, through Academy IT, a registered training organisation.
Uniting Communities is backing the project, with the campus taking up two floors within its Pitt Street building.
The State Government is contributing $750,000, while local business Loftus has contributed about $300,000 as a founding partner.
Paid internships will be available at Lockheed Martin, Fleet Space Technologies, Codan, Maxima and CareApp, among others.
Ms Stone hoped more national businesses would partner with 42 to amplify its success.
Word count: 420
