AN app developed to monitor the welfare of elderly loved ones in care has secured more than $500,000 in funding, including $250,000 from the State Government.
CareApp will use the injection of funds to expand and scale up the smartphone app and connect more aged-care facilities as social distancing remain in force.
Private investors including Southern Angels – a not-for-profit network of high net worth individuals – have tipped in $250,000, following the group’s $500,000 investment in CareApp last year.
CareApp allows aged-care operators to post notices, events and newsletters to keep families informed about their loved ones, enables the sharing of images and videos, and features a live video chat function.
In March, following the COVID-19 outbreak and as families were isolated from their elderly loved ones in care, CareApp offered new aged-care facility subscribers free access until September 30.
Founder and chief executive Allison Nikula said the company had since secured new agreements with more than 200 aged-care organisations representing more than 150,000 seniors.
“We were hopeful that the aged care community would view CareApp as the best way to keep families connected to their loved ones during this difficult time – but the uptake is something I couldn’t have dreamt of,” she said.
“Our recent growth has been exponential but more exciting is the fact that families who are placing their loved ones in care are reaching out to us to find out which of their local aged-care providers use CareApp.
“The funding will help us to support up to six additional staff within our Adelaide team, including developers and account managers, to deliver the service to new customers.” Amid a second wave of COVID-19 cases hitting Australia, CareApp has extended its offer of free access for six months to new subscribers. Innovation Minister David Pisoni said the State Government funding would allow CareApp to service the surge in demand from aged-care operators. “The COVID-19 social distancing and self-isolation restrictions now in place for most aged-care facilities means this app is a valuable solution for families unable to visit their loved ones – it has also presented an opportunity for CareApp to achieve accelerated growth and market penetration,” he said.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 367
