MEDICAL experts believe a hi-tech health system can unclog busy hospital emergency departments, ease ambulance ramping and, most importantly, save lives.
In the process, the booming digital health economy will create lucrative skilled jobs in South Australia while improving quality of life for patients.
Insights from the latest Fearless Conversations forum – a 13-week collaboration ­between The Advertiser and Flinders University covering topics vital to South Australia’s future – delves into health technology and medical devices, revealing varied opportunities as well potential pitfalls.
Digital Health CRC chief executive Terry Sweeney, Flinders University Professor of Digital Health Systems Trish Williams, CareApp founder Allison Nikula and orthopaedic surgeon Matthew Liptak offered a number of insights at the forum on Wednesday.
Dr Sweeney noted health data was doubling every 73 days and artificial intelligence was set to “turbo charge” it even more.
He said there were massive opportunities to use data to improve lives including a leap from “wearable” technology like smart wristbands to “thinkable” technology able to anticipate a person’s health problems.
This is against a backdrop of adverse patient incidents costing more than $4bn a year.
“We can drive costs down … we’re going to save lives,” he noted. “Virtual emergency ­departments such as the new one at the Women’s and Children’s Hospital, telehealth consultations and portable health monitoring devices will keep people healthy and cut ED presentations.” Professor Williams said EDs were clogged with people with chronic conditions and technology could prevent some of those presentations.
“What we need to engage in more is that adoption of technology, so that people can be doing that at home and you will then have less people coming into hospital – people themselves become the point of care … rather than having them come into the hub of where we provide care,” she said.
The forum heard many health tech innovations had direct benefits for the public, such as Dr Liptak’s MAXM Skate system offering clinician-connected physiotherapy guidance at home after surgery, while Ms Nikula’s CareApp connects families, carers and people in care.
Ms Nikula stressed: “We need to keep the client at the centre (of technology) and the people who support them.” Participants also stressed that clinicians needed to be part of health tech developments for it to work well.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 382
