THE French-inspired free coding school, 42 Adelaide, launches this week with its “deliberate” all-women leadership team promising to produce the best Aussie tech talent.
The first 120 of the more than 600 applicants have been selected for the initial four-week coding bootcamp, starting June 21.
More than 60 per cent of the applicants are aged 16-24, a quarter of whom have never finished school.
The launch on Wednesday is a pivotal moment for the team led by social enterprise organisation KIK Innovation’s founder, Louise Nobes.
Ms Nobes has spent months rounding up key partners to bring home an idea first introduced in 2013 in France by tech billionaire Xavier Niel, founder of telco Groupe Iliad.
A fee-free computer programming school with peer-to-peer learning that doesn’t involve teachers and lectures, 42 has internship opportunities and ongoing assessments towards personal best benchmarking.
“KIK has always been about breaking down barriers to growth and opportunity and when I first heard about 42, I knew it was something I wanted to bring home,” Ms Nobes said.
“There is so much innovation around us now with technology, but education has been slow to change.
“In 2019, I undertook a global exercise and looked at the best educational models on the market. I wanted an educational model which would focus on the skills of the future because, traditionally, our entrepreneurship was still sitting in retail, hospitality and low- entry jobs – and I found 42 in France.
“With 42, we want to not just build talent and skills but also transfer hope and confidence.” Ms Nobes said 42 Adelaide was particularly open to applications from women and disadvantaged youth.
“We know more needs to be done for certain sections of our society and we are committed to being the change we want to see,” Ms Nobes said, also highlighting her all-women team of Mel Stirling in operations, Jazz Stone in partnerships, Annette Reid in programming and Natalie Renna in marketing.
Helping with the space set-up last week, student Ben Griffiths, 23, said he was excited to get into the bootcamp and couldn’t wait to get started on the tech journey.
Open to those aged 16 and above, the admission process at 42 Adelaide starts with a two-hour online test involving two games, an introduction session, followed by a four-week coding challenge before final selection.
A second bootcamp for a new group will be held in July ahead of the final selections for the one to three-year, self-paced 42 degree in software engineering, starting in September.
Students will also be able to complete a diploma of information technology, ICT­50220, through Academy IT.
Uniting Communities is backing the project, with the campus taking up two floors within its Pitt St building.
The state government is contributing $750,000, while local business Loftus gave about $300,000 as a founding partner. Paid internships will be available at Lockheed Martin, Fleet Space Technologies, Codan, Maxima and CareApp, among others.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 491
