HUNDREDS of young South Australians can learn computer coding for free at a new institute in Adelaide.
The initiative, led by social enterprise organisation KIK Innovation, will use a French-founded training system called “42” to introduce coding skills.
Uniting Communities is backing the project, the State Government will chip in $750,000, and local businesses are providing equipment and have agreed to take on trainees for paid internships.
KIK Innovation chief executive Louise Nobes said 450 students a year could undergo training.
Applicants need to pass a two-hour gaming-style test to get into the first phase, a four-week boot camp – or piscine (swimming pool) in French 42 terminology – where students plunge into the deep end in peer-to-peer learning.
“There are no teachers and no classes,” Ms Nobes said. “It’s a gamified system.” Students will be given ­projects to solve by working together and which demonstrate they can build understanding of coding.
Selected students then proceed to the next phase, eight to 12 months of completing units that will lead to a nationally recognised diploma in information technology.
The diploma course has been designed with registered training organisation Academy IT and Loftus IT has helped organise funds and equipment.
Courses will run at premises owned by Uniting Communities in Pitt Street, with facilitators helping students but not giving them instructions. Students then would become paid interns at participating businesses, which include Lockheed Martin, Fleet Space Technologies, Codan, Maxima and CareApp.
Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni said the contemporary approach to learning would encourage creativity and flexibility outside a traditional educational pathway.
“KIK Innovation is an experienced social enterprise dedicated to helping young South Australians overcome challenges and forge promising careers,” he said.
The government expects at least 140 students a year aged 16-24 will find jobs. Miah Bishop-Oldfield, 22, is among the first prospective students to register. “This is a good opportunity; I think this is the future of jobs,” she said. The entry test was interesting, Miah said.
“It gets progressively harder and there are no instructions; you just have to figure it out yourself.” Registrations are open for the first intake of 150 students in May.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 363
