How a mobile phone app, created by a South Australian motherof- two, is slashing the response times for at-home care An Adelaide mother-oftwo is the innovator behind a local start-up with a new app designed to slash response times for at-home care. Kingswood resident, Allison Nikula, 35, partnered late last year with Parkside-based, St Louis Home Care, to trial CareApp.
The device enables at-home carers to immediately flag a client need and facilitate a response within seconds.
Needs range from home and garden services, meal preparation and cooking, to medical and nursing care.
"Our goal through the app was to enable carers to communicate and collaborate in real-time, in 30 seconds or less," Ms Nikula, a graduate of the Business SA Young Entrepreneur Scheme, says. "The flag is received for rapid response by the care co-ordinators back at the St Louis office and also shared with other members in the client's dedicated care team.
"It removes the vertical flow of information, as well as cutting the information exchange cycle from weeks to just minutes." St Louis Home Care, founded in 1946 by Dorothy Naish and still owned and run by her family, pioneered the introduction of low-level dementia home care in 2003 and high-level home care for dementia sufferers in 2005.
Dorthoy's grandson and current aged care administrator, Maris Naish, says St Louis was quick to recognise the benefits for their 200-strong home care client base at Parkside and Victor Harbor. "We're always looking at new ways to improve our service so when we realised the CareApp would help us more rapidly address the specific needs of our clients, we didn't hesitate," he says. "At-home care is all about re-enabling people to live the life to which they're accustomed and we're thrilled that with this app we can help our clients more quickly than ever before." A qualified occupational therapist, Ms Nikula devised the idea in a previous role when responsible for around 400 community carers.
"Every day, I witnessed the extraordinary influence of carers on re-enabling people and how much they can change someone's life," she added. "I wanted to find a way to build a community of care around each individual. The app was borne from the realisation that the better the communication and the stronger the collaboration, the better the service experience for the client." Sarah Rankin, 35 and a carer for seven years, says the app has simplified her work.
"I can quickly record what my client needs and know that our office will be onto it straight away," the Wynn Vale resident says. "And my clients are benefiting from quicker turnaround times to make them feel extra special,which is what it's all about."
Credit: WORDS CRAIG COOK
Word count: 446
