ELDERLY AGED care homes will ban visitors who have returned from overseas within a 14-day period, or who have been in contact with a confirmed coronavirus case, under new rules announced by the Federal Government yesterday.
Aged care residents will be allowed to receive one visit a day, with a maximum of two people.
School groups will be prevented from attending centres across the country. Aged care provider Estia has gone a step further, banning all visitors from its aged care homes.
Estia operates close to 70 residences across the country, including 17 in South Australia.
An email from Estia chief executive Ian Thornley to family and friends of residents said its homes would close to visitors from 5pm yesterday.
“We understand that this decision will have significant impact on our residents and their close contacts and sincerely apologise for this,” he wrote.
Visitors would still be allowed in “exceptional circumstances on compassionate grounds”, with volunteers also to be barred from Estia homes and non-essential residents outings to be banned.
As part of the national restrictions, Prime Minister Scott Morrison said extra visits to dying relatives would have to be arranged with individual aged care centres.
“We all know how distressing that can be and so the aged care facilities will be asked to put in place sensible arrangements,” he said.
The Australian Nursing and Midwifery Federation said the Government should ban all non-essential visits to aged care homes. Three aged care residents have already died from the virus.
“This government is completely out of touch with the reality that currently exists in nursing homes,” the federation’s acting federal secretary Lori-Anne Sharp said.
Aged Care Minister Richard Colbeck said children should not be visiting aged care homes at all.
“We know older Australians love to see children in their lives, but the fact is, children are not reliable when it comes to practising the good hygiene necessary to stop the spread,” Senator Colbeck said.
Meantime, an Adelaide start-up business is helping families keep in touch with their elderly loved ones.
CareApp is offering aged care providers free subscriptions to its platform in an effort to help keep families connected during the unprecedented health crisis.
CareApp is a smartphone app allowing carers to photograph – with permission – people in care, while updating their records, noting anything from physical and mood changes to ensuring they are taking medication.Family members can view photos, videos, notices, events and other details on their smartphones, so they can keep an eye on relatives between visits.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 424
