Gawler Rangers dominated from the batters box in beating bottom Division Three baseball side Adelaide Angels 12-0 on Saturday.
It was the Rangers' most convincing performance for the season, scoring in every inning except the first, and playing almost faultlessly in the field.
After a scoreless first frame, Gawler made its mark in the second, after hits to Rick Leonard, Shaun Clark, James Parker and Ryan O'Handley set up a three-run push.
Another three-run inning in the third, after four errors and hits to Shaun Clark and Parker, saw the scoreline blow out to 6-0.
With a RBI double in the fourth dig, Shaun Clark picked up his third hit of the game and increased the Rangers advantage to 7-0.
Then in the fifth inning, Parker's two-run single was the highlight of a four-run frame, and his third hit of the game, as the lead blew out to 11-0.
Dave O'Brien ran out an infield hit and eventually scored in the bottom of the sixth to complete the scoring.
Starting pitcher Andre Benjamin threw four innings for one hit, while striking out six batters, and relievers Sam Murphy and Rick Leonard offered good support with one digs each of shut-out ball.
The Rangers B grade lost 5-12 to Glenelg, after leading 4-3 in the fourth inning, with the Tigers breaking the game open with a seven run fifth frame.
In a sensational Division Seven game, although losing 2-3 to Playford Rebels, Gawler Rangers played some of the best baseball seen in this grade.
Gawler scored both its runs in the first inning, through Adam Soar and Darren Unger, while Rebels managed single runs in the first, third and fourth frames.
Soar and Aaron Jerram shared the pitching for the Rangers and kept the game close throughout.
Gawler Rangers under 14s almost pulled off a miraculous win before conceding three last inning runs to go down 12-13 to Adelaide.
Trailing by five runs going into its last at bat, Gawler scored seven runs to hit the front, Josh Young belting a long home run. Earlier Thomas Norley had hit two home runs.
The other Gawler under 14 team managed a close 6-3 win over Golden Grove Central Districts, with Jake Jarvis and Ben Mayfield sharing the pitching duties.
Little League Majors had a resounding 16-3 victory over Port Adelaide, Brodie Ewen and Sebastian Heintze-Unger picking up three hits each, while Matthew Young belted a long home run.
In the Little League Minors, Gawler was unlucky in going down 5-6 to Golden Grove Central Districts on the last hit of the game.
Division Three
Adelaide 0 0 0 0 0 0 -0
Gawler Rangers 0 3 3 1 4 1 - 12
Hits: Shaun Clark 3, James Parker 3, Sam Murphy 2, Ricky Clark 2, Andre Benjamin, Rick Leonard, Ryan O'Handley, Dave O'Brien.
Division Five
Glenelg 12 d Gawler Rangers 5.
Hits: Paul Skelton 2, Liam Holland, Mark Amphlett, James Sheekey, Dean Richards, Steve Allen, Glen Holland.
Division Seven
Playford Rebels 3 d Gawler Rangers 2.
Hits: Adam Soar, Trevor Norley, Graham Fischer.
Under 14
Gawler 6 d GGCD 3.
Hits: Zac Allen 2, Ben Mayfield, Jake Jarvis, Riley Holland.
Adelaide 13 d Gawler Rangers 12.
Hits: Hamish Nemeth-Webb 2, Thomas Norley 2 (2hr), Josh Young (hr), Michael O'Connor, Jordan Holmes, Michael Walton, Callum Borchard, Dylan Allan.
Little League Majors
Gawler Rangers 16 d Port Adelaide 3.
Hits: Brodie Ewen 3, Sebastian Heintze-Unger 3, Zakeray Heintze-Unger 2, Declan Gillard-Martin 2, Jack Jenkins, Zacery Walford, Zachary Carston, Alex Smethurst, Cooper Amphlett, Matthew Young (hr).
Little League Minors
GGCD 6 d Gawler Rangers 5.
Hits: Jackson Pike, Trent O'Brien, Wyatt Ryan, Cooper Wilson, Jacob Allen.
Next games:
Saturday: Division Three v Sturt at home, 3pm; Division Five v Southern Districts at home, 12.30pm; Division Seven v Northern Districts away, 1.30pm.
Sunday: Under 14 A v Kensington at home, 12.30pm; Under 14 B v Adelaide at home, 3pm; LL Majors v Henley & Grange at home, 10am; LL Minors v Woodville away, 10am.
Credit: Robert Laidlaw
Word count: 672
