Two in three hirers say they look more favourably on candidates that have volunteer experience on their resume, new research from employment marketplace SEEK reveals.
They are perceived to have better interpersonal skills (43 per cent of hirers believe this), be more proactive about developing their career (42 per cent) and be unafraid of challenges (40 per cent).
Online portal SEEK Volunteer currently lists more than 8800 volunteering opportunities that span one-off events through to six-month commitments.
Some require specific skills – such as photography, web development or a foreign language – or a specific ticket – such as a driver’s license or Working with Children Check – but many do not have any prerequisites.
So how can jobseekers use volunteer experience to their advantage?
LEARN OR REFINE SKILLS
Recruitment agency Adecco Australia’s managing director Kelly Van Nelson says volunteering provides the opportunity to learn both technical and human skills.
“While (some) skills may not be a direct reflection of what you need for your career, they can certainly be transferable,” she says.
“Think of skills like problem solving, teamwork and collaboration, resilience and client/customer-facing skills.”
Computer science graduate Alexa Nguyen, 26, landed her role as an associate developer with SEEK after volunteering with Code Like A Girl, a social enterprise providing girls and women with the confidence and knowledge to thrive in the male-dominated world of computer coding.
“(I started) because I wanted to contribute to a worthwhile cause and help create a safe space for women in tech in Adelaide, but I quickly discovered that it provided me with the tools to develop important professional skills like communication, interpersonal and team work skills, time management through balancing volunteering and study, problem solving and adaptability,” she says.
Nguyen, who studied in Adelaide but is now based in Perth, also worked as a workshop volunteer with Robogals Adelaide, a media lab volunteer with Adelaide City Library, and volunteer photographer for events such as Big Day In, the Japanese Film Festival and AVCon.
“I left the interview (with SEEK) feeling quite good because I was able to answer questions using specific examples from my volunteer experience,” she says.
PROVE YOUR PASSION
Van Nelson says volunteering in a field they are professionally interested in or doing tasks that might be required in their desired role highlights a jobseeker’s ambition and enthusiasm for the area.
The Star Entertainment Group chief people and performance officer Kim Lee agrees.
“Volunteering can help bridge the experience gap and demonstrate to future employers an applicant’s ambition to pursue a career in their sector,” she says.
BUILD NETWORKS
As well as gaining referees that can be added to a CV, volunteers can make new contacts that may be helpful down the line.
Van Nelson says building networks is “one of the most effective ways to catapult your career forward”.
The Star Entertainment Group head of internal communications Anita Finlayson got her break into the communications industry 20 years ago via a volunteer role.
“I was working as a rep for a pharmaceutical company, studying for my Bachelor of Business in Public Relations and did volunteer work at RSPCA Queensland on the weekends,” she says.
“I got to know some of the office team including the head of media, communications and fundraising, so when a role came up in their team she encouraged me to apply.”
Finlayson advises volunteers spend time getting to know the organisation and its people well.
“From leaders to team members, you never know who you’ll run into and leave an impression on,” she says.
“Always treat everyone with respect.”
INCREASE EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE
EQ – or emotional intelligence – has become increasingly important as employers realise the value of having a team that is self aware and can get along.
Van Nelson says volunteering allows people to expand their EQ and develop it as a trait they can use in their career.
“Those with high EQ are well positioned to both manage and lead others, and it’s a trait that hiring managers are always looking out for,” she says.
VOLUNTEER POSITIONS AVAILABLE NOW
SOURCE: volunteer.com.au
3440 Community services roles
1370 Seniors and aged care roles
700 Young people roles
530 Education and training roles
340 Health roles
320 Disability services role
280 Human rights roles
250 Environment and conservation roles
220 Animal welfare roles
170 Museum and heritage roles
150 Family services roles
150 Arts and culture roles
150 Sports roles
110 Homelessness roles
100 Emergency response roles
90 Recreation roles
80 Migrant services roles
70 Mentoring and advocacy roles
40 Mental health roles
20 Drug and Alcohol Services roles
Word count: 714
