VOLUNTEERING Volunteering is not just good for the soul, but it can provide real benefits for jobseekers.
New research from employment marketplace SEEK reveals two in three hirers look more favourably on candidates with volunteer experience. They are perceived to have better interpersonal skills (43 per cent believe this), be more proactive about career development (42 per cent) and be unafraid of challenges (40 per cent).
Online portal SEEK Volunteer currently lists more than 8800 volunteering opportunities.
So how can jobseekers use volunteer experience to their advantage? Learn/refine skills Recruitment agency Adecco Australia’s managing director Kelly Van Nelson says volunteering provides the opportunity to learn both technical and human skills.
“While (some) skills may not be a direct reflection of what you need for your career, they can certainly be transferable,” she says.
Computer science graduate Alexa Nguyen, 26, landed her role as an associate developer with SEEK after volunteering with Code Like A Girl, a social enterprise helping girls and women thrive in the male-dominated world of computer coding.
“I left the interview feeling quite good because I was able to answer questions using specific examples from my volunteer experience,” Nguyen says.
Prove your passion The Star Entertainment Group chief people and performance officer Kim Lee says volunteering can demonstrate to future employers an applicant’s ambition to pursue a career in their sector.
Build networks As well as gaining referees that can be added to a CV, volunteers can make new contacts that may be helpful down the line.
The Star Entertainment Group head of internal communications Anita Finlayson got her break in the communications industry 20 years ago while volunteering at RSPCA Queensland when she was a university student. “I got to know some of the office team including the head of media, communications and fundraising, so when a role came up in their team she encouraged me to apply,” she says.
CREDIT: MELANIE BURGESS
Word count: 318
