AN exhibition of industry-based Concept 2 Creation projects from northern Adelaide high schools will be held at the Playford Civic Centre in Elizabeth on Wednesday, showing what can happen when industry and education work together.
The C2C Expo 2006 will showcase school projects undertaken this year in a program run by the Northern Advanced Manufacturing Industry Group.
NAMIG was formed in 2003 by manufacturers in northern Adelaide with the aim of providing leadership in addressing major skills shortages.
The group's members are BAE Systems, Tenix Defence, Holden Ltd, IMP Printed Circuits, NTS Global, DANA Australia and Futuris Automotive.
They recognised a need to create a program for high school students to build relationships between schools and industry, prepare students for the workforce and excite their interest in careers in advanced manufacturing, science, mathematics and technology.
NAMIG, through funding by the Federal Government's Sustainable Regions Program, delivers the C2C program in partnership with the education sector.
Schools participating in the project are Craigmore High School, Para West Adult Campus, Para Hills High School, Salisbury High School, St Columba College, Temple Christian College, Tyndale Christian College and Valley View Secondary School. Smithfield Plains and Parafield Gardens High Schools are also involved in a special project with BAE Systems and the UniSA Robotics Peer Mentoring Program.
Among the C2C projects this year are a specially designed lip- gloss bracelet with students at Craigmore High School designing the bracelet and working out the chemistry to make the lip gloss.
Temple Christian College is developing an automatic fish feeder which will dispense food at specific intervals. This device has the potential to be used for other automatic dispensing applications.
One of the Para West Adult Campus C2C projects is a household security system incorporating keypad code access, motion detectors and a gas detector.
Some schools have chosen to develop "helping technologies". Para Hills High students have been designing and building an electronic communication device to enable non-speaking children to communicate.
The school incorporates a unit for severely autistic children. The C2C students have been building a device which, when an icon is touched, will recall a sound file and transmit it to a radio, allowing the autistic children to communicate to staff via a portable radio, or with their parents via a car radio.
Tyndale Christian College students have been working on FM microphones and FM receivers for students who have central auditory processing disorder.
Some of the Valley View students are developing a sight stick for people with a vision impairment which has lasers and electronic components that measure distance and warn of hazards.
Tenix human resources manager and NAMIG chairwoman Annette Cinnamond says "the C2C program encourages students to develop employability and entrepreneurial skills while planning and managing their projects".
"As part of the program, the students go on industry tours and participate in manufacturing workshops, occupational health and safety workshops and electronics and computer-aided design courses," she says.
Teachers aren't left out of the C2C program as NAMIG, in partnership with TAFE and UniSA and local business, has provided teacher professional development programs in electronics and computer-aided design software to teachers across 10 schools in Northern Adelaide.
"The C2C Program is a groundbreaking example of industry-led education partnerships," Ms Cinnamond says. "It effectively prepares students for the challenges of the 21st century where science, maths and technology will play a pivotal role."
* For more information phone (08) 8260 8903 or view the website www.concept2creation.com.au
Word count: 602
