Science Alive! booth holders:
1 - 4: The Investigator Science and Technology Centre - A selection of Investigator's most engaging hands-on exhibits to challenge and delight all ages.
5 - 6: Optometrists Association of Australia - Visiting this stand will give you a picture of what your eye looks like inside. Each visitor will get a picture of the back of their eyes, showing the inner health and workings of their eyes.
7 - 8: Microbric - Featuring a sneak peak at the upcoming The Advertiser and Sunday Mail robot as well as last year's robot, the i- bot, and Microbric Viper for visitors to play with.
9: Astronomical Society of South Australia - Amateur astronomy in SA is a fun and fascinating pastime for everyone. Here you will be shown how it's done.
10 - 11: City of Unley, Sustainable Living - Discover the science of organic gardening from the Fern Avenue Community Gardeners. Get your hands dirty learning how to create a chemical-free garden.
12: Science Alive! Information Booth - Everything you could ever want to know about Science Alive! Free tickets to Stardomes.
13: Tall Poppy Campaign and DFEEST - A shared booth to showcase the Tall Poppy Campaign and DFEEST science initiatives.
14: Australian Geographic - Huge range of fun, educational science kits, games and toys. Special discounts for Science Alive! visitors.
15: Adelaide Hills Wilderness Lodge - The lodge is an exciting new facility catering for environmental and sports education. Meet tame native animals, such as Jasper the carpet python and Truffles the bettong, while learning about the many environmental courses and hands-on activities at the lodge's forested wildlife sanctuary.
16: The SA Neuroscience Institute - Test your ability to train your brain rhythms that underlie your mental states. Neurofeedback involves placing electrodes on the scalp to collect these rhythms as they occur and using the activity of these rhythms to influence the individual's interaction with a computer. See how electrical signals are generated by the nervous system.
17: Centre for Australian Space Education - Are you interested in a career in space science and technology? Find out about cool residential courses for Year 10 and 11 students.
18: Electronics Industry Association - Be a bright spark and make your own LED torch to take home. No charge but bookings are essential. Learn how an electronic circuit board works. You will construct, solder and make your own LED torch, using a light- emitting diode, printed circuit board and battery pack. Senior TAFE SA lecturers will supervise this workshop. For bookings, ph 8272 5222 or email josborne@eiaa.asn.au or view the website www.eiaa.asn.au. Suited to Year 6 and over.
19: Northern Advanced Manufacturing Industry Group - The group funded by the Australian Government's Sustainable Regions Program will present live computer-aided design demonstrations, robotics demos and examples of student C2C Projects. More information at www.concept2creation.com.au
20: Australian Science and Mathematics School - The ASMS is a state secondary school committed to excellence and excitement in science and mathematics education. The ASMS stand will demonstrate why the school is a recognised leader, nationally and internationally, in these fields.
21: Biotechnology at Flinders - Biotechnologists use biology to solve practical problems and one example of this is discovering and making new medicines. Once you have made a medicine, you need to know how much to give a patient and hands-on activity will show you how to get the dose right.
22 - 23: Science and Engineering, Flinders University - From wildlife to wired life. Dig for dinosaur bones, pat the robotic dog and meet Bob, the cycling skeleton.
24: Australian Society for Medical Research - Ask a researcher a question, test your body mass index, see what DNA really looks like, have a look at a stem cell and shake hands with our skeleton named Boris.
25: The Gene Juice Bar - The fun and interactive Gene Juice Bar gives people the opportunity to do a DNA extraction experiment from different fresh fruits, vegetables and cereals. While at the Gene Juice Bar people will also discover how scientists work with DNA.
26 - 27: University of Adelaide - Visit the University of Adelaide stand and have fun with 3D computer displays, microscope slides and animal skeletons and speak to marine biologists. Find out about different options for studying science and the range of stimulating career opportunities that they can lead to.
28 - 29: UniSA - The UniSA booth will be alive with slithering snakes, crawling lizards, a flight simulator, virtual computing, geospatial concepts that will get you thinking, DNA extracting activities and more. You will also have the opportunity to meet TREV, UniSA's two-seater renewable energy vehicle.
30: Dept for Environment and Heritage, Coastal Protection Branch - Find out how pipelines will be used in the near future to recycle sand on Adelaide's beaches.
31: Dept for Environment and Heritage, Coast and Marine Conservation Branch - Discover the science behind the scenes of marine habitat mapping and imagery. Learn more about how geographic information system technology helps preserve and protect our marine environment. Learn more about SA's marine bioregions and the Adelaide Dolphin Sanctuary.
32: SARDI - What's feeding the biodiesel industry? Find out how SARDI scientists are breeding new crop varieties to fuel a cleaner future for Australia.
33: CSIRO - Children will be given the opportunity to work through a number of work stations from CSIRO's Science Education Centre's popular Forensic Frenzy school program. They will investigate crime scene experiments, use forensic techniques and sift through evidence to solve the crime.
34 - 35: CSIRO Double Helix Club - Be amazed as water is turned into wine, try to power a calculator using a potato, make music with the amazing Singing Rods. Enjoy hands-on science activities.
Word count: 995
