Gawler Rangers finally broke the drought for their first victory of the 2011/12 division three baseball season, with an inspiring 11-7 win over Adelaide Angels.
A solid four-run first inning lay the foundation while some late insurance runs halted a challenging Adelaide fightback.
With one out, hits to Ryan O'Handley, Sam Murphy, Ricky Clark, James Parker and Dylan Winning, plus a walk to Shaun Clark, saw the Rangers score four runs in the first frame, with Adelaide answering with two runs.
Gawler took control of the game with a three-run second dig. Ricky Clark hitting a two-run single, to give him four runs batted in to that stage, as the Rangers led 7-2.
Starting pitcher Rick Leonard shut Adelaide out in the second inning to hammer home the Rangers' advantage, with Murphy coming on in relief to pitch the next three frames for just one run.
Ricky Clark batted his fifth run home with his third hit in the fourth inning, and Parker hit a sacrifice fly, as Gawler went to what seemed a match-winning 9-2 lead.
But then the one-inning malaise, which has been a negative factor in the Rangers' season, seemed to hit in the bottom of the sixth frame, where three errors paved the way for four Adelaide runs.
Cool head Andre Benjamin, who had come on to pitch, stayed focus on the mound and helped the Rangers navigate the stormy seas to keep afloat and lead 9-7.
Game star Ricky Clark led off the seventh and final inning for Gawler with his fourth hit, which when combined with hits to Parker, Winning (his third of the game) and Benjamin, saw two further Rangers runs and an 11-7 lead.
With a pair of strikeouts, Benjamin helped Gawler retire the Angels in order through the bottom of the seventh to preserve the Rangers first win of the season.
This Saturday Gawler play its third straight away game, when it travels to Mitcham to play Sturt Saints.
Gawler B grade lost 4-9 to Glenelg, a four-run first inning by the Tigers proving the difference. The Rangers only managed one hit, to Adam Soar.
Although putting up a good performance, Gawler's division seven side lost to Port Adelaide 9-17.
In the final inning the Rangers came alive with the bat to score five runs, with hits from James Sheekey, John Harkness, Paul Casson and Trevor Norley.
The Rangers under 14s lost 3-19 to Kensington, with Thomas Norley collecting two hits and Hamish Nemeth-Webb missing a home run by inches.
Gawler's second under 14 team beat East Torrens 15-8, breaking open an 8-8 ball game with seven final inning runs to none, after big hits to Nathan Harakos, Riley Holland and Jake Jarvis.
LL Majors won for the first time this season, beating Port Adelaide 14-9, with Jack Jenkins belting a long home run and pitching a shutout inning, while Cooper Amphlett and Declan Gillard-Martin also pitched well.
In a close game LL Minors lost 10-13 to Golden Grove Central Districts,
Cameron Keon and Cooper Wilson leading the way with two hits each, while Kale White took a sensational catch in centrefield.
In Gawler Slowpitch, SA Nomads climbed into second position with double-header victories over Kangas and TGI Friday, while Gawler Rangers remained undefeated with a win over White Pointers, and Giants beat VB.
Division Three
Gawler Rangers 4 3 0 2 0 0 2 -11
Adelaide Angels 2 0 0 1 0 4 0 - 7
Hits: Ricky Clark 4, Dylan Winning 3, Ryan O'Handley 2, Sam Murphy 2, James Parker 2, Andre Benjamin.
Division Five
Glenelg 9 d Gawler Rangers 4.
Hit: Adam Soar.
Division Seven
Port Adelaide 17 d Gawler Rangers 9.
Hits: Trevor Norley 2, Darren Unger, James Sheekey, John Harkness, Paul Casson.
Under 14
Kensington 19 d Gawler Rangers 3.
Hits: Thomas Norley 2, Michael O'Connor, Dylan Allen, Callum Borchard, Hamish Nemeth-Webb.
Gawler Rangers 15 d East Torrens 8.
Hits: - Jake Jarvis 2, Mark Bergen, Riley Holland, Geoffrey Barraclough, Nathan Harakos, Ben Mayfield.
Little League Majors
Gawler Rangers 14 d Port Adelaide 9.
Hits: Zakeray Heintze-Unger 2, Brodie Ewen 2, Jack Jenkins (hr), Mathew Young, Tyler Davis.
Little League Minors
GGCD 13 d Gawler Rangers 10.
Hits: Cameron Keon 2, Cooper Wilson 2, Kale White, Hunter Powell, Jackson Pike, Trent O'Brien, Wyatt Ryan.
This week:
Wednesday (tonight) - Division Seven v GGCD Dodgers at home, 6.15pm; under 14 A v GGCD away, 6.15pm; under 14 B v GGCD Dodgers away, 6.15pm.
Saturday - Division Three v Sturt away, 4pm; Division Fiive v Southern Districts away, 3pm; Division Seven v GGCD at home, 3pm.
Sunday - under 14 A v West Torrens away, 12.30pm; under 14 B v Kensington away, 3pm; LL Majors v Henley & Grange away, 10am; LL Minors v Woodville at home, 10am.
Slowpitch results: Gawler Rangers 1.58 d White Pointers 0.42; SA Nomads 2.57 d Kangas 0.92; Giants 0.80 d VB 0.38; SA Nomads 7.30 d TGI Friday 3.00.
Points: Gawler Rangers 8, SA Nomads 6, Giants 4, VB 3, TGI Friday 2, White Pointers 1, Kangas 0.
This Friday's games: 7.15pm - VB v Gawler Rangers and White Pointers v SA Nomads; 8pm - Giants v Kangas and VB v TGI Friday.
Games are played at Elliott Goodger Memorial Park, and follow the tee-ball and rookie ball games, which start at 6pm. For details contact Rob on 0407 979 163.
Credit: Robert Laidlaw
Word count: 903
