THOUSANDS of families are expected to flock to the Adelaide Showground to be part of the largest free community event of National Science Week.
Science Alive! - on Saturday and Sunday between 10am and 4pm - is in the Stirling Angus Hall, near the Rose Tce gates of the Showground, and aims to celebrate science in an entertaining, "hands- on" way.
This is not an event where visitors observe from a distance. Everyone gets a chance to "do something", hopefully learning a little bit along the way.
Celebrity scientists Rob Morrison and Deane Hutton, together on TV for 18 years on The Curiosity Show and now occasional presenters on the New Inventors, will be the headline act at Science Alive! They will be performing science shows at noon and 1pm daily.
SciWorld Science Shows on energy and matter will also feature at other times and Splash Theatre will perform its hilarious Water Show three times daily - highly entertaining but with some great water- conservation messages.
All science shows and the Water Show are free, thanks to the generosity of the event's sponsors.
More than 30 organisations are involved in Science Alive! and each is offering free interactive experiences.
The full list of booth-holders and what they are offering is on another page of this feature. But for those who can't get enough of science there will be some items on sale, including The Advertiser Science Showbags, full of interactive fun and only $7 (or two for $12). There is also a premium bag available for $12.50.
Australian Geographic, CSIRO Education and Microbric will also be offering robots and science gizmos and gadgets for sale at discounted prices.
The Electronics Industry Association and tafeSA are offering teenagers the challenge of soldering electronics circuits to create their own torch; five to 10-year-olds will be fascinated by the native animals provided by Remabi Park and the slithering creatures provided by Bugs 'n' Slugs; each of South Australia's three great universities will have amazing interactive displays; and there will even be live lobsters and a sing-a-long at the SARDI stand (great for those who can remember the Rock Lobster song).
CSIRO Education and the Double Helix Science Club will be providing a big array of hands-on experiences - always a huge drawcard for primary school students.
Sessions in SciWorld's huge Stardomes are guaranteed to be extremely popular as is the Astronomical Society display.
The University of Adelaide booth is offering free soil analysis to people who bring a jar of soil from their backyard - so don't miss this chance to find out more about your garden's health.
If you can't get enough of gadgets, be inspired by TREV, UniSA's two-seater renewable energy vehicle, or wonder at Flinders University's robotic dog.
See how SA high school students are developing their own gadgets through an industry/education program called concept2creation.
Careers in the defence industry will be highlighted at the DSTO and BAE Systems booths while Engineers Australia and the Department for Transport, Energy and Infrastructure booths will be staffed by young engineers keen to share their work experiences and to highlight the excellent opportunities for engineers.
Keen on maths and science? The Australian Science and Mathematics School and Orange Education stands have plenty to offer.
Want to know more about DNA? Visit the Gene Juice Bar or the Australian Society for Medical Research booths. The Australian Radiation Protection Stand will be offering advice on the safety or otherwise of many products.
Our natural environment will be highlighted at the Nature Foundation SA, Reef Watch, Weeds CRC and Adelaide's Living Beaches stands.
The Nature Foundation is hoping to sign up hundreds of new members for its Save, Protect and Restore campaign.
* Inquiries: There are nearly 100 events in SA in National Science Week - visit the website www.scienceweek.info.au for details.
Word count: 667
