STUDENT demand for a Year 11 electrotechnology course at a northern suburbs high school has almost doubled this year.
Valley View Secondary School has experienced a surge in both boys and girls wanting to study for an electrotechnology Certificate I, which encourages students to consider technology-based careers.
The certificate requires students to choose a major project. Many adopt the Concept2Creation Plus, a vocational education initiative aimed at engaging students in maths, science and technology.
The course is part of the $5.4 million federally funded Advanced Technologies Industrial Pathways Program for three Northern Area lead schools.
Valley View Secondary's electrotechnology co-ordinator Tony Clough said there had been a "massive rise" in the C2C+ subject because students could see the direct link to career pathways.
C2C+ is an extension of the Year 10 subject, Concept2Creation, which provides hands-on experience in creating small electronic devices.
Mr Clough said C2C has a maths/science focus, is problem-based and uses advanced technology in electronics for "real situations".
It involves small groups of students working with industry partners who act as mentors to develop a product from start to finish. The course provides opportunities for students to use technology in real-life situations.
Students who go on to enrol in C2C+ in Year 11 can choose three projects with real-life applications. They can make radio-controlled planes as part of the Uninhabited Aerial Vehicle Challenge (supported by the RAAF), radio-controlled hovercrafts for the Suburban Wetlands Acquisitions Telemetry (supported by British Aerospace) and a vehicle tracking system (supported by Holden Australia) which uses the device to locate cars in a car park that require repairs.
The subject motivates many students to study electronics or physics in Year 11, Mr Clough said.
Currently more boys are enrolled than girls, but this is starting to change.
"Boys are attracted because they want to be electricians," he said. "But there are other career paths to it."
The Year 11 students (pictured) are making hovercrafts as part of the physics course which will be used for water testing at designated points in lakes.
Students who missed out this year can take part in the hovercraft program next year as part of the Year 12 electronics course.
The C2C programs are organised by the Northern Advanced Manufacturing Industry Group and count towards SACE.
More than 1500 students at 20 schools are taking part this year.
Credit: NIE MANAGER MARTINA SIMOS
Word count: 405
