SCIENCE Alive! is the largest free community event of National Science Week 2006 and it is happening on Sunday at the Royal Adelaide Showground, Wayville.
The event, being held between 10am and 4pm in the Stirling Angus Hall near the Rose Tce gates of the showground, aims to celebrate science in an entertaining, hands-on way.
Science Alive! co-ordinator Brian Haddy says this is not an event where visitors wander about with hands clasped behind their backs.
"Everyone gets a chance to do something, while hopefully learning a little bit along the way," Mr Haddy says. "From the rollicking fun of The Investigator Science Centre shows to the challenge of soldering electronics circuits to create your own LED torch, there is something for everyone. Primary school children will be fascinated by the native animals displayed by Remabi Park and the slithering creatures provided by Bugs 'n' Slugs."
Mr Haddy says teenagers will learn about science being offered at SA universities and at TafeSA. "Hard-core CSI fans will love the crime-scene presentation by Science Outside the Square at noon. CSIRO will be providing a huge array of hands-on experiences through its Forensic Frenzy activities and their Double Helix Club, which is always a huge drawcard for primary-school students.
"Sessions in The Investigator Science Centre's huge Stardomes are guaranteed to be extremely popular, as is the Astronomical Society display."
If you have ever wondered what the back of your eye looks like, visit the Optometrists Association of Australia booth and have your eye photographed, showing its inner health and workings. You can take the photo home.
You can be among the first to see what will replace the popular i- bot in this year's The Advertiser and Sunday Mail robotics promotion.
Visit the Microbric stand and see how the
AI-2 i-bot robotic toy can perform an amazing array of functions. Later this year you will have the chance to own an AI-2 through The Advertiser and Sunday Mail.
If you can't get enough of gadgets then be inspired by TREV, UniSA's two-seater renewable energy vehicle, or stare in wonder at Flinders University's robotic dog.
Mr Haddy says you can see how South Australian high school students are developing their own gadgets through a unique industry/ education program, concept2creation.
"Our precious marine environment will be highlighted by the Department of Environment and Heritage and the University of Adelaide," he says. "SARDI scientists will be explaining their quest for fueling the biodiesel industry with new crop varieties."
The Australian Geographic Shop will also be at Science Alive! with some fabulous discount offers.
There are nearly 100 events in SA in National Science Week, Australia's largest science festival.
It began in 1997 to raise the profile and increase the public's understanding and appreciation of the role of science, technology and innovation in maintaining and improving our society, economy and the environment.
The real force behind National Science Week is the hard work and creativity of hundreds of people who each year volunteer their time to make the events, activities and programs happen.
National Science Week is a partnership program between the Department of Education, Science and Training, and the ABC, ASF Limited, ASTA and CSIRO.
The volunteer co-ordinating committees in each state and territory plan and run events and also offer support and advice to local event holders.
* For more details visit www.scienceweek.info.au
Word count: 588
