FLIGHT CHALLENGE NEARS
STUDENTS from four northern Adelaide schools will compete in the Uninhabited Aerial Vehicle Challenge, to be staged at the Edinburgh RAAF base on October 21.
The students, from Craigmore High School, Riverton & District High School, Temple Christian College and Valley View Secondary School, have been mentored by engineers from the air force and BAE Systems Australia as they have prepared their aircraft to compete in the UAV competition.
They are involved in the Concept2Creation project, which encourages schools and local businesses to form partnerships for various activities.
Competitors will need to use their aircraft to drop an emergency medical aid package to a group in a remote area.
Teams will not only be competent in flight and navigation but will apply their engineering expertise to develop a drop mechanism for the aid package and calculate the drop trajectory.
The challenge is made more demanding with the pilot not able to see the aircraft and being completely dependent on effective communication with the navigator, bombardier and other team members.
THAT'S USING YOUR LOAF
BEST friends Millie, 7, and Sally, 8, from Glen Osmond Primary School, have been very busy raising money for the children in Brookman ward at the Women's and Children's Hospital.
After watching their MasterChef idols, the girls decided to practise their cooking skills for a worthy cause. They baked a variety of buns and biscuits to sell at recess time. The treats sold for $1 each and they raised $154.
CALL TO KITCHEN GARDENERS
SCHOOLS have one week left to get on board the next round of the Stephanie Alexander Kitchen Garden national program.
The federal government initiative, which encourages primary school students in Year 3 to Year 6 to learn how to grow, cook and share fresh food, is designed to improve nutrition and eating habits in young people.
Applications close on October 20. The scheme provides up to $60,000 to help schools cover the cost of building kitchens and gardens. For more information, go to www.kitchengardenfoundation.org.au.
Word count: 344
