To find out more about the Men's Shed, call 8262 5544.
BRYCE Routley has turned his passion for helping others into an obsession.
He has spent the past four years working hard to secure funding to set up a Men's Shed in Pooraka to help socially isolated men reconnect with their community.
The shed will open next month at the back of the Memorial Hall, Scott St, thanks to $35,000 from Community Benefit SA.
"I've been blown away by the number of people wanting to be involved with this," Mr Routley, 55, of Pooraka, says.
"We have more than 50 people on a stand-by list waiting for the shed to open and get around two to three calls about it a day.
"It shows that there is a real need for this in the community and many men out there who are feeling isolated." Mr Routley's community work will be honoured tonight (Wednesday, March 7) when he is named one of seven Salisbury Living Legends.
The annual awards, run by Salisbury Council, recognise people who make outstanding community contributions.
The Men's Shed will offer programs such as woodwork, mechanics, recycling and look to support youth mentoring.
Mr Routley has volunteered at Ingle Farm Baptist Church since 2003 and started work with the Pooraka Farm Community Centre in 2002.
"It started out more than nine years ago lending a helping hand on Sundays in the church hall and quickly led to being part of management and helping get the Pooraka Farm Community Centre off the ground," he says.
"I really feel these awards are a good chance for people to see the good work that goes on in our community and for others to get involved themselves."
The awards will be presented tonight at the John Harvey Gallery, 12 James St, Salisbury at 6.30.
2012 Living Legends
FIVE other people will be recognised for their outstanding contributions at a special event tonight (Wednesday, March 7). Here is how the council saw their contributions to the Salisbury community:
- Maureen Morton: Ms Morton is passionate about making young people aware of the career opportunities available in science, through her involvement in groups such as the Science at the Lakes Committee. She also raises funds each year through the Mawson Lakes Rotary Club for students to attend a major science event in Canberra.
- Brian Menadue: Mr Menadue's tireless volunteer work with a number of community organisations and programs, including 50 years with the Salisbury CFS, earned him the Living Legends honour. He was also integral to the development of the Salisbury Recreation Precinct.
- Roger Knowles: Mr Knowles is a shining light in the local African, Burmese and Bhutanese communities. He has volunteered his time mentoring refugees and helping them settle in the Salisbury area through his participation in the New Arrivals program.
- Nick Zissopolous: Through his role as assistant principal at Parafield Gardens High, Mr Zissopolous pushes students out of their comfort zones to help them achieve their best. He is also the head chanter at the Parish of Saint Dimitrios on Saints Rd, Salisbury, and in his spare time runs a free music school.
- Lincoln Wood: Mr Wood was instrumental in establishing the Northern Advanced Manufacturing Industry Group and developing the Concept2Creation program for schools. Now a Professor of Systems Engineering at Adelaide University, Mr Wood continues to inspire science, technology, engineering and maths students.
Credit: PAM BROMBAL
Word count: 571
