Alexandra Grigg, who was a former investment manager at now-defunct fund manager Blue Sky Alternative Investments and worked with Dr Stead managing the South Australian Venture Capital Fund, said there was finance industry chatter that the SA fund would struggle to find co-investors and start-up investee companies following the articles’ publication.
The second day of Federal Court hearings into Dr Stead’s defamation case against Mr Aston also heard that she resented being told by Blue Sky colleagues to stop using her Twitter account.
Dr Stead’s musings on Twitter, which are limited to a private group of followers, were regular fodder for Mr Aston’s columns.
There were also “a lot of conversations behind closed doors” within the South Australian Government, Renee Hakendorf, formerly a manager at the University of Adelaide’s ThincLab start-up accelerator, testified.
Dr Stead is suing Mr Aston for defamation over a series of columns, published in the Australian Financial Review, which she claims made her look “reckless” and “stupid”
Ms Grigg was an Adelaide-based employee of Blue Sky, which until last year had a circa-$1 million per year mandate to run the South Australian government’s venture capital fund.
Dr Stead was lead manager running the fund, and when Blue Sky failed, was kept on by the fund’s overarching investment committee. That committee also mandated via a tender process that she be employed by the fund’s new manager. That did not eventuate, however Ms Grigg was employed by Artesian which took it over.
Ms Grigg told the Court that Mr Aston’s articles prompted conversations to the effect that “no one’s probably going to invest with you guys now’’ in the broader financial community.
“All sorts of phone calls would start with ‘have you read the article?’’’ Ms Grigg told the Court.
“And from there it would be like, ‘OK that’s a little bit concerning, what does that mean for you? What does that mean for the South Australian Venture Capital Fund? Implying that the government were going to take it as a liability.
“There was one in particular that ‘no one’s probably going to want to invest with you guys now’.’’
Ms Grigg said those comments came from the general finance community.
“There were other comments ... from companies and start-ups that we were working with, around ‘we’re not sure if we want to be involved with Elaine or the South Australian Venture Capital Fund because of this.’’
Ms Grigg also told the Court that Dr Stead had told her that she felt she’d been mistreated at Blue Sky in 2019.
She also told the Court that she had overheard conversations at Blue Sky to the effect that Dr Stead had been asked to stop using Twitter.
Ms Hakendorf told the Court that following one of Mr Aston’s columns in October 2019, she was aware that there were “a lot of conversations behind closed doors” within the SA government’s Department for Innovation and Skills, which oversees the SA fund.
Dr Stead’ sister Olivia agreed with the assertion made that Dr Stead did not like the fact that she had been asked to stop using Twitter - a direction which she adhered to for a period of time, before resuming.
Venture capitalist Alan Jones told the Court he had a conversation with another person in the VC community to the effect that the reputational damage sustained by Dr Stead would “be a difficult thing to come back from’’.
The Court heard on Tuesday that Mr Aston had targeted Dr Stead in part because of her gender.
In opening submissions in the Federal Court, Sue Chrysanthou SC, argued that Dr Stead was a “highly educated”, well-respected venture capital investor, who had a good track record and that Mr Aston’s columns, which Dr Stead’s statement of claim says made her out to look “cretinously stupid’’, were “highly offensive and damaging’’.
Mr Aston’s defence, which is yet to be heard, will rely on honest opinion as a defence, Court documents show.
The matter continues.
Word count: 640
