A NEW push to unearth innovation within the South Australian mining and energy sector through learning and collaboration is underway at Lot Fourteen.
A CORE Innovation Hub has now opened at the precinct on North Terrace to bring together innovators, start-ups, scale ups and entrepreneurs and businesses into a co-working space with a specific focus on the mining and energy sectors.
CORE Innovation Hub state manager Renee Hakendorf said over the coming months CORE would create an open source digital map of the innovation ecosystem for the energy and resources sectors.
“The ecosystem map will identify clusters of capability in SA and provide a channel to stimulate collaboration and partnerships,” Ms Hakendorf said.
“With such diverse sectors it can often be difficult for the new entrants to find the right partners and for the major companies to source the right talent or access new equipment or technology.” The hub will also have meeting spaces, networking events, and professional training programs specific to members.
Energy and Mining Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said the state’s resources sector would receive significant benefits from the opening of the advanced innovation hub at Lot Fourteen.
He described it as a foundation partnership between the Government and CORE Innovation Hub, providing opportunities to work together and grow investment and jobs.
“As part of the Government’s Economic and Business Development Growth Fund, the partnership with CORE Innovation Hub will provide a pivotal tool to connect South Australian innovators with the resources and energy sector,” he said.
The CORE Innovation Hub will be based within the Stone & Chalk start-up hub, with a satellite presence also at the Tonsley Innovation District.
The partnership will also encourage links with the state Department for Trade and Investment and the Department for Innovation and Skills to attract more companies here.
“CORE’s programs will provide an opportunity for emerging innovators, established industries and all organisations in between to collaborate with intent, growing the state’s knowledge economy,” Ms Hakendorf said.
“Creating collaborative opportunities allows industry members to form partnerships along the supply chain, build trust, create jobs, and above all, to facilitate connections at a deeper industry level.” An online skills marketplace will connect individuals and organisations with training and development opportunities. “By encouraging learning and collaboration, CORE will assist the sector to embed emerging skills in areas like data analytics, automation and artificial intelligence across their existing workforce,” she said. CORE’s first innovation hub was established in Perth, WA, in 2016. Hub to connect innovators to resources and energy sectors
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 423
