Defence today announced, in its latest military spending budget, a $4.8 million contract to incorporate an ultra-precision sapphire clock into the national Jindalee over the horizon radar system.
The Australian developed Sapphire Clock, recognised as global leading technology, is 1000 times more precise than other commercial time piece and when combined with radar is able to zero in on aircraft and ships with extreme accuracy regardless of size, thousands of kilometres offshore.
Defence Minister Linda Reynolds said the Sapphire Clock would potentially significantly boost detection performance of Australia’s vulnerable northern approaches by the Jindalee Operational Radar Network (JORN).
BAE Systems Australia and CryoClock Pty Ltd were awarded the contract to further develop the technology.
“It is fascinating that this extremely precise timepiece, which was designed for improving clocks, radars and measuring systems, has the potential to be used in radar systems such as JORN,” she said today.
Defence’s investment in the technology coincides with CryoClock’s relocation into South Australia’s hi-tech innovation precinct alongside the Australian Space Agency and some of Australia’s most advanced technology companies.
According to CryoClock, the clock is so precise it loses just one second over 40 million years, its accuracy able to give unparalleled precise GPS coordinates.
It’s “purity” in time frequencies will allow the JORN tracking network to detect smaller objects at great distances than its current capability.
The scientists, many of whom were from Adelaide University, have already been working with military high frequency radar teams from the Defence Science Technology Group (DSTG).
The clock, that has been more than 20 years in development, has a literal artificially grown single crystal 1200 carat sapphire, at its heart to make it tick in what company co-founder Professor Andre Luiten describes is like a bell that when struck can ring for a month in an ultra-low phase noise frequency oscillator to provide an extremely accurate signal. He said the sapphire was the size of a fist and worth about $20,000.
Senator Reynolds said the RAAF-managed JORN that surveys the northern air and sea approaches of Australia out to a range of 3000 kilometres was vital to our national defence.
“This contract is part of this Government’s $270 billion investment in defence capability over the next decade which is creating new jobs and delivering more opportunities for small businesses to thrive,” Senator Reynolds said.
“If successful, follow-on work is expected which will see a production and integration contract for the incorporation of the technology into JORN under Defence’s AIR2025 Phase 6 upgrade project.”
Word count: 404
