A CLOAKING device able to make a warship invisible to air, sea and land radar has been quietly developed in South Australia, in what the Royal Australian Navy has described as a game-changer in electronic combat warfare.
Aptly named Project Cuttlefish, after the mollusc that can deploy a biological invisibility cloak, the top-secret development began more than a decade ago with a modest $3m in funding.
Back then it was little more than a “Capability Technology Demonstrator”, an outside-the-square idea worthy of developing if it could contribute to national defence objectives.
But it can be revealed that in the past 18 months extensive sea trials of the extraordinary technology, developed by BAE Systems and Defence Science Technology Group (DSTG), have been a success.
That success was measured by it achieving its stated objective to the RAN to “create, disrupt and block an adversary’s surveillance and protect its own platforms in real time”. Its sea trials were completed firstly on Defence Maritime Services ship Seahorse Spirit, usually berthed in Sydney and Melbourne, and then on RAN frigates, including at RIMPAC, the world’s largest biennial naval exercise off the coast of Hawaii.
It is not known where it is now being deployed but is understood to likely be part of the Hunter-class future frigate currently being developed to replace the Anzac-class warship fleets.
Few within the companies involved or Defence Department are willing to discuss the program.
“BAE Systems Australia is not able to comment on this particular program,” a spokeswoman said on Saturday.
“However, working with Defence, industry and academia, BAE Systems is continuously searching for innovative ways to provide our customers with a competitive edge across air, land, maritime and cyber domains.” Cuttlefish technology was pitched to counter surveillance by adversary aircraft with sophisticated advanced imaging radar to detect, identify and track surface ships and co-ordinate attacks.
By countering radio frequency emitters, it could make the ship invisible to radar and, according to its early confidential brief, “enable the Royal Australian Navy to sustain a presence in hostile and threatening environments”.
Sea trials were first slated for 2009 but it would be another decade before the technology was further funded and ready for testing against today’s suite of sophisticated radar.
“It’s an extraordinary piece of work, really impressive technology,” said a navy source familiar with the Cuttlefish program said.
“It does now play into Australia’s push into having sovereign capability and just hap­pens to be a world leading-edge development.” It is likely the technology would be sold to allies, notably the US. In physical terms, the cloaking device is essentially a very expensive box that can be quickly mounted into standard 48cm computer server-style racks on any vessel.
CREDIT: CHARLES MIRANDA
Word count: 452
