AN artificially grown sapphire the size of a fist will be at the heart of Australia’s early warning defence system, enabling radar to identify threats with pinpoint accuracy before they can reach our shores.
Defence has announced, in its latest military spending budget, a $4.8m contract to ­develop incorporating an ultra-precision sapphire clock into the Jindalee “over the horizon” national radar system.
The Australian-developed sapphire clock is world-leading technology, 1000 times more precise than other commercial timepieces. When combined with radar, it can zero in on aircraft and ships with extreme accuracy thousands of kilometres offshore.
Defence Minister Linda Reynolds said the sapphire clock could significantly boost the protection of Australia’s vulnerable northern coastline by the Jindalee radar.
BAE Systems Australia and CryoClock were awarded the contract to further develop the technology. “It is fascinating that this extremely precise timepiece, which was designed for improving clocks, radars and measuring systems, has the potential to be used in radar systems such as Jindalee,” she said.
Defence’s investment in the technology coincides with CryoClock’s relocation into South Australia’s hi-tech innovation precinct alongside the Australian Space Agency and some of Australia’s most advanced technology companies.
CryoClock says the sapphire clock is so precise it loses just one second over 40 million years, its accuracy able to give unparalleled precise GPS co-ordinates and detect smaller objects at greater distances.
The scientists, many from Adelaide University, have ­already been working with military high-frequency radar teams from the Defence Science Technology Group.
The clock, which has been more than 20 years in development, has an artificially grown 1200-carat sapphire to make it tick, in what company co-founder Professor Andre Luiten describes is like a bell that when struck can ring for a month in an ultra-low frequency, providing an extremely accurate signal. He said the sapphire was the size of a fist and worth about $20,000.
Senator Reynolds said the RAAF-managed Jindalee radar network that surveyed the northern approaches of Australia was vital to defence.
“This contract is part of this government’s $270bn investment in defence capability over the next decade which is creating new jobs and delivering more opportunities for small businesses,” she said. charles.miranda@news.com.au
CREDIT: Charles Miranda
Word count: 364
