As baby-boomers age they’ve busted the idea that fitness is for the young, and reset expectations on what health and exercise at 60 and beyond is supposed to look like
David Shean knew he had to do something when he retired from a Darwin office job in 2017 and came to live in Adelaide. He weighed 110kg, was struggling to walk on two bad knees, had just turned 65 and was always short of breath. Within a month of going to the gym at the Parks Recreation and Sports Centre three times a week, he was starting to gain energy and, 18 months later, had dropped 15kg.
He’s just one of the rising number of 60-somethings who are making a conscious decision to get and stay fit. Some, like Jayne Redding, Ashley Martin and Sunshine Paradis, have all had to deal with medical issues and benefited greatly from increased fitness. For others like Pamela Lockyer-Scrutton, nothing much has changed as she maintains a daily fitness regimen and teaches yoga.
The claim that 60 is the new 40 may be a bit of a stretch but there’s no doubt many people approaching or experiencing the early years of retirement are, in general, younger and fitter than ever before.
The attitude that sees 60-somethings enjoy pop, rock, new wave and even rap music at an age long after their parents had put away the vinyl rock’n’roll and swing discs, translates to better health. People are thinking and acting younger.
You can increasingly find sexagenarians – yes that really is the name for them – in gyms and swimming pools, on squash and tennis courts, doing tai chi in the park, and strolling beaches and walking trails. Adelaide and surrounds has plenty of the latter, with Mount Lofty, Anstey Hill, Cobbler Creek, Black Hill, Belair and the Linear Park alongside the O-Bahn among up to a hundred that are free options for older people looking to maintain their fitness.
While the 2016 Census indicated only 18 per cent of people aged 60-70 were involved in organised physical activity, anecdotal evidence indicates that number is rapidly on the rise.
Over the past three years, YMCA chief executive Haydn Robins says he’s seen a steady increase in the number of 60-somethings signing up to improve their fitness. In the past 12 months alone, he says there have more than 75,000 visits from older members – an increase of 200 per cent on the previous year.
“We introduced a program called Active Adults for over 60s in 2016 across all our YMCA sites and have seen a massive increase in interest among older members,” he says. “We partnered with Council on the Ageing to produce a program specifically suited to people over 60 at a reasonable rate. We do a health check upon signing on and then all of our products are tailored around that space. Members have access to the gym, of course, but also classes specifically designed for older members taking into account their requirements.” Across Adelaide, there’s been a significant rise in people aged 60 and above attending gyms and fitness centres – and involved in programs that take into account that the average peak heart rate limit of 155 beats per minute for a 60-something compares to 200 for a 20-year-old and that blood pressure is often a factor for older Australians. Benefitness managing director Darren Saul has seen a steady increase in over-60s at his Fairview Park gym in the past five years.
“We have sessions set aside for older people if they want them but a lot also just do regular workouts,” he says. “People are becoming very aware of their abilities and are usually willing to get advice on what suits them best. We’ve found older clients are very switched on to tailoring programs to give themselves the best outcomes.” The Parks health and fitness co-ordinator Ingrid Pennington has noted a marked increase in the 60-70 age group, who are taking advantage of age-specific programs that allow them to achieve their best outcomes. She says the centre also has members aged over 70 and its oldest participant is 94.
“The over 60s demographic has become increasingly engaged in organised exercise such as the Strength For Life program,” she says. “By offering aged-specific exercise programs, we provide greater accessibility to people who perhaps wouldn’t have considered attending a gym. They’re finding a supervised and social environment is very rewarding on many levels.” For many 60-somethings, getting and staying fit is not just a means to an end, it’s a way of life. And it doesn’t start and finish with an hour at the gym every day …
Jayne Redding, 60 When she’s not working with people with disability in one job and as a swimming instructor to young children in another, Jayne Redding stays fit running around after five grandchildren. But she doesn’t stop at that. The Murray Bridge widow maintains her fitness with early morning rowing exercises along Australia’s great river and trains for major walks that she aims to undertake once a year.
“I’ve always enjoyed walking but as I’ve got older, I realise how important it is to keep doing the things you enjoy to stay fit,” she says. “That’s why I’ve continued with the Murray Bridge Rowing Club even though I no longer take part in competitions. A group of us row early in the morning as a way of keeping fit and socialising, and even on freezing winter mornings it’s great to get out there for a couple of hours and then go for a coffee. The Murray offers that opportunity you can’t get in a lot of places but I like to go to smaller waterways like the Glenelg River, where I recently went on a five-day kayaking adventure.” Jayne has always enjoyed good health, with the exception of a bad back brought about by a chronic ailment called spinal canal stenosis, so she takes on exercises that will improve rather than aggravate the condition. Her weekly regimen is simple enough but still beyond what many would consider an easy ask – walking with or without her dog Lily up to 5km a day, rowing once a week and, of course, swimming virtually every day.
“These are exercises I actually use in doing what I love,” she says. “Nepal’s Annapurna track is the biggest walk I’ve done but I always try to incorporate walks into any holiday I take. It’s a great way to see the world and stay fit at the same time, and going on walks through Scotland, Ireland and Slovenia have allowed me to experience other countries the way many can’t do.”
Ashley Martin, 62 Ashley Martin retired from his work with the Defence Science Technology Group a couple of years ago, knowing that staying fit was a non-negotiable as he managed mature age onset diabetes. It was never going to be a problem for the former engineer, however, as he hiked Anstey Hill and similar trails several times a week and had already completed several 400km-plus pilgrimages through Spain and Portugal. Over a decade, he’s done more than 2000km in walks across the two countries.
Earlier this year, however, Ashley realised that all the walking may have done more than just prepare him for overseas hikes. He suffered a heart attack and was told by his doctor that his residual fitness may have been a major factor in reducing his heart damage.
“I did my first walk through Spain in 2007,” Ashley recalls. “The Camino de Santiago took five weeks and introduced me to wonderful cultures and new friends. I missed the camaraderie of it so I planned another walk in 2010, this time from Coimbra Portugal. I met an Englishman called Steve on the 2007 walk and we kept in touch and met up again in the 2010 walk, when we met a German woman called Siggi. We’ve all been walking buddies ever since.” Ashley and Steve did the Lisbon to Fatima Caminho de Fatima walk in 2016, then returned to Lisbon and walked the Rota Vicentina through South Portugal with Siggi. “The following year I did the Kangaroo Island Wilderness Trail over four days and in 2018, I returned to Portugal with my wife Cristina, who was born there, where I did a 300km walk with Steve and Siggi.
“Fast forward a year and I’m walking Anstey Hill when I experienced a dull chest pain, numb arm, jaw ache and heavy sweating, and realised I’m having a heart attack. My wife rushed me to hospital and four stents later, I’m feeling good and walking again. The doctor said it may have happened 10 years ago and been worse if I hadn’t done all this walking.”
Pamela Lockyer-Scrutton, 62 Pamela Lockyer-Scrutton isn’t rediscovering fitness – she never lost it. She teaches yoga once a week and practices it every day, with Sunday also a “walk day” where she usually takes the dogs for a 6km stroll along Tennyson beach.
Pamela maintains yoga is a lot more than just exercise. It’s a means of bringing together mind, body and spirit. “I practise what’s called blissful yoga, which works on all areas,” she says. “It helps stretch, strengthen and balance the body while focusing on the now. There are a range of asanas (poses) including lying on your back, tummy, side, seated and combining a lot of different movements.” Long before she took up yoga, Pamela maintained her condition playing competitive sports such as netball and squash, and also by working as a fitness instructor – although she recalls some of the high-impact sports took their toll.
“Like a lot of sportspeople with ankles and knees and broken fingers, I damaged myself,” she says. “I was young and didn’t worry about such things but as you get older, a lot of those things come back to bite you. Some of those injuries, I still carry. I wish I’d have found yoga much earlier in life. I’ve found with yoga, I’ve become more relaxed, calmer, more patient.
“I’ve never found any other exercise as satisfying as yoga. You centre yourself and become calm as you enter the asana practice. You also enter what we call the complete yoga breath so you’re focusing on your breathing a lot more than the actual poses. Some asanas are inverted so your head is down and your feet are in the air and that cleanses the body because the blood has to work against its usual flow. When I come out the other end, I always spend about 15 minutes in relaxation and meditation.”
David Shean, 67 Arriving in Adelaide from Darwin just over two years ago, David Shean was determined to lose some weight and regain the fitness he enjoyed as a competition hockey player in his youth. He had worked in administration jobs most of his life and, while that didn’t exactly make him office-bound in the Top End, it didn’t give him much chance to exercise either.
David was the classic retiree needing to get fit. He had just turned 65, weighed around 110kg and had two bad knees. Something had to change. Then he came across the YMCA Active Adults program, which offered exercises that were tailored to his strengths and weaknesses, and the results started to flow.
“The Strength for Life program was made to order for me and I threw myself into it, doing three classes a week, each one lasting two hours,” he says. “Often I’ll walk the 2km from home to the gym. I concentrate mainly on weights, stretching and leg strengthening but there are a range of options.
“I was a hockey player in my youth but as I got older, went into admin jobs and lost fitness. When I came down from Darwin, I made a commitment to get fit and lose at least 15kg. I managed to lose that but I’ve steadied recently and I’d like to lose another three or four kilos to get to my ideal weight.” David says he’s discovered a social side to working out in his 60s, which combines with fit-for-purpose exercises to make going to the fitness centre three times a week something to look forward to.
“We have an instructor dedicated to the Strength for Life program and she customises every program to the individual,” he says.
“It’s a lot of fun. There are quite a few characters among the older group and the mixture of male and female is just about equal. It’s a good social fit.”
Sunshine Paradis, 63 Good to her name, Sunshine Paradis has a positive attitude about life and wellbeing, keeping herself fit to do the thing she loves doing most – dancing. After learning ballroom dancing from the age of seven back in her native Austria, the retired psychologist has been dancing up a storm for the 19 years she’s lived in Australia.
Sunshine does rock’n’roll and salsa three times a week and, when she’s not dancing, she walks to stay fit. Twice a year she travels to Bali to visit friends and enjoy daily four-hour walks through the mountains around Ubud. When she’s home, she takes her pet chihuahua to the park and walks for at least an hour every day.
“She’s a tiny thing and I usually wear her out and end up carrying her home, but I always make sure I walk,” she says. “I don’t drive so I take public transport but, weather permitting, I walk from home (Plympton) to Glenelg fairly regularly.
“It’s very important to me to stay fit and active. I fell on ice in Austria twice and broke my coccyx both times a few years before I came here, and was told at one time I may never walk again.“I’ve got a little bit of arthritis as I’ve got older but I manage it well and I’ve never let it stop me doing things. My main exercise is walking but dancing also keeps me very fit and healthy while I’m doing one of my great loves.”
CREDIT: WORDS SHANE McNALLY
Word count: 2347
