AUSTRALIA'S military must work harder at developing defence systems to protect land-based vehicles from attack rather than relying on heavier vehicles designed to withstand blasts, the army's head of modernisation says.
Major-General Fergus McLachlan has told the Land Forces Conference in Adelaide that the army cannot keep having vehicles that increase in weight.
"For some time it's been expected that ships and planes will either spoof an incoming threat to cause it to miss or physically knock it down to prevent it hitting the platform, yet the protection approach to land vehicles has been to let the projectile hit the vehicle and see if you're going to survive," he said.
"As a result the weight of our combat platforms is escalating incredibly dramatically so how do we prevent our vehicles from being hit (using) active protection systems or defensive aid suites. We must be better at achieving that capability.
"Innovation is a process and we have to learn to be better at it. The notion of the modern fighter jet that is designed to be unstable and is controlled by a fly-by-wire computer is the sense of how we have to achieve in our military, we have to achieve a military that can with relatively small inputs adjust its heading to a change of circumstances.
"That is not the military we have and it's not process that we have in defence in bureaucracy." His comments come as the Australian Defence Department is close to choosing the successful company to build 225 new reconnaissance vehicles for the Australian Army in the Land 400 Project, worth up to $10 billion.
Global heavyweights BAE Systems Australia and Rheinmetall are in the battle to build the vehicles, prototypes of which are being displayed at the Land Forces Conference and trade exhibition at the Adelaide Convention Centre.
In referring to those "wonderful" vehicles, Maj-Gen McLachlan asked how it was that wheeled-vehicles were still lagging behind "track vehicles" in performance.
"Autonomous electric drive, the range of sensors that are available on most of our commercial vehicles have not yet made it into the land combat vehicle space," he said.
Researchers within the Defence Science Technology Group are developing new vehicle armour, made from plastics, which could help reduce the weight of vehicles in the field by up to a third."An army that is not developing is an army that is stationary, which means relative to its adversary, it's going backwards," Maj-Gen McLachlan said. He said he was working with the Defence Science Training Group to create a space to make it easier for innovators to find and work with the army and where intellectual property agreements can be "very quickly" resolved.
Credit: RENATO CASTELLO
Word count: 459
