THE Australian Defence Force will launch into space with two shoebox-sized nano-satellites next year.
Buccaneer, a fold-out satellite, will "ride-share" on a NASA Delta II rocket launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, on March 17.
It is designed to work with the ADF's over-the-horizon Jindalee Operational Radar Network, which monitors Australia's northern approaches.
The launch of a second satellite, Biarri, which has advan ced GPS technology, is expec ted later next year.
Part of a US-led program working with the Five Eyes intelligence network of Australia, the US, UK, Canada and New Zealand, it will conduct "space situational awareness experiments" and more accurately plot satellite positions.
Australian Defence Science Technology Group scientists developed its GPS card. Both "cubesat" satellites will be taken to the International Space Station and relaunched into their orbits at 400km and 800km above the Earth, DSTG research leader Dr Nick Stacy said.
Buccaneer, co-developed with the University of NSW, will "measure aspects of the (JORN) radar from a unique perspective on the other side of the ionosphere," Dr Stacy said.
This year's Defence White Paper underlines the importance of space-based systems for information-gathering, communications, navigation, and surveillance for ADF and allied operations.
Defence Minister Marise Payne said the launches were part of a push to establish "a sovereign Australian space capability". "Advances in small, low-cost space platforms provide a unique opportunity to support Australian Defence Force capabilities and our international partners, and to rejuvenate Australian space research," Ms Payne said.
Concerns have been raised in the military and government that Australia has become too reliant on US and other allied space capacities.
Satellites provide the ADF's primary means of long-range communications. Dr Stacy said the ANU Research School of Astrono my and Astrophysics at Mount Stromlo Observatory did Buccaneer's space-ready testing.Ground stations at UNSW Canberra and DSTG Edinburgh had been built to upload data.
Credit: MARK DUNN
Word count: 323
