FRYING the circuitry of missiles, computers and roadside bombs with bursts of high-powered microwave (HPM) energy is among the "game-changing" battlefield weaponry desired by the Australian Army.
The 2016 Land Forces conference and expo in Adelaide has heard that the army would seek to use expanded funding for new technology provided through the 2016 Defence White Paper to investigate developing direct energy weapons such as lasers, but particularly high-powered microwave to counter the new digital age of warfare. "With everything going digital, computers, antennas, communications, provides us with a new opportunity to exploit," said Lieutenant-Colonel Corey Shillabeer, from the army's Force Projection unit.
"Depending on the power you can provide (with microwave energy) you can either upset the system, dazzle it, cause it to restart, you can then lock up the system, therefore making it not fit for further use, or you could severely damage the machine beyond repair.
"Think in terms of the 5th generation fighters and their potential vulnerabilities, missiles in flight ... if there's a way in - and high-powered microwaves provide those different ways of getting in - then there are opportunities to exploit.
"This is probably a more effective way in being more covert, or clandestine for the land forces. It can (also) be used on a variety of different payloads." Lt-Col Shillabeer said the Defence Science Technology group had also had success in using the high-powered microwave weaponry in disabling improvised explosive devices.
"We have a fair bit of catch-up to do, some would say in the early cyber days we were late adopters," he said.
"I wouldn't like to see us being late adopters in this particular capability. "Senior leadership is extremely interested, we now need to work with industry and our partners to maximise this as a game-changer." He said the advantage of direct energy technology was it could be deployed instantaneously, powered to cover multiple targets at once, reduce collateral damage and had low operating costs.
"The disadvantage is we don't really know . . . when it works . . . I can fly a UAV over to look at the bomb damage but I can't do it with this," he said.
"Clearly, for us there is opportunity at the suitcase level, for more of the covert operations, getting close enough to a system, whether it be civilian infrastructure or adversary infrastructure. We could extend this to hand-thrown grenades into areas which have this high-powered microwave energy effect." The US Air Force in partnership with Boeing has developed and tested a cruise missile equipped with HPM technology, the electromagnetic pulse shutting down a room full of computers.
"It's difficult for army and DST to join research programs if we don't have our own programs," Lt-Col Shillabeer said."We need to think about how we can start countering our systems, shielding our systems, beyond cyber but more from high-powered microwave."
Credit: RENATO CASTELLO
Word count: 492
