We all live in a digital world, bringing convenience but also vulnerability. Thousands of jobs are being created, stretching availability of skilled workers – but a new collaboration centre will plug gaps and launch new companies into global relevance Fixing the shortage of skilled workers in the burgeoning cyber security sector will be one of the first targets of a nation-leading initiative in South Australia. Industry, academia and governments will work together at the Australian Cyber Collaboration Centre being established at Lot Fourteen in Adelaide’s city centre. “We need to solve the problem today,” says Mohan Koo, co-founder of Dtex Systems and a member of SA’s Entrepreneurship Advisory Board.
The centre will identify the most common and the hardest jobs to fill in cyber, tease out what skills underpin those roles and then search the community for people with the right aptitude who can be taken through an intensive education course. “Cyber is about the right people,” Koo says.
The centre has been allocated $4.25 million from the State Government over four years, and a promise of ongoing funding of $1 million a year after that. Still in its formative phase, it has already brought together 11 organisations committed to working together. These include Optus, Broadcom subsidiary Symantec, Dtex, US-based Mitre Corporation, the SA Government, the Commonwealth’s AustCyber and Defence Science Technology Group, the three major SA-based universities and TAFE.
The second immediate priority project set by the centre is to establish a launch pad for Australian cyber technology companies. As well as physical infrastructure, the launch padwill be a conduit for advice on business management and access to capital. “There’s a lot of early stage capital sitting around in SA right now,” Koo says. “The family money and angel money that exists in SA is unbelievable – it’s just not joined up, it’s all in little pockets and most of it is invested in property.
“We’ll bring that up to make sure we’ve got that early-stage funding, venture capital funding that’s competitive and then private equity behind that. We’ll help those companies launch out into global markets and be competitive from day one.” Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni says cyber security is increasingly important, with one in four businesses subjected to cyber crime. “The likelihood of a widespread malicious attack is increasing and cyber security is one of the biggest challenges facing the economy,” he says. “And, of course, it’s one of our biggest opportunities.” The SA Government forecasts there will be 5000 to 7500 job opportunities in SA in the ICT sector over the next five years, of which 1500 will need cyber security skills. In addition, about 4000 existing workers will need upskilling in security.
“That’s why the partnerships which make up the $9 million Cyber Collaboration Centre are key to overcoming skills’ gaps,” Pisoni says.
“Collaboration on this scale is a first for Australia. The centre will be fully operational by July next year.”In the interim, work is building momentum, with South Australia on September 26 signing a memorandum of understanding on cyber with the US State of Maryland.
CREDIT: words chris russell
Word count: 519
