AAP MEDIANET LOCKHEED MARTIN AUSTRALI
MEDIA RELEASE PR64714
Project Coorong Delivers Next Generation Capabilities in Over the Horizon Radar
ADELAIDE, Australia, June 8, 2016 /PRNewswire-AsiaNet/ --
Working in partnership with the Defence Science Technology Group (DST),
Lockheed Martin is pleased to announce the successful completion of phase 1 of
its research and development initiative Project Coorong.
Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160607/376756
Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20141118/159313LOGO
Project Coorong is a leading edge research initiative that is specifically
focused on the development of Over-the-Horizon Radar (OTHR) capability
including the ability to track fast and small targets at night.
Lockheed Martin and DST worked together to take this lab-based research and
development initiative and demonstrate it in practical application of next
generation capability for OTHR. Funded by Lockheed Martin, Project Coorong is
an excellent case study in how private-public partnerships can innovate and
collaborate to deliver new capabilities on schedule and under budget.
"Project Coorong demonstrates Lockheed Martin Australia's commitment to
engaging and supporting small to medium enterprise (SME) companies and
developing their innovative ability to participate in leading edge technology,"
said Jack Mahoney, Lockheed Martin Australia general manager. "The project
successfully completed its milestones ahead of schedule and in less than 12
months, while bringing on board a number of SMEs new to the program."
DST has been researching OTHR technology since the 1970s, culminating with the
development of the Jindalee Operational Radar Network (
http://www.lockheedmartin.com/au/what-we-do/mission-systems---training/jindalee-over-the-horizon-radar.html
) (JORN). The JORN system is principally used to monitor and detect aircraft
and ships in the country's northern maritime approaches. Lockheed Martin
Australia has extensive experience in OTHR as a key partner in the design,
integration, construction and commissioning of the JORN and is partnered with
the Australian Defence Force in the design, integration and on-going
maintenance and support for this national capability.
"We have worked closely with Lockheed Martin to take an idea and use our joint
technical expertise to bring it to reality," said Chief Defence Scientist, Dr.
Alex Zelinsky. "Developing leading edge OTHR technological advancements
benefits not only Defence capability, but sets Australia apart in international
research and development in this field."
With phase 1 of Project Coorong complete, Lockheed Martin Australia and DST
will expand the original research with additional system test and evaluation,
begin an experimental data collection campaign, and conduct data analysis.
Final results are slated for publication in open technical literature. Project
Coorong will also be a featured presentation at the upcoming DST Industry Group
Meeting in June 2016.
For additional information, visit our website:
www.lockheedmartin.com/au/what-we-do/mission-systems---training/jindalee-over-the-horizon-radar.html
About Lockheed Martin Australia
Headquartered in Canberra, Lockheed Martin Australia is a wholly-owned
subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation. The company employs more than 1,000
people in Australia and New Zealand working on a wide range of major programmes
spanning the aerospace, defence and civil sectors.
SOURCE: Lockheed Martin Australia
CONTACT: Michelle Scully, +61 448 032 387; michelle.m.scully@lmco.com, Melissa
Chadwick, +1-202-740-5997; Melissa.a.chadwick@lmco.com
08-06 1030
Word count: 479
