RIDING the wave of excitement coursing through a crowd of children at a science show is the buzz that keeps the Surfing Scientist coming back for more.
Ruben Meerman, 45 of Bondi Beach, has performed at more than 1300 schools over 20 years and this weekend he's the star at ScienceAlive!
"My favourite noise in the world is to hear a bunch of kids say the word 'Wow!'," he said.
"They cannot get enough science, they're glued to every single demonstration, their eyes are like laser beams they're so into it." Mr Meerman knows a thing or two about laser beams, having worked as a physicist at Laserdyne Technologies in Queensland after university. And Amazing Lasers is one of the spectacular shows he's brought to Adelaide.
He believes Australians should be ashamed of the way "we've turned the most interesting subject in the whole curriculum into the most scary and boring subject", but the tide is turning.
As a society we're realising that science, technology, engineering and maths hold the key to the future. And the internet and social media has helped spark interest with YouTube channels "pumping out great science videos". But it's no substitute for real life.
"A picture is worth a thousand words, a video is worth a thousand pictures, but a live demonstration is infinitely more powerful than any of those put together," he said.
Allie Borgo, 11 of Mount Barker says science is "fun". "It's very interesting when you get to do new things like explosions," she said.
Organisers say they're expecting more than 25,000 people at Adelaide Showground for the largest science event in the southern hemisphere.
Cost: free for under 18s. Adults $15 ($10 concession) plus booking fee online or $20 ($15 concession) at the door - www.sciencealivesa.org.au HIGHLIGHTS The Surfing Scientist: Ruben Meerman presents three spectacular shows daily. Amazing Lasers reveals the power of light and Human Energetics explains what happens to the food we eat.
Curiosity Show: Legendary Australian science communicators Professor Rob Morrison and Dr Deane Hutton (The Curiosity Show, 1972-1990) are back with new tricks and old favourites.
Academy of Interactive Entertainment: Immerse yourself in Adelaide's largest projection game Wildlight Nights, discuss virtual reality and 3D modelling.
Size Matters: An interactive play that explores what it means to be big and how we measure size. Just how big is the biggest dinosaur?More at www.sciencealivesa.org.au
Credit: CLARE PEDDIE SCIENCE REPORTER
Word count: 411
