HUNDREDS of small businesses facing huge power price increases will demand an explanation from electricity retailers at a business summit today.
Confusion over new electricity contracts for about 2800 firms has forced Business SA to arrange the meeting to outline the options available as time runs out to secure supplies.
About 250 companies will attend the meeting, which comes amid warnings that higher tariffs will cost jobs.
New power contract offers from electricity retailer AGL range from increased prices of 65 per cent for five years up to 100 per cent for a one-year contract.
AGL and and another retailer, CitiPower, will have speakers at the seminar to outline customers' options.
* Continued Page 2
Power alarm bell ringing
* From Page 1
Business SA chief executive Peter Vaughan said yesterday the SA business community was becoming "increasingly frustrated and concerned" about significant price rises and security of supply.
Victorian power consultant and broker Energetics revealed it was negotiating contracts for power worth $50 million for SA companies, yet those same contracts in Victoria and NSW would cost only $20 million.
"Our clients are scared, they are angry and they are not comfortable with the State Government's position," principal consultant Mark Searle said. "They believe the Government promised them savings on power prices and they now feel they have been let down. Other states saw a 35 per cent drop in power prices because of deregulation.
"Those prices have crept up, but not to pre-deregulation levels, while in SA the increases have been huge."
Mr Searle said businesses were very uncertain about their long- term viability.
Asked whether companies would have to lay off staff, he said: "You can't have your bill put up 30 per cent without it having some effect."
Mr Searle said SA was "a difficult market" because of the shortage of generating capacity and questions over the reliability of supply.
The revised contracts are due to be in place by July 1 but at least one senior lawyer who has been negotiating for more than 50 companies said the AGL contracts had been presented "as a fait accompli". "They are between a rock and a hard place," said the lawyer, who did not wish to be named.
"If they let the AGL contract go, there is no certainty they will get another power contract. The risk of locking yourself into a five- year contract at crappy prices is not that inviting either."
The lawyer said companies which had been offered contracts in October last year and had not taken up the offers were now wishing they had because they were at lower prices than those now on offer.
Opposition treasury spokesman Kevin Foley said he had been told by an automotive company the cost of its electricity contract would increase by 65 per cent for five years and 80 per cent for one year.
"The owner said he would have to lay off at least one worker and other companies are making the same predictions," Mr Foley said.
SA's power industry Independent Regulator Lew Owens will speak at the seminar, which is part of an education program for new customers in the deregulated market.
He said yesterday he was still receiving calls from people wanting to know what to do.
"I can't tell them what to do - it's a tough decision," he said.
"But the AGL prices appear to be higher than what the market is offering. One would hope other retailers might be able to do better."
The seminar will start at 2pm in the Australian Mineral Foundation headquarters in Conyngham St, Glenside.
Electricity supply - South Australia
Prices - South Australia - Electricity
Business - South Australia
Illustration
Photo: Dinkus: power shock
Word count: 666
