ADELAIDE City Council considered becoming an energy retailer in a bid to meet an ambitious target of becoming carbon-neutral by 2020, one it will ultimately fail to meet, previously confidential documents show.
As the capital city council became one of five of the state's local entities to join the Cities Power Partnership, The Advertiser can reveal the council considered investing or co-investing to build, own and operate a regional solar power station to achieve planned renewable energy targets under its Carbon Neutral Adelaide pledge.
Documents released from confidentiality by the council after multiple Freedom of Information requests from The Advertiser disclose how the council considered a proposal to become an electricity retailer after an examination by energy market experts Energetics.
It was estimated to cost the council $20 million in up-front capital to establish a solar power station for 30 years and would have resulted in the council becoming a generator on the National Electricity Market (NEM).
But this was eventually scrapped, with Energetics saying it was “not a core competency” for the council, leading to it instead deciding to go to the market to secure a contract that would replace its current electricity operations with 100 per cent renewable energy.
Council’s director of growth Ian Hill said the intention was to approach the market early next year and switch over to 100 per cent renewables for electricity by June 30, 2020.
“Council administration will seek to maximise ratepayer value and minimise risks in any purchase agreement,” he said. “Through the power purchase agreement, there will be a contractual arrangement with the retailer and generator where they will be required to provide council with 100 per cent renewable electricity at all times.” Mr Hill said because of this timeframe, the council would not meet its corporate target of “zero net carbon emissions” among its own assets by 2020.
“We are developing a road map to achieve the Carbon Neutral Council operations target through cost-effective and reasonable carbon reduction measures in preference to purchasing offsets,” he said. “Council is on track to be a carbon-neutral organisation by the end of 2020.
“The road map will prioritise key carbon emissions-reduction projects that will provide deep cuts in carbon emissions as outlined in the City of Adelaide 2016-2020 Strategic Plan.” Lord Mayor Martin Haese, pictured, said the move to 100 per cent renewable electricity would significantly reduce any cost to council for future offsets. He said he was not too concerned the council would not be classed as carbon- neutral by the start of 2020.
“As long as it is achieved by December 31, 2020, we have achieved our goal,” he said. “It’s important that councils show leadership on this issue.“It is also important that we explain to the community why we are doing this and how it will benefit them.”
CREDIT: SIMEON THOMAS-WILSON CITY EDITOR
Word count: 474
