It's renovation rescue as Belvoir St Theatre calls on its supporters at a fund-raising benefit gig.
At the end of today, Neil Armfield is scheduled to wrap up shooting on his feature film, Candy, starring Geoffrey Rush and Heath Ledger. It's barely soon enough for Armfield's colleagues back at Belvoir St Theatre.
While their artistic director is toying with concepts such as focus and multi-takes, the crew at Belvoir St have had to double their fund-raising efforts in the lead-up to renovations starting on July 4. When the overhaul was first announced, the team at Belvoir set itself the target of raising $2.5 million to add to $5.5 million pledged by the State Government.
Thanks to various benefactors, some from as far afield as South Australia and Western Australia, $2.3 million has been raised. But now, for reasons we won't learn until Company B's annual general meeting on May 23, at least another $800,000 is needed. All we know is that it has something to do with Sydney City Council.
Doing their bit for the cause next Saturday, May 14, are Steve "Sandman" Abbott and Paul "Flacco" Livingstone staging The Kings of Bingo, a benefit performance.
Producers see Redhouse
Showbiz has always been a big part of the McGregor family, but now it's also a family business. When a new play called A Girl in a Car with a Man fell into Lenore McGregor's lap last year, she immediately knew she wanted to produce it in Sydney and Canberra. Without any money, she turned to her father, Ross (McGregor, the director), step-mum, Angela (Punch McGregor, the actress), and sister Kirsty (a casting director) with the idea of forming their own production company. And so was born Redhouse Productions.
"I don't know what people are going to think," Lenore laughs. "It's a bit like the Partridge Family. Our little brother Dougall does the poster distribution."
A Girl in a Car with a Man is by a young Welsh-born, Scottish-based playwright named Rob Evans. He actually wrote most of the play in Australia, formulating the concept when he attended the World Interplay Young Writers' Festival in Townsville in 2003. He then refined the work at last year's National Playwrights' Conference in Adelaide.
That's where Lenore McGregor was introduced to the piece, invited to direct its debut public reading. She made the young playwright an offer on the spot, even though she had no idea how she'd fund it. The show has since been staged in Berlin and at London's Royal Court Theatre.
The McGregor production opens at the Old Fitzroy Theatre in Woolloomooloo on May 19.
Purse strings pulled tight
Incredibly, all but one of the 12 shows workshopped at last year's National Playwrights' Conference went on to be produced somewhere in Australia. They also shared a bagful of prizes, including the South Australian and Queensland premiers' literary awards and the Patrick White Playwrights' Award. Which makes it all the more frustrating for the conference curator, Chris Mead, that this year's event has had to be scaled back because of what he describes as "funding crises" at both state and federal levels.
"It's just boring for us because it means we can't do as many plays," Mead says. "Last year we had 12 plays; this year we can do eight. Last year we had 28 actors; this year we can only afford 17."
Mead hopes the financial problems will be sorted out before the 2006 conference in Perth. This year's Australian National Playwrights' Conference takes place in Newcastle between June 19 and July 2.
Romance reworked
To those who still believe in the retro notion of true cool, the must-see show of the year is a one-off performance by Jane Birkin at Sydney Theatre on June 16. Aside from her acting credentials, Birkin was once famous as the wife of the wonderfully wacko French songwriter Serge Gainsbourg. The pair recorded several albums together, the first of which featured the hit single Je T'Aime Moi Non Plus. Birkin's touring show has her presenting African-flavoured interpretations of the Gainsbourg catalogue.
Clean sweep for Dirty Dancing
Dirty Dancing ends its six-month debut season at the Theatre Royal on May 14. Wednesday marks its 200th show in Sydney, with more than 200,000 tickets sold. The musical moves on to Melbourne, with plans for other capital cities to follow. The same production will then tour Asia. A German production is scheduled to open next April, followed by a British production in October next year. dscatena@smh.com.au
SEEN UNSEEN
What actress Choloe Dallimore has seen and wants to see.
SEEN
I went to see the Bette Midler concert while I was in Brisbane. I was in the front row and it was just extraordinary. It was as if no one else was there and it was jut transporting. I could see the glitter in her eye shadow.
UNSEEN
I'm longing to go and see the film White Noise. I think it will be an interesting look at other-worldly things. I'm deeply into energetics and the powers beyond what we see day to day.
Chloe Dallimore plays Ulla in The Producers, which opens in Sydney this month.
Illustration
Caption: PHOTO: Big bucks for bingo: benefit hosts Steve "Sandman" Abbott and Paul "Flacco" Livingstone.
Word count: 895
