MEDIA RELEASE CITY OF MELBOURNE This is a media release - distributed by AAP MediaNet.
Offices Are The Key to Reducing Carbon Emissions in Melbourne
Media Release 25 June 2008
The City of Melbourne, in partnership with Sustainability Victoria, WWF-Australia and Investa, will host a breakfast seminar `From Leadership to Action' this morning at the Melbourne Town Hall for office tenants about how they can save greenhouse gas, save money and build their reputation.
Minister for the Environment and Climate Change, Gavin Jennings, will launch the CitySwitch Green Office program, being delivered by the City of Melbourne, in partnership with Sustainability Victoria, at this morning's breakfast, joining with other Australian Capital Cities to deliver a world leading environmental program for commercial tenancies.
City of Melbourne Acting Lord Mayor, Gary Singer, said it is important to give offices a framework to lead their tenants to reduce their emissions, not just for Earth Hour, but for every hour of the year.
"We want to be a leading example of how to implement green initiatives in business and encourage others to join in this new way of doing business. CitySwitch Green Office commits businesses to tangible changes and delivers long term environmental benefits in greenhouse gas, water savings and waste reduction. Together, we can be at the forefront of energy efficiency," said the Acting Lord Mayor.
City of Melbourne Councillor Fraser Brindley, Chair of the Environment Committee, said if all of Australia's commercial office tenants were to adopt the simple changes involved in CitySwitch Green Office it could deliver a saving of 960,000 tonnes of CO2 per annum, which is the equivalent of taking 200,000 cars off the road.
"Melbourne businesses that join CitySwitch Green Office can take simple actions to improve their energy efficiency rating, such as upgrading office lighting via motion sensors to help eliminate unnecessary energy use; making sure equipment is switched off at the end of each day; switching from CRT monitors to flat screen monitors; and by installing shading or blinds on windows," Cr Brindley said.
WWF-Australia CEO, Greg Bourne, said their aim this morning was to convince tenants of the need to take urgent action to reduce emissions within their offices.
"The built environment represents a significant part of the consumption of energy and resources in Australia and globally. This seminar was held on the back of Earth Hour, which inspired millions of people around the world to turn off their lights and appliances for an hour as a demonstration of concern about climate change. We now want office tenants to continue to take up this challenge and become models of energy efficiency," Mr Bourne said.
The Investa Property Group, the largest private owner of commercial property in Australia with assets under management of $9 billion, today will outline how office tenants can tackle climate change. In Melbourne, Investa's assets include 242 Exhibition Street and 120 Collins Street.
Investa CEO, John Thomas, explained how Investa at its Sydney head office has been able to save $30,000 per annum in energy costs by introducing simple efficiency measures like occupancy-based lighting controls.
"As owner and manager of a large commercial office portfolio we believe we are unique in our position to take a strong leadership role in this area. We recognise that if we can help our tenants become more efficient, ultimately we can help our own business. Saving energy does not only save us money, it's also a big staff motivator," Mr Thomas said.
CitySwitch Green Office is a program designed to demonstrate to businesses that small changes can collectively make a big difference to our environment and our future. The environmental and financial benefits of participation are substantial for commercial tenants, particularly those operating in several Australian cities.
Nationally CitySwitch Green Office aims to sign up 700 businesses by 2012, a goal that will see the program reach 76 per cent of commercial office space in Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth.
Businesses interested in joining the CitySwitch Green Office program should visit: www.cityswitch.net.au.
Please also refer to the CitySwitch Green Office Fact Sheet to follow.
For further media information please contact:
Emma Smith, Media Adviser, City of Melbourne Ph: (03) 9658 9740 / 0400 525 914 Email: emmsmi@melbourne.vic.gov.au
Paul Williams, Lord Mayor's Media Adviser Ph: (03) 9658 9484 / 0411 235 434 Email: paulwil@melbourne.vic.gov.au
Kath Eggleston, WWF-Australia Press Office Ph: (02) 8202 1294 / 0408 408 562 Email: keggleston@wwf.org.au
Samantha Magnusson, Investa Property Group Ph: (02) 8226 9372 / 0423 116 696 Email: smagnusson@investa.com.au
Monty Sangar, Sustainability Victoria Ph: (03) 8626 8863 Email: Monty.Sangar@sustainability.vic.gov.au
CitySwitch Green Office Fact Sheet
Worldwide it is estimated that 40 per cent of energy use is in buildings (International Energy Agency).
As much as 50 per cent of total energy demand in cities is attributable to stationery energy usage, which includes office equipment, lighting and computers.
Stationary energy is the largest and fastest growing sector in terms of greenhouse gas emissions [National Inventory Report 2005 (Revised)].
In Australia, commercial buildings produce 8.8 per cent of national greenhouse emissions and have a major part to play in meeting Australia's international greenhouse targets (Australian State of the Environment Committee, 2001), and has the fastest growth of emissions of any sector (DECC 2000).
Office tenants account for almost 50 per cent of electricity consumed in buildings (Australian Greenhouse Office, 2005).
If all of the existing signatories were to improve their NABERS Energy tenancy rating by just two stars, the result would be a saving of $36.5 million in energy costs and over 329,000 tonnes of CO2 every year. This saving would be the equivalent of taking nearly 68,000 cars off the road.
With the inclusion of Adelaide, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney CitySwitch Green Office has the potential to save nearly $67 million in energy costs every year.
If all capital cities were to join CitySwitch Green Office, Australia could reduce its energy consumption by 778,000 tonnes of CO2, costing $86.5 million every year.
Businesses which become CitySwitch Green Office signatories commit to achieving an accredited four stars or higher National Australian Built Environment Rating System (NABERS) Energy tenancy rating. Administered nationally by the NSW Department of Environment and Climate Change (DECC), NABERS Energy rates the efficiency of buildings and tenancies from 1 to 5 stars, with 5 stars representing exceptional greenhouse performance.
Improving an office's star rating not only saves the tenant money on their energy bills but can also increase the value of a property, with tenants keen to be seen as green. Already 56 high profile corporations (see list below) have signed up to the program. Representing more than 330,000 sqm of office space in Melbourne alone. As most building stock is currently rated as 2.5 stars, each signatory is encouraged to improve their energy tenancy rating by at least two stars.
In Melbourne alone such an improvement in efficiency could yield an impressive saving of over 151,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions every year. With the inclusion of Adelaide, Melbourne and Perth, CitySwitch Green Office could make a saving of up to $67.3 million annually.
Chief Executive of Property Council Australia, Peter Verwer, today endorsed CitySwitch Green Office. Property Council Australia is the nation's leading advocate for commercial property interests.
Current CitySwitch Green Office signatories include: 135onKing; ahm Dental & Eyecare Practice; Allens Arthur Robinson; AMP Capital Investors; Arup; Barclays Global Investors; Big Switch Projects; Brookfield Multiplex; CB Richard Ellis; City of Sydney; Clemenger BBDO; Colliers International; Colonial First State Global Asset Management; Commonwealth Bank; Department of Environment and Climate Change; Department of Water and Energy; DEXUS Property Group; Dinosaur Designs; DTZ; Ebsworth & Ebsworth Lawyers; Energetics; ENVIRON Australia; Ernst & Young; Ferrero Australia; Garfield Barwick; Commonwealth Law Courts Building; Gilbert + Tobin Lawyers; GlasgowHart; Goodman; Haden Engineering Pty Ltd; hamiltonthomson; Insurance Australia Group Limited (IAG); ING Real Estate; Investa Property Group; Jones Lang LaSalle; Knight Frank; KPMG; Lenovo; Lend Lease; Mirvac; NIX Management Pty Ltd; North Sydney Council, NSW Fire Brigades; NSW Health; O'Donnell Griffin; Parramatta City Council; PricewaterhouseCoopers; Rice Daubney; Roberts Weaver Group; Stockland; Sydney Harbour Foreshore Authority; Sydney Water; The GPT Group; TressCox Lawyers; University Cooperative; Bookshop; Westpac; and WWF Australia.
For more information on the City of Melbourne's environmental sustainability initiatives go to: http://www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/info.cfm?top=218&pg=2582
- ENDS -
SOURCE: City of Melbourne
NNNN
25-06 0503
Word count: 1376
