MEDIA RELEASE CITY OF MELBOURNE
This is a media release - distributed by AAP MediaNet.
National launch of the CitySwitch Green Office Program
As the City of Melbourne celebrates World Environment Day, Acting Lord Mayor, Gary Singer, today announced the Council was joining with other Australian Capital Cities to deliver the CitySwitch Green Office program a world leading environmental program for commercial tenancies.
The CitySwitch Green Office program is a national sustainability initiative to help commercial tenants improve their energy efficiency and reduce CO2 emissions. In Melbourne it is being delivered by the City of Melbourne in partnership with Sustainability Victoria.
The program has been coordinated through the Council of Capital Cities Lord Mayors (CCCLM) and has evolved from the 3CBDs Greenhouse Initiative delivered by the North Sydney, Parramatta and the City of Sydney Councils.
Cr Singer, said the City of Melbourne was aiming for zero net emissions of greenhouse gas emissions throughout the municipality by 2020, and encourages local businesses to work with him to achieve these important targets.
"We want to be a leading example of how to implement green initiatives in business and encourage others to join in this new way of doing business. CitySwitch Green Office commits businesses to tangible changes which saves them money and delivers long term environmental benefits in greenhouse gas, water savings and waste reduction. Together, Melbourne can be at the forefront of energy efficiency," said the Acting Lord Mayor.
CitySwitch Green Office is a program designed to demonstrate to businesses that small changes can collectively make a big difference to our environment and our future. The environmental and financial benefits of participation are substantial for commercial tenants, particularly those operating in several Australian cities.
Councillor Fraser Brindley, Chair of the Environment Committee, said if all of Australia's commercial office tenants were to adopt the simple changes involved in CitySwitch Green Office it could deliver a saving of 960,000 T of CO2 per annum, which is the equivalent of taking 200,000 cars off the road.
"Melbourne businesses that join CitySwitch Green Office can take simple actions to improve their energy efficiency rating, such as upgrading office lighting via motion sensors to help eliminate unnecessary energy use; making sure equipment is switched off at the end of each day; switching from CRT monitors to flat screen monitors; and by installing shading or blinds on windows," Cr Brindley said.
Nationally CitySwitch Green Office aims to sign up 700 businesses by 2012, a goal that will see the program reach 76 per cent of commercial office space in Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Perth. Businesses interested in joining the CitySwitch Green Office program should visit: www.cityswitch.net.au. Please also refer to the CitySwitch Green Office Fact Sheet to follow.
The City of Melbourne, in partnership with Sustainability Victoria, WWF and Investa, is hosting a Breakfast Seminar 'From Leadership to Action' on Wednesday 25 June 2008, from 7.30am, to further discuss the national green tenancy program.
For further media information please contact:
Emma Smith, Media Adviser, City of Melbourne
Ph: (03) 9658 9740 / 0400 525 914
Email: emmsmi@melbourne.vic.gov.au
Paul Williams, Lord Mayor's Media Adviser
Ph: (03) 9658 9484 / 0411 235 434
Email: paulwil@melbourne.vic.gov.au
CitySwitch Green Office Fact Sheet
Worldwide it is estimated that 40 per cent of energy use is in buildings (International Energy Agency).
As much as 50 per cent of total energy demand in cities is attributable to stationery energy usage, which includes office equipment, lighting and computers.
* Stationary energy is the largest and fastest growing sector in terms of greenhouse gas emissions [National Inventory Report 2005 (Revised)].
In Australia, commercial buildings produce 8.8 per cent of national greenhouse emissions and have a major part to play in meeting Australia's international greenhouse targets (Australian State of the Environment Committee, 2001), and has the fastest growth of emissions of any sector (DECC 2000).
Office tenants account for almost 50 per cent of electricity consumed in buildings (Australian Greenhouse Office, 2005).
If all of the existing signatories were to improve their NABERS Energy tenancy rating by just two stars, the result would be a saving of $36.5 million in energy costs and over 329,000 tonnes of CO2 every year. This saving would be the equivalent of taking nearly 68,000 cars off the road.
With the inclusion of Adelaide, Melbourne, Perth and Sydney CitySwitch Green Office has the potential to save nearly $67 million in energy costs every year.
If all capital cities were to join CitySwitch Green Office, Australia could reduce its energy.
Businesses which become CitySwitch Green Office signatories commit to achieving an accredited four stars or higher National Australian Built Environment Rating System (NABERS) Energy tenancy rating. Administered nationally by the NSW Department of Environment and Climate Change (DECC), NABERS Energy rates the efficiency of buildings and tenancies from 1 to 5 stars, with 5 stars representing exceptional greenhouse performance.
Improving an office's star rating not only saves the tenant money on their energy bills but can also increase the value of a property, with tenants keen to be seen as green. Already 56 high profile corporations (see list below) have signed up to the program. Representing more than 330,000 sqm of office space in Melbourne alone. As most building stock is currently rated as 2.5 stars, each signatory is encouraged to improve their energy tenancy rating by at least two stars.
In Melbourne alone such an improvement in efficiency could yield an impressive saving of over 151,000 tonnes of CO2 emissions every year.
With the inclusion of Adelaide, Melbourne and Perth, CitySwitch Green Office could make a saving of up to $67.3 million annually.
*Chief Executive of Property Council Australia, Peter Verwer, today endorsed CitySwitch Green Office. Property Council Australia is the nation's leading advocate for commercial property interests.
Current CitySwitch Green Office signatories include: 135onKing; ahm
Dental & Eyecare Practice; Allens Arthur Robinson; AMP Capital
Investors; Arup; Barclays Global Investors; Big Switch Projects;
Brookfield Multiplex; CB Richard Ellis; City of Sydney; Clemenger BBDO;
Colliers International; Colonial First State Global Asset Management;
Commonwealth Bank; Department of Environment and Climate Change;
Department of Water and Energy; DEXUS Property Group; Dinosaur Designs;
DTZ; Ebsworth & Ebsworth Lawyers; Energetics; ENVIRON Australia; Ernst &
Young; Ferrero Australia; Garfield Barwick; Commonwealth Law Courts
Building; Gilbert + Tobin Lawyers; GlasgowHart; Goodman; Haden
Engineering Pty Ltd; hamiltonthomson; Insurance Australia Group Limited
(IAG); ING Real Estate; Investa Property Group; Jones Lang LaSalle;
Knight Frank; KPMG; Lenovo; Lend Lease; Mirvac; NIX Management Pty Ltd;
North Sydney Council, NSW Fire Brigades; NSW Health; O'Donnell Griffin;
Parramatta City Council; PricewaterhouseCoopers; Rice Daubney; Roberts
Weaver Group; Stockland; Sydney Harbour Foreshore Authority; Sydney
Water; The GPT Group; TressCox Lawyers; University Cooperative;
Bookshop; Westpac; and WWF Australia.
For more information on the City of Melbourne's environmental sustainability initiatives go to:
www.melbourne.vic.gov.au/info.cfm?top=218&pg=2582
SOURCE: City of Melbourne
NNNN
05-06 0501
Word count: 1133
