THREE Adelaide start-ups have pitched their ideas to energy giant Schneider Electric, which is seeking to invest in ideas to support the global transition to renewable energy.
Three executives from the company visited Adelaide this week to meet with SA chief entrepreneur Jim Whalley, State Government officials, investment firms and potential partners, to discuss opportunities to collaborate on future energy initiatives.
Their visit comes a year after the company launched an $800 million venture capital fund – Schneider Electric Ventures – with the aim of investing in high growth businesses facilitating the global shift towards renewable energy.
Technology company Clipsal Solar, which uses data analytics to advise households and small businesses on how to reduce energy costs and make the right decisions on battery storage, has already secured funding and incubation support from Schneider.
During their visit to the Lot Fourteen start-up hub this week, the Schneider executives told The Advertiser South Australia was well placed to deliver innovative solutions to the world’s global energy challenges given its position as a world-leader in the uptake of renewables.
“We see all the ingredients being put together to create a really strong ecosystem leveraging the strength of the local economy, the defence cluster, the Australian Space Agency, and, what is very important for us, all the innovations around energy we are seeing here in South Australia,” Schneider’s Hong Kong-based chief innovation officer, Emmanuel Lagarrigue, said.
“We feel very optimistic about the creation of potentially new technologies that can be created here and used globally.” During their visit the Schneider team heard pitches from local software company Trellis Technologies, blockchain start-up Fohat, and Powerdiverter, which has created technology to divert excess residential solar energy to hot water tanks before exporting to the grid.
Senior vice president of innovation Heriberto Diarte Martinez, who’s based in Silicon Valley, said he was impressed with Lot Fourteen and the work being done in Adelaide to generate an innovation ecosystem.
“I see a very well thought out effort to generate innovation that is attacking all the angles – from the academic and knowledge base to the capital formation to create a cluster,” he said.
“The best innovation is when you have a market, and I see that there could be potentially world class companies coming out of here that are very much focused on the energy transition and the new energy landscape, because you are at the forefront of this.” Schneider bought Adelaide-based electrical products company Clipsal in 2003 for $750 million. Clipsal Solar was spun out and launched in Adelaide in September, and employs five people in Adelaide, with additional staff in Sydney, Silicon Valley and Bangalore.
Preeti Bajaj, who heads up Clipsal Solar, said the technology was currently on offer to homeowners and small businesses in South Australia and New South Wales, but that it had the potential to go global.“What we want to do is use data to save you money and we want to be the first one to use predictive technology to tell you what’s the optimal size of battery storage for your home,” she said. Ms Bajaj expects 100 homes in Adelaide to be signed up to Clipsal Solar by the first quarter of next year.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 540
