Website gives residents intel on neighbourhood greening
MARION Council is planting almost 30,000 trees to double its street tree canopy, leading the race to cool and green the suburbs amid growing competition between councils.
More than half of the councils in Greater Adelaide are working with local software developer Forestree to manage their natural assets.
But Forestree co-founder Ben Seamark says that Marion “has taken it to the next level”, integrating with other technology and giving residents unprecedented access through the new website trees.marion.sa.gov.au “That’s what’s so great about the Marion site, what you see there is real time, it’s not a snapshot in time, it’s … right now, today,” he said.
“So when a tree is planted, it will appear on the map … it will show when it’s being watered, all those sorts of things, all in real time.” Anyone can search for a street or suburb to see each individual tree, including photographs and details about the species such as how big it will grow.
The watering schedule, the volume of water used and the number of tree ­inspections made are also displayed.
Mayor Kris Hanna said the council had an ambitious plan to green the city. “We want to blanket our streets in shade and attract birdlife,” he said. “This will involve doubling the street tree canopy – the area covered by leaves and branches.” The 30,000 trees planted over the next seven years will include saplings and ­advanced trees in native and exotic species – from coral gums and dwarf SA blue gums to ornamental pears, jacarandas and maples.
Local Government Association of SA president Angela Evans said that SA councils were committed to increasing urban canopy, supporting the state gov­ernment’s target of increasing green cover by 20 per cent in metropolitan Adelaide by 2045.
“Councils invest millions of dollars every year providing and maintaining trees in their communities, and use a range of strategies and programs to support their proactive approach to tree management,” she said. “It’s fantastic to see technology evolving in this area, and councils embracing the opportunity to modernise their tree management practices,” Ms Evans said.
CREDIT: CLARE PEDDIE
Word count: 359
