WBC - Company Announcement
Netquote Comnews - netquote.com.au
14-02-05
Part 1 / 1
---
WESTPAC BANKING CORPORATION
--
Melbourne
Level 15, 90 Collins Street
ABN 27 058 693 388
Melbourne Vic. 3000 Australia
Telephone
61 3 9654 4477
Facsimile
61 3 9650 6555
Sydney
Level 23, Gold Fields House
1 Alfred Street
Sydney NSW. 2000 Australia
Telephone 61 2 9251 4220
Facsimile 61 2 9251 7709
Website www.hfm.com.au
TO:
Australian Stock Exchange Limited
Company Announcements Office
10th Floor, 20 Bond Street
Sydney NSW 2000
FROM:
Kim Rowe, Company Secretary
DATE:
14 February 2005
PAGES: 12
HASTINGS DIVERSIFIED UTILITIES FUND (CODE HDF)
ANNOUNCEMENT HEADING:
HASTINGS DIVERSIFIED UTILITIES FUND JOINTLY ACQUIRES UNITED KINGDOM
WATER UTILITY, MID KENT WATER
Hastings Diversified Utilities Fund (ASX: HDF) today announced it is the successful joint
bidder to acquire a 50 percent interest in Swan Group plc, which owns leading UK water utility
Mid Kent Water.
Mid Kent Water is the UKs fourth largest, by Regulatory Capital Value,
Water Only Company.
HDF will invest approximately A$98 million for its 50 percent interest, with Hastings Funds
Management Limiteds unlisted Utilities Trust of Australia (UTA) contributing the other 50
percent.
Westpac will provide bridging finance to HDF for its share of the acquisition. UTA will be
funding its share of the acquisition from its own equity sources.
The Hastings Yield Fund (HYF) will participate in a junior debt facility to assist in the
acquisition. Mid Kents long term debt facilities will remain in place.
In December 2004, the UK water regulator Office of Water Services (Ofwat) issued its fourth
five-year regulatory determination, which provides Mid Kent Water with a stable revenue
stream to 2010.
Please find overleaf a release and an investment narrative.
The release will be distributed to
media.
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 1 -
For further enquiries, please contact:
Jim Hallam
Media Enquiries
Chief Operating Officer
Sarah Hudson
Hastings Diversified Utilities Fund
Cannings
Tel:
(03) 9654 4477
Tel:
(02) 9252 0622
Fax:
(03) 9650 6555
Fax:
(02) 9252 0707
E-mail:
hfm@hfm.com.au
Email: shudson@cannings.com.au
Website:
www.hfm.com.au
Yours sincerely
Kim Rowe
Company Secretary
Hastings Funds Management Limited
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 2 -
MEDIA RELEASE
14 February 2005
Hastings funds acquire UKs Swan Group plc for A$574 million
Hastings Diversified Utilities Fund (ASX: HDF) and the unlisted Utilities Trust of Australia
(UTA) today announced that they were the successful joint bidders to each acquire a 50
percent interest in Swan Group plc, which owns leading UK water utility Mid Kent Water,
for an implied enterprise value of 241.3 million or approximately A$574.3 million.
The
implied Regulatory Capital Value (RCV) multiple for the regulated Mid Kent Water
business is 1.2 times, which is in line with recent market valuations.
HDF and UTA are managed by Hastings Funds Management (HFM) which is 51 per
cent owned by Westpac Banking Corporation. Westpac will move to full ownership of
HFM in June 2005. HFM currently has A$2.8 billion funds under management.
Mid Kent Water is the fourth largest (by RCV) of 13 Water Only Companies in England
and Wales and is responsible for the provision of water to approximately 580,000
customers within a supply area covering 2,050 square kilometres of Kent and part of East
Sussex.
In December 2004, the UK water regulator Office of Water Services (Ofwat) issued its
fourth five-year regulatory determination, which provides Mid Kent Water with a stable
revenue stream to 2010. Mid Kent Waters forecast RCV as at 31 March 2005 is 192.3
million (approximately A$457.7 million) (based on Ofwats final determination and Mid
Kent Water inflation forecasts).
HDF and UTA will each invest approximately A$98 million for their 50 per cent interest.
Westpac will provide bridging finance to HDF for its share of the acquisition. UTA will
fund its share of the acquisition from its own equity sources.
The Hastings Yield Fund (HYF) will provide a convertible note facility to the bidding
vehicle (jointly owned by UTA and HDF) to refinance part of Mid Kent Waters debt,
support cash requirements and fund transaction costs. Mid Kent Waters long term debt
facilities will remain in place.
HDF Chief Operating Officer, Mr Jim Hallam, said today: Mid Kent Water represents
HDFs first international investment as outlined in its investment strategy and is an
important strategic step in building a diversified portfolio of utility assets.
Mid Kent Water satisfies our investment criteria for HDF in three areas. That is, to invest
in primarily listed or unlisted equity or quasi-equity utility infrastructure assets within
Australia and other OECD countries, to focus on assets with a high degree of cashflow
certainty and to maintain a balance between regular cash yield and long term growth
prospects.
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 3 -
It is important to stress that this acquisition is expected to be accretive to HDF cash
earnings and is not expected to have a negative impact on the 2005 and 2006 forecasts
we provided at the time of the IPO.
HDF will fully hedge the foreign currency exposure
on the cash distributions received from Mid Kent Water on a rolling five year basis.
HDF
expects to repay the bridge financing through a public offer of hybrid securities.
Full
details of this offer will be available in an offer document expected to be lodged with
ASIC following the results announcement at the end of February.
Mr Hallam added: This is another example of the Westpac/Hastings partnership working
together to secure an outstanding investment result.
UTA Chief Operating Officer, Mr Peter Taylor, said today: Mid Kent Water is an
outstanding acquisition for UTA and is complementary to UTAs portfolio parameters. The
regulated asset sector is a target sector for UTA and the outlook for the water sector in
the UK provides a unique opportunity for UTA to invest in stable cash generating
businesses.
Mr Taylor also said: The investment objective of UTA is suited to regulated assets and
the Ofwat approach to regulation recognises the importance of attracting capital to the
sector in a balanced manner in order to fund capital expenditure over time.
HDF and UTA intend to retain the existing Mid Kent Water management team, together
with the Chairman and three independent directors.
HDF and UTA will have
representatives on the Board of Mid Kent Water.
Financial close is expected to be in approximately two weeks.
JPMorgan acted as exclusive financial adviser to HDF and UTA on the acquisition.
About HDF and UTA
About UTA
Utilities Trust of Australia (UTA) is an unlisted unit trust seeking to consistently provide
investors with benchmark-plus returns by taking influential minority positions in
infrastructure projects, privatisations and developments in Australia and internationally.
Established in November 1994, UTA is an open-ended trust currently owned in the main
by a number of Australian superannuation funds.
The principles of UTA's investment strategy broadly include the following:
Assemble a portfolio of unlisted infrastructure assets with monopoly
characteristics;
Influence management and asset performance through representation on
investee company boards;
Seek return characteristics that have consistency in returns and low correlation
with listed equities and property markets; and
Achieve diversification across risk and stage of maturity within the infrastructure
asset class.
UTA assets include investments in:
Melbourne Airport, Perth Airport, Statewide Roads,
Interlink Roads, ForesTree Cahaba, Hancock Victorian Plantations, ElectraNet, Port of
Portland and Global Renewables Limited.
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 4 -
About HDF
Hastings Diversified Utilities Fund (HDF) was established to invest in utility infrastructure
assets with a moderate risk profile and which offer predictable cash flows. Hastings has
run HDF as a listed company since December 2004.
Managed by Hastings Funds Management, HDF target investments include:
Gas transmission and distribution assets
Electricity generation, transmission and distribution assets
Hydro and wind power generation assets
Regulated and unregulated assets
Australian and offshore assets (OECD)
HDF assets include: Moomba to Adelaide Pipeline System, South West Queensland
Pipeline, Pilbara Pipeline System and the South East Pipeline.
About Mid Kent Water
Swan Group plc (Swan Group) is the non-trading holding company of Mid Kent Water
and its associated businesses.
Swan Groups interests include:
Mid Kent Water plc (Mid Kent Water) whose regulated activity is the provision of
drinking water in Kent and whose unregulated activities include a range of water-
related services;
Swan Property Limited, the owner of an undeveloped land bank; and
A 51% shareholding in Halcrow Water Services Limited, a specialist provider of
water engineering and related services.
Located in the county of Kent, Mid Kent Water is the fourth largest (by RCV) of 13 Water
Only Companies supplying drinking water to customers in England and Wales.
The economic regulator for the UK water industry is Ofwat.
In December 2004, Ofwat
released its final determination on price limits for Mid Kent Waters regulated business for
the five year regulatory period from 31 March 2005 to 31 March 2010.
The regulated business contributes approximately 93 per cent of revenue and contributes
approximately 96 per cent of earnings before depreciation, interest and tax.
For further information:
Graham Canning
+61 418 866 214
Sarah Hudson
+61 424 034 059
Cannings
+61 2 9252 0622
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 5 -
Swan Group plc
England and Wales water industry
Mid Kent Water plc is one of 23 companies which operate in the water and sewerage
services industry in England and Wales.
Water and sewerage services in England and Wales are currently provided by ten
Water and Sewerage Companies (WaSCs) and 13 Water only Companies (WoCs).
The structure of the industry dates from the 1989 Water Act, which resulted in the
privatisation of ten public sector water authorities. Each of the WaSCs and WoCs are
appointed to be water undertakers for the areas specified in their appointments, for a
rolling term of 25 years.
Figure 1 depicts the service boundaries of water companies in England and Wales
and highlights the region serviced by Mid Kent Water.
Figure 1
England and Wales water industry geographic regions
WaSC area (sewerage boundary)
WoC area
Mid Kent
Economic regulation
Each water company in England and Wales must comply with various duties
imposed by the Water Industry Act 1991 (the Act), with regulations imposed by the
Act and with the conditions of their licence.
All companies are regulated by the Office of Water Services (Ofwat), which sets
performance targets for the water industry. Ofwat is the economic regulator of the
industry and sets limits on the prices that the companies can charge their customers
over a five year period. In setting these prices, Ofwat is primarily concerned with
ensuring that WoCs and WaSCs have sufficient resources to finance and carry out
their functions properly, assuming efficiency improvements year by year.
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 6 -
Other regulation
Additional regulators in the England and Wales water industry are described in Table
1 below.
Table 1
Other regulators
Regulator Description
Department for Environment, Food and
o
Regulates drinking water quality and environmental
Rural Affairs
standards
o
Oversees the legal framework within which the
activities of the regulators and the water companies
are conducted
The Drinking Water Inspectorate
o
Assesses the quality of drinking water in England and
Wales
o
Investigates consumer complaints and incidents
o
Enforces rectifying actions, where necessary
The Environment Agency
o
Secures and licenses the proper use of water
resources in England and Wales
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 7 -
Swan Group overview
Swan Group plc (Swan Group) is the non-trading holding company of Mid Kent
Water plc (Mid Kent Water) and its associated businesses which will be indirectly
acquired by UTA and HDF. A summary of Swan Groups interests is described in
Figure 2 below.
Figure 2
Corporate structure
HDF
UTA
50%
50%
Swan Group plc
100%
51%
100%
Halcrow Water Services
Mid Kent Financing Limited
Swan Property
Limited
100%
Mid Kent Water plc
Regulatory
Ringfence
Regulated
Non-appointed
business
businesses
Mid Kent Water - regulated business
Mid Kent Water is the fourth largest WoC, by Regulatory Capital Value (RCV), in
England and Wales and is responsible for the provision of water to approximately
580,000 customers within an appointed area of 2,050 square kilometres in the south
east of England. As shown in Figure 3, this area is predominantly in Kent, but also
extends into a small part of East Sussex.
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 8 -
Figure 3
Mid Kent Water service boundaries
Water inflow
Mid Kent Waters licensed area is varied in terms of its geology and topography. The
principal natural features generally run from east to west and include the chalk ridge
of the North Downs, the clay soils of the Weald of Kent and Romney and Walland
Marshes. The area has the highest mean temperature and one of the lowest annual
rainfalls in the UK.
For this reason, Mid Kent Water is heavily dependent on ground water drawn from
aquifers, with over one hundred operational wells, springs and boreholes, providing
90% of supply. The remainder of its supply comes from the River Medway Scheme,
which is operated by Southern Water. The River Medway Scheme consists of the
Bewl Water reservoir, located on the Kent/East Sussex border, the Springfield river
intake at Maidstone and the Burham treatment works, situated in Mid Kent Waters
areas of supply, south of Rochester. Mid Kent Water contributes to 25% of the costs
and is entitled to 25% of its yield.
Water infrastructure and outflow
Mid Kent Water provides bulk supplies of water to Folkestone and Dover Water
under terms and conditions formally determined by the Director General of Water
Services in April 1999. Folkestone and Dover Water are entitled to an average of 2
mega litres per day (ML/day) for ten years.
Mid Kent Water operates 28 pumping stations and treatment plants. The largest of
these sources has an average output of 17.6 ML/day and the smallest 0.8 ML/day
and as such Mid Kent Water has one of the lowest unit averages of source/supply
station output capacity of any water company. Mid Kent Water also operates 60
water towers and service reservoirs and 50 booster pump stations. It has
approximately 4,181 km of underground pipes. Its distribution mains are
predominantly 100 mm or less in diameter, reflecting the fact that the network was
largely designed and laid between 1900 and 1939 to serve a dispersed agricultural
community.
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 9 -
Customer base
The level of demand for water from Mid Kent Water ranges from 155 to 221 ML/day.
In the year to 31 March 2004 the average daily output was 166 ML/day and the peak
daily output of 221 ML was the highest ever recorded.
Around 60% of Mid Kent Waters customers live in Ashford, Canterbury, Maidstone,
Whitstable, Herne Bay and Faversham. Broadly speaking, Mid Kent Waters
domestic customer base is affluent, with average ratable values of property higher
than the national average. All commercial customers are metered, as are 30% of
domestic customers, compared to a national average of 22%. Mid Kent Water is not
overly dependent on large commercial customers, having 20 customers with
demands greater then 50ML/annum, of which only seven are in excess of
100ML/annum. The customer base does include a large number of smaller
horticultural and agricultural businesses, which contribute significantly to peaks in
demand when the weather is hot or rainfall low.
Operational performance
Significant steps have been taken over the last four years to reduce the operating
costs of the regulated business in line with Ofwat requirements. These have included
a major operational restructuring in 2002, improved procurement and the introduction
of new technologies, including the ability to operate all sites from a single control
room in Snodland.
Hastings Funds Management believes, based on its due diligence, that Mid Kent
Waters capital programme has been adequately recognised in the December
determination by Ofwat and that sufficient allowance has also been made for
operating costs over the period of the determination.
Pricing
On 2 December 2004, Ofwat released its final determination for the prices Mid Kent
Water will be able to charge its customers for the five years commencing 1 April
2005. Ofwats determination involved measuring the capital employed in the
regulated business to determine Mid Kent Waters RCV. Ofwat then determined the
allowed rate at which Mid Kent Water is permitted to generate returns on its RCV,
taking into account past performance and efficiency improvements.
Based on an Ofwat determined RCV of 192.3 million (as at 31 March 2005), Mid
Kent Water is allowed to increase current prices by an average of 3.3% p.a real over
the 5 years to 31 March 2010 and earn a post tax return of 6.5% on its RCV.
Financing arrangements
Mid Kent Waters 163 million long term debt facilities will remain in place following
the acquisition. In addition another Hastings-managed fund, the Hastings Yield Fund
(HYF) will provide a 24 million convertible note facility to repay the debentures,
finance capital expenditure, meet other cash needs and fund acquisition costs.
Details of the debt facilities are described in Table 2 below.
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 10 -
Table 2
Financing arrangements
Facility Description
Artesian loan
o
135 million secured, index-linked loan payable in September 2032
o
Lender is Artesian Finance plc (arranged via RBS)
o
Cash interest rate of 3.692%, with principal indexed to movements
in the Retail Prices Index (RPI)
RBS revolving credit facility
o
25 million revolving credit facility entered in April 2004, for 18
months (drawn to 20 million)
o
Interest is charged at 0.65% over LIBOR
o
Commitment fee of 0.325% of the unutilised facility
Debentures
o
4.0 million of redeemable debenture stock due for repayment on 31
March 2005, with a coupon rate of 12.25% (payable six monthly)
o
0.5 million of perpetual debenture stock with an average coupon
rate of 4.37%
HYF convertible note facility
o
24m of convertible notes repayable in March 2011
o
Proceeds used to repay the redeemable debentures, finance capital
expenditure, meet other cash needs and fund acquisition costs.
Mid Kent Water - unregulated (non-appointed) businesses
Mid Kent Waters non-appointed commercial businesses provide a wide range of
services to business and domestic customers ranging from recreation, plumbing,
drainage, leak management, ecological consultancy and water engineering.
Mid
Kent Waters non-appointed businesses include:
Waterlink
specialist water-related mechanical services;
Mid Kent Plumbing
provider of plumbing services;
Drinking Water Services
specialist in optimising drinking water supply; and
Mid Kent Fisheries
management of 23 quality fisheries in Kent.
Mid Kent Water also owns a portfolio of rental properties.
Other businesses
Swan Property
Swan Property owns a 20 acre undeveloped land bank in Maidstone, Kent which has
potential for future development.
HWS
HWS is a joint venture between Swan Group and Halcrow Group, the infrastructure
engineering and development group.
Formed in 1995, HWS provides consultancy
and niche operational services, specialising in the efficient management and
operation of water supply and distribution systems.
Swan Group has a 51% interest
in HWS.
Revenue and EBITDA for HWS during the year ended 31 March 2004 was 5.1
million and 0.4 million respectively.
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 11 -
Financial overview of transaction
Forecast acquisition equity IRR (10 year) of 12% p.a
Total acquisition cost to HDF of approximately 41 million (A$98 million)
HDF acquisition cost to be funded by a bridge facility provided by Westpac
HDF anticipates repaying the bridge facility via the issue of a hybrid security
with a Public Disclosure Statement to be lodged following the results
announcement at the end of February
Table 3 below sets out key profit and loss information in relation to the acquisition.
Table 3
Swan Group key financials (100%)
2005
Years ending
pro forma
2006
2007
1
1
forecast2
3
3
31 Mar (m)
2003A 5
2004A 5
4
forecast 5
forecast 5
Profit & Loss
Turnover 42.6
44.6
44.4
47.7 49.7
EBITDA 21.5
23.2
23.4
25.3 27.0
EBIT
15.1 15.9
Interest expense6
11.7 13.3
7
NPBT
3.3 2.6
Tax
1.4 1.3
NPAT
1.9 1.3
Equity distributions7
(8.4) (8.4)
8
Figures may not add due to rounding
Notes
1.
Includes non regulated businesses
2.
Based on 7 months actual financial information and 5 months forecast
financial information
3.
These figures represent the consolidated financial information for Swan
Group
4.
These figures represent the Mid Kent Water financial performance
5.
Mid Kent Waters financial forecasts for FY2006 and FY2007 are based on
modeling reflecting the December 2004 Ofwat regulatory determination
6.
Cash interest is lower than interest expense as Artesian loan facility has cash
and non-cash interest components
7.
Forecast cash interest 6.9 million in FY2006 and 8.3 million in FY2007
8.
Equity distributions represent dividends and return of capital to UTA and HDF
M:\Marketing - Reporting\HDUF\Transactions\Mid kent\Mid Kent Capital
Raising\Announcements\Announcement_Mid Kent 140205.doc
- 12 -
14-02 1119
Word count: 3497
