As the post-COVID-19 fallout leaves many people isolated, senior South Australians are finding ways to stay connected and look after themselves – and each other, writes LYNN CAMERON A lot has changed in the past few months: businesses have closed, families have been kept apart and new ways of working and living have come into play. But, while many doors have closed since the coronavirus pandemic led to government restrictions back in March, there is one avenue that has kept many more doors open, to health, wellbeing, family and business: technology. From Skype and Zoom to telehealth and online shopping, more senior Australians are connecting with technology than ever before. A recent survey by the Global Centre for Modern Ageing (GCMA) discovered that 21 per cent of older Australians have engaged with new technology since the start of the pandemic. The survey, Finding a Silver Lining, also found that 29 per cent of older Australians have increased their social media use, and 61 per cent who use video calls once a week or more are more likely to feel socially connected than those who don’t. But while digital know-how is more important than ever, new and senior adopters of technology are facing some challenges, including accessing equipment, knowing how to use online platforms and trawling through the overwhelming amount of information available. To help combat these issues, the GCMA has launched a free COVID-19 portal for older Australians, an online platform offering advice and support on areas including food and nutrition, health and wellbeing, physical activity, work and e-learning, and social connection. “There is a plethora of online information out there but much is of a varying quality or not of interest to older people,” says Julianne Parkinson, chief executive of the Global Centre for Modern Ageing. “We want to help people navigate through and provide a safe filter.” The survey results also echoed a new, positive trend that has been developing in our communities: looking after each other. “In our COVID research we saw in the early stages a lot of older people were even witnessing a silver lining in the outreach of people to help other people,” Parkinson says. “For example, they were hearing from their family members far more regularly than before COVID, and we were hearing of grandchildren helping their grandparents get online for a Zoom or for online shopping, or neighbours helping people with online shopping or banking.” The question is, as we go forward and restrictions ease, will this investment in technology and each other continue? With the survey revealing that 19 per cent of older Australians called for improved delivery of products and online services, it means more changes have to be made. “It’s going to be a fascinating aspect of our society to watch,” Parkinson says. “I think what’s important is, as we develop online usage, we need to be curating and understanding it in ways that give a great experience for both the customer and the professional. It needs to be particularly informed by the citizen or the person at home helping to guide what their needs and best experience look and feel like from their point of view.” To this end, the GCMA is inviting older South Australians to play an active role in their future and the future of others. “We have another level of COVID surveying being undertaken so people can also participate in the next round of our research,” Parkinson says. “Or if they have an interest in being a participant in guiding what that platform looks like in the future, they can join as a co-designer of new products and services.”
ONLINE HEALTH One of the largest uptakes in technology this year has been in the area of telehealth, with the GCMA’s Telehealth – Here to Stay? survey reporting one in five older Australians have taken part in an online appointment or consultation with a health professional during COVID-19. Of course, telehealth isn’t new to Australia: the system has been in place throughout the country for more than a decade. What has changed is that, once used primarily in remote and under-resourced communities, it is now common practice in our metropolitan areas also. And the results to date are positive: 85 per cent of older Australians who took part in an online telehealth appointment or consultation found it easy or very easy to log in or set up an online appointment, and 67 per cent feel confident to use it in the future. But whether they will continue to use the service remains to be seen. “That’s the question the GCMA is really interested in, because we think it’s important to understand where telehealth fits in to the blend of care models that are available to clinicians, health professionals and patients, their carers and families who might be alongside them,” Parkinson says. “These are very important levels of inquiry that need to take place in the months to come.” Interestingly, the survey also recorded that, while senior Australians are largely willing to use technology for their health issues, other areas are not as popular. “We saw in our study that there was less take up in online shopping,” Parkinson says. “It was unclear as to this is the case but it points to the need for further inquiry. Is it something older people could activate themselves just as they are activating other ways of taking online learning and experiences?” gcma.net.au
THE FAST FACTS 23 per cent of Australians aged 60 or older have used technology that is new to them, such as iPads, apps or video calls, since the pandemic started.
Of this 23 per cent, 56 per cent now feel more confident with technology. 34 per cent of the over 60s are “more confident” with technology than before the COVID-19 outbreak. 46 per cent said their confidence had not increased, because they were “already confident”.
CREDIT: LYNN CAMERON
Word count: 984
