CONSUMERS are no longer finding the choice between face-to-face consultations and telehealth as straight forward when wanting to see a primary healthcare provider or visit a doctor and are evaluating their options to find the optimum blend between the two, according to a report by the Global Centre for Modern Ageing.
The Global Centre for Modern Ageing (GCMA) found people are increasingly taking personal and medical situations into account when booking appointments, during the third phase of research tracking older Australians’ response to Covid-19 restrictions and their interaction with telehealth.
The GCMA’s The Future Of Telehealth – Refining The Blend compares Australians’ telehealth experience to face-to-face consultations, and the video experience to telephone looks at differences in response across all age groups with a focus on older Australians, and importantly, incorporates contexts such as the nature of the appointment and relationship with the health professional.
The report found lower satisfaction with telehealth when there was no existing relationship with the practitioner.
The research detected lower satisfaction levels for telephone appointments addressing new physical conditions, as opposed to an ongoing condition, or to have a health and lifestyle conversation.
The report found older Australians were less likely than younger people to be offered a face-to-face option at a similar time to their telehealth booking.
Older people were also less likely than younger people to use telehealth through an Apple device.
Of the respondents, 88 per cent aged 60 or older said they were satisfied with their video telehealth consultation, and 77 per cent were satisfied with their telephone appointment.
However, many more experienced telehealth via telephone than video. Older people were more likely to use face-to-face medical consultations than younger people.
In the report, 59 per cent of all respondents and 53 per cent aged over 60 said it was important for healthcare professionals to provide telehealth services, suggesting the level of support for telehealth funding should continue beyond September.
“Our latest research suggests that the key to telehealth success is in the blend, and understanding how it can be integrated with existing approaches to offer new models of care that optimise the clinician and patient experiences,” GCMA chief executive Julianne Parkinson said.
GCMA researchers conducted the online study in July 2020. The report, The Future Of Telehealth – Refining The Blend can be downloaded at gcma.net.au. The GCMA is not-for-profit based in Adelaide and is dedicated to improving the lives of older people.
Word count: 404
