Lockdowns and other restrictions have led to an uptake in technology among senior Australians, creating new opportunities for businesses to invest in the older generation, writes LYNN CAMERON They say when one door closes, another opens. That’s been the case for many older Australians during the fallout from the Covid pandemic during the past 18 months. Forced to close their physical doors to friends and family, many have opened the door to a new way of staying connected to those they love – technology. The number of older Australians now engaging with technology has never been higher. A study by the Global Centre for Modern Ageing (GCMA) in May 2020 revealed that 23 per cent of Australians aged 60 or older were using technology that was new to them, such as smartphone apps or video calls, since the pandemic started. Of that number, 56 per cent felt more confident with technology, while 34 per cent of over-60s in general were more confident with technology than before the Covid-19 outbreak. “Covid-19 became a real catalyst for greater adoption of technology beyond the obvious remote working solutions we have experienced,” says Julianne Parkinson, GCMA CEO. “Technology adoption has clear benefits for older Australians. When the GCMA released our second survey into the response of Covid-19 restrictions in July 2020, we determined that more than one in five Australians aged 60+ had used technology that was new to them. Almost a year on, in June 2021, new data shows more than one in three Australians aged 60+ are continuing to use telehealth and of those people, half are new users. In the 12 months to the end of March 2021, 54 million Medicare-subsidised telehealth services were delivered to 13.5 million patients across the whole healthcare sector.” Also translating to online shopping and communications, this uptake in technology is creating new opportunities for businesses to invest in the older generation. “We are now seeing platform providers and product developers joining together to understand the changing needs of older people,” Parkinson says. “It’s a very interesting time and space for Australia: We’re well placed to take the lead in what can be coined gerontechnology – technology assisting and enabling gerontology to provide and create tools that assist older adults to age well, whether that’s in their homes or through access to communication channels, health, safety, comfort, mobility and leisure activities.” But bringing Australian seniors up to tech-savvy speed hasn’t all been about supporting our older citizens: it’s something of a two-way street. “Older people have been able to extend their reach which brought comfort to younger generations who were feeling quite anxious and perplexed as to what Covid was presenting,” Parkinson says. “Technology has empowered all of the community, not just older people.” TECH TRAINING While many older people are happily adopting new technologies, what happens when you don’t know your app from your android? For those with a bit of experience, there is a plethora of online learning portals; for those who don’t know how to turn on a computer, tablet or smartphone, community training programs can help. One such program is Telstra’s Tech Savvy Seniors. Run through self-teaching videos or face-to-face training at local libraries, it is designed to help build the technological skills and confidence of older Australians, particularly those in regional areas. Since establishing its South Australian pilot in the Riverland in 2017, the program has provided around 4500 training places across the state. “We invest predominantly in regional South Australia because the Australian Digital Inclusion Index tells us that’s the area where seniors are needing the greatest support in South Australia,” says Heather Rea, Telstra senior specialist for strategy and inclusion. “We know that seniors are the largest age group most likely to be digitally excluded, and many just need someone to sit alongside them and help them get started. “Covid and the associated lockdown of communities has really accelerated the digital transformation of many organisations and services, and it brings in to stark contrast the experience of those who are digitally included and those who are digitally excluded. Those people at home without the ability to connect to the internet are much more isolated than those who can.” As well as learning valuable new technical skills, the sessions create a platform for friendships and new social connections. “We think digital inclusion is very much about social inclusion and we see the same group of people will come to the library and learn together,” Rea says. “They’ll have four sessions together then they’ll use that same timeslot to go and have a coffee.” Malcolm Harper, 77, has attended several Tech Savvy Seniors programs at his local Strathalbyn library where he has got to grips with subjects including learning how to use Windows 7 or 10 and getting the best out of his android tablet. “I have found the program really useful and have picked up some fairly basic tips I didn’t know how to do before,” he says. “The instructors have all been excellent and extremely helpful, and the sessions are very relaxed and friendly. There’s no such thing as a silly question and I learn something from the questions other people ask.”
CREDIT: LYNN CAMERON
Word count: 867
