Advancements in medical technology and the way that technology is applied are not only allowing people to recover more quickly and with less pain, but also helping patients and doctors prevent the onset of disease or ill health in the first place, writes JENNIFER HULLICK At 75 years of age, lifetime hockey enthusiast Ric Roberts knows a thing or two about joint replacements. He’s had three in the past 13 years, including two hips and a new knee. “When I was 62, I had my right hip replaced,” he says. “I was five days in hospital and then six weeks of rehab.” For the second hip replacement, one year ago, Roberts had just three days in hospital and less time spent doing rehab before he could walk normally again and resume playing his favourite sport. “You’d think being 12 years older it would have taken longer in rehab but it didn’t,” he says. “Having the physio come to my home and monitor my progress was very useful in speeding up the process.” The boost in recovery time and pain management is explained by a major evolution in surgical technology. Australian Orthopaedic Association president Michael Gillespie says joint replacements have evolved since the 1960s thanks to better imaging, more accurate crafting and placement technology and more durable materials. “Advances in instrument design and imaging techniques mean you can do so much more with much greater precision through much smaller incisions. It means people aren’t sore and they recover more quickly,” Gillespie says. “There are better materials and linings, which are much better engineered. We have lowered the wear rates of those implants so that they last 15 to 20 years. We understand how to fasten them securely to bone and we have better instruments to help us put them in so we can position them really accurately.” This involves using computer studies to map the patient’s joint and 3D printing to produce “cutting blocks” or navigational devices for the procedure. “Now, in parts of the US and Europe, you can have a joint replacement in the morning and go home the same day,” he says. “Rehab and exercise can be conducted safely in your own home, not just because the surgery is better but the anaesthetic is better and pain control is better.” Gillespie believes robot-assisted surgery will be the future of orthopaedics, saying it is already used in bowel and prostate surgery. Here, the robots are controlled by a surgeon but the robot “limbs” can make precision cuts in difficult places. The surgeon also points to similar improvements in gall bladder operations and cataract surgery: “People don’t even get out of their day clothes, there’s just a little local anaesthetic in the eye. It’s no more stressful than having a tooth filled.” Ian Burgess, CEO of the Medical Technology Association of Australia, says the fundamental aim of medical technology is to extend and improve the quality of life and save lives. “There have been enormous advancements and innovation that have directly contributed to reduced mortality rates and greater life expectancy while shortening hospital stays,” he says. He points to pacemakers as a great example. Once these machines – designed to monitor and correct an irregular heartbeat – were the size of a fridge. “Now they are these small devices inserted under the skin with batteries that last 10 to 15 years,” he says. Technological innovations mean placing a stent inside a patient’s blood vessels to help unblock them is now potentially day surgery, rather than a highly invasive process requiring long recuperation. The devices are placed using microscopic cameras inserted through a small incision in the arm, through the arteries, to unblock or repair the damaged part of the blood vessel. “Previously treating those coronary disorders, you had to rip open the ribcage and that’s a traumatic thing for the body,” Burgess says. Keith Henderson, 58, benefited from this rapid, non-invasive procedure. “There were three arteries that were narrowed or blocked, so the stent, they stick it up through the arm and it opens the artery. I was conscious the whole time,” he says. “They did it there and then and I was out the next day. I’m a pastor and I was out in time for Good Friday services.” New eye surgery is also able to cure conditions that once might have taken our sight, with artificial lenses implanted to overcome glaucoma, poor eyesight or cataracts. Beyond surgery, technology is helping patients and the doctors stave off or treat disease in a less stressful way. Professor Justin Beilby, an academic researcher and GP, says new apps that take advantage of digital technology are helping people manage their own health better. “I have a patient who comes to me with his phone and an app that relates to his pharmacy,” Prof Beilby says. “It’s classic future digital care. He says, ‘I’ve just got a reminder that I need new scripts for X Y and Z medications’. He shows me the app and I print out his scripts. He controls all his health care with his phone.” Apps linked to new technology can help us keep an eye on our blood pressure, heartbeat and blood glucose. Better technology around telehealth, familiar to many during Covid times, is also helping patients and doctors reduce stress and travel time. “We did some trial work with an app that can take a picture of an ulcer and, with machine learning, analyse the depth and changes of the wound to check if it’s healing or needs different treatment,” he says. “That app would save all those trips back and forwards to the GP surgery.” Part of the professor’s work is with the Global Centre for Modern Ageing, which works with older people and companies to trial new technology to ensure it is co-designed to meet people’s needs. Centre CEO Julianne Parkinson says there is “a whole lot of new technology making its home in medical or medicine-related environments”. “But what we are noticing is that a lot of this is being experienced or at least delivered in people’s homes,” she says. “Because of technology and advancements, including the speed people are having services delivered to them, this opens up what we call ‘hospitals in the home’ solutions.
CREDIT: JENNIFER HULLICK
Word count: 1046
