The modern elder movement has the potential to transform society’s idea of what it means to grow old
They may not know it yet, but modern elders are everywhere. Due to demography, longevity and economy, they can expect to live longer, healthier and more prosperous lives than any previous generation.
One aspect of modern elders is the concept of positive ageing: being fully engaged with life well into advanced years. The unprecedented population boom of the over-50s means there are going to be many more people questioning assumptions about what it means to grow old.
Some of them are Baby Boomers – I’m a late entry, born in 1958 – but they also include Generation X, those born from about 1965 and who are now coming into their mid-fifties.
Some blame this cohort for everything from climate change to high house prices, but there’s much more to the story. They’re looking for inspiration and leadership to tackle the many challenges, such as youth-focused workplaces and midlife transitions in terms of family and finding meaningful purpose.
The modern elder movement, pioneered in the US, now has an active chapter in Australia. The Modern Elder Academy, known as MEA, aims to give a down-to-earth spin on inspiring and empowering those who question the tired retire-at-65 model.
The first MEA campus opened on the Baja California Peninsula in Mexico in 2018. Since then, 1500 alumni with an average age of 54, including several from Australia, have done courses on location and online.
More prominent mid-lifers engaged with MEA include American rapper and poet Michael Franti, 55, of the Disposable Heroes of Hiphoprisy, and US entrepreneur Blake Mycoskie, 45, founder of TOMS Shoes. He went to MEA as a student and returned as a teacher.
Local identities connected with the movement are Melbourne business figure Tom Verghese, Mike Rungie, a director at Adelaide’s Global Centre for Modern Ageing, and poet Diana Percy.
It’s all the brainchild of US author and hospitality industry disrupter Chip Conley, who went to work with the founders of Airbnb a few years back. Then in his early 50s, he was almost twice as old as his co-workers.
When Conley’s youthful colleagues first called him a modern elder, he was uncertain about what they meant. Then they explained that they didn’t mean elderly, but that he had a sense of curiosity and seemed wise.
“We’re in an era where we live longer, the power in many industries is moving younger, especially in anything related to tech, and the whole world is changing faster,” Chip tells me from his home in Santa Fe, New Mexico. “Just those three variables have a lot of people in midlife bewildered and often feeling irrelevant, even if they had successful careers and generally successful lives.” His thinking led to the 2018 best-selling book Wisdom at Work: The Making of a Modern Elder, and the belief that midlife is not just a phase but a marathon. He says sociologists consider it can last from age 33 to 75 and ­beyond.
MEA courses say adolescents have school to prepare them for adult life, but the so-called “middle essence” – those in their 50s who may live for another 40 years – have few rituals or guidance to help.
“I think the modern elder movement is dedicated to the idea we are lifelong learners and maybe we are even long-life learners,” Conley says. “It asks, ‘How do we learn how to live a long life which is as deep and meaningful as it is long?’” Gabriela Domicelj and her husband Derek Young are among the Australian volunteers from Baja who are seeking to answer that question. They are piloting what’s billed as the first midlife wisdom school outside America. It’s called MEAx, or the Modern Elder Academy multiplied.
Others include writer Angela Galloway, who took off on her golden gap year, and those interested in conscious ageing, leaving a legacy and championing intergenerational connections.
The pandemic has given us all cause and pause to reflect, says Domicelj, while accepting that living longer does not guarantee ­wisdom.
“We need to shift our mindset on ageing and reframe midlife from a crisis to a calling,” she says. “The MEA programs fit right into this. They provide the tools and the space to really rethink how we can give back and how we consciously curate our future lives.” The MEAx version will provide native content and adapt some of the Americans’ trademark enthusiastic energy. “We are very aware Aussies can be cynical if it’s too American or too new age,” she says.
There are in-person three and six-day residential workshops scheduled for the Blue Mountains, west of Sydney, in late January to March next year.
Domicelj, who is the Asia-Pacific lead for the project, recently took part, along with this writer, in an eight-week worldwide online course called Navigating Midlife Transitions. She says more than a third of the participants were from Australia and the feedback has been overwhelmingly positive.
I found a cohort of varied and committed mid-lifers, all intent on living somewhat different later lives than their parents did. Most had undergone recent transitions – losing a job, a partner, or the kids leaving home – and wanted more agency in shaping their futures.
I became interested in the positive ageing movement because of death, money and staying happily married. I’d turned 60 and was involved with the deathcare industry as a board member on the NSW regulator of cemeteries. That experience opened my eyes to the need to be better prepared for all aspects of death.
I’m also the public face and blogger for a local consumer network, the FiftyUp Club, whose 425,000 members are highly engaged about their super and retirement incomes. Above all, my wife Jacqui had followed Chip Conley for three years and she suggested I needed a refresh along his philosophy’s lines.
Also, I turned 63 this year, and according to John Tapper, a dear friend and mentor who has long been active in this area, I’m now in my “last quarter”. (The first quarter is to age 21, the second to 42, and so on.) As in most games or films, the last quarter is what defines the story, and I wanted my own life story to keep going strong.
Like others on the MEAx course, who are life and business coaches and involved in policy, I believe that we can all do our ageing much better given the natural energy of many older Australians and our bounteous surroundings.
The idea of contributing more to the world of work and beyond was common as was, in a new word to me, generativity: the wish to promote the wellbeing of younger generations.
“Chip’s ideas really resonate here,” Domicelj says. “When he was called a modern elder at Airbnb, he took it on board and wrote his book reflecting on how organisations can re-engage with older employees. It’s also about how older people can make themselves more attractive: either back into the workforce or to society at large.” Conley has visited Australia before, thinks there’s something special here and is keen to return.
“There’s a spirit and adventurous, courageous spirit among Australians,” he says. “Your idea of a walkabout and travelling around the world – not just when you are 20 years old but when you are 60 years old. Going out and moving beyond your comfort zone seems to be part of the Australian Zeitgeist and psyche.” Of course, you don’t need an academy, and self-guided modern elders can be found everywhere. But being in a cohort of like-minded people certainly helps. In general, those at MEAx prefer to rewire their thinking rather than retire in the traditional sense.
On our Zoom calls, many of the modern elders from around Australia, Asia, the Pacific, and the US belie their years. There’s a shared energy, freshness, playful humour, and a determination not to let society leave them on the shelf. They don’t seem to fit the mould of more conventional entities such as the Council on the Ageing or National Seniors.
“We must realise being a modern elder does not just mean being fit and healthy and looking good at 60,” Conley says. “You also want a sense of purpose and the ability to distil your wisdom and offer it out there in the world.” For more about MEAx, upcoming courses, and free information sessions in Sydney and online, go to meax.com.au/free-events.
ARE YOU A MODERN ELDER?
There are more than five characteristics to describe what makes a modern elder tick. Chip Conley surveyed members of the Modern Elder Academy to focus on a handful of adjectives that best represent this diversity. You may think some or all of these descriptions apply to you, but which ones would your network nominate?
AUDACIOUS: Conley says modern elders think about the future, and are not interested in old-school ways. They are “open to being rebellious”.WISE/CURIOUS: Wisdom is not correlated to age, but experience helps. When younger executives at Airbnb described Conley as wise and curious, they started him on his journey as a modern elder.
GENEROUS: “As we get older, being focused on what survives us, our legacy, our generativity – what we give back – is important,” Conley says.
PLAYFUL: “We know people who might be older but have a youthful spirit, and we tend to lean into them and enjoy their company.”
CREDIT: CHRISTOPHER ZINN
Word count: 1571
