SOUTH Australia’s first LifeLab to help businesses and entrepreneurs test prototypes, products and services for seniors is now operational at the Tonsley precinct.
The Global Centre for Modern Ageing (GCMA) is tasked with managing and commercialising the lab, which has two test rooms, a meeting area and data/observation rooms, and is designed to bring innovators and consumers into one location to co-design products and experiences.
Pilots already conducted by the GCMA include testing products in the food, health and innovation sectors.
Potatoes SA and the University of Adelaide trialled foods with high-nutrient content to meet the dietary needs of older people.
Start-up Prohab’s rehabilitative device – initially designed for elite athletes to measure force during exercise – has used the lab to test its appeal for a different cohort of customers.
The next trial at LifeLab will focus on smart technology for homes and how people aged over 65 can be healthier and happier in their homes for as long as possible. GCMA chief executive Julianne Parkinson said the centre would also work with enterprises in their chosen settings.
“We know this will benefit enterprises and must be entreprise-driven over the long term, and those are the conversations we are having now.
“This is an intergenerational response to improving how we live our lives as older people and how we can share that knowledge globally,” she said.
Early trials had set a high bar for the lab’s ability to deliver training and demonstrate the process, content and methods behind product testing and evaluation.
Ms Parkinson said the centre had also opened up access – through online registrations – for older people who were keen to be our co-designers.
“We know we now have an improved way to build our team of co-designers, help businesses accelerate a good idea faster than before and even, sometimes, help them to fail swiftly, quietly and effectively to free them up for other ideas,” she said.
The 2017-18 State Budget provided $11.4 million over four years for the LifeLab, the establishment of an entity and the creation of a pilot citizens’ group with the assistance of the Council of the Ageing.“We are having market conversations now – at state, national and international level – with the lab acting as the magnet for it, but also looking athow we can export products and services,” Mrs Parkinson said.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 395
