Older people are in demand to help develop the products and new technologies being conceived with them in mind, write CLARE PEDDIE and JENNIFER HULLICK Older South Australians are road-testing, co-designing and future-proofing new products and services at a new research facility at Tonsley.
The showpiece of the Global Centre for Modern Ageing is a living laboratory called LifeLab, built to replicate a suburban home with modern appliances.
Director Veera Mustonen, fresh from Finland, is working with senior South Australians who give their time to help guide developers. “We want to engage older people to co-design, alongside entrepreneurs and researchers, future services and solutions that better match the real needs and expectations of older people,” she says.
The centre has so far focused on an ageing-in-place project looking at adapting homes for people as they get older, and including technology to help the process. In the future, Mustonen says, giving feedback on mobility devices, aged-care services and testing new products for the home are likely.
From experience overseas, she says LifeLabs are needed most when there is “disruption in the market”.
“The disruption comes from new technologies such as new mobility solutions like the e-bike and totally new connected wheelchairs; and of course there are these autonomous cars, buses and other vehicles,” she says.
“How will they be embedded in the daily practices and lives of people? How will they really add value?” So far LifeLab co-designer Vicki Jarnis, 66, of Salisbury East, has enjoyed working on a prototype Prohab device for exercise and rehabilitation that will be adapted for seniors.
“I felt I had a positive, empowering part to play in product design and development,” she says. “These are the sorts of services and products that would be of benefit to myself one day, or to loved ones.” The GCMA has been granted $10 million in seed funding from the Marshall Government spread over four years. Premier Steven Marshall says the GCMA “is the leading organisation operating in this space not only nationally but more broadly in the Southern Hemisphere, and ... sits among the best-inclass globally”.
The Council on The Ageing (COTA) SA is helping train older people to take part in product testing and feedback roles through its Plugin proj ect. The project invites older people who want the power to influence the future of ageing to join the group and have the opportunity to work alongside industry, innovators and researchers to help create technology, products and services that will better meet their future needs.
Plugin has been recruiting “senior citizen scientists” of late, and groups of volunteer “influencers” all aged 60 or older have been in training on co-design and innovative thinking, preparing them for getting involved in LifeLab projects.
Mustonen says such training is helpful but not essential: “Many people represent themselves well without any training. Sometimes we get the most valuable feedback from people coming fresh to a project.” To join the Global Centre for Modern Ageing LifeLab, register online at gcma.net.au/ contact/ or call 6117 5510.
Register with the Plugin group at theplugin.com.au/connect/ or call 8224 5582. Countrycallers 1800 182 324.
CREDIT: CLARE PEDDIE; JENNIFER HULLICK
Word count: 524
