REWIREMENT, and not retirement, is the key to shifting outdated stereotypes around older people and enabling them to contribute more fully to contemporary society a CEDA lunch in Adelaide heard this week.
Former World Health Organisation (WHO) director of ageing, Dr John Beard, said that getting older in the 21st century is a vastly different proposition from ageing in the 20th century. Ageing is a continuum and cannot be separated into artificial or society engineered, segments he said.
“We need to reimagine the second half of life,” he told an ironically, mostly middle-aged audience.
“In Japan after WW2, there were just 98 people aged over 100. Today there are 60,000. The same rate is happening in less developed countries such as in Chile, Iran and China that are catching up. They have to adapt to changes.” Australia’s 3.7 million people aged 65 plus will jump to six million by 2031 he said.
“Chronological age is a bad starting point,” to determining someone’s worth he said, revealing that he had recently been forced to retire by the WHO as he hit its statutory cut off point.
“You do not just wake up feeling old one day,”’ he said. “We need to break down such environmental barriers.” Good health is much more than the absence of disease Dr Beard said, it requires social action through the removal of a stereotyped vision of ageing, the range of experiences increase as you get older.
There was however, a touch of pragmatism, the second half of your life is generally a downward battle Dr Beard said.
“Most people over 65 have different medical issues. We need to create a supportive environment and create health systems.” Dr Beard referred to a WHO 2012 global cities initiative, launched with billionaire Mike Bloomberg which has led to 800 cities coming together to try and become age friendly.
Even seemingly small steps such as providing more public benches and toilets can make a huge difference he said to engaging the older community.
“Until we can rethink ageing, we are going to have same solutions,” he said. Several myths must be dispelled.
“That there is a typical older person,” is just not true he said. Getting older brings forward an incredibly diverse community. More damning was “70 is the new 60”.
Socially it rings true Dr Beard said but is incorrect from a health perspective. “What really matters is how close you are to your death, it’s the last 18 months that have most health costs.” Indeed where you sit is determined by life’s cumulative advantage and disadvantage.
“People with the greatest needs are the ones with the least resources. We need to over come this.” The fear factor that the older population will send us broke should also be discarded he said. Older people pay tax and are consumers too. Instead of blaming the older generations, look at improving inefficiencies and technology.
The final note accordingly, went to Julianne Parkinson, chief executive for the Global Centre for Modern Ageing.
“We are ageing from the moment we are born,” she said. “In 1950 the average Australian male retired at 65 and died at 67. We are living longer but haven’t got better at living life better, longer.
A child born today in a developed country has a 50 per cent chance of living until 104.”We need to rethink.
CREDIT: RICHARD EVANS
Word count: 562
