LET THERE BE LIGHT I’ve had two unsuccessful attempts to see the Northern Lights (aurora borealis) costing me quite a lot. Not giving up. Can you recommend the best places to see the Southern Lights, which would be closer to home? Are there tours that specialise in Southern Lights? When is the best time?
DOC You will need to be prepared to make a last-minute winter dash south to see the Southern Lights, aurora australis. They’re notoriously hard to predict so it’s not really possible to book in advance with any real expectation of seeing them. Keep an eye on the Aurora Australis Tasmania Facebook page (facebook.com/groups/auroraaustralis), as well as Aurora Service’s Aurora Forecast site (aurora-service.net/aurora-forecast/) for a steer on what’s happening in the atmosphere, and be ready to hot-foot it to Tassie. Once you get there, hire a car and get to a spot with little light pollution – near Hobart, the Aurora Australis Tassie Facebook group recommends Mt Wellington, Mt Nelson and South Arm Lookout.
Another option would be a trip to New Zealand – but again, you’d need to be prepared to travel within a few days of the prediction, and allow a few days to maximise your chances. The Aurora Australis New Zealand Facebook page is one to keep an eye on (facebook.com/groups/auroranzalert/). And you should consider booking a star gazing tour there, as a night sky back-up plan. Visit darkskyproject.co.nz for options.
CAPE TOWN TIPS My husband and I (aged 58 and 64) are travelling to Cape Town in October and hiring a car. Is it best to arrange car hire online and pick it up at the airport or wait until we arrive to arrange car hire? Is there any car hire company you can suggest? We would like to do the Garden Route and spend time in Cape Town to explore surrounding areas. I have heard the “red bus” and attraction card is great and wonder if it’s best to arrange online?
DOC It has sadly been many years since I’ve visited Cape Town so I consulted Ivona Siniarska, an Africa specialist with 1000 Mile Travel Group, a member of the Helloworld Business Travel network, for help.
“The trip sounds wonderful,” she says. “October can still be a busy travel period, so to ensure you get your preferred type of vehicle and transmission, I would always suggest organising a car in advance.
“For touring in and around Cape Town, you are correct. Cape Town actually has one of the best hop-on hop-off bus tours I have ever experienced globally and allows you to explore the city and its main sites (Cape of Good Hope, Simon’s Town, Table Mountain and surrounds) at your own pace, and they have 48-hour and 72-hour options, including ones that go to the Constantia winelands.
“My personal recommendation would be to delay car hire until you are ready to leave the city and start your adventure along the Garden Route. If you are doing the bus tours, a car isn’t required and parking is an additional expense anywhere in the Victoria & Alfred Waterfront or the city bowl. Many car hire companies, Avis included, will bring the car hire to your hotel for a minimal fee.
“I would suggest you start with the scenic winelands, going through Stellenbosch and Franschhoek, and pre book tastings and lunch at places such as Delaire Graff Estate, a tasting and glass of pinotage at Rickety Bridge, and a chenin blanc at Grand Provence. If you enjoy good food then two days in the winelands is worth the stop, before continuing to places like Mossel Bay, Knysna, Storms River, Oudtshoorn, and Wilderness. If you have time, consider some of the Eastern Cape game reserves outside Port Elizabeth for game viewing.”
TRAIN, WALKS CALLING My friend and I are off on a 13-day tour of France in April 2020. The tour ends in Nice where we plan to stay two to three days, then go back to Paris. From there, we’ll have a week in England staying in AirBnbs or hotels in Oxford. Where can we get train and bus details? We might visit York and Bath, but York is quite a distance from Oxford. Are you able to advise us?
DOC Train lines in Europe are operated by different companies, as are bus routes, so you can hit the internet to make bookings yourself, or go to a travel agent. An agent will also be able to look at your individual journeys and work out if buying a Eurail pass would be the most cost-effective option. If you’re going to do it yourself, thetrainline.com is a useful site for booking tickets within the UK and raileurope.com.au is a good option for cross-country travel.
In Oxford, local uni students conduct two-hour free walking tours of the area. You can book via footprints-tours.com. Just make sure you give them a tip. And if you want a decent pub meal and to pay tribute to the late, great Bob Hawke at the same time, head to the Turf Tavern, where he set a world record for drinking a yard glass of beer.
You will be able to get from Oxford to Bath within about 1½ hours on the train with one change, and it would definitely be a day trip worth doing. I would even consider staying a day or two if you could. It’s a compact city, and easy to walk around, but with many great things to see.
You can download a free Jane Austen walking tour at visitbath.co.uk – if you’re a fan it’s a great way to learn about her and the city she’s so associated with, and take in some of the best sights in about 1½ hours.
And if you are a walker, do the 10km National Trust Bath Skyline Walk. The circular trail gets you a little way into the countryside where you’ll walk through woods, fields and narrow pathways that offer great views of the city. Pick up a map at the tourist office.
ASK THE EXPERT NEED HELP?
DOC HOLIDAY WORKS CLOSELY WITH HELLOWORLD TRAVEL TO ENSURE YOU GET THE MOST RELEVANT, ACCURATE TRAVEL ADVICE @EMAIL DOCHOLIDAY@NEWS.COM.AU PERSONAL REPLIES ARE UNFORTUNATELY NOT POSSIBLE
CREDIT: CLAIRE SUTHERLAND
Word count: 1039
