ACCOMMODATION Older people are keeping it real when it comes to the future of life at home, writes Jennifer Hullick Adelaide’s Global Centre for Modern Ageing and ZestFest – an arts and community festival designed for people over 50 – have taken a shot at co-designing the future of life at home, with a one-of-a-kind event involving 40 older South Australians. People of a variety of ages over 50 gathered at the GCMA’s LifeLab for a series of workshops last month, deep-diving into key unmet needs and design solutions for life at home.
Two participants gave us a sneak preview of their ideas and experience before heading into the Lab, with a full report on the results due out later this year.
JUDITH LEESON, 85 Judith Leeson is quick to point out that her body may be failing her but she still has all her marbles and 65 years of experience in the workforce to rely on when it comes to designing the future. “I am someone who is ageing and living at home, prizes their independence, their freedom of choice and their ability to make decisions,” she says.
She and her husband chose to move to a small rural property near Echunga 15 years ago. “People thought we should have been moving into a ‘detention centre’,” she grins. “A retirement village. We moved into our rural property to live a more sustainable life, to invest in the land and the future of the country. This was a values-driven decision and not taken lightly. My husband ... manages our water, manages the whole property. I used to do the vegies and the flowers but unfortunately, in the past year, I’ve had to ask for help.” Leeson, who has asthma, arthritis and a heart condition, can see a time three to five years in the future when the couple may need more assistance. Until then, she is working with the community association to help re-imagine the future of Echunga.
After 65 years working in disability, career development and early childhood areas, it’s what she does best. “I’m good at re-imaging futures with people, not for them, so I guess I’ve been doing co-design for the past 40 to 50 years. It’s just a new name for working with people,” she says. “I want a person-centred focus for aged care or living. People being able to tap into expert aged care when they need it and experts being able to tap into people’s lived experience.” The key point for Leeson is she doesn’t want to be told what to do, which is why she values opportunities like the workshop. “You will learn so much from the diversity of experience of the people who come,” she says. “I worked until I was 83. If we are not here to make a positive difference, why are we here? Co-design should be a team exercise.” KEN BURT, 71 Ken Burt and his wife are in the middle of renovating their family home, a fitting metaphor for the purpose of this workshop.
“We are bringing it up to value so we have an option,” he says. “We can either stay on or, if we see something else, we can be ready to move.” Being ready for the future is something Burt feels strongly connected to, having worked in strategic marketing most of his life. Now he and his wife are heavily involved in the Uniting Church on committees and looking to make sense of an increasingly complex world. “I will be talking about ageing in place and what does it mean to be a modern elder,” he says. “How to use our experience to address the complexity of society. My son says he wants me to tell him how I went about things, not tell him my war stories.” He has also been delving into different ways for people to age in their own homes with the proper support.
“In the US, you have the naturally organising retirement. It’s a village-to-village network,” Burt says.
“People are saying, ‘We don’t want to run down and finish up in a nursing home’ ... so they’ve formed membership co-operatives in a location and undertake to support each other.
“I spent a day with one in Seattle and that was amazing. It’s membership driven. They tap into unique skills they can share.” It means those involved can stay in their communities and help each other out by sharing skills. “Someone might have a garden full of fruit but they can’t do the upkeep any more, so they’d organise people to help and share the bounty.” More on the Global Centre forModern Ageing: gcma.net.au/
CREDIT: Jennifer Hullick
Word count: 777
