From sport and leisure to sweaty workouts, it’s fun to see how fitness has changed, writes Clare Peddie
WHEN the National Fitness Council of South Australia was established in 1939, the new advisory body sought to alert citizens of the state to the importance of physical fitness.
There were marches, camps and courses. Most of the programs were sex-segregated. The Council offered coaching in sports including tennis, athletics, hockey and netball. It helped organise and promote new team sports, formed the SA Amateur Gymnastic Association in 1952, and introduced softball, cricket and court cricket to girls’ schools.
In 1976 the Council was taken over by the Department of Tourism, Recreation and Sport. It was a time when awareness of the importance of physical fitness had grown to such an extent that a whole new industry was being born.
Fitness Australia regional manager Steve Grace, 32, studied the history of his industry during his exercise and sports science degree. “Structured fitness didn’t really exist until the late ’60searly ’70s,” he said.
“It was basically sport and group activities before that.” If you go even further back, Mr Grace says, “sport came about as an alternative to training for battle, centuries and centuries ago”.
Games like rugby kept soldiers interested.
Continued Page 22 Fitness fun for kicks and giggles From Page 21 Aerobics was launched in 1968, the brainchild of US Air Force exercise physiologist Dr Kenneth H. Cooper. His first book featured running, walking, swimming and cycling but then came The New Aerobics in 1979.
Actress Jane Fonda’s first exercise video came out in 1982, the same year the first episode of Aerobics Oz Style aired on Channel 10. (You can stream some of the episodes right now on 10Play).
There was an explosion of celebrity workout videos aimed at stay-at-home mums, while gyms started to cater for a new market.
“Through the 1970s and ’80s, fitness started to grow as an industry,” Mr Grace said.
“Now the benefits, both physically and mentally, are pretty well renowned and researched.” He says the rise of fitness in Australia can be largely attributed to our love of sport, as playing sport gives people a reason to get fit. But let’s not forget one of the other driving forces, the desire to look good for the opposite sex, or whichever sex takes your fancy.
Australia is a pretty warm country and lots of people like to strip off and show off in summer.
“When there’s a bit of warmth, people like to get down to the beach and look good,” Mr Grace said. “So there’s an aesthetic side to it. You want to look good and feel good at the same time.” Research by Fitness Australia shows Baby Boomers are the nation’s most active generation, racking up 364 hours of physical activity each year, compared with 281 hours a year for those under 40. A lack of confidence was identified as one of the barriers holding people back.
Since 2004, the SA Council on the Ageing has run Strength for Life, funded by SA Health.
Manager Jeanette Richards, 65, says the program is offered at 105 sites across the state and more than 5500 people attend.
Each has their own individual strength program tailored to their needs, developed with trained exercise and fitness professionals.
“When we keep people exercising, we keep them out of hospital,” she said. Ms Richards started teaching power walking 30 years ago and later worked for Keep Fit SA. Her mentor Dot Partridge, 87, was still teaching tai chi classes until Christmas. Now she’s happy to exercise at home and keep her husband on his toes.
“He’s very unsteady on his feet but there’s a lot of strengthening exercises you can do,” she said.
“If you can get your legs a little bit stronger, they will hold you in good stead for perhaps not falling over quite so much.” Mrs Partridge believes the most important ingredient in a fitness class is humour. She likes to have a laugh and says that is what keeps people coming back.
Now that gyms are reopening after the disruption of COVID-19, Strength for Life classes can resume at most fitness centres.
“I feel really positive that the program we have and the connections people made will bring them back,” Ms Richards says. “It’s almost like a tribe; people go into the same session every week and they know those people.
“We have people who travel together and go out together. I’m so proud that has happened.” With the big shift to virtual training during the break, even Strength for Life had videos online and offered telehealth sessions.
There’s a huge variety of virtual fitness training options available online, many offering free trials.
For those who are a little nervous about exploring the web on their own, the Adelaide-based Global Centre for Modern Ageing recently launched an information portal.
Chief executive Julianne Parkinson says the content was carefully curated to help older people stay healthy, connected and active. “There is a plethora of information on the internet, but much is of varying quality or not of interest to older people,” she said.
“Our free portal has curated trusted information that older people can access with the click of a button.” The centre’s research shows technology use is increasing among older Australians, with a recent survey showing more than one in five people (21 per cent) aged over 60 engaging in a new technology since the beginning of the COVID-19 outbreak. The portal is broken into five categories: food and nutrition, health and wellbeing, physical activity, social connection, and work and e-learning. Visit: gcma.net.au/portal
CREDIT: Clare Peddie
Word count: 942
