As the Morrison government’s aged-care royal commission gears up, technology experts are designing ways for the elderly to stay in their own homes longer and to use sensor devices to remotely monitor those already in nursing homes.
Terry Sweeney, IBM’s Asia Watson Health managing director, is today’s keynote speaker at the opening of the Global Centre for Modern Ageing in Adelaide.
The centre was established by the former South Australian government following the collapse of the automotive industry to generate new employment opportunities in the aged-care sector.
Dr Sweeney said he was excited by the opportunities the centre, run by an independent company with a non-government board, presented through an innovation hub that included a real-time test facility to allow businesses to invent and trial products and services in a simulated “real-life”environment.
He said the latest research showed that 90 per cent of the elderly in Australia wanted to remain in their own homes, but only 30 per cent were able to, given everyday risk of accidents, diseases such as Alzheimer’s and social isolation.
Using advances in artificial intelligence for healthcare, Dr Sweeney said technology could “make the lives of our parents and grandparents better; it will also serve to make our lives better, and that of our children … We must continue to move from ‘sense and respond’ healthcare technologies to ‘predict and act’.” Dr Sweeney said: “Helping the world’s ageing population manage life’s vital decisions, prolong independence and stay more connected is incredibly important.” Healthcare devices being developed by IBM include real-time sensors that can provide peace of mind for relatives of those in aged-care homes by remotely monitoring how regularly care was being provided.
“We are entering a new era of technology … where we can use structured data to make an informed decision,” Dr Sweeney said.“Artificial intelligence systems are ones you don’t program — they will learn as you use them, and they have an insatiable appetite for information.”
CREDIT: MICHAEL OWEN; EXCLUSIVE
Word count: 328
