AN Adelaide-based venture capital fund has been launched to raise $10 million to invest in digital start-ups with a healthcare focus.
GP InnoVentures’ newly appointed chief executive Suhit Anantula said the fund had already made its first investment.
“We have set up a joint venture with Japan’s I’rom Group, owners of SA-based CMAX, one of Australia’s leading clinical trial businesses.
“The joint venture, GP Irom, merges the technical expertise of CMAX and I’rom with GP InnoVentures and its parent company, GP Partners Australia, which has a network of more than 1600 medical practitioners.” GP InnoVentures is a for-profit subsidiary of member-based GP Partners, a not-for-profit organisation supported by general practitioners (GPs) and through Federal Government grants.
Mr Anantula is also chief executive of GP Partners Australia. “CMAX has traditionally conducted global trials in hospital settings for international pharmaceutical giants.
“Through GP Irom, we are extending GP clinics as potential test locations for pharmas that want to conduct those trials,” he said.
From its base in Adelaide, GP Irom will deliver rapid, highly adaptable and quality clinical trials in line with standards in all major markets including the US and EU.
The company aims to transform the clinical trial process, enabling new drugs to be trialled and brought to market quickly through the delivery of trial data.
GP Irom’s first clinical trials for UK-based flu vaccines maker Vaccitech are currently underway across GP clinics in SA, Mr Anantula said.
“GP InnoVentures’ investment and strategic support will allow the company to further operationalise and scale,” he said.
Mr Anantula said he would look to consolidate services offered by different GP groups around Australia to meet the $10 million target as well as look at raising funds from the market.
“It’s a long-term plan, so about three to five years to find those rough diamonds and then give them the time to make that return on investment over the next five to seven years,” he said.
Mr Anantula joined the fund in March.
He said he had a 15-year background in strategy and consulting, focusing on strategy design. He was most recently a partner at business design agency, Business Models Inc.
Announcing his appointment, GP InnoVentures chair Roseanne Healy said Mr Anantula’s expertise in early-stage investments made him a perfect fit for the fund.“The appointment marks the next phase for the fund as we explore the health-tech space and expand our work with rough diamonds to larger start-ups as well as technology from other industries,” Ms Healy said.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 419
