Spills to facing page (5) two photos page 4; two photos page 5
The opening of NBN Channel 3 marked a further epoch in the city's history and development, the Lord Mayor (Ald. Purdue) said yesterday.
The opening of NBN was symbolic of Newcastle's recent trend in major development.
The Newcastle and Hunter Valley area had a character and individuality of its own and by the establishment of a local station a greater opportunity would be given for the expression of that individuality.
- The Newcastle Morning Herald and Miner's Advocate, March 5, 1962
AT 6pm on Sunday, March 4, 1962, on television screens in hundreds of lounge rooms across Newcastle and the Hunter, a black and white test pattern flickered to life on VHF Channel 3.
The exciting new world of TV had arrived in the Hunter.
The broadcaster was NBN and it promised viewers a "feast" of 56 hours of TV each week: Mum would have The Rosemary Clooney Show after the ironing; Dad would have Gunslinger after work; and the children would have The Mickey Mouse Club after school.
Broadcasting from 2.30pm to 10.30pm, NBN was proud to boast that "no less than 10 hours a week are devoted to the presentation of features emanating from the NBN studios in Newcastle".
Switched on six years after Bruce Gyngell ushered in the medium with those famous words, "Welcome to television", NBN became regional NSW's first TV station.
But 1962 was a momentous year in Australian broadcasting for another reason: it was the year the nation's first TV networks were formed.
The Channel Nine stations in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane and Adelaide came together as a network in a corporate power play that forced the Channel Seven stations in those cities to do likewise.
As personalities like Tommy Hanlon, Brian Henderson, Bobby Limb and Bert Newton and their popular programs changed channels in the shake-up, one of Australia's oldest and fiercest corporate rivalries was forged.
And the architect of this landmark media carve-up? Sir Frank Packer.
Forty-five years later and TV might be colour and Newcastle viewers might have five free-to-air channels to choose from but the Packer dynasty is still transforming the media landscape.
This week NBN was sold for a whopping $250 million to Nine Network owner PBL Media, the joint venture investment vehicle set up last year by Sir Frank's grandson, James Packer.
The last time a corporate giant bought NBN, pharmaceuticals conglomerate Washington H. Soul Pattinson and Co paid $36 million in 1989.
"We are buying a successful TV station at a time when it is possible to enter the industry at sensible prices," then Soul Patts chairman Jim Millner said the day his company sealed the deal.
"Soul Pattinson supports the long-established NBN policy of strong local identification and maximum local production."
This week, PBL Media has been less forthcoming on its intentions for NBN, raising fears in the Hunter that the local identity and local production jobs of Newcastle's TV station are at risk as NBN's operations are folded into increasingly cost-conscious, profit-driven Nine.
With its weeknight hour of news and 30-minute weekend bulletins, NBN claims to produce more local programming than any other regional station in Australia.
Former NBN newsreader Jodi McKay, new Labor MP for the state seat of Newcastle, was among the first to voice concerns this week when she declared the Hunter community would not accept NBN becoming a "relay station for Sydney".
Murray Finlay, the first person to appear live on NBN on that Sunday night in 1962, also expressed fears for the news bulletin he anchored for more than 20 years.
Another long-time NBN personality, former weatherman Nat Jeffery, believes it is inevitable that PBL Media will run a cold accountant's eye over the cost of producing local news.
"When I started at NBN in 1979 we used to put out 13 different programs a week and now there's only one, the news, and you'd have to think that new owners would be looking at it because of the cost, which is what it's all about," he said.
"Making that program is an immense expenditure, with up to 50 staff plus cars and cameras and studios, so it's inevitable that a new owner is going to look at it."
Jeffery, host of NBN's Today Extra morning show for 17 years until it was axed in December, was at the station for 28 years.
"When I started I was full of big ideas for new shows and I kept taking them to management and I remember the station manager told me 'We're here to make money, not television'."
Jeffery hopes Newcastle people will fight any dilution of local content.
"I think the older viewers in Newcastle and the Hunter still have a loyalty to NBN, and a connection to all the old shows Channel 3 used to make," he said.
"But it's been 15 years since aggregation so there's also a whole new generation of viewers, the under-25s, who have grown up here with three TV channels to choose from, plus pay-TV and the web."
When the Newcastle, North Coast and Tamworth TV markets merged in January 1992 under the Federal Government's aggregation policy NBN signed up to take Nine's programs as its potential audience of 650,000 more than doubled.
Northern NSW, which stretches from the NSW Central Coast to Queensland's Gold Coast and west to Moree, now has a potential audience of 1.9 million, making it Australia's fourth largest TV market behind Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane.
NBN lays claim to being Australia's top-rating TV station because it dominates the ratings in its Newcastle home market, the viewing capital of northern NSW.
Underpinning that dominance has been the loyalty of Newcastle viewers to NBN's 6pm news bulletin, which delivers the station a substantial headstart in building prime-time audiences.
But Prime TV general manager of news and regulatory affairs Alan Butorac said regional broadcasters were not obliged to do more than the brief news updates that Prime airs in Newcastle.
Under licence conditions that came into effect as a result of Prime's 2001 axing of local news bulletins in Newcastle, Canberra and Wollongong, regional stations must screen a minimum of 120 minutes a week of "local information programming" in sub-markets where they do not have a local news bulletin.
While Prime still has half-hour local news in its Tamworth home market and on the North Coast, it screens eight news, weather and community notice spots a day to meet its points quota for Newcastle.
The segments, ranging in duration from 30 seconds to two minutes, are compiled in Newcastle but presented and broadcast out of Prime's Canberra station.
"We get across the line each week by a handful of points not by multiples," Butorac said.
"From a regulatory point of view you only have to comply with the minimum. From a market point of view it would not be good business for us to close down a service like Tamworth and NBN would probably be in the same situation in their market."
Steve Allen, chief executive of national media buyer Fusion Media, reckons PBL Media will see the value of NBN's local content in Newcastle.
"Do they want to make Newcastle and northern NSW a clone of the Nine Network or do they see regional as a bit of a twist around the dial? Most learned commentary would say it's a bit of a twist around the dial, that there is value in localism.
"I think they will grasp this. I think, however, PBL is now a very pragmatic organisation, and it will simply be . . . what it is the cost imperative for doing this?"
PBL Media's $250 million purchase price, at almost 14 times NBN's full-year earnings, was "at the top of multiples for television assets in this country".
"So . . . one has to assume all the areas of duplication are going to be very rapidly engineered out," Allen said.
"We used to put out 13 different programs a week and now there's only one, the news, and you'd have to think that new owners would be looking at it because of the cost."
Illustration
Caption: FOUR PHOTOS: FOCUSED: NBN's local productions like Romper Room and on-air personalities such as Ray Dinneen have contributed to its strong branding and top ratings since its inception in 1962. artwork by Mandy Graham
Word count: 1395
