SYDNEY, Nov 9 AAP - The main stories in today's newspapers:
THE DAILY TELEGRAPH
Page 1 - Seventeen men accused of conspiring to slaughter civilians in "catastrophic" attacks on our cities.
Page 2 - Seventeen suspected terrorists rounded up in raids across Sydney and Melbourne allegedly planned to wage a holy war against Australia using hundreds of litres of explosive chemicals. A terror suspect immediately opened fire on three policemen when tackled in a suburban street shortly before 9am yesterday.
Finance - The last batch of Telstra shares has lost $6.7 billion in just six years.
THE AUSTRALIAN
Page 1 - Massive terrorist attack on Australian soil narrowly averted after sweeping raids across Sydney and Melbourne leads to arrest of 17 members of suspected terrorist cell. Melbourne cleric Abdul Nacer Benbrika claimed three months ago that he was "not involved in anything". A sudden explosion of intercepted "chatter" early last week rang the alarm inside the nation's spy and police network. A red-brick bungalow in south-west Sydney believed to have been used as bomb-making factory to manufacture the explosive used in July's London suicide bomber attacks.
Page 2 - Muslim leaders appeal for calm amid claims heavy-handed tactics were used during police raids across two states early yesterday morning.
Page 3 - Former bit-part actor in a gritty TV crime drama gunned down in shoot-out with police yesterday after opening fire on officers when they confronted him near a mosque in Sydney's south-west during a series of raids. The seven men charged in Sydney accused of being the bomb-makers of the foiled terrorist operation.
Finance - More than $1 billion retail assets now up for sale as merchants wilt under the pressure of shrinking margins and declining consumer spending.
THE SYDNEY MORNING HERALD
Page 1 - Chemicals used in London bombings and weapons seized in raids, 17 arrested in Sydney and Melbourne in the biggest anti-terrorist operation in Australia's history, foiling an "imminent" attack; Police Commissioner Ken Moroney predicts more arrests. Suspected terrorist shot by police in a Sydney street an actor in Home and Away. $1.3 billion M7 Westlink contract documents reveal state government banned from building new roads or improving existing ones within a 40 km radius for 34 years. Iconic retailer Gowings in administration after the family scuppers a takeover deal with Lowes. 1980's corporate fugitive Abe Goldberg uncovered in Poland. AFL players face contract tear-up for paying hush money to alleged sexual misconduct victims.
Pages 2 and 3 - Months of watching end as police swoop on terror suspects in raids across two cities.
Finance - 137-year-old Sydney retailer Gowings throws in the towel, appointing administrators.
THE AUSTRALIAN FINANCIAL REVIEW
Page 1 - NSW Premier Morris Iemma to launch a drive to attract thousands of skilled migrants from overseas to plug the state's skills gap. PM vindicated on terror as new amendments used to charge 16 people in Sydney and Melbourne with terrorism offences. Independent arbitrator rules against Patrick Corp on plan to break up rail joint venture and set up transport company to rival hostile takeover bidder Toll Holdings.
Page 3 - Federal government will expand the powers of the national media regulator to punish companies that breach media rules or content standards, paving way for landmark media reform.
World - French government battles to find answers to urban violence, mobilising the most police and public order officials in 40 years and moving to impose curfews in troubled areas.
Markets - CSR delivers an unexpected 10 per cent upgrade to its full-year earnings guidance despite a gloomy outlook and $30 million slump in earnings due to rain-plagued sugar harvest.
HERALD SUN
Page 1 - Holy war plot (headline)
Page 2 - Home-grown terror cells in Melbourne and Sydney accused of plotting a "catastrophic" chemical or explosive attack were smashed during early morning raids yesterday.
Page 3 - A Melbourne man was desperate to become Australia's first suicide bomber as revenge for the war in Iraq, a court heard yesterday.
Finance - Chris Corrigan suffered a significant defeat yesterday in his fight to block the $4 billion takeover bid for Patrick Corp by Paul Little's Toll Holdings.
THE AGE
Page 1 - In the biggest counter-terrorism operation ever mounted in Australia, police have arrested 16 men in Melbourne and Sydney for allegedly planning to carry out attacks on civilians in the name of jihad. It was probably the worst-kept secret in Australia that a group of alleged terrorists were close to realising their long-held plans to launch a major attack.
Page 2 - While her husband spent last night in secure detention, the wife of accused terror leader Abdul Nacer Benbrika was at their north suburban home keeping their six young children away from the spotlight.
Page 3 - One of nine Melbourne men accused of planning to unleash jihad attacks on the city had allegedly asked his spiritual leader for permission to be a suicide bomber in Australia.
Finance - Telstra has muted its angry personal attack on Australian Competition and Consumer Commission chairman Graeme Samuel, and has said it is not trying to have him removed.
CANBERRA TIMES
Page 1 - Raids allegedly foil terrorist bomb plan; Canberra airport owner says commercial developments needed to fund infrastructure.
Page 2 - Labor steps up attack on IR laws, accusing Liberals of rewarding mates.
Page 3 - Local governments say they're underfunded and undervalued; ACT chief minister criticised for not relaying concerns about whaling to Canberra's Japanese sister city; Alan Evans expected to be re-elected as NRMA president.
ADELAIDE ADVERTISER
Page 1 - Sixteen terror suspects appear in court after police raids.
Page 2-3 - Floods damage hundreds of homes in Adelaide and the Adelaide Hills.
Finance - Adelaide Energy to explore for gas in the Cooper Basin. Geothermal power station planned for Millicent. Adelaide shipbuilder ASC reports $16 million annual profit.
AAP
09-11 0828
Word count: 989
