MUCH has been discussed about how the young, vibrant Dockers will match up against the seasoned, hard-bodied Bombers.
The same could be said about the coaches.
Chris Connolly is the vibrant young firebrand who uses imagination and creativity to inspire his charges.
Kevin Sheedy is the senior citizen of the AFL coaching fraternity, but underestimate him at your own peril.
Australian football has the youngest coaches of any sport in the world.
In most overseas sports, young coaches just out of the game get to cut their teeth as head coach in minor leagues or universities.
Age and experience are cherished commodities.
Sheedy, 56, would be seen in many sporting codes to be in the prime of his coaching life, not nearing the end.
Experienced coaches are not learning on the job and have a wealth of knowledge, and Sheeds is a glowing example of this.
Set plays have become an important factor in football and the Bombers' old fox still has a better record than his young adversaries. Kick-in structures are a good example.
HOW VITAL ARE THEY?
THE ability to have possession of the ball and time to orchestrate clean movement can be a massive advantage if used successfully.
We only need to go back a few weeks to realise how important kick- ins are.
In the dying minutes of the St Kilda v Brisbane game at Telstra Dome, the Lions had a kick-in to either win or hold on to the game.
Their regular kicker Chris Johnson had been pushed forward and Mal Michael took on the job. Without the experience of his teammate, he drove the ball into a 50-50 contest. The Saints won possession and Troy Schwarze goaled to win the game.
Looking at tonight, the Bombers have been far superior with their kick-ins. They have scored 87 points from direct kick-in plays. Opposing teams have scored just 27 points from intercepts.
This is a net worth of 10 goals to the Bombers just from the kick- out structure, which is worth just over a goal per game.
When studying Fremantle's work in the same region, it has only scored 27 points while conceding 18 points to its opposition, gaining virtually no advantage from its kick-in structures.
WHY IS ONE TEAM
BETTER THAN ANOTHER?
THE simple answer to this can always be that certain teams have better skilled kickers in their line-up.
Some players have the ability to remain composed and have better lateral vision than others, while also possessing the ability to drill the ball deep and long. Dustin Fletcher virtually takes every kick-in for Essendon.
DIRECTION
WHEN studying an opposition's kick-ins, a coach will look for patterns to emerge.
Fremantle virtually never uses the centre corridor, which means it will use its better defensive players on both flanks, as well as having markers in this region.
Essendon will not expose the middle of the ground, but will encourage Fremantle to continue this practice as it makes it less likely to score a coast-to-coast goal.
When looking at the Bombers, they are far less predictable using the left, centre and right side of the ground on an equal ratio.
This keeps the Fremantle defence on its toes and ensures that it is spread as there are no guarantees where the ball will head.
DISTANCE
ONCE again Fremantle is far more easy to read as it kicks short regularly. This structure has not allowed the team to score goals from kick-ins, so the Bombers will be happy for it to continue.
Watch Essendon allow the Dockers to get the first short kick away to the pockets and then try to lock them into one side of the ground.
The Dockers use Roger Haddrill, Peter Bell and Shane Parker as options. Bell can only kick short, while Haddrill, although effective, also goes short.
The Bombers are almost the best in the business.
No one can predict what is likely to happen, and when you think you're set, they will then kick to themselves, run, carry and kick the ball over the top of the opposition's defensive zone.
TESTING BOUNDARIES
SHEEDS has always been a lateral thinker, and he surprised everyone by trying to outsmart the Cats.
Early in the game, every time a point was scored, a Bomber would run off through the interchange gates as if he was being replaced.
He was never actually replaced and the opposition would set its defensive structure without factoring in this 18th player.
The player would wait until the first kick-in was successful, then run back on to the ground unguarded to try to receive the second kick. Watch for this tactic again later in the year.
HARD TO COMBAT
IN ROUND 7, the Bombers played the Bulldogs. On tele vision it was highlighted that Fletcher would bomb the ball over the back of the Bulldog zone and have teammates run into open space and score.
The following Friday against Adelaide, the first kick-in of the night went to the identical position, allowing free possession to the Bombers.
Let's see if Connolly can counteract it tonight.
Telstra Dome, 7.40PM FORECAST: SHOWERS, 14C TV: Channel 9, 8.30PM RADIO: Triple M, 3AW, ABC 774
Word count: 917
