How each club's new players performed in AFL Round One.
ADELAIDE
Adelaide unveiled two seasoned recruits in Wayne Carey and Jason Torney who made immediate impacts with their new club -- Carey booting four goals and Torney collecting 28 possessions in a polished display in defence and the midfield.
BRISBANE
In such warm conditions, you wouldn't think a bench-warmer was required, but that was the role for ex-Bomber Blake Caracella. Saw little time against his former club and was used mostly when the contest was decided. Will remain very much a first choice player and his style should complement the Lions.
CARLTON
Rookie rover Jon McCormick was the Blues' best only a few days after being elevated from the rookie list, while Jarrad Waite also made his debut. Former Port ruckman Barnaby French had a tough night, but he had plenty of mates.
COLLINGWOOD
Former Brownlow Medallist Shane Woewodin was among the Magpies' best, while ex-West Coast midfielder Andrew Williams showed why coach Mick Malthouse was keen to recruit him. Matthew Lokan ran hard off the half-back line and fellow youngster Tristen Walker did not disgrace himself with a debut against one of the league's most dangerous forwards, Matthew Richardson.
ESSENDON
The performance of ex-Lion Damian Cupido was one of the main positives in the Bombers' loss. No-one ever doubted the South African-born forward possessed sublime skills, but he constantly presented for the ball and at times had the superb Brisbane defence flummoxed. Former Fremantle youngster Adam McPhee was stationed in defence early and had little effect but did get better as it went on.
FREMANTLE
The Dockers were well served by former Brisbane premiership player Des Headland (22 possessions) while South Australian teen Byron Schammer displayed touches of class in his AFL debut. But most pleasing for the Dockers was the performance of ruckman Aaron Sandilands, at 211cm the tallest player in the competition. Sandilands showed remarkable mobility for a player of his size and registered 13 hit-outs and a goal against one of the strongest ruck combinations in the league.
GEELONG
Matthew McCarthy made an unexceptional debut as a marking forward on a day when the Cats' attack failed to fire.
HAWTHORN
Former St Kilda ruck-forward Peter Everitt had an unwelcome postscript when he was reported for making contact with an umpire, but he played a key role in the Hawks' revival. After everyone had had trouble kicking into the wind, his booming goal from 50m brought the Hawks to within a point late in the match.
KANGAROOS
Daniel Wells demonstrated exactly why the Roos grabbed him up at pick two in the draft. Gathered just 11 possessions but in great style, with his lightning speed a feature. Will be very good. Ex- Docker Leigh Brown was handy, but it appears the Roos are unsure where to put him yet and he still looks like he could lose a kilo or two.
MELBOURNE
Former Essendon midfielder Chris Heffernan started the game well enough, but only finished with eight possessions. Rookie Mark Jamar was a pinch-hitter in the ruck, while fellow first-gamers Ryan Ferguson and Brad Miller had key position roles.
PORT ADELAIDE
Steven Salopek's first AFL kick was a goal, but he had a mixed day which included a bad fumble. Other first-gamers were rookie Toby Thurstans and former Kangaroos Byron Pickett and Stuart Cochrane.
RICHMOND
Kane Johnson (ex-Adelaide) faded in the second half as Collingwood took control, but was among the Tigers' best and will bolster their midfield. Former Essendon onballer Justin Blumfield was not prolific enough, only amassing 11 touches.
SYDNEY
Ex-Magpie Nick Davis showed he could be a handy foil for Barry Hall in attack, while Adam Schneider booted a couple of goals in a handy debut.
ST KILDA
2001's number two draft pick Luke Ball made a belated debut after injury last year and was serviceable. Has good lateral vision, and unlike many youngsters took it upon himself to get involved. Former Bulldog and Demon Stephen Powell started well but drifted out of it as he ran out of legs. Rejected talls Luke Penny and Barry Brooks added size but not much else. Both promise to show more as they develop.
WEST COAST
The Eagles had no first- gamers in their big win over Port Adelaide.
BULLDOGS
With the season-ending injury to Chris Grant, former Port player Scott Bassett made an encouraging start against Geelong.
Illustration
Caption: GOOD PICK: Former Melbourne player Shane Woewodin goals for Collingwood against Richmond in the first round.; Photo: Photo
Word count: 803
