BEING an entrepreneur means taking a great leap of faith into the unknown and having the confidence to back yourself when others might not.
Taking that leap can also be frightening, especially when your hard-earned savings are on the table.
If you’re living in the country, taking that step can be even harder. Your market might be more limited than if you were living in Adelaide, your transport costs higher, your support networks smaller.
If the jobs market in your community is limited and the opportunities to work are less plentiful – but you want to stay at home with your family and friends – having a spark of an idea and starting a small business might just be the answer you’re looking for.
Small businesses are the beating heart of our regional communities. They employ people, keep towns thriving and the money circulating up and down local main streets.
With e-commerce an the growth of digital communications, living and working for yourself in your regional community, with your bright spark of an idea, has never been easier with the right support.
For the past 21 years Business SA has been helping young entrepreneurs aged 18 to 35 to light their business fuse as part of our SAYES program.
Along with our Encore program for those aged over 35, Business SA provides participants with practical learning programs backed by mentors and assistance from industry experts.
By the end of the program, they have the skills and confidence to implement their business plan and grow their sales or services.
Think body artist Emma Hack, The Seller Door, Burger Theory, Lateral Vision and mural artist Dave Court. More than 600 young people have gone through Business SA’s SAYES program – that’s 600 new businesses starting with the right tools to help them take one more step towards success.
Having a light-bulb moment is one thing but knowing what to do next or where to seek advice is another.
Business SA can plug that idea in and help you turn on the light. To boost our country communities, Business SA has launched Regional SAYES. Kicking off in October, we’re helping our country entrepreneurs move forward.
We’ll be holding our city sessions in blocks to avoid too many trips, and they’ll all be held at Lot Fourteen.
If entrepreneurs want to mingle with like-minded people in a space conducive to ideas and collaboration, the Lot Fourteen innovation precinct is the place to be.
When starting out, it can be costly travelling to and from Adelaide and staying in hotels. As part of Regional SAYES, Business SA will be covering travel and accommodation costs for participants. If we can cut some logistical costs, we will.
Business SA believes we need to develop our state’s economy and population. We need to support our young people to take a business leap and help them succeed wherever they live.
And if they’re living in the country, we’re here to pull them up with both hands.MARTIN HAESE IS CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF BUSINESS SA
CREDIT: MARTIN HAESE
Word count: 508
