Last night's game told the story of Hawthorn's season 2009, writes Greg Baum.
HAWTHORN'S premiership defence began on a Friday night at the MCG with a beating from Geelong. Losing had an alibi then: too many premiership players missing, too rushed preparation. To all intents and purposes, it finished on another Friday night at the MCG, with a beating from Adelaide. Now, there were no excuses.
Nine premiership players still were missing, the latest and most sorely missed Jarryd Roughead. But the Hawks have had four months to adopt and adapt. Last year, they looked the team of best-laid plans. This year, they look the team of their unpicking. Last season, the Hawks got on a roll. This year, they didn't really get going.
The story of this, their last hurrah, can be told as a series of huddles. Humans huddle for different reasons, to regroup in adversity, to commune in triumph. Hawthorn's first huddle was in pre-match warm-up. It was a compact, but it also was a rehearsal. The first half consisted of huddles, one in the middle, one on each forward line. Mostly, Luke Hodge was in his own personal huddle as he looked to shake Robert Shirley's tag by tagging another Crow.
In this maelstrom, momentarily the Hawthorn of old asserted itself. In such a madding crowd, clean possession was rare and some of the most important touches were barely touches at all. The first goal was made by Cyril Rioli's flying tackle on an unawares Bernie Vince. The second was Rioli's doing, lashing the ball out of mid-air 40 metres from goal; somehow, the ball spun like a truly kicked drop punt.
The fifth arrived when Lance Franklin slipped a handball away at half-back, then seconds later laid a tackle on Scott Stevens in the forward pocket. Franklin's contribution stood out then because his movement was longitudinal in a game was mostly being played as if both teams were playing to imaginary goal posts set on the wings.
The Hawks of old led by 31 points, but not for the first time this season had flattered to deceive. The Crows knuckled down and kicked the next six goals. Now the silkiness of Andrew McLeod stood out as the silkiness of Rioli had in the first quarter, the old master usurping the young.
Goals came from Kurt Tippett's Roughead-powerful goal-square mark, from McLeod's lateral vision, then from a masterpiece of improvisation from Trent Hentschel. Hemmed into the forward pocket, he swept an almost-dead ball against the legs of a Hawthorn player, where it ricocheted out on the full. Then, coolly, he converted from an acute angle.
Hentschel, playing his third match in two years, added three more goals in the second half. Last year, all the fairytales were Hawthorn's; Stuart Dew's, for instance. This year, they are at Hawthorn's expense: Jimmy Bartel three weeks ago, Hentschel last night.
The second half was for Adelaide to consolidate the gains of the first. The Crows are more robotic than inspired, meticulous rather than surprising. The Hawks of yesteryear might have sliced them to pieces. But the Hawks of 2009 were too busy fighting their own devils, the spawn of diminished manpower, an unsettled line-up and dwindling confidence. They were unable to burst through lines as they did last year, or even last month against Collingwood, lacked crispness, turned the ball over repeatedly, kicked for goal atrociously, were unable to improvise.
From the 22-minute mark of the first quarter, they kicked four goals, all Franklin's; thereby hangs the tale. One was as breathtaking as it was isolated; a gather while on a banking run, a snap from 50 metres. There was one last huddle at three-quarter-time, but nothing rubbed off except massage oil.
The crowd was less than 33,000, modest enough, and not all stayed for the last rites. It was not as if the Hawks had their mantle snatched away from them; it was never really theirs to hold. Of 10 matches against top eight teams this season, they have lost eight. It was a mild night in Melbourne for August, hinting more at September. Excepting miracles, it is the only hint the Hawks will have this year.
Word count: 710
