ENTREPRENEURIALISM has become a buzzword in our schools.
The argument goes that schools, for too long, have stuck to a 19th-century mod­el of drumming the curriculum into students – a model suited to an industrial economy where you needed to know just enough to survive in a job.
But in a knowledge economy, that’s not enough. We need more students with the drive, ambition, creativity and problem-solving skills to want to start their own businesses, or at least become innovators in the companies they will go on to work for.
This is especially important in South Australia, where we don’t have the big corporate headquarter employers who tend to gravitate to the eastern states.
The State Government has recognised this by introducing specialist entrepreneurial public schools. As announced late last year, the first are Murray Bridge, Mt Gambier, Heathfield, Seaton and Banksia Park International high schools.
Those schools are also leading the development of SA’s inaugural entrepreneurial-learning strategy, so all schools can embed it in their curriculum and culture.
Many schools – public and private – already engage with industry on a range of programs. Independent Pem­­broke School has taken this a step further by giving businesses a home in its new $25 million technology, science and arts centre. Students will benefit from witnessing first-hand how innovative companies operate from day to day.
The first business to move in, virtual-reality specialist Lateral Vision, will also train teachers and have students test their products.
It’s likely the next to move in will be a “big data” business – an area that will be crucial to the future careers of many young people.
While most schools will not be able to afford a building such as Pembroke’s, many would be able to find a space for an inspirational business venture to set up shop.
While we must remain on guard against over-commercialisation of schools, such win-win schemes like that unfolding at Pembroke should be encouraged.
Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Matt Deighton, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 342
