SOUTH Australia is sending a well-balanced side for the 2003 Claxton Shield championship in Blacktown, NSW, in an effort to break its longest drought in the competition since the trophy was first presented in 1934.
SA hits off today with a 7pm game against NSW, followed by a matches each day against Western Australia, Queensland, Victoria and then an Australian Provincial side for a place in Friday's semi finals.
The grand final will be played next Saturday at 7pm.
After winning the inaugural Shield in 1934, SA has won 15 Shields up until its most recent success in 1980.
From 1990, the Australian Baseball League replaced the Claxton Shield until it started again in 2000.
SA has named 10 players who can pitch, including Adelaide Angels coach Darren White, who is better known as an aggressive batter.
Another pitcher who is no slouch with the bat is Tom Brice, which allows the team more flexibility.
Over the five preliminary matches, South Australia will need at least four quality starters and will bank on Calvin Chipperfield, Darren Fidge and Leigh Neuage to lead from the front.
Ben Wigmore will do most of the catching, with rookie Jason Scott more than a capable back-up. Jamie Kloeden will likely start at first base,
Team: Tom Brice (Sturt), Calvin Chipperfield (East Torrens), Ben Dixon (Glenelg), Darren Fidge (Goodwood), Simon Galpin (Goodwood), Tyrone Hambly (West Torrens), Jamie Kloeden (Glenelg), Dylan Martin (Southern Districts), Paul Mildren (Sturt), Leigh Neuage (Southern Districts), Leigh Norman (Kensington), Daniel Redden (West Torrens), Jason Scott (Glenelg), Tristan Stevens (Glenelg), Marc Taintey (West Torrens), Craig Watts (Sturt), Darren White (Adelaide), Ben Wigmore (Goodwood), Daniel Wilson (Glenelg), Dale Ziersch (Glenelg). - Robert Laidlaw
* * *
AUSTRALIAN Dave Nilsson will get a $678,000 one-year contract if the Boston Red Sox add him to its 40-man roster. The team finalised its minor league contract with the free-agent catcher/first baseman yesterday.
Nilsson, 33, last played in the major leagues in 1999, when he hit .309 for Milwaukee.
He spent all eight of his major league seasons with the Brewers, hitting .284 with 105 homers and 470 RBIs in 837 games.
His best year was 1996, when he hit .331 with 17 homers and 84 RBIs in 123 games.
A left-handed hitter, he was primarily a catcher with Milwaukee but also played first base, the outfield and at designated hitter.
Word count: 395
