top priority
Readers debate media hoax calls and how blame may be apportioned in the event of unintended consequences.
DJs not to blame
DON'T blame Mel Greig or Michael Christian, the radio employees responsible for the hoax call. Nobody could have predicted such a tragic outcome, and in no way can we hold them responsible for the death of the nurse involved.
If we blame them, not only could they be the next victims of this stunt, but we would be putting the future of all great media stunts at risk.
Remember the Chasers' bin Laden stunt?
Has anybody considered the role that the poor woman's work associates played?
Did they make life intolerable for her? If not, who did?
ROBERT BURKE, Daw Park.
Ask hard questions
IT is with disbelief that I read about the appalling behaviour once again by lazy Australian journalists.
Why are these educated people not asking the serious questions about why the British nurse Jacintha Saldanha may have committed suicide?
Shouldn't the real questions include: "What (if any) heavy-handed action was taken against her for a minor error, that caused her so much distress that she didn't go home but instead took her life at the hospital she worked at?"
Surely this is the story, not the easy no-brainer of blaming two people who just did what radio stations around the world have been doing for decades.
In fact this prank call was probably one of the least culpable calls I have heard.
Please investigate the real story behind this terrible tragedy and do what's right instead of what's easy.
ANNA EDWARDS, Forestville.
It's just bullying
CRUELLY ironic, is it not, how shock jocks Mel Greig and Michael Christian are now desperately ducking for cover and pleading for privacy in order to recover from the shame that their thoughtless grab for notoriety has brought on them?
Perhaps a spotlight-addicted colleague might try a spot of "harmless" pranking at their expense?
It's time for pranking to be called what it is: bullying.
HELEN TUNNEY, Largs North.
Grow up and see harm
UNFORTUNATELY, it takes a tragedy like the suicide of the prank-call victim to highlight the way practical jokes can backfire, particularly those in the public arena. The radio station CEO describes prank calls as a "craft". If that is the case, then what a sad indictment of modern entertainment. Surely it is about time media personalities and those in charge of them grew up and realised that these calls and practical jokes amount to humiliation of the victims. They are a form of harassment disguised as humour.
GEOFF FORBES, Beaumont.
Stop and think
DID anyone at 2DayFM (perhaps a producer or researcher) stop to consider the consequences of what is termed "never more than a harmless prank" before the call was made to King Edward VII's Hospital?
Together with Greig and Christian, what were they thinking? Have any of them heard of the term "patient confidentiality"?
What
did they think would happen to any of the nursing staff or the Duchess of Cambridge if the call made it through?
Do they know what pressure nurses are under in the normal course of their duties, let alone having to scrutinise phone calls?
Once a upon a time the media had lateral vision. How "blind" are the decision-makers at 2DayFM?
Some people and situations should be off-limits. Sadly, this proved to be one of them.
May Jacintha Saldanha rest in peace and her family be given the comfort they need as Christmas approaches.
VANESSA HEIN, Hawthorndene.
Disgraceful conduct
HOW is it in this day and age of anti-bullying laws that radio stations and presenters can humiliate people for a cheap laugh at the expense of valued community members such as nurses? Disgraceful.
RAE GRIERSON, North Adelaide.
Thoughtless pranks
THE hysteria over the radio prank call needs to stop.
Learn that what you say may contribute to a person's already fragile state.
There is no reason to play thoughtless pranks on unwary victims.
Wish good thoughts for the dead nurse's family who are the unfortunate real victims and think always of consequences and responsibility.
JOY PENNY, Glengowrie.
Identity theft
IN a country where privacy laws are absolute, the so-called prank by the radio hosts stands alone.
This is a case of impersonating the Queen, asking for private medical information and then broadcasting and rebroadcasting the results.
All with no thought for the poor nurse who worked in a royal hospital, probably loved the royal family and faced being the butt of jokes for the rest of her life.
When did identity theft become an acceptable lark?
This only reinforces the view that the current generation have been engendered with the idea that responsibility for actions belongs to someone else.
JAMES HEIN, Hackney.
Do unto others
SUDDENLY a radio broadcaster's career highlight becomes a shameful and regrettable action (The Advertiser, yesterday). While the tragic apparent suicide of nurse Jacintha Saldanha could not have been foreseen, our cheeky prankster culture defies the golden rule: Do unto others as you would have them do unto you. Then there is the responsibility to love thy neighbour - which itself is second only to the greatest commandment of loving God. Although monetary offerings will never begin to make atonement, the offending radio station should
establish a memorial scholarship
to fund the training of nurses at King Edward VII's hospital.
The Federal Government should also make a sizeable contribution - having failed to supervise communications in our nation which is now internationally disgraced.
DAVID d'LIMA, Sturt.
Frightening prospect
IT'S frightening to think that any one of us could be the target of a journalist's prank and have this plastered all over Twitter, Facebook, etc.
Shame on the face of Australian journalism to impersonate and lie.
ROSIE MONTROSE, Sellicks Beach.
No laughing matter
I HAVE no doubt that a good deal will be said about the irresponsible prank by two radio presenters which may have contributed to a tragic death.
That should be warning enough to all media presenters to think more carefully before they try to humiliate others in the belief that it is "funny". It is not.
What is even more disturbing is that the Prime Minister has also indulged in an equally irresponsible piece of behaviour.
Her solemn announcement that the world was going to end on December 21 is to be condemned. Yes, I know it was supposed to be "funny". It was not.
It was not funny for two reasons.
The first is that it was making fun of another ancient indigenous culture. If it had been Australian indigenous culture then the Prime Minister would, rightly, have been condemned had she been foolish enough to allow the piece to be made. Why should any other culture be any different?
The second is that there are people who will, indeed are, taking her seriously. Yes, of course most people understand it is not to be taken seriously but there are also some people who will not understand that. It is causing them distress.
We may never learn if it causes someone to do something foolish or, worse, take their own life. Even if it does neither of those things the fact that it causes distress makes it objectionable.
It was, quite simply, inappropriate for anyone in the position of Prime Minister to participate in something like this.
If this is the way the media behaves then it is little wonder that governments are looking to curb their powers.
K.M. GUNN, Lower Mitcham.
Word count: 1262
