Friday, August 20
DRIVER AND HIS DOG CLOCKED AT 197KM/H AT WELLINGTON EAST
A hoon in a Mercedes lost their license after being caught speeding at 197km/h in a 110km/h zone at Wellington East on Friday afternoon.
Police caught the driver, with his dog riding shotgun, at about 4.30pm on the Princes Highway.
The driver, a 40-year-old Meningie man, was stopped and issued an instant six-month loss of licence and a $1814 fine.
CAR TORCHED AFTER PURSUIT
Investigations are under way after a stolen car was torched at Elizabeth on Friday morning.
About 12.45am, police spotted a black Subaru Liberty travelling along Quinlivan Road at Pooraka.
Checks revealed the car had been stolen from a home at Paradise on Wednesday.
The patrol activated emergency lights and attempted to pull the car over, but it took off at speed. It was pursued west on Montague Road for a short time before police terminated the chase for safety reasons.
Just after 1am, officers were called to Ridley Road at Elizabeth South after a resident reported seeing a group of men pull up in a black Subaru.
They fled the scene and the car burst into flames a short time later.
Police including PD Bandit searched the area but the suspects have not been found. The car was towed from the scene.
ROBBERY LEADS TO CRASH
A robbery led to a serious crash in Adelaide’s northern suburbs on Friday morning, police say.
About 4.30am, a man was asleep in his green Commodore on Jessie Road at Paralowie when he was dragged from his car and allegedly assaulted by two masked offenders.
The pair then stole the car and sped off, while the man was taken to hospital with serious injuries.
READ MORE HERE
MOTORCYCLIST CAUGHT WITHOUT HELMET AND ALMOST FIVE TIMES OVER LIMIT
Police have caught a motorcyclist on Hodges Road just after 5am riding without a helmet, while disqualified and blowing a staggering 0.249 blood alcohol reading, almost five times the legal limit.
The rider received a 12 month instant loss of licence and his motorbike was impounded for 28 days. Further checks revealed the rider was disqualified from holding a licence and the motorbike was unregistered and uninsured.
The man was reported for drink driving, driving disqualified, riding an unregistered and uninsured motorbike and riding without a helmet. He will be summonsed to appear in Port Augusta Magistrates Court at a later date.
Two men were caught by police drink driving in Port Augusta earlier Friday morning, one of whom blew almost five times over the legal blood alcohol limit.
Earlier at about 4.20am on Friday Port Augusta Police stopped a white Mitsubishi station wagon travelling on Hodge Street at Port Augusta for the purpose of a mobile driver test.
The driver, a 29-year-old unlicensed Port Lincoln man returned a positive breath analysis test with a reading of 0.098 and received a six month immediate loss of licence and his vehicle was impounded for 28 days.
Police also searched the man and located equipment used for smoking methamphetamine. He will be issued a drug diversion.
MAN ACTING SUSPICIOUSLY IN MOUNT GAMBIER
On Thursday two children walking on Lake Terrace East were beckoned to by a man sitting in a white sedan
The two girls did not approach the man and there was no conversation. The children left the area and reported it to parents immediately.
The white sedan, possibly a Mitsubishi Magna or similar, had a distinctive piece of cardboard covering the rear left passenger window. There is no further description of the man. Police searched the area but were unable to locate any cars matching the description.
Police do not think this incident is linked to a suspicious behaviour report published on 16 August. Anyone with information that may assist is asked to contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000 or online at www.crimestopperssa.com.au
Thursday, August 19
DELAYS AFTER CRASH
Motorists experienced major delays after two cars crashed at Happy Valley this morning.
The crash happened at the intersection of Kenihans Rd and Panalatinga Rd, near Main South Rd, just before 7am.
There were no serious injuries.
Northbound traffic was being diverted via the Southern Expressway while tows are arranged. Traffic had reportedly improved at 8.30am.
STOLEN SCOOTER TORCHED
A suspect remains at large after a stolen scooter was set alight at Elizabeth South.
The fire was sparked at a reserve on Ridley Rd about 10.45pm Wednesday.
Fire crews prevented the blaze from spreading but the scooter was destroyed.
Among the rubble, police found the registration plate, and discovered it had been stolen from Carrington St in the city earlier that night.
Anyone with information on the suspect should call Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
Wednesday, August 18
CBD PUB ROBBED AT GUNPOINT
One man has been arrested while another remains on the run after allegedly robbing a CBD pub with a sawn-off shotgun and a machete.
The alarm was raised at the The West End hotel and bottle shop on Hindley St at 5.30am Wednesday, following reports a man entered the pub, threatened staff with the gun and stole money from the till.
Police allege the second man, armed with the machete, stood outside the hotel.
Both men left the scene in a blue Holden Commodore sedan.
The car was last seen heading west on Hindley St. CCTV cameras tracked the vehicle to Port Rd, before it was spotted heading north on South Rd.
Police attending a Modbury home about 9.45pm Wednesday, and arrested a man, 40, from Direk. He was taken to the Lyell McEwin Hospital for treatment, and is expected to be charged with aggravated robbery.
The blue Holden Commodore was found at the address, and seized for forensic examination.
Police are still hunting a second offender, and ask anyone with information to contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
BIKIE ARRESTED OVER AMMUNITION
A Comanchero bikie will face court after two different types of ammunition were allegedly found in his car.
As part of an investigation, police on Tuesday seized and searched two cars. In one of the vehicles, they allegedly found seven rounds of ammunition in a hidden compartment.
They later attended a Hyde Park address and arrested a 35-year-old Para Vista man. He was charged with possessing insecure ammunition, refused police bail and will face the Adelaide Magistrates Court on Thursday.
Detective Chief Inspector David Scutchings, the officer in charge of the Crime Gangs Task Force, said police were committed to investigating firearms offences involving Outlaw Motorcycle Gangs.
“While police will allege this person is a member of the Comanchero Outlaw Motorcycle Gang, this arrest is not directly related to Operation Ironside,” he said.
“This offending is yet another example of the propensity shown by OMCG members to arm themselves.
“Of concern to police is that the seizure of two types of ammunition would indicate there are a number of outstanding firearms that are yet to be located.”
ASSAULT AFTER BEING ASKED TO WEAR A MASK
A man who would not wear a face mask was allegedly involved in an assault on Monday.
The man entered a supermarket on Aldinga Beach Rd about 2:30pm, before staff challenged him and he allegedly became irate and abusive.
A member of the public intervened and spoke to the man, but was then allegedly abused and pushed in the chest, causing him to fall to the ground.
After an investigation, a 41-year-old man from Aldinga Beach was arrested on Tuesday and charged with assault, disorderly behaviour and failing to comply with a direction. He was granted police bail to appear in the Christie Beach Magistrates Court in September.
Police will investigate all alleged breaches of the Emergency Management Act.
PARALOWIE BREAK IN SUSPECTS REVEALED

Police have released images of suspects involved in the break-in and theft of a motorcycle and other items at Paralowie in April.
At about 3.50pm on Friday 23 April, a man returned to his Wildwood Street home to find the house had been broken into, with a Yamaha R1 motorcycle, laptop, computer and motorcycle helmets stolen.
CCTV footage shows a woman arrive in a stolen Hyundai Santa Fe SUV, with stolen number plates of S718BYV.
The woman forced her way into the property and then exited soon after driving off in the Hyundai.
A gold Nissan patrol with stolen number plates of S982BRP then arrived with two men inside the vehicle. They proceeded to steal items from the house including the computer and helmets, then one of the men rode off on the victim’s motorcycle.
The motorcycle was later recovered in Greenwith.
The first suspect is described as being of Caucasian appearance, aged in his late 20s, 170cm tall with short dark hair, wearing an olive green hooded jumper, black gloves, black and white Adidas tracksuit pants and red shoes.
The second suspect is described as being of Caucasian appearance, aged in his 30s, 180cm tall, tanned complexion with a short stubble beard, wearing a black beanie, a black T-shirt over a grey long sleeve shirt, dark blue jeans and black and white sneakers.
If anyone recognises the suspects or vehicle involved or has information that may be able to assist with the investigation, please contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000 or online at www.crimestopperssa.com.au
POLICE SEEK IDENTITY OF PAIR AT ELIZABETH
Police are seeking the identity of a man and woman pictured at Playford International College on Philip Highway at Elizabeth on June 1, who may be able to assist with a police investigation.
Police urge anyone who knows the identity of the people in the images to please contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000 or report online at www.crimestopperssa.com.au. You can remain anonymous.
BUS CAUSES MORNING DELAYS ON PORT RD
An articulated bus that crashed into a traffic light at Port Rd caused heavy delays for motorists heading into the city this morning.
The bus smashed into the lights at the intersection of Port Rd and Park Tce shortly after 7.30am on Wednesday morning.
Turning-lane traffic from Port Rd heading right onto Park Tce was completely blocked by the bus, after it became jammed on the traffic light.
Passengers on the bus were escorted to a nearby service while police managed traffic.
A passenger from the bus said traffic quickly built up on Manton Rd and Port Rd, and “was sure to cause traffic chaos.”
Traffic SA reported up to 10-minute delays on Manton Rd, and six-minute delays on Port Rd.
‘HOON’ MOTORCYCLIST ARRESTED
A motorbike rider has been arrested following an alleged late-night hoon ride through the northern suburbs.
Police allege the man, riding a black Suzuki motorcycle, was spotted speeding on McIntyre Rd at Modbury about 12.50am on Wednesday.
The PolAir police helicopter tracked the bike as it sped through the area, doubling back as the rider appeared to avoid patrols on the ground, unaware he was being watched from the sky.
About 40 minutes later, the bike was followed to Daniels Ave at Globe Derby Park, where the rider abandoned the bike and attempted to hide between two sheds.
PolAIr officers relayed the information to patrols, who located the man shortly after.
The 33-year-old Elizabeth Downs man was charged with driving while disqualified and displaying incorrect number plates.
He was bailed to appear in the Elizabeth Magistrates Court on September 22.
His bike was impounded for 28 days, and police will examine PolAir footage to determine other offences that may have been committed.
Tuesday, August 17
WOMAN ARRESTED FOR QUARANTINE BREACH
Police have arrested a woman at Aldinga Beach for breaching quarantine restrictions – and a man for breaching bail.
Both underwent rapid Covid-19 testing, which returned negative results.
Acting on information, police attended a holiday park on Cox Road around 11.30am on Tuesday August 17, to conduct a search for a woman who had left her nominated quarantine address in the southern suburbs.
As police approached the cabin, a man came out and ran off but was arrested after a short foot chase. The woman was found inside.
A 37-year-old woman from Queensland has been charged with failing to comply with a direction under the Emergency Management Act, and a 40-year-old man from Smithfield Plains has been charged with breach of bail.
They have been refused bail and will appear in the Adelaide Magistrates Court on Wednesday.

PORT LINCOLN MAN WANTED
Police are hunting a man wanted over an alleged domestic assault at Port Lincoln.
Ronald Dorizzie, 38, is described as being of Aboriginal appearance, 185cm tall, slim build, with black hair and brown eyes.
Police are appealing for Dorizzie to turn himself in to the local police station.
They are also asking members of the public who sight him to not approach him, but report it to police.
Anyone with information should call the police assistance line on 131 444.
MAN CHARGED AFTER DOMESTIC ASSAULT
A man has been arrested after a domestic incident east of the city.
Just before 4pm Monday, police were called to a house on St Bernards Road at Rostrevor following reports a man assaulted a woman known to him at a neighbouring property. The woman was not injured.
Officers negotiated with the man for several hours, before he was eventually taken into custody by STAR Group officers.
The man – a 43-year-old from Victor Harbor – has been charged with aggravated assault and issued with a police interim intervention order.
He was bailed to appear in the Adelaide Magistrates Court in October.
St Bernards Road was closed for several hours but has since reopened to all traffic.
ARSON AT SMITHFIELD PLAINS
Two people were caught fleeing a barber shop after it was torched at Smithfield Plains.
Fire crews were alerted to smoke coming from the Curtis Rd business about 7.40am Tuesday.
After examining CCTV footage, it was discovered that the fire was deliberately lit about 2am, before two suspects left the scene in a blue Subaru WRX sedan.
Police believe accelerant was used to start the blaze.
Anyone with information, or who say suspicious activity in the area, should call Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
BIKES STOLEN IN BREAK-IN
Two e-bikes with a combined value of nearly $25,000 have been stolen during a break-in at a bike shop in the southern suburbs.
Just before 4am Tuesday, police were called to a shop on Brighton Road at Hove after an alarm was activated.
On arrival, officers noticed the front glass door had been smashed. They set-up cordons and searched the area with the assistance of the Dog Operations Unit, but they were not able to find the offenders.
Police have reviewed CCTV footage, which shows two men entering the store through the smashed door.
They then left with two electric bikes – a black Specialised Turbo LEVO Expert e-bike, which is worth more than $16,000, and a black Specialised Epic Hardtail e-bike with missing pedals, which is valued at about $8000.
The pair was last seen walking the bikes north on Brighton Road.
Anyone with information should contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
Monday, August 16
THIEVES TAKE THOUSANDS IN CASH, ELECTRONICS
Vision of an aggravated serious criminal trespass and theft that occurred earlier this year has been released to the public.
At 10.35pm on April 11, two men entered the offices of a business on Burma Road at Pooraka.
They stole electronic items valued at about $5000, as well as about $3000 in cash.
Police investigating the incident on Monday released security camera vision.
They are appealing for anyone who has information that may assist the investigation to contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
Police have released vision of an aggravated serious criminal trespass and theft that occurred in April in Pooraka.
SECOND ARREST AFTER SEXUAL ASSAULT
Two men have been arrested following an alleged sexual assault which occurred last week.
Police did not disclose where the assault occurred.
On Friday Detectives arrested a 21-year-old man from the northern suburbs and charged him with rape and on Monday a 27-year-old man from the western suburbs was arrested and also and charged him with rape.
Both men were bailed to attend the Port Adelaide Magistrates Court in September.
SUSPICIOUS BEHAVIOUR AT MOUNT GAMBIER
An investigation is underway into an incident involving a child at Mount Gambier earlier this month.
About 2pm on Friday, August 6, a girl was on a school oval when an unknown man spoke to her from the footpath of Mulga Street.
He suggested she leave the school with him, but the student declined and returned to her classroom.
The man continued walking north on Mulga Street. The girl was not injured and no threats were made to harm her.
“The occurrence is being treated as an isolated incident,” SA Police said on Monday.
Since the incident, police have undertaken over and plainclothes patrols in the area, however, no further incidents or sightings have been reported.
The man was described as being aged in his thirties and was wearing a surgical face mask but had a brown beard and moustache.
He was wearing a black hooded jumper, black tracksuit pants and black shoes with “distinctive rips at the toes with grey socks”.
Anyone who witnessed the incident or has any information that may assist in identifying the man should contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
ASSAULT AT TRAIN STATION
A man has been reported for an assault at a southern suburbs train station on Friday.
About 6pm, emergency services were called to the Seaford train station after reports of the assault.
On arrival, police found a 33-year-old man with minor injuries. He was taken to the Noarlunga Hospital for treatment.
Following investigations, police on Sunday reported a 23-year-old man for assault.
He has also been issued with a three-month transit barring order.
RESTAURANT BREAK-IN AT MILE END
A man and a woman have been arrested after cash was stolen from a restaurant at Mile End.
Just after 6.30pm Sunday, police were called to a restaurant on Henley Beach Road after a woman stole a container of cash from the counter.
She was last seen getting into a Hyundai sedan, which was parked nearby. A man was behind the wheel when the pair escaped.
Investigations led police to a nearby home, where they were arrested without incident.
A 27-year-old Mile End woman and a 40-year-old Sturt man have been charged with theft and bailed to appear in the Adelaide Magistrates Court on October 11 and 12.
MAN ARRESTED OVER STABBING
A man has been arrested after an assault at a Henley Beach home on Sunday night.
Just after 9pm, police and paramedics were called to a house on East Terrace following reports a man had stabbed another man.
The pair were known to each other, police said.
The victim, from Henley Beach, was taken to the Royal Adelaide Hospital for treatment of a minor stab wound to the abdomen.
A 38-year-old man, also from Henley Beach, has been charged with aggravated assault causing harm.
He has been refused police bail and will appear in the Port Adelaide Magistrates Court on Monday.
SUSPICIOUS CAR FIRE AT PORT ADELAIDE
Investigations are underway following a suspicious car fire at Port Adelaide early Monday morning.
About 3.50am, police and MFS were called to Endeavour Drive following reports of the fire.
Firefighters extinguished the fire but the Mazda utility was completely gutted, police said.
Checks revealed it had been stolen overnight from Lockleys, and a number of tools had been removed.
The area was searched but police could not locate a suspect.
Anyone with information should contact Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
Sunday, August 15
VIOLENCE ON SOUTHERN SUBURBS TRAIN
Shocking footage has emerged after a man was assaulted in a violent altercation on a southern suburbs train.
Police are on the hunt for a man after a violent attack on a southern suburbs train on Friday night.
The incident was reported to police on Friday night, after a victim was assaulted by another man about 6pm.
The video shows a man in an orange high-vis vest approach another man, wearing a black T-shirt and jeans.
The man wearing the black T-shirt, then told the first man to “calm down”, before a third man swung a punch, causing the victim to fall to the ground.
A Christie Downs man, 33, was taken to the Noarlunga Hospital for treatment of minor injuries.
Investigations are continuing and no arrests have been made.
Police urge anyone with information to call Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
DRINK DRIVER AT SEATON
A driver has lost his licence after blowing nearly seven times over the limit at Seaton.
Police stopped an orange Magna sedan on Trimmer Parade about 10pm Friday and breath tested the driver.
He allegedly returned a reading of 0.349, nearly seven times over the legal limit of 0.05.
The Queenstown man, 38, was arrested and charged with drink driving.
He was bailed to appear in the Port Adelaide Magistrates Court at a later date.
The driver’s car was impounded, and he lost his licence for a year.
MAN WANTED OVER BREAK-INS
Police have released images of a suspect wanted over two recent break-ins at Plympton.
A man allegedly broke into a restaurant and cafe at a shopping centre on Anzac Highway, about 1.30am Friday.
The suspect, wearing in a dark coloured Michael Jordan hoodie, dark pants, and white running shoes, was captured on CCTV running south from the rear of the premises, towards Elizabeth St.
Police have released CCTV images of the suspect, and ask anyone with information to call Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
SUSPICIOUS HOUSE FIRE
A home has been destroyed in a suspicious house fire at Elizabeth Downs.
The alarm was raised just before 4.30am Sunday, after reports a home on Nutt St was on fire.
No one was home at the time of the fire.
Crime scene investigators are attending the scene to determine the cause of the blaze.
Anyone with information should call Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
BREAK-IN AT GEPPS CROSS
Suspects are on the run after an early-morning break-in at Rebel Sport Gepps Cross.
Police were called to the Main North Rd Gepps X Home HQ about 5am after reports of the break-in.
The front door was smashed and clothing was stolen. A dark-coloured car was seen leaving the scene.
The area was searched but no suspects were located.
Investigations are continuing, anyone with information should call Crime Stoppers on 1800 333 000.
Word count: 3530
