“WE have to hurry or there will be no seats.” Our guide says it just is how it is.
It is the night of the Storm-Cowboys game on September 13 and Theo Thomas, a Kundiawa local and friend of PNG Post-Courier reporter Patrick “Big Pat” Levo and colleague Rita Peki, has secured us the hottest tickets in town.
The Sunday Herald Sun has partnered with the Post-Courier, the “Heartbeat of PNG”, to see how fanatics in the rugby league-mad highlands support Melbourne Storm’s rising star and “superhero” Justin Olam.
You have to be quick to get a seat at Peter Nime’s “video house”, one of about 35 in Kundiawa, a small town, and birthplace of Olam, on the Wara Simbu (Chimbu River) in the shadows of Mt Wilhelm.
THE “JO EFFECT” THEO is not wrong. It’s standing room only when we arrive at Nime’s video house in the heart of Kundiawa.
As cameraman Steve Umaru pans the jam-packed room, locals meet our lens with a smile and four fingers raised.
“If someone in ‘4 konaoi town’ (Kundiawa) shows you four fingers, don’t worry, be happy,” Big Pat says.
“That’s the new normal in Kundiawa, the effect of No.4 on the back of JO!” As kick-off beckons the “Olam, Olam, Olam” chants escalate towards a roof-raising crescendo. The catchcry “Waelo Pangra Wah” — Pidgin for “Let’s Get Wild” — is also common in these parts.
It really is standing room only as the adrenaline-charged crowd is glued to one small television perched on a ledge up against an exposed timber wall.
Despite not being able to extract from Nime the price of admission, Big Pat has since learned plans are afoot for a new video house to cater for a growing demand.
“JO fans are willing to pay anything to see him put on a shot, run the ball, and they smash Nime’s wall when he scores,” Big Pat says.
“It’s 80 minutes of adrenaline-pumped war-chanting all across town. In every available video house, JO fever reaches astronomical pitch.” There’s no try for Olam on this night but some big hits — including a bone-jarring shot on Cowboy Justin O’Neill — have the crowd in a frenzy.
The next day, policeman Sgt Wellis revealed a welcome by-product of the “JO effect”.
“It’s like every young man in Simbu wants to emulate their hero JO,” crime fighter Wellis says.
“They’ve turned away from bad things and are now into footy. Everyone wants the No.4 jersey.” – Patrick Levo (Big Pat) and Rita Peki, of the PNG Post-Courier
SLOW CARS, FAST TALK TRAFFIC was not something Olam took any notice of until he arrived in Melbourne in 2017.
For starters in Lae, the second-largest city in PNG with a population of about 100,000, where Olam studied applied physics and played semi-professionally, time and distance travelled married up.
“Five kilometres is 10 minutes (in PNG), constant you know, that’s it,” Olam said.
“Here you need to see what time of the day it is and if it is busy it takes longer normal.
“I did a pretty good job with that back then because I didn’t have a car, so I was relying on public transport and Melbourne is so good with the transport, it helped me a little bit.” Living with a host family in Ascot Vale gave Olam a leg-up on navigating Melbourne, but cold mornings and packed trains prompted the keen road-tripper to shell out for a set of wheels.
“I like to sleep in,” he confided. “I felt like it was easier to get a car and plus, I like to go for adventures and road trips to keep my mind away from footy to refresh.” Olam knew the language, but the accent, like the traffic, took some getting used to.
We speak fast here, some quicker than others, mixing in slang terms with the Queen’s English. And then there is Cameron Munster — the Usain Bolt of linguistics.
“He skips words, aye,” Olam said. “You can’t keep up.” As Olam became comfortable in Melbourne and its surrounds, his confidence and independence grew.
Having grown up on traditional chicken or pork dishes, cooked in coconut cream with sweet potato, corn, beans and vegetables, the human wrecking ball set out to explore culinary Melbourne.
“I was eating all kinds. I’d go Indian, I’d go Asian, I’d go Middle Eastern, I’d go whatever. I love to eat new food and try new things so it was good for me because I had a good time doing that,” Olam said.
“I would go out and go to good restaurants and try food that I have never had before to see what it’s like. That was a bit of adventure for me, which I enjoyed.” – Gilbert Gardiner
ISLAND BOYS BIG city life is possible only because of the bond between “island boys”. It is a connection forged on similar values and upbringing, and helps to combat culture shock.
A big reason Olam has managed to stave off the pull of home, aside from an innate determination to make the most of his NRL journey, has been Storm’s Fijian prop, Tui Kamikamica.
“We have a lot of things in common,” Olam said.
“The food we eat, listen to the same kind of music and pretty much he helped me not feeling home sick or feeling like I’m left alone here. It’s like we’re on the same page and I think it’s a big part of me staying in Melbourne, helped me adapt to the new culture and environment.” The inseparable brothers first crossed paths in 2016 in the Test arena and clicked the next year when they reported at Storm on the first day of pre-season.
They spent the best part of two seasons shuttling between Melbourne and its Queensland Cup feeder side Sunshine Coast until they broke into the top squad properly last year.
“The good part of it is me and him are both playing first grade at the moment,” Olam said. “To be successful together is what makes it even sweeter, I guess.” For Kamikamica, seeing Olam take the first tentative steps in Melbourne was like staring into a mirror, having lived the “shock” himself as an 18-year-old in Sydney.
“I knew how he felt when he first got to Melbourne,” Kamikamica said. “I put myself there to help him if he ever felt homesick … was pretty hard for me when I came here.
“One of the things that makes us stronger, I’ve been in his shoes when I first got here, so giving him advice to keep our focus on what is important and that is footy and family.” – GG
AT THE CROSSROADS SATISFACTION, not failure, motivated Olam.
After three lacklustre performances in 2018, he was resigned to being cut. One way or another, Olam would go out on his terms.
“I had three opportunities to prove myself. I didn’t play well and felt like my opportunity was gone,” he said.
“I didn’t think they were going to play me again. After that my mindset was to pretty much work as hard as I could and put myself in the best position so I don’t have to regret it.
“I didn’t want to leave Storm with regrets. I wanted to do everything I could to be in the best position and if I didn’t get picked, that’s it, I’d be satisfied.” The turning point, while not obvious then, came in June 2019 when Storm medical staff urged Olam to withdraw from an upcoming PNG international due to a hamstring niggle.
It was a devastating blow for the proud Kumul, but ultimately the decision defined his future.
“I didn’t like it because I missed the opportunity to represent my country,” he said. “But if I did play I would’ve hurt my hamstring and I wouldn’t get that chance (to play NRL again). I listened to them, which helped me.” Olam was down the Storm pecking order at the start of the year but untimely injuries thrust the developing outside back into the spotlight, and a Round 15 win against the Roosters at Adelaide Oval.
“Marion Seve hurt his shoulder and Craig (Bellamy) came up to me before captain’s run and said, ‘You’re going to play’,” Olam said. “I was like, ‘Oh’. I didn’t even prepare myself.
“I had nothing to lose. They gave me three chances (in 2018) and I couldn’t show them what I had, so that was my last chance. I was going to go out there and be aggressive.
“I didn’t expect to play the next week as well, I thought it was going to be a one-off.” Olam has not looked like relinquishing the starting centre position ever since. – GG
‘BUILT LIKE CONCRETE’ THE more homework Melbourne Storm did on Olam, the stronger the recruitment case became.
With natural speed and no bad habits, due to his limited exposure to organised rugby league, the stocky PNG Hunter had the physical traits and acumen to make it.
Former PNG Rugby League chief Bob Cutmore put Olam on Melbourne’s radar in 2016 when he invited Storm recruitment guru Paul Bunn to scout the “rugged” outside back.
“Everything he’s done it’s come from his own hard work and learning the game,” Cutmore said.
“He had a lot of the things you look for in a natural rugby league player but he had no finesse because he didn’t understand the game. If you said to him, ‘I want you to run through that wall’, he’d say, ‘OK, I’ll run through that wall’.
“New Guineans aren’t big, but they’re physically hard, they’re not worried about running into you at full pelt … they’re built like concrete.” Olam played semi-pro in PNG before he signed with Hunters for the 2016 Queensland Cup season.
The regular matches in Queensland allowed Storm to track him for about 12 months before Bunn booked an interview with Bellamy, Frank Ponissi and Dave Donaghy.
“We did a stack of homework,” Bunn said.
“Through people connected with the Hunters we knew his character, his determination and willingness or want to achieve … all that just kept adding up and adding up.” Olam took a base contract and pledged to work hard.
“They got to be able to train to get there,” Bunn said.
“No good bringing a lazy boy to our place, they won’t last five minutes. We knew he wasn’t lazy.” – GG
PNG PATHWAY OLAM insists there are “heaps of players” better than him in PNG. Yet the 26-year-old is one of only three PNG-born Kumuls at NRL clubs, including Xavier Coates (Broncos) and Nene Macdonald (Sharks).
The reason? Work ethic usually, with traces of homesickness, but mostly a lack of drive.
“Hard work always beats talent,” Olam said.
“I’ve experienced it, doesn’t matter how talented, big or fast someone is, if you work hard you will get what you want.
“My advice (to PNG youth) would be work hard, be patient, be disciplined and trust the process.” Olam hopes to play a part in that process as a role model and mentor for Generation Next.
It is a pedestal island boys know well, a mental “burden” of sorts which comes with playing not only for yourself and your club, but for family, friends, countries, villages, parents’ villages and so on.
“Definitely, I feel like I have a bigger burden on me,” Olam said. “Not just Storm but for my people, the kids in PNG.
“I want to play well and hopefully give the opportunity to other young kids to do the same.” Cutmore said Olam’s commitment to “really learn the game” at Storm could motivate an entire generation.
The PNG way is to run hard and tackle hard, trusting instinct over structure. But Olam, at the urging of mentors in PNG and Australia, has embraced the systematic Storm way.
“Justin will be the next icon in New Guinea,” Cutmore said. “He could be a real light for young kids to come through. The new Marcus Bai.
“Bai had a cult following in Melbourne and Justin is starting to get that too. “You’ve got eight million people in PNG that love the game … he could do so much good for the game.” – GG
KUNDIAWA Country: Papua New Guinea Province: Kundiawa is capital of Simbu Province Population: 11,500 Elevation: 1524m above sea level
VIDEO SPECIAL SEE WHAT JUSTIN OLAM MEANS TO KUNDIAWA heraldsun.com.au
CREDIT: GILBERT GARDINER; PATRICK LEVO; RITA PEKI; SABRINA GALATAU; SIMON KESLEP
Word count: 2082
