CELEBRATING its 40th birthday this morning, the Adelaide Marathon and its 2500 participants will create a party atmosphere when the starter’s gun fires at 7am.
But Angela Benny and Michael Nitschke will be all business, with genuine claims to be first across the Adelaide Oval finishing line around three hours later.
Benny, quite remarkably, is using the marathon as preparation for a half-ironman triathlon race in Cairns in a fortnight, which her partner and fellow triathlete Brett describes as the most ridiculous thing he’s ever heard.
“I’ve been training hard for the last six months for both events,” Benny said. “(Today) will be a setback for the half-ironman.
“This marathon is to prove I’ve become a better runner.
“There is a forecast of 10mm of rain. Fortunately I’ve done a lot of running in the rain so it should be OK, but it will make it interesting to see how it turns out because anything could happen.” Nitschke is among SA’s top local hopes to win the men’s event.
TOP OF HIS CLASS ADELAIDE’S Joel Durnford has lit up college golf in the US after raking out the Division One National Championship in Texas this week.
Durnford led Iowa Western to a runner-up finish in the teams event, the school’s best ever result.
Durnford, who plays at Kooyonga when home, shot all four rounds under par to close at 15-under for a stress-free 6-shot victory.
WHISTLING SINCE ‘74 NEXT Saturday Barry Lewis will umpire his 1000th Adelaide Footy League game. And that’s not the half of it - he has already officiated in more than 2000 matches across 44 seasons for a variety of junior and senior leagues.
Lewis, a superintendent in the SA Police Force, took up the caper by accident while secretary of the Port Adelaide Police Social Club, after the umpire didn’t turn up for a game with Darlington Police in 1974. Lewis filled in and has barely missed a week since.
MODS MAKES DIFFERENCE LEITH Forrest reckons Modra Magic has struck again.
The FiveAA Sunday Sports Show host joined Crows legend Tony Modra and The Advertiser columnist Chris McDermott at Mt Burr in the Mid South-East Football League for the Mozzies’ clash with Hatherleigh in the grand final rematch ahead of a club fundraiser.
Mt Burr was in all sorts of trouble at three-quarter time and kicking into a stiff final- term breeze. But Mods joined the Mozzies’ huddle, which inspired the team to a stirring 10-point win.
SKIN IN THE GAME RESIDENTS of the Mallee region have another reason to head to the footy on Saturday, with the third Mallee Melanoma Awareness clash.
Karoonda will host Border Downs Tintinara, with the game organised by Glenda Thomson in honour of her son Aaron, who lost his battle with melanoma in 2011.
Complimentary skin checks will be available by melanographers from Molecheck Australia during the afternoon.
LEAGUE OF THEIR OWN AFTER years of some serious pastings in the Southern Football League, O’Sullivans Beach Lonsdale and Marion are finally sitting pretty.
The two clubs joined division 7 of the Adelaide Footy League this year and headed into yesterday’s round eight holding the top two spots on the premiership table.
Both clubs won just one game in the SFL in 2017, with the Lions’ percentage sitting at 9 and Marion 12.
SEND AN ANGEL IN a coup for the Adelaide Angels Baseball Club, four of the club’s junior boys will represent South Australia in the Adelaide Rays Charter Team, which will be competing at the Little League Championships held in Lismore, NSW, from June 6-12.
Ben Ganley (11 years old), pitcher and infielder; Lachlan Pace (12), pitcher and infielder; Lachlan Anderson (12), pitcher and outfielder; and Brady Smith (12), catcher and outfielder.
It’s the first time the Angels has fielded so many players in the team.
CLUB SPIRIT ADELAIDE City has won the prestigious Rebel Sport Club of the Year at the City of Adelaide Sports Awards on Thursday night.
NPL SA club City was honoured for its success as well as community programs for women and homeless residents around the city’s south parklands.
Wild Imagination took out Event/Program of the Year, while the volunteers of Torrens Parkrun were honoured for their lifelong commitment to community well-being. Julie Hargreaves of Adelaide Harriers was named Volunteer of the Year.
ALWAYS ON THE BALL IT’S rare a police report becomes a potential netball recruiting drive, but ABC Radio Breakfast host Ali Clarke’s 6:45am Chat with Police Media’s Peta Scholz seemed destined to be such on Thursday.
At the close of the police rounds info, Clarke, a former Netball SA board member and passionate Thunderbirds supporter, enquired as to whether Senior Constable Scholz was the same Peta Scholz who played for the T-Birds and Australia a decade ago. It was.
“Are you still playing?” Clarke asked, perhaps considering encouraging her to assist her former club, which is currently in a hapless state.
“No, I’ve had the last year off,” Scholz said. “The body’s getting a bit old.” Oh well. You can’t blame Clarke for trying.
DOG FINALLY HAS HIS DAY IT’S been 881 days between drinks, and for the connections of greyhound Oldmate Ben it was worth every minute of the wait.
One of the most unsuccessful greyhounds in history, Oldmate Ben saluted by a nose for just the second victory of his career at Angle Park on Wednesday after defying $71 odds to defeat all other starters in the Grade 6 event.
His last race win came in 2015 in a maiden field in Dubbo, NSW. He moved to Adelaide early last year to be trained by Benjamin Lowick, but had raced unsuccessfully 53 times before Wednesday.
His record now is 75 starts for two wins and 19 placings.
IT’S ANYONE’S GAME THE beauty of community footy will be on display from 9am at Athelstone this morning, when the Raggies host Mawson Lakes in the Under-7s. Fronting for Athelstone is Harry Waechter, who has cerebral palsy and can’t walk. In the Mawson Lakes team is Josh Weller, who lives with cystic fibrosis and hydrocephalus.
The two clubs have agreed to let the boys play with their mates. Harry will use an Upsee, an upright mobility device designed to allow children with movement delays to stand and move with the help of an adult.
Josh will play with a special helmet that protects a shunt in his head which allows the drainage of cerebrospinal fluid.
“We want this game to highlight how the two clubs have welcomed these kids with disabilities and medical conditions and demonstrated how a ‘nothing’s too hard’ attitude means that these children can play footy and be part of the team,” Harry’s father Ben said.
SHE’S A GOOD SPORT You could be forgiven for thinking there are three 14-year-old girls named Keeley Kustermann.
Goodwood Saints footballer Keeley was this week named in the state U15 team. But she’s also played state netball and won two silver medals at state athletics events.
Twitter: @benhook1 Facebook: BenHook-SundayMailEmail: hook_shots@yahoo.com.au
CREDIT: BEN HOOK
Word count: 1172
