FROM A CULTURE SHOCK TO A CULT FOLLOWING, STORM STAR OLAM IS LIVING OUT HIS RUGBY LEAGUE FAIRYTALE
‘WE have to hurry or there will be no seats.” Our guide says it is how it is.
It’s the night of the Storm-Cowboys Round 18 clash and Theo ­Thomas, a Kundiawa local and friend of PNG Post-Courier reporter Patrick “Big Pat” Levo and Rita Peki, has got us the hottest tickets in town.
The Courier-Mail has partnered with the Post-Courier — the “Heartbeat of PNG” — to see how fanatics in the rugby league-mad PNG highlands support Melbourne Storm’s rising star and “superhero” Justin Olam.
SMILES AND FOUR FINGERS IT is standing room only at Peter Nime’s “video house”, one of 30-40 homes with a TV in Kundiawa, a small town and the birthplace of Olam, on the Wara Simbu (Chimbu River) in the shadows of Mount Wilhelm.
As cameraman Steve Umaru pans the jam-packed room glued to one small television perched on a ledge up against an exposed timber wall, locals meet our lens with a smile and four fingers raised.
“If someone in ‘4 Kona Town’ (Kundiawa) shows you four fingers, don’t worry, be happy,” Big Pat says. “That’s the new normal in Kundiawa, the effect of No.4 on the back of JO!” As kick-off beckons, the “Olam, Olam, Olam” chants escalate. The catchcry “Waelo pangra wah” — pidgin for “Let’s get wild” — also gets a fair hearing.
“JO fans are willing to pay anything to see him put on a shot, run the ball and smash Nime’s wall when he scores,” Big Pat says.
There’s no try for Olam on this night but some big hits — including a bone-jarring shot on Cowboy Justin O’Neill — keep the crowd “four fingers happy”.
The next day, a policeman reveals a welcome by-product of the “JO effect”. “It’s like every young man in Simbu wants to emulate their hero JO,” he tells Big Pat. “They’ve turned away from bad things and are now into footy.
“Everyone wants the No.4 jersey.” Former PNG Kumul Ezekiel Ben, president of the neighbouring Minj Rugby League, recalls Olam was a ­regular at his home ground. He proudly points to the corner where JO scored his first try for his local team Suwai Storm in the Ipatas Cup some years back.
MOVING TO AUSTRALIA TRAFFIC was not something Olam took any notice of until he arrived in Melbourne in 2017.
For starters in Lae, the second-largest city in PNG with a population of about 100,000, where Olam studied applied physics and played semi-professionally, time and distance travelled married up.
“Five kilometres is 10 minutes (in PNG) — constant you know,” he says. “Here you need to see what time of the day it is and if it is busy it takes longer.” While living with a host family in Melbourne, he bought a car. “I like to sleep in,” Olam admits. “I felt like it was easier to get a car and, plus, I like to go for adventures and road trips to keep my mind away from footy to refresh.” Olam knew the language, but the accent took some getting used to. We speak fast here, some quicker than others — including ­Cameron Munster, the Usain Bolt of linguistics.
“He skips words,” Olam laughs. “You can’t keep up.”
ISLAND BOYS BIG-city life is only possible because of the bond between “island boys”, forged with similar values. It helps combat culture shock. Olam’s friendship with Storm’s Fijian prop Tui Kamikamica has staved off homesickness.
“We have a lot of things in common,” Olam says. “The food we eat, listen to the same kind of music and pretty much he helped me not feeling homesick.” The “brothers” first crossed paths in 2016 in the Test arena and clicked the next year as they reported at Storm on the first day of pre-season. They spent the best part of two seasons shuttling between Melbourne and its Queensland Cup feeder side Sunshine Coast until they broke into the top squad in 2019.
“The good part of it is me and him are both playing first grade,” Olam says. “To be successful together is what makes it even sweeter.” For Kamikamica, seeing Olam take the first tentative steps in Melbourne was like staring into a mirror, having lived the “shock” himself as an 18-year-old in Sydney.
“One of the things that makes us stronger, I’ve been in his shoes,” Kamikamica says. “So giving him advice to keep our focus on what is important and that is footy and family.”
AT THE CROSSROADS SATISFACTION, not failure, motivates Olam. After three lacklustre performances in 2018, he was resigned to being cut by the Storm.
“I had three opportunities to prove myself … I didn’t play well and felt like my opportunity was gone,” he says.
“I didn’t think they were going to play me again. After that, my mindset was to work as hard as I could. I didn’t want to leave Storm with regrets, I wanted to do everything I could to be in the best position and if I didn’t get picked that’s it, I’d be satisfied.” The turning point came in June 2019 when Storm medical staff urged Olam to withdraw from an upcoming PNG international due to a hamstring niggle. “If I did play I would’ve hurt my hamstring and I wouldn’t get that chance (play NRL again),” he says. “I listened to them, which helped me.” Olam was down the Storm pecking order at the start of this year but injuries thrust the developing outside back into the round 15 win over the Roosters at Adelaide Oval.
“Marion Seve hurt his shoulder and (coach) Craig (Bellamy) came up to me before captain’s run and said, ‘you’re going to play’,” Olam recalls.
“I had nothing to lose, they gave me three chances (in 2018) and I couldn’t show them what I had so that was my last chance. I was going to go out and be aggressive.” He has not looked like relinquishing the starting centre position since.
EYE OF THE TIGERS IN a humble beginning, Olam was spotted by the Lae Snax Tigers’ talent scouts playing for Unitech Spartans in Lae, PNG’s northern city.
Impressed by his speed, Tigers team manager and coach Tim ­Rodgers gave Olam a chance in the Digicel Cup, the PNG National Rugby League elite competition.
“The first thing I noticed was Justin was a very well-disciplined person with a good attitude on and off the field,” Rodgers says. “Teaching players new skills comes natural to us Papua New Guineans, however, credit to ­Justin and his family, he was a very well-disciplined person.” Olam was able to juggle study and sport with the support of the Tigers, who prioritised the importance of players having a life after football.
He would do extra sessions with teammates at school and sometimes when the Tigers played away Olam would leave before the rest of the team to get to class in the morning.
“It’s not like whether you make it or you don’t make it you’re not in the team,” Rodgers says. “We trust him to do the right thing and he always did.”
HUNTER THE HUNTED FORMER PNG Rugby League chief executive Bob Cutmore put Olam on Melbourne’s radar in 2016 when he invited Storm recruitment guru Paul Bunn to scout the “rugged” back.
“Everything he’s done it’s come from his own hard work and learned the game,” Cutmore says of Olam. “He had a lot of the things you look for in a natural rugby league player but he had no finesse because he didn’t understand the game.
“If you said to him I want you to run through that wall, he’d say, ‘OK I’ll run through that wall’.
“New Guineans aren’t big, but they’re physically hard, they’re not worried about running into you at full pelt … they’re built like concrete.” Olam only played semi-pro in PNG before he signed with the PNG Hunters for the 2016 Queensland Cup season.
The regular matches in Queensland allowed the Storm to track Olam for about 12 months before Bunn booked an interview with Bellamy, Frank Ponissi and Dave Donaghy.
“We did a stack of homework,” Bunn says. “Through people connected with the Hunters we knew his character, his determination and willingness or want to achieve.” Olam accepted a base two-year contract and pledged to work hard. “They got to be able to train to get there,” Bunn says. “No good bringing a lazy boy to our place, they won’t last five minutes.”
FROM IDOLS TO TEAMMATES LIKE many budding league fans of the same vintage, Olam would shout “I’m Billy!” as he played with friends, often using plastic Coca-Cola bottles filled with grass as a makeshift football.
“I used to love Darren Lockyer (as a young Broncos fan) and I would go for Queensland,” Olam recalls.
“When Billy (Slater) came and played for Queensland, that’s when he totally stole me.” One could only then imagine what emotions Olam experienced two decades later when the real Slater presented the wide-eyed Kumul with his Storm debut jersey before round nine in 2018.
“I was just a fan and to get the opportunity to train with my idols was a dream come true,” proud Storm player No.187 Olam says.
“Looking back to where I came from, it was nothing like what I thought I’d be able to do. I dared to dream but it was just a fairytale.” The next big moment came in round 17 of 2019 when Olam broke through to score his first NRL try in Cameron Smith’s 400th game.
“I feel like I will look back (one day) and be like, I played with Cameron in his 400th game and I scored my first try,” Olam says.
PNG PATHWAY OLAM is the first to admit there are “heaps of players” better than him in PNG. Yet the 26-year-old is one of only three PNG-born Kumuls at NRL clubs, along with Xavier Coates (Broncos) and Nene Macdonald (Sharks).
The reason? Work ethic usually, with traces of homesickness, but mostly drive. “Hard work always beats talent and it’s true,” Olam says. “I’ve experienced it, doesn’t matter how talented, big or fast someone is, if you work hard you will get what you want.
“My advice (to PNG youth) would be work hard, be patient, be disciplined and trust the process.” Olam hopes to play a part in the “process” as a role model and mentor for the next generation of players.
Cutmore says Olam’s commitment to “really learn the game” at the Storm could motivate an entire generation.
The PNG way is typically run hard, tackle hard, with players reliant on instinct over structure. But Olam, at the urging of mentors in PNG and Australia, has embraced the systematic Storm way.
“Justin will be the next icon in PNG,” Cutmore says. “He could be a real light for young kids to come through — the new Marcus Bai. “Bai had a cult following in Melbourne and Justin is starting to get that, too. You’ve got eight million people in PNG that love the game. He could do so much good for the game.”
CREDIT: WORDS; Gilbert Gardiner; Patrick Levo; Rita Peki; Sabrina Galatau; Simon Keslep
Word count: 1882
