Not waving drowning
WHAT really happened when the latest asylum-seekers allegedly 'threw their children into the sea' when confronted by the Australian Navy's HMAS Adelaide? It has now been revealed - by Navy sources - that the Adelaide fired its guns over the terrified passengers on the fishing boat. Did they then jump for their lives, children and all? Prime Minister John Howard responded to the initial accusation saying, 'Quite frankly, I don't want in this country people who are prepared, if those reports are true, to throw their children overboard.' So why did he not discover if the reports were true? A clue perhaps from ABC radio yesterday morning: On this issue the formerly ubiquitous Ministers for Immigration, Philip Ruddock, and Defence, Peter Reith, were 'unavailable for comment'. In the middle of an election campaign.
Brain teaser
ANOTHER Jack Waterford special. Splendid book prize for the third caller after 9.30am with the correct answer: You are in a small boat in a swimming pool and there is a stone also in the boat and you throw the stone into the water. Does the level of the water in the pool go up, down, or stay the same?
We're back
THE INVINCIBLES are coming to town. The Lord's Taverners the cricketing charity group have secured at least four of the champions from the 1948 Ashes tour for a dinner at Manuka Oval in December. Bill Brown, Neil Harvey, Sam Loxton and Arthur Morris will attend the dinner on the eve of the Prime Minister's XI December 6 match against New Zealand. Guest speaker is Ian Healy and the Invincibles will answer questions from the floor. The Bradman Pavilion is limited to only 220 guests; so it's going to be the hottest ticket in town. Ph 6273 3728.
WOT's on and who's there?
WITH the War on Terror breaking out in Afghanistan, Australia's military chiefs decided they'd better upgrade security on our defence establishments. However, government policy meant that most guard duties had been outsourced to private firms. And, we're told, they just couldn't meet the demand to double the guards. So all around the country military personnel are doing the second shift. And they don't like it one bit.
Dog's life
SYLVIA ALSTON, of Braddon, was concerned to read in yesterday's CT that some people, desperate for housing, are being forced to seek shelter in dog kennels! 'I refer,' she says, 'to an ad in the classified section on page 18: 'Wanted - dog kennel for pensioner, as new, weatherproof ...' '
Left right out
ASTONISHING response to the Jack Waterford teaser in which we said that if a Martian (who spoke excellent English and knew what humans looked like) telephoned from Mars you could not explain which was your left hand. Among the dissenting suggestions from Justin McGuire, Jack Lonergan, Brad Pillans, Malcolm Miller, Wendy Macklin, Ewen Drummond and Mike O'Shaughnessy: If the Martian knows about the internal anatomy of humans, then the spleen, heart, liver and lungs could all be used to work out which side is left or right. He knows where the Earth is in its orbit and what the seasons are in each hemisphere. I tell him that where I live it is now mid-winter. This tells him that I am in the southern hemisphere. I tell him that I am now looking in the direction of the sun and that it rose on my right side and will set on my left side. There are dextro-rotatory and levo-rotatory molecules, which are identical on Mars, Earth, or anywhere else in the universe. We could tell him to take a look at the Mars probe we sent there a few years ago. If we can describe the letters N and S, we can tell him N is to the left of S in NASA. More to come ...
Easy to undo?
STILL on matters dexterous, Brad Pillans at the ANU notes that men's and women's shirts are effectively left-and right-handed - mens shirts have buttons on the right side, womens on the left. 'This has always puzzled me,' he says. 'Is it to discourage men dressing in women's clothing and vice-versa? Is it to make it easier to undress each other in the dark? Or what? 'I presume there is some historical explanation but I don't know it. Can your readers shed any light?'
Just say no
THE ACT Democrats' Domenic Mico, pictured, is angry at the questionnaire sent by the Australian Christian Lobby to all candidates in the ACT election. The accompanying letter warns, 'Your responses will be distributed to our supporters and ACT Churches in the form of a Voters' Guide.' Questions include: 'Do you believe in the Virgin Birth, Death on the Cross and Resurrection of Jesus Christ? Would you support the inclusion of instruction in religious faith as part of the curriculum in ACT schools? Do you support denying access to IVF for single women?' Mico said, 'It's this sort of activity that is dividing the community. The other candidates should join me in refusing to touch it.'
Star turn
THE Bungendore Defence HQ imbroglio gets more amazing every day. Yesterday we learned that the radio telescope which the HQ would put out of business is an international treasure - it has discovered more pulsars than all other radio telescopes combined. Pulsars are rapidly rotating neutron stars that emit regular and rapid pulses of radiation. They hold the key to some of the mysteries of the universe. When the world's astronomical community hears the great explorer is endangered by an electoral barrel of pork, the decibels of protest are expected to be, well, astronomical.
Long way home
A SYDNEY friend decided to go home to Perth for a holiday; after all, the tourism industry was telling us all to take our hols at home. But with the death of Ansett the cost was $1800! It was cheaper, he discovered, to travel Sydney-London-Perth-Sydney. So he took the long way round - with an overseas airline - but still went home for hols. Alas, not quite what the industry had in mind.
Our bear
THE Robertson family, of Macarthur, caught last week's item about the brown bear spotted at Chisholm and decided to 'fess up. 'It was most likely our Newfoundland dog, Molly, out for a bit of exercise,' they say. 'Molly is due for a haircut in preparation for summer, and at some 60kg is big enough to be mistaken for a bear.'
Big jump
TOURIST operators like Cockington Green might be in trouble but the National Museum of Australia is going from strength to strength. Last weekend its Lost Kingdoms exhibition (on mega-fauna) passed the 42,000 visitors for the previous Gold & Civilisation show. By this weekend it should crack 50,000.
(Endstory) (Story #22195 ).
Word count: 1134
