The challenge for the community is to have a full range of treatment options available for people wanting to beat their addiction, says MICHAEL MOORE.
DRUG use and drug dependency are issues which are guaranteed to create a stir. So too, can the issue of treatment.
Both are set to hit the national agenda today when the Ministerial Council on Drug Strategy meets in Adelaide. One of the key items on the agenda will be the tabling of a report by the National Drug and Alcohol Research Centre in relation to a number of trials of pharmacotherapies for the treatment of drug dependency. Over the last four years, trials in Australia have been testing the use of various pharmaceuticals as alternatives to those already provided.
The ACT trial has specifically looked at the use of naltrexone in the detoxification process. Other trials have examined ways of improving maintenance treatment. Unfortunately, people who use drugs and particularly illicit drugs are often judged morally rather than viewed medically.
It is true that many expensive and disturbing social problems can be traced directly to drug dependency, particularly in relation to crime and lost work productivity. The reality is that drug dependency is not a simple medical condition. It is a chronically relapsing medical condition requiring a range of medical and pharmacological interventions.
Drug dependence produces significant and lasting changes in the brain's chemistry and functioning. Effective medications have been available and accepted for some years for the treatment of nicotine and alcohol dependence, which are both licit drugs. Interestingly, one of the most widely supported treatments for nicotine is nicotine patches.
In medical terms this is an agonist drug one that binds to the opioid receptors in the brain, mimicking the actions of the body's natural chemicals. An agonist provides a substitute for the drug (whether the illicit heroin or the licit nicotine) so that individuals do not experience withdrawal and have opportunities to restore their physical, psychological and social well-being. Agonist treatments for opioid or heroin dependency include methadone and Levo-alpha-acetylmethadol (LAAM) and buprenorphine, which is a partial agonist.
In lay terms we might refer to these as 'replacement' therapies. Methadone maintenance remains the most cost-effective treatment available in Australia. This has been confirmed through national trials of a number of pharmacological treatments, including methadone, buprenorphine, LAAM and naltrexone.
The ACT public clinic, known generally as the 'Methadone Program', is undergoing a transformation in readiness for the new pharmaceuticals as they become available. Buprenorphine will shortly become available through the clinic once it has been listed on the Pharmaceuticals Benefits Scheme. This is a change designed to focus on the needs of people rather than the drug.
Naltrexone is an antagonist treatment that binds to the opioid receptors, blocking the actions of the body's natural chemicals. In recent trials, naltrexone was found to be effective for rapid detoxification under light sedation. There is no evidence that rapid detoxification under anaesthesia (made famous some years ago as the supposed 'wonder treatment' in Israel), provides better outcomes than rapid detoxification under sedation.
THE NATIONAL trials have confirmed that the sedation procedure is the most cost-effective detoxification procedure and should be made available following the development of approved clinical guidelines. Naltrexone is not currently registered for use in rapid detoxification in Australia. There are both ethical and legal implications involved for use of naltrexone in this way.
Naltrexone is registered for maintenance treatment of those who have stopped using heroin. It blocks the craving for, and effects of, heroin. It is also a recognised form of treatment for alcohol dependency.
There is a growing interest in the use of naltrexone to detoxify people and then for them to continue with naltrexone maintenance. Previous published trials indicate that naltrexone is useful for detoxification. For this to happen, the Therapeutic Goods Administration would need to approve the use of naltrexone as a treatment and develop a protocol for its use.
It would seem that the use of agonists (LAAM, buprenorphine and methadone) may be more effective than the use of antagonist treatments (naltrexone). The concerns which other jurisdictions have had with naltrexone related to inadequate post-detoxification support and other side-effects of the drug, such as a possible link with depression. Overseas there are alarming reports of increased use of amphetamines, benzodiazepines and other drugs among people prescribed naltrexone.
There have also been more than 60 deaths among patients in other states who have been on naltrexone maintenance programs. The ACT Community Care Alcohol and Drug Program is putting in place requirements to provide naltrexone as an option within the detoxification program. Naltrexone will be available by the end of the year.
The one message that is coming over loud and clear is that treatment works so long as people are in treatment. That might sound obvious. But in the same way that other chronically relapsing conditions such as diabetes, asthma and hypertension require a maintenance program, so does drug dependency.
We must recognise that not all treatments suit everybody. Drug dependence has been treated as if it were an acute illness. What we've learned is that long-term care strategies of medication and monitoring produce lasting benefits.
Those benefits have a flow-on effect to the whole community. An investment in treatment, therefore, benefits everyone. In the ACT there are about 1500 people dependent on illicit drugs although it is recognised there are others who use illicit drugs but are not dependent.
Australian and overseas experts consider we should be providing treatment places for at least 50 per cent of this number. Currently we have 800 methadone places and 100 rehabilitation beds across youth and adult services. That's 900 treatment places in abstinence-based programs and pharmacotherapies.
If we add to that the number of counselling places through Government and non-Government services, then we have treatment places for about 70 per cent of drug dependent people in the ACT. Adding detoxification places would further increase this. However, the role of detoxification needs to be clarified.
Just as drug dependency is a process which happens over time, so too is drug treatment. It is not an event which takes place at a given time on a given day. It happens over time, and only when the person is ready to accept the challenge.
Our challenge is to be ready and equipped with treatment opportunities to meet that need.
Michael Moore is the ACT Minister for Health, Housing and Community Services.
Word count: 1070
