THE Wollongong Hawks reckon they have the right game plan to account for Adelaide in Sunday's battle at Adelaide Arena.
Wollongong have won three from three to share top spot with title favourites Perth, while the 36ers boosted their record to 2-1 with last week's home victory over Cairns.
Boasting a massive frontline of 216cm Luke Schenscher, 212cm Dan Johnson and 198cm Stephen Weigh, Adelaide are banking on their superior size to win.
But that might be easier said than done.
"Using the interior and playing slower will be their thing, whereas quickness, mobility and spreading them out is a strength of ours," Wollongong captain Oscar Forman said.
"We'll try to drag Schenscher out of the paint with some shooters and then use quickness to beat him, so we need our ball movement to be good and we want to stretch them out and open up the penetration for our guards.
"Wins obviously bring confidence, but the way we're getting our wins is the really encouraging thing. We're moving the ball well and we've been solid on the defensive end, and they're good signs for us.
"Offensively our structure's holding up well. Everyone's buying into it and it's getting us really good open looks."
After starting as $18 outsiders for the championship, Wollongong have firmed as low as $6 in some betting markets.
Confidence is high, but the Hawks have rarely tasted success in Adelaide over the past 30 years and are not getting ahead of themselves.
"It's definitely a game we're going to have to be ready for," Forman said.
"Adelaide dropped one to New Zealand but other than that they've been pretty tough. Against Cairns last week they were aggressive and quick in the open floor and pushed the ball in transition.
"Our defensive transition will have to be good, as will our rebounding.
"We were good last week with our rebounding, but Adelaide have a lot of big guys and everyone crashes the boards, so we'll have to be really strong with that."
Meanwhile, Hawks development squad player Luke Jamieson is raising funds to help pay for a tour of US colleges.
Jamieson, the region's best teenage prospect, will line up in an Australian junior team against various college sides.
A raffle will be held at Berkeley Hotel tomorrow between 6pm and 8pm, and tickets are $2 each.
Prizes include a signed Hawks jersey and a case of wine.
GRAPHIC: NBL ROUND 4
Illustration
Caption: Flying high: Adris Deleon shows what he's good at while his teammates look on during a practice session at the Croom Road Sports Complex. Picture: DAVE TEASE
Word count: 455
