Sleeping in tents or roughing it under the stars is all part of Schoolies Week. But there are more comfortable ways for teens to spend their
end-of-school holiday, writes Travel Editor JESSICA HURT.
FIVE-STAR accommodation at Byron Bay, a luxury cruise complete with a two-storey water slide or a sleeping bag on the beach - the choice is yours. Schoolies Week (dates vary between states but usually in November and December) is one of the biggest events for Year 12 students.
The stress of exams has passed and students are ready to let their hair down and have some fun. Each year, thousands of Australian students head to towns like Victor Harbor and fill caravan parks, rental properties and motels.
However, a growing number are looking for another way to celebrate the end of the year - and money, it seems, is no object. Luke Jamieson, general manager of online accommodation provider schoolies.com, says students will converge on beachside towns around Australia for a three-week period starting on November 19. Among the popular destinations are the Gold Coast, where 30,000 are expected to party. The Sunshine Coast, Noosa, Byron Bay, Airlie Beach, Magnetic Island and Lorne also are popular.
Accommodation can range from about $350 to $800 a week a person.
While this is more expensive than camping at a caravan park, Jamieson says, it is less expensive than a schoolies cruise.
"It looks cheap compared with cruises which cost about $1600 to $2000," he says.
"Cruises are quite popular but they are an enormous amount of money.
"On the Gold Coast, it's all high-rise apartments, while at Byron it is smaller boutique accommodation."
He says Byron is popular with teenagers who do not want the big- city option.
"Sometimes parents are paying so it's their choice," he says.
Among resorts welcoming students is the Lord Byron Resort, which offers modern accommodation for $477 a person for seven nights. The resort features a pool, spa, tennis court, sauna, games room, restaurant and barbecue.
Another drawcard for schoolies is Magnetic Island International Resort.
Resort manager Renelle Askew says thousands of teenagers will flock to the island for some much-needed R&R. "It is a very laid- back environment," she says. "We have film nights, theme nights and there is snorkelling and horse riding on the island."
The resort includes a pool, gym and tennis courts, and a restaurant serving special schoolies dishes. Prices start from $326 a person for seven nights.
Jamieson says that because of the increasing popularity of schoolies festivals, bookings for 2006 are already coming in.
"Demand is always incredibly high, particularly for rooms close to entertainment and the beach," he says.
In South Australia, about 6000 graduation students are expected to head to Victor Harbor from November 25.
While many students will stay in tents and cabins in the town's caravan parks, others are looking at alternatives.
Christy Spier, manager of Encounter Youth, which runs the schoolies event, says motels, hotels and rental properties are also popular.
"Two new hotels have opened this year and while the major caravan parks are booked out, the hotels still have rooms available," she says.
Other schoolies will celebrate the end of the year on a cruise, aboard such ships as the P&O Pacific Sun. This year's P&O cruises are so popular that they have already sold out, with about 3400 students (two cruises with about 1700 passengers each) on board. P&O Cruises vice-president, marketing and planning, Mark Barnes says the school-leaver cruises "always sell out quickly".
"Next year, we are adding a third South Pacific cruise to the `School's Out' schedule to meet the ever-growing demand for sailings each year. That means Pacific Sun will offer three eight-night cruises to New Caledonia in late November and early December, 2006," he says.
The cruises are available only to passengers aged between 16 and 19. Guests under the age of 18 are not permitted to buy alcohol but they can still go to the nightclubs on board during a school-leaver cruise and have fun with their friends.
"Parents can have peace of mind knowing where their children are, while kids can enjoy a floating hotel that provides meals, accommodation and a great way of travelling to three fantastic destinations," Barnes says.
For many, it is also their first overseas holiday. The three, eight-night cruises on the Pacific Sun next year depart from Sydney on Thursday, November 23, Friday, December 1 and Saturday, December 9.
The fares range from $1595 a person, based on a complete quad- share.
Students aboard Pacific Sun's School's Out itineraries get the chance to explore the South Pacific including New Caledonia's capital, Noumea, the secluded island of Lifou and the Isle of Pines.
For more information and to make bookings for Schoolies Week interstate, visit www.schoolies.com, or go to www.schooliesfestival.com.au for details about Schoolies Week in Victor Harbor.
Contact a travel agent for information about P&O Cruises.
Word count: 859
