A FIVE-STAR display against title contenders Adelaide has given the Wollongong Hawks a perfect launching pad for this weekend's season-defining double against Townsville and Sydney.
The Hawks completely overwhelmed the second-placed 36ers yesterday at WIN Entertainment Centre, putting together their most complete performance of the season to win 102-80.
Despite sitting equal last on the ladder with Townsville, Wollongong (7-13) are just three wins outside the top four with eight games remaining.
They host the Crocodiles (7-13) on Friday night before backing up the following night against the Kings (10-9) in Sydney.
If the Hawks can grab two wins, they will soar into top-four contention.
Anything is possible if they play as well as they did against the 36ers.
Wollongong were up 28-19 after one quarter and stretched their lead to 60-40 at half-time.
An Adelaide second-half fightback seemed inevitable but did not materialise. The home team continued to dominate, leading by as many as 28 in the third period.
The Hawks had six players in double figures and the whole team had a whopping 25 assists compared with Adelaide's 10.
Also, Wollongong finished on the right side of the rebound count, 35-32, for just the fourth time in 20 games.
"It's nice to get one up when we've been so close in a number of games, so we should take a lot of confidence out of that," Hawks coach Gordie McLeod said.
"The pleasing thing is the contributions we got across the whole group. [Then] we can really put some teams under pressure and we give ourselves a really good chance of winning. We rebounded very well, we valued the ball.
"The exciting thing about the back end of the season is that a lot of teams are pushing up to the teams that were setting the pace early.
"You really have to accelerate your development over the last two months of the season - that's the real key to making pushes.
"We've got a big week in front of us, but we should certainly take a lot out of that game."
Credit: BASKETBALL TIM KEEBLE
Illustration
Caption: All smiles: Rookies Shane Harris-Tunks (left) and Luke Jamieson got some rare game time for the Hawks. Picture: ANDY ZAKELI Outa my way: Tyson Demos barrels into Adelaide guard Brendan Teys during the Hawks' 22-point drubbing of the second-placed 36ers at the WIN Entertainment Centre yesterday. Picture: ANDY ZAKELI
Word count: 418
