HOW THEY SHAPE UP ADELAIDE 36ERS
Titles: Four
Last season's ladder: Eighth
Players to watch: Mitch Creek, Jason Cadee
CAIRNS TAIPANS
Titles: Nil
Last season's ladder: Sixth
Players to watch: Stephen Weigh, Mitchell Young
MELBOURNE TIGERS
Titles: Four
Last season's ladder: Fifth
Players to watch: Nate Tomlinson, Lucas Walker
NEW ZEALAND BREAKERS
Titles: Three
Last season's ladder: First (Premiers)
Players to watch: Kerron Johnson, Corey Webster
PERTH WILDCATS
Titles: Five
Last season's ladder: Second (grand finalist)
Players to watch: James Ennis, Tom Jervis
SYDNEY KINGS
Titles: Three
Last season's ladder: Fourth
Players to watch: AJ Ogilvy, Brad Hill
TOWNSVILLE CROCODILES
Titles won: Nil
Last season's ladder: Seventh
Players to watch: Steven Markovic, Todd Blanchfield
WOLLONGONG HAWKS
Titles: One
Last season's ladder: Third
Players to watch: Rotnei Clarke, Larry Davidson
At 37 and with six Australian NBL championships tucked under his belt, CJ Bruton would have been within his rights to take it easy in an off-season and work his way into shape for his final lap with the Breakers.
Of course, that was never going to happen. Bruton is too much of a competitor for that. This is the final hurrah for one of the greats the game has seen Down Under, and he was never going to present in anything but pristine condition for his sixth, and final, campaign.
"He's come to us in great shape," said new head coach Dean Vickerman yesterday.
"He's been chippy at practice which has helped me stay on top of my game, and he's brought an intensity. His competitiveness hasn't dwindled at all, and he's one of the most competitive guys every practice and every game."
Bruton smiles when his coach's appraisal of his fitness is mentioned. "I have to be a little better," he says.
The rest is left unsaid. He has to be better because in terms of veteran leadership it's down to him, with support from Mika Vukona, as the club shoots for an historic title four- peat.
Dillon Boucher and Bruton shared the old soldier's role over the last two seasons, but Boucher has now gone, with that third championship to mark his last hurrah. Before that they also had Paul Henare - and he, too, got a title to mark his farewell, back in 2010-11.
If you don't think Bruton is desperate to go out on the same glorious note, then you just don't know this guy. He's a charmer off the court, but on it is a stone-cold assassin.
"This is my last year in New Zealand and obviously I want to win a championship," he says. "That's the reason I stayed, and I've got to lead by example and show I've made every stride for us be to be successful, and play my part again."
No one doubts Bruton will play his part. He's lost a step, and a little snap, but when push comes to shove he's a guy you want with the ball.
This year his role is even more crucial. With Boucher gone and 22-year-old first-year pro Kerron Johnson replacing league MVP Cedric Jackson at point guard, the Breakers have a new identity to forge. His coaches have challenged Bruton to lead the way there.
In fact, change has been a theme this year. As well as four new players (Darnell Lazare, Jeremiah Trueman and Reuben Te Rangi are the others) they've got a new coach and will have to play a new style after the league basically outlawed their trademark physical defence.
"This is one of those moments when there's a lot thrown at you in one year," says Bruton.
"The rule change is a big one. The challenge ahead is a little greater, the league has gotten a little closer, and it's going to be a great season."
But Bruton likes what he sees. In Johnson he can envisage a young Ricky Grace, both in style and ability. For those not familiar with the former Wildcat, that's some compliment.
Wollongong tonight is a tricky first-up hurdle, even with their import dramas, but Bruton reckons that given all the change, it will be a while before any definitive judgments can be made.
What he does know is that it's going to be harder for him to go out in the same blaze of glory as his old mates Henare (now assistant coach) and Boucher (now in corporate sales). Harder, but still achievable.
"Everything about change is about growth, and this club has been growing every year since I got here, and it's going to continue to grow when I leave," he says.
"There are always going to be challenges when you play this game."
The Breakers will raise their third championship banner and retire the No 24 singlet of Boucher before tonight's game.
Vickerman is wary.
"We've got to take some of that in and then let it go really quickly. This group hasn't done anything yet, we've got to start from scratch again and come out with the desperation of a championship team."
NZ Breakers: Kerron Johnson, Daryl Corletto, Reuben Te Rangi, Corey Webster, Tom Abercrombie, Mika Vukona, Darnell Lazare, CJ Bruton, Jeremiah Trueman, 35 Alex Pledger.
Wollongong Hawks: Tyson Demos, Dom Cooks, Luke Jamieson, Oscar Forman, Larry Davidson, Rhys Martin, Shane Harris-Tunks, Rotnei Clarke, Tim Coenraad, David Gruber, Mike Mercer (tbc).
Credit: BASKETBALL
Illustration
Caption: Last hurrah: At 37, CJ Bruton remains as competitive as ever. Picture: GETTY IMAGES
Word count: 899
