SOUTH EAST
OLYMPICS: Naracoorte's own Olympian Jess Trengove left Adelaide yesterday to prepare for the August 14 Olympic Marathon in Rio.
Trengove, who was born in Naracoorte, is competing in her second Olympics and is well prepared for the 42.195 kilometre event.
On the back of a bronze in Glasgow at the 2014 Commonwealth Games and a personal best of 2:27:45 recorded in Melbourne last year, she is hopeful that her preparation and passion will see her put her best foot forward in Brazil.
Trengove has been overwhelmed by the support of the Naracoorte community which includes videos, cards and messages from her old primary school, Naracoorte Primary.
FOOTBALL: Four South East footballers will represent SA Country at Adelaide Oval today when they take on Western Australia Country.
Simon Berkefeld and Matt Wilson from Penola, Brett O'Neil from South Gambier and Heath Caldwell from Bordertown will take to the field while former South Gambier and Penola player Luke Duncan will act as assistant coach.
The game will commence at 1.20pm prior to the Adelaide Crows versus Essendon AFL game.
Former Millicent youngster Mason Redman signed a two year deal that will keep him at the Essendon Football Club until the end of 2019.
The former Millicent Saint is delighted to extend his stay and is feeling confident about his future and the direction the Bombers are flying.
Redman was selected at pick 30 in last season's draft and has played three games so far this season after making his debut against Sydney in round seven.
Redman has flown to Adelaide as an emergency.
South East Football umpire Michael Button ticked off a significant milestone yesterday when he assumed the role of a SANFL goal umpire yesterday.
The former St Martins Lutheran College Student began as an umpire in 2008 at the age of 13 and has umpired in the last six Western Border Football League Grand Finals.
Former Mount Gambier junior Beau Nunan was rewarded for his efforts at the under 15 National AFL Championships in Maroochydore on the Sunshine Coast by being named in the Australian Schoolboys representative side.
Mt Burr senior playing coach Thomas Renzi had a day out last Saturday when Mt Burr took on Nangwarry. Renzi booted 20 of his side's 39 goals in a win that saw the league's top side defeat the bottom side 39.17 (251) to Nangwarry 1.0 (6).
Nangwarry scored their goal in the first quarter and trailed by 58 at quarter time, 113 points at half time and 188 points at three quarter time.
The 245 point margin didn't help Nangwarry who currently sit at the bottom of the MSEFL ladder, winless and prior to Saturday's game, with a percentage of 5.89.
BASKETBALL: The Castec Rural Pioneers have continued to impress as the SEABL season heads towards the final series after a 12 point win at the Icehouse on Friday night to a determined Ballarat Miners.
The Pioneers flew out of the blocks and lead by 8 at the first break before going into the main break leading 48 to 40.
The second half saw the home side continue to impress running out eventual winners 91 to 79.
Tyrone Lee top scored with 24 points, while Luke Jamieson continued to impress with 4 blocks and 4 steals.
SHOOTING: Over 50 shooters took part in the most recent 50 target event at Burrungule Park in Mount Gambier with Jeremy Kent continuing his rich run scoring 49 out of 50 to claim the High Gun.
Ron Rhook and Malcolm Whitehead topped AA grade with Ken Atkin in third while Portland's Phil Begelhole won the A grade from Tim Widdison who finally won a shoot off from Andrew Hoare in third.The next shoot is at Lake Bonney on Sunday, August 21.
Word count: 638
