SOUTH-EAST
BASKETBALL THE Mt Gambier Pioneers have continued their outstanding home form, claiming their fifth South East Australian Basketball League Conference Final in a row on Friday night at the Icehouse, defeating the Nunawading Spectres 79 to 76.
In a game that was described by Spectres coach Dave Biwer as one of the finest SEABL games he has witnessed, the game went right down to the wire with the last play crucial to the home team’s victory.
With both sides packed with shooters the first quarter was an arm wrestle with the home side trailing at the first break by 1 point 14 to 15.
The second quarter saw the home side regain the ascendency and take a six-point lead into the main break with Tom Daly, Daniel Alexander and Luke Jamieson all getting amongst the points.
For the Spectres it was Simon Conn, SEABL Most Valuable Player, and Shane McDonald who stepped up in the third term to claw the lead back to a solitary point going into the final term.
In front of a vocal home crowd and undefeated at the Icehouse all season, the final 10 minutes was always going to be tight.
Tom Daly created the first break with seven minutes to go, laying up for two and extending the lead to five points, before once again the Spectres fought back to level the scores.
With little over five minutes to go the Spectres hit the lead before Luke Jamieson hit a three pointer.
Scores were level once more with two minutes to go until Alexander and Brad Hill made crucial plays to see the Pioneers hold on to claim their fifth consecutive title.
For the Pioneers it was an excellent result that reinforces their reputation as the No.1 franchise in the competition and the side to beat.
Coach Richard Hill praised the significant contribution of Daly, Hill, Erik Burdon and Matt Sutton who have been there for all five titles.
FOOTBALL VANSITTART Park will host the inaugural South East Women’s Football grand final on Sunday with Millicent hoping to topple the undefeated South Gambier outfit at 3pm with the experienced South Gambier’s run and forward pressure expected to be too much for the young Saints.
The action will commence at noon with the consolation finals between the All Stars and North Gambier and West Gambier and East Gambier with full catering available.
In other football news the Mail Medal winner for 2017 will be announced later today at the Millicent Civic and Arts Centre.
In what is expected to be a tight count, all eyes will be on Port MacDonnell big man Will Macdonald as he aims to claim his fifth medal.
SOCCER GAMBIER Centrals’ title defence will be on the line on Sunday when it hosts Blue Lake at the Den.
Centrals go into the finals campaign full of confidence after knocking Apollo Soccer Club off top spot on the ladder last Sunday and handing the 2017 minor premiership to International Soccer Club.
After a breakout 2016 season, head coach Robbie Nagy has struggled to find consistency this season with several of his premiership heroes not returning this time around.
Blue Lake has comfortably made the top four and will want to highlight that it intends to do more than make up the numbers.
If Centrals are going to have any chance of recording back-to-back titles they will need to ensure inspirational keeper Norton Fuller remains fit and take their chances in front of goal.
AROUND THE GROUNDS THE Blue Lake Public Golf Links has been nominated for the PGA Legends Tournament of the Year for the second year running.GLENCOE Football Club senior coach, Zac Cocks, has been reappointed for the 2018 campaign.
Word count: 600
