TAIPANS V HAWKS RUN TO NBL FINALS HAWKS legend Gordie McLeod is wary of the Taipans getting into a running game with Illawarra tonight with their season on the line.
McLeod, a member of the inaugural 1979 Hawks team who has his No.5 singlet retired by the club, will return home today as his current club tries to push their finals hopes.
The Taipans have a perfect 3-0 record against the second-placed Hawks, claiming two Far North victories as well as a drought-breaking win in Illawarra early in the NBL season.
The Snakes (12-12) have played with more pace in recent weeks, scoring 85 points or more in the past three wins, running the ball down the throat of defences instead of trying to soak up shot clocks.
McLeod, who coached the Hawks from 2009-2015, now an assistant in Cairns, is cautious of increasing the tempo too much against his old club.
The Hawks are the second highest scoring club this season, with 2218 points over 25 games, while the Snakes are second last, with 1960 in 24.
"When you get a chance to run and get easy buckets, you need to do that in this league," McLeod said.
"You also need to have a good transition game and solid in the half-court, which you need to do against Illawarra.
"You do not necessarily want to get into a track meet with them and some of the other teams in the league. With them doing what they did to Adelaide 36ers last week on that court, you know what you are going to get.
"Success will come for us as a total group, we need them all playing up to their level to get wins in this league." Fresh import Tony Mitchell, left, is expected to have an increased role tonight after his first settled week in Australia.
"We are trying to accelerate Tony Mitchell into our system and get him up to speed as much as possible," McLeod said.
McLeod earned NBL Coach of the Year honours in 2014 and admits he does get a little bit nostalgic when heading back to Wollongong.
"When you go to your home town like this, it is always a little bit special," McLeod said.
"I have been on my basketball journey for a fair while now and it is nice to get home and see family and friends for five minutes." The Snakes are equal fourth with Perth, who they host on Sunday back in the Far North.
when: Tonight, 6:30pm -- WIN Entertainment Centre Hawks Rotnei Clarke Marvelle Harris Mitch Norton Nick Kay Michael Holyfield AJ Ogilvy Oscar Forman Rhys Martin Tim Coenraad Cody Ellis Luke Jamieson Coach Rob Beveridge taipans Tony Mitchell Travis Trice Cameron Gliddon Mark Worthington Jarrad Weeks Mitch McCarron Nnanna Egwu Nate Jawai Damon Heuir Stephen Weigh Alex Loughton Coach Aaron Fearne NBL ROUND 18 Friday: Illawarra v Cairns, Perth v Brisbane Saturday: Adelaide v New Zealand, Sydney v Melbourne Sunday: Cairns v Perth, Melbourne v Illawarra Odds: Illawarra $1.55 v $2.45 CairnsV
Credit: JORDAN GERRANS jordan.gerrans@news.com.au
Word count: 510
