SOUTH-EAST
FOOTBALL IN big news for the local women’s competition, a review of the recent inaugural season has been completed and the Western Border Football League has announced plans for an expanded competition next season.
The league can confirm a competition will be arranged to continue the good work of volunteers during this season.
While a number of details are still to be finalised, the plans include: A FEBRUARY 2018 start to a 13-week season GAME scheduling to include Friday-night fixtures ADDITIONAL competition grades, likely to be under-17s and the retained open-age REALIGNMENT of the newly formed All Stars side under Glencoe Football Club SIGNIFICANT interest expressed from the following to arrange sides to compete next year’s women’s competition: Kalangadoo Football Club, Upper South-East with a combined team from Naracoorte and the Kowree Naracoorte Tatiara Football League. To enable players to register and clubs to continue recruitment processes, the Western Border Football League will take a lead role co-ordinating the Limestone Coast women’s football competition.
NETBALL ADELAIDE Thunderbirds players Abigail Latu-Meafou and Kaitlyn Bryce flew to Mt Gambier on Monday to coach at a netball clinic held by Netball SA partner HomeStart Finance.
More than 50 junior local netballers took part in the clinics, which were part of a competition. Padthaway Netball Club is on the hunt for an A Grade senior coach for the 2018 season.
RACING THE Gold Cup is fast approaching and this year’s event is set to be even more special, with the Mt Gambier Racing Club announcing that this year’s Gold Cup cocktail party will feature Darren Percival.
The historic running of a second cup in the one calendar year has excited punters, with the cocktail party at Jens Town Hall Hotel on November 24 at 6.30pm.
DIESEL AND DIRT DERBY ON the back of this year’s Keith Diesel and Dirt Derby, Keith is set to host round one of the Australian Formula Jet Sprint Association World Series in October next year.
In a coup for the region, Keith will host round one of the two-legged World Series event on October 27 and 28 at the purpose-built track before the competition heads to northern NSW for round two later in the year.
TRIATHLON THE 30th anniversary of the Kingston South-East Triathlon is on again on February 11, with a huge crowd expected to take part in the celebrations.
The event, which offers more than $5000 in prizes, is also race seven of the Triathlon SA State Series and will feature an Olympic course and a short course. For more information and to register, visit www.kingstonsetriathlon.com
AROUND THE GROUNDS MT Gambier boxer Bobby Trigg had his hopes of a second Australian title halted last weekend after the fight was stopped in the sixth round. The Colin Cassidy- trained fighter’s bout was stopped by the referee after it was judged Trigg could not protect himself after suffering a shoulder injury.
LUKE Jamieson has resigned for another season with the Castec Rural Pioneers. Jamieson had an outstanding season with the SEABL title-holders, averaging 11.7 points and 7.2 rebounds a game. He is expected to improve even further when he returns to the Icehouse.THE Mt Gambier Golf Club was awarded the South Australian PGA 2017 SA Pro Am of the Year last weekend at an awards ceremony in Adelaide. Mt Gambier professional Craig Davis was on hand to receive the coveted award at the Playford.
Word count: 567
