SOUTH-EAST
BASKETBALL THE Castec Rural Pioneers recorded an outstanding come from behind win at the Icehouse on Friday night.
In front of a sold-out crowd the Pioneers looked in control at the final break, then had to fight to the end to maintain their impressive home record against the Hobart Chargers.
The Chargers led by 4 at the first break and maintained the same lead at the same break leading 49 to 45.
The third term saw the Pioneers regain the ascendancy and take a two-point lead into the final break only to be overrun early in quarter by a resurgent Chargers.
A 10-point surge by the Chargers saw the Hobart outfit go from six points down with seven minutes to go to leading by 4 with five minutes to go.
Matt Sutton steadied the ship nailing a three-pointer and the big plays kept coming with Luke Jamieson levelling the score with three and half minutes to play and slotting another three-pointer 30 seconds later to wrestle the lead back and extend the lead with Erik Burdon, Daniel Alexander and Tom Daly all stepping up to score points at a crucial time.
A 27-point final term saw the home side run out 10-point winners, 99-89. Burdon finished the game with 20 points and Jamieson scoring 17 points and recording an impressive 10 rebounds with the ever important Alexander racking up nine assists and 10 rebounds.
Next up for the Pioneers it’s a tough road trip to take on the Melbourne Tigers before a rematch against the Chargers in Tasmania and then a tricky clash against the Kilsyth Cobras away from home next Saturday.
After only dropping two games out of 21 so far this season and with two home finals assured, the three fixtures on the road are going to be extremely important in the build-up to the finals series.
CYCLING NEW Zealander Brad Evans claimed the yellow jersey after the fourth stage of the Tour of the Great South Coast on Friday with a daring display on the 92.9km hilly ride between Heywood and Casterton.
Evans finished only two seconds behind stage winner Scott Sunderland, gaining an eight bonus points along the way, to give him a one second lead going into yesterday’s 121.4 kilometre road trip around Cape Bridgewater involving eight sprints and eight hill climbs.
The tour will conclude later today with a criterium in Portland.
FOOTBALL GLENELG will take on Adelaide today at the Bordertown Oval with the action set to commence at 1.10pm.
In a positive sign for footy fans the Tigers are keen to further develop their ties to their country zone.
The Tigers have had a relationship with the region since 2003 and have provided opportunities for player development through a series of junior talent academies in Naracoorte, Millicent, Bordertown and Mount Gambier. Prior to the clash a local female curtain raiser will take place at 11.30am.
In other football news South Gambier celebrated the 20th anniversary of its 1997 senior grand final yesterday.
AROUND THE GROUNDS APOLLO will take on International Soccer Club in a blockbuster at Webb St this afternoon.
ELEVEN young soccer players have recently returned from Adelaide where they took part in the State Talent Identification Championships as part of the Country Zone.ARCHERS from across the region visited the St Martins College Hall as guests of the Blue Lake Archery Club when they were one of the host sites of the 2017 National and State Championships last weekend. Local archer Rebekah Manser successfully defended her national and state title at the event.
Word count: 577
