Melbourne Tigers fans have been trading looks of surprise while checking the team's scoring during the NBL pre-season. "Is that the same Nate Tomlinson?"
The hesitant, mistake-prone rookie who struggled through much of last season has gone. In his place is the new, injury-free, second-year point guard who has led his team with distinction in the build-up to the 2013-14 season.
True to his background as the son of noted NBL coach Bill Tomlinson, the University of Colorado graduate gave his own rookie campaign a poor grade and in the off-season set about rehabilitating his troublesome groin and improving his play.
He flew back to his old college in Boulder, Colorado, and trained in familiar surroundings for six weeks. He then went to China for three weeks and trained with his dad, who is an assistant coach to Brian Goorjian at Chinese club Dongguan Leopards.
"Last season I felt a little bit lost with my work ethic and that's my fault," Tomlinson, 24, said. "I got comfortable when I shouldn't have been. In Colorado, I was around some familiar heads, they knew the injuries I was carrying and helped me through it, then being around young kids who want to work, want to get better, it made it easier for me to train hard."
The statistics have shown just how far he has come, with Tomlinson's coach at the Tigers, Chris Anstey, singing his praises. "I've said it a few times now, Nate has been our best player this pre-season," Anstey said. "He has been outstanding; he has done everything we have asked of him."
Tomlinson scored 20 points in each of the Tigers' two losses at the NBL Blitz and will be called on for a big role in the opening half of the season as the Tigers play without injured leading scorer Chris Goulding and captain Tommy Greer. Tomlinson will be a starting guard when the Tigers open their season against the Sydney Kings in Sydney on Sunday.
He is ready for the challenge, even though he won't be playing alongside the two guards he worked with all pre-season. Instead he will have to steer rookie guard Greg Page and the rest of the side through the match.
The Tigers aren't expecting Tomlinson to score big each week, but he is expected to protect the ball, play defence and make sure the team is getting good shots.
"I've put in the work and I feel like I belong and I'm feeling more comfortable with the team," Tomlinson said.
"Last year we were really a one- or two-man team, this year we are spreading the load and that makes it easier to play together and makes it harder for other teams to stop us."
HOW THE NBL TEAMS SHAPE UP ADELAIDE 36ers Coach: Joey Wright Ins: Gary Ervin, Jarrid Frye, BJ Anthony, Brendan Teys.
Outs: Stephen Weigh, Scott Christopherson, Nathan Crosswell, Pero Vasilijevic.
Imports: Former NBL MVP Gary Ervin brings swagger and scoring to the Sixers while Jarrid Frye is an unpredictable, athletic player.
Burning question: Are they tough enough?
Joey Wright brings a winning ethos to the Sixers who have been too soft for too long.
The signs look good.
CAIRNS TAIPANS Coach: Aaron Fearne Ins: Demetri McCamey, Mitchell Young , Stephen Weigh, Matt Burston.
Outs: Brad Hill , Dusty Rychart, Aaron Grabau, Shane Edwards, Kerry Williams.
Imports: Demetri McCamey is a strongly build guard with great scoring touch while the returning Jamar Wilson will run the show at point guard.
Burning question: Are they title contenders?
The Taipans have been around the mark for years. McCamey, Alex Loughton and Cam Tragardh are all dangerous; if they can get it together there will be plenty of orange in the grand final series.
MELBOURNE TIGERS Coach: Chris Anstey Ins: Mark Worthington, Ayinde Ubaka, Scott Morrison, Auryn Macmillan.
Outs: Jonny Flynn, Seth Scott, Matt Burston, Liam Rush, Bennie Lewis.
Imports: Ubaka returns as a late replacement for injured Stephen Dennis. The former Tiger will off er reliable ball-handling and scoring plus a popular locker-room presence.
Morrison is a Canadian centre who scores around the ring and defends well.
Burning question: Can they make the playoff s? With injuries already hitting the squad, they are up against it. Yet with veterans like Worthington on board, don't rule out the Tigers.
NEW ZEALAND BREAKERS Coach: Dean Vickerman Ins: Kerron Johnson, Jeremiah Trueman, Darnell Lazare.
Outs: Will Hudson, Cedric Jackson, Dillon Boucher, Leon Henry.
Imports: Kerron Johnson is super-fast, fearless when driving into the lane and adept at scoring from all parts of the court, he is an MVP candidate while Darnell Lazare is a hard-working forward who will provide some punch in the paint.
Burning question: Are they still title contenders? After three straight titles, the Breakers have lost coach Andrej Lemanis, gun import Cedric Jackson and veteran Dillon Boucher, leaving the remaining players to fill their shoes.
PERTH WILDCATS Coach: Trevor Gleeson Ins: James Ennis, Jermaine Beal, Drake U'u, Tom Jervis, Mathiang Muo, Erik Burdon, Jarrad Prue.
Outs: Kevin Lisch, Jeremiah Trueman, Cameron Tovey, Brad Robbins, Everard Bartlett.
Imports: James Ennis is the talk of the NBL with his athletic dunks and relentless scoring.
The Miami Heat second-round pick will bring the excitement while Jermaine Beal is a cagey scorer.
Burning question: Can Gleeson marshal his troops? Big changes at Perth means new coach Gleeson has to get his side together in time to make a title charge. The Wildcats have the talent to win it all, now they need to find the right chemistry.
SYDNEY KINGS Coach: Shane Heal Ins: AJ Ogilvy, Brad Hill, Ben Allen, Cody Ellis, Shaun Gleeson, Kyle Armour, Jesse Sanders, Charles Carmouche, John Macham.
Outs: Aaron Bruce, Darnell Lazare, Corin Henry, Luke Martin, Graeme Dann, Ian Crosswhite, Daniel Joyce.
Imports: Jesse Saunders is an organised, hard-working guard. Charles Carmouche can score, but needs to find some consistency.
Burning question: Will the changes in Sydney make a diff erence? Heal says he finally has the side he wanted, now they need to perform.
TOWNSVILLE CROCS Coach: Shawn Dennis Ins: Brian Conklin, Josh Pace, Mirko Djeric, Steven Markovic, Greg Vanderjagt, Scott Kenny.
Outs: Gary Ervin, Ben Allen, Brendan Teys, Michael Cedar, Chris Cedar, Luke Nevill.
Imports: Josh Pace is an unconventional player who finds original ways to get to the basket and can make an impact on defence.
Conklin is an old-school banger.
Burning question: Can they defend? The Crocs will rack up the points but whether they can shut down the opposition remains to be seen.
WOLLONGONG HAWKS Coach: Geordie Mcleod Ins: Rotnei Clarke, Shane Harris-Tunks, Dom Cooks, Luke Jamieson.
Outs: Glen Saville, Adris Deleon, Malcolm Grant, Lance Hurdle, Daniel Jackson, Mirko Djeric, Auryn Macmillan.
Imports: Rotnei Clarke is the best shooting import to come to the NBL in years. He is a smart playmaker as well. The Hawks have yet to announce a replacement for Durrell Summers, who left after demanding more pay.
Burning question: Do they have the depth to keep up? The Hawks will threaten each match but have precious few senior players.
NBL ROUND 1 THURSDAY NZ Breakers v Wollongong, Vector Arena, 5.30pm FRIDAY Perth v Adelaide, Perth Arena, 9.30pm SATURDAY Townsville v Cairns, Townsville Entertainment Centre, 9pm SUNDAY Sydney v Melbourne, Sydney Entertainment Centre, 2pm
Illustration
Caption: PHOTO: On the prowl: Nate Tomlinson has been working hard. Photo: Getty Images
Word count: 1248
