SOUTH-EAST
BASKETBALL A NOISY 735 fans watched the Castec Rural Pioneers fall short against the Geelong Supercats at The Icehouse on Friday night.
Trailing by seven at the first break and two at half-time, the game was in reach but a disappointing second half by the home side saw the Pioneers go down by 17 points, 89 to 72.
For the Pioneers, big man Luke Jamieson top scored with 20 points and eight rebounds, while Tom Daly compiled 15 points and six assists.
With the SEABL season drawing to a close, the Pioneers’ fate may now be in the hands of those teams around them.
KARTING YOUNG gun Kai Allen claimed his ninth state title last weekend at the Victorian State Championships at the Todd Road Raceway.
Allen was impressive on his way to title that adds to his impressive highlights reel, which also includes his 2016 Australian crown. Allen was joined by fellow local driver Jobe Stewart in the elite junior class and he did not disappoint, competing well all weekend. The Mount Gambier Kart Club will host its July Club Day today at the Glenburnie Raceway, with the action to start at noon.
GOLF THE South East District returned from the recent 2018 Brett Ogle Cup as champions.
The annual three-day teams matchplay tournament was held from Tuesday, July 10 to 12 at the Port Augusta Golf Club.
Seven Districts took part, with South East winning the division one trophy. On day one, 40 players competed in the district qualifying event with impressive scoring across the field.
The South East District set the pace as top qualifier, while Southern, Northern and Eyre rounded out division 1.
On day two, South East defeated Northern 4-1 and Southern beat Eyre 3-2 in division one, setting up a crucial fixture on day three against Southern.
And the South East claimed its second win on the third day, defeating Southern 3-2 to take home the title.
AFL RICHMOND premiership player Jack Riewoldt will be the special guest of the South Gambier Football Club later this month. The high-profile star will be the highlight at the sportsman’s night at Blue Lake Sports Park on July 30, with football fans across the region already excited at the opportunity to meet one of the AFL’S biggest names.
Riewoldt is a two-time All Australian and has claimed the Coleman Medal on two occasions.
Tickets are available from the club, Sportspower, Lennon’s on Lake Terrace and the South Aussie Hotel, as well as on the door on the night.
HOLISTIC personal trainer and wellness coach Kris Massie will be the special guest at a unique community event at St Anthony’s Catholic Primary School in Millicent on Wednesday, July 25.
The two-hour event will start at 7pm and will feature health, balance and productivity advice from the former Adelaide Crows and Carlton star.
VOLLEYBALL DURING the week it was announced that the Mount Gambier Volleyball Association will be formed to provide playing opportunities for junior and senior volleyballers in Mount Gambier and the surrounding areas through Spikezone, junior league and senior league competitions.
The first MGVA annual general meeting will be held at The Mac’s Hotel, Mount Gambier, on July 23rd at 6:30pm.
SPEEDWAY THE Borderline Speedway auxiliary committee would like to extend an invitation to all members and interested persons to attend its AGM on Friday, July 27, at 7.30pm at the Speedway clubrooms. For further information contact Neil Boatman on 0428 838 962.
Word count: 578
