CHANGES TO THE WAY FACEBOOK OPERATES WILL FORCE COMPANIES TO PAY FOR THEIR NEWS TO BE DISSEMINATED OR PUSH THEM INTO ESTABLISHING OTHER ON-LINE CHANNELS. VALERINA CHANGARATHIL REPORTS.
SOUTH Australian businesses relying solely on social media website Facebook to reach out to potential customers, or relay important messages, will have to put some money where their post is - or build another web presence.
Publicly listed US-based company Facebook spends about $1 billion to run its site every year, mostly funded through advertisements that pop up on the right side of a user's home page.
Now, it is encouraging all users to "promote" their posts for a charge.
For an average Facebook user, posts make up the content that appears in the central column of your home page. You also see photo tags, friend requests, event updates, group memberships and other activity.
However, recent changes to how the social media giant decides what a user sees on their Facebook home pages will rank paid posts higher than unpaid ones - making it quite certain that not all messages will feed through.
In Facebook's own words: "As a business, you may have a really great sale going on, or a new item in store that you want to promote far and wide, so that more people are aware of it. Tools like promoted posts are simple ways to turn those important Page posts into ads."
Internet forums are abuzz about how Facebook's EdgeRank algorithm minimises user engagement with their fan pages and then charges page owners a fee of between $5 and $300 per post to increase exposure to an existing user base.
The charge depends on how many of your audience and their friends you wish to reach.
The Burnside Village Shopping Centre posted a message on its Facebook page on November 15: "Facebook is now charging us to communicate with you, which means you'll be missing out on almost 90 per cent of our posts about competitions, all things fashion and even sales!"
Facebook's marketing team estimates that "organically, you get anywhere from 15 per cent to 20 per cent of your fans. In order to reach the remaining 80 to 85 per cent, sponsoring posts is important."
The strongest impact of the changes is likely to be faced by the not-for-profit entities.
Women's & Children's Hospital Foundation online media co-ordinator Jane Durbridge says its Facebook page used to receive about 800 hits per post.
"This is now down to 200 hits. We have about 2500 fans on Facebook and obviously, the changes mean not all of our audience are able to connect or interact," she says.
"But Facebook is just one spoke in our hub. It was an engagement tool just like the multiple channels we use to reach our audiences, for instance our website, Twitter feeds, Instagram, mailers, etc."
Adelaide-based digital consulting company DBG Technologies is trying to raise awareness about having a multi-pronged strategy.
DBG's online marketing director Luke Jamieson says having a wider digital presence is key.
"For small businesses, it may turn users on to platforms such as Google+ or Twitter," he says.
"Many companies jumped on the Facebook bandwagon because they understood it to be a free service.
"The rules have changed. Setting up a website may be an option or building your own online database by emailing all your fans to sign up. You are limiting yourself if you don't broaden your strategy."
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 585
