SOUTH-EAST
BASKETBALL THE Pioneers made it three SEABL Championships in four years last weekend when they defeated the Dandenong Rangers 92 to 85.
In a competition that often sees recruits come and go and teams change season to season the Mount Gambier franchise has achieved unprecedented success that will see it assume a special place in SEABL history.
After an undefeated regular season the Pioneers bounced out to a double figure lead after a 28-11 third term with Erik Burdon on fire from outside the arc and captain Tom Daly attacking the hoop.
Leading 78-74 with four minutes to play, Dandenong forced the Pioneers to use 23 seconds of the shot clock only to find Brad Hill open in the corner for three, his swish plus a layup soon after settled the Pioneers as they held on for the win.
During the week the Pioneers held their end of season awards with star American import Daniel Alexander claiming the Allan Scott Medal for the most valuable player for the 2017 season.
Long-term stalwart Tom Daly was rewarded for an outstanding season finishing runner-up to Alexander and claiming the final’s Player of the Year.
In other awards presented on the night, Brad Hill claimed the Golden Hands Award, Luke Jamieson took home the Defensive Player of the Year and the Coach’s Award for Commitment to Excellence was won by Jack Madgen.
In other basketball news the 2017 Basketball Mount Gambier grand finals get underway today with the staging of junior grand final day when eleven finals will be decided.
The day tips off with the under-12 girls and boys at noon and concludes at 5.00pm with the under-18 men and under-16 boys’ division 2 games.
Senior grand finals will begin tomorrow and continue through to the South East Coast men’s and women’s league finals on Wednesday night when the Icehouse will host the women’s SECBL Final between Cougars and Saints at 7.30pm then Panthers-Wizards will take on Bulldogs Red in the SECBL men’s grand final. Presentations will follow the finals, including Most Valuable awards for the season.
STATE OF A WARRIOR STATE of a Warrior will return to the Tatiara Civic Centre on October 28 with a full card of fights scheduled.
The annual event will see Modern Thai and Full Thai fights with the main bouts contesting titles.
Tickets are on sale from the Tatiara District Council Office and online via Ticketek.
Doors open at 6.30pm with the event presented with the support of the Bordertown BJMA Martial Arts Club and MatchMaker Promotions.
AROUND THE GROUNDS THE September round of the Mount Gambier Disc Golf League will be held today and is open for anyone contemplating giving the sport a try.
Registration opens at 12:30pm with players encouraged to meet at 12:45pm at the Brownes Lake course.
MILLICENT netball star Lisa Duldig played her 300th senior game for the Saints yesterday.
During her stellar career she has played in nine premiership sides, represented the WBNA at interleague level fourteen times, has been named in the WBNA Team of the Year on eight occasions and has been named Coach of the Year in 2014, 2015 and 2016.
IN GOLF, South East will host the 2017 SE Men’s Open Championship and the SE Champion of Champions at the Millicent Golf Club today.
THE Mount Gambier Softball Association will hold their annual sign up day today at Blue Lake Sports Park between 10.00am and 12 noon.All interested players, junior or senior are encouraged to attend.
Word count: 565
