SOUTH-EAST BASKETBALL THE Castec Rural Pioneers are close to completing their roster for the upcoming 2017 season with imports American Daniel Alexander and John Jones from Barbados set to join the franchise in the coming weeks.
Head coach Richard Hill has high hopes for the imports who will add to his impressive list of Icehouse favourites. With the biggest roster Hill has had at his disposal, big things are expected of Luke Jamieson and Alexander, while 'Big' John has the potential of becoming a crowd favourite. Tom Daly, Brad Hill, Matt Sutton and Erik Burdon will all return to the home pine with Jamieson and Jack Magden currently involved in the NBL and hopes high that Kane DeWitt will maintain his recent, impressive form. The first chance locals will get to see the new line up will be at Millicent on the first weekend in March before a road trip to Ballarat and a home game against the Frankston Blues at the Icehouse on March 18. The first game of the season proper will be against Albury on March 25 with the first home game, a clash with reigning champions Bendigo, set to heat the Icehouse the following weekend. HOCKEY NARACOORTE High School student Jacob Edwards is one of only two goal keepers who have been selected to represent South Australia in the U15 Boys State Hockey team this year.
The team will fly to Sydney to compete against all other states at the Liverpool Moorebank Hockey Club in April. Hockey has been a huge part of Jacob's life since the age of four.
He has been a team member of the Redlegs, Rams and Tigers Hockey clubs and has played in the U13s since he was seven years of age.
"It is an absolute privilege to be coached by Matt Morton and Michael Wells who is the Men's Hot Shots goalie and to represent South Australia for the second time is amazing. The skills and game tactics that I am now learning are invaluable," Jacob said.
Jacob previously represented South Australia, as part of the U13 State Hockey team in 2015 in Darwin.
KARTING MT Gambier young gun Kai Allan, 11, raced in the first Australian round at Newcastle last weekend after his move from under-12s to the junior under-16 class and if his first outing is anything to go by the older competitors have something to worry about.
Allan finished second in the final and currently sits third in the points after the first round. He is off to Geelong in late March for Round 2.
In local karting action Round 1 of the Mt Gambier Kart Club's 2017 season commenced last weekend at the Glenburnie Raceway with younger drivers Parker Scott and Charlie Evans impressive in their divisions.
Racing will continue this weekend at the circuit.
COACHING THE second Coaching Excellence Seminar will be held on February 27 at the Barry Holmes Stadium, Tenison Woods College and will once again be delivered by Tony Checker in partnership with the South Australian Sports Institute. It will focus on sports nutrition and is tailored for all coaches and parents who are involved in coaching and mentoring of athletes. To register for this free session please contact Tony Elletson at starclubse@lclga.sa.gov.au AROUND GROUNDS Ben Bruhn took out the South Australian State Junior Men's wakeboard title last weekend in Renmark.
Jack Tierney won the 2017 Kingston Triathlon last weekend in challenging conditions. Chloe Lane took out the Open Female category with a time of 2:25:40.Local BMX riders Jye Smith, Jasmine Morgan and Riley Morgan have been selected to ride for South Australia in their respective age groups. They will compete in Queensland in April at the National Championships.
Word count: 608
