SOUTH-EAST
CRICKET
ROUND four of the Mt Gambier and District Cricket Association Barber Shield season did not go ahead because of heavy rain this weekend.
All scheduled fixtures will go ahead next weekend as one- day fixtures with plenty of action for fans.
South Gambier and Penola will battle it out, with South holding the home-game advantage. The Demons have recorded wins against Mil Lel and East Gambier. With Brad Maney and Dave Somerfield in form with the ball, they will be hard to beat.
Penola, on the other hand, let a golden opportunity slip against North Gambier in round three, not able to reach 102 with only three players recording double figures.
Mil Lel and East Gambier have both struggled, with both yet to record a win. Josh Jantosh has been in fine form with the bat for Mil Lel, while runs are expected to come from the evergreen Dion Stratford for East. Expect a close one, with both sides looking forward to breaking their duck. In the big one, North Sportsman’s will take on West Gambier in the top-of-the-table clash.
With both sides undefeated and plenty of talent on show with the bat and the ball, setting a target will be vital. Matt McInerney has been a stand- out so far this season and could be the difference if he can get among the runs. Even though it is early in the season, this one could be an indication of what the season may hold for the two heavyweights.
MOTORSPORT DAN Day was red hot as the local driver claimed the fastest time and set a new course record on his way to successfully defending his title at last weekend’s Legend of the Lakes Hill Climb.
Day recorded not only the fastest time in the event’s 12-year history, he also recorded the only sub-50 second time ever recorded with a time of 49.85. Adelaide-based Kevin Mackrell finished in second place with 50.03.
In other motorsport news, the 2017-18 Borderline Speedway calendar has been released with 11 nights of action on the clay scheduled between November 25 and the Super Sedan SA Title, which will be held on April 13.
The Kings Sprintcar Challenge will feature on January 18, with the highly anticipated SCCA Australian Sprintcar Championship held over three nights in January eagerly expected.
BASKETBALL IT has been a busy few weeks for the Pioneers, with several key players returning to the Mt Gambier-based franchise.
On the back of Luke Jamieson committing for season 2018, young gun Kane de Wit has committed for his fifth season with the club. De Wit, the son of former Pioneers’ coach and player Ray de Wit, continues to lead the Lakers in the CBL, where he was named the competition MVP last season.
Fan favourite and 2012 Alan Scott Medallist, Erik “Eze” Burdon will also return to the Icehouse with the prospect of becoming one of a select few to make 200 appearances for the franchise.
Burdon comes off a sublime shooting performance in the SEABL national final and is just a handful of games from 200 games and life membership. The prospect of challenging for another championship provided the inspiration for his return.The final signing of a busy few weeks was that of local player Kyle Tipene, who is set to return to the team he represented as a junior eight years ago. Tipene will help the Pioneers in the back court with his excellent ball handling and three-point shooting, which has become a strength of his game and a highlight of his impressive numbers for Shepparton in the Big V last season. He recorded 16.5 points, 3.2 rebounds and 3.3 assists a game while leading the league in three-point shooting, making 44 of his 88 attempts.
Word count: 627
