SOUTH-EAST
BASKETBALL SEVEN hundred and thirty spectators braved the chilly conditions at The Icehouse on Friday night as the Pioneers continued their erratic season, this week going down to the Dandenong Rangers 80 to 64.
After the disappointment of Brad Hill’s shock announcement during the week, the home side struggled to find consistency and trailed by one point at the first break and nine points at the main break.
The second half was a similar story, with the Rangers slowly extending their lead as the Pioneers unable to close the gap.
Samuel McDaniel was impressive for the home side, scoring 26 points, nearly half of the Pioneers’ tally, while Luke Jamieson finished with 14 points and 9 rebounds.
For the Rangers, Rhys Vague was a standout, finishing the game with 20 points and a whopping 16 rebounds.
The loss could not have come at a worse time for the franchise after the disappointment of losing key veteran Hill who succumbed to a chronic ankle injury, forcing him out for the rest of the 2018 season.
Hill has battled for the past couple of seasons with a degenerative condition in his ankle, with both he and the club hopeful his off-season surgery had arrested the problem.
Early indications were that he would be able to return to his best but two pre-season mishaps set Hill back and a recent visit to his surgeon confirmed further damage to the ankle.
Hill, a veteran of 277 NBL games, 139 of those with the 36ers and 191 SEABL games, 138 of those with the Pioneers, has been a key member of the Pioneers incredible run of five national finals and three national championships.
He has been an all-SEABL team of the year member three times, Alan Scott medallist twice and was grand final MVP in the Pioneers’ first championship win.
On a positive note, the Pioneers have announced athletic American wing player Alex Marzette as a replacement for Hill and Majok Deng. Marzette a versatile 193cm wing will add sparkle to the roster, having played recently in the G League after successful stints in Finland and Portugal where he averaged 16.5 points, 4.6 rebounds and 2.5 assists per game.
FOOTBALL ALL roads will lead to the Robe Football Club next weekend when the Mid South East club will host the South East Zone Carnival with the region’s finest footy players set to battle it out.
The South East Zone Carnival will be held on June 9 with the KNT, Mid SE and Western Border Leagues vying for regional supremacy.
SOCCER AFTER a shock loss to Blue Lake two weeks ago, Apollo Soccer Club will head to Casadio Park, the home of International Soccer Club today with the hope of closing the gap on their bitter rivals.
After a close game in the recent pre-season cup, spectators can expect no prisoners to be taken when these two heavyweights go head- to-head.
In other games, Gambier Centrals Soccer Club hosts the impressive Blue Lake Rangers and Naracoorte United has the bye. For Centrals, so much will depend on the performance of their star striker Nathan Fleetwood who is beginning to show the form that will catch the attention of football fans across the region.
AROUND THE GROUNDS THE South East Darts Association is looking for junior players between the ages of 8 and 18 to take part in a junior competition to be held at the RSL in Mount Gambier on Wednesday nights.All interested juniors are encouraged to contact Des West on 0427 439 660 for further information.
Word count: 593
