SOUTH-EAST
FOOTBALL HISTORY was made at Vansittart Park in Mt Gambier on Friday night when the South- East Women’s Football League kicked off.
Under lights, a large crowd gathered to see the launch of the six-team competition that will provide the opportunity for sides from East, West, North and South Gambier plus Millicent and a composite All Stars team to battle it out.
The competition will include five home and away rounds and a grand final scheduled for August 27.
On Friday night, West Gambier defeated the All Stars 4.10 (34) to 2.7 (19), and Millicent got over the top of North Gambier 4.10 (34) to 3.0 (18). In the highest-scoring encounter of the evening, South Gambier recorded a comfortable win, 8.8 (55) to East Gambier 1.2 (8) with South Gambier’s Kate Lehmann snapping the first, historic goal.
Millicent footballer Olivia Fuller recently returned from the AFL Women’s Under-18 Championship as part of the undefeated SA squad that included another Millicent local, Jess Allen. She was named in ruck as part of the All-Australian Squad. Allen plays her club football for Centrals in the SANFL competition.
West Gambier and East Gambier remembered the significant contribution the late Phil Muhovics made to the local football community, contesting the Call to Arms Cup yesterday.
BASKETBALL THE Castec Rural Pioneers held off the Albury Wodonga Bandits at the Icehouse on Friday night, winning the important fixture 103-82.
With scores level at the first break and holding a narrow lead at the main break 47-45, it was an impressive third term that saw the home side set up the win. Daniel Alexander and Luke Jamieson finished with 21 points each, while Brad Hill continued his scoring form, racking up 20 points.
CYCLING FORMER dual British road cycling champion Jeremy Hunt will manage a top-rated Malaysian team in the Tour of the Great South Coast, which starts in Mt Gambier on Wednesday.
Hunt, 43, who won 35 professional races during a remarkable 16 year international career, representing Great Britain at the 2000 Sydney Olympic Games and in six world road championships, as well as the Tour de France, the Tour of Italy and the Tour of Spain.
The 500km tour, from Wednesday to Sunday, will be contested by an outstanding field of cyclists from Malaysia, New Zealand, all Australian states and the ACT.
The line-up includes experienced West Australians, London Olympic Games bronze medallist Scott Sunderland and inaugural tour victor and former national criterium champion Anthony Giacoppo.
Sydney Olympic Games madison gold medallist Brett Aitken will manage the South Australian Sports Institute team, which includes prominent allrounder and tour winner prospect Harry Carpenter.
The Tour of the Great South Coast will feature two criteriums – in Mt Gambier and Portland – and four road stages, which will take in Mt Gambier and Port McDonnell in South Australia, and Heywood, Casterton and Cape Bridgewater in Victoria.
The race is a showcase event on Cycling Australia’s Subaru National Road Series calendar and will begin with a 36km criterium around Mt Gambier’s Vansittart Park on Wednesday at 11am.
AROUND THE GROUNDS THE third MiniRoos Regional Round will be played today with the Limestone Coast Football Association’s youngest players heading to Millicent. The league’s newest club, Tatiara, will return to Casadio Park this afternoon to take on International Soccer Club after being unable to field a side a week ago.LOCAL speedsters Aaron Bowering and Nathan Lowe took out round two of the South Australian Rally Championship in Burra, after winning the Rally of the Heartland.
Word count: 572
