SOUTH-EAST
FOOTBALL NORTH Gambier opened its account, taking out the Anzac Day clash at Blue Lake Sports Park against South Gambier.
North Gambier 16.5 (101) defeated the Demons 10.10 (70).
The 31-point victory saw the Tigers climb off the foot of the ladder and demonstrate that they still have plenty of quality among the ranks.
North Gambier’s Brock Egan was the standout and was rewarded with the Tony Casadio Medal for best on ground, while he was well supported by Nick Blachut and Nick McInerney. Sam Stafford kicked the first goal for the day and finished with three majors, while Jordan Hollitt booted four.
The Tigers led at every change, in front 6.1 (37) to 2.1 (13) at the first break, 9.3 (57) to 5.2 (32) and then extending the lead to 33 points at the final break. For the Demons, Brayden Kain kicked four goals and Bradley Bryant popped up with two.
BASKETBALL THE Pioneers fell short in the final term on Friday night against the Bendigo Braves at the Icehouse.
Trailing by two points at the first break and not making any progress at half-time, the home side went into the second half trailing 38 points to 40.
At the final break and trailing by four points, expectations were high. Unfort-unately, the Pioneers couldn’t close the gap, running out the game 14 points behind the Braves, who scored an impressive 89-75 win.
The undermanned Pioneers were well served by Lewis Thomas, who topscored with 22 points and 11 rebounds, and Luke Jamieson and Kyle Tipene, who both finished with 10 points.
SOCCER THE Belgiorno Cup qualifying finals will be held today with matches at Casadio Park and the Den.
At Casadio Park, the home of International Soccer Club, International will take on Blue Lake in the seniors, the reserves, the under-17s and Portland in the under-12s, while Naracoorte will play Blue Lake in under-14s.
At Gambier Centrals’ the Den, the home side will take part in all five fixtures, hosting Apollo in the seniors, under-17s under-14s, while the reserves and under-12s will play Naracoorte. All games will kick off 30 minutes early, with the under-12s at 8.30am and the seniors at 2.30pm.
Next week’s finals will be at Malseed Park, the home of Blue Lake Soccer Club. The finals of the Pink Ribbon Cup, the annual preseason tournament of the South-East Women’s Football League, will be next Saturday at Blue Lake Sports Park.
MOTHER’S DAY CLASSIC THE Mt Gambier Mother’s Day Classic will celebrate its 10th year this year and will once again offer participants a 2, 4, 6 or 8km walk or run.
The Classic will be at the Valley Lakes on May 13, with online entries closing on May 9. For further information, please contact Peter Collins on 0401447260 or log on to the Mother’s Day Classic – Mount Gambier, SA Facebook page.
AROUND THE GROUNDS ZODIACS Netball Club will celebrate its 30th anniversary this year will a gala function at the Commodore on the Park on June 23.
FORMER Tenison Woods College netballer Molly Watson was named the most valuable player of the championships while representing South Australia at the national championships. Alongside Watson in the championship-winning side was Jordyn Adams and Nyah Allen, with Allen named the most valuable player in the grand final.THOMAS Bignell has returned to Mt Gambier after competing at the Georgina Hope Foundation 2018 Australian Age Swimming Championships in Sydney. He competed in the 200m breaststroke and the 100 breaststroke, in which he shaved 0.3 seconds off his personal best time.
Word count: 592
