SOUTH-EAST
BASKETBALL THE Castec Rural Pioneers have created South-East Australia Basketball League history by becoming the first team to record a "four-peat" at the Icehouse on Friday night.
The Pioneers defeated the South Conference minor premiers, the Hobart Chargers, 97-72 in a perfect performance to claim the South Conference final. The first quarter set the standard and the roster maintained the intensity for the entire match. At quarter-time, the lead was 13 points and that margin was extended in both the second and third terms and despite some resistance, including a sideline scuffle, the margin increased to 16 points at the final break.
The final term was a high- scoring affair, with the home side continuing its spree, racking up 32 points.
For the Pioneers, Tyrone Lee scored 26 points and had an impressive 11 rebounds. Luke Jamieson highlighted his importance coming off the bench to score 13, have 11 rebounds and four assists.
The Pioneers had winners all over the court, with Brad Hill returning to the pine and racking up 12 rebounds. The always impressive Tom Daly scored 16 points, Desmond Simmons scored 13 and Erik Burdon was class all night.
The Pioneers will face the winner of the East Conference final, the Bendigo Braves or the Nunawading Spectres, on Saturday at the State Basketball Centre, Melbourne, in the SEABL grand final, with tip-off scheduled for 7.15pm SA time.
FOOTBALL IN the MSEFL Mt Burr will have another chance to take on Kalangadoo after Mt Burr cruised to a comfortable win against Tantanoola in the do-or-die preliminary final at Hatherleigh yesterday.
Mt Burr went into the clash favourite after finishing two games clear of Tantanoola in the regular season. It was the finals experience of Mt Burr that proved too much in the end.
By half-time, Mt Burr had a handy lead 9.2 (56) to 4.4 (28) and extended the lead even further in the third term, booting four unanswered goals and holding Tantanoola to one point. Mt Burr triumphed 15.5 (95) to Tantanoola 6.5 (35). For Mt Burr, Jake Dowdy booted five goals in an fine effort.
In the KNTFL today, the first semi-final will see Lucindale take on Keith. Yesterday Kybybolite held on for an impressive win against Penola 8.6 (54) to 6.11 (47). Adam Merrett put the first goal through for Penola in a low-scoring first quarter before Kybybolite hit back to level the scores at half time.
In the third quarter, Kybybolite booted six goals and led by 28 points at the final break, with late final quarter goals not enough to save Penola.
For the Eagles, Merrett booted four goals, while for Kybybolite Jamie Bittner and Nathan Stark both kicked two goals.
This week Lucindale on-baller Ryan McInerney took out the Sunday Mail Medal, recording 29 votes, including a string of three consecutive best-on-ground efforts late in the season.
Penola's Matt Willson won the Edwards Trophy for finishing second with 25 votes and Bordertown's Clint Diment polled 22.
SOCCER APOLLO will take on Gambier Centrals today at Webb St in the qualifying final, with the winner to go straight into the final in a fortnight's time.
Apollo goes into the clash as minor premier and is expected to return to the winner's circle after going down to an impressive Gambier Centrals in the final game of the season proper a fortnight ago. In the elimination final, powerhouse International should have far too much for a depleted Portland outfit.
AROUND THE GROUNDS MOOREX will host the final two rounds of the South Australian Off Road Championships this weekend.
LOCAL motorcycle rider Levi Day has been invited to take part in this year's Goodwood Revival Festival.
A LARGE crowd attended the annual Father's Day Cruise around the Limestone Coast yesterday.
LOCAL teacher Melissa Russell has been named SA Primary School Ambassador of the Year.THERE will be an NRL Come and Try session at Blue Lake Sports Park on September 16 from 5-7pm on the main baseball diamond. The league hopes all interested players including juniors in the under-10s, under-13s and under-17s age cohorts will attend.
Word count: 691
