SOUTH-EAST
BASKETBALL ON THE back of an impressive run, the Castec Rural Pioneers welcomed back Tom Daly and took to the road in search of another win on Friday evening.
The Pioneers visited the Belconnen Basketball Stadium in the nation’s capital to take on the young guns from the Basketball Australia Centre of Excellence but struggled to keep up with the BA CoE in the first quarter trailing by 10 points at the first break.
The second term saw the Pioneers fight hard and slowly close the gap to three points with a little over three minutes to go before the main break, before creeping out to seven points with 90 seconds to go and then closing to five points at the break.
The 23-point quarter saw Tom Daly lead the scoring for the Pioneers with 13 points for the half, one point in front of Alex Marzette on 12.
Defensively the Pioneers were struggling to hold Kyle Bowen who racked up 20 points and nine rebounds in the first half.
The third term ended with the gap still at five points and the Pioneers in the hunt with Marzette up to 20 points and Bowen held to just two points for the quarter.
The final term was an epic affair with the Pioneers wrestling back the lead to be in front by two points with 17 seconds remaining only to be level with five seconds on the clock.
With three seconds remaining Erik Burdon found Luke Jamieson who made the jump shot to record a stunning come-from-behind victory that keeps the dream alive.
Marzette finished with 22 points and eight rebounds; Daly recorded 19 points in his return game; and Burdon also finished with 19 points and five assists in what could prove to be a monumental result come the end of the season.
FOOTBALL WITH the South Australian Country Championships taking centre stage this weekend, Casterton Sandford sit on top of the Western Border Football League two points ahead of Millicent; a whopping 11 points in front of West Gambier; and 13 points in front of fourth-placed East Gambier.
After an impressive win over Kalangadoo last weekend Mount Burr are top of the Mid South East Football League, four points in front of Robe and Kalangadoo.
The battle for fourth is intriguing with Port MacDonnell on 24 points and Hatherleigh and Glencoe four points behind on 20 points.
Kaniva Leeor United are four points clear at the top of the Kowree Naracoorte Tatiara Football League on 40 points with Penola on 36 and Keith and Lucindale tied on 32.
MOUNT GAMBIER REGIONAL SPORT AND RECREATION CENTRE APPLICATIONS closed on Thursday for members of the Limestone Coast community to provide input into the design, functionality and operations of the proposed Indoor Sport and Recreation Centre.
The community reference group will assist in the development of the proposed facility that continues to gain community support.
SOCCER NARACOORTE United Soccer Club is celebrating its 50th anniversary this year with the club remembering the formation in 1968.
The highlight will be a cocktail evening on Saturday, August 11, followed by the visit of Gambier Centrals Soccer Club on the Sunday.
Ticket sales close this Monday and available from Kevin Marshall on 0424 877 663.
AROUND THE GROUNDS THE Mt Gambier Little Athletics Club will be holding their final Cross Country event for the year today, with registrations open from 10.30am prior to an 11am start.City Hall in the Main Corner Complex will host the 2018 Mount Gambier Moto Classica display on Saturday, July 21 and Sunday, July 22, with all proceeds going to Cancer Council SA. The display of classic and vintage motorcycles is an annual event that includes display items pre 1985.
Word count: 622
