SOUTH-EAST
FOOTBALL THE defence of the South Australian Country Championships in Murray Bridge yesterday started well for the Murray South-East squad as it attempts to not only win back-to-back titles, but to become the first side to win the championship as host.
In its first outing, Adam Merrett’s side ran out convincing winners, 11.7 (73) to Central 2.5 (17) with Tim McIntyre, Jack Kelly and Brad Wright all booting two goals.
In the second game, it was Brodie Martin who led the scoring with two goals to secure a grand final spot today at 2.00pm, the final score MSE 10.4 (64) to Western 5.2 (32).
Scott Merrett and Brett O’Neil played well and led from the front with Kelly a constant threat.
All the action will streamed live on the SANFL website later today: youtube/k7vlkB5VyAg
SOCCER THE place to be today for fans of the round ball will be Casadio Park where last season’s champions Gambier Centrals take on this year’s ladder leader International Soccer Club.
International recruited well at the end of last season, and with the return of several well known faces, looks the team beat. Centrals have struggled since being crowned champions in 2016 and with the loss of several players, including the irreplaceable Matt Pilven, have struggled to find consistency.
International should be too good at home and will take a significant step towards the 2017 title today.
In the junior grades, the cream of the crop will clash with Centrals. International is sitting in first and second spot on the ladder in the under-12, 14 and 17 competitions.
OFF-ROAD RACING JACK Rhodes and David Pullino have taken victory in the 2017 Glenroy Plains Produce and PMD Race Products Off Road Masters.
Ivan Schmocker came home second and Alan Dixon and Scott Palmer rounded out the podium.
Held at Moorex, north of Naracoorte, and hosted by the Limestone Coast Off Road Club this year the event had a change in format with all racing held on Saturday and with no night stages.
The 26 competitors raced over eight laps of the 38km course and 14 competitors finished the full race distance.
From the start it seemed spectators were in for a very close race between the Jimco buggy of Rhodes and the Alumi Craft buggy of Aaron James but with James suffering issues which dropped him back in the pack after the first lap it was left to Rhodes to show the way.
Setting the fastest lap time of the weekend on his way to the win and winning by 8mins 22secs from Schmocker in second the win makes Rhodes and Pullino the 2017 CAMS South Australian Off Road Champions.
BASKETBALL THE Castec Rural Pioneers won another one at the Icehouse on Friday night and the signs are very bright for the championship franchise as it heads toward another finals series. The Pioneers won 92-81 over the Nunawading Spectres with winners all over the court.
Brad Hill was red hot again finishing with 24 points and 13 rebounds, Daniel Alexander continued his impressive first season with another 18 points while Luke Jamieson and Tom Daly scored 27 points between them. The Pioneers led at every break and had too much all over for the court for the Spectres.
The Holiday Hoops program will return to the Icehouse during the school holidays with opportunities for junior players 12 to 18.
AROUND THE GROUNDS FORMER AFL player Danny Frawley will visit the Linksview Bar and Bistro on Thursday night.STATE of a Warrior will return to Bordertown on Saturday October 28. The Martial Arts event is currently taking nominations.
Word count: 583
