SOUTH-EAST
CRICKET AS the Mount Gambier and District Cricket Association moves towards the final minor round of the one-day format the battle for league positions continues to heat up.
Last week Mil Lel only needed 35 overs to defeat East Gambier and move to fourth, Penola 7/185 easily defeated South Gambier 8/92 and West Gambier 9/198 recorded a convincing win over North Sportsman’s 4/138.
East batted first and missing Dion Stratford and Alex Hentschke, who were on representative duties with the SA Outbacks, found the going tough. For Mil Lel Justin Lamont starred with the bat and Justin Taylor led the bowlers with three wickets.
MOTORSPORT BORDERLINE Speedway came alive on Thursday night with the running of the iconic Kings Challenge.
Steven Lines took out the event from James McFadden with the impressive Carson Macedo third.
The action will return this week when the 56th Australian Sprintcar Championships is held over three nights starting Thursday evening.
In addition to the action on the track, Wednesday night at the Mount Gambier Showgrounds will see a Calcutta and Fan Appreciation Evening.
There are 82 cars registered for this year’s event. For further information and to purchase tickets log on to the Borderline Speedway website.
BASKETBALL THE Pioneers have re-signed inspirational captain Tom Daly for a further two seasons.
The championship captain joins Erik Burdon, Kane DeWitt, Luke Jamieson, Dellon Brown, Lachie Hunter, Lewis Thomas and Kyle Tipene at the Icehouse.
In another coup for the franchise, Daly, who was named the most valuable player in last seasons championship game will be joined by Adelaide 36er Majok Deng.
Deng, in his second season with the 36ers, is expected to make a huge impression at the club and be an ideal fit in Mount Gambier. In other basketball news the region’s finest junior players and coaches have been involved in the Australian Country Junior Basketball Cup over the past week with several players involved in finals matches yesterday.
In the under 14 Girls Final SA Magpies came up against the SA Sharks in the battle for the Jim Matthews Memorial Cup after the Sharks defeated the Bushrangers 36-34 in their semi-final and the Magpies cruised to an 18 point win.
The under 14 SA Sharks defeated the NSW Kookaburras 54 to 50 to book a final date with the Tasmania Kangaroos.
The under 16 boys Magpies lost their semi-final and the under 16 Sharks had a similar result going down to the NSW Waratahs 47 to 73 with Claire Hunter scoring 12 points.
The under-18 boys and girls sides missed out on the semi-finals with the SA Sharks narrowly going down to the Victoria Goldminers by 1 point.
BOXING MOUNT Gambier boxing champion Bobby ‘Trigger’ Trigg will defend the Australian Bantamweight Title in Brisbane on February 24.
Trigg will fight Jarrett Owen on Owen’s turf and is expecting a tough encounter against the 32 contender.
AROUND THE GROUNDS WE’RE So Lucky flew home to win at Penola on Thursday in hot conditions. Justin Potter rode the five-year-old mare to victory to enable Tatiara trainer Daryl Dodson to claim his second Coonawarra Vignerons Cup.
THE Robe Boat and Fishing Festival continues today with more than 3000 people expected to attend.AN invitation has been extended to the public to snorkel in Piccaninnie Ponds on February 3 as part of the Natural Resource South East’s celebration of World Wetlands Day. Bookings can made by contacting Alison Boomsma via email at: alison.boomsma@sa.gov.au.
Word count: 575
