SOUTH EAST
BASKETBALL: The Castec Rural Pioneers recorded a stirring win against the Sandringham Sabres at the Icehouse on Friday night.
In a must win game the Pioneers started well racing away to a 13-point lead at the first break and never looked back.
The home side took a 21- point lead into the main break and looked impressive all over the court.
The third quarter was won by the home side 28 to 20 and they didn't hold up after the final break, smashing the Sabres 31 to 11 keeping the visitors to 11 points for the second quarter of the night.
The 49-point win was impressive but it was the manner of the victory that would have impressed coach Richard Hill.
It included 27 points from turnovers, 12 second chance points and 3 players recording 100 per cent efficiency from the free throw line.
Hill would also be impressed with the work rate of his leadership group, Tyrone Lee topscored with 25 points, Desmond Simmons racked up 13 rebounds, Tom Daly had 7 assists, Luke Jamieson recorded 2 blocks and Matt Sutton led he steal count with 3 to his name.
Lee was impressive all night top scoring and racking up 9 rebounds, 7 assists and 2 blocks to highlight his efforts.
With the finals fast approaching there is a sense of hard-fought optimism starting to grow in the camp.
FOOTBALL: With the South East Football and Netball Commission up and running and finals fast approaching it appears that one club may already be considering a change.
Kaniva/Leeor United are currently in talks with both the Wimmera Football League and the Horsham District Football and Netball League.
They are currently sitting at the bottom of the Kowree/ Naracoorte Tatiara Football League.
After dismissing senior coach Colin Macaffer, father of Collingwood player Brent Macaffer, president Jason Gordon is optimistic that his members could find a better fit.
Gordon named the club's salary cap as a concern and was worried that the current trend could hamper preparations for the future.
"We are exploring all options within our region to find the best fit for the long-term future of both senior and junior football and netball," Gordon said yesterday.
"Our first choice would be to remain in the KNTFL, however, if we are unable to compete because of the new rules we will look elsewhere." He went on to add that an information evening at the clubrooms with all three leagues was well attended last Monday night and currently no decision regarding the future of the club has been made.
This year's KNTFL Grand Final will be played at Kaniva on Saturday, September 17.
CYCLING: Olympic gold medallist Brett Aitken is hoping that speed will help steer his South Australian Sports Institute team to a coveted victory in the upcoming Lakes Oil-Fulton Hogan Tour of the Great South Coast road cycling classic.
Since the tour's inception in 2012, overall victory in the five-day event has eluded South Australian riders.
West Australian Anthony Giacoppo won the opening event, New Zealanders Samuel Horgan and Patrick Bevin triumphed in 2013 and 2015 respectively, and Victorian Brenton Jones sprinted to an amazing win in 2014.
Adelaide-based Aitken, SASI's head cycling coach, is one of Australia's most decorated bike riders of all time His track medal haul includes Olympic gold, silver and bronze medals, two gold medals and a silver medal at the Commonwealth Games, and gold in Australia's four-man teams pursuit line-up at the world championships in Norway in 1993.
Aitken will manage a youthful seven-man squad in the tour, which will be raced over a spectacular 511 kilometre course in South Australia and Victoria from August 10-14.
The fifth Tour of the Great South Coast will kick-off with a traditional 30-lap criterium around Mount Gambier's historic Vansittart Park at 11am on Wednesday, August 10.
The race will then take in Port MacDonnell, Penola, Casterton and Cape Bridgewater before ending with a criterium on Portland's scenic waterfront at 12.30pm on Sunday, August 14.
The tour is backed by the municipalities of Mount Gambier, Grant and Wattle Range in South Australia, and Glenelg in Victoria.It is part of Cycling Australia's Subaru National Road Series.
Word count: 709
