SOUTH-EAST
CRICKET MT Gambier hosted the South Australian Outbacks as they broke a 32-year-old drought by claiming the team's first title at the Australian Country Cricket Championships this week.
The Outbacks declared against South East Asia in their first match of the competition and went on to win outright.
The following day, they fell 12 runs short against New South Wales. A win against Victoria by 134 runs in round three and a loss to Queensland by 111 runs in round four saw the crucial clash against Western Australia go down to the wire, with a win and a bonus point for the Outbacks. The championships have been hailed a success, with Cricket Australia's executive general manager Andrew Ingleton saying they were a great representation of country cricket.
He thanked the South Australian Cricket Association and the Mt Gambier Council for their support. The closing ceremony included the launch of the ACCC Hall of Fame, honouring the founders of the competition and some of Australia's best regional cricketers, an initiative that Cricket Australia will continue in future tournaments. Three South Australians were named in the Australian Country XI for men - captain Ben Smith, Ben Parish and Sean Nottle. Brittany Perry and Emma Faint where rewarded for their efforts with selection in the Country XI for women.
At the T20 semi-finals on Friday night, West Gambier defeated Yahl. West finished 7/186, with captain Jason McCrae scoring 114 including 10 sixes and 6 fours while Yahl battled hard to end up 9/179, with Josh Reader 93. West will play in their fifth T20 final in eight seasons already winning three titles. They will play Millicent Association who defeated South Gambier in a low- scoring affair, Millicent 112 to South 104. The final will be held next Sunday at 5pm at Frew Park.
BASKETBALL THE 2016 South-East Australian Basketball League fixture list has been released and the newest team on the block, the Melbourne Tigers will host the Pioneers on May 28. On court the national champions have added some tall timber with the inclusion of 208cm Sydney King Centre Angus Brandt. Angus will join the 2014-15 SEABL champions and is renowned for his size, athleticism and competitive spirit. Currently the starting centre for the Kings, Angus was named the NBL's most improved player last season.
The Pioneers have also added Desmond Simmons to their talented roster. Simmons is a versatile 200cm forward and a graduate of Saint Mary's in the WAC where he started every game and built a reputation as the team's best defender. Simmons spent four years at Washington University where he was part of a Pac 12 championship-winning team.
He has a good skill set, is a great rebounder and can shoot. The final player to complete head coach Richard Hill's roster is Illawarra Hawks development player and Canberra gunners starter Luke Jamieson 21 and a 203cm forward.
Last season, Jamieson was a starter in the SEABL with the Canberra Gunners, where he averaged 7.7 ppg and 4.8 rpg in 22 minutes of action.
Jamieson will fill the void left by the retirement of Kurt Russell and the loss of Lukass Blicavs to football.
The Pioneers' roster is now complete with Brad Hill, Erik Burdon, Tom Daly and Matt Sutton recommitting to the program, Sydney King Angus Brandt, import Desmond Simmons joining the defending champions and a group of talented youngsters including Kane Dewitt, Brad Rathjen, Hayden Annett, Dellon Brown, Mony Makoi and Lachie Hunter.
MOTORSPORT BRITISH Supersport Championship rider Levi Day completed three days of coaching at Mac Park with riders of varying skill levels last week.
Day will return to the track on February 21 and 26.
Day announced this week that two-time Australian Superbike Champion, Josh Waters will join his coaching day at Mac Park on February 21. For further information email leviday57@hotmail.com
AROUND THE GROUNDS FORMER Naracoorte athlete Jessica Trengove has been named in a strong Australian women's team to contest the 2016 IAAF World Half Marathon Championships on in Cardiff on March 26.FORMER Millicent netballer Natalie Medhurst is currently in England with the Australian Diamonds preparing for a three-Test Series against the English Roses.
Word count: 702
