SOUTH-EAST
FOOTBALL ROUND 2 of the Western Border Football League season was played in wintry conditions across the region yesterday, with the Call to Arms Cup the highlight.
The clash between West Gambier and East Gambier is aimed at raising awareness of men's cancer and this year's cup was won by West Gambier.
West took a two-point lead into quarter-time, leading 2.3 (15) to 2.1 (13). A good second quarter saw the Roos extend their lead to 27 points after a four-goal term. The lead blew out in the third quarter after West piled on a further five goals while holding East goalless. West won 12.8 (80) to 5.12 (42) Best on ground, the Phil Muhovics Medal, was awarded to West Gambier's Lawrie Bradley-Brown.
At Island Park, Casterton Sandford struggled against South Gambier, going down to a rampant Demons side. Aat Vansittart Park, Millicent found the going tough against a red-hot North Gambier, which continue to look impressive. North booted six goals in the first term to lead by 33 and extended the lead to 57 at half- time. The Tigers booted a further 11 goals, winning 20.17 (137) to Millicent 4.4 (28).
The Western Border Football League is currently seeking applications for its senior, under- 17, under-15 and under-14 interleague coach positions. Former AFL footballer Heath Black will speak at the Bordertown Civic Centre on Wednesday night in support of a mental health initiative driven by the KNT Football League.
Details: contact Jo Callaghan at kntfl@sanflcfl.com.au
BASKETBALL THE Castec Rural Pioneers suffered a rare home defeat at the Icehouse on Friday night against the Hobart Chargers.
It was a tight affair all night, with scores level at 25 a piece at quarter time, the Pioneers were two points up at half-time and held the same 2 point lead going into the fourth quarter.
From there the equation was simple, the Pioneers had only the final term separating them from a perfect record of three wins from three games to start the season. However the Chargers proved too strong over the final stages, out scoring the home side by 12 points in the final term, with the Pioneers 84 going down to the Hobart Chargers 94.
Luke Jamieson had another big week, finishing the game with 23 points, 8 rebounds and 4 blocks. Next Friday night the Pioneers play their first game for the season away against the Geelong Supercats at the Geelong Arena.
GOLF VICTORIAN Glenn Joyner claimed the Barries Water Centre South Australian PGA Senior Championship as part of the E-Z-GO Legends Tour at the Blue Lake Golf Links yesterday.
Capping off a stellar week, Joyner took part in a playoff with fellow Victorians Tim Elliott who carded a 70 on Friday and 70 on Saturday and Michael Harwood who equalled the course record with 67 on Friday and 73 yesterday.
Joyner was a picture of consistency, carding 70 on Friday and Saturday. When he needed something special late on Saturday afternoon going down the picturesque 10th, he found it, sinking a 10-foot putt for birdie to claim his third win in SA on the tour.
SOCCER IT has been a big fortnight for Tess Clark, 26, from Gambier Centrals Soccer Club.
After coming off the bench in the second half as a substitute for the Lions against the Western Strikers, the mother of two has been inundated with media interest after becoming the first female soccer player to take part in the national, knockout FFA Cup competition. Clark has dominated the SEWFA competition since its inception and has racked up nearly 50 appearances in the local men's competition for Gambier Centrals. Clark, who coaches at the Young Lions MiniRoos Academy, will play seniors for Centrals today at home against Portland and took part in the South East Women's Football Association Pink Ribbon Carnival at Blue Lake Sports Park yesterday.
The spoils went to Millicent United, which claimed the under-15 cup, defeating Wanderers 1-0. In the seniors, it was Wanderers who took home the silverware, defeating United in the final 2-0.
AROUND THE GROUNDS MT Gambier's Simon Feil took out the Twin Peaks Hill Climb at Port MacDonnell last Sunday.
THE South-East Women's Football Association started the 2016 season with the traditional Pink Ribbon Carnival at Blue Lake Sports Park yesterday.THREE netballers helped SA laim the national under-17 championship, defeating NSW in the final 29-24. The side was led by Mary Wilson and vice-captained by Maisie Nankivell, while defender Sienna Allen rounded out the trio.
Word count: 758
