FOR a team that prides itself on accurate three-point shooting, the Wollongong Hawks often missed the target in Thursday's 92-73 road loss to titleholders New Zealand Breakers.
Of their 17 attempts from three-point range, the Hawks made just four.
The Breakers were far more effective, knocking down 12 of 24 'threes'.
Ironically, Wollongong won the rebound battle 35-31 and out-scored their opponents 42-36 on points in the paint.
They also had just nine turnovers compared to six for the reigning champions.
The Breakers generated 16 points directly from those Wollongong mistakes and conceded zero points from their own errors.
The Hawks started strongly, leading by as many as nine early and holding a 28-26 edge after one quarter.
The Breakers responded with a dominant display in the second period and were ahead 51-44 at half-time.
Wollongong were never really in the contest in the second half and will need a far more consistent effort when they take on Adelaide on the road next Saturday.
"I was really disappointed with a number of things," Hawks coach Gordie McLeod said.
"We need our core guys who have been here five or six years to be a lot stronger organising and demanding.
"To have success, we're going to have to have contributions from a lot of guys. We're down one import at the moment and we have to spread that load across the group and get contributions from everyone.
"We've shown in the preseason tournament that we can compete when we do that.
"We need to make some adjustments with regards to playing with one import and we have to be vigilant about not getting into foul trouble," he said.
Hawks import Rotnei Clarke marked his NBL debut with a game-high 20 points and centre Larry Davidson tallied 12 points and 11 rebounds.
Bench forward Dave Gruber chipped in 12 points, guard Tyson Demos had eight points and six rebounds while Tim Coenraad was hampered by foul trouble and finished with nine points and no rebounds.
Captain Oscar Forman (four points, four rebounds) endured a tough night against his former club and Rhys Martin missed all five of his field goal attempts.
Rookie Dominique Cooks hit one of six shots and development player Luke Jamieson showed his potential with an athletic rejection of a Breakers fast-break lay-up.
The Hawks are hoping to have a second import signed in time for their round two stoush with the 36ers.
Wollongong's first home game is on October 26 against Townsville.
Credit: BASKETBALL TIM KEEBLE
Word count: 429
