Rugby room
With the Rugby World Cup bearing rapidly down upon us, Flight Centre has accommodation packages available in all the major cities. The Derby Day weekend (November 1) in Melbourne, when the Wallabies face Ireland in a sell-out game atthe Telstra Dome, will be one of the most atmospheric periods in the entire tournament. But there's still room at the Grand Hyatt Melbourne for $414 a double, excluding air fares and game tickets.
For details of this and other games involving the Wallabies, against Romania in Brisbane and Namibia in Adelaide, phone 131 600.
Australia in 3-D
An unusual travel book, by the veteran photographer Ken Duncan, has just beenreleased. Called 3-D Australia, it has 45 images of the country, from the Sydney Opera House to Eric the saltwater crocodile, which can be viewed through the pair of 3-D glasses that come attached to the book. Duncan, and friends, spent "a fun-filled year" taking the images. The book ($35) is available at bookstores or can be ordered online at www.kenduncan.com
Schoolies' fun
The largest online survey of the travel needs of Australian school leavers has just been completed by Schoolies.com. The organisation claims to have surveyed 5000 past and present schoolies about accommodation and events during schoolies' weeks.
The general manager of Schoolies.com, Luke Jamieson, said the survey was designed "to ensure the Schoolies experience continues to evolve and improve".
When asked their impressions and expectations of Schoolies 2003, 33 per cent rated attending the event "extremely important", 20 per cent said it was "very important" and 19 per cent said it was "important".
Activities rated by schoolies as ones they would be most likely to attend if they were available included: beach dance parties (92 per cent), dance parties (89 per cent), live bands (89 per cent), extreme sports demonstrations (75 per cent) and beach DJs (74 per cent).
Thirty-one per cent said they expected to spend between $26 and $50 a day on food and partying, 29 per cent expecting to outlay between $51 and $75 and 19 per cent saying they would spend between $76 and $100.
Most of the money will be coming from the schoolies' pockets, with 49 per cent of respondents saying they would be paying for their own holiday, while 44 per cent said they would share the costs with their parents or guardians.
More than 40,000 people are expected to attend schoolies' celebrations from November 22 to December 21. Online bookings can be made at www.schoolies.com
China flights
One sign that SARS is a fading memory comes with the announcement that China's largest airline, China Southern, has introduced a third weekly Boeing 777 flight from Australia to Guangzhou. The new service operates every Tuesday from Melbourne and Sydney to Guangzhou, complementing the current Thursday flight on the same route and the Sunday service from Sydney only.
"The addition of a third weekly flight reflects a return to growth in the passenger and freight markets after recent global crises," said China Southern'sgeneral manager Australia, Annie Ye.
The new flights coincide with China Southern's recent announcement of a "buy one, get one free" business class fare of just $2780 for two people from Melbourne and Sydney to Guangzhou and Hong Kong, including all local taxes. For an extra $200 - a total of $2980 - both passengers can also fly economy class from Guangzhou to either Beijing or Shanghai. The special business class fares are available on most flights until March 31. Conditions apply. Details: phone 9231 1988.
Take this
We had spent a few days driving around Ireland from Cork towards Dublin. On this evening, the Irish sky turned on a gorgeous sunset for us over the spectacular Shannon River. The lads on the boat were larking around on a trapezeand I think the photo captures the wonderful sense of fun the Irish share, not just with each other but with anyone passing through their fair isle.
Annie Brandes, Beecroft.
For your chance to win a $30 voucher from Dymocks, the travellers' bookshop, send your best travel photo to: Take This, SMH Travel, GPO Box 506, Sydney 2001,or email in jpeg form at least 15cm wide to travel@smh.com.au. The Herald regrets that it is unable to return individual snapshots.
Next week
CARRY ON CAMPING
Adventure unlimited in the Northern Territory
Word count: 751
