WHAT CAN WE DO IN BARCELONA?
Could you give me some advice on what to do for a week in Barcelona and environs before a cruise to Copenhagen? We are a Baby Boomer couple, arriving in late May.
Aside from the obvious – a walk along famous La Rambla, a visit to the incredible food market, Mercado de La Boqueria, and a day at the museums (put the Picasso and Museum of Contemporary Art on your list) – you should allow for a day of (almost) aimless wandering, making sure you include the Gothic Quarter, and El Poble-sec area for the best tapas.
There are day trips you should consider too. If you want to hit the beach minus crowds, it’s a 25-minute train trip to Montgat Nord, where the railway station is right near one of the city’s best. An hour from Barcelona is Montserrat, a Benedictine monk retreat high in the mountains. Catch a train from the city to the base of the mountain, then take a cable car or rack railway to the monastery and its incredible views, and various walking trails.
You might also want to take a trip to the ancient walled city of Girona. Famous for its medieval architecture, and its starring role in season six of Game of Thrones (playing Braavos), it’s about 40 minutes from Barcelona by high-speed train. There you can walk along the medieval walls and explore one of the best preserved Jewish quarters in Europe.
My (adult) son and I will travel to Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania for about three weeks (in that order, one week each). I’ve heard mixed advice on visas – some say get on arrival, others that there is an East African visa online, or is it three separate visas? Appreciate any guidance so we can travel with confidence.
Ivona Siniarska is an Africa expert with 1000 Mile Travel Group, a member of Helloworld Travel, as well as the owner of Take Off Go, which creates customised Africa itineraries. She says, depending on your order of travel you should get the visas in advance if possible.
“You could organise a Tanzanian visa, as well as an East Africa tourist visa in advance. The East Africa tourist visa is a single-entry visa for foreigners visiting Kenya, Rwanda and Uganda simultaneously. It is multi-entry within the three countries, however, this expires automatically if a traveller goes outside of the three countries – so as long as nobody is flying back from Tanzania via Kenya or Uganda that could work.
“Otherwise, all three visas are available on arrival. Having them in advance saves queuing, sometimes – I say sometimes because you still have to go through immigration. Last time I flew through Nairobi the line for people with visas was longer than the one for ‘on arrival’. TIA (this is Africa) is a saying you will hear often – the equivalent of our shoulder shrug.”
My wife and I intend to travel to family in the UK in 2020 and while there take a trip to St Kilda in the Outer Hebrides, where I served in the army in 1959 (part of the rocket range – I had my 21st birthday there). We want to use a train to get from Stoke-on-Trent or Crewe to Mallaig on the west coast of Scotland (via Glasgow and Fort William). Then take the CalMac ferry to Lochboisdale in South Uist in the Outer Hebrides, overnighting at Lochboisdale Hotel. The next day we’ll bus or taxi north through South Uist, Benbecula, North Uist, then ferry to Harris where the St Kilda boat leaves from. I have particularly chosen this route through the islands as I also spent time on St Uist and Benbecula. (I realise I could reach Harris by ferries from Skye.) I’m still working out my time schedule but it will probably be from July 13-31. My question is, which train company or ticketing agency should I use to buy my tickets from, and which of the many types of tickets would you recommend?
Wow, what an incredible journey. I can vouch for the Glasgow to Mallaig train trip. I’ve done it three times. The first two were so mist-enshrouded I didn’t see a thing, but 18 months ago I struck glorious weather, and the most incredible scenery you could ever hope to see from a train window. I hope you get the same.
Your train tickets won’t likely be available to book until eight to 12 weeks before you travel. You can buy them via ScotRail or, more conveniently, use raileurope.co.uk. There’s no price difference but you can set up an alert to notify you when tickets for your selected journey go on sale. You can book ferry tickets on the CalMac website (the Mallaig to Lochboisdale route does need booking, unlike many Hebridean passenger-only ferry tickets).
As for what train tickets to choose – go to nationalrail.co.uk and click on the train operator you’re planning to use to find out the difference between first and standard. For example, ScotRail’s first-class seats recline more, have more leg room and have power points, and you’ll get free tea, coffee, water and biscuits along the way. On other lines, the difference can be negligible.
Don’t check your bank balance or buy anything online while using public Wi-Fi. And always log out of your email and bank account if you’re using a public computer.
Doc's TIP OF THE WEEK Don’t check your bank balance or buy anything online while using public Wi-Fi. And always log out of your email and bank account if you’re using a public computer.
NEED HELP?
Doc Holiday works closely with Helloworld Travel to ensure you get the most relevant, accurate travel advice Keep up with Doc’s weekly advice at escape.com.au/doc-holiday Send your questions to docholiday@news.com.au Personal replies are unfortunately not possible
CREDIT: Claire Sutherland
Word count: 978
