IT started as a plan to help Hills children reconnect after the devastating Cudlee Creek blaze – and now Bushfire Kids Connect is preparing to spread its messages across the globe.
Carly Ascott and her son Sebastian, now 10, founded the charity in the wake of the fires that ripped through the region just before Christmas in 2019.
The dual impacts of bushfires and Covid-19 lockdowns hit local families hard, Mrs Ascott says, with little support available for children.
“They had no play dates or sport because that was all cancelled,” she says. “Sebastian said, ‘Mum, I just want to have fun and be connected’. “I realised how crucial that connection was for children in their recovery.” They established the charity, which began hosting a series of events for children, such as a cartoon drawing, a BMX workshop and visit to town for the Christmas Pageant.
Mrs Ascott is among those recognised at this year’s Women in Innovation Awards, announced at a virtual ceremony on Thursday night.
The charity recently launched a new software program for city and country-based children about bushfires, yielding “incredible” feedback so far, Mrs Ascott says.
“Our aim is to roll this out nationally and internationally.” The program was developed in partnership with education technology company Makers Empire, and helps students understand bushfires and why they happen.
Mrs Ascott says this week’s award validates the charity’s vision – to give children a voice. Women in Innovation is a not-for-profit group supporting female innovators across South Australia.
Its president, Nicole Swaine, says the “outstanding” award winners are behind projects having an international impact in areas including science, the arts, technology, engineering, maths and data.
“This year’s Winnovation finalists and category winners are incredible women, making significant advancements across industries which drive our economy,” Ms Swaine says.
Visit: womenininnovation.com.au
WOMEN IN INNOVATION WINNERS Arts: Kathy Smart, Joy Everafter Stories Emerging Innovator: Dr Amal Osman, Flinders University Science: Helen Banwell, University of South Australia Technology: Alice Fitch, Whola Engineering: Amanda Mader, Vine Scout Maths & Data: Menasha Thilakaratne, University of Adelaide Rural, Regional & Remote: Carly Ascott, Bushfire Kids Connect Social Impact: Carmen Garcia, Community Corporate Open: Nina Sivertsen, Flinders University Young Innovator: Mary Kelly, Reusably Innovation and Intrapreneurship in Government: Susie Jones, SA Water
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE
Word count: 380
