A bunch of young entrepreneurs in South Australia are proving age is no barrier when it comes to making a start in business. From a seven-year-old farmer to a teenager with his own clothing line – there are some amazing kids who are earning more than just pocket money. PAULA THOMPSON looked at the young movers and shakers coming up with innovative ways to make a buck HAMISH EDWARDS LMV LIMOUSINS He’s only seven but this Fleurieu Peninsula lad is proving you’re never too young to follow a passion for farming.
Hamish Edwards is already on his way to setting up his own cattle stud, with the purchase of his first stud heifer this year.
But despite his youth, Hamish has been earning his own money since the age of three, rearing chickens and selling them at the local football club and to others in the Mount Compass area.
The funds raised have gone towards his dream of becoming a cattle man – but mum Kiara Edwards said he had also been given a lot of help from those in the agricultural industry along the way.
“Hamish was given a calf called Lucy by (Mount Compass livestock agents) Pro-Stock,” she said.
“She calved down but unfortunately Lucy died from birth complications. “We raised her calf, Willow, and later mated her and she had a calf we called Meg.” The names of these three cows helped form Hamish’s stud name – LMV Limousins. Hamish was told by his mum that if he made enough money from selling Willow and Meg, he could buy a stud heifer.
He fulfilled that dream this year, purchasing a heifer from the Maryvale Limousin stud at Kapunda, which he called Ruby. Ruby will be mated in July.
“Hamish would really like to eventually become a stock agent,” Mrs Edwards said. “He just lives and breathes agriculture.”
NATHAN WOODROW RYDE CLOTHING Nathan Woodrow has turned a negative into a positive – his very own clothing line.
The Renmark teenager has a lifelong passion for skating, wakeboarding, bike riding and surfing.
But at 15, a devastating knee injury stopped him taking part in sport for 18 months.
With plenty of time on his hands, and wanting to share his passion for the outdoors, he started the label Ryde Clothing – which celebrates both the outdoors and the Riverland – with handpainted T-shirts. He was just 16.
Those T-shirts expanded into a clothing range that now includes beanies and hoodies.
For the first three years, all the label’s sales were exclusively online, with his clothing being bought across Australia.
But last year, Nathan – who is now 20 – opened his first shop in Renmark.
SAM WEAVERs SAM’S POPCORN At just 10, Sam Weaver started his popcorn business that has taken him around the world.
“I started doing some business research when I was nine,” Sam, of Wayville, said.
“At first, I wanted to make chips. Every Friday, I’d try and make a batch but after six months I realised it wasn’t working.
“Later on, I was eating another company’s popcorn and I thought ‘I could make this better’ – and so Sam’s Popcorn was born.
“At first, I was just selling to family members, then to friends of the family.” Sam, now 13, went on to supply the Regal Theatre in Kensington with his popcorn and to also take on a number of speaking engagements about his business.
He spoke on the topic of “Thriving with Autism” at the Asia Pacific Autism Conference in Singapore, attended by 2600 people.
Sam said while he had not yet decided what he would like to do as a career, he was examining ways to expand his business, including possibly setting up a store.
Keen to give back, Sam has raised $20,000 for the Childhood Cancer Association. “Before COVID, I was going into schools, selling pails of popcorn, with 40 per cent of the sale price going to the Childhood Cancer Association,” he said. “Since COVID hit, I’ve been selling the pails on my website.” GRACE LAM GRACE’S HANDMADE CARDS When Somerton Park’s Grace Lam was in Year 11, she was agonising about what to do after school.
With visual and hearing impairment and Down syndrome, the 19-year-old felt there were no options for her after finishing her studies.
So, with the help of her mum, Monica Kwan, the creative teen set up her business, Grace’s Handmade Cards.
Grace started making cards featuring her own designs back in 2018, solely as a fundraiser for Tutti Arts – an organisation that develops the skills of artists with a disability.
“Grace realised she had no job options but she’s always been very creative,” Ms Kwan said.
“While she started off making cards as a fundraiser, we realised it was possible for her to have her own business.” As well as cards, Grace also makes candles, tote bags, T-shirts and custom glasses, selling through her website.
Ms Kwan said Grace’s big dream was to employ people in her business, with one of her friends already working alongside her one day a week.
ELI JONES MR ‘ELI’ PINECONE Mount Gambier’s Eli Jones is blazing his own trail with his quirky way to earn some extra pocket money in the South East.
Eli, 10, is selling 10kg bags of pine cones for $20, for use as firelighters, and delivering them across Mount Gambier.
The enterprise started only a few weeks ago, with Eli collecting the cones from his grandparents’ property near Millicent and bagging them up.
Eli’s mum, Emily, helps him use social media to spread the word about his enterprise.
“I thought it was a good way of helping Eli develop social skills, a good work ethic and resilience,” she said.
NOAH PRONK STICKY PRONK What started as a school project has turned into a business for Glenelg North teenager Noah Pronk.
When Noah, 14, was in Year 6 in primary school, he was given a project to start a small business – with only $20.
Being an avid surfer and ocean lover, Noah came up with the idea of an environmentally friendly surf wax made using beeswax and coconut oil.
He started off supplying the product to his mates and family but word of mouth spread through social media and his business, Sticky Pronk, has now been running for three years.
“I’ve got about 15 stockists, mainly in South Australia but also a few in Queensland and NSW,” he said.
While he’s still only in Year 9, Noah said he hoped the Sticky Pronk business could one day grow to become a full-time career.
HARRY REPANICH GLENELG CANDLE CO Glenelg South youngster Harry Repanich has turned his passion for candle-making into his first business.
The 13-year-old registered his own venture – Glenelg Candle Company – a month ago.
“I’ve been making candles for about three years with my Mum and really fell in love with it,” he said. Harry said he had a long-time dream of setting up his own business and candles were the perfect fit.
His candles are already stocked in Glenelg South business Mrs S & Co and he is also selling to Pvu Retreats in Port Elliot and Airbnb accommodation in Glenelg.
Sales are also made through his Instagram page.
Harry is also looking at attending markets in the future to spread the word about his candles.
ELLIOTT AND JESSICA THORNHILL G3D PRINTING SOLUTIONS These entrepreneurial siblings from Adelaide’s southern suburbs have sold hundreds of manufactured products since establishing their start-up business, G3D Printing Solutions.
Elliott Thornhill, 14, was introduced to the technology by local start-up Makers Empire, which provides 3D printing software and learning programs to more than 1000 primary schools in four countries.
Together with 11-year-old sister Jessica, they use 3D printers to manufacture a wide range of products including bag tags, custom cake toppers, pet tags, cookie and icing imprinters, coffee stencils and custom parts to replace broken household items. They run market stalls and sell products on Facebook, delivering across Australia.
CREDIT: PAULA THOMPSON
Word count: 1338
