ADELAIDE software company Makers Empire is being feted by governments across the nation as its innovative 3D printing learning program continues to be rolled out across the world.
The Federal Government picked the company to star in one of its television advertisements promoting innovation launched just over a month ago.
And, the State Government is supporting a $40,000 pilot program launched this term to trial its technology at 28 schools in northern Adelaide and the Limestone Coast.
It's been a rapid growth curve for the company that first launched its 3D printing program in 2014 after graduating from the ANZ Innovyz START accelerator.
Since then the number of primary schools across the world using the program has climbed to 129 with company chief executive Jon Soong just arrived back in Adelaide from meetings in New York State where 25 of those schools are based.
Mr Soong said the company, founded with his friends Roland Peddie, Anthony Chhoy and Lap Leung, was targeting children and teachers from kindergarten to Year 8 to be part of the future in technology and advanced manufacturing.
"We wanted to get in on the earlier years, if you wait until Year 8 to teach in this area a lot of kids are self-selecting themselves out of it," he said.
The company found itself operating in New York after an initial cold call from Professor Stan Silverman at the New York Institute of Technology who said he had been on the hunt for a program like the one developed by Makers Empire.
After presenting their case, the company ended up running a 15-school pilot project started last year in New York State and Makers Empire now has two staff based there along with its product being used in about 25 schools in the US.
"Makers Empire has also recently signed agreements with Regional Information Centres and Board of Cooperative Education Services in the state of New York, allowing hundreds of school districts in the state to easily access and procure Makers Empire 3D Printing Learning Program," Mr Soong said.
There are also schools in China using the program and Makers Empire had signed a deal with Korean distributer Greencom to target its local education market.Makers Empire had secured a sales and distribution partnership with Datacom Education for Australia and NZ, and now has 10 staff and a headquarters in Pulteney Street with Mr Soong saying the plan is to build its presence in schools by the hundreds over the year.
Credit: BELINDA WILLIS
Word count: 427
