Clare Primary School are one of 50 schools selected from across the State to integrate 3D printing into their curriculum.
In a joint initiative between the South Australian Department for Education and Child Development, and Adelaide tech startup Makers Empire, CPS has received two new 3D printers to help assist with the students learning.
Makers Empire's 3D software is being used as part of the roll-out, designed to develop the students science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) skills, as well as encouraging them to be creative and think critically.
Year 1 and 2 students from CPS were invited to take part in a showcase with the other 49 schools involved, and received positive feedback for their work having been the youngest age group participating.
Mrs. Jane Wetherall, Year 1 and 2 teacher at CPS, said the other schools were "amazed" at her students learning process.
"Being the youngest children there was amazing," she said.
"I think the other schools were amazed at the learning process the children had gone through, and then to their final product and how they had actually linked it across all of the curriculum areas.
"They could explain the process and what they had actually learnt, so I think creating something is great but being able to explain your learning process shows a greater and a deeper understanding and that is what they did."
Principal Mark Vincent echoed Mrs. Wetherall's sentiments.
"It was a great opportunity for our students, six and seven year olds, to go and present their learning in front of students from a number of other schools," he said.
"And to stand up and talk about what they had been doing and to show the learning that they had been undertaking was a fantastic opportunity and they did a great job.
"It was a really proud moment for me to see our young students being able to stand in front of strangers and talk about what they had been learning."
The student's project using the 3D software was based on dinosaurs, which focused on using their creativity to create their own idea for what it would look like.
The process involved a lot of pre-planning and problem solving in the design process before their idea was created.
Mrs. Weatherall said that the 3D software could trickle down into other subjects as well, revolutionizing the way students are taught.
"You do not have to say today we are doing 3D printing, you could do it in history," she said, "so it could be that you are reproducing artefacts.
"The children go on this journey of learning for a real purpose and a real reason and I think when the learning is real, children get really engaged."
CPS are working alongside a number of schools from within the metropolitan area, and Mrs. Weatherall said that the access her students had to this type of technology put them on a level playing field with those from the city.
"We are on a level playing field with everyone across the State," she said.
"Often rural schools are excluded and it may be due to access or time or training and development, so Makers Empire and the Education Department, because they have merged with this project, have made sure that teachers have access to training.
"It has been revolutionary for us I think."
Integrating 3D printing into the school curriculum is currently still in the trial phase, however it could be rolled-out into more South Australian schools by next year if it is deemed a success
CREDIT: Brendan Simpkins
Word count: 591
