Clare Primary School is one of 50 schools selected from across the state to integrate 3D printing into their curriculum.
In a joint initiative between the Department for Education and Child Development, and Adelaide tech startup Makers Empire, CPS has received two new 3D printers to help assist with the students' learning.
Makers Empire's 3D software is being used as part of the rollout, designed to develop the students science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) skills, as well as encouraging them to be creative and think critically.
Year 1 and 2 students from CPS were invited to take part in a showcase with the other 49 schools involved, and received positive feedback for their work.
CPS Year 1 and 2 teacher Jane Wetherall said other schools were "amazed" at her students' learning process.
"Being the youngest children there was amazing," she said.
"I think the other schools were amazed at the learning process the children had gone through.
"They could explain the process and what they had actually learnt, so I think creating something is great but being able to explain your learning process shows a greater and a deeper understanding."
Principal Mark Vincent echoed Mrs Wetherall's sentiments.
"It was a great opportunity for our students to go and present their learning in front of students from a number of other schools," he said.
"And to stand up and talk about what they had been doing and to show the learning that they had been undertaking was a fantastic opportunity and they did a great job."
The student's project using the 3D software was based on dinosaurs, which focused on using creativity to design their idea for what it would look like.
Mrs Weatherall said CPS was working alongside a number of schools from within the metropolitan area, and the access her students had to that type of technology put them on a level playing field with those from the city.
"We are on a level playing field with everyone across the state," she said.
"It has been revolutionary for us I think."
Integrating 3D printing into the curriculum is currently still in the trial phase, however it could be rolled-out into more state schools by next year if it is deemed a success.
CREDIT: Brendan Simpkins
Word count: 377
