AN Adelaide software company that wants to lay the 3D building blocks for jobs of the future has teamed up with a US maker of high-tech next-generation toys to start a creativity revolution.
Makers Empire's tablet-based 3D application program, used by schools in South Australia and New York, will now be part of US gaming company Sphero's popular smart-device operated robot, Ollie.
A participant in the ANZ Innovyz START accelerator program, Makers Empire's smartphone application allows Ollie followers to design their own 3D add-ons for the toy.
It's a marriage made in techie heaven, says Roland Peddie, one of the three founders of Makers Empire.
"We met the founder of Sphero at an event in Sydney. He showed us Ollie and we showed him our applicaton and the collaboration was born," he said.
The free Ollie Customizer application allows users to customise and create accessories which can be custom-printed and shipped, for under $50 or self-printed from just $1.29, Mr Peddie said.
The two companies have a strong interest in building the next generation of inventors and innovators and have a presence in the education sector.
North Adelaide Primary School, Scotch College and Westminster School are among at least a dozen schools in Australia using Makers Empire's 3D design and printing learning program Lighthouse.
Sphero has its own program - Schools, Parents, Robots Kids (SPRK) - in the US where students learn programming to control the robot toys using smart phones and tablets.
"Mohawks and camera mounts are a given, I'd say, but I'm very curious what kind of wacky genius comes out of the Ollie community. We'll be encouraging creativity with some competitions along the way," Mr Peddie said.
Sphero co-founder Ian Bernstein said the partnership was a great opportunity for both companies.
"We are constantly inspired by the creativity we see around our robots and are thrilled to offer our community a tool that will bring their ideas to life," he said.
While sales are hard to predict, Mr Peddie said, the bigger goal was to make 3D fun and accessible.Makers Empire is based at the UniSA Centre for Business Growth on North Terrace, chaired by Harvard educated Dr Jana Matthews.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 379
