Mundulla Primary School students are the proud owners of a brand new 3D printer thanks to a state-wide competition involving more than 50 schools.
In a joint initiative between the dtate government, the South Australian Department for Education and Child Development, public schools and Makers Empire, the competition was designed to engage students in Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics Skills using 3D technology.
Padthaway Primary School principal Olivia English was fortunate enough to secure a grant for Tatiara district primary schools including Mundulla, Padthaway and Frances to allow them to use the software and enter the competition.
Students from Mundulla Primary were set with the brief of designing an entrance sculpture for the town through the 3D printer software.
From there, 40 students from Years 3 through to 7 each designed their own sculpture and from that, the best 10 were voted on by the students to be sent to the Limestone Coast primary schools expo in Naracoorte on June 9.
"The program was a great way for the students to try their hand at something different. They really enjoyed using the software to create sculptures that could one day be introduced into the town," Mundulla Primary School teacher Joann Packer said.
The company, Makers Empire, is a global educational technology company, headquartered in Adelaide.
Its world-first 3D printing learning program — Makers Empire 3D for Schools — contains everything schools need to introduce 3D printing to the classroom with 3D printing lesson plans, a teacher's dashboard, professional development and analytics.
"The DECD-Makers Empire partnership is an excellent example of businesses working with school communities to develop learning experiences that involve students in real world problem solving and challenges" said Linda Olifent - Director of Primary Learners.
Mundulla Primary was named one of the runners-up in the 50 school state-wide competition after some participating schools came together for a Showcase Day at Grange Primary School last Friday.
"The staff at the Department of Education and Child Development were so impressed with our designs that they have even added two printing filaments with the printer," Mrs Packer explained.
While the students are yet to receive the new printer, they are waiting in anticipation for the arrival of the new machine. The printer is expected to arrive within the next few weeks.
CREDIT: Hamish Ferguson
Word count: 383
