ONE of the world's largest start-up accelerators Mass-Challenge is establishing a base in Adelaide at the Microsoft Innovation Centre with support from the Federal Government.
The new partnership was announced by Industry, Innovation and Science Minister Christopher Pyne yesterday along with $280,000 federal funding in a bid to help launch new tech companies in the state.
"MassChallenge, a non-profit that takes no equity in the start-ups, has a proven model that has graduated 835 alumni since 2010, raised $1.1 billion in funding, generated over $520 million in revenue and created 6500 jobs," Mr Pyne said.
"That is the kind of opportunity we want to create for start-ups here in Australia while also helping upskill the Australian innovation ecosystem." Originally from the United States, MassChallenge has spread internationally and now runs intensive four-month programs for start-ups in four other countries.
"We want to create that ecosystem in Australia so we don't just rely on agriculture, or international students or the mining sector or the actual services sector," Mr Pyne said.
"(We want Australia to) really break out into this new sector of the economy of innovation and we encourage all of our existing businesses to think creatively and innovatively about the future of their businesses.
MassChallenge would start a bridge program in Adelaide in 2016 with plans to launch a full program in 2017.
Microsoft Australia managing director Pip Marlow said at the launch in Adelaide yesterday it was important to make innovation part of the national agenda and that it was long overdue.
"Innovation has always been at our heart and it's something we believe in, we know it creates jobs, we know it creates the solutions for the future, it's about us here in Australia being competitive on the international stage and we have a real opportunity to do that in partnership with Mass-Challenge," Ms Marlow said.
She said it was important to remember most job creation came from companies less than five years old and most job destruction from those older than five years "so embracing this community and helping our start-ups be successful is important to job creation and the future of Australia".
Jon Soong, from educational 3D app creator Makers Empire, was part of the four-month MassChallenge program in Boston last year and said it had helped the Adelaide start-up grow its business.
There were now 10 staff at the Makers Empire Adelaide office, more in New York and contracts sold worldwide.
EMPIRE STRIKES 2013: Makers Empire founded by Adelaide friends Jon Soong, Roland Peddie, Anthony Chhoy, and Lap Leung - developing software learning programs on 3D printing technology for use in schools.
September 2014: Launched Makers Empire in Hong Kong.
February 2015: Launched a pilot 3D design and printing program for schools and museums in New York state.
April 2015: Secured a sales and distribution partnership with Datacom Education for Australia and NZ.
June 2015: Joint winner of the Start Up Company of the Year award at the SA iAwards 2015.June 2015: Finalist in the MassChallenge global accelerator in Boston, US.
Credit: BELINDA WILLIS
Word count: 520
