ADELAIDE 3D software company Makers Empire has attracted $1 million in funding as part of an equity deal with a new US-based shareholder.
US cloud services company Polar3D’s investment will also make Makers Empire a partner in its GE’s Additive Education program to roll out 3D printers (and related education) to 400 schools there.
Makers’ software, which helps children from kindergarten through to Year 8 get familiar with 3D printing and also assists teachers in education, will be rolled out to 200 of those schools.
“Polar3D saw the potential of what we are doing and it’s great to be a part of their partnership with GE,” said Makers Empire chief executive and co-founder Jon Soong.
“We’ll be developing customised products for the US schools,” he said. “The addition of the Polar Cloud to our solution set completes the design cycle and gives our users the ability to control 3D printers from their browsers.” Polar3D chief executive Greg LaLonde said the group would welcome Makers’ 200,000 student users to its platform. “We look forward to delivering Makers Empire’s design tools, including 3D software and over 130 curriculum-aligned lesson plans, to our global community,” Mr LaLonde said.
The start-up company, which first launched its 3D printing program in 2014 after graduating from the ANZ Innovyz START accelerator, has grown rapidly to 16 staff, 13 of them based at the St Paul’s Creative Centre in Adelaide.
About 50 schools in SA use its software, some as part of a $40,000 pilot supported by the state government.
The GE roll-out takes its total global footprint, including Australia, to about 500 schools.
“The opportunity in this space is big enough and we are confident about the growing focus on 3D design in schools as part of the future of technology and advanced manufacturing,” Mr Soong said. “We do want to eventually get to every school in Australia.” Last May, the company co-founded by Mr Soong, Roland Peddie, Anthony Chhoy and Lap Leung, was included in the Federal Government’s advertisements promoting innovation.
The company has a distribution partner in China, which Mr Soong described as a market with a “slower burn”, and a deal with Korean distributer Greencom for that market.There is also a sales and distribution partnership with Datacom Education for Australia and NZ.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 383
