MANY children spend their spare time playing video games or watching TV but a pair of entrepreneurial siblings in Adelaide’s southern suburbs are instead focused on growing their own start-up business.
Elliott Thornhill, 12, and sister Jessica, 9, have sold hundreds of manufactured products since establishing their start-up business, G3D Printing Solutions.
Elliott said he was introduced to the technology by local start-up Makers Empire, which provides 3D printing software and learning programs to more than 1000 primary schools across four countries.
“At school, me and my friends thought that it would be a good idea to run a skateboarding business but nobody was committed to starting it up so that failed,” he said.
“But then, once I knew how to 3D print, I thought this would be a great idea for a business and that’s where it all started. We thought it would be a great idea to attend local markets to sell our products and show people the technology we use.” The Thornhills spend more than 20 hours a week on their business, using four 3D printers to manufacture a wide range of products including bag tags, custom cake toppers, pet tags, cookie and icing imprinters, coffee stencils and custom parts to replace broken household items.
They run market stalls and sell products via Facebook, delivering across Australia and New Zealand.
Since it was established in 2014 as part of ANZ’s Innovyz accelerator program, Makers Empire has grown its workforce to 17 and currently generates annual revenue of more than $2 million.
Founder and chief executive Jon Soong recently graduated from ANZ’s Business Growth Program, delivered by the Australian Centre for Business Growth, UniSA and growth expert Dr Jana Matthews.
“The Business Growth Program was over three modules – one in Adelaide at UniSA and two units in Melbourne,” Mr Soong said.
“It’s really about teaching you the skills and processes to grow your company and it’s targeted at businesses that are a little more mature, that are past the early start-up phase.
“Being able to talk to other companies – there were some really big companies in the program with tens of millions of dollars in revenue – learning from them was excellent.” Mr Soong said Makers Empire delivered its service to around 300 schools in South Australia and more than 1000 schools across Australia, the UAE, China and the US.
With the company targeting annual growth of 50 to 100 per cent, Mr Soong said his focus remained on reaching out to more schools and educating children like Elliott and Jessica.
“They’re learning all the skills you need to sell something and create a business. They’re so enthusiastic, it’s a pretty crazy story,” he said.Makers Empire is a finalist in this year’s Telstra Business Awards.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 463
