MICROSOFT has picked South Australia ahead of NSW and Victoria to open its second Australian innovation centre.
"We felt SA gave us a unique opportunity in terms of access to talent and - probably more importantly - a joined-up ecosystem between industry, government and academia to really make a go of it," Microsoft state director Brian Kealey said.
The Microsoft Innovation Centre SA, formally opened last night, joins a similar operation in Queensland and a network of about 100 around the world.
"At MICSA, we are bringing together the best and brightest start-ups in the local area, supporting them to reach their goals as they move through the mentoring and founder training curriculum," Mr Kealey said. "Our mission is to nurture our local talent when they need it the most. The target is to create at least 80 new jobs through start-ups using the centre." The centre will give access for start-up companies to take part in Microsoft's BizSpark program of training workshops, software and cloud facilities. Rooms will be made available in Microsoft's SA HQ for business meetings, and product launches.
Microsoft will use its connections with all three major SA universities, government and existing incubators such as Majoran, to give start-ups as much support as possible.
At the centre's opening, Premier Jay Weatherill said the centre would help the state create new opportunities.
"We need to create a business environment that integrates and provides significant value-add to the global supply chain," he said.
"Innovation drives growth, sustainability and diversification for SA's businesses and the broader economy.
"Here in Adelaide we are building ourselves a reputation as an emerging entrepreneurial community that is supported by programs and services that drive innovation, create new business and jobs growth." The centre will encourage mentorship with five new companies signed up as foundation partners after already working with Microsoft.
Jon Soong, one of the owners of Makers Empire, said the Microsoft BizSpark Plus program had been a fantastic boon.
Makers Empire is a software developer making programs to help teachers in primary and middle schools teach 3D printer skills to their students.
"It's given us plenty of access to their software and cloud hosting," he said. This had saved Makers Empire a significant amount of money as well as speeded up its development process.
Mr Kealey said Microsoft was excited by the project.
"We think SA will have an impact on the national scene in terms of innovation and business growth," he said.
FIRST MOVERS THE foundation members of the Microsoft Innovation Centre SA include: my Evidence: Founded by Tung Tran and Jerome Lienert, my Evidence aims to simplify work for police by digitally capturing evidence from the scene of a crime.
Maker's Empire: Software developed for teaching 3-D printer skills in primary and middle schools.
LASH: Lend A Skilled Hand connects a range of volunteers with community and charity projects.
Codies: An interactive learning program for children using competitive gaming.Jemsoft: A system to automatically scan retail customers with potentially threatening individuals denied access to the store.
Credit: CHRISTOPHER RUSSELL
Word count: 519
