IN less than a year, more than $3.5 million has been granted to nine innovative South Australian small and medium enterprises via a revamped federal program.
Makers Empire, which develops software programs to help teachers in primary and middle schools teach 3D printer skills to students, has been granted $284,882. Company co-founder Roland Peddie said the grant would be used to spread the 3D learning experience in the US and grow distribution links in Asia.
Since the launch of Accelerating Commercialisation (AC) in November last year, which superseded Commercialisation Australia, SA businesses represent 16 per cent of successful applicants.
They have received 12 per cent of the $30.3 million allocated nationally. The local entrepreneurial ecosystem and nurturing environment are key reasons why SA is punching above its weight, given that the state is home to 7 per cent of Australia's population.
AC director Pat Mooney said that a fundamental aspect of the program, overseen by the Department of Industry, Innovation and Science, was that companies don't just get cash to splash - each is assigned an experienced adviser and access to a network of interconnected companies.
Locally, Doug Adamson, Ann Angel and Grant Steinberg are on-the-ground advisers. "We have a big emphasis on how we work with companies, it's not just about handing money out," Mr Mooney said.
"The commercial advice we provide is absolutely integral, because many businesses don't know what their end goal is or where they need to position themselves within the market." Another business to have received AC funding is Latent Heat Storage (LHS), which has patented a low-cost and highly scalable thermal energy storage system (TESS) based on the latent heat properties of silicon derived from sand.
It differentiates from competing technologies because of its scalability, from small-scale 500kW applications through to large scale applications in the hundreds of megawatts. It will be suitable for commercial and industrial businesses where both heat and electricity are required such as hotels, hospitals, schools and aged care facilities.
LHS was recently granted $400,000, which shareholders will match dollar-for-dollar.
"Our team is eager to further develop and introduce the TESS device on a global scale, so we're very excited at the federal government grant, which gives us a huge boost as we pursue commercialisation," chief executive Jonathan Whalley said. "After three years of R&D, our key objective now is to complete building a commercial prototype of the TESS device." The device has been developed with engineering consultancy ammjohn and the University of Adelaide.
The next round of successful AC applicants will be announced in the coming weeks.
SA RECIPIENTS Accelerating commercialisation: - Portalogue Solutions $800,000 - iDataMap Corporation $410,707 - Latent Heat Storage $400,000 - Biosensis $375,783 - SureNUT $361,921 - Regional Skills Training $339,968 - Air Tip $325,000 - Makers Empire $284,882- Adelaide Research and Innovation $250,000
Credit: LUKE GRIFFITHS
Word count: 483
