ORGANISERS of the annual SouthStart conference, described by the State Government as the “jewel” of Entrepreneur’s Week, are pulling the plug on the event and all other entrepreneurial support activities, citing lack of support.
SouthStart co-director Steve Barrett yesterday lashed out at the State Government’s “rhetoric” on making Adelaide an entrepreneurial hub.
“There is a lot of talk around making the city a technology and innovation hub, but there is no support on the ground, no financial or other help,” Mr Barrett said.
“We submitted a number of proposals to the State Government to keep SouthStart operational.
“It is a key platform for technology start-ups, but there is nothing on the table for an organisation that has helped more than 60 start-ups get off the ground.” SouthStart – formerly known as Majoran – operates a co-working space on Grenfell St, runs networking activities, has organised an annual start-up conference since 2013 and has a start-up accelerator program. Majoran was Adelaide’s first private, co-working space when it started in 2012 on Pulteney St.
The conference was supported by $400,000 in state funding over four years, which ended this year, and has been a key plank in the growth of Adelaide start-ups like Makers Empire, which is focused on 3D printing programs for schools and online art gallery Bluethumb.
The not-for-profit organisation, funded through memberships, has seen its membership dwindle to 10-12 active participants, down from 60 three years ago. Mr Barrett blamed the decline on the mushrooming of other co-working spaces in the CBD, showing a “lack of focus and vision” and SouthStart’s inability to offer new entrants a hi-tech space with fast internet speeds.
“We are the first building they show in all the animated fly-throughs of Adelaide as a smart entrepreneurial hub, but we have dismal internet speeds,’’ he said.
“There’s no sign of the promised GigCity rollout. We are not able to get a 2000sq m space to build the next generation of companies, while Sydney and Melbourne have access to thousands.” SouthStart said about 130 industry leaders, business owners, and venture capitalists supported its petition for a State Government-funded, CBD-based tech precinct. “It was aimed at creating a dedicated technology-enabled real estate purpose-built for start-ups, international tech companies, entrepreneurs and programs,” Mr Barrett said.
Innovation Minister Kyam Maher said to date, the Government had provided SouthStart with $400,000 in funding “There are no plans to provide SouthStart with funding to cover their co-working space’s rent or renovations,’’ he said.
“South Australia has a thriving innovation ecosystem, with a significantly larger number of programs and co-working spaces than when SouthStart opened in 2012, including global programs such as Techstars and MassChallenge.
“As with all businesses, the challenge remains for these co-working spaces to provide competitive value and differentiate their product.’’
SOUTHSTART’S TRACK RECORD ■ FIVE years supporting South Australian start-ups companies and entrepreneurs ■ 60 start-up companies ■ 232 co-working members ■ 500-plus one-day hot desks sold ■ Five programs launched ■ 50-plus workshops and events ■ 130-plus meet-ups SOUTHSTART CON-FERENCE HAS SEEN ...
■ 120-plus speakers and VIPs ■ 3000-plus attendees ■ 150-plus exhibitorsSource: Steve Barrett, co-founder SouthStart
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 512
