A FOURTH generation member of the family behind one of South Australia's most successful businesses is among the state's largest trade delegation in China this week which is exploring new export pathways.
Philippa Crawford, daughter of Paul Crawford, joint managing director of CMV Group, is visiting sister-state Shandong, assessing export opportunities for CMV Farms.
CMV Farms is the agribusiness arm of the diversified group established in 1934 which employs more than 1200 staff with an annual turnover of more than $1 billion.
The business development manager of CMV Farms, spread across three horticultural farms and vineyards in South Australia and Victoria, said her maiden visit to the region was about understanding the market.
"I hope to understand how our farms can feed the growing thirst for wine in China," she said.
"About 354 hectares of our land at Langhorne Creek is under wine. "Most of the current volume of grapes is sold under a long-term arrangement to Pernod Ricard (maker of Jacob's Creek and other brands), which is a strong relationship for us.
"Besides that though there is scope to expand our Shearer's Hill brand of wines, which is currently sold exclusively through a distributor in Shenzen in China." A cellar door in Shenzhen currently showcases the Shearer's Hill range which consists of a classic, premium and prestige label.
Ms Crawford, who has studied viticulture and worked overseas for wine companies joined CMV Group earlier this year.
She is one of 300 South Australian business and government representatives visiting five cities in the region this week - Jinan, Zibo, Qingao, Yantai and Linyi - led by Premier Jay Weatherill, Trade Minister Martin Hamilton-Smith, Tourism Minister Leon Bignell and Regional Minister Geoff Brock.
Mr Weatherill told the travellers at a pre-departure briefing last week it was the largest international delegation to anywhere in SA's history, highlighting the interest and effort going into growing exports by leveraging the sister-state relationship with Shandong.
He said each of the cities - with a total population of 40 million - was a multi-million dollar opportunity for businesses across sectors, but the onus was on them to make the most of the business forums organised around sporting, dining, fashion and other events.
Barossa Fine Foods' Franz Knoll, Micromet's Andrew Townsend, Ziltek's Richard Stewart, Makers Empire's Jonathan Soong, Austofix's Mark Balnaves, Zoos SA's Sarah Brown, Campbell Thompson from Chapel Hill Winery, Randal Tomich from Tomich Wines, Andrew Stocks from Iron Road, Stehr Group's Marcus Stehr and Seppeltsfield's Nicole Hodgson are among the visitors.
Mr Hamilton-Smith and about 70 of the visitors will stay another week to participate in the events planned along side the Federal Government's Australia China Week.
"The response to the trip has been outstanding, businesses involved are paying their way as well as additional costs," Mr Hamilton-Smith said.
However, Shadow Trade Minister Tim Whetstone commented: "Given the State Government is still unable to provide an overall cost of the previous large trade mission to China, it seems unfathomable another 300 people are travelling to China again without being able to measure value for money.
"The Weatherill Government's failure to support effective in-country trade representation in Shandong has hurt our export performance despite a 30-year sister-state agreement with the province."
WHAT'S HAPPENING . . . AND WHERE JINAN Adelaide 36ers vs. Shandong High speed basketball game tonight; tomorrow, the government's China adviser Sean Keenihan will launch a new bilingual SA Shandong Connect information portal featuring SA business profiles.
A business fair has been organised around three themes - wine, health and general.* 30th anniversary gala dinner at the Shandong Hotel.
QINGDAO, LINYI, ZIBO Launch of a new SA Film Corporation-supported TV series, Chef Exchange, a four-part series that will run on Qingdao TV this month. The series features Adelaide chef Jock Zonfrillo and Shandong chef Qu Jianmin.
Also expected to emphasise Fringe favourite Royal Adelaide Club, previously known as Royal Croquet Club, will be part of annual beer festival in August.
YANTAI A sister-city intent agreement and a memorandum of understanding on aged care will be signed between Yantai and City of Charles Sturt mayor Angela Evans.
OTHERS As reported in The Advertiser recently, FABAL Wines chief executive Chris Day is on the trip and will also be visiting Shanghai to launch an office there.* The business fairs are being repeated in all cities.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 733
