DESIGNER Matt Stuckey Matt Stuckey, who works as BeFriendly, is spreading a message of happiness through his design initiatives and public art works. He tells GORDON KANKI KNIGHT he wasn't always so upbeat...
ABOUT TRUST In terms of shaping the city, it's a unique privilege to be able to affect people who you're never going to meet - hopefully positively. I did the East mural on Ebenezer; Progress Produce on Ebenezer; two in Topham Mall; one in Uni SA; there are two on Leigh St; Bank St and Claxton St on the ground; Whyalla skate park and more. When I started out doing murals, I knew they'd have an impact and I wanted them to be interesting - but now I'm thinking more about the social aspect of them.
TURNING THE TIDE When I was in my early 20s, I played in a heavy metal band called Tidal. We all looked the part: belts with spikes in them, chains, multiple piercings, and then I woke one day and realised I wasn't angry about anything. I'm a white guy in Australia - none of my issues were anything but teen angst. So I quit the band.
HAPPY TIMES My first design job was at Happy House (an art-based girls' lifestyle and product brand). I'd just turned 22 and was employed as an illustrator, but quickly began doing product and packaging designs for our licensees around the world, primarily in South Korea, so I had to learn to communicate bilingually and across cultures, often by expressing things visually. This experience, probably more than anything I learnt at uni, taught me the importance of clarity.
POSITIVE SIGNS Recently, I was approached by Reece Formosa, who runs Delivery Boyz (deliveryboyz.com.au). He was sitting in his car at a red light, staring at an empty wall and had thought: "Wouldn't this wall be better with something positive on it?" He was thinking more like a street art wall, I guess. But after mulling the economics of it I ended up thinking of it as a campaign, not an art project. (You can see Positive Signs in Pirie St carpark, York St and on EcoCaddy rickshaws, visit positivesigns.net.au). Positive Signs is all about creating positivity, changing the way people think day to day.
EARLY YEARS My dad is a minister of religion so we moved a lot when I was young. I went to five primary schools so I learned how to bounce between things. And if I was curious about something, my parents would let me do it. It was always: "I want to know how to do that so I'm going to try."
BACK TO SCHOOL With my son being in Year 1, I'm really interested in education again. Coincidentally, late last year I was approached by Makers Empire, a company that does curriculum-based 3D printing and design programs for Years K-8. They were looking for a branding/user interface/user experience designer. I'm not very impressed with the Australian school system. Maybe I'm naturally biased, but research indicates that design thinking - observation, empathy, collaboration, exploration - are the skills kids need, not standardised testing. Working at Makers Empire gives me an avenue to be involved in improving education.
NEXT UP Different people know different things. In life you should hang out with different people, so I've joined together with a copywriter, art director, producer, film-maker, motion-graphics guy, photographer and web developer in a shared space we're calling Super8. Together, we have the complementary skills to do just about anything. Personally, I'm trying to figure out how I can do more to effect a mindset change. You can change a logo or paint a mural but, ultimately, that's only going to do so much. I'm trying to attract clients who understand that there's a whole mentality that goes with it. I want to effect institutional change. --
Word count: 637
