Thrillseekers can get in the picture, as Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson explains
CONTOUR GPS VIDEO CAMERA
Meeco Sales, $499
meecosales.com.au
****
WHAT do base-jumping, biking, hiking, hunting and off-roading have in common? All offer outdoorsy fun and yet none is camera-friendly.
No one wants to drop their camera in the drink, get it covered in mud or carry it in a sweaty palm while walking for several hours. Not even Bear Grylls.
To counter this, a company called Contour has developed "wearable cameras". And the latest offers GPS-tracking.
By wearable, the company really means mountable. The Contour GPS Video Camera comes with three attachments: two adhesive mounts for flat surfaces and one that can be affixed to a goggle strap. This should give you some idea of its target audience -- those who take part in sports so risky they require a helmet.
Mercifully, the Contour GPS camera is reasonably lightweight at just 147g.
This camera shoots in three resolutions and two frame rates, with the most impressive being full high-definition (1080p) and 30 frames per second.
The other easily available resolution is 720p at 30fps -- accessed via a switch near its battery -- while other settings offering higher frame rates and such must be accessed via software.
Alternatively, you can set the camera to capture still photos at a rate of three, five, 10, 30 or 60 per second.
The camera, made from aluminium, has very few buttons, so a read of its manual is recommended.
Video from the Contour GPS is colourful, surprisingly crisp and very watchable, even on a big screen. The video does suffer from barrel distortion (a fish-eye effect), though, and the omnidirectional microphone is a great addition, but can only do so much in high wind.
The Contour GPS may not be the cheapest way for thrill seekers to capture and share their adventures (Flip video camera and gaffer tape, anyone?), but it must be one of the slickest. Those who do invest should love the results.
Credit: Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 345
