CRICKET
AGGRESSIVE fast bowler Brad Williams was rushed to Adelaide last night as Australia hatched a hostile game plan for tomorrow's second Test against India.
There is a substantial push for Williams to play at the Adelaide Oval tomorrow and yesterday he was hauled out of Western Australia's Pura Cup game against Tasmania in Perth after taking six wickets in the match to ensure he could catch a 5pm flight to Adelaide.
Williams has applied overwhelming pressure on seamer Andrew Bichel who had poor game in the first Test in Brisbane, taking 1- 130 in India's first innings.
Bichel yesterday did not attend a compulsory media open day for the players in Adelaide and Cricket Australia officials could not locate him for several hours after he left the team's morning training session.
The final decision on the 12th man will not be made until Australian captain Steve Waugh meets with selector Andrew Hilditch this morning but there is a growing feel Australia needs more grunt in its pace attack.
In the absence of Brett Lee, Williams's name is up in lights on a ground at which he has taken 24 first class wickets at 16.46.
"It is one of my favourite grounds to bowl on," Williams said yesterday. "I have tended to get reverse swing there."
Waugh is a long-time advocate of having fast bowlers who can rattle the opposition with short pitched bowling and he admitted yesterday Williams's aggression may have been missed in the first Test when he was 12th man.
"We picked the right bowlers for those conditions up there, we just didn't get to bowl when it was green and seaming around," Waugh said. "Brad gives us different things when he comes into the side -- pace, bounce and a bit more aggression."
Australian selection chairman Trevor Hohns said Williams was taken out of the Pura Cup game to ensure he would have enough rest to be ready to play in the Test if he is selected but no decision had been made on whether he would play.
The Indian media were surprised Australia failed to put more heat on the batsmen with short pitched balls in the first Test but Waugh said the composition of the attack made this difficult.
"If you have a Brett Lee or possibly a Brad Williams you can possibly bowl a bit shorter. The attack we had probably wasn't suited to bowling a lot of short stuff," he said.
"We tried to create pressure but it didn't happen all the time at the Gabba. We had our moments in the Brisbane Test but we did not play as well as we would have liked and we hope to see improvements this Test."
Waugh admitted he was still amazed by continuous media referrals to his role in Damien Martyn's run out and fears for the future of the player who replaces him in the Test arena if he is subjected to similar scrutiny.
"It is still in the papers a week later. Are you going to blame fieldsmen who drop easy catches in future? Where does it stop? A mix- up, a run-out and seven days later we are still talking about it. I can't come to terms with it. It's not right," he said.
Word count: 570
