BASEBALL
THE SA Baseball League returns this Saturday night and familiar faces are expected to again feature in finals this season.
Defending champions West Torrens will kick off the season in a grand final rematch against Port Adelaide with American slugger Terrell Joyce a key in.
The Eagles will be without one of Australia’s young guns as 19-year-old Jordan McArdle moves to Sturt where the Arizona Diamondbacks Minor League player will juggle Adelaide Bite commitments.
Port has been strengthened by the return of key imports in Capps Medallist Dylan Brammer and Alex Carter and will be expected to contend for a championship.
On paper, Sturt is an early favourite with McArdle and Henley & Grange pair, Devon Barker and Tyler Chappell, also making the switch east.
When the Saints come up against Kensington this Sunday there will be intrigue as Evan LeBlanc steps up for the Cardinals against his former side, while Greg Mosel also debuts for a new team.
Alongside Joyce, Mosel is part of a key trio which has departed Glenelg, along with 2015/16 Capps Medallist Wes Roemer. The Tigers travel in the opening round to Goodwood, which has made smart acquisitions, including Adelaide Angels’ key man Luke Keogh.
East Torrens has gained Queenslander Ryan Duncan, while Woodville has brought journeyman Wilson Lee back after several successful seasons in Europe. Both teams are top-six challengers.
At the bottom, Canadian coach Rob Ushy returns in a boost for Northern Districts. His goal will be developing a winning attitude while leading a young side, coming off just three wins last season.
The Reds will be focused on overcoming fellow tailenders Southern Districts and Golden Grove, which have shown improvement with youth.
Meanwhile, the expanded SA Women’s Baseball League will begin on October 20 with 14 teams, from Gawler to Onkaparinga, represented.
OPENING ROUND SATURDAY 7PM West Torrens v Port Adelaide SUNDAY 3PM Sturt v Kensington Goodwood v Glenelg East Torrens v Woodville Golden Grove v Henley & Grange Southern Districts v AdelaideBYE: Northern Districts
CREDIT: Alex Jacobs
Word count: 338
