COLLINGWOOD president Eddie McGuire labelled aspects of Friday night's AAMI Stadium first qualifying final "amateur hour" in a heated conclusion to the Magpies' 13-point boilover.
McGuire was infuriated by the antics of scoreboard announcer Roger Rasheed, who urged the crowd to get behind Port Adelaide at the quarter, half and three-quarter time breaks and questioned umpiring decisions.
He was so angry that he rushed to AFL chief executive Wayne Jackson to vent his frustration at three-quarter time.
"It was fair dinkum amateur hour," McGuire said.
"It's not good enough for an AFL final.
"The game was in the balance and you've got some lunatic on the scoreboard saying `barrack harder' and `that wasn't a free kick, that wasn't touched'.
"Something like that can also incite a crowd to riot. You don't need a moron whose job it is to incite the crowd and start bagging the umpires."
McGuire confirmed the club would send a letter detailing their concerns to the AFL this week.
"They had pretty much the Port Adelaide show on the scoreboard," McGuire said.
"It's supposed to be a neutral venue. I don't mind the fact it was in Adelaide and good luck to the supporters. But you can't have the scoreboard inciting a riot or inciting one side.
"It would be like me getting up at three-quarter time at the MCG in two weeks' time and telling the crowd to `c'mon, let's get behind Collingwood'. It was a circus."
On radio yesterday McGuire said Collingwood might try to set up an association with its South Australian equivalent, the Port Adelaide Magpies, exploiting a growing rift in that state. There has been tension for several years between the Power and its SANFL sister club and McGuire is looking at exploiting the situation.
"I am just hearing a lot of stuff back from SA at the moment that there's a real rift between the Power and the Magpies -- that the Power don't really want them," he said.
"We might talk to them and may be a big brother for them. They're orphans and we just may be their foster parents . . . that's if it happens."
Port Adelaide chief executive Brian Cunningham angrily dismissed McGuire's claims of a rift between the Power and SANFL Magpies.
"I think that's typical of Eddie's showmanship, speaking about things he's got no idea about," Cunningham said.
"There's no rift between the Magpies and the Power."
Illustration
Caption: Magpies fly home: Anthony Rocca is all smiles at Melbourne Airport after arriving home yesterday.; JOE SABLJAK; Photo: Photo
Word count: 425
