GARY Ayres was involved in another altercation with a spectator last night in the aftermath of Adelaide's amazing second semi-final win against Melbourne at the MCG.
Ayres angrily confronted a spectator as he made his way from the Great Southern Stand coaches' box, seconds after the Crows had booked themselves a preliminary final berth against Collingwood. In a high-standard, free-flowing shootout, Adelaide led by 40 points
quarter time, trailed by 28 points midway through the third quarter, then booted 6.6 in the final period win by 12 points.
Ayres played down the incident with the spectator, the second time this season he has been involved in crowd-related incident.
Against Geelong at Skilled Stadium in Round 17, he landed in trouble with a finger gesture to the crowd after the Crows' victory.
A witness to the altercation last night said the spectator was a Collingwood supporter among a
group of people who had verbally abused Ayres and other Crows officials.
People were coming up to us as was trying to get down and then someone pushed me from behind and I actually grabbed the guy and don't know whether he was a Collingwood supporter, or what," Ayres said.
Ayres said his players were courageous in weathering the Melbourne comeback.
The boys were very, very brave tonight," he said. "We certainly left Brisbane last week with our tails between our legs and to come away with a two-goal win after a 12-goal belting showed enormous character," he said.
We got ourselves back on track the last quarter. At three- quarter time all I said to the players was that they were capitalising on our mistakes."
Ayres said the mood of the side had remained upbeat despite the point turnaround by Melbourne.
"I said to the guys during the week if we were to do well in the finals, our leaders would have to stand up, and that is exactly what they did tonight," he said.
I thought Mark (Ricciuto) in the last quarter was great, Andrew McLeod going to full-forward, Benny Hart, Nigel Smart, Tyson Edwards, Matty Clarke in the ruck, they all got on top."
McLeod, who had been shut down by Simon Godfrey after dominating early, was forced from the field in the third quarter with what club later said was an ankle complaint.
But he returned early in the final quarter and played at full- forward the rest of the match, kicking a goal in the Crows' astonishing surge.
Melbourne's Stephen Powell was concussed in the first quarter after being slung to the ground in a tackle by Tyson Stenglein.
Melbourne recovered part of its point quarter-time deficit with goal-of-the-year nominations from
Peter Vardy and Adem Yze, but were left to rue two poor attempts goal, from Travis Johnstone and Brad Green, before halftime.
BEN HART knows football in September is all or nothing, as Michael Place reports.
The dual premiership player last night said a risk-or-reel mentality had been the cornerstone to the Crows' final-term resurgence against the Demons. He believes it could be the key the club's charge at a third flag in six seasons.
"It was about taking risks, getting on the front foot and winning the ball in tight a bit more," Hart said of his side's remarkable comefrom-behind win.
"I think we really took a risk and went for it and it came off. When you get the chance to play finals footy, it doesn't come around too often.
"In that third quarter, not a lot was happening for us and to the boys' credit they got their hands on the footy and things turned out well."
Hart, who played most of the match on former teammate Peter Vardy, said he made a concerted effort to run off his man late in the match.
He was among those to help sway the momentum the visitors' way.
Last night's win helps bury the memory of last year's elimination final mauling against Carlton at the same ground.
Illustration
Caption: Saturday night special: Andrew McCleod celebrates a goal.; DAVID GERAGHTY
Word count: 673
