REBORN Socceroos' winger Stan Lazaridis has given the strongest indication yet he will finish his blossoming career with Adelaide United.
Fresh from his most successful season in the English Premier League, Lazaridis is on the cusp of signing a lucrative new deal that will tie him to Birmingham City until the 2006 World Cup.
He arrives in Australia this week to prepare for Australia's two international friendlies against World Cup semi-finalist Turkey later this month and the Oceania Nations Cup, beginning in Adelaide on May 29.
In the past, the former West Adelaide star has been non- committal about returning home to play, but his enthusiasm has been stoked by Frank Lowy's broom sweeping through Australian soccer.
Adelaide, his wife Mary's home town, looks the most likely option, but he also expressed interest in a possible move to Perth aide.
"People want it to work and it sounds very exciting," Lazaridis said of the revamped national league, which is not expected to start until July or August next year.
"I will be in England for the next two years and focusing on the World Cup. Frank (Farina) will probably not be playing anyone who isn't based overseas, so I've got to be playing in the best competition possible.
"But after two years I would like to look at playing in Australia, particularly in Perth or Adelaide."
The Oceania Nations Cup is the first step on the winding road that is Australia's World Cup qualifying campaign.
Lazaridis, 31, is a central figure in Farina's plans after a stunning season with Birmingham City which catapulted him to the Premier League's top bracket.
In March, The Independent newspaper ranked him the second best midfielder in England behind Robert Pires of Arsenal and ahead of such luminaries as Roy Keane (Manchester United), Patrick Viera (Arsenal), Frank Lampard (Chelsea) and Steven Gerrard (Liverpool).
He has also netted a string of awards this season, including Birmingham's most improved player and his club's goal of the year honour.
"I have one more year on my contract as it stands but we'll be looking to to extend that for maybe another year," Lazaridis said. "We'll talk more about it at the end of the season and see what happens."
Word count: 372
