AUSTRALIA'S rough-house tactics against Ireland at Subiaco Oval on Friday night have ignited fears about the future of the International Rules concept.
The fall-out from the spiteful clash has already begun with recently-retired Adelaide and Australian midfielder Mark Bickley reported on a striking charge and defender Matthew Scarlett the subject of league investigation.
Bickley's charge will be heard on Wednesday night.
Scarlett faces a probe by an AFL investigations officer after a second quarter incident that left Irish star Des Dolan with a broken nose.
AFL media manager Patrick Keane said yesterday an investigation had begun due to the lack of video evidence.
The clash, which appeared to be unprovoked, occurred while Scarlett was running towards the interchange bench.
While Irish coach John O'Keeffe played down the incident, Dolan and his teammates were privately fuming.
When asked after the match if the Australians had acted outside the spirit of the game, an angry Dolan offered a curt "what do you think?".
As he spoke his teammates yelled, "he has a broken nose".
Yesterday's fiery clash follows a long line of ugly incidents that have marred recent International Rules matches.
Defender Chris Scott was suspended from this series after being found guilty of striking last year.
Two years ago his Brisbane teammate Jason Akermanis also received a two-match ban for striking.
Former Australian coach and Sunday Mail columnist Neil Kerley yesterday feared Ireland may boycott future series if Australia does not address the situation.
"We don't have to revert to that to win the game," Kerley said. "It's bloody stupid stuff and completely unnecessary.
"I'd hate to see the game tarnished and dispensed with because of these incidents.
"Ireland might just turn around and say `we're not playing in these games any more'."
Kerley, who coached Australia's 1987 tour of Ireland, called on Australian coach Garry Lyon to stamp out the bully-boy tactics ahead of Friday night's second Test at the MCG.
He said the AFL may be forced to suspend players from premiership matches to deter undisciplined acts in future. Currently, players can only be suspended from International Rules games.
Lyon said the Australians' approach was "controlled aggression".
"It was outstandingly so and they played almost to the letter of the law and when we did step over we copped the penalty," he said, noting that a first quarter tackle by Barry Hall probably set the tone for the remainder of the match.
Bickley was reported after clashing with Paul McGrane, an incident for which he received a yellow card and 15 minutes in the sin bin.
Word count: 428
