AGGRESSIVE fast bowler Brad Williams was rushed to Adelaide last night as Australia hatched a hostile game plan for tomorrow's second Test against
India.
There is a substantial push for Williams to play in the Test, and yesterday he was hauled out of Western Australia's Pura Cup game against Tasmania in Perth to ensure he could catch a 5pm flight to Adelaide.
Williams -- who took six wickets for the match against Tassie -- has applied overwhelming pressure on Australian seamer Andy Bichel.
Bichel had a poor game in the first Test, taking 1-130 in India's first innings.
Bichel yesterday did not attend a compulsory media open day, and Cricket Australia officials could not find him for several hours after he left the team's morning training session.
The final decision on the 12th man will not be made until Australian captain Steve Waugh meets with selector Andrew Hilditch this morning, but there is a growing feeling the home side needs more grunt in its pace attack.
In the absence of Brett Lee, Williams' name is up in lights on a ground at which he has taken 24 first-class wickets at an average of 16.46.
"It is one of my favourite grounds to bowl on," Williams said yesterday.
"I have tended to get reverse swing there.
"I think my preparation this season has probably been the best it's ever been so I'm confident if I do get selected I can get through.
"I'll probably get to Adelaide, have a nice massage tomorrow and do all my recovery like I normally do.
"Hopefully I feel pretty good come Friday."
Williams also doused fears about his health.
"I've just had a bit of a virus," he said.
"I just worked my way through that and I'm feeling a lot better today, and felt a lot better bowling."
Waugh is a long-time advocate of having fast bowlers who can rattle the opposition with short-pitched bowling and he admitted yesterday Williams' aggression may have been missed in the first Test when he was 12th man.
"We picked the right bowlers for those conditions up there. We just didn't get to bowl when it was green and seaming around," Waugh said.
"Brad gives us different things when he comes into the side -- pace, bounce and a bit more aggression."
Australian selection chairman Trevor Hohns said Williams was taken out of the Pura Cup game to ensure he would have enough rest to be ready to play in the Test if he was selected, but no decision had been made on whether he would play.
The Indian media was surprised Australia failed to put more heat on the batsmen with short-pitched balls in the first Test, but Waugh said the composition of the attack made that difficult.
"If you have a Brett Lee or possibly a Brad Williams you can possibly bowl a bit shorter. The attack we had probably wasn't suited to bowling a lot of short stuff," he said.
"We had swing bowlers, guys who can bowl a good line and length who bowl in the corridor. There is no point bowling a lot of short deliveries if it is not the style of bowlers you have got.
"We tried to create pressure but it didn't happen all the time at the Gabba. We had our moments in the Brisbane Test, but we did not play as well as we would have liked and we hope to see improvements this Test."
Waugh admitted he was still amazed by continuous media referrals to his role in Damien Martyn's run-out and fears for the future of the player who replaces him in the Test arena if he is subjected to similar scrutiny.
"It is still in the papers a week later. Are you going to blame fieldsmen who drop easy catches in future? Where does it stop? A mix- up, a run-out and seven days later we are still talking about it.
"I can't come to terms with it. It's not right.
"To create issues like that guys are going to be thinking if they make a mistake on the field they are going to be thinking what are the consequences of that."
Waugh said he had no regrets about announcing his decision to retire before the start of the Indian series despite the pressures which engulfed him in Brisbane.
"I am 100 per cent happy and confident I made the right decision for the right reasons and everyone at the time thought it was the right decision," he said.
BRAD-ELAIDE OVAL
Brad Williams' first- class record at Adelaide Oval:
Mts Wkts Av
4 24 16.46
Five wickets hauls:
6-98 Vic v SA 1995-96
5-38 WA v SA 2002-03
5-49 WA v SA 1999-00
First-class career:
MtsWkts Av
53 191 30.16
10 five-wicket hauls
Best: 6-98 Vic v SA 1995-96
Word count: 857
