ESSENDON will nervously await the results of this week's video review after a third-quarter incident involving fullback Dustin Fletcher in Friday night's first elimination final against Fremantle.
While the quartet of Matthew Lloyd (hip), Dean Solomon (ankle), Damian Cupido (knee) and Dean Rioli (wrist) are set to play in this week's semi-final, Fletcher could be headed back to the tribunal for the second time this year.
Fletcher appeared to raise his arms and feet off the ground before making contact to the head of Fremantle's Roger Hayden.
Hayden was awarded a free kick, but was unharmed by the hit.
Umpire Mathew James was heard to say to Fletcher: "Dustin, keep them (arms) down."
Fletcher was cleared of a striking charge against Adelaide's Brett Burton in Round 15, but has been to the AFL tribunal 10 times since his first appearance in 1995.
Last year, he was suspended for two matches for misconduct against Chris Judd during the elimination final against West Coast. He missed Essendon's second final, the cut-throat semi-final clash with Port Adelaide.
The news on Lloyd is better, with the star forward likely to play this week against the loser of today's qualifying final between Port Adelaide and Sydney.
Lloyd left the field early in the third term after a knock to his left hip but returned to boot two goals in the final term. He kicked five for the match.
Solomon hobbled to the bench just before three-quarter time after rolling his ankle, while Cupido and Rioli should also play this week.
All took part in the club's recovery session at Cottesloe Beach yesterday, and officials said they were certain starters for the semi-final.
Bombers veteran Joe Misiti said the club would try to make the most of an eight-day break to recover from the long trip west and some injury concerns.
It will be the first time the Bombers have played consecutive interstate finals.
Skipper James Hird believes the football public's infatuation with Fremantle's maiden finals appearance provided the spark for Essendon's demolition job.
Hird, who amassed 28 disposals and two goals in a silky display, said the Bombers had used the nationwide Dockers hyperbole as ammunition.
"I just think that sometimes people forget there's two teams playing," Hird said.
"I know it was a home final and they've played well, but we're a footy club that's been around for 140 years, and I think that we deserved a little bit more respect than what was perhaps given.
"I think it was a given that Fremantle was going to win. No game is a given."
The Bombers have won nine of their past 11 matches, and coach Kevin Sheedy believes his charges are better placed than last year, when they were knocked out in the second week of the finals by Port Adelaide.
"We played very well against Port last year," Sheedy said.
"We lost (Matthew) Lloyd and (Dustin) Fletcher, and (Mark) Bolton got a hamstring (injury) in the game. It was actually a very tight game up until about 100 minutes. So I think we're better placed this year."
FLETCHER'S RAP SHEET
2003 Round 15, striking (Brett Burton, Adelaide), cleared
2002 Elimination final, misconduct (Chris Judd, West Coast), 2 matches
Round 13, striking (Nathan Brown, Melbourne), 2 matches
Round 3, melee (Brisbane), fined $3000
2001 Round 10, tripping (Craig McRae, Brisbane), 1 match
Round 10, tripping (Craig Bolton, Brisbane), cleared
Round 16, goalpost shaking (Kangaroos), $600
2000 Grand Final, striking (Brent Grgic, Melbourne), 2 matches
1999 Round 13, kneeing (Luke Darcy, Bulldogs), 3 matches
1995 Round 2, striking (Anthony Jones, Fremantle), 1 match
Word count: 599
