Essendon 3.3 7.6 11.8 15.11 101 points
Fremantle 2.2 3.4 4.6 8.9 57 points
INSPIRATIONAL skipper James Hird believes the football public's infatuation with Fremantle's maiden finals appearance provided the spark for Essendon's demolition of the Dockers at Subiaco on Friday night.
The Bombers will enter next week's first semi-final against the loser of today's Port Adelaide-Sydney duel with no injury concerns after full forward Matthew Lloyd (hip) and defender Dean Solomon (ankle) were cleared of serious damage.
Lloyd left the field early in the third term after a knock to his left hip but returned to boot two goals in the final term and five for the match.
Solomon hobbled to the bench just before three-quarter time after rolling his ankle. Both took part in the club's recovery session at Cottesloe Beach yesterday and will play next week.
Hird, who amassed 28 disposals and two goals in a silk-laced display, said the Bombers had used the nationwide Dockers hyperbole as ammunition.
"I just think that sometimes people forget there's two teams playing," he said.
"I know it was a home final and they've played well but we're a footy club that's been around for 140 years and I think that we deserved a little bit more respect than what was perhaps given."
When asked whether the lack of interest in Essendon's build-up had provided motivation to the team, Hird replied: "Definitely. I think it stirred something in all of us. It was constantly talked about. I think it was a given that Fremantle was going to win. No game is a given."
The Bombers have won nine of their past 11 matches and coach Kevin Sheedy believes his charges are better placed than last year when they were knocked out in the second week of the finals by Port Adelaide.
"We played very well against Port Power last year," Sheedy said. "We lost (Matthew) Lloyd and (Dustin) Fletcher and (Mark) Bolton got a hamstring (injury) in the game. It was actually a very tight game up until about 100 minutes. So I think we're better-placed this year."
Fremantle had a sensational year -- but a sorry exit.
"We're really, bitterly disappointed like, really bitterly disappointed that two times in three weeks Essendon's thrashed us," Connolly said.
"Absolutely thrashed us."
Connolly has stuck to his mantra he is shaping a young team to become a force in the finals in the years to come.
"We're going to learn a hell of a lot from this game, the whole week. The game is immeasurable for a lot of our players but I think they got a taste of wanting to do it again," Connolly said.
Word count: 445
