KENSINGTON and Glenelg loom as premiership favourites, Port Adelaide as the smokey and Henley and Grange as the big improver in the SA Baseball League season which starts this weekend.
After beating perennial contender Glenelg in last summer's league decider, the Cardinals are aiming for their third straight championship - a feat that has not been achieved since the mid-1980s.
They have added highly-touted pitcher Martin Schneider, from the Czech Republic, as well as US import Adrian Burnside.
Coach Leigh Norman said: "We've probably got the equal of last year's team, if not better. The danger would be complacency but we were one of the first teams to start pre-season. Everyone's pretty prepared and I think we're looking all right."
Glenelg coach Darren Bromley said he expected his side to feature highly again this season after last year's grand final loss.
"There was a bit of disappointment after last year," he said.
"The expectations for this year are high again. We still have a very strong squad (and) we've got some good young talent that we've had in the last couple of years and some really good juniors."
Adelaide Bite assistant general manager Nathan Davison, a former long-term division one coach, said: "Last year's champs will go in as favourites. They've recruited well. Glenelg have lost a few but will rely on their depth in pitching to make sure they're strong."
Davison said Port Adelaide and Woodville also would be around the mark.
Henley and Grange, boosted by key recruits, should improve on last summer's 11th-placed finish.
Davison said Sturt and Golden Grove Central District would be among contenders, with East Torrens and Northern Districts tipped to improve.
Adelaide Angels
Last season: 10th
Coach: Ben Catalano
Ins: Lou Gamble (US), Chris Congdon (Glenelg)
Outs: Ben Weekley (retired)
Glenelg Tigers
Last season: Runner-up
Coach: Darren Bromley
Ins: Joe Atkins (East Torrens), Wayne Ough (returning)
Outs: Alex Derhak (US), Todd Gossage (US), Ben Hilterbrand (Czech Republic), Chris Lawson (Sturt), Cameron Langley (Goodwood)
Credit: MATT TURNER
Word count: 334
