RICKY Ponting has warned the world's fastest bowler Shoaib Akhtar that Australia has no fear of his bowling or his motor mouth in cricket's showdown of the summer.
Australia yesterday completed its 2-0 destruction of New Zealand in the Trans-Tasman series leaving Ponting and the nation's cricket fanatics hankering for a spicy confrontation between the Pakistani thunderbolt and Australia's domineering batsmen on the game's fastest pitch in Perth.
Ponting yesterday said his men were craving the competition and were unfazed by the verbal taunts sure to flow their way.
"I think he tries to get under your skin a little bit, as he did in the last tour here of Australia," Ponting said.
"The good thing about it is we have had some success against him so we don't need to build it up too much or say too much back to him.
"He can do whatever he wants to put us off. It's a bit of a challenge to us to be as strong as we possibly can and make sure we are doing the job with the bat.
"So I am sure all those antics will continue on in this next series and I am sure we will enjoy it as well."
Akhtar was unconcerned by Ponting's remarks when informed about them at the team hotel in Perth yesterday.
"Let them talk but I want to talk with the ball rather than talk myself," he said. "I'm fit and strong and I am paid to bowl quick and I have a few more years to bowl quick. They are the toughest batsmen in the world and it is not going to be easy for us."
Continued Page 95
Bring on the best
From Page 96
The clash with Pakistan will pump up an international summer, punctured by a boring and out of depth Black Cap unit which lost the second Test in Adelaide by 213 runs.
Chasing 464 to win, New Zealand added just one run to its overnight total of 5/149 before Jacob Oram (40) edged Glenn McGrath to Adam Gilchrist, a mortal blow to any hope the Black Caps had of saving the game.
Stephen Fleming would have been glued to online weather forecasts when Gillespie softened up keeper Brendon McCullum then trapped him lbw with the score on 160.
Daniel Vettori applied himself as those higher up the order should have making 59 but this just delayed the inevitable with the Kiwis eventually dismissed for 250, one run less than their first innings total.
The Australian attack of Glenn McGrath (2/32), Jason Gillespie (2/ 41), Michael Kasprowicz (2/39), Shane Warne (2/79) and Darren Lehmann (2/46) shared the spoils in a relentless assault on the Kiwis.
Ponting heralded the work of his attack on curator Les Burdett's brilliant Adelaide Oval strip.
"This group of bowlers is something very special - there's no doubt about that. The way we were able to build and maintain pressure on a very good batting wicket was something very special in itself," Ponting said.
Page 92
Australia's
challenge
Word count: 539
