AFL
ESSENDON
15.11 (101)
DEFEATED
FREMANTLE
8.9 (57)
ESSENDON will nervously await this week's video review after a third-quarter incident involving full back Dustin Fletcher in Friday night's first elimination final against Fremantle.
The Bombers smashed the Dockers by 44 points, after a week of punch and counter-punch between coaches Kevin Sheedy and Fremantle's Chris Connolly.
But as the dust settled, attention turned to another mishap involving Fletcher.
The Bomber appeared to raise his arms and feet off the ground before making contact to the head of Fremantle's Roger Hayden, who was awarded a free kick but was not hurt by the hit.
In Round 15 this year, Fletcher was cleared of a similar striking charge against Adelaide's Brett Burton.
If cited, it would be Fletcher's 11th appearance at the tribunal since 1995.
It was the only lowlight on a night in which Essendon turned up the heat on finals debutant Fremantle.
And none were happier than Docker-turned-Bomber Adam McPhee, who has learned not to take things for granted.
For McPhee, it is not just hackneyed football jargon when he tells you he is just happy to get a game.
Twelve months ago he couldn't.
In a sub-plot almost forgotten amid the purple frenzy of the Dockers' first final, McPhee played a key role in dismantling the club that last year off-loaded him.
The 20-year-old has become the latest multi-purpose weapon of wily coach Sheedy.
He began the match opposed to Matthew Carr before being charged with shadowing Dockers' skipper Peter Bell.
In the second half he found himself on the wing and also spent time in defence.
It's a role McPhee is revelling in.
"It's a good challenge when you don't know who you're going to play on," he said.
"I guess that's what it's been like all year for me.
"I don't mind where I'm playing as long as I'm playing. That's the positive thing."
McPhee said he noticed the difference in club culture the moment he walked in the door at Windy Hill.
"The difference in both clubs is pretty dramatic," he said. "The spirit around the club is a lot more obvious and the boys are a bit more experienced.
"They are pretty casual in the way they go about things. They don't get too excited and just stick to the team plan."
The Bombers face another sudden-death away final against the loser of today's clash between Port Adelaide and Sydney.
The finals-hardened Bombers strangled the life out of Fremantle and its 42,000-plus crowd.
Skipper James Hird set up the rout and spearhead Matthew Lloyd kicked five goals.
Ruckman David Hille excelled as the visitors booted eight goals to two in the second and third quarters, while tagger Damien Peverill frustrated many of the Docker runners.
It was the Bombers' first interstate win since Round 9 last year, and the first time a Victorian club has defeated the Dockers in the west under Connolly's tenure.
ESSENDON 3.3 7.6 11.8 15.11 (101)
FREMANTLE 2.2 3.4 4.6 8.9 (57)
GOALS: Bombers: M Lloyd 5, J Hird 2, D Cupido 2, D Hille, D Peverill, S Welsh, J Johnson, B Haynes, A Henneman. Dockers: M Pavlich 2, P Medhurst 2, J Farmer, P Hasleby, L Webster, D Headland.
Word count: 540
