STEVE WAUGH has shelved his traditional "blood and thunder" WACA warning to tip Stuart MacGill to turn history on its ear against Zimbabwe in Perth today.
Tipping a leg-spinner to shine in Perth is akin to nominating a Spanish clay-courter to win Wimbledon.
Of the 25 five-wicket hauls taken by Australian bowlers in Perth's 33-year Test history, all but two have fallen to pace with only Perth off-spinner Bruce Yardley bucking the trend.
Last year Waugh made England quiver on match eve when he forecast "there's going to be injuries" on Australia's bounciest pitch and only last week he made a similar prediction for Zimbabwe.
But on arriving in Perth and noting an early-season deck which may not be as firm and fast as last year's, Waugh has warned Zimbabwe that MacGill could be as effective as pace trio Brett Lee, Jason Gillespie and Andrew Bichel.
"Stuey (MacGill) is bowling exceptionally well in the nets, possibly as well as I have seen him," Waugh said. "He will play a big part in this match."
Even the great Shane Warne (23 wickets at 42 in nine Tests) has been reduced to bit-part status in Perth.
MacGill, who took an encouraging 4/84 in his only Test here against the West Indies, was raised in Perth before heading to Sydney eight years ago.
That this is the first Test between the two nations in Australia is a minor embarassment to the host nation, given Zimbabwe had to wait 11 years as a major nation for an invitation to play Tests on our soil.
Statistics paint a desperate picture of Zimbabwe's prospects.
It has no batsman averaging more than 28 while Australia has five averaging more than 50.
Zimbabwe has won just seven of its 67 Tests, including three against Bangladesh and none against non-Asian nations, a stark comparison to Australia's 80 per cent success rate in the four years of Waugh's captaincy.
The skipper dropped another hint this is likely to be his farewell Perth Test, therefore his last chance to score a ton on the only Australian ground where his highest Test score (99) is beneath 100.
"The odds are unlikely," he said. "I've played 162 Tests and got 32 centuries. That means one roughly every five Tests. It's not a gimme."
When quizzed about whether this would be his farewell tour he quipped "you make me sound like Cold Chisel".
There is genuine sympathy within Australia's ranks for the plight of the Zimbabweans. The base of the game there has all but collapsed with the white population of about 250,000 dwindling to 20,000 under the presidency of Robert Mugabe.
"Zimbabwe have a lot of potential," Waugh said.
"We need to support them and the ICC needs to back them as well."
AUSTRALIA: Matt Hayden, Justin Langer, Ricky Ponting, Damien Martyn, Steve Waugh (captain), Darren Lehmann, Adam Gilchrist, Andy Bichel, Brett Lee, Jason Gillespie, Stuart MacGill (Brad Williams 12th man).
ZIMBABWE (probable line-up): Dion Ebrahim, Trevor Gripper, Mark Vermueulen, Stuart Carlisle, Craig Wishart, Craig Evans, Sean Ervine, Heath Streak (captain), Andy Blignaut, Tatenda Taibu, Ray Price.
Word count: 544
