PAKISTAN has turned Glenn McGrath's famous targeting practice back on the Australian paceman by declaring it has marked him as their man to watch in tomorrow's first Test in Perth.
McGrath had livened up the three-Test series by naming Pakistan batting trumps Inzamam-ul-Haq and Yousuf Youhana as the batsmen he would hunt down.
But Pakistan coach Bob Woolmer placed McGrath in the sights of his players as they prepared for the huge task of beating world champions Australia at home.
"We'll target him as much as he targets us," Woolmer said.
"We'll recognise Glenn McGrath as a threat and we will want to see him off. We want to see him bowl his spell and be taken off without a wicket.
"But this is not about one person, it never has been."
Pakistan has had more trouble with Shane Warne over the years, surrendering 76 wickets to the leg-spinner in just 12 matches.
Warne's skill may be challenged by the pace-friendly WACA Ground but Woolmer will instruct his batsmen to forget about Warne's reputation as Test cricket's greatest wicket-taker.
"We can't get too carried away - we're playing against a cricket ball. If you start getting too focused on the names behind the cricket ball then you will make it harder for yourself," Woolmer said.
Pakistan returned to the WACA nets yesterday after being granted a rest day on Monday following its disastrous 10-wicket loss to Western Australia.
The tourists' zippy pace attack will appreciate the Perth wicket but they only needed to listen to McGrath talk yesterday to douse some of their hunger.
"You probably get carried away with seeing (the ball) fly through to the keeper," McGrath said.
"When you see him take it above his head you can start running in, trying to bowl as quick as you can and probably bowling a little bit short.
"You can't bowl too full because it is a good batting wicket and the outfield is very quick so it's a very fine line. You've got to hit that right length otherwise you can go for plenty of runs."
McGrath is set to lead an attack minus Brett Lee, whose chances of playing appear slim despite a rousing 40-minute spell in the nets yesterday.
The right-armer did not bat, further indicating he would probably be 12th man again while selectors stick with in-form pace trio McGrath, Jason Gillespie and Michael Kasprowicz.
"It's tough for the Australian selectors to have so many good fast bowlers at once," McGrath said.
Word count: 444
