Gawler Rangers' Division Three side threw away their finals' chances with a 4-8 loss to lowly-placed East Torrens.
An all but impossible slim chance remains, if the Rangers can win their last five games and some divine intervention can create a miraculous solution involving other clubs' fortunes.
Leading 4-0 after four innings on Saturday, Gawler's finals hopes were on the rise, but in a return to the 'bad old days' the side again lost a game it should have won, conceding four runs in each of the final two frames.
The start was promising, with hits from Dylan Winning, Andre Benjamin, Sam Murphy and Shaun Clark giving the Rangers three runs in the first inning, back-to-back hits from Clark and Liam Holland scoring a fourth run in the fourth dig.
Starting pitcher Benjamin was spot on through the first four frames, giving up just one hit and three walks while striking out four batters, in throwing shut-out ball.
But the Torrens' bats came alive in the fifth, with three consecutive hits and a trio of walks to score four times and tie up the ball game.
Relief pitcher Rick Leonard came on to the mound in the sixth and final inning, but was unable to stem the flow, as the opposition scored four runs, although they were all unearned when, with two out, a wild throw kept the rally alive.
With five games remaining for the season, Gawler is three-and-a-half games behind fourth team Woodville, which it plays in the final minor round.
This week the Rangers host bottom-of-the-table Adelaide Angels at Willaston from 3pm, and to call it a must-win game is an understatement.
The Rangers B grade played well in defeating Flinders 11-8, with a combined five hits and four runs coming from Wayne Jenkins and Mark Amphlett at the top of the batting order, which was complimented by a three-hit, three-run effort from Paul Skelton.
Pitcher Dean Richards was also solid through the first five innings, surrendering nine scattered hits for no walks and four K2s.
Showing plenty of fight, Gawler's C grade came back from a slow start, trailing 0-10, to be competitive over the remainder of the game.
Graham Fischer batted two runs in on his hit in the fourth frame.
Bases loaded walks to Josh Mayfield and Stephen Nemeth in the fifth inning made the final scoreline 4-17.
Gawler remained in contention for the double chance in under 14s, with a 16-6 victory over Henley & Grange.
Pitcher Jake Jarvis threw three innings for just three hits and two walks for six strikeouts, and collected four hits, while James Bergen, Chris Mayfield, Riley Holland and Michael Brain also had multiple hit games.
The Rangers other under 14 team won on forfeit from East Torrens.
Little League Majors played well in beating the Redsox 10-9.
Little League Minors scored the maximum runs in a three inning game against Henley & Grange, winning 15-5, Trent O'Brien and Link Ryan hitting big doubles.
Division Three
East Torrens 0 0 0 0 4 4 - 8
Gawler Rangers 3 0 0 1 0 0 - 4
Hits: Shaun Clark 2, Dylan Winning, Andre Benjamin, Liam Holland.
Division Five
Gawler Rangers 11 d Flinders 8.
Hits: Wayne Jenkins 3, Paul Skelton 3, Mark Amphlett 2, James Sheekey 2, Dean Richards, Steve Allen, Jimmy Hope, Aaron Jerram.
Division Seven
GGCD 17 d Gawler Rangers 4.
Hits: Adam Soar, Glen Holland, Trevor Norley, Stephen Nemeth, Jason Curry.
Under 14
Gawler 16 d Henley & Grange 6.
Hits: Jake Jarvis 4, James Bergen 3, Chris Mayfield 3, Riley Holland 2, Michael Brain 2, Zac Allen, Mark Bergen, Ben Mayfield, Geoffrey Barraclough.
Gawler Rangers 7 d East Torrens 0 (forfeit).
Little League Majors
Gawler Rangers 10 d East Torrens 9.
Hits: Brodie Ewen, Alex Smethurst, Tyler Davis, Matthew Young.
Little League Minors
Gawler Rangers 15 d Henley & Grange 5.
Hits: Trent O'Brien 2, Jackson Pike, Carter Powell, Hunter Powell, Link Ryan, Bailey Smith, Jacob Allen.
Next games:
Saturday: Division Three v Adelaide at home, 3pm; Division Five v Glenelg away, 3pm; Division Seven v Playford Rebels at home, 12.30pm.
Sunday: Under 14 A v Adelaide away, 12.30pm; under 14 B v GGCD away, 12.30pm; LL Majors v Port Adelaide away, 10am; LL Minors v GGCD away, 10am.
Credit: Robert Laidlaw
Word count: 719
