GLENN McGrath had barely finished celebrating his eighth Pakistani scalp yesterday when he set his sights on going where no Australian fast bowler has gone before.
The veteran paceman revealed his goal was to take 500 Test wickets and possibly play on until the 2007 World Cup.
His return of 8/24 yesterday was the 34-year-old's best haul in Test cricket and hoisted his overall wicket tally to 471.
It was also the first time McGrath had taken five wickets in an innings in Perth.
Only one fast bowler - Courtney Walsh with 519 - has broken the magical 500-wicket barrier and McGrath is bent on joining his old West Indian foe.
"At the moment 500 Test wickets is a pretty big goal of mine," McGrath said.
"For any bowler to achieve that is a pretty fair effort. That's the one I'm aiming for at the moment, then I'll re-set (my goals) from there.
"While I'm still enjoying it and we're playing well, there's a lot to play for."
McGrath, who returned to the Australian side in May after being sidelined for nearly a year with an ankle injury, believes his time away from the game will prolong his career.
He has the next World Cup in the West Indies on his radar, despite the fact he will have turned 37 by the time the tournament starts.
It is a rarity for a fast bowler to play this long.
Dennis Lillee retired at McGrath's current age and Jeff Thomson remains the last Australian paceman to play a Test beyond his 35th birthday.
"After having so much time out of the game I just felt fresh and ready to go," McGrath said. "I was keen to get out in the middle, get a few overs under my belt and hopefully take a few wickets.
"The way I felt today, I would definitely like to see myself there (2007 World Cup). We'll have to see what happens."
He described yesterday's performance as one of the best of his career despite feeling flat at the beginning of play.
"I was just running in, trying to hit the deck, hopefully get them in the right areas and as it turned out it probably ranks up with one of my best days of bowling."
Word count: 404
