PAKISTAN started its Australian tour like only it can - bowled out for 83 and losing to an unheralded WA Second XI in Perth yesterday.
The tourists provided a typical blend of flair and fragility on an unpredictable University of WA wicket - but mostly it was the latter.
A Pakistan victory in the three-day warm-up match seemed certain late on Thursday when the hosts were dismissed for 192 in the second innings.
But, needing just 94 to win, the tourists were rolled for just 83 yesterday morning.
It ended a bizarre match in which 40 wickets fell for 690 runs in just over two days.
WA paceman Justin Coetzee was the chief destroyer, scything through Pakistan's top order in the second innings to finish with 10/ 89 for the match.
Despite their second innings collapse, it wasn't all doom and gloom for the Pakistanis.
Leg-spinner Danish Kaneria mesmerised WA's batsmen with both his stock ball and wrong'un to bag 7/45 in the second innings.
Perhaps even more pleasing was the sight of Pakistan paceman Shoaib Akhtar charging in off his long run.
The injury-prone 29-year-old bowled 10 lively overs for the match, picking up a wicket in each innings.
It was the performance of Pakistan's batsmen that will be more worrying for coach Bob Woolmer.
Younis Khan was the only player to look comfortable against the grade-standard attack. His scores of 142 and 28 were exactly half of his team's aggregate for the match. A less-than pleased Woolmer offered no excuses for his team's performance after play yesterday.
"I think it's a reality check for all of our players who now have to start working a bit harder than they were," Woolmer said.
"Of course I'm concerned about our performance but it's not a big blow.
"It shows the limitations of some of our batsmen. We've got a lot of work to do in the next few days."
Woolmer, the former South African coach who has been with Pakistan since July, admitted he had no solution to his team's often erratic form.
"I've been with Pakistan for five months now and we've done this three or four times," he said. "We're unpredictable. You can take what you like out of this. I don't know what's going on either.
"I know my team is trying hard. I think they will do as well as they can.
"We had a bad day yesterday (Thursday) afternoon. We've just got to put that behind us. We can't worry about it."
Pakistan easily won the 40-overs-a-side match that followed the early finish to the three-day game. The tourists batted first and made 8/273 off its 40 overs.
Abdur Razzaq smashed 74 off 54 balls, including eight fours and three sixes, while Shahid Afridi scored a quick-fire 34 off 25 balls.
In reply, WA struggled to 147 off 38.1 overs.
The tourists now have three days off before a one-day clash against the Cricket Australia Chairman's XI at Lilac Hill on Tuesday.
They will then play a four-day match against WA before the first Test at the WACA Ground beginning on December 16.
Chairmans XI: Justin Langer (WA - captain), Beau Casson (WA), Tony Dodemaide (WA), Ben Edmondson (WA), Murray Goodwin (WA), Michael Hussey (WA), Geoff Lawson (NSW), Marcus North (WA), Chris Rogers (WA), Luke Ronchi (WA), Dominic Thornely (NSW), Peter Worthington (WA).
Word count: 593
