ERRATIC Zimbabwe batting and a clinical display in the field put Australia A in a forceful position in its one-day clash at the WACA Ground yesterday.
Playing in their first warm-up match before the VB tri-series against Australia and India later this month, the Zimbabweans recovered from a mid-innings collapse to post a competitive 240 off 49.5 overs on an ideal batting strip.
At one stage the total looked like it wouldn't reach 200 before a 52-run ninth wicket stand between Stuart Carlisle (100) and Ray Price (21) vaulted the tourists to a reasonable target and made sure the heat was on the home side.
Carlisle, who scored his maiden Test century against Australia at the SCG in October, continued his affinity with Australian conditions by carrying his bat for the innings.
NSW seamer Dominic Thornely was the best of the bowlers with 3/ 38 from 9.5 overs.
Despite losing opener Vusi Sibanda for three, the tourists galloped to 68 in the 12th over.
But the hosts struck when Mark Vermeulen was run out after Carlisle failed to respond to his call for a single to mid-on.
The wicket brought Grant Flower to the crease and he began shakily, offering a chance on four when he sliced a ball from Adam Griffith to backward point only for Nathan Hauritz to grass the catch.
Reprieved, Flower set about picking off the Australia A attack but his innings was terminated when he was run out attempting a second run to Shane Watson at third man.
The Zimbabweans then tumbled like dominoes.
Next ball Stewart Matsikenyeri inexplicably attempted to swat Hauritz beyond the Barry Shepherd Gate and succeeded only in providing an easy catch to Australia A paceman Mark Cleary at mid- wicket.
Then, two overs later, Hauritz struck again when wicketkeeper Tatenda Taibu danced out of his crease to a wide ball and was stumped by Brad Haddin.
Australia A skipper Michael Clarke then re-introduced South Australian Shaun Tait, who immediatley looked more settled than his wayward opening spell. The move reaped almost instant rewards when he scattered Heath Streak's stumps for two.
Zimbabwe managed to keep the scoreboard ticking over but could not stem the regular loss of wickets.
Sean Ervine's 30-ball resistance ended when Clarke latched onto one of the catches of the summer at backward point off the bowling of Thornely. Launching himself horizontally to his right the ball was almost passed him when he clutched it with his outstretched right hand.
In Wellington, Pakistan warmed up for its five-match one-day series against New Zealand with a 34-run win over a Wellington provincial side at the Basin Reserve yesterday.
Abdul Razzaq took 4/33 from 10 overs as Pakistan dismissed Wellington for 224 in the 45th over in reply to its 9/258.
Wellington gave Pakistan the win when its batting crumbled on the same ground on which New Zealand lost seven wickets for eight runs in the second Test this week.
The home side was cruising at 2/192 in the 33rd over but then lost six wickets for nine runs. After opener Chris Nevin had scored 80 to give Wellington a flying start Razzaq crashed through its middle order.
Word count: 559
