ZIMBABWE battled to apply the knockout blow before finally edging out Australia A by seven runs last night in the limited-overs clash at the WACA Ground.
Playing in their first warm-up match before the VB tri-series against Australia and India later this month, the tourists were in dire trouble when they slumped to 8/174 after batting first on an even wicket.
But a 52-run ninth wicket stand between man-of-the-match Stuart Carlisle (100) and Ray Price (21) vaulted the visitors to a competitive 240 from 49.5 overs.
In reply, Australia A staggered to 7/103 as Zimbabwe's bowlers combined impressive control with baffling late-swing.
But where the-top order failed, the tail wagged impressively until Australia A was finally dismissed for 233 after 49 overs.
The late run-chase fell agonisingly short but Shaun Marsh (57 off 58 balls), Adam Griffith (34 off 35) and South Australians Mark Cleary (29 off 23) and Shaun Tait (22 off 27) showed how it should be done.
Among the cheap scalps was Australia A captain Michael Clarke, who managed just eight runs before skying an attempted pull shot off Doug Hondo to Zimbabwe wicketkeeper Tatenda Taibu.
Former Australian allrounder Shane Watson, playing as a specialist batsman, also struggled against the pace assault of Heath Streak, Andy Blignaut and Hondo.
Having absorbed 20 minutes before scoring his first run, Watson fell for a painful five after hitting Blignaut to Grant Flower at mid-wicket.
Earlier, Carlisle provided the backbone to a Zimbabwe total that could have been more formidable if not for inexplicable shot selection and poor running between wickets.
Carlisle, who scored his maiden Test century against Australia at the SCG in October, continued his affinity with Australian conditions by carrying his bat for the innings.
His carefully constructed knock came off 129 balls and included nine fours and a six.
Of the senseless Zimbabwe dismissals, the most galling for Zimbabwe coach Geoff Marsh - Shaun's dad - was that of 20-year-old Stewart Matsikenyeri. Coming in at No. 5, Matsikenyeri attempted to swat off-spinner Nathan Hauritz beyond the Barry Shepherd Gate with the first ball he faced.
He succeeded only in providing an easy catch to Mark Cleary at mid-wicket. Two overs later, Hauritz struck again when Taibu danced out of his crease to a wide ball and was stumped by Brad Haddin.
Despite failing with his bat, Clarke provided the highlight of the match when he latched on to one of the catches of the summer at backward point off the bowling of Dominic Thornely. Launching himself horizontally to his right the ball was almost passed him when he clutched it with his outstretched hand.
In Wellington, Pakistan warmed up for its five-match one-day series against New Zealand with a 34-run win over a Wellington provincial side at the Basin Reserve yesterday.
Abdul Razzaq took 4/33 from 10 overs as Pakistan dismissed Wellington for 224 in the 45th over in reply to its 9/258.
Wellington gave Pakistan the win when its batting crumbled on the same ground on which New Zealand lost seven wickets for eight runs in the second Test this week.
Word count: 544
