OPENER Salman Butt yesterday pressed compelling claims for Test selection with a polished century in Pakistan's 43-run victory against the Cricket Australia Chairman's XI in Perth.
Salman struck an unbeaten 115 off 135 balls as Pakistan reached 9/ 256 in the limited overs clash at Lilac Hill.
In reply, the Chairman's XI was bowled out for 213 in the 46th over. Chris Rogers top-scored for the hosts with 61 off 59 balls while wicketkeeper Luke Ronchi clubbed five sixes in his innings of 51.
Test opener Justin Langer made just one run before edging a ball off Mohammad Khalil to second slip.
Pakistan opted to rest speedsters Mohammad Sami and Shoaib Akhtar for the match but included captain Inzamam-ul-Haq, who missed the tour opener against Western Australia's second XI with bronchitis.
Despite perfect batting conditions and the ground's post-stamp dimensions, most of Pakistan's batsmen laboured against the modest Chairman's XI attack.
The exception was Salman, who is jostling with Yasir Hameed and Imran Farhat to open in the first Test against Australia at the WACA Ground beginning tomorrow week.
The aggressive left-hander, who has played just one Test but averages 50.4 in six one-day internationals, was particularly destructive square of the wicket and laced his innings with 11 fours and a six.
The next top scorer was Imran, who made 25 from 29 balls. All- rounder Abdul Razzaq struck a patient 24 (off 44 balls).
Despite ending his international career more than a decade ago, Tony Dodemaide was arguably the pick of the Chairman's XI bowlers with 1/25 off five overs. Fellow 1980s-era paceman Geoff Lawson collected 1/31 from six.
Part-time medium-pacer Mike Hussey was punished early but caused some late damage to finish with three wickets.
Pakistan coach Bob Woolmer praised Salman's innings.
"He batted well. It puts him into the mix," he said. "If you're in form, you're always pushing (for selection)."
Woolmer was happy with his team's overall performance.
He said the first-class fixture against WA beginning at the WACA tomorrow would provide a more accurate gauge of his team's progress.
"We're happy with how things have gone so far," Woolmer said. "I think the important game will be the four-day game against WA. I'd be looking for all the batsmen to get between 50 and 100."
PAGE 87: Scores in Sport Digest.
Word count: 413
