SHOAIB Akhtar has re-ignited the fire in his five-year war with Matthew Hayden by declaring Justin Langer a greater threat to Pakistan this summer.
Akhtar says Hayden is struggling, despite plundering 1000 runs in a calendar year for the fourth successive time.
"I do believe Matthew Hayden is not in his peak form," said Shoaib, who has taken 20 wickets at 38.55 against Australia.
"I wouldn't say that he is playing up to the potential that he has shown.
"He is still a class player and has made more than 5000 runs . . . but I have always said that Langer has an edge over every opener in the world because he is a stayer.
"He is the best opening batsman I have seen because he is so difficult to get out."
The feud between Hayden and Shoaib dates back to 1999/2000 when they clashed during a tour match at Allan Border Field.
Hayden, who was not in the Australian team at the time, baited the world's fastest bowler by urging him to bowl quicker.
At one stage he playfully backed away from the crease when Shoaib was midway through his run-up.
The stunt infuriated Shoaib who responded by peppering Hayden with a volley of short-pitched thunderbolts.
Hayden went on to score 125 but finished heavily bruised after being repeatedly struck on the body.
The rivalry was rekindled during the first Test in Colombo in 2002 when Shoaib complained that Hayden was backing up too far at the non-strikers' end.
A heated verbal exchange ensued before umpires Steve Bucknor and Srinivas Venkatraghavan were forced to intervene. In his book, Worth the Wait, Darren Lehmann said the entire Australian team was aware of the tension between the pair.
"People watching from the sidelines or on television may not be aware of the rivalry between these two but when they meet it's frightening," Lehmann wrote.
"The big fellow just wants him. He keys himself up for Shoaib and the sparks that fly when they get in the middle resembles the Sydney Harbour Bridge fireworks on New Year's Eve."
Shoaib, 29, has played just three Tests in Australia, taking six wickets at 67.66.
It makes for meagre reading when compared to his career record of 133 wickets at 24.32.
Shoaib believes he is a far better bowler now than five years ago and says his best cricket is ahead of him.
"Maturity comes along with age basically and I believe my lines are a lot better," he said.
"I believe that fast bowlers are at their peak in their early 30s. That's when they mature. They train harder, they're still young and they know what they're capable of."
Pakistan will play three Tests against Australia before contesting the VB triangular one-day series, also involving Australia and the West Indies.
The tourists began their tour yesterday in a three-day game against Western Australia's second XI.
They will play the annual one-day clash against the Cricket Australia Chairman's XI at Lilac Hill next Tuesday before a four- day game against WA.
The first Test at the WACA Ground begins on December 16.
Word count: 552
