DETAILS
FREMANTLE 2.2 4.5 6.8 10.15 (75)
BRISBANE 2.3 5.6 9.8 10.12 (72)
BEST - Fremantle: Cook, Hasleby, Polak, Schammer, Pavlich, McManus, McPharlin. Brisbane: Black, Akermanis, Power, Lappin, Leppitsch, Hart.
GOALS - Fremantle: Medhurst, Pavlich 2, Hasleby, Bell, Schammer, Headland, Farmer, J. Longmuir. Brisbane: Pike 3, Voss 2, Akermanis, Hart, Leppitsch, Copeland, Bradshaw.
INJURIES - Fremantle: McPharlin (calf), Headland (ankle). Brisbane: McDonald (knee).
REPORT - Brisbane: Charman, by umpire Sheehan, for allegedly striking Headland (Fremantle) in the second quarter.
UMPIRES - B. Sheehan, M. Head, D. Woodcock.
CROWD - 28,450 at Subiaco Oval.
FLEDGLING Dockers star Byron Schammer said yesterday Brisbane paid the ultimate price for not showing the Dockers enough respect.
And injury-plagued defender Luke McPharlin, who also played a key hand in the victory at centre-half back, said Fremantle's three- point win would permanently silence the Dockers' serial knockers in the eastern states.
Last week Schammer revealed he spent part of 2001/2002 summer trainining with Brisbane, who were keen to net him in last year's national draft.
Yesterday, the 18-year-old unleashed his talent on the dual premier with 17 second-half disposals and a pivotal final-term goal. In just his 10th game, Schammer said he relished the running commission given to him by coach Chris Connolly after half-time.
"I was playing on the wing and I think Chris Scott was supposed to be playing on me," Schammer said. "He just didn't man me up. He didn't show me any respect and I just tried to run around as much as I could."
Schammer's 30-metre goal on the run put the Dockers within two points at the 23-minute mark. He spent the last five minutes of the match shadowing Brownlow Medallist Jason Akermanis.
The silky West Adelaide recruit said he expected to be dropped next week if he didn't perform on Saturday.
"I spent a lot of time on the ground and had to take my opportunity or else I'd probably be out of the team," he said. "I put a lot of pressure on myself and I wanted to get a few kicks and help my team out as much as I could."
McPharlin, who has endured a wretched run with injury since arriving from Hawthorn last year, was instrumental in the win with 21 disposals and 11 marks. He took a towering mark deep in defence to assure the Dockers victory with 20 seconds remaining.
"That was by far the best game of footy I've been involved in," McPharlin said. "The crowd was awesome, the atmosphere was unreal and all credit to the boys - they never gave up.
"We've been a bit of a joke over the years, now Fremantle are definitely competitive . . . and I think a lot more clubs will be taking notice of us."
Word count: 492
