STEVE Waugh has given his strongest indication yet this will be his last domestic summer as Australia plots ways of extending its dominance at the top of world cricket.
And national coach John Buchanan predicts the International Cricket Council will soon introduce measures to curb Australia's supremacy.
The first Test against Zimbabwe starts at the WACA next Thursday and it looms as Waugh's final chance to seize a rare piece of cricket history. The WACA remains the only Australian Test venue where Waugh is yet to score a century.
He has reached the 90s on three occasions and came closest with 99 not out against England in 1994-95. He said this could be his last chance to achieve the feat.
"You always want to go out on a good note. I'm not exactly sure when it's going to be but it's a good chance that this will be the last time I play in Perth," Waugh said.
"I won't mind if that (99 not out) is the best score I get in Perth but of course you'd like to get 100."
Each of Australia's 25 contracted players, except banned leg- spinner Shane Warne, are taking part in a four-day camp that began in Perth yesterday. Buchanan said the camp's chief aim was to draft a blueprint for future success - including pre-planning for the 2007 and 2011 World Cups.
"We'll present some benchmarks both for the team and as individuals," Buchanan said. "It's about not only maintaining that dominance but actually increasing it if we possibly can.
"In one-day terms we'd like to create some unparalleled history. In other words 2007, 2011, we want to set in place things that will give us the best chance of winning those two tournaments.
"Test-cricket-wise I suppose an outcome might be if we can maintain the dominance."
Buchanan said the ICC might be moved to introduce rule changes although he declined to expand on what they might be. He cited a precedent in the 1990s when a one-bouncer-per-over rule was introduced after the West Indies tormented the world's batsmen for almost two decades.
"Maybe there will be some rule changes that will need to be put into place to bring us back into the field," he said. "But our job is to continue this journey to Everest, wherever that might be."
Meanwhile, Buchanan was confident spearhead Glenn McGrath, who has made steady progress from surgery on his left ankle, would be available for the first Test.
Word count: 436
