THE Adelaide Bite is doing everything it can to stay in the ABL playoff race, making a raft of changes to its roster ahead of this round's clash against the Canberra Cavalry.
In a surprise move, the Bite released LA Dodgers outfielder James Baldwin for a lack of production while fellow Dodger prospect, relief pitcher Blake Smith, has been shut down by the MLB club in preparation for its upcoming "young guns" camp.
To help cover the losses, the Bite has called on three imports playing in the South Australian Baseball League -- outfielders Byron Wiley (Adelaide Angels) and Andrew Davis (Port Adelaide) as well as left-arm pitcher Matt Wickswat (Goodwood).
All three have spent time with MLB clubs and are looking to rejuvenate their careers after strong showings in the local competition. The Bite will also welcome back gun outfielder Angus Roeger, who had a breakout year in 2012/13 but has battled through a knee issue this season.
"We'll be trying to mix them in and add a little bit more offence to our line-up," Bite manager Brooke Knight said.
"Ben Lodge has recovered from a slight strain and he'll be good to go as well." With four rounds to go, the Bite sits in fifth place on the ABL ladder with a 13-17 record as it visits the defending champion. Realistically, the team needs to win 11 of its last 16 games to ensure a spot in the top three, but Knight is trying to keep the team's focus on its immediate challenge.
"That's a big monster to work towards rather than chunking it down and saying we're only two games behind (third-placed) Melbourne and one back of (fourth-placed) Sydney," he said.
"All we have to do is make sure we do our job when we play those guys -- if we can at least split against Canberra, we'll still be in with a chance." Converted closer Matt Williams will start game one tonight with Kyle Brueggemann, Darren Fidge and James Campbell to complete the rotation. The Bite will take a lot of confidence into the series from winning its past two games against the Cavalry.
"It was a big step for us to get after those guys and pull out a couple of games to get back on track and stay in the playoff hunt," Knight said."All the games mean a little bit more now."
Credit: TOM BIDDINGTON
Word count: 412
