DROPPING Michael Kasprowicz for Brett Lee in the first Test against Pakistan would be a grave mistake, three former Test fast bowlers have warned.
Terry Alderman, Geoff Lawson and Len Pascoe have poured scorn on deafening calls for Lee to be recalled at the WACA -- home of the fastest pitch in world cricket -- for the Test starting on Thursday.
And Pascoe urged Lee to beware the speed trap, believing he would be a better bowler if he cut 5-10km/h off his pace.
Alderman said it would be plain "wrong" to leave out "Kasper", who has taken 38 Test wickets at 25.63 this year.
"Michael Kasprowicz has bowled his heart out for Australia," he said.
"It doesn't matter what the pitch looks like and how much bounce it has.
"Unless Australia goes in with five specialist batsmen or leave out Shane Warne, which I can't see happening, Lee shouldn't play.
"Kasprowicz did the job against India and New Zealand. The push to play Lee has come from the media but it would be wrong."
Captain Ricky Ponting has flagged the option of dropping a batsman, with Darren Lehmann most likely to be jettisoned despite 81 in his last knock, against New Zealand in Adelaide last month.
Lawson said if the Test wasn't in Perth, Lee wouldn't even be considered.
"Kasprowicz has earned his spot and doesn't deserve to be dropped," he said.
"He has been brought up on something like that (the WACA) in Brisbane, so he would probably be suited to those conditions also.
"Brett has to be bowling well. He's been bowling with good rhythm in the one-dayers which is terrific.
"His pace has been good but he hasn't been accurate enough. He's still going for five an over."
Pascoe called on Lee to learn from Gillespie, McGrath and Kasprowicz, all of whom place greater premium on direction than speed.
"One thing he's got to learn is to attack the off-stump," Pascoe said.
"There's so much talk about biomechanics and other peripheral things.
"But it's a simple process: attack the off-stump just short of a length.
"It's as simple as that.
"He needs to calm down a bit. He probably won't bowl his best until he's a little older and a bit of pace is knocked off him."
Pascoe urged Lee to remain upbeat, saying time on the outer would add to his longevity.
"Brett is like money in the bank because he is staying fit and motivated. What you miss out on now you'll pick up at end of his career."
* Field of screams, Page 121
Word count: 432
