AUSTRALIA will be making a grave mistake if it drops Michael Kasprowicz for Brett Lee in the First Test against Pakistan starting at the WACA Ground on Thursday.
That's the view of former Test fast bowlers Terry Alderman, Geoff Lawson and Len Pascoe, who have poured scorn on deafening calls for Lee to be recalled on the fastest pitch in the world.
And Pascoe urged Lee to beware the speed trap, believing he would be a better bowler if he cut five to 10km/h off his pace. Alderman said it would be plain "wrong" to leave out Kasprowicz, who has taken 38 Test wickets at 25.63 this year.
"Michael Kasprowicz has bowled his heart out for Australia," Alderman said. "It doesn't matter what the pitch looks like and how much bounce it has.
"Unless Australia go in with five specialist batsmen or leaves out Shane Warne, which I can't see happening, Lee shouldn't play."
Australian captain Ricky Ponting has flagged the option of dropping a batsman, with Darren Lehmann the most likely to be jettisoned despite making 81 in his last knock against New Zealand in Adelaide last month.
But selectors have never opted for five specialist batsmen on Australian soil since Adam Gilchrist debuted in 1999.
Lawson said that would be Lee's only lifeline. He believes if not for the fact the match was in Perth, Lee wouldn't even be considered.
"Kasprowicz has earned his spot and doesn't deserve to be dropped," Lawson said. "He has been brought up on something like that (the WACA) in Brisbane so he would probably be suited to those conditions also. Brett has to be bowling well. He's been bowling with good rhythm in the one-dayers which is terrific."
Pascoe called on Lee to learn from Gillespie, McGrath and Kasprowicz, all of whom place a greater premium on direction than speed.
"One thing he's got to learn is to attack the off stump," Pascoe said.
Pascoe urged Lee to remain upbeat, saying his time on the outer will add to his longevity.
"Brett is like money in the bank because he is staying fit and motivated," Pascoe said.
"What you miss out on now you'll pick up at end of his career.
"If he doesn't play for 12 months now he will play for an extra 12 months at the end of his career. The opportunities will come to him." Pascoe said the WACA's reputation as a fast bowler's oasis was often a mirage.
"My call is don't take the gamble because the WACA can be a bit of an illusion," he said.
"It might be quick for a short time but then it could turn into a batting paradise and you will need the workhorses.
"Once the ball softens up on the hard deck, (Lee's) just at the right pace to come onto the bat.
"It's kind of like batting on a synthetic surface.
"When you've got Gillespie, McGrath and Kasprowicz - they do so much off the seam that rarely to batsmen hit it off the middle.
"The temptation to play Lee is over the top. He will get his chance but he has to be patient."
Word count: 527
