RICKY Ponting has warned the world's fastest bowler Shoaib Akhtar Australia has no fear of his bowling or his motor mouth in cricket's showdown of the summer.
Australia yesterday completed it's 2-0 destruction of New Zealand, leaving Ponting and the nation's cricket fanatics hankering for a spicy confrontation with the Pakistani thunderbolt on the game's fastest pitch in Perth.
Ponting said his men were craving the competition and were unfazed by the verbal taunts sure to flow their way.
"I think he tries to get under your skin a little bit, as he did in the last tour here of Australia. The good thing about it is we have had some success against him so we don't need to build it up too much or say too much back to him," said Ponting.
Akhtar was unconcerned by Ponting's remarks when informed about them in Perth.
"Let them talk but I want to talk with the ball rather than talk myself," he said.
"I'm fit and strong and I am paid to bowl quick and I have a few more years to bowl quick. They are the toughest batsmen in the world and it is not going to be easy for us."
The clash will fire up an international summer punctured by a lacklustre Black Cap unit which lost in Adelaide by 213 runs yesterday.
New Zealand added just one run to its overnight total of 5-149 before Jacob Oram (40) edged Glenn McGrath to Adam Gilchrist, a mortal blow to its hope of saving the game.
Jason Gillespie trapped keeper Brendon McCullum lbw with the score on 160.
Daniel Vettori applied himself as his teammates higher up the order should have, making 59.
McGrath (2-32), Gillespie (2-41), Michael Kasprowicz (2-39), and spinners Shane Warne (2-79) and Darren Lehmann (2-46) shared the spoils in a relentless assault.
The form of McGrath, Gillespie and Kasprowicz is likely to keep speedster Brett Lee out of the line-up in Perth.
But Ponting believes the embarrassment of riches augurs well for the future of the side that will eventually adopt a rotation policy for its bowlers.
"It's a great sign for Australian cricket that we have someone like him [Lee] who is not in our team," said Ponting of the New South Wales tearaway.
"You always measure the quality of a side by the guys that aren't playing. I am sure that Brett would walk into most other teams anywhere in the world."
Word count: 434
