BRAVE defender James Clement could recover from a fractured cheekbone in time for Collingwood's clash against Essendon at the MCG on Friday night.
Clement was injured in a collision early in the 33-point win against Fremantle at Subiaco on Friday night.
He refused to leave the field despite obvious discomfort.
Collingwood assistant coach Guy McKenna said yesterday Clement would have his cheekbone assessed this week.
"I think he's going to face the doctor at some stage over the next few days to have his cheekbone re-aligned and, fingers crossed, he can get out and play," he said on Triple M.
"With injuries to (Simon) Prestigiacomo, (Shane) Wakelin, (Jason) Cloke, you throw Jimmy Clement in there and all of a sudden the backline starts to look very thin."
Wakelin suffered a similar injury against Brisbane in Round 3 and played the next week.
" `Wakes' obviously did that against Brisbane . . . and he got fixed and played the next week and there were no ill-effects, so fingers crossed Jimmy can do the same," McKenna said.
Collingwood coach Mick Malthouse praised the leadership and courage of Clement.
"Jimmy was absolutely outstanding," Malthouse said. "He's got a crevice . . . that resembles the Grand Canyon.
"It's more than just gutsy, it was a very calculated decision to stay on the field.
"When he knows the injury he's got and is prepared to stay out there for his teammates, it is a wonderful example."
McKenna also wouldn't concede the Magpies' finals chances were dead, saying if they won the remaining three matches -- against Essendon, Port Adelaide and Carlton -- 11 wins may sneak them into the eight.
Clement went on to limit Troy Simmonds's influence and provide his signature rebound off half-back.
After the match he was taken to hospital where an X-ray confirmed the Magpies' worst fears.
Malthouse was justifiably delighted with a performance reminiscent of the side that reached the past two grand finals.
Leon Davis was potent with three goals, including a rampant 10- possession, two goal-third term.
Brownlow medal-winning pair Nathan Buckley and Shane Woewodin led a midfield brigade that smashed the Dockers, particularly in a pressure-soaked first half.
In defence, Ben Johnson helped stonewall the Dockers' passage to goal.
Then there were youngsters Nick Maxwell, Tristen Walker and David King.
King, who slotted the winning goal against Richmond, played his best game for the club with three goals in an effervescent display from a forward pocket.
It all points to a brighter horizon after a gloomy season for Malthouse's men.
"We started our pre-season probably two weeks ago," Malthouse said.
"We have certain deficiencies in the side, but we get heartened by performances like that today."
Woewodin, who helped blanket the influence of Matthew Pavlich, joined Malthouse in lavishing praise on Clement.
"He has been fantastic all year, and really stemmed the flow," he said.
Fremantle coach Chris Connolly was bitterly disappointed with his team.
"We're on the big stage, we need to show we've improved in this area and that area . . . and we didn't," he said.
"Their transition play, to run and attack and then defend with purpose, was outstanding. They really taught us a lesson."
Stats, Page 79
SCOREBOARD
FREMANTLE (73)
2.1 2.5 7.7 11.7
COLLINGWOOD (106)
3.9 4.14 10.17 14.22
FREMANTLE
GOALS
Simmonds 2, Browne 2, Medhurst 2, Farmer 2, Smith, Headland, J Longmuir
BEST
J Longmuir, Hasleby, Haddrill, Headland, Pavlich
COLLINGWOOD
GOALS
Davis 3, King 3, Lonie, Burns, Licuria, Tarrant, O'Bree, Holland, Lockyer, Woewodin
BEST
Davis, Woewodin, O'Bree, Clement, Holland, Licuria
REPORTS
Nil
INJURIES
Fremantle: Parker (shoulder), Bell (groin).
Collingwood: Clement (cheekbone).
Umpires: Rowe, Woodcock, Jeffery
Attendance: 40,901 at Subiaco
Word count: 613
