AS Michael Clarke prepares to dazzle his home crowd at the SCG today, his credentials as the next Aussie batting star have again come under fire.
Former Australian batsman Dean Jones has declared Clarke is not the man to fill the middle-order Test void left by retired skipper Steve Waugh.
Clarke, 22, is the front-runner to replace Waugh in the Australian team which plays three Tests against Sri Lanka in March.
"I don't think he's ready," Jones said. "He still has to earn it. To play Test cricket you have to make runs in first-class cricket." But none of that will worry Clarke as he gets the chance to prove himself for the first time in front of his home crowd today when Australia tackle plucky Zimbabwe at the SCG.
After saying goodbye to their favourite son in Waugh last week, Sydneysiders will have the chance to embrace generation-next when Clarke steps out in Australia's second match of the one-day tri- series.
Australia's 18-run opening victory against India at the MCG on Friday was just the 22-year-old's second match on home soil in 11 games.
After debuting in Adelaide last summer, he played in the West Indies and India before scoring a dapper 63 off 66 deliveries at the MCG.
"For me, personally, being in my home state I am really looking forward to it," he said yesterday.
"Home ground, family and friends there, it's going to be great." His excellent all-round play on Friday -- he also took 1-22 with his left-arm spinners and four catches -- may be another dagger in Darren Lehmann's hopes of returning to the one-day side.
A Test spot is Clarke's ultimate goal, with Martin Love and Lehmann his main rivals.
While Clarke averages 65 in 11 one-day internationals for Australia, his first-class average is 39.25.
It makes for meagre reading when compared to Love's 50.46, Lehmann's 56.91 and Brad Hodge's 43.63.
Last week former Test selector John Benaud called for Clarke to be fast-tracked into the ageing Australian Test team, but Jones believes he is yet to prove himself for NSW.
Jones says Waugh's No5 batting slot should be filled by either Hodge or Lehmann.
The latter has just returned for South Australia after three months on the sidelines with an achilles tendon injury.
"They (selectors) will also be looking at Love, who made a hundred in his last Test. But he probably doesn't give them enough in the field," Jones said.
"He is a bit slow off the mark.
"Hodgey fields well, also bowls off-spin and he is making runs at the right time. Lehmann is also back, so it will be interesting." Martyn ended Jones' Test career when he controversially replaced the Victorian in the opening Test of the 1992-93 summer against the West Indies at the Gabba.
Jones, who averaged 46.55 from 52 Tests, never wore the baggy green again. But he was a welcome ally to the West Australian amid murmurs he isn't doing enough.
"I don't have a problem with Damien Martyn," Jones said.
"Everybody goes through flat periods. He still averaged 40-odd against the Indians.
"I think he's still the man to bat at four. I just want him to play like he normally does, be confident and aggressive, and the runs will come.
"He has showed that early in his innings he is a little bit vulnerable to spin, but I'm not overly concerned by that." Jones praised Simon Katich, who he believes will be Australia's wild-card on the turning decks of Sri Lanka and India this year.
"He won me over in Sydney because he was good against the spinners and guess where we are going in February and September?" he said.
"Nobody in the Australian team played the spinners as well and I think for that reason he has cemented his place."
Word count: 639
