NO TALL defenders, no Anthony Rocca, no Alan Didak, no worries.
Collingwood last night mocked its underdog status and severely wounded Fremantle's hopes of a home final with a 33-point victory, 14.22 (106) to 11.7 (73), at Subiaco Oval.
Playing with the purpose and desperation that was the hallmark of their Grand Final teams of the past two years, the Pies strangled the Dockers early then staved off a spirited revival from the home side to seal their eighth win of the season.
It was Fremantle's fifth loss from its past seven games at home.
The Pies have now won three games in a row and coach Mick Malthouse would justifiably be wondering where last night's form has been all season.
Shane O'Bree, Paul Licuria, Shane Woewodin and Nathan Buckley shone in the midfield while Ben Johnson ran rampant off the half- back line.
But the game-breaker was much maligned forward Leon Davis.
The mercurial "Neon" Leon helped stave off a third term charge by the Dockers with 10 disposals and two inspirational goals.
The second came after he found space amid a traffic jam of defenders before spinning around and goaling from 30m.
It gave the Pies a seemingly unassailable 41-point lead during time-on in the third quarter.
But the Dockers, playing a more free-flowing brand of football, refused to wilt.
Goals to Troy Simmonds and Des Headland gave Fremantle a glimmer of hope as it went to the final break trailing by 28 points.
The Pies had plenty of chances to wrap up the match early in the second quarter but frittered away numerous chances in front of goal, as they had all match.
Fremantle's unsung defence, led by full-back Robert Haddrill who restricted Chris Tarrant to 1.3, battled valiantly to curb the Pies in the final term.
Not only did they repel numerous attacks, they also created run out of defence.
With goals to Justin Longmuir, Paul Medhurst and Dylan Smith, the Dockers reduced the margin to 14 points midway through the last quarter.
Suddenly the Pies were flat-footed. They steadied after a nerveless set shot from Brodie Holland and then sealed the match when Tarkyn Lockyer converted from 40m at the 27-minute mark.
Woewodin capped a wonderful match with a brilliant running goal in the dying minutes.
The visitors entered the match without Didak (jaw), Guy Richards (groin), Shane Wakelin (broken arm), Simon Prestigiacomo (shoulder), Rocca (ankle) and Jason Cloke (thigh).
Tarrant, who returned after three weeks out with a torn hamstring, began as the Magpies' sole marking target inside the forward 50m.
His early influence was minimal, but the space proved a play- ground for on-ballers Licuria, O'Bree and Scott Burns.
While the Pies opted for an open forward structure, the Dockers loaded up with Troy Simmonds, Graham Polak and Justin Longmuir playing deep in attack.
Davis sparked the visitors when he latched onto a Shane Parker fumble 20m out and slung the ball onto his boot for the Pies' opening goal.
Shortly after Ryan Lonie converted a set shot from 50m.
O'Bree was the catalyst in the midfield and ran unchecked for much of the term as the Pies pumped the ball inside 50m 13 times to three in the first 20 minutes.
Only scattergun kicking for goal prevented Collingwood from taking a bigger lead into quarter-time with Buckley, Lockyer, Josh Fraser, David King and Tarrant guilty of wasting chances.
After a tense first half, the game became a much more attractive spectacle in the second.
But crucially, the Dockers were unable to restrict the Pies' fleet of onballers, who despite Longmuir's dominance in the ruck, proved the difference.
Last night's contest was the first of four consecutive Friday night games in the final month for the Magpies. Next week they meet Essendon (MCG) before taking on Port Adelaide (MCG) and Carlton (MCG).
Fremantle has remaining games against Geelong (Skilled Stadium), West Coast (Subiaco) and St Kilda (Telstra Dome).
Votes
5 Leon Davis (Coll)
4 Shane Woewodin (Coll)
3 Shane O'Bree (Coll)
2 Paul Licuria (Coll)
1 Justin Longmuir (Fre)
Word count: 722
