CONTROVERSIAL swim coach Scott Volkers will assist Brazilian athletes before and during next month's Olympics despite a request by Australian officials to bar him from the Rio Games due to alleged child sex crimes.
The Brazilian Aquatic Sports Confederation (CBDA) confirmed Volkers, who is head swim coach at Brazil's Minas Clube, will take part in Brazil's Games preparations, though he will not be present at the pool during Olympic competition.
According to CBDA spokesman Ricardo de Moura, Volkers will join the Brazilian squad's pre-Olympic training camp in Sao Paulo later this month. The 57-year-old will then travel to Rio to continue working with Italo Manzine (50m freestyle) and Henrique Martins (100m butterfly).
"It was a mutual agreement with Minas (Clube)," Moura said. "We spoke with them and the club nominated a different coach for the Olympic squad.
"But Scott will be in Rio de Janeiro. He will (train) with the athletes that he most closely works with - Henrique and Italo - until they go to the (athletes') village." Australian Olympic Committee president John Coates wrote to his Brazilian counterpart Carlos Nuzman in May requesting Volkers be barred from any involvement at the Rio Games.
The request was accepted by the Brazilian Olympic Committee. "Our request was that he wouldn't be allowed in accredited areas or on pool deck in Rio and that was agreed to," an AOC spokesman said.
"Nothing has changed from our perspective." It is understood Volkers was eligible to join Brazil's coaching staff in Rio due to the number of Minas Clube swimmers who qualified for the Games.
Volkers was charged with nine counts of indecent dealing with three girls under 16 in the 1980s.The charges were dropped by Queensland prosecutors in 2002 and Volkers has repeatedly proclaimed his innocence. But a Royal Commission report published last year found there were "a number of inadequacies in the processes" of prosecutors investigating the case.
Credit: MICHAEL PLACE
Word count: 331
