CAUTIOUS Brazilian defender David Luiz has made the stunning claim that the Socceroos will be afforded the same level of respect as archrival Argentina at the Mane Garrincha stadium in Brasilia on Sunday morning.
Despite Brazil sitting 37 places higher on FIFA's world rankings, Luiz said Holger Osieck's team would be treated like any of the South American giant's rivals.
"We have to make the most of these friendlies," the Chelsea star said. "For me, playing against Australia is the same as playing against Argentina.
"We have to take on all our opponents the same way. It will be the same next year during the World Cup." Australia and Brazil have met six times with Brazilian holding a 4-1 advantage with one draw.
The Socceroos' only victory came at the 2001 Confederations Cup in South Korea when Shaun Murphy headed in a late winner at the Munsu stadium in Ulsan.
Luiz criticised the state of the Mane Garrincha stadium surface. The venue was also the subject of controversy after Brazil's 3-0 victory over Japan in the Confederations Cup in June.
"With a bad surface we managed to win against Japan.
It's a sign that we can do it again," Luiz said.
Meanwhile, Socceroo Robbie Kruse faces a trial by fire in the coming weeks. Australia's friendly against Brazil will be followed by a clash against France in Paris on October 11.
Sandwiched in between is Kruse's UEFA Champions League debut for Bayer Leverkusen against Manchester United on September 17.
Kruse, who joined the Bundesliga club from Fortuna Dusseldorf for a reported $2.16 million in April, is looking ahead with relish, despite the pedigree of the upcoming opponents.
"I've had a really good last year and have been happy with how the move has gone," Kruse said from the Socceroos' hotel in Brazil's capital.
"We'll be playing at Old Trafford in a couple of weeks so it's going to be an important month for me," Kruse said.
"Hopefully I can start it all off here in Brazil." Kruse's lack of minutes this season is unlikely to impact his standing as a vital part of Socceroos' coach Holger Osieck's 2014 World Cup plans.
He arguably had his best match at international level in June, scoring one goal and setting up two others in a 4-0 World Cup qualifying victory over Jordan at Etihad Stadium.
"I'm confident in myself and I have felt that I've have done well for the Socceroos,"Kruse said.
Credit: MICHAEL PLACE
Word count: 423
