MELBOURNE ruckman Jeff White says he and the Demons were never close to parting company, despite his name constantly being floated as trade bait in the lead-up to the trade period.
But White admitted to a nervous trade week after watching best friend Shane Woewodin swapped to Collingwood a year ago.
White needed operations on both knees during the season, as well as a graft on an ongoing shin injury, with speculation intensifying about a possible move.
Melbourne kept faith with the talented ruckman, confident he would return to the form that saw him finish fifth in the 2002 best- and-fairest.
"The fact of the matter is I was struggling with injury and, at the end of the day, I want to be a part of the Melbourne Football Club and they want me here as a player as well," he said.
"I don't think it was ever going to get to that stage. Obviously everywhere I went everyone was asking me about it. That's just life. You go through your career and you are always mentioned in the media as being trade bait, and that was my first time."
A member of Woewodin's bridal party in Perth late last month, White said his friend's departure from Melbourne caused him some reflection as the pressure built.
"It was frustrating because I had one of my best mates go through similar circumstances a year earlier. That was tough because I know what he went through and I was feeling the same pressure, but I think with (coach) Neale (Daniher) and the match committee, their communication was great. There were no guarantees, but I was reassured by what they had to say.
"But there were some nervous times. It is hard to explain.
"Shane was spoken about highly as a required player at the club but, at the end of the day, that's history, that's past and to be in that situation myself was a bit nerve-racking."
White was besieged by critics after a form-slump midway through the season, yet few knew the extent of his injuries.
He had 121 votes in his club best-and-fairest after five rounds, yet added only three more in 11 games.
"I had surgery after Round 6, just a minor arthroscope on my left knee. But then I had an operation on my shin and then, after Port Adelaide, I hurt my knee (and had surgery). Three operations all up, so it was definitely a tough year."
Determined that there be no excuses in 2004, White is already putting in three preseason sessions a day including an extra swimming or cycling workout.
"I am training three times a day and I am loving it. It is the best break I have had leading into the preseason and I'm on the bike, doing extra swimming sessions and am really enjoying it so far."
ESSENDON could upset Saturday's national draft by turning its back on the nation's premier 18-year-old ruckman, Michael Place reports.
Most clubs expect the Bombers to pounce on West Perth's Kepler Bradley with pick six. But wily Dons coach Kevin Sheedy has cast doubt on that strategy, declaring the club would use its first round pick on a midfielder.
"He (Bradley) is a good young player, but there's probably better players in the draft. I think, in the end, midfielders are the types of players we've got to start looking at," Sheedy said.
The Bombers are said to be keen on Calder Cannons utility David Trotter, while West Perth's Callum Burges has attracted Sheedy's eye.
White wipes slate, Page 58
Word count: 595
