It was the fab four, then the fab five, could it soon be the super six? Michael Place reports
RICHARD Hadley didn't know whether to crow or cower.
The Brisbane Lions had completed their final training session before last year's semi-final against Adelaide when coach Leigh Matthews approached the youngster in the car park.
"He said to me, `you are in and playing on Mark Ricciuto'," said Hadley, who had not played a senior match since his debut more than two years earlier.
Hadley's reaction is reflective of his unobtrusive nature on and off the field.
There were no boastful phone calls to home or his mates in Perth.
Instead, the former East Fremantle youngster sat in his car and began to plot his game on Ricciuto.
While the eventual Brownlow medallist netted 26 possessions against the Lions, Hadley did enough to command a berth in the preliminary and Grand Finals.
He didn't disappoint.
In the Grand Final, he emerged from the bench to snap a left- foot goal that kindled the Lions' game-busting second term.
"We have such a good side and I thought I was a mile off when I was playing with (Suncoast Lions) in the second half of the year," Hadley said. "I was injured early on but managed to get some form back approaching the finals.
"Luckily for me there were a few injuries and suspensions that opened a gap for me."
Having overcome shin problems that racked his first three years, Hadley is an entrenched, if still unheralded, member of Brisbane's five-star midfield.
"When the opposition look at our midfield Richard's probably not one of the first players they look at," Matthews said.
So why the rapid improvement in the 21-year-old.
"I think more than anything it's his growth and maturity," Matthews said. "Some break in at 18 or 19, others gradually develop over a number of years.
"He's had some injuries over the last couple of years. He's got over them now and that's allowed him to play consistent senior football.
"It's been pleasing to see him progress and complement the players we already had in there.
"He's a good size, has good endurance and ball skills, and is able to extricate the ball out of congestion."
Given he's missed only two games this season it's hardly surprising Hadley is feeling more relaxed around his teammates.
"For me, the feeling this year is a lot different," said Hadley, who lives with ruckman and good friend Jamie Charman.
"Coming into last year I didn't know the boys as well and probably wasn't as involved.
"I'm feeling much more a part of the team now and more confident."
It wasn't until his late teens that he believed he could make the grade as an AFL footballer.
"When I was 15 or 16 I always loved my footy but doubted myself a little," he said.
"I suppose my family and later East Fremantle footy club was always there to support me. When I started making representative teams I realised I might be able to make it."
Hadley is among many Sandgropers to have played with Brisbane since the club's inception in 1987.
Others currently on the list are Simon Black, Beau McDonald, Ashley McGrath, Matthew Moody, Llane Spaanderman.
"You can definitely feel the WA connection here," Hadley said.
"We're all pretty close. It's good to have something in common and reflect on."
Word count: 567
