Media release distributed by Medianet.

ADELAIDE?S REVOLUTIONARY X-RAY TECHNOLOGYTO TRANSFORM AMERICAN AIRPORT SECURITYAustralia?s Micro-X opens USA headquartersOfficial Opening at 10 am PDT, Friday in Seattle3 am Saturday AESTFeaturing: - Rover, a mobile X-ray machine that weighs less than 100 kg and is FDA approved for US hospitals - Carbon nanotube X-ray tube technology - Prototype self-service baggage scanner







Micro-X has reinvented how X-rays are generated.
Using their patented carbon nanotube X-ray cold cathode emitter technology they?ve invented Rover, a mobile X-ray machine that weighs less than 100 kg and is ruggedised for high intensity use in field hospitals and remote locations.
But the technology can do much more. It could transform airport security across America, enabling faster and more reliable X-ray baggage screening, reimagining airport checkpoints.
?Today, we?re expanding our US operations,? says Peter Rowland, Micro-X Australian CEO.
?Our new SeaTac facility will be a center of excellence for imaging product development that will revolutionize medical, defense, and security x-ray imaging,? says Brian Gonzales CEO of Micro-X?s rapidly expanding US operations.
The facility was opened by
? Congressman Adam Smith, chairman of the House Armed Services Committee
? Brigadier Hugh Meggitt representing Australian Defence Staff, Embassy of Australia
? Stephen Patterson, South Australian Minister for Trade and Investment (Pre-recorded)
? Erin Sitterley, SeaTac Mayor.
?Our mobile X-ray machines are available now for use in public and military hospitals. They?re lighter, cheaper, more robust, and more precise than our competitors,? says Peter.
?In Australia we?re developing a CT brain scanner, so small and so light that it will integrate into any ambulance allowing brain scans at the point-of-care.?
?Our team here at SeaTac will work on proprietary imaging software and algorithms as part of this project as well as lead our work with the US Government to reinvent airport checkpoints. Our vision is for a self-service booth that provides a 3D image of carry-on luggage together with a body scanner and passport reader,? says Brian.
?We?re excited to be investing in SeaTac and Washington State, the home of many global leaders in innovation and technology. We thank Congressman Adam Smith and SeaTac Mayor Erin Sitterley for their warm welcome,? says Brian.
?The patented invention that makes all these ideas possible is inside our 1.5kg x-ray tube which replaces a conventional x-ray tube weighing more than 20kg.?
Traditional x-ray tubes use a hot filament, like an old-fashioned light bulb, to generate the electron stream needed to make x-rays.
But Micro-X?s technology applies voltage to an emitter made from carbon nanotubes (CNT) to generate the stream of electrons instead. It?s smaller, more energy efficient and longer lasting, like LED lights.
Not only are the devices much lighter, they produce a beam that can be controlled instantly and precisely by simply adjusting the voltage, revolutionizing how x-ray products are used worldwide.
Full release and supporting information at
https://micro-x.com/revolutionary-x-ray-technology-from-australia-to-transform-american-hospitals-and-airports/
About Micro-XMicro-X Limited (the Company) is an ASX listed hi-tech company developing and commercialising a range of innovative products for global health and security markets, based on proprietary cold cathode, carbon nanotube (CNT) emitter technology. The electronic control of emitters with this technology enables x-ray products with significant reduction in size, weight and power requirements, enabling greater mobility and ease of use in existing x-ray markets and a range of new and unique security and defence applications. Micro-X has two mobile digital medical x-ray systems being sold commercially for diagnostic healthcare applications and Micro-X medical products are now in operation in 26 countries around the world.
Micro-X has a portfolio of innovative products in development, including the IED X-ray camera for imaging Improvised Explosive Devices in security, defence and counter-terrorism applications; a next-generation self-service X-Ray Airport Checkpoint Portal with an integrated body scanner; and a lightweight brain CT imager for early stroke diagnosis in ambulances.
https://www.medianet.com.au/releases/release-details.aspx/?id=951416SOURCE: Micro-X Ltd
Word count: 633
