Gawler Rangers continued to add further frustration to its season when it lost 5-6 to Goodwood Indians in division three baseball last Saturday.
Although playing competitive baseball through most of the season, the Rangers have continually shown they lack that 'killer' instinct.
And in spite of a fortnight's break for Christmas, failed to change the status quo in their first game of the new year.
The start was promising, when the first three players garnered hits in the top of the first inning, after singles to Dylan Winning and Andre Benjamin, and a long triple by Sam Murphy for three runs.
While Goodwood answered with a pair of runs in the bottom of the first, Gawler responded with another two runs in the top of the second frame, thanks to James Parker's double and two errors.
With two bad errors the Rangers gifted Goodwood three runs in the bottom of the second inning for a score of 5-5, with a cricket score looming.
But then the feast became a famine.
Both sides' scoring opportunities dried up, as both teams only managed one hit each the rest of the way.
Murphy came on to pitch for Gawler in the third frame and struck the side out, then pitched shut-out ball until the sixth and final inning, when two errors and a hit gifted the Indians with the winning run.
This week the Rangers travel to Lockleys for a game against West Torrens.
Trailing 4-9, the Rangers B grade team scored five last inning runs to snatch a 9-9 draw with Adelaide in division five baseball.
The highlight of Gawler's late rush was Wayne Jenkins long two-run triple, in a game where all players contributed.
Gawler's division seven side fought hard but lost 8-15 to Port Adelaide, a five-run fourth inning the highlight, with three consecutive hits from Trevor Norley, Thomas Norley and Ben Mayfield driving the push.
Paul Casson and Steve Nemeth also collected hits.
Division Three
Gawler Rangers 3 2 0 0 0 0 - 5
Goodwood 2 3 0 0 0 1 - 6
Hits: Sam Murphy 2, Andre Benjamin, Dylan Winning, James Parker.
Division Seven
Gawler Rangers 0 2 2 0 5 - 9
Adelaide Angels 6 0 3 0 0 - 9
Hits: Jimmy Hope 2, Liam Holland, Darren Unger, Steve Allen, James Sheekey, Wayne Jenkins, Paul Skelton, Adam Soar.
Next games:
Saturday - Division Three v West Torrens away, 3pm; Division Five v West Torrens at home, 3pm; Division Seven v GGCD Dodgers away, 12.30pm.
Sunday (January 22) - Under 14 A v East Torrens at home, 3pm; Under 14 B v Henley & Grange at home, 12.30pm; LL Majors v Redsox at home, 10am; LL Minors v Henley & Grange at home, 10am.
Credit: Robert Laidlaw
Word count: 462
