Adelaide tech company Opensensing this week secured State Government funding to develop a hi-tech system that would allow authorities to constantly monitor the levels of waste in quarantine bins.
Staff at the department of Primary Industries and Regional Development have been scrambling to get on top of several fruit fly outbreaks across Adelaide and the Riverland – threatening the state’s $1.3bn horticulture industry.
Cases recently spiked in the areas of Prospect and Stepney, while stone fruits were pulled from the shelves of the state’s major supermarkets following reports of fruit fly larvae.
Opensensing received a grant after pitching its new project through the Go2Gov program, which calls on local innovators to respond directly to public sector challenges.
General manager Leo Gaggl said the monitoring system would use a Long Range Wide Area Network that allows data to be processed and communicated in real-time without using SIM cards or telecommunication providers.
“We have existing level sensors for bins, but the huge challenge for the biosecurity bins is that the coverage inside of those bins is just not here,” Mr Gaggl said.
“What we are addressing in our project is the more localised wireless coverage and then back over long distances.”
Mr Gaggl said his company was also working to develop bin-surround monitoring, which would be used to alert PIRSA staff to dangerous levels of fruit waste building up around bins.
Primary Industries and Regions Minister David Basham said the government was doing “everything we can to protect SA’s horticulture industry”.
“This is why we are excited to partner with local start ups to explore new technologies and
innovation which could improve biosecurity and better protect our state from the threat of fruit fly.”
Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni said Opensensing’s grant would accelerate the company’s idea, with the view of the government becoming a paying customer once completed.
In August 2019, Opensensing installed 100 smart sensors across Adelaide as part of the Local Government Association’s ‘Smart Cities’ framework, monitoring car park levels, road congestion points and rubbish bin levels.
NAT - Stay Informed - Social Media
Word count: 333
