ENGLAND deserves enormous credit for the sustained excellence of its cricket in this series. Watching the tourists has given pleasure to all save the most one-eyed observer, a breed not unknown in either nation.
England has been a team without heroes or egos, a hard-working, tough, thoughtful and committed outfit that has avoided bleating and inexorably crushed a shaky opponent. As much has been obvious during three humiliating days for Australia at the MCG.
Andrew Strauss's side has been a cut above the glamorous England outfits of the 1980s, an era in which the team's failings were hidden by the emergence of a handful of gifted players.
That was a time of rebel tours, dissolution, cynical domestic exchanges, lazy champions and false prophets. It's taken a long time and a lot of hard work, but finally England has regained the grit that was its hallmark for so many decades.
Now it is Australia's turn to reflect upon its failings. Except in Perth, Ricky Ponting's side has been outclassed by a more resourceful opponent. Nor can locals be confident that the pain will be short-lived. By the look of things, the malaise is widespread.
Australia can begin its revival by acknowledging the superiority of a well-drilled touring team superiority evident as much off the field as on it. The teacher has become the pupil. Strauss's side has taught the locals many lessons, not least in the attention it pays to detail and the respect it shows for the basics.
A long list can be provided of areas in which England has surpassed its host. Some of them are avoidable. England has been the fitter side. None of the tourists has carried any extra baggage. Contrastingly, a local speedster has "hit the wall" presumably he was fined a tidy sum for his indulgence and another paceman has broken down in the middle of the match. Indeed, young pacemen are regularly in dry dock. That Ricky Ponting and Mike Hussey are the most streamlined players in the side tells the story.
England's work in the outer has been athletic and alert. It's hard to recall an Australia side being outrun by any touring team since the Windies became idle, let alone by a traditionally heavy-footed mob of Poms. Strauss's outfit has no weak links, no Phil Tufnell or Eddie Hemmings, to provoke caustic comment. Everything has been rehearsed, including the relays and flick-backs. No stone left unturned.
England's selectors have been more astute. The squad was carefully chosen and each player assigned a role. Steve Finn's stack of wickets in Brisbane alone denied Ajmal Shahzad an opportunity on an Adelaide track that suited his skidders. Tim Bresnan's mastery of reverse swing secured him a place at the MCG. Contrastingly, the hosts looked amateurish.
Strauss has had a tactical edge. Graham Swann went around the wicket to remove Michael Clarke yesterday and the catch was taken at a second slip stationed in anticipation of exactly that error. Hussey was held at short cover, placed especially for him. Shane Watson's best shot had been blocked by a deep and straight mid-on. It's been the case all series. England has played its fine leg much wider than usual, thereby saving a fieldsman.
England's batsmen have given their opponents lessons in occupation and concentration. Alastair Cook does not have many shots at his disposal but he waits upon chances to play them and executes with precision. Jonathon Trott's application did not flag in his eight hours at the crease. Hussey apart, none of the locals looked as solid. Some of them resemble flibbertigibbets.
The England bowlers revealed skills beyond their counterparts. Jimmy Anderson swung the new ball sharply, while Bresnan and Chris Tremlett moved the old ball late. All of them kept a full length. Swann was modest enough to produce a containing spell, as requested, and wise enough to adjust his pace to suit the MCG. His faster, flatter deliveries worried every batsman and he might have taken more wickets.
Clearly, England bowling coach David Saker knows his biscuits. Alone among the candidates, he paid his own airfare and hotel bill when interviewed for the position. Others relied on videos. Andy Flower liked his commitment. Flower was another fine appointment, an intelligent, calm man able to add African rigour to English ability.
Australia has been unable to match these capable and diligent visitors. Ponting's ill-chosen team has floundered. Captains tend to get an excess of credit and blame. Ponting will come under scrutiny, but the think-tank cannot escape examination. Coaches, chairmen and selectors can make a captain's job easier or a great deal more difficult.
Credit: Peter ROEBUCK
Word count: 782
