The Warriors are losing games and fans are losing heart.What does the Auckland club have to do to get back on track? League writer DYLAN CLEAVER tells them straight THE SIGN hanging from the car said it all as the crowd departed Ericsson Stadium after the Warriors 38-24 mauling by the Canterbury Bulldogs last week. It read `THE WARRIORS OR WOMBLES - Gene Ngamu is a bludger'.
Tough call? Well, it would be unfair to single out Ngamu as the only "bludger" in a team which consistently fails to reach its potential. But the sentiment would sum up the frustrations of thousands of fans - many of whom were still shaking their heads in disbelief 10 minutes after referee Steven Clark ended their misery.
The debacle was all the harder to take as it was preceded by the Warriors best 15 minutes of the season.
It could have easily been Orinoco, Wellington, and Tomsk who blew a 12-point lead and collapsed against a tough, but uninspiring Canterbury outfit. Coach John Monie - Great Uncle Bulgaria - would have been pulling his hair out in the stand.
Lepers, girls, amateurs and a range of choice expletives unfit for publication issued from the mouths of the faithful, thousands of whom continue to support New Zealand's premier under-achievers.
But signs are the Warriors cannot expect blind loyalty to continue. Crowds have dropped to a point where the pessimistic budget figure of 15,000 a game may seem like a dream by the end of the season.
The public wants more from its team. The excuses won't wash any more, not with the public. Look at Adelaide. They seem to be fronting okay in their first season. Remember the Warriors are in their third.
Going into this weekend the Warriors lie ninth of 10 teams in the Telstra Cup. Only today's opponents, North Queensland, save them the indignity of the cellar.
Ninth may have been acceptable approaching halfway in the 1995 and 1996 seasons, but this year the number of teams has been cut by half and two new franchises with meagre talent pools have joined the fray. Two teams who joined Auckland in the ARL expansion days, Perth and North Queensland are there as well so Auckland should be expected to be well up the ladder. COACH "John Monie is an overrated coach."
DON'T jump on the "John Monie can't coach" bandwagon. It's pointless.
The guy has a fantastic record on both sides of the world with Parramatta and Wigan. But, even his ardent fans would concede the mix hasn't worked in Auckland and it's time for a change.
The team isn't winning. It hasn't achieved consistency and has made little significant progress from the opening game in 1995.
Monie has had his time and a change is overdue. The Warriors need a new coach.
The knives have been sharpened and Monie must feel a man under siege.
Former Kiwi utility player Gary Prohm says he is not sure whether coaching is a problem, but says he is getting agitated by the lack of progress.
"Managing to blend a team from the individual players is not working," he says.
"John Monie would be a very worried man right now. He has to get the team working."
Prohm is an advocate of the coaching abilities of former St Helens coach Mike McClennan. "He's the best coach I've ever seen without a doubt. What we're trying to do is beat Australians with an Australian coaching New Zealanders. He's trying to play an Australian type of game and trying to beat them at it.
"Trying to beat them by doing things differently is the way to go in my opinion. You can take some very good points out of the Australian game, but there are a few things you have to do the New Zealand way."
Never one of the most ebullient characters, Monie has looked more hangdog than usual lately.
There has always been an element on the Warriors board who wanted a New Zealander to coach New Zealand's highest profile league team and recently Monie lost his closest ally, ex-chief executive Ian Robson. It is impossible to believe he can last until the end of the 1998 season when his contract expires.
Monie has asked for his position to be reviewed at the end of this season.
He has been coy about his future but was linked with the coaching position at Wigan made vacant by the sacking of Graeme West.
Monie seemed resigned to the fact things weren't going to plan when he said at the end of last season he feared some players had gone backwards under his direction.
Of more concern this season will be the thought the team, not individuals, has gone backwards under his direction.
It is not practical to ask Monie to change his style. Why should he? He's won more trophies than most in the game. The chances are Monie will be successful with another team after his term at the Warriors is over.
It has been reported he has a problem relating to Polynesians. As exaggerated as this is likely to be, it does appear the natural flair and athletic ability of some Warriors has not been developed. Tony Tatupu was one who wouldn't or couldn't produce the performances his enormous talent suggested.
Monie has said the buck stops at the coaching staff and more people are convinced the Warriors need a change in direction.
Someone who will put the fun back into their football. Kiwi coach Frank Endacott is the logical choice. He has a rapport with his players and has had success with the reserves, the Kiwis and with Canterbury. PLAYERS "The Warriors need some tough Australians"
THE Warriors need to look carefully at their playing staff and recruitment policy.
Too many Warriors first graders are struggling to make an impact and there is a reluctance to make wholesale changes despite the success of Frank Endacott's reserves.
The Warriors need a grafter in the back row - like Gary Larson or Robert Relf - to complement Steve Kearney and a clever player in the backs who can control the game. They can't afford to gamble on converts any more.
News the Warriors have written to every player agent in Australia to see who is off contract is a positive. It is also an admission the Warriors need to boost player resources in significant areas. Monie said the real birth of the Warriors will be when the players in the under 19 team and development squad start to force their way into the first team.
Unfortunately, dwindling crowd attendances suggest the public has little patience for this theory.
The Warriors much-vaunted attack has reaped 121 points in the Telstra Cup this year. Only North Queensland with 118 have scored less.
Their defence - noted for its improvement this season - went back to its open door policy last Sunday. Conceding 172 points already their defensive record is better than only Canberra and, you guessed it, North Queensland.
"It doesn't worry me too much if they win or lose, but it's how they play the game. I'm sick of watching midfield bombs and seeing nobody chase the ball," Prohm says.
"After the game I felt something had to be done and done now. I'd had enough."
Prohm would like to see the Warriors stick to New Zealanders when they go into the player market at the end of the year.
"I'm very happy to see guys like Stacey Jones and Bryan Henare come through. I'd rather get the best players we've got in New Zealand rather than buy some Australian that doesn't really like it in New Zealand."
Outside Ridge the Warriors have had a poor recruitment record. Gavin Hill and Manoa Thompson were two big name flops and Andy Platt never really hit his straps in Warriors colours.
Greg Alexander has shown more form at the start of 1997 with Penrith than he did in his two years here, while Phil Blake was bought at the end of his use by date. In fairness Blake's influence at the club in terms of experience and knowledge may prove to be more profound than his playing.
Rugby convert John Kirwan made a better fist of league than many would have expected, but Mark Carter did not adapt to the 13-man game and it was no surprise when he rejoined union.
Another rah-rah convert who is proving enigmatic is Marc Ellis, well known for his on-field mistakes and off-field TV performances. His undoubted ability is offset by his penchant for making defensive howlers. The heart is literally in the mouth when a bomb is aimed at Ellis and Iva Ropati.
As for Oudenryn, it is hard to judge how astute an acquisition the former Parramatta and Gold Coast winger is. "The players are overpaid"
OVERPAID. It is a label every professional sportsman or team gets tarred with when they're losing.
Whatever the players are getting paid, you can hardly blame them. Most people, no matter what their profession, are after the best deal.
But Warriors management must act now. When players come off their contracts performance-based clauses must be introduced.
If Ridge is getting $700,000 and Denis Betts $650,000, as is rumoured, good on them.
Players are paid too much, but that is a result of the ARL v Super League war which wildly inflated salaries.
Average players suddenly found themselves with princely sums and would be aggrieved at a pay cut.
League is a 10-year career for most - even shorter if a player loses form or is injured. What seems like a fortune in earnings at the time can dwindle if there is no career prospects after league. "There's been some very big numbers talked about," Prohm says.
"I've been told Denis Betts is being paid $10,000 a week. "I don't know whether this figure is true, but I can tell you he hasn't earned $10,000 a week for the two or three years he's been over here."
In fact, if rumours are true about Betts $650,000 contract he would be paid a lot more. The Warriors would play a maximum 30 games a season which means Betts would be getting more than $20,000 a game. It is dog eat dog among the clubs. Rich clubs like Manly and Brisbane have the bargaining power to match anyone so if a club starts implementing drastic pay cuts - like the South Queensland Crushers did last year - there are plenty of clubs waiting to feed off the disillusioned players.
The buzzword is incentive payments. It is seen as a way of removing any doubts the players are sitting on their butts each week waiting for pay cheques.
A hefty part of a week's wages being tied up in the result of a game might instil a fierce desire to win.
This begs the question of whether players are actually thinking about money when they're on the field.
You could poll every league player and 99 per cent would say they were playing for the love of the game, the money is just a bonus. Rugby converts might be different.
HEART "The Warriors have no guts" IT hurts the Warriors more than other criticism to be accused of playing with no heart. In sport it is one of the biggest insults you can hurl at someone.
There is no doubt the Warriors want to win every time they run on the field, but the difference in close games can often come down to how much pain and sacrifice individuals are prepared to endure.
Australian teams do it. The Warriors don't. So are they real Warriors or just imitations? The Warriors do not look like a team desperate to win.
Prohm is adamant a lack of heart is not the problem. "I believe every player goes out there and plays to the best of their ability. I honestly believe that."
However, it does sometimes appear the Warriors are resigned to the fact they are going to be beaten well before the final whistle.
"It certainly looks that way at times," Prohm says. "I don't think they'd ever give up, it's not bred into league players to give up."
Monie has identified a lack of tradition at a new club as a problem. He argued when the going got tough there was no history or pedigree for the Warriors to fall back on.
Guys like Matthew Ridge who has already shown he is prepared to put his body on the line for the good of the team will be needed for inspiration if a "warrior" spirit is to develop.
Inexcusable was stand-in captain Stephen Kearney's explanation for losses to Adelaide and Hunter Valley.
"We were out-enthused," he said. The comment could be forgiven if the Warriors were outplayed, outthought or outmuscled, but you should never be out-enthused .REFEREES "The refs are cheats"
ALWAYS a good one to fall back on when your team is losing, but the fans may have a point.
Auckland do seem to be denied equilibrium here. Perhaps, it is a hangover from the days when Australians viewed New Zealanders as a wild, undisciplined lot intent on hurting the opposition as much as possible.
Warriors coaching staff have meet referee's boss Graham Annesley to sort out where they feel the Warriors are being unfairly treated. The Warriors have showed admirable discipline despite a rash of awful calls which have gone against them.
On Sunday, Kearney was near the end of his tether when he pleaded with Clark and could be heard saying: "All we're asking for is a fair go."
Referees have admitted on at least two occasions the Warriors have been the victim of dodgy calls, but as Ridge pointed out last week, an apology doesn't equal two points.
Prohm says the referees have made mistakes but the Warriors aren't playing well enough.
"The ref made a crucial mistake against Canberra but it didn't really count because the Warriors still won. The game it cost them was against the Mariners where the ref made a fatal mistake in terms of the result.
"Having said that, if the players had played with the same determination as they had against Canberra, it would not have been a problem."
Chairman Gerald Ryan may have to shoulder some blame. Saying 106- year-olds from the bottom of the South Island could referee as well as some Australians may have made for a good chuckle, but he would not have done the Warriors any favour with his outburst.
--------------------
Illustration
CAPTION: FULL TIME: John Monie needs to move on. PICK 'N MIX: Recruitment needs scrutiny. PUMPED UP: Ridge has what it takes. FAIR PLAY: Less dodgy calls from refs.
Word count: 2456
