RATING * * * * * *
SYDNEY forward Barry Hall virtually gave away the Coleman Medal for the AFL's leading goalkicker to help his red-hot side enter next week's finals on the best possible note.
Sydney's 54-point thumping of Hawthorn at the MCG on Saturday booked the Swans a qualifying final berth against West Coast in Perth on Friday night.
Hall entered the match trailing St Kilda's Fraser Gehrig by five on the goalkicking table and could have had those and more by half- time such was his dominance early.
Instead he finished with three goals and had a hand in several others, unselfishly passing to team-mates from kickable positions as the Swans had 13 individual goalkickers, led by Nick Davis with four.
Hall may find he's traded the Coleman for a premiership medallion in a month's time after spearheading his side to its seventh win in eight games to further frank its finals credentials.
The Swans took control of the match in the first quarter and outmuscled, outthought, outplayed and outclassed the young Hawks in every department.
Sydney opened up a 27-point lead by quarter-time, extended it to 49 by the long break and pushed the win out to nine goals by the end.
Hall had 19 touches and 13 marks and finished the match warming the bench as coach Paul Roos took no chances ahead of its final next week.
Roos also rested midfielder Paul Williams and forward Michael O'Loughlin for much of the term with the game already won.
SYDNEY 5.5 12.5 15.7 20.9 (129)
HAWTHORN 1.2 4.4 6.9 11.9 (75)
BEST - Sydney: Hall, Kirk, Buchanan, O'Keefe, Goodes, Davis. Hawthorn: Hodge, Everitt, Crawford.
GOALS - Sydney: Davis 4, Hall 3, Goodes, O'Keefe 2, Ablett, Ball, Buchanan, Crouch, Fosdike, Kirk, O'Loughlin, Schneider, Vogels. Hawthorn: Dixon 3, Lonie 2, Everitt, Franklin, Hodge, Miller, Osborne, Young.
INJURIES - Hawthorn: Croad (thumb) replaced in selected side by Ball, Ries (quadriceps) replaced in selected side by Murphy.
REPORT - Hawthorn: Hodge by umpire Donlon for allegedly charging Kirk in second quarter.
UMPIRES - C. Donlon, C. Rowe, D. Morris.
CROWD - 31,891 at MCG.
Word count: 383
