COLLINGWOOD'S goal kicking woes continued but it just didn't matter.
In the past two weeks the AFL's minor premiers just got over the line by three points against Adelaide, despite kicking 6.18, then went down by three points to Hawthorn after scoring 13.17.
The Magpies were so dominant in the first half of last night's qualifying final against the Western Bulldogs at the MCG that they held a 32-point lead at half-time despite kicking 7.15 (57).
The Bulldogs could only manage 3.7 (25) by the break.
With skipper Nick Maxwell playing as a loose man in defence and gathering 14 possessions in the first half, the Magpies launched their full court press defence at every opportunity, strangling the life out of the Bulldogs' attempts to go forward.
Time and time again the Bulldogs found their chip kicks cut off by Collingwood's defence.
When the Bulldogs went long looking for Barry Hall, they either went over his head or took so long to get the ball forward that Hall was triple teamed.
The Bulldogs seemed to be spending more energy trying to put Collingwood's Harry O'Brien on the turf but O'Brien got in first with a bruising bump on Hall.
Scott Pendlebury and Brownlow Medal favourite Dane Swan had 17 disposals each in the first half, and some magical touches from Alan Didak and Jarryd Blair's five inside-50s gave the Magpies full control of the contest.
The Bulldogs' defence had their own problems with star fullback Brian Lake landing heavily on a shoulder and briefly leaving the field early in the second quarter, later returning to battle on.
Tall defender Tom Williams made several crucial mistakes, which radio commentator Garry Lyon described as "dumb football".
Ryan Griffen had 21 touches in the first half for the Bulldogs and even he seemed totally thrown by Collingwood's defence, kicking over the leading Hall's head and fluking a long-range goal as the ball dribbled forward and over the line.
Outclassed, out-run and outthought, the Bulldogs needed something special to get themselves back into the game.
Shaun Higgins, Daniel Giansiracusa, lightly built forward Jarrad Grant and veteran skipper Brad Johnson were among those who needed to lift.
Grant's big chance came in the third quarter with his side trailing by six goals. He ran clear, had a bounce and slotted through a point as the TV camera flashed to coach Rodney Eade, who muttered under his breath and took a swig of his water bottle.
The Pies won by 62 points and Magpies fans booed Johnson and Hall as they came off the ground late in the game.
Word count: 434
