By Guy Hand
MELBOURNE, Aug 27 AAP - Sydney forward Barry Hall virtually gave away the Coleman Medal for the AFL's leading goalkicker today to help his red-hot side enter next week's finals on the best possible note.
Sydney's 20.9 (129) to 11.9 (75) thumping of Hawthorn at the MCG today booked the Swans a qualifying final berth against West Coast in Perth on Friday night.
Hall entered today's match trailing St Kilda's Fraser Gehrig by five on the goalkicking table and could have had those and more by halftime such was his dominance early.
Instead he finished with three goals and had a hand in several others, unselfishly passing to teammates from kickable positions as the Swans had 13 individual goalkickers, led by Nick Davis with four.
Hall may find he's traded the Coleman for a premiership medallion in a month's time after spearheading his side to its seventh win in eight games to further frank its finals credentials.
The Swans took control of the match in the first quarter and outmuscled, outthought, outplayed and outclassed the young Hawks in every department.
Sydney opened up a 27-point lead by quarter-time, extended it to 49 by the long break and pushed the win out to nine goals by the end.
Hall had 19 touches and 13 marks and finished the match warming the bench as coach Paul Roos took no chances ahead of its final next week.
Roos also rested midfielder Paul Williams and forward Michael O'Loughlin for much of the term with the game already won.
"It's a real credit to Barry. I said during the week we weren't going to change anything and clearly Barry wasn't - he played his normal team role," Roos said.
"He kicked three, probably dished off another three or four - quite conceivably he could have easily kicked five goals.
"It shows where Barry is at as a player - his concern is more for playing within team structures, playing a team role.
"If the Coleman had come along, well and good.
"I think it sent a signal to the rest of the team that he's in it for the team and nothing else."
Sydney sealed third place on the ladder with the victory and now faces the difficult task of travelling west to play the second-placed Eagles, who let the minor premiership slip with a eight-point loss to Adelaide in Perth today.
But Roos believes his team is tracking well enough to be a factor in the finals.
"In 2003 we won 14 games and we were fourth but we lost three players going into the finals, last year we ended up losing Williams and (Ben) Mathews in a game, so we're probably equal to where we were last year in terms of form and fitness," Roos said.
"We all know it can change significantly. But after round 22, we're happy with where things are at."
Hawthorn is now assured a priority pick at the national draft after winning just five of its 22 games for the year.
But it could find itself starting next season without star midfielder Luke Hodge, who was reported for charging Sydney's Brett Kirk in the second quarter.
The young Hawks were badly weakened with the loss before kick-off of key forward Trent Croad, who withdrew with a broken thumb.
AAP gh/avp
27-08 1858
Word count: 567
