Dale Hunter, coroner: Dale Hunter was Nelson coroner from 1977 to 1992. He was a senior partner in the law firm Hunter Ralfe, working primarily in conveyancing, before he became coroner. - B 1921; d Richmond, Feb 15, 1999.
Herbert Green, academic: Professor Green - Bert Green as he was known to many - was one of Australia's most eminent physicists. In 1951 he became the first professor of theoretical physics in Australia, with his appointment to the chair of mathematical physics at the University of Adelaide. "His work on the theory of molecular liquid physics was considered groundbreaking by physicists throughout the world," said a statement from the university. Author of 13 books ranging from the theory of liquids to quantum computing, Prof Green wrote more than 150 scientific papers and was elected to the Australian Academy of Science in 1954. Despite suffering from severe deafness most of his life, he enjoyed social occasions, was an excellent host and a regular concert-goer. - B 1920; m, 2ch; d (lymphoma) Adelaide, Feb 16, 1999.
Gene Siskel, film critic: Known for the thumbs-up and thumbs-down reviews he and fellow film critic Roger Ebert shared on their popular US TV show Siskel & Ebert, Siskel wrote movie reviews for the Chicago Tribune and also for CBS This Morning and WBBM-TV in Chicago. Siskel and Ebert were perhaps the most recognisable movie critics in the US. Their trademark "thumbs-up" and "thumbs-down" reviews became a benchmark for the movie industry. Siskel graduated from Yale University in 1967, joined the Tribune in 1969 and he and Ebert began their partnership in 1975. - B 1945; m Marlene, 2ch; d Chicago, Feb 20, 1999.
Michael Higgins, artist: Glass artist and designer Michael Higgins was half of the husband-wife team who created the colourful and sought-after "higgins" glass. Some of the household objects the pair created from vividly coloured fused glass over their 50-year joint career are in the collections of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Smithsonian Institution, the Corning Glass Museum and London's Victoria and Albert Museum. Others are in the homes of people who bought them at department stores or art fairs. All are signed with the simple word "higgins". London-born Higgins went to the US in 1939 and married Frances Stewart in 1948. In their first tiny Chicago apartment, the two installed three glass kilns behind the sofa and began producing art glass. "He and his wife were among the first people to create an American glass aesthetic. They were the building blocks of the movement," said Michael Madden, chief curator at the American Craft Museum, New York. - B London, 1908; m Frances; d Riverside, Chicago, Feb 13, 1999.
Hideo Itokawa, rocket scientist: A prominent aeronautical engineer, Itokawa was widely known in Japan as Dr Rocket for his role in the early stages of Japan's space programme. He succeeded in horizontally launching a 23cm pencil rocket in 1955. After graduating from Tokyo Imperial University in 1935, Itokawa joined the former Nakajima Aircraft Industries Ltd and helped design fighter planes for Japan's military during the Second World War. Itokawa joined the University of Tokyo's Institute of Industrial Science in 1964 and took part in the development of high-speed projectiles and rockets. - B 1912; d Maruko, Japan, Feb 21, 1999.
Gideon Rafael, diplomat: Pioneer diplomat Rafael helped found the Israeli Foreign Ministry half a century ago. Rafael - who served as the Ministry's director general and fulfilled many other roles, including ambassador to the United Nations - willed his body to science. Born in Germany, he moved to pre-state Palestine in 1934 after the Nazis rose to power. His first mission was to organise illegal immigration of Jews at a time when British mandate authorities set severe limits. Rafael retired from the foreign service in 1978 and published a book about his career three years later. - B Germany, 1912; d Jerusalem, Feb 10, 1999.
Xiao Qian, author: Chinese author, journalist and translator Xiao Qian wrote his first novel in 1933 and in 1938 he went to university in London. He wrote for the long-established Ta Kong Pao newspaper and was the only Chinese journalist in Europe during the Second World War, said Xinhua news agency. Xiao went to Kings College, Cambridge, in 1942 and later reported on the Potsdam conference, Nuremberg trials and the founding of the United Nations. Xiao was a translator into Chinese of great works of literature including Shakespeare, Ibsen and Joyce. He was persecuted during the anti-right movement in 1957 and only rehabilitated in 1979, a year after he was once again allowed to publish under his own name. - B Mongolia Jan 27, 1910; d Beijing, Feb 11, 1999.
Ann West, campaigner: West, the mother of British Moors murder victim Lesley Ann Downey, suffered 34 years of torment following the brutal killing of her 10-year-old daughter, who was snatched from a fairground by Myra Hindley and Ian Brady on Boxing Day, 1964. Always believing her daughter died at Hindley's own hands she campaigned tirelessly, often when desperately ill, against the killer ever being released from prison. - B 1929; d (liver cancer) Fallowfield, Manchester, Feb 9, 1999.
Sarah Kane, playwright: One of Britain's most controversial playwrights, Kane shocked the theatre establishment with her graphic handling of physical and emotional violence. She was found hanged at King's College Hospital, London. Kane made her debut when she was 23 at the Royal Court theatre in London with her play Blasted, which divided critics with its depiction of cannibalism and male and female rape. Though some critics dismissed her work as a "feast of filth", others said Kane wrote in the "bleached language of truth and poetry". Kane's subsequent plays were Phaedra's Love, Cleansed and Crave. - B 1970; d Feb 20, 1999.
- NZPA, AP, AAP, AFP, DPA, Reuter
Supplied by New Zealand Press Association
Word count: 977
