SOUTH Australians should reconsider travelling to Queensland, while those who have returned in the past month must closely monitor for any illness after a coronavirus community transmission outbreak, the state’s chief public health officer has warned.
In a development Professor Nicola Spurrier described as “very concerning”, Queensland authorities yesterday revealed a COVID-19 cluster of seven cases was traced back to a Brisbane youth detention centre.
While the cases are linked to a centre supervisor, 77, of Ipswich, southwest of Brisbane, officials said the cluster represented community transmission in Queensland.
As Premier Steven Marshall was drawn into the crisis and SA Pathology suspended a text alert system with company Personify Care over a data breach, Prof Spurrier issued an urgent public health alert for anyone who visited Brisbane or Ipswich, since July 22.
Mr Marshall spent four days earlier this month in Queensland, primarily to attend his son’s graduation. A spokeswoman said last night a COVID test completed upon his return was negative.
The State Government is reviewing Queensland travel amid fears of a crackdown if the outbreak worsens. At present there are no travel restrictions on Queensland travellers but Prof Spurrier said anyone with a trip in the coming weeks, particularly to Brisbane or Ipswich, should “reconsider their need to travel” and “be aware that quarantine requirements … may change rapidly based on close monitoring of the situation”.
“The COVID-19 situation in Brisbane – with initial links to a youth detention centre – is very concerning and represents community transmission,” Prof Spurrier told the Sunday Mail last night.
She also urged Queensland travellers to: CLOSELY monitor their health and take a COVID-19 test “with even very mild symptoms”.
NOT visit or work in any aged care or disability care service for a fortnight since their return to South Australia and for a virus test is negative.
AVOID visiting vulnerable people, the elderly or those with chronic health problems.
Police figures show 4461 Queensland border crossings in the past week, the third highest of 16,149 total trips.
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said authorities were “concerned” by the new cluster. “These people have been out and about in the community,” she said. They warned more cases would emerge and raised concerns about a Brisbane disability accommodation service and an Ipswich Hospital emergency department. Chief health officer Dr Jeannette Young said: “I can clearly say in Brisbane and in Ipswich, if you’ve got symptoms of the flu it’s most likely to be COVID.” SA Health yesterday reported a fifth consecutive day of zero new cases. There are currently six active patients.
CREDIT: ANDREW HOUGH JANELLE MILES
Word count: 434
