ADELAIDE-based tech company Personify Care will receive help from the Innovation Institute of the Texas Medical Centre to launch its mobile patient monitoring platform into the US market.
Personify Care is one of just 25 companies selected internationally by the TMC, after a competitive selection process.
TMC consists of 54 medicine-related institutions, including 21 hospitals, seven nursing schools and two pharmacy schools.
It handles more than eight million patients annually and surgery is performed there every three minutes. As part of its TMCx accelerator program, the resources of the institute are paired with businesses working in the area of digital health and medical devices.
Personify Care's software allows nurses, specialist practices and hospitals to detect when a patient is at risk of a complication and intervene before their condition escalates.
Personify Care chief executive Ken Saman said it had its sights on the US market from day one and the idea for the platform came after he had knee surgery.
"I was being driven home after my second anterior cruciate ligament knee reconstruction and frustration was my overriding experience," he said.
"Despite having been through it before, I was having trouble recalling some basic information I'd been given during my hospital stay." Mr Saman worked with technology veteran Ivan Peevski to make it easier for patients to manage their recovery.
The Personify Care system sends discharged patients regular text messages from their nurse over a six to eight-week period with information about their recovery and tests to monitor risks.
"We looked for opportunities about how we could help patients after they leave hospital with a handful of forms and a vague idea of what to do (next)," Mr Saman said.
St Andrews Hospital, in Adelaide, has announced a hospital-wide rollout of the platform."We have been working with St Andrews Hospital for most of last year on the extensive evolution of their platforms," he said.
Credit: ALEXANDRA ECONOMOU
Word count: 308
