US healthcare IT giant Allscripts has unveiled its new Innovation Hub in the CBD, where it hopes to attract and collaborate with local tech innovators in the sector.
The company, which is working with SA Health on upgrades to its controversial EPAS electronic medical record (EMR) system – now known as Sunrise – employs 35 staff at its Australia and New Zealand headquarters on Frome St.
The Innovation Hub offers flexible workspaces for prospective tenants, while a separate Health Experience Centre (HEC) replicates a hospital environment, allowing Allscripts and its partners the ability to showcase their tech solutions.
Allscripts Australia and New Zealand general manager Todd Haebich said multiple healthcare IT start-ups would be supported in the new Innovation Hub, which would encourage collaboration.
“The idea of this is to encourage small innovative companies, which want to also be close to a large healthcare IT provider like Allscripts, to have a facility where they can come in and work, brainstorm, communicate and discuss and maybe reach out to our marketing group or development group to bounce ideas around,” he said.
“Our preferred arrangement would be for a company to sign up for six months, 12 months or whatever they think they need, so they can hopefully get under way and then be big enough to have their own facility in Adelaide.
“One of the key drivers to facilitate that innovation is to give them access to facilities like the HEC, knowing that if they connect into that particular environment, they could potentially connect into SA Health and into thousands of hospitals around the world that use the same solution.” Mr Haebich pointed to Allscripts’ 2016 acquisition of Adelaide-based software devel­oper Core Medical Solutions as an example of how his company has tapped into Adelaide’s “fast-developing reput­ation as a hub for medical innovation”.
“Whilst its flagship (document management) platform BOSSnet has grown to operate in over 100 hospitals across Australia, the BOSSnet management and support team now operate at a global level,” he said. “BOSSnet has established a client base in the UK and US and is being marketed through Allscripts’ global channels throughout the US, UK, Singapore, India, Indonesia, Philippines and Malaysia.” Allscripts also runs an Innovators Programme, allowing local healthcare IT groups to integrate their technologies with the company’s open platform.
“We hosted our first Innovators Programme event early last year to introduce Allscripts to the local industry and it proved very successful with more than 35 local business signing up including Axios, DoseMe and Personify Care,” Mr Haebich said.
Last month, Allscripts upgraded SA Health’s Sunrise system as a first step towards meeting the recommendations of an independent review into the controversial EMR roll-out.
“It absolutely is one of the 36 recommendations that came through from the independent review, and that’s one of the things we’ve already ticked off,” Mr Haebich said.
He said Allscripts was working with SA Health to determine the next steps towards meeting the review’s recommendations.The company is also hoping to extend the roll-out of its Anaesthesia Information Management System, which was introduced into the new Royal Adelaide Hospital in 2017.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 521
