ADELAIDE is fast becoming a magnet for international investment which is being underpinned by four significant growth sectors, says a leading national property analyst.
A new paper launched in Adelaide last week by global property group JLL - titled "Has Adelaide re-emerged on the investment landscape" - identifies SMEs, technology, defence and education as the four growth sectors driving investment in South Australia and fuelling Adelaide's re-emergence on the global investment landscape.
JLL (SA) managing director Jamie Guerra is adamant Adelaide has re-emerged on the investment radar for cross-border investors and large Australian institutional fund managers in recent years.
"Activity within the defence tech sector has already increased over the last 12 months. Boeing, DCNS and Babcock International have all recently opened SA offices in the CBD and fringe," he said.
"Meanwhile SAAB, Lockheed Martin and BAE Systems have expanded or are in the process of expanding operations in Mawson Lakes and Edinburgh Parks in the city's northern suburbs." The new DCNS headquarters in Keswick has a workforce of about 50. SA engineers have been liaising with the DCNS HQ in Cherbourg-en-Cotentin in Normandy while members of the French supply chain are to re-locate to Adelaide to help with preliminary program work.
SMEs are a key growth sector for the SA economy, and the desire of large companies to collaborate and work with innovative start-ups has stimulated the growth of co-working spaces in the Adelaide CBD Mr Guerra said.
The Co-Working SA Association claims there are already about 30 co-working spaces in Adelaide, the highest number per capita in Asia.
The Commonwealth of Australia 2016 Defence White Paper suggests about $195 billion will be invested here over the next 10 years with major investment implications for SA Mr Guerra said with the coming $50 billion submarine contract expected to generate 3000 new jobs locally.
The number of international students here increased by 7.8 per cent last year with international student numbers up almost two thirds since 2006.
The Economist intelligence unit ranking Adelaide as the fifth most liveable city complements this perfectly, he said.
ABS figures suggest the technology sector expansion has resulted in 750 SA technology firms employing between 1 and 19 people, with small-scale biotech companies such as Alcidion, LBT Innovations and Personify Care all recording business growth in the past 12 months.
The new Health and Biomedical Precinct on North Terrace will underpin the growth of this sector.
JLL's national head of research Andrew Ballantyne said real estate investors had a bias for low-risk assets with Adelaide the epitome of low risk, with the volatility of returns typically lower through the investment cycle.
"One of the key concerns for investors is a perceived lack of depth in the Adelaide market and liquidity issues," he said.
"The JLL liquidity index (which adjusts for market size), highlights Adelaide as one of the most liquid CBD office markets in Australia. Through the cycle, liquidity provides a level of confidence for investors in being able to execute an exit strategy." Adelaide also offers investors a cyclic opportunity as the prime grade yield spread between Adelaide and other CBD office markets is wider than historical benchmarks he said.
"The wider than average spread highlights the attractiveness of asset pricing in Adelaide relative to Sydney and Melbourne and has started to stimulate new investment inquiry in the Adelaide CBD office market," Mr Guerra said.
"With a more diverse tenant base than other CBD office markets, Adelaide is ideal for investors as a diverse tenant base flows through to lower volatility in occupier demand and reduces Adelaide's reliance on any one industry sector for growth." The key to understanding market growth is to look through the lens of offshore capital, Mr Ballantyne said, as infrastructure projects help change market attractivenes.
"Infrastructure projects and offshore investment are highly correlated," he said, with the expected doubling of passenger numbers through Adelaide airport in the next 20 years a prime example.Beware that Adelaide remains a conservative market he said, heavily influenced by very high private investor numbers with the volatility of real estate returns expected to stimulate further interest away from risk-averse investors.
Credit: RICHARD EVANS COMMERCIAL PROPERTY
Word count: 675
