Too soon to ease restrictions as people in 20s urged to get tests
SOUTH Australia has recorded a second day in a row of zero new COVID-19 cases – now authorities want more young adults with cold-like symptoms to get tested.
The total stands at 435 cases with 354 people now recovered, or more than 80 per cent, and there are 77 active cases.
Seven people are in hospital, one in intensive care in a critical condition. The state death toll remains at four.
The zero result comes amid a testing blitz launched on Thursday. CONTINUED PAGE 4 Double zero a win in state’s virus war Too soon to ease restrictions as people in 20s urged to get tests FROM PAGE 1 The blitz led to 5209 tests in three days as authorities expanded their focus to people with symptoms but who had no travel history or known contact with confirmed cases.
Deputy chief public health officer Dr Michael Cusack said the age group 21 to 30 was under-represented in the blitz and appealed for young people who have a cough or sore throat to be tested rather than dismissing it as a seasonal cold.
“We very much encourage anyone between those ages of 21 to 30 who has symptoms of a sore throat, cough or a temperature to get tested,” he said, adding that health officials are “very much buoyed” by the consecutive zero results.
“With the restrictions that have been brought, we really have managed to get control of it,” he said, while warning against the risk of becoming “slack” over social distancing.
Health and Wellbeing Minister Stephen Wade said SA has now had three weeks of zero or single digit new cases daily and reached milestones including more than 40,000 tests and 2 per cent of the population tested “I think it is realistic to expect to see some easing of restrictions in the next month particularly in terms of elective surgery,” he said.
“Many other restrictions are dependent on getting an assurance we do have this disease under control. We need to brace ourselves for the fact border controls will not be the first wave of restrictions to be eased.” National Cabinet will discuss elective surgery restrictions tomorrow. Mr Wade said an issue had been availability of protective equipment for clinicians but this was resolved.
In another SA innovation, people who return a negative result for a coronavirus test will be sent an SMS alert to check their results online under a plan to speed the process and allay concerns.
Those who test positive will still be told in person with subsequent medical care, quarantine and contact tracing.
Patients taking the test can register their details with SA Pathology via an SMS, then when a negative result is available they will be sent a text alert to check it online.
Mr Wade said it would help people get swift peace of mind.
“Developed in conjunction with SA technology company Personify Care the new digital service is another example of SA Pathology embracing innovation,” he said.
SA Pathology director of Clinical Services Tom Dodd said the digital service is efficient and safe.
“We are performing in excess of 7000 tests a week, and on average, 98.7 per cent are negative results,” Dr Dodd said.
“The process of undergoing testing for COVID-19 and waiting for the results can be stressful so it is hoped the portal will reduce delays and ease some of the anxiety.
“Test results will be manually reviewed before entering them into the portal to ensure accuracy, and all patients who return a positive COVID-19 test result will still be contacted personally to inform them.” The service will be available at all metropolitan and eight regional clinics from today and be rolled out across the state.
SA’s zero result comes as University of Melbourne modelling shows SA may have as few as 12 active cases by April 27 as more people recover.
Meanwhile, tight security is in place for the arrival of two flights bringing around 880 Australians from overseas. A flight from Chennai via Jakarta and Denpasar is due to land at 7.30am today and passengers will be taken under police escort to the Pullman Hotel in Hindmarsh Square for mandatory isolation. They will be swabbed then checked daily.
A flight from Mumbai via Jakarta and Denpasar is due at 8.45am tomorrow.FRONTLINE HEROES
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 733
