INTERNATIONAL research into cancer is taking a leap forward at the University of Adelaide, with the opening of a $3 million proteomic laboratory equipped with two highly coveted machines.
Professor of immunology Shaun McColl, who led the team that won the funding to establish the centre, said the lab would allow researchers and staff to observe proteins at a molecular level.
"We might be able to come up with different ways to stop cells forming and spreading," Professor McColl told the HES.
With a $1.5 million Australian Cancer Research Foundation grant, the school of molecular and biomedical science has bought two of the most sophisticated pieces of proteomic research equipment in the world -- Maldi TOF/TOF and ESI mass spectrometers -- that isolate proteins in a process seen as the next step from mapping the human genome.
"It's used to identify proteins and modifications that have happened that could be related to disease," he said. "Hopefully you can look at the difference between normal cells and tumour cells and see the changes."
The ACRF grant was the largest private foundation research grant awarded in South Australia and the largest the organisation has granted.
The university head-hunted internationally renowned German proteomic expert Peter Hoffmann to run the centre because of his expertise in setting up a similar laboratory at the Biotechnology and Biomedical Centre at the University of Leipzig, Germany, in 2003.
One of the attractions in coming to Adelaide was the chance to work with the mass spectrometers, the only ones of their kind in Australia.
"If you want to have a really good proteomic lab the machines are complementary," Dr Hoffmann said. "If you want to be state-of-the- art you would have both, and we're the only ones who have both."
The machines are also attracting international attention, with scientists in Germany and the US showing interest in working in the laboratory.
"We're being inundated with people who are keen on coming here and working from Germany and the US. The problem is getting the funding and they're looking at their country helping with funding and we're looking at ours," he said.
The centre already collaborates with the Hanson Institute, a centre for cancer research.
Word count: 388
