RIVERLAND SOCCER: Barmera United's Sam Atkins has won the Steve Poutakidis Medal as the Best and Fairest A Grade Men's Player in the 2014 season.
Atkins polled 19 votes to finish ahead of club mates Martin Barber, 16, and Frank Radic, 14, followed Renmark Olympic's Maxim Leturgie 12.
The Riverland Association annual presentation dinner was held last weekend at the Renmark Club.
In the A grade goal kicking Barber took out the Golden Boot award with 39 goals from team mate Jim Fournaros 33 and Hari Sahota (Renmark) 32.
Eric Sialis (Renmark) received the trophy as the Best Goalkeeper while the Team of the Year comprised Sam Atkins, James Wallace, Josh Tsorotiotis, Kevin Barber Jnr, Martin Barber, Rhys Barber, Josh Ekisa (Barmera), Eric Sialis, Tarquin Frahn, Shane Taylor, Yanni Sialis, Hari Sahota, Afshen Bahrami (Renmark), Dylan Eleftheriadis (Berri River Rangers), Geordie Franks and Jeff Hassani (Loxton).
In the Open Women's awards Ebony Hoffmann from the top team Berri won the Best and Fairest trophy with 22 votes from Stephanie Karagiannis (Barmera) 17 and another Berri player Stacey Geyer 16.
The Golden Boot was won by Geyer with 22 goals from Berri's Marnie Stewart (13), while Loxton's Haylee Symens won the goalkeeper's award.
The Women's Team of the Year included Alissa Knight, Renee Honopoulos, Geyer, Hoffmann, Stewart, Staci Pront (Berri), Symens, Cody Hammerstein, Patty Fournaros- Carney, (Loxton), Rhianna Williams, Angela Pavlomanolakos, Sukhdeep Kahlon (Renmark) and Jiji Mitchell (Barmera).
In the under-16 grade Brock Van Der Biezen (Barmera) and Adam Drogemuller (Berri) tied on 17 votes in the Best and Fairest counting and the Golden Boot trophy went to Jesse Frazer (Barmera) with 13 goals with the runner up Nicholas Kostantakis (Barmera on 11.
Berri's Antonio Zahos won the Under 14 Best and Fairest with 18 votes from Simon Crouch (Renmark) 17 and also took out the Goal Kicking award with 35 goals followed again by Simon Crouch with 16.
It was the same situation in the under-12s with Evan Gregoric (Berri) winning the Best and Fairest with 28 votes and Golden Boot with 40 goals.
Blake Koskinas (Barmera) was runner-up in the Best and Fairest with 25 votes and Antonios Vrastaminos (Berri) in the Goal Kicking with 35 goals.
DINGHY RACING: With some of the top teams not starting and fancied pair Marr Thur and Ben Pobke out of the race early, the battle for the 2014 Riverland 30HP Sports Class championship intensified when round four, the Enduro, was run last Sunday.
Finishing first in the event that carried double points and grabbing top position were Murray Bridge's Adam Price and Aaron Ulstrup while Adelaide's Cliff and Roy Glover, second, and Michael Preen and Matt Maslin, third, also kept their chances of the title alive.
In the 30HP Super Standard Class brothers Kyle and Ryleigh Pfitzner beat home Anthony Lincoln and Kelly Lee-Gantz and in 30HP Standards the placings were Barry and Jayd Glover followed by Jason Brown and Jamie Dixon and Tylar and Carter Giles.
The 300cc Modified Class went to John Chigros and Jody Cole from Reece Glazbrook and Shane Palat and 25HP Standard to Charlie Wiese and Jackson Sanders from Bode Baylis and Isaac Dominic and Dallas Bennett and Richard Noack.
FOOTBALL: After joining the Riverland Superdogs in the SA Australian Masters competition for the first time in the 2014 season David Pankhurst has taken out both the Best First Year trophy and The Dog Tag award as the Best and Fairest Player.
Pankhurst finished with 44 votes ahead of the 2013 winner David Gregoric on 32. In other awards at the Superdogs annual presentation dinner at the Lyrup Club, the Best Team Man was Chris Thompson, Hard Nut Peter Hoffmann, Most Consistent Greg McConnell while the Coach's Trophy went to Johnny Gropler.
The Superdogs used 42 players in the season with coach Shane Healy reporting a significant increase as a number of veterans turn to competition.
MOTOR SPORT: Following the success of the Big River Nationals in 2012 the Riverside Rodders and Riverland Customs and Classics clubs are combining to host the Big River Campout from October 17-19 at Barmera.
Organisers are anticipating up to 200 cars from the Riverland, across SA and interstate to enter the event which is open to Hot Rods, Customs and Classics up to 1979. Included on the program will be a cruise to places of interest on Saturday and from 11am to 2pm on Bruce Oval on Sunday a public Show'n'Shine.
There will also be a rock and roll dinner dance for entrants on Saturday night and ample catering over the weekend.
For those only able to attend the Show'n'Shine, a Sunday entry has been introduced.
Contact Graham Matthews on 0419 807 837 or at bimbimbi@hotkey.net.au. Beyondblue will benefit from fundraising during the event.
SQUASH: Despite a loss to Sir Les Patterson 2-8-286 to 3-10-234, Strop still holds top position after nine rounds of the spring season at Loxton.
In other matches, a 3-2 win by Simon Knowles over Todd Stehbens at bottom single gave Dodgy Brothers victory over Uncle Authur 3-11-279 to 2-10-265 and Ted Bullpitt 3-9-215 defeated Russell Coight 2-7-194. The table reads Strop 139 points, Dodgy Brothers 122, Sir Les Patterson 118, Kath and Kim 106, Uncle Authur 94, Ted Bullpitt 93, Kel Knight 87 and Russell Coight 79.
BOWLS: Newly-formed Bowls Riverland will start both its Midweek Triples and Wednesday Pennants this Wednesday.
There are 16 teams in the Triples competition while the first round of Wednesday Pennants Division 1 sees Renmark host Loxton, Waikerie meet Berri, Renmark RSL at home to Barmera and Lyrup with a bye.
Saturday Pennants will start on October 11 with Loxton Yellow meeting Berri, Renmark RSL playing Waikerie, Barmera - Loxton RSL and Renmark - Loxton Blue in Division 1. Bowls Riverland held its Opening Day at Loxton on September 14, with clubs represented by 112 players.
New sponsor BankSA was represented by its area manager Matthew Lehmann. Also held recently at Loxton was the annual Loxton Irrigation Centre Men's Fours tournament with 24 teams competing. The winning rink comprised Phil Duthoit, Peter Kimber, Geoff Furness and Neil Thiele (Loxton) with the runners up Gerry Clarke, Daryl Gray, Mark Tonkin and Ian Hachel (Marion) and Chris Richards (Port MacDonnell), Brad Semmler, Trevor Schulz and Vic Pavia (Loxton) third.
Nearly 100 bowlers from across the Riverland and Mallee attended a charity fund raising day to benefit Adelaide"s Greenhill Lodge at the Barmera Bowling Club last Sunday.
An initiative of the Barmera and Waikerie clubs the successful day raised $3600. To become an annual event, it will be held in Waikerie in 2015. In other bowls news with the Berri Club set to move its operations from Riverview Drive to Glassey Park a meeting of members has decided to cover two greens with an all-weather solid cover.
GOLF: A Make A Wish Pairs Aggregate Day was held at the Berri Club last weekend with the winners with 68 points Lyn Smith and Cynthia Wait.
Garry Leyson and Ron Nagy, Kelvin LeStrange and Les Campbell and Matt Morrison and Greg Fumberger followed with 66 points.TABLE TENNIS: Minor premier Top Spinners will meet Desperados in division one and The Trio plays Jar in division two in the grand finals of the Renmark competition at the KM Tucker Hall on Tuesday night. Top Spinners, with Geoff Haby and Rod Stoeckel in top form, recovered from its second semi-final loss to Desperados to defeat Action Rollers in the preliminary final 10-2.
Credit: GRAHAM CHARLTON
Word count: 1260
