Idol moments
CASEY was ecstatic at the Australian Idol win and she was lauding it over ANTHONY at every chance after the two had been ribbing each other for the previous week.
This not the Casey or the Anthony, but the LEMIEUX children at Willaston who just happen to share the names of the Idol finalists.
The irony, says mother LEANNE, is that Anthony, 9, is the one with the voice but, Casey, nearly 7, has the "right door, wrong key" approach to music that is best left to the shower.
Lizard heavyweight
FOLLOWING on from the story of a brown snake in a Hallett Cove shower, RAEL, also of Hallett Cove, had a nasty surprise.
Answering the call of nature in her parents' ensuite bathroom, she was surprised while sitting to see a large blue tongue lizard laying across the bathroom scales and peering at her.
Making a hasty retreat, Rael could only surmise that the lizard was weighing itself in for the fight ahead.
Dad was contacted immediately to arrange removal of the reptile before mum ventured home.
Home on the Grange
PETER FERRIER, of Henley Beach, thinks "wine snob" DEREK, of Parkside, (It's unbelievable, last week) isn't so clever with his geography.
Grange the suburb, Peter points out, is not "somewhere between West Beach and Henley" but between West Lakes and Henley.
And the suburb of Grange is more important to SA history than "Grange, the plonk", says Peter, because it was named after The Grange, the local historical home of explorer CHARLES STURT.
Peter urged Derek to enjoy some of his plonk this summer relaxing by one of the best beaches in SA and taking in a bit of history as well as geography.
Wartime laughs
NEVER underestimate the importance of a good laugh, even in the most stressful of situations.
PETER MUNSON, of Victor Harbor, says it was a character called BILLY BROWN of London Town, created by DAVID LANGDON, whose humorous advice during the blitz of World War II did so much to lift the spirits of Londoners.
Peter says Billy Brown was the character featured in the London Laughs newspaper cartoon mentioned by JOHN FREELAND in this column last week.
London's Adelaide
STILL in London, former Adelaidean PETER HOFFMANN has been living there for four years and has a couple of ways to beat homesickness.
Firstly, his mum sends a cutting of this column over to him every week. That's how he saw last week's item on GRANT, of Parkside, who found Adelaide St just off Trafalgar Square.
Well, Peter can go one better than that. Near where he lives, an Adelaide Rd links Swiss Cottage and Chalk Farm and halfway along the road is a pub called the Adelaide.
That's where Peter and LIB go sometimes for a few lagers to bring back Adelaide memories. But Peter admits he pines for a nice schooner of Coopers.
Rort retort
AT the Ingle Farm shops last Saturday morning, PAUL noticed a young man and his female friend park in a disabled spot and then pop a disabled sticker on the dashboard. Paul became angry when he heard the young man laugh and tell the female that he had borrowed the sticker from his grandfather.
Having a disabled father and knowing the value of a disabled park, Paul twice challenged the young man over his actions.
Hopefully, the young man was sufficiently embarrassed not to try that stunt again.
Toy Run Number 26
THE joy will just roll on for today's Toy Run from the Bay to Hahndorf. Co-ordinator PAUL MORGAN points out that it's the 26th, not the 25th Toy Run, as we said last week. Whatever, there will still be a silver lining for lots of kids.
In the picture
HAPPILY, we tracked down the mystery wedding couple pictured in last week's column, from negatives found in the city's south parklands by LANA KRUEGER of Edwardstown.
They are CLARE and MICHAEL FESZCZAK who wed at St John's Church, Coromandel Valley, on January 2, 2003. Clare is originally from Adelaide and the couple came out from the UK for the wedding. But Clare's mother KAY, of Aberfoyle Park, says how the negatives came to be in the parklands remains a mystery.
Dollars from dolls
AND some more happiness, thanks to Bill King readers.
All those who donated neglected dolls to the Animal Welfare League for a stall at its open day contributed to a great success with lots of money raised to care for animals.
The hunt is now on for dolls for next year's stall.
Spitting distance
MANDY, of Norwood, loved highlights such as the Great Wall, the Forbidden City and Shanghai during her four-week visit to China.
And she learnt to cope with the chaotic traffic and being the object of attention of so many at such close quarters.
What she could not handle was - and there is no delicate way of putting this - the spitting in public places.
With the Olympics coming up, the Chinese will have to learn a lesson in being a tourist destination: don't expect to rate if you expectorate.
On right track
WALKING along Jetty Rd, Glenelg, last Wednesday night with his friend, 18-year-old MICHAEL, of Hope Valley, noticed a police car pulled up in front of the tram on the tracks.
Behind the tram was a bus and behind the bus a growing number of irate drivers.
Thinking there might have been an accident, Michael took a closer look. All he found was a police car with its motor running, but no police officer in sight.
Michael took the bold step of getting into the police car, which was open, and moving it off the tracks - to the delight of a growing crowd.
When a police officer did emerge from a nearby cafe, he wanted to know who the culprit was who had moved the car.
Michael stepped forward. He agreed with the officer that he could have been arrested for moving the police car, but he pointed out that, apart from it being parked in a place that obstructed traffic, it was lucky someone else had not stolen the open vehicle.
Not surprisingly, no charges were laid.
Word count: 1036
