WHERE once, finding a cure for cancer was seen as an impossible dream, it could now be closer to reality, thanks in part to the work of Australian researchers.
Scientists here are leading the way in the complex field of proteomics, which looks at all the proteins present in cells and tissue.
Proteins provide the architecture of cells, affect metabolic processes and play a major role in how a cell's growth can be altered
by cancer.
By understanding the growth of cancer at the protein level, the disease can be targeted and treated much earlier.
Researchers at the University of Adelaide are now at the forefront of this science, with a Proteomics Centre that has the latest technology to identify proteins and develop sniper-type treatments to hit cancerous mutations at the earliest stage.
Professor Peter Hoffmann, director of the Adelaide Proteomics Centre, said: "If you want to be at the forefront of cancer research, you need proteomics.
"At the moment, if you are detecting a cancer by X-ray it may already have spread through your body and may kill you.
"With proteomics, we can detect cancer at a very very early stage by looking at markers in the bloodstream and treat it before it spreads."
The mapping of the human genome has also led to the development of microarray analysis, which allows scientists to simultaneously profile the expression patterns of thousands of genes.
Microarray analysis of the pattern of gene expression can also be used to distinguish and classify tumours more precisely than has previously been possible.
The University of Adelaide and the world-renowned Hanson Institute have this year set up a joint initiative to carry out research on how DNA microarray technology could help to build up the most-detailed ever pictures of an individual's tumour.
According to Professor Ian Olver, chief executive officer of the Cancer Council, the latest developments could mean that a cure for the disease is no longer simply a dream, along with world peace and enough food for all. He said: "In the future, we could have tailor- made therapies so that when a tumour is found, doctors will know precisely what kind of cancer it is, how aggressive it is and what therapies should be used to treat it.
"I think we will come to regard chemotherapy as rather a crude, blunt tool that will be a thing of the past."
Other world-leading researchers in Australia include Professor Tim Hughes of the Hanson Institute, who was among the first to show the benefits of the drug Glivec in treating chronic myeloid leukaemia
While gene testing is now available for certain cancers, such as breast cancer where the BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutations can indicate a higher lifetime risk of developing the disease, Professor Olver says that more needs to be done to pinpoint the exact risk and develop remedies before large-scale screening programmes are developed.
He believes that the key to reducing cancer rates lies not simply with scientists and cutting edge research, but with the public as well.
"We now have a huge wealth of data about the links between different cancers and lifestyle factors, such as sun exposure, drinking, smoking and exercise," he said.
"More evidence is coming out about the link between alcohol breast and colon cancers.
"We know that lifestyle changes could prevent about a third of cancers, so research into prevention is also important."
Australian researchers are also leading the way in the vital field of data collection when it comes to understanding how cancer develops and can be treated.
The Garvan Institute in Sydney has developed a system called CanSto, which for the first time has collated detailed information on prostate cancer sufferers in a way that allows scientists to access the data without compromising the privacy of patients.
The database uses the latest IT systems to store huge amounts of information and has excited interest from around the world because it will give a bigger picture of prostate cancer than has ever been in one place before.
Word count: 670
