A SIMPLE blood test could soon be used routinely for the early detection of stomach cancer, reducing the need for invasive endoscopies, South Australian researchers say.
A University of Adelaide team has identified four new proteins that change in concentration in the blood of stomach cancer patients.
Associate Professor Peter Hoffmann, the project leader and director of the university's Adelaide Proteomics Centre, said a blood test would be as little as three years away. "Using the four markers together produces high levels of selectivity and sensitivity in detecting stomach cancer," he said.
The biomarkers are subject to a patent and researchers are seeking a commercial partner to run large clinical trials.
Associate Professor Hoffman said that blood test, which would cost between $30-$50 each, could lead to a wide-scale screening program.
Stomach or gastric cancer is the fourth most common cancer and the second leading cause of cancer death.
"Stomach cancer is typically without symptoms in the early stages, so most cancers are not diagnosed until the later stages and the survival rates are therefore low," Associate Professor Hoffmann said.
"Endoscopic investigations are invasive and expensive and most are generally not conducted until the cancer is at an advanced stage. A non-invasive, inexpensive screening technique through a simple blood test for the early detection of stomach cancer would make a huge difference in the survival outcomes for people." He said early detection of stomach cancer usually only occurs now "by accident" when doctors are investigating another gastrointestinal issue and then happen to discover the cancer.
In the study, the researchers showed differences in the four protein levels between serum samples from 37 gastric cancer patients, including 11 early stage cancer patients, and the controls which included healthy and non-cancerous patients with other gastric disease.
They found all four proteins - afamin, clusterin, haptoglobin and vitamin D binding protein (VDBP) - were individually superior to a current clinical marker CA72-4 in discriminating stomach cancer from healthy controls.
The researchers are also investigating whether the biomarkers could be used to detect cancer in other parts of the gastrointestinal system, including the bowel and oesophagus.The National Health and Medical Research Council and the Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research funded the research, which was conducted in collaboration with Associate Professor Matthias Ernst of the Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research.
Credit: JORDANNA SCHRIEVER EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 404
