Ram raid
MADCAP mayhem in the streets of Nuriootpa last Saturday morning when three rams were on the loose.
ROGER HOOTON and his dog Rose were able to corral the woolly threesome into a computer store car park in Murray St while the police were called.
The police in turn called for the dog catcher, but meanwhile the rams made a break that led to a traffic-dodging chase ending in Kranz St.
Roger says one of the police officers, CHRIS, who joined the chase had so much practise in trying to tackle the rams that he could form the Nuriootpa Police Mounted Sheep Division.
Maybe it was Christmas that brought the sheep down from Menglers Hill. Roger suggests they were looking for a nativity scene.
Rosemary's bouquet
ROSEMARY DUNSTAN, of North Haven, and other passengers for the 7.27am Outer Harbor train had a very enjoyable trip into the city with TransAdelaide on Wednesday.
Funny thing is, they didn't travel by train. Rosemary and four others were waiting at their station when a Tarago van pulled up and LESTER, from TransAdelaide, told them the 7.27 had broken down and he would take them to Osborne station where another train was waiting.
But that train was just pulling out of Osborne when they arrived. No worries, Lester told them, he would drive them into the city.
Lester ended up taking six passengers into the city. Although none had met before, they all chatted happily during the trip. Lester even offered the use of his mobile phone if they wanted to ring work.
No beg pardons
THE users of four-wheel-drive vehicles need all the good PR they can get. That cause, especially in the eyes of young mother FIONA, was not helped by an incident at Marion Shopping Centre.
Fiona was walking along the side of the road in the centre's car park, with her three-year-old twin daughters and her 23-month-old sleeping son in a stroller.
About six metres from a pedestrian crossing, a 4WD stopped beside them. A passenger swung her door open, knocking Fiona's stroller and the drink she had on top of it all over her sleeping baby.
The woman passenger did not apologise or stop to see if the baby was OK. In fact, he was drenched and upset and a fuming Fiona had to buy him a new set of clothes.
Oh well, these things don't happen when 4WDs are out on the dirt tracks in the Outback - which is why people buy them, of course.
Whatever ales you
HAVING just returned from four years in London, HAYLEY HARRIS had a pang of sympathy for Adelaide ex pat PETER HOFFMANN (last week's column).
Drinking at his nearby London pub called the Adelaide, Peter says he gets a longing for a Cooper's ale.
Hayley suggests two Coopers suppliers that Peter (who gets clippings of this column from his mum) might like to chase up.
One is the Australia shop in Covent Garden, which sells cartons for the lofty price of pound stg. 45. Another is the off licence opposite Dollis Hill tube station (pound stg. 35).
"Other than that," Hayley says. "All I can say is: `There's no place like home'."
Getting the message
A COUPLE of weeks ago we mentioned that DEB, of Vale Park, had taken a message on her phone machine, mistakenly dialled through to her from a SEAN in Barcelona.
Through that item, DAD got his happy birthday greeting from Sean.
Sean also asked about his dog Rufus. Well, we hear Rufus is doing fine and digging so fast he may soon meet Sean in Barcelona.
Another run
CLEARING our conscience for Christmas, there may have been a wee bit of confusion caused by last week's reference to the Toy Run.
The date for the 26th annual Toy Run from Glenelg to Hahndorf will be next Sunday, December 12. That's official, definite, all systems go, everything done and dusted, no stopping it now, stand by to start your engines.
Word count: 666
