RIVERLAND BOWLS: The much-anticipated opening day for the newly formed Bowls Riverland Association will be held at the Loxton Bowling Club on Sunday, September 14.
This season's Saturday pennant competition will now proceed with changes to the heat and inclement weather policy originally issued by Bowls SA.
That document, referring to extreme heat, said if on the evening two days before the matches a forecast of 38C was issued, all games would proceed as early as possible.
If the forecast was for 39C or above the matches would be cancelled. Following negotiations with Bowls SA, it has now been ruled that if the Thursday evening Bureau of Meteorology forecast is for 40C or more, play will start at 9am or earlier if the teams agreed.
But if the temperature reaches 40C on the day of the game, play will be halted immediately the end in progress is completed.
Meanwhile, the Renmark RSL Bowling Club is incorporating a Come and Try invitation into its open day on September 13.
The club boasts excellent grass greens and is canvassing for new members for pennant or social bowls.
For further information, contact Ron Adam 8586 5574, Maria Spano 0447 008 026 or John Van Der Wyst 0408 811 249.
GOLF: Don Wheeler, 91, of Waikerie finished with 30 points to be third behind Wayne Rothall and Gerry Foulis, both 31, in the C-grade at the Riverland Veterans' Day at Berri on Monday.
In the A-grade, the winner was Jim Merritt (35 points) ahead of Derek Howes (33) and Rob Knight (32).
In B-grade, Andy Giles (36 points) beat Gordon Sedden and Clem Zwarts, 32. After a number of upsets at Berri a week ago, the final of the A- grade men's championship this weekend will be between seventh and eighth-placed qualifiers Kym Traeger and Richard Keightley.
In the final at Waikerie, Wes Bald plays Craig Davis, Kevin Martin meets Tyson Swanbury at Barmera and, at Renmark, Greg Morrison tackles Greg Shields. Loxton's title will be decided next weekend.
FOOTBALL: Former Richmond champion Matthew Richardson will be a guest at the Riverland League's Whillas Medal dinner at the Loxton Sporting Club on September 8.
A week earlier, on September 1, the Independent competition's Duthie Medal dinner will be held at the Cobdogla club, with guest Crows' ruckman Sam Jacobs.
Semi-finals of the Independent competition are on this weekend, with the first semi- final today at Moorook between Browns Well and Wunkar. In two previous meetings this season, Browns Well defeated Wunkar in round one 22.16 (148) to 9.13 (67) but Wunkar reversed the result in round eight, winning 21.10 (136) to 10.12 (72) Six members of the Riverland Superdogs will represent SA at the AFL National Masters Carnival in Adelaide from September 28 to October 4.
Dave Gregoric, Peter Hoffmann and Matthew Clifford are in the 40-44 years team, Shane Healy is in the 45-49 years and Peter Aston and Rick Frahn the 55 years and over.
At the other end of the age scale, the Riverland Junior League has its annual presentation function at the Barmera Monash Football Club today at 4pm.
Former Riverland junior Sam Durdin, who is now with West Adelaide and one of 15 juniors from the state chosen for the AFL draft combine, will be the guest speaker.
NETBALL: Loxton moved into the A1 grand final with a 46-37 victory over premier Renmark at Renmark on Friday night.
In a contest that did not reach the exceptional standard of the meeting between the two teams a week earlier, Loxton proved too even right across the court.
Attacker Amber George and defender Sharona Edwards showed the way. Renmark's best were Hannah Foody and Sonja Modlinski.
Next Friday night's preliminary final at Loxton Stadium will be between Renmark and Loxton North after the latter defeated Waikerie 60-42 in the first semi-final.
Youngsters Jordan Jachmann and Marlee George starred for North, while Waikerie was best served by Hannah Lehmann and Gaby Taylor.In A2, Loxton North won the first semi-final 52-31 from Berri and in the second semi- final Renmark defeated Loxton 40-29.
Credit: GRAHAM CHARLTON
Word count: 694
