OFF ROAD: Mannum brothers Carl and Aaron Haby drove their vehicles into second and third positions overall behind Victorians Glenn Owen and Troy Zyveld in last weekend's Glenroy Plains Masters event.
The race was the fourth round of the SA off road championship and round two of the Victorian title.
Owen and Carl Haby engaged in a see-sawing battle for the race lead before the Victorian broke clear for victory.
Among the Riverland drivers at the event, Brad Gallard, with Chris Haigh as navigator, had a good work-out for this weekend's major event at Goondawindi in Queensland, by finishing fifth overall. Lindsay Foster and Scott Modistach were eighth and John, Margie and David Schultz ninth.
Wally Francombe in his Pro Buggy finished second to Owen in the prologue but mechanical problems interrupted his appearance in the main race.
Last Sunday's event also concluded a Tri State series with final placings over the three-race competition going to Kev Philp (Victoria), Lindsay Foster and John Schulz.
BASKETBALL: Former Renmark junior Nicole Seekamp will return to the US later this month for a second season with South Dakota in division one of the Summit League Conference.
After starting her career in the Riverland then moving to Adelaide to play, Nicole took up a full basketball scholarship with the university last year and has three years remaining on her contract.
Granted special leave so the she could return over her summer vacation to visit her Renmark parents, Nicole has found time to turn out with her home netball club during her stay.
She also has been required to work on special exercise and running programs set by her American coaches.
NETBALL: Loxton withstood early pressure from Barmera to win a high standard A1 clash 58-49 on Friday night.
Alice Kelsh and Cobie Drogemuller (until injured) in attack and form defenders Katie Saville and Sheri Beech continued to star for the improved Barmera line-up while the introduction of early season dynamo Mackelle Armfield into the contest resulted in a strong finish to the game.
In the end though Loxton had too much fire power through midcourters Eve Will, Jackie Dahlitz and Hollie Bullock, defenders Skye and Amber George and accurate goal shooter Alysha Proud. It gradually increased its lead from the one goal advantage that it held at quarter time.
In the other game 2011 champion Renmark looked close to premiership form again when it won everywhere across the court and overpowered Loxton North 70-24.
There was not a passenger in the Renmark combination but Jesse-Lee Jones and Kerri Turk were outstanding.
Loxton North's senior members Kylie Wooldridge and Karina Tschirpig stood up best to the onslaught.
FOOTBALL: After 12 rounds of the local A Grade season the premiership ladder seems to be taking shape for what should be an exciting major round.
Barmera Monash heads the table with 22 points, followed by Waikerie 18, Berri 15, defending champion Loxton North 8, Renmark 5 and Loxton 4.
The season, however, has never approached the even six-team battle of the 2011 season.
Meanwhile, there is an interesting struggle developing for the goal kicking honours. Berri forward David Hankin leads with 37, Loxton's Jamahl Liddle is on 33, Ben Venning (Waikerie) and Marc Elliot (Barmera Monash) 31 and Jamie Ferguson (Loxton North) 26.
Confirmation of ladder leader Barmera Monash's forward options is the fact that Murray Middleton, Robert Price 26 and Tyler Baldock 22 all feature high on the list.
In the Independent competition the double chance and places in the top four are still in dispute.
Blanchetown Swan Reach and Paringa both have 24 points, Ramco 22, Cobdogla 14, reigning premier Lyrup 12, and Browns Well 10.
Ramco's Max Baddack 63 is leading the goal kicking table from Paringa's Dean Hill 59, followed by Jed Martinson (BSR) 43, Geordie Franks (Browns Well) 42 and Max Martinson (BSR) 40.
With thirteen rounds completed in the neighbouring Mallee League and only two to play before the finals, the main interest focuses on a fight for fourth position between Murrayville and Peake. Both are on 8 points, behind BDT 24, Karoonda 22 and Lameroo 14.
Murrayville is to play BDT and bottom-placed Pinnaroo (2 points) and Peake meets Karoonda, then Lameroo.
Murrayville has been well served around the goals with Daniel Fry kicking 62 and Trent Sporn 41. Others near the head of the league list are Shane Agelis (Lameroo) 40, Scott Feltus (Peake) 36, and Karoonda pair Corey Knight and Luke Hocking 35.
In the AFL masters competition, the Riverland Superdogs lost by 13 points in a keen contest played in extremely wet and muddy conditions at the new ground of Adelaide Uni Greys last Sunday.
The Superdogs will travel to Murray Bridge to play the Supercats next Sunday.
Against Uni Greys, Peter Hoffmann and Mathew Clifford each contributed two goals but their side went down 8.5 (53) to 9.12 (66).
Hoffmann was also named as his team's best player after another lion-hearted effort in ruck. Others that were prominent were Shane Healy, Ken Karpany, Peter Aston and Neville Ebert.
EIGHTBALL: Alan McCauley has won the Riverland Singles title with a victory over Billy Maniatis in the final.
McCauley defeated Neil Lemmey and Phil Pfennig in the quarter and semi finals while Maniatis progressed past Mick Papandrea and Daniel Stieler.
Credit: GRAHAM CHARLTON
Word count: 886
