RIVERLAND
NETBALL THE Murray under-17 team, coached by Lameroo's Muriel Walter, won the State Country Regional Academy championship in Adelaide over the October long weekend with a determined display.
The squad included Melody Pfeiler, Brooke Durdin, Connie Griffiths, Neisha Hampel, Ella Schultz, Ashlee Wutke, Eva Nikou (Riverland), Molly Maddaford, Charlie Lewis and Madison Fielke (River Murray).
With nine country academies competing in a round- robin format, Murray won four, lost two and tied in two of its matches to finish third going into the finals.
After losing to Northern Metro 18-25 earlier, it reversed that result 25-16 in a semi-final and then went on to defeat Eyre 25-16 in the decider.
The Murray under-15 and under-13 teams both won five and lost three of their round robin matches to reach the semi-finals.
South-East won both divisions and in the semi-finals defeating the Murray under-15 team 29-19 and the under-13s 25-13. Murray had won its under-13 round robin match 21-17 over South-East. After the event seven girls from the Murray region were invited to try out for the SA under-17 team.
They were Brooke Durdin, Connie Griffiths, Ella Schultz, Ashlee Wutke and Charlie Lewis from the academy tournament and Abbey Siviour and Amy Stephens.
SOCCER A SENIOR Riverland team had one of the association's best victories last Sunday when it defeated Collegiate Cup premiers Rostrevor College 4-1 at the Elite Systems Centre in Adelaide.
The majority of the Riverland's leading players were available and coach Kevin Barber put Riverland soccer on show which led to discussions on the RSA being invited into a major tournament next season.
Riverland troubled Rostrevor from the outset with its fastball movement. At 3-0 at half-time, it had the game in hand. Association best and fairest Chris Miller and runner-up Marco Mittiga were dangerous up forward.
After the break, Miller joined Mittiga with two goals and Rostrevor grabbed one late against a visiting defence that had dominated through outstanding young goalkeeper Eric Sialis, captain Russell Frankel in a best-on-ground performance, Frane Radic, Yanni Sialis and Tarquin Frahn. Kevin White, Riley Wallace, Kenzo Kokeguchi and Charles Van Royen were in everything across the midfield.
Also juniors Simon Crouch, Aiden Erceg, Ali Akbari, Rajab Qambari and Richard Mitchell all looked at home when given game time by Kevin Barber.
In an under-18 curtain raiser Australian College of Sport defeated Riverland 6-0 but despite the score line the young RSA side were competitive against an older and bigger opponent.
In his first game for the day Eric Sialis in goals held Rostrevor out on many occasions with strong support provided by Aiden Erceg and Simon Crouch while Jasper Hoffmann was outstanding in the middle.
In other junior news Vincent Vu (Renmark) and Harrison Carney (Loxton) both played impressively in their age group teams at the Futsal State Championships at Parafield Gardens last Sunday.
Harrison who has been chosen in a SA Country team to play in the SingaCup tournament in Singapore next month has now been named in the state under-14 team to play in the Nationals in Sydney in January next year.
He also has been invited to play for Junior Premier League under-16 team Modbury Jets and join the club's under-18 development program.
Renmark's Jordan Gadaleta has also trialled and been included in the Metro Stars under-12 squad.
TENNIS LOXTON'S Delaney Lueth and Renmark's Jake Stoeckel were chosen in SA's 15 years and under team for the Australian Country Foundation Cup finals in Brisbane next January following the State Regional tournament held in Berri.
Jake Stoeckel, who has shown improvement in the past 12 months, gained a ticket to Brisbane by winning the 15 years and under boys title against the best juniors in the age group from Country SA.
He recovered from one set down against Nick Bates (Port Lincoln) in the final to take the match in a super tie-breaker.
BOWLS RENMARK repeated its 2015-16 grand-final triumph over Berri when the two teams met in round three of the Wednesday pennant competition last week.
Renmark won all three rinks with Sandi Schulz' team beating Jenny Kubank 18-17, Betty Coombs winning 19-17 against Jenny Price and Jocie Cooper 22-19 over Jan Grosser.
Lyrup won its second game on end when it defeated Renmark RSL despite wining only one rink, Sue Lloyd defeating Ini Proud 32-13. Cathy Topperwein and Maria Spano both had narrow victories for Renmark RSL 20-19 against Sharon Nattrass and 18-16 over Ros Smith.
In the other game Loxton had its first win for the season 59-54 against Waikerie. Bernie Mattner's rink won 20-15 from Dawn Boehm and Margaret Schutz 28-11 from Judy Strauss but Tim Strauss gained some ground for Waikerie with a 28-11 result against Lyn Kimber.
In the Midweek Triples competition, Berri after a 86-70 win against Waikerie and Loxton after defeating Renmark 81-76, is the only undefeated Division One team after three rounds.
In Division Two, only Renmark RSL has won all games including last week's 78-77 defeat of Berri Red.
FOOTBALL RIVERLAND Superdogs state representatives Jason Marr (35 years and over) and Shane Healy (45 and over) were chosen in All-Australian teams following the AFL Masters Champion ships on the Gold Coast.
The SA 45 years and over team was runner-up in its division. Superdogs chosen in All Australian teams in previous years include Tim Jackson, David Gregoric, Peter Hoffmann and Nick Kossatch.
MASTERS GAMES AMONG locals in Alice Springs for the Masters Games, Triathlon Club member Nadia Mills won the 45-49 years division of the long-course duathlon and cyclist Bob Pankhurst was fourth in a 75-79 years Criterium. In softball, the Riverland Rats won five, lost four and drew one of the lead up games and then went down in a keen tussle with Raiders 7-9 to win a bronze medal.
MOTOCROSS WITH the competition including visitors from across Australia and overseas local riders found the going tough in the recent Australian Junior Championships held at the Renmark complex.Despite not having a podium finish there were a number of impressive perform-ances including Cooper Bevan in the 50cc class, Kaiden Schiller 65cc, Clay Burnett 85cc and Nathan Walmsley 125 and 250cc all reaching the finals.
Credit: GRAHAM CHARLTON
Word count: 1040
