Spring is here and the owners of some of Adelaide's top gardens are inviting the public in for a look as part of Open Gardens SA. Reporter Caleb Bond took a stroll through two of the best.
GARDENING has been a lifelong passion for Anita Poddar, right from her early childhood.
"My earliest memories involve space and gardens," Ms Poddar says of her formative years in rural India.
But the family then moved to Calcutta, where gardens were rare. "So when we moved to Australia ... the focus was on growing things because I came from a place where that was a difficult option." And grow things she has.
Ms Poddar, 53, once an agricultural journalist, has lived in her Kingswood home with partner Peter Hoffmann, 54, for 16 years. Built in the late 1800s, Ms Poddar has endeavoured to create a garden - known as Seafield - befitting the home's era.
"I chose to go in keeping with the period because I think we're actually losing a lot of that garden heritage, she says. "Someone who stepped in this backyard in the late 1800s or the early 1900s, with the exception of a couple of things, would recognise all the plants." In the front garden, which is just as full and green as the rear yard, the couple maintains an almond tree to honour the area's former life as an almond grove. Not that they ever have a chance to eat the almonds - Mr Hoffman says the rosellas pinch them first.
From fence to fence, front to back, not one square metre is unused. There are fruit trees in one corner - quince because it provides three seasons of foliage, and plum, which is a favourite with the local possums. In the other corner is the experimentation space for seedlings.
The garden is extraordinarily green with pops of colour from roses, poppies and other seasonal flowers dotted around the perimeter.
The recent rain has helped - Ms Poddar says the plants are looking the lushest they have in about 10 years.
The centrepiece is a black-tiled swimming pool that doubles as a fountain. A black pool was a risky move - the installer even offered to send the tiles back and swap them for blue at the last minute - but it paid off.
Without looking too closely, it looks like a regular water feature. Behind it sits a Greek folly - a formal, dome-capped rotunda - in the centre of a gravel path and, to the left of that, is the iconic Hills hoist.
It is a meeting of cultures but, like the rest of the garden, it just seems to work.
Saturday is Ms Poddar's opportunity to work on her pride and joy. She starts in one corner and works her way around during the morning.
She relishes the opportunity to spend time outdoors and wind down. "This is not the first garden I've made and it won't be the last garden I make," Ms Poddar says.
Seafield Garden is open as part of Open Gardens SA on Saturday and Sunday, November 19 and 20, 10am-4.30pm, at 25 Seafield Ave, Kingswood. Entry $8.
GARDENS GALORE Saturday, October 15 - Sunday, October 16 Baroona: 43 Fifth Ave, St Peters On the property of a manor-style home once owned by a St Peters mayor, the garden features contemporary sections and some based on photos of the original garden.The Iris Society will give a talk.
Saturday, October 22 - Sunday, October 23 Beard Garden: 134 Beulah Rd, Norwood (see story) Saturday, November 19 - Sunday, November 20 Seafield Garden: 25 Seafield Ave, Kingswood (see story) Saturday, November 26 - Sunday, November 27 Bron's Tiger Garden: 13 Grange Rd, Lower Mitcham An Asian-inspired garden featuring tiger statues, a 1920s telephone box and a fire-breathing dragon lantern.
All gardens open 10am-4.30pm. Entry is $8, or $6 concession. Children free.More details at opengardensa.org.au
Credit: Caleb Bond
Word count: 655
