SOCCER: LOXTON stalwart Mark Kershaw has taken out the inaugural Steve Poutakidis award as the best and fairest player in the A-grade competition, accumulating 21 votes - two clear of Berri River Rangers' Steve Atkinson.
Kershaw defied the odds to grab the prized trophy as his team finished at the bottom of the ladder in its return season to the competition.
But he has been rarely out of the best-player acknowledgments in what has been a classy 2010 performance.
Other awards went to Shanay Hoffmann (Loxton) in senior women , Marcus Drogemuller (Berri) in under-16 and Kallam Head (Renmark) and Dillon Eleftheriadis (Berri) in the two divisions of the under-13s.
Martin Barber (Barmera Dev Estates) topped the A-grade goalscoring with 36, ahead of teammate Anthony Ielasi, 30, while Marcus Drogemuller completed an under-16 double by scoring most goals.
Another inaugural Players Trophy, voted on from the playing ranks, went jointly to Atkinson and Barmera Dev Estates`Anthony Ielasi.
2010 premier Barmera Dev Estates will play Berri River Rangers in the final of the Top Four Cup today at Berri at 2pm.
Last Sunday, Dev Estates defeated Barmera Gold, 11-2, and Rangers upset 2009 Cup winner Renmark Olympic 4-2 in the semi-finals.
In other finals, today Barmera No.2 meets Renmark No.1 at 9am in under-13; Berri plays Renmark No.1 at 10.30am in under-16; and at 12.15am Loxton is up against Berri in Open Girls.
In the semi-finals, Loxton beat Renmark No.2 2-0 while Berri defeated Renmark Red 4-3 in penalties.
HOCKEY: Former Australian Country representatives Billie Jo Hammerstein and Brett Stokes have taken out the 2010 best and fairest awards in the Riverland A-grade competition.
Hammerstein (Loxton), finished on 54 votes, ahead of Berri's Merinda McMahon and Renmark's Toni Casey 32, while Stokes (Berri) polled 37.
Renmark's Danial Shawyer was runner up on 27.
Hammerstein was named in the women's Team of the Year along with Stephanie Baird, Eloise Hampel, Tara Allister, Tracey Townsend, Louise Smith (Loxton), Merinda McMahon, Kristen Hibberd, Karina Payne (Berri), Danielle Weeks, Kate Coden, Casey (Renmark), Carlye Waye, Carly Levi, Kristen Pick and Kimberley Fulwood (Waikerie).
In the men's team are Stokes, Matt Baird, Peter Aitchison, Tony Herbert, Anthony Daelman (Berri), Karl Hennig, Matt Hammond, Steve Trezise (Loxton), Callum Benda, Shawyer (Renmark), Ryan Edwards, Rowan Hope, Brenton Kroehn, Matthew Morgan, Jason Redemski and Mark Krogan (Waikerie).
Last Wednesday, Stokes attended the Hockey SA Awards night in Adelaide, where he won the SA Coach of the Year award, and as president of the Riverland Association accepted the inaugural Hockey SA Regional Association of the Year Award. Former Renmark player Will Telfer was runner-up in the Premier League medal count and along with Tom Wickham (Waikerie) included in the Men's Team of the Year.
Karrie McMahon (Berri) was named in the women's team.
SHOOTING: 14-year-old Kailan Mackham (Renmark) has won a sub junior title at the National Sporting Clay Championships held in Jurien Bay, WA. Kailan is a member of the Renmark-Berri Field and Game Association.
ATHLETICS: In an exciting contest, the R-7 component of the Lameroo Regional Community school finished on 238-5 points ahead of Pinnaroo Primary 283-3 and Geranium Primary 197-4 in the annual Highway 12 Carnival.
Individual trophies went to Mercedes Sumner and Nick Brown (Lameroo), in girls and boys 13 years; Jayme-Lee Brown (Pinnaroo) and Oliver Gilbertson (Lameroo) in 12 years; Chloe Brown (Pinnaroo) and Masen Hand (Pinnaroo) in 11 and in 10 years, Hayley Maynard and Charlie Hay (Lameroo).
FOOTBALL: For the first time in the history of the Riverland Australian Masters team Superdogs, a tie has occurred in voting for the best and fairest award.
Ken Karpany and Peter Hoffmann both finished on 25 votes for the Dog Tag award, followed by Shane Healy on 19.
Other trophies went to Andrew Hawkins (best first year), Paul Arnold (most dedicated), Geoff Cubbin (coach's trophy), Rick Frahn (most consistent) and Shane Hannagan (most courageous).
Frahn was also awarded life membership.
Superdogs' Nick Kossatch will play for the state 35-44 years team at the Australian Masters Championships in Canberra in November.
CRICKET: Renmark will return to the A-grade competition in 2010-11 with other clubs involved Waikerie-Ramco, Berri, Loxton and Monash.
There are reports that defending champion Berri is considering entering a second A-grade team and therefore eliminating a bye.
Credit: GRAHAM CHARLTON
Word count: 716
