We need scientific realists, not sceptics or populists
MOST TALKED ABOUT
THE CLIMATE DEBATE
THE articles by Matthew Warren ("The hottest of topics", Inquirer, 29-30/9) and Paul Kelly ("Just a green gesture", Inquirer, 29-30/9) should help your readers to think through the issues. There is no question that global warming is bad news for Australia which our political leaders have signally failed to address effectively over the years.
For the past decade, the Howard Government has stalled behind smokescreens, arguing by stages that scientific opinion was divided, that Australia's emissions were an insignificant part of the global problem, and that the Kyoto Protocol was worthless because it did not commit the major developing countries or the US.
The fact that Australia secured a very favourable emissions target under the protocol recognising its special circumstances, and that Kyoto had the clear intention that the developed countries, as the major historical generators of atmospheric carbon damage, must take the first steps to control it, were conveniently obscured while its deficiencies and double dealing were high-lighted.
The Government's last ditch pre-election conversion to setting up, in the medium term (2011 or 2012), some kind of carbon emissions trading scheme with indeterminate economic and environmental effects marked progress. The most recent conversion to mandatory renewable energy targets, as Kelly rightly points out, while modest in effect abandons the principle of allowing economic considerations to determine which alternative clean energy strategies are adopted. High hopes continue to be pinned on the development of clean coal technology as the means of reducing penalties on our domestic and export markets for coal, with the Government also pushing the controversial case for nuclear power.
The nature of the debate has, for the thinking public on both sides of politics moved beyond how best to defend Australia's economic interests to recognition of a serious global problem that will inevitablly penalise us but cannot be ignored. What we need now (or perhaps after the election) are far-sighted scientific realists, not sceptics or bureaucratic masters of ambiguity or, indeed, populists.
John Piper
Waverton, NSW
THE Howard Government still hasn't got it regarding renewable energy. The Government's renewable energy targets are just a gathering together of state government targets already set out and, although rationalisation and standardisation are welcome, these targets will not allow Australia to meet the demands of both climate change and peak oil.
This is not surprising from a Prime Minister who still hasn't retreated from his statement that solar will "never" be a mainstream energy source. His government has seen Australia lamely hand over world-leader status in solar power research to Germany, Japan and California.
In the mid-1990s, the CSIRO said concentrating solar power technology in the Australian outback could power the national grid. That technology could be built far quicker than nuclear power stations. Meanwhile, thin-film solar panels, solar roof tiles, solar energy paint, etc, are driving a revolution in photovoltaics that may echo the computer revolution for exponential doubling of efficiencies. We could be a nation driving electric vehicles from a solar grid.
All this seems to be beyond John Howard, who's latest plan is really just "green-washing" for the election.
P. Parry
Bellevue Heights, SA
IN your editorial ("Greenhouse mania", 29-30/9) you say, in referring to a warning by AFP Commissioner Mick Keelty that "climate change would be the biggest security issue of the 21st century", that the latest report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change predicts a possible rise in sea levels during the next century of only 43cm, half the figure cited by Keelty.
This, unfortunately, seems not to be the whole story. According to New Scientist, the current IPCC models assume that the Greenland ice sheets will melt only slowly. However, many glaciologists now believe that these huge ice sheets could fracture as they melt, leading to a much more rapid rise in sea levels. Similarly, there are worrying reports that the rate of loss of ice from Greenland has unexpectedly doubled in the last decade.
John Bromly
Waterford, WA
DISCOUNTING Mick Keelty's comment that climate change would be the biggest security issue of the 21st century miss the point. Sea- level rise is one of the many predicted impacts of climate change. Well before significant changes in sea levels occur some regions throughout the world are predicted to experience more frequent storms, cyclones and flooding, while other regions are expected to experience less (and more unpredictable) rainfall. The impacts of these changes on the use of water resources, food production and the displacement of people are obvious. One only has to look at history (as well as current events) to see how these factors have impacted on global security.
Mike Misso
Alawa, NT
I HAVE just read Malcolm Turnbull's little booklet, "Be Climate Clever". Malcolm, of course, is welcome to use our money at any time to let us know about all the things we already know about. I was particularly fascinated to learn about the light bulbs. Gee whiz, eh?
David Mercer
Seacliff Park, SA
Australian literature is outbid by rugby league
A COUPLE of months ago, the Australian Society of Authors emailed a survey to members of the House of Representatives and the Senate to try to understand how informed and interested our elected representatives were on issues relevant to authors and Australian literature.
Seventeen per cent of Labor representatives and only 2.4 per cent of Coalition members replied. Notably there was no reply from the Minister for the Arts or from any member of cabinet. There were also no replies from the Greens, the Independents or Family First.
One of the questions asked of the parliamentarians was what they thought was the average income of authors. To make it easier they were given three choices: $11,000, $25,000 and $40,000 per annum. The most common answer was $25,000. No one guessed the correct answer, which is $11,000. Our parliamentarians, however, all knew that opera received more federal funding than Australian literature.
Amid debate about the current perilous state of Australian literature studies in our universities, the Government recently announced $1.5 million for a third, much-needed chair in the subject. At the weekend, the Prime Minister announced $10million towards a rugby league hall of fame. The numbers say it all.
Denise Leith
Newport, NSW
AT one minute to midnight, after 11 years deadening down the country and the arts, the Liberals have sent out one of their lickspittles, Glenn Milne, to write an apologia for them, built around an attack on me.
Milne ("The arts community should back Howard", Opinion, 1/10) argues that the arts sector "deserves better than to be reduced in the hands of people such as Keating to yet another manifestation of Howard hating" and attacks me for implying that the arts cannot function in "the stunted and low embrace of someone like Howard".
Milne quotes from my Sydney Film School speech of July this year, where I said that John Howard held all things cosmopolitan under suspicion and reminded people that the Oxford Dictionary describes cosmopolitan as "from all parts of the world; free from national limitations". Howard's cut across the spiritual grain of the country in favour of his cherished redneck ideas is what has been so deadening for the arts and the country in general.
Milne underlined the Sydney Symphony Orchestra beginning its season with Vladimir Ashkenazy as chief conductor as an example of the Howard Government's arts leadership. Milne failed to tell his readers that I was the one who, as prime minister, pulled the SSO out of the artistic straitjacket of the ABC and I was one of the few people consulted by the orchestra's management on Ashkenazy's appointment. Ashkenazy's appointment has nought to do with Senator George Brandis or John Howard's miserable policies.
Paul Keating
Potts Point, NSW
The abyss of liberalism
IT was disappointing to read of the decision by the Anglican Appellate Tribunal paving the way for the appointment of women as bishops ("Women bishops on the way", 29-30/9). This decision only goes to show how much the Anglican Church in Australia has descended into the abyss of liberalism. This decision represents a major departure from apostolic teaching and tradition.
Alan Barron
Grovedale, Vic
NOW that the Anglican Church has ruled that a woman can be a bishop, I suppose its next challenge will be to rule on whether a queen can be a bishop. The rules of chess are confusing enough as they are.
Peter Wall
Ascot, Qld
IT should be pointed out to Sydney Archbishop Peter Jensen that Jesus did not ordain anyone, male or female; church orders are not mentioned in the Gospels.
N. Hall
St Lucia, Qld
I'M trying to work out what role Kay Goldsworthy's parental status might play in the possibility of her becoming an Anglican bishop ("Mother welcomes chance to become leader", 29-30/9). I've tried substituting "father" but it still doesn't make sense.
Gillian Appleton
Leura, NSW
A weakened food chain
IT'S time to stop portraying drought as a farmer problem and put the real issues up in lights. Bite the bullet and call it what it is: a serious threat to food supplies to urban Australia.
Out here in the paddocks, drought is doing dire things to our viability. To see the issue of drought, however, portrayed solely in the context of farmer viability is drawing public focus only to the tip of the iceberg. A farm sector weakened by drought means a weakened food chain, with consequences for everyone.
Ralph and Wilga Clarke
Gundowring, Vic
ON top of the outrageous drought handouts announced recently, we now find that councils in rural areas are receiving up to 100 times the federal grants, in per capita terms, than those in the cities ("Crumbs from federal pie for city slickers", 1/10).
Of course, if people want to live in the middle of woop woop, harvesting dust, that is their right. But why should city people have to subsidise country folk's work and lifestyle choices and amenities?
The argument that we need Australian farmers to put food on our tables is a nonsense. Agriculture is only two per cent of GDP, and we could easily afford to import all our food requirements if we ever needed to. In any case, there is a market for food, with prices automatically adjusting to reflect supply and demand, without any need for government subsidies. In fact, by keeping otherwise unviable farmers on the land, these subsidies depress food prices and thereby hurt more efficient farmers.
It's time that the sacred cow of rural largesse was slayed. If some farmers -- whether "hard working" or not -- can't make ends meet on their own, they should be forced off their land and back into the real world.
M. Vasic
Barton, ACT
Telstra free to criticise
WHY is Helen Coonan ("Telstra castigates Coonan as a failure", 1/ 10) crying foul over Telstra's decision to issue material to its shareholders critical of the Government? After all, she and John Howard pushed through the privatisation of Telstra against the wishes of most Australians.
Surely it has to be just as legitimate for a privatised Telstra to campaign against the Government as it is for other businesses to run advertisements supporting the Government's Work Choices legislation. I didn't hear Coonan or her Coalition colleagues complaining about them.
Marcia Turner
Gosford, NSW
Port entitled to take a bow
PATRICK Smith ("Time for Tredrea to take a bow on behalf of timid team", 1/10) has predictably linked Port Adelaide captain Warren Tredrea's bow during the previous week's defeat of the Kangaroos to a supposedly deserved grand final humiliation on Saturday at the hands of an excellent Geelong team. What Smith fails to report is that Port Adelaide were in 10th place on the AFL table half way through the season. Their efforts to get from there into a grand final were significant, and Mark Williams, Warren Tredrea and their team are entitled to take a bow for that fact alone.
John Capel
Black Rock, Vic
You can't take that away
ONE point that Wayne Smith ("From Jardine to Jonny, England the depression we had to have", 1/10) fails to understand in his amusing article about beating (or is that hating) England, is that whatever happens in the sporting future between our two great nations, November 22, 2003 at Telstra Stadium can never be taken away from us Poms and the feeling of winning a rugby World Cup against Australia, in Australia, is unlikely to ever be bettered. Marseille on Saturday will be a minor postscript by comparison.
Alan Baxendale
Duncraig, WA
FIRST BYTE
letters@theaustralian.com.au
I plead with the Prime Minister to call the election before the cricket season starts. It would be un-Australian not to.
Donald Oats
Murray Bridge, SA
The huge number of AWAs that are failing the Workplace Authority's fairness test shows it wasn't just workers who thought the Work Choices laws granted a licence to bosses to impose unfair conditions. The bosses clearly did too.
Gordon Drennan
Burton, SA
How did the Howard Government ever get away with calling an individual employment contract an "Australian Workplace Agreement"?
Philip Smart
North Balgowlah, NSW
I'm having difficulty living on the age pension. How can I become a farmer?
Peter Leith
West Heidelberg, Vic
Port Adelaide captain Warren Tredrea exhibited extreme arrogance with his bowing performance in the preliminary final against the Kangaroos. Perhaps his team's huge loss in Saturday's grand final has also taught him the meaning of humility.
Philip Mendes
Kew, Vic
Lady Sonia McMahon's catty remarks about Janette Howard ("A love beyond understanding", Inquirer, 29-30/9) prove she is no lady.
Don Barrett
Spring Hill, Qld
No amount of money, medicine and media, Robin Gaud (First Byte, 29-30/9), will make up for the fact that racing industry mares are impregnated within three weeks of giving birth and are bred until they die. It's all about the money.
A. Uren
South Plympton, SA
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
GPO Box 4162, Sydney, NSW, 2001Fax: 02 9288 3077
Email: letters@theaustralian.com.au (no attachments)
Emails and letters should bear a full postal address and day and night telephone numbers.
Letters to the Editor of The Australian are submitted on the condition that Nationwide News Pty Ltd as publisher of The Australian may edit and has the right to, and license third parties to, reproduce in electronic form and communicate these letters.
Letters online
Letters from this page are published on The Australian's website - - and online readers have the opportunity to add their own comments. To join the debate go to: www.theaustralian.com.au/letters
Prints of Leak cartoons
For information on buying prints of any Bill Leak cartoon go to leakcartoons@theaustralian.com.au
Prints of Nicholson cartoons
To buy a print of a Nicholson cartoon go to http:// www.nicholsoncartoons.com.au/print
Word count: 2580
