We need to rebuild these once great community assets
MOST TALKED ABOUT
LOCAL HOSPITAL BOARDS
THE proposal to establish local boards in public hospitals is a positive move to rebuild these important and once great community- based assets. It's worthy of support. The current system is not working.
The policy provides the opportunity to bring together health professionals and the local community to directly confront the problems affecting the productivity of their hospital and make decisions that will lead to an improvement. This enhances the prospect of attracting more direct community support for local hospitals.
We should never underestimate the ability of ordinary Australians to make something they believe in work to the best of its ability. No hospital can meet all the expectations of all people, but with good leadership it can meet most of the reasonable expectations of reasonable people.
Stephen Milgate
Executive director
Australian Doctors' Fund
Arncliffe, NSW
THE suggestion by Tony Abbott that public hospitals should be managed by local boards is yet another example of policy on the run by a government that is increasingly concerned about its re- election prospects.
The role of boards of governance, whether they be not-for-profit or in the private sector, is to set policy directions, to undertake forward planning and to review progress towards agreed objectives. In other words, the big-picture stuff. It's certainly not their role to micro-manage, which appears to be what the Health Minister is suggesting.
Professionals with specific expertise are those who rightly have responsibility for the day-to-day management of organisations and they should be allowed to perform their tasks without being second- guessed by a board.
There is, of course, nothing new in what Abbott is suggesting and many jurisdictions have tried this method of local board management previously with varying degrees of success -- which depended largely on the expertise of board members and how much they tried to interfere with the day-to-day management of the hospital.
Whilst opinions may vary on the type of management structure that is best for public hospitals, there does appear to be unity in the view that what is lacking is resources, and no local board, irrespective of its expertise or desire to have improved outcomes, will be able to deliver higher quality services unless more funding is made available.
Ian De Landelles
Hawker, ACT
HEALTHCARE in Australia is a disgrace. The state governments should hang their heads in shame with what they have done to the system in this wealthy nation. Get the politicians and accountants out of healthcare management and get the health professionals with financial management capabilities into the jobs.
Why can't we get doctors? It's simple: pay them more money. I have older friends who won't go to hospital for fear of their life and friends in Queensland who fly to Adelaide for hospital care. How on earth did it get like this? Enough is enough.
Peter Burrows
Burleigh Heads, Qld
THE announcement that a re-elected Coalition Government would give public hospitals the power to run their own affairs should be welcomed. In Victoria, we have monolithic health bureaucracies with massive administrative costs and high salaries for "managers" and "administrators", when the funds should be going to treating patients and employing more nurses and doctors.
The "State of Our Public Hospitals" report, which was released a few months ago, was damning in its assessment of Victorian hospitals. The current system is not functioning properly and must be reformed.
Peter Allan
Blackburn, Vic
TONY Abbott now wants local boards to run individual public hospitals. It sounds like an added expense to the health system and less money available for paying the wages of those who actually do the work -- doctors and nurses. If the Health Minister has money to spare, he knows where it's really needed.
Brian Yare
Kahibah, NSW
THE federal Government plan to bypass the states and directly fund individual hospitals is going to be a disaster. The thought of Tony Abbott conducting an interview without incessant anti-state vitriol is unthinkable.
James Walker
Tusmore, SA
HOW can there be rational service delivery of increasingly expensive medical procedures when the whole scheme is based on parochialism? Who will appoint the boards? Will they be elected or will they be a refuge for political cronies? Tony Abbott's grand hospital plan has all the hallmarks of a political quick-fix of the Government's "Kevin Rudd" problem and none of the characteristics of a long-term solution to our ailing health system.
Alannah McIntosh
Chatswood, NSW
AFTER a decade of ideological banter, Tony Abbott is about to wedge hospitals in an instant. Imagine, 750 public hospital boards? Deciding the 750 managers should be a doddle with a very long list of Liberal/National supporters to thank. Such are the benefits of longevity.
Keith Russell
Mayfield West, NSW
Hockey shoots messengers bearing inconvenient truth
JOE Hockey's political attack on research into Australian Workplace Agreements by the University of Sydney with funding from the federal government's Australian Research Council and Unions NSW reeks of deviousness. Funding for such research is highly competitive. Only the best projects and top researchers win Australian Research Council grants, which are signed off by Hockey's ministerial colleagues.
Where are the Australian Bureau of Statistics figures the minister claims back up his attack? His personalised attacks on the researchers and failure to rebut evidence that the most vulnerable workers are losing the most as a result of AWAs shows Government contempt for evidence-based policy-making.
The Government should use research findings to improve public policy rather than "shooting the messengers" when they reveal another inconvenient truth. Trust in Government is betrayed and demeaned by misleading attacks on research findings. Not unsurprisingly, when the Government now says "trust me", the voters say "why should we".
Ken Coghill
Associate professor
Department of Management
Monash University, Melbourne, Vic
THE most recent Bureau of Statistics figures suggest workers on AWAs are earning nine per cent more than those on collective agreements. But the bureau only measured the first eight weeks of Work Choices, up to May 2006, while this new Australia at Work study is based on data gathered until July this year. However, a spokesman for Joe Hockey says, "We think the ABS figures are a more reliable guide than a study cooked up by (co-author and director of Sydney University's Workplace Research Centre) John Buchanan and his cronies."
I think Hockey needs to clarify the situation as soon as possible. Has the federal Government spent taxpayers' hard-earned dollars on a "cooked-up" study? If so, let's see him prove it, and then deal accordingly with those responsible. Perhaps he could find a way to implicate those union bosses. Or perhaps he would like to consider telling the truth for once.
Mark Dobbins
Empire Bay, NSW
IF the Sydney University research had shown that people were better off under Work Choices, Joe Hockey would be using it to bludgeon the ACTU for claiming the opposite. If Work Choices is so great, his department should be able to release the data to prove it. That it can't or won't speaks volumes.
All of Hockey's demonising of anyone who dares to disagree with him won't hide the fact that thousands of workers have lost pay and conditions on the Howard Government's watch.
Cathrynne Henshall
Bungonia, NSW
Gillard will play her joker
THE recent fiasco ("Costello leaves Swan in his wake", 2/10) surrounding potential ministry appointments should Labor win the election is another sideshow and of little importance to an electorate already set on returning Labor to power. The main game will come after the dust settles and Kevin Rudd is forced to deal with the factional overlords to assemble his dream team.
Despite Rudd's assertion to the contrary, there will be give and take on who sits where on the government benches. But, in the end, it's likely that Julia Gillard will play her joker and become Australia's first female treasurer.
Marc Hendrickx
Berowra Heights, NSW
COMPARISONS between Wayne Swan and Peter Costello don't count for anything if the latter won't be treasurer for the full term of a re- elected Coalition government. Of more concern to voters is who Costello's successor will be. Since he only credits himself with the skill to run a trillion-dollar economy, voters will take note.
Philip Smart
North Balgowlah, NSW
THE polls are telling us Kevin Rudd for prime minister and Peter Costello for treasurer. No confusion there.
Paul Haege
Darling Point, NSW
Drug-induced recklessness
AS a West Coast Eagles supporter, I desperately hope that the tragic death of Chris Mainwaring ("Shock as Eagles high-flyer dies at 41", 2/10) will underline the ludicrous nature of the AFL's three- strikes policy on drugs. For the sake of our children, the AFL must take a strong stand -- a first offence must invoke an immediate suspension of, say, at least six months for recreational drug use. No club, nor the AFL itself, can accept anything less than zero tolerance.
As to the question of whether or not recreational drugs are performance-enhancing, I don't think it matters. Do we really want our children to believe that the pinnacle of sporting bravery, as exhibited by Andrew Johns, Daniel Kerr or Ben Cousins, is only achieved by a drug-induced sense of recklessness? Or do we want them to believe that courage comes from the heart?
Gerard McMullan
Wahroonga, NSW
SO now will the West Coast Eagles accept that there is a drug culture in their club and that it is deadly?
Pip Denton
Guildford, NSW
We sacrifice our best land
THE forecast that Australia will become hotter and drier calls for serious reassessment of the nation's food policy. During the past 50years, we have progressively cut back food production in the region which combines good soil with reliable rainfall -- the high- rainfall zone along the coast -- covering it with resorts, retirement villages, parking lots, golf courses, national parks, racehorse studs and hobby farms. This will seriously impair our ability to produce sufficient food in the dry era ahead, especially if we are forced to abandon large parts of the wheatbelt and Murray- Darling basin.
World food reserves are already at their lowest in half a century, a forewarning of regional famines to come as climate change, water shortages, land loss and nutrient losses bite everywhere. Australia can no longer afford to sacrifice its best land to personal indulgence. It's time to re-zone the high-rainfall country for food production only. Unless we want to eat racehorses.
Julian Cribb
Nicholls, ACT
Equine flu mismanaged
THROUGHOUT Australia, horse-owners, riders, and thoroughbred racing industry workers have been, and are being, held to ransom by the racing industry's reaction to equine influenza.
This epidemic began at the quarantine facility at Sydney's Eastern Creek, which has dramatically shortened the quarantine period for horses due to pressure from the racing industry. The intelligent strategy for dealing with this virus would have been to let it run. In two months it would have burnt out and life would have gone on as before.
Instead, we've had extreme measures that have slowed the spread of the virus, thus severely affecting the incomes of everyone working in the horse industry: farriers, trainers, jockeys, transporters, professional showjumpers, eventers, dressage riders, rodeo performers, etc.
Very few horses have died. Far fewer than the number of humans who died as a result of the human flu epidemic that we experienced earlier this year. Although human life was at risk at the time, there were no lock-downs of hospitals or quarantining of exposed humans.
Equine flu is not foot-and-mouth disease. It's little more than a cold.
Joy Ringrose
Castaways Beach, Qld
Bush wants one last strike
THE US is preparing to attack Iran ("US shifts focus in Iran from nuclear sites to key troops", 2/10). It has been planning to do so for a long time but recently preparations have intensified. President Bush wants to get in one last hit before he goes.
However, talk of "surgical strikes" is nonsense because thousands of ordinary Iranians would die. The repressive Iranian government would be strengthened by a US attack which would solidify popular support behind it. US aggression against Iran would make Iraq look like a sideshow, especially if Pakistan were pulled in.
Let us hear John Howard and Kevin Rudd say -- unequivocally -- that they would condemn an attack on Iran and would not cooperate with the US in any way in this mad scheme.
Mike Puleston
Brunswick, Vic
FIRST BYTE
letters@theaustralian.com.au
Please, Prime Minister, call the election soon, otherwise, by the time we go to the polls, the budget surplus will have been completely exhausted by your government's relentless self-promotion at taxpayers' expense.
Paul Silbert
Beldon, WA
Will the Howard Government have time for a new series of taxpayer- funded ads selling Tony Abbott's bold plan to "fix" our hospitals? A short prime-time blitz shouldn't cost any more than $10 million.
Greg Bowyer
Sturt, SA
Has it occurred to John Howard that his cabinet is the millstone around his neck?
Tony Quick
Sellicks Beach, SA
Now that John Howard and Kevin Rudd have had their orgy of photo- ops at the football finals, would it be too much to
ask that one of them is seen attending an arts event?
Cynthia Breusch
Pullenvale, Qld
When did we last see the Prime Minister and his wife patronising the arts by attending the opera or an art exhibition? As usual, Paul Keating has put it so succinctly.
Cynthia Harris
South Yarra, Vic
Can we have a weekly column from Paul Keating so that we can regularly refresh our understanding of the phrase "dripping with bile".
Jonathan Baldry
Coorparoo, Qld
Just a quick question for the Government: which is the bigger threat, terrorists or unions? I get confused over who we are supposed to fear the most.
Seth Richardson
Enmore, NSW
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
GPO Box 4162, Sydney, NSW, 2001Fax: 02 9288 3077
Email: letters@theaustralian.com.au (no attachments)
Emails and letters should bear a full postal address and day and night telephone numbers.
Letters to the Editor of The Australian are submitted on the condition that Nationwide News Pty Ltd as publisher of The Australian may edit and has the right to, and license third parties to, reproduce in electronic form and communicate these letters.
Letters online
Letters from this page are published on The Australian's website - - and online readers have the opportunity to add their own comments. To join the debate go to: www.theaustralian.com.au/letters
Prints of Leak cartoons
For information on buying prints of any Bill Leak cartoon go to leakcartoons@theaustralian.com.au
Prints of Nicholson cartoons
To buy a print of a Nicholson cartoon go to http:// www.nicholsoncartoons.com.au/print
Word count: 2581
