Interest rate hike will damage the nation's welfare
MOST TALKED ABOUT
RESERVE BANK
THIS interest rate hike has made it even more likely that the Reserve Bank will eventually tip the country into recession. Under governor Glenn Stevens, it has been very easy to forget that -- as well as being responsible for holding inflation between 2 to 3 per cent -- the RBA also holds two other mandates: to maintain full employment; and to ensure the welfare and prosperity of the Australian people.
Rather than let previous interest rate increases bite (there is usually an 18-month lag), the RBA has instead been reacting with an almighty knee-jerk to new inflation figures. The danger lies in the increasingly high chance that all those increases will eventually come to the boil and bite hard all at once. This will cause economic activity to plummet.
Of course, following this, people lose their jobs -- that's one mandate down already -- and in times of high unemployment and low economic activity, I'm sure that levels of welfare and prosperity would not be at their highest.
On the bright side, it would take care of the inflation problem (although there isn't really one, as the 2 to 3 per cent band needs to be maintained as an average over seven to 10 years). Oh well. Can't say they didn't have their priorities in order.
Mr Stevens said there were signs that prior interest rate rises were starting to take effect. So why not sit back, give those increases a chance to do their thing, and then take it from there? The RBA needs to urgently rethink its approach to managing the economy, because otherwise, at their hands, there will be not much of an economy left to manage.
Dan Lahav
Glen Iris, Vic
WE are still in the changeover period from the Howard to the Rudd Government -- that period in which the economic policies of the Howard government still hold sway. Because of timelags, this period will extend for three months or more after the Treasurer's first budget in May.
With the Reserve Bank increasing interest rates by yet another 0.25 percentage points, the fourth since last August, John Howard in his enforced retirement should spare a thought for his battlers, especially those who over-committed themselves to home loans on the basis of Coalition promises concerning low interest rates made during the 2004 election campaign, since when the Reserve Bank has increased rates by 0.25 percentage points on 12 occasions. Increasingly, private welfare agencies, such as the Smith Family, are being approached by a new type of client -- the overwhelmed mortgagee. Doing it comfortably on his parliamentary pension, retirement perks and fat fees from the celebrity speaking circuit, Mr Howard should make a substantial donation to the welfare agency of his choice.
Dennis Hale
Beecroft, NSW
SURELY the Reserve Bank's strategy is wrong. Raising interest rates only affects those who have little disposable income left after paying their mortgage. How could these people possibly be responsible for the spending that is causing inflation?
Michael Guppy
Moruya, NSW
ON the day our central bank raised interest rates to a 12-year high, Canada's central bank reduced its rate for the first time in more than six years. Canada's petroleum, responsible for supplying more than 50 per cent of US energy needs, could be seen as being the equivalent of our resources boom with record sales of coal and iron ore to China. Why then are these two economies working in opposite directions?
Inflationary pressures are already evident in North America, the result of higher petrol prices, but both the US and Canada see the need to stimulate their economies. We have decided to put the brakes on.
The difference in economic policy underlines a basic difference in attitude and thinking between us and our North American cousins. North America has traditionally believed in the importance of easy and sound credit to help the economy. The managers of our economic levers subscribe to the theory that you have to suffer first before things can be put to right.
Management of a modern economy should be able to handle international pressures and maintain a competitive domestic market without sacrificing the wellbeing of people who live and work within that economy.
Val Wake
Port Macquarie, NSW
LET'S put this in perspective: 12 rises of $70 a month on a $400,000 loan means many borrowers are now paying about $840 a month more to someone who has the money to lend. That's a pay cut of $10,000 after tax. Relief is not a word that springs to mind.
Interest rates are a blunt instrument. One must question why those who borrow most must be the ones to pay for control over inflation, and why those who lend most must be the ones to pocket the change.
Philip Smart
North Balgowlah, NSW
INFLATION remains one of the elephants that the Coalition still refuses to notice. Malcolm Turnbull's side denied that Australia had a two-speed economy and ignored the problems it brought. Mr Turnbull seems to want Wayne Swan and Kevin Rudd to adopt the deliberate ignorance that was raised to an artform by Peter Costello and John Howard.
R. Inglis
Westbourne Park, SA
Bjelke-Petersen was not a benign, eccentric patriarch
STAFF at Four Corners who produced the limp, almost apologetic analysis of Joh Bjelke-Petersen's dictatorship in Queensland must have been asleep at their desks.
They clearly forgot to dust off the files on the Queensland government's imposition of a state of emergency in 1971 for the Springboks rugby tour; or to focus on Bjelke-Petersen's aggressive stance against John Sinclair's actions to save Fraser Island from development; or of the allegations of bribery and brown-paper bags.
Ministers were brought down, a police commissioner jailed but Bjelke-Petersen avoided a similar fate. And don't forget his involvement with developers and of his disdain for the environment in allowing the building of the Daintree to Cooktown road through what is now a World Heritage area.
But Bjelke-Petersen's most infamous role was in his denial of the ALP's candidate, Mal Colston, to replace Bert Milliner who died in office in 1975. This denial was in breach of convention and Bjelke- Petersen, clearly in train with the conservative federal Opposition, nominated Albert Field, a French polisher. His appointment to the Senate gave the Opposition the balance of power and the ability to deny supply to the Whitlam government which led to the dismissal of that government by governor-general John Kerr.
Bjelke-Petersen was not a benign, somewhat eccentric patriarch as portrayed by Four Corners.
Ken Collins
Hobart, Tas
JOH Bjelke-Petersen and my father were both first elected in 1947. Dad picked Joh for the scoundrel that he was well before he became premier.
Apologists for Bjelke-Petersen, such as Frank Bellet (Letters, 4/ 3), like to imply that he was saintly in refusing to participate in the parliamentary superannuation scheme. Perusal of Hansard shows that Bjelke-Petersen had complete disdain for the ability of bureaucrats managing the scheme to grow his contributions better than he could outside of it. This was his typical arrogance, not altruism.
Bill Burrows
Emu Park, Qld
YOUR editorial (5/3) provides food for thought. The assumption in Queensland today seems to be that the Crime and Misconduct Commission takes care of everything. In Queensland, where property developers rule supreme, there should be greater official scrutiny of material transactions involving not only state politicians but also federal politicians, local councillors and anyone who might be in a position to influence a favourable decision or to lubricate the process.
Only full disclosure and independent scrutiny will allay the suspicions of many in the community and address the repeated rumours that still circulate about unexplained increases in the personal wealth of various past and present politicians and officials.
Peter Wall
Ascot, Qld
I EXPECT better editorials in The Australian than the spiteful piece on Joh Bjelke-Petersen. The last two paragraphs were packed with the usual wild stories pushed by Bjelke-Petersen haters and failed activists of the Left, and very little of his lonely opposition to the disruption of the Whitlam and Fraser years.
It was far too close to the malicious yellow journalism of the tabloid Left and the internet blog. Was this payback for what the editorial called his vindictiveness towards his opponents in the media? I would prefer better balance in The Australian's editorials.
L.D. Johnson
Auchenflower, Qld
Muslims tied by orthodoxy
SUPERFICIALLY, it would appear that there are many different shades of Islam around the world and many different types of Muslim. But there does appear to be one aspect in which they are truly monolithic and that is in the acceptance of an Islamic orthodoxy.
To go outside the orthodox position is to risk being labelled a heretic. Any moderate position is locked into the orthodox position. And when viewed from a framework that is locked in by the orthodox position, moderates know that they have little or no doctrinal support for a liberal interpretation of the Koran from within the Koran itself.
A literal interpretation of the Koran, coupled with a total acceptance of the orthodox version of the life of Muhammad, and the history of the origin of Islam, leaves the doctrinally weaker moderates mortally wounded and the Salafists in the ascendency.
Riaz Hassan (Inquirer, 1-2/3) does not challenge the orthodox position, nor does he seriously challenge the Salafist position. All the moderates can do is maintain a sullen silence and keep a low profile, and not risk being added to the list. The fear of the label of heresy also requires the mandatory ostentatious demonstrations of loyalty, shows of anger, chest beating, flag burning, and the like, at every perceived slight against Islam. And they like to moan about the way they are all lumped together with extremists by non- Muslims.
A. Crooks
Adelaide, SA
Vaile's moonlighting
FORMER deputy prime minister Mark Vaile skived off to do a bit of income-boosting moonlighting. However, Alexander Downer reckons we should stop criticising poor Mr Vaile, because his post-election pay drop has left him surviving on a backbencher's miserable pittance of $127,000.
The Opposition would have a better chance of getting back into the game if disgruntled former ministers departed immediately instead of treating their parliamentary pay packets as some sort of pension scheme for the workshy. The defence that these individuals have "earned" the right to rip off the taxpayers ignores the generous $200,000-plus they earned during their years of ministerial service.
No wonder the Howard government lost touch with the lives of ordinary citizens when its front bench was peopled with such inflated egos.
Mira Toglin
Penrith South, NSW
IF Mark Vaile were to undertake a bit of freelance fencing, in his spare time, people would complain he was double dipping. Leave him alone. He's all about helping the nation.
Keith Russell
Mayfield West, NSW
History of the Howard era
BY what standard does John Stone come to the conclusion that "despite his faults, the previous prime minister was our best leader so far" (Opinion, 2/3)? Surely Stone is not talking about Howard's record on ministerial accountability and truthfulness, nor of ensuring the competitive future of the economy by investment in skills and infrastructure.
Maybe Stone is referring to Howard's skills of wedging the Australian people and polarising the community. Stone holds up as Howard's crowning achievement the negotiation of the Australia-US trade agreement. Only the most cynical of us would see that Howard used Australian troops in Iraq as his bargaining chip to secure this agreement.
And as for Stone arguing that Howard would be remembered for having taken the Australian-US alliance to new levels of intimacy, we can only look back in embarrassment at the way the relationship was flaunted as a personal friendship.
But Stone does pose the tantalising question of what one alternative could have been to the Howard years -- the continuation of the Keating Labor government. One can only speculate, but I believe we would have seen a totally different Australia.
I think Stone needs to put a little more time between the end of the Howard era and how history will judge the man. For what it is worth, my bet is that the Howard years will be seen as a period of lost opportunity.
Gary Hodge
West Perth, WA
Doomsday arithmetic
TO dismiss people who question climate science as flat-earthers, David Blake (Letters, 5/3), suggests a fear of questioning. So help me through the maths, if you would.
Of all the Earth's greenhouse gas responsible for absorbing the sun's energy, the vast majority is water vapour. Only 3.7 per cent is made up of carbon dioxide. So how much of this is attributable to human activities?
Booker and North, in Scared to Death, quote 3.3 per cent with the remainder, 57 per cent given off by the oceans and 38 per cent from animal and human respiration. Thus 0.12 per cent of greenhouse gas is contributed by human activity. Your 50 per cent increase of carbon dioxide from human activity would result in a six 100th of 1 per cent increase in total greenhouse gases worldwide. Is this the doomsday scenario?
Peter Watt
Elizabeth Bay, NSW
FIRST BYTE
As a South African, I dislike Adam Gilchrist's good form. As a spectator I admire and love his talent and strokeplay. As a person, I wish I could match his energy, honesty and humility. Thank you Mr Gilchrist. All the best with your new adventure.
Henrico van Schoor
Strathfield, NSW
Why all the wailing and beating of breasts? We won the real cricket, didn't we?
Graeme Manning
West Hobart, Tas
Am I the only Australian who will be over the moon to see an end to what has become the summer circus commonly known these days as cricket so that we can swamped by more grown men playing their different codes of football with larger, odd-shaped leather balls?
D.J. Fraser
Mudgeeraba, Qld
Instead of a shoulder hit on the streaker, Andrew Symonds should have used the monkey wrench.
Joe Dwyer
Rose Bay, NSW
Looking at the replays it's obvious that had Andrew Symonds been playing in an AFL game he would have been reported for using his elbow when giving the streaker a hip and shoulder.
Tony Barrell
Balmain, NSW
Christopher Pyne wants the ordinary branch membership of the Liberal Party to elect the parliamentary leader. How does he feel about ordinary Australians electing the president of the republic?
Roy McKeen
Biggera Waters, Qld
The 7 per cent of voters believing Brendan Nelson would be a better PM than Kevin Rudd would be well advised to seek a second opinion on their condition.
Col Shephard
Yamba, NSW
letters@theaustralian.com.au
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
GPO Box 4162, Sydney, NSW, 2001Fax: 02 9288 3077
Email: letters@theaustralian.com.au (no attachments)
Emails and letters should bear a full postal address and day and night telephone numbers.
Letters to the Editor of The Australian are submitted on the condition that Nationwide News Pty Ltd as publisher of The Australian may edit and has the right to, and license third parties to, reproduce in electronic form and communicate these letters.
Letters online
Letters from this page are published on The Australian's website - - and online readers have the opportunity to add their own comments. To join the debate go to:
www.theaustralian.com.au/letters
Prints of Leak cartoons
For information on buying prints of any
Bill Leak cartoon go to
leakcartoons@theaustralian.com.au
Prints of Nicholson cartoons
To buy a print of a Nicholson cartoon go to http:// www.nicholsoncartoons.com.au/print
Word count: 2719
