The LifeLab at Tonsley’s Global Centre for Modern Ageing is bringing insight to inventors of products for older people, as well as allowing people in their over 60s to share their wisdom and even add to it.
Vicki Jarnis thought she had the ageing process pegged: “I was thinking old age for me is going to be somewhere well into the future, post the age of 75. I saw myself continuing to work and doing what I wanted to do.” That all changed when fate dropped two events into her life, including having to care for her ageing mum for six years before her mother passed away.
“I had this romantic view of what being a carer was,” she says. “I thought I had planned for things pretty well, in terms of setting up the house, but then the experience was a different thing all together. That was extremely confronting, besides the personal sacrifices you make in your own life. It was my mother and I would still make the same choice. However, I learnt a lot as I saw her health decline and how her needs changed and what that meant for me, and what it meant for the layout of the house, her mobility, her staying connected with people.” The other event was the onset of an auto-immune disease that now plays havoc with her mobility and cognition and forced her to leave the workforce far earlier than expected.
Rather than retreating from the world, the quest to share her experience and insight has led her to the Global Centre for Modern Ageing at Tonsley, where she and many other people in their 60s and older share their wisdom with businesses and inventors wanting to understand the needs and wants of older consumers. “I thought I need to be involved in something ... where I can have a say but also bring to the table the experience I have gained and work with other like-mined people who want to produce products and services for the benefit of the general ageing community,” Jarnis says.
When asked how many other people there are like Jarnis contributing at the Tonsley site, centre chief executive officer Julianne Parkinson answers: “None. Everyone’s unique and that’s what we focus on.” The centre, officially opened in October 2018, came out of State Government sponsored consultation sessions years before, acknowledging the global ageing phenomenon and asking the question about how business could be better involved in improving older lives.
The LifeLab, which Jarnis has participated in, is there to help business make sense of the older consumer.
“(It’s) a safe place of good governance that allows innovation to take place that meets the needs of what people say they need and want, allows a product developer to understand it in a way that translates the new products and services with more confidence than before,” Parkinson says. “Citizens co-design and co-create their future needs and wants alongside the entrepreneur and researcher.
“So, rather than it being made with the best of intentions on a lab desk and presented as fait accompli, they help to decide from concept all the way through to prototype all the way out to market.” The laboratory – a space that can be adapted from kitchen to loungeroom to workspace – is equipped with cameras and sensors that allow businesses to gain in-depth feedback about what volunteers think of the product, how they interact with it, and how the talk about and relate to the product and even its packaging.
Other testing is being done in other settings, but the LifeLab is the heart of the operation.
“We’ve had food projects looking at tackling things around more nutritious food that also tastes great and is age-appropriate – there’s not enough of it readily available in the market,” she says.
“People don’t want to be isolated and eating special-needs food. We all need food that is special but that’s different to special-needs food.” Other assistive devices for the home, including sensors and support mechanisms, have also passed through the hands of volunteers and benefited from the insights of the people who may actually use them one day.
“Every individual brings their own backstory – childhood memories of food ...,” Parkinson says. “All those things are rich DNA that modern-day marketing teams don’t have in front of them. These people bring themselves and inform the conversation.” Lyndon Huf, chief of PROHAB Technologies, brought his rehabilitation sensor device to the lab to “engage a market segment and try and understand what that market segment really needs and how we would approach that market segment”.
It’s a device that clips into existing rehabilitation equipment, such as resistance trainers, and gives feedback on the quantity and quality of work someone is doing and how to safely progress. “A big part of engaging our target market is ... how to engage them using the right language and terminology and (so that) they are able to engage in a way that makes sense for them,” Huf says.
“It’s not just about turning a device on, it’s not just watching it on the The LifeLab at Tonsley’s Global Centre for Modern Ageing is bringing insight to inventors of products for older people, as well as allowing people in their over 60s to share their wisdom and even add to it.
screen. Do we talk about strength?
Or getting them back to doing their activities that really mean something for them?” Huf says he discovered the volunteers were more interested in the process around the device than he imagined and has welcomed the feedback.
Jarnis took part in the PROHAB sessions and relished the opportunity. “I was fascinated by the process of how can you tell when you’ve actually done an exercise and done it properly and the right level of strength,” she says. “I saw that as being very beneficial for people doing rehab and needing to build up their strength.” Other benefits have come from the process: “My experience is that it’s been a wonderful opportunity to create connections and meet other people who are like-minded but are so diverse in terms of their backgrounds that they bring a very different backstory.
“When you are listening to other people you realise you hadn’t thought of that and that opens you up to think about things in a different way.”Visit: gcma.net.au/become-a-codesigner
Word count: 1061
