AN Adelaide physiotherapist and sports scientist will have a global audience when he pitches a newly-developed, simple-to-use rehabilitation device at the Commonwealth Games.
Lyndon Huf, CEO of South Australian sport-tech start-up Prohab, says the chance to showcase the SA design to industry leaders such as Adidas chief executive Kasper Rørsted is incredibly important.
“We see a huge opportunity to partner with some of the biggest brands in the world,” he said. The device connects to standard resistance bands or cables, widely used in physiotherapy, to precisely measure the force applied to the band.
The data is then captured and sent to an app where it can be viewed in real time to help medical professionals devise accurate, tailored programs for sporting injuries and fitness training. It can be used for training athletes and sportspeople as well as to motivate and monitor patients recovering from injury or surgery.
“It collects strength data so it actually tells you how much to do in a way patients understand . . . how much intensity, how much volume,” Mr Huf said. “You can tell if a patient is doing too little or too much.” He said inspiration for the device came when his mum fell and hurt her shoulder then struggled to recover.
“(My parents live interstate) and mum was going to see a physio but her injury just wasn’t getting better . . . so I talked to my brother (a technological whiz) and we came up with the concept. “My dad was so impressed with it, he said, ‘you should do something with this before I die’.” So, with the help of the Flinders University’s Medical Device Partnering Program (MDPP), a functional prototype was designed and built.
“We’ve had some very good market feedback . . . it lends itself to upper arm sport such as tennis, cricket, (and) major league baseball. “(We’re) talking to the AFL as well . . . they are keen to use it to fix up some of those shoulders you see taped up on screen.” Mr Huf says there’s also interest in the small device that can “essentially attach to anything you can hook on to” in the sports science sector.
“Because it can drill right down deep into the metrics of a data curve and provide precise measuring, we can produce some very interesting information . . . it is such a functional device and there are a lot of different ways to get information quickly to guide programs,” he said.
“(For example), coaches can prescribe a set training program for athletes and monitor the impact of the program.” Flinders University Associate Professor in Product Design Sandy Walker is among a team of physiotherapy, rehabilitation engineering, product design, commercialisation and manufacturing experts, to work on the prototype.
“It’s a really exciting product because it is so simple, yet has a wide range of applications and users,” he said.More than $4.5 billion is invested in sporting technology (“sportstech”) globally, on developments such as smart stadiums, wearable devices and other ways to support the health and safety of players and fans.
CREDIT: REBECCA BAKER
Word count: 518
