An Adelaide company has created a device it says will make rehabilitation from injury or surgery faster and more effective.
The small device can be clipped onto exercise bands and sends real-time data to a phone or computer.
Its creator, physio and sports scientist Lyndon Huf, said that could then be used by a clinician or the patient to determine whether they were doing too little or too much.
"It collects strength data, so it actually tells you how much to do, whether it be how much intensity or how much volume," Mr Huf said.
"[It] puts it in a way that patients understand, so they can understand how to do an exercise and really do it well."
Mr Huf said doing too much too soon was a common mistake made by those recovering from an injury, and that less rehab could sometimes produce better outcomes.
"Quite often people are working in the dark [so] it helps them to actually to work out how much they can do, and how often to do it," he said.
Mr Huf, who is CEO of company Prohab, believes the device has potential applications across the health and fitness sector.
"We've had a lot of pressure from sport saying 'build it, we actually need this'," he said.
"We've already had interest from AFL, certainly from tennis, so there's definitely an interest there with professional sport.
"But we're also looking at healthcare and even the wider fitness market, so we're aiming at a global opportunity."
Developers have been running various trials with prototypes.
"We've been doing trials with all sorts of different groups - elite sportspeople plus the general public - and really trying to understand what actually works for them," Mr Huf said.
Elite squash players are among those groups, including 16-year-old Alex Haydon.
She trains twice a day, six days a week.
"It's just really good with monitoring how much weight you're doing and how you can improve," she said.
Ms Haydon said it could apply to any athlete, even when not injured.
"There's a lots of different exercises you can do with the resistance band, so it can help with strengthening and everything," she said.
Mr Huf plans to release a final market-ready product soon.
"We're aiming for a launch in three months so we've already got our second and third prototypes built," he said.
"We're putting them together so they're actually fit for purpose and designed for manufacture."
Word count: 408
