ADELAIDE entrepreneurs Stuart and Toni Derbyshire have sold their fast-growing preschool sport business Ready Steady Go Kids after taking it global during the past four years.
The business they bought in 2011 had grown to 10,000 children being enrolled each term across 200 locations in Australia - compared to fewer than 1000 children enrolled across 30 sites when the couple first took over.
Added to those figures, Mr Derbyshire said Ready Steady Go Kids had established another 50 to 100 locations through 11 international franchises after the two created a new model to take it forward.
The business will now be headquartered in Melbourne after it was bought by the Derbyshire's first franchisees, Danie O'Connor and Sherrie Boulter. "This is what we like to do, buy small businesses, grow them and get to medium size and sell them, it's not our intention to have them long-term," Mr Derbyshire said.
"We felt the business, to continue to prosper, needed a different management style, it needed someone capable of managing a more mature business and that's not where our interest lies.
"For the new buyer, there's no reason why this business can't double in size again." In 2011, the Derbyshires had also created new branding, a central booking centre and included merchandise into the mix with the help of Adelaide company Them advertising.
They now plan to turn their attention to other ventures, and are in the process of establishing another business "potentially aligned" to Ready Steady Go Kids, but Mr Derbyshire said the details were still under wraps.
Mr Derbyshire said that they had also bought an eCommerce company Eastwind Textiles - which specialises in selling 100 per cent bamboo products online - with plans to launch a new website next week.
And they have purchased another eCommerce business called Dog Outfitters, that sells dog accessories online and was in its early stages.
"We'll see what happens with the business that is related to Ready Steady and if that happens, great, we'll throw ourselves into that and keep the eCommerce businesses ticking away on the sidelines," Mr Derbyshire said."If that doesn't happen, then we'll add to the eCommerce business portfolio with niche brands."
Credit: BELINDA WILLIS
Word count: 376
