ORGANISED sport for preschoolers is turning into a serious business with the more savvy operators tapping into parents' needs for high-quality activities.
As leading sport organisations such as the AFL use the market power of high-profile stars to draw the young to footy clinics, others are using their own brand ideas to create a niche.
Adelaide couple Stuart and Toni Derbyshire have only been involved in sports programs for children aged two to six years for about 12 months. Already, they claim their Adelaide pre-school exercise business Ready Steady Go Kids is the largest in the country.
They have upped their locations from 40 to 60, have franchises nationally and created a national booking centre at their Glenelg head office.
Company director Mr Derbyshire said it was important to show parents an upbeat, professional brand.
They now have more than 5000 children nationally paying about $150 a term to join their 10-week programs.
Mr Derbyshire said the company had about 90 staff and was negotiating a franchise deal in Singapore.
"Our goal is to be at 100 national locations by the end of the next calendar year, that represents roughly 40 new locations across the country and the international locations we'll be targeting are Singapore and New Zealand," he said.
The pre-school program covers five sports each term, including soccer, tennis, hockey, football, cricket, athletics, basketball, rugby, golf and T-ball. Melbourne has emerged as the company's strongest market, bringing in 60 to 65 per cent of revenue in enrolment fees.
Each new interstate co-ordinator is trained with Mrs Derbyshire and another staff member taking on the role and travelling to new destinations.
Mrs Derbyshire said the business was branching out with merchandise, including T-shirts, hoodies and caps.
There were plans to extend the range to sporting equipment and they had begun hosting multi-sports birthday parties, tailored in cost to numbers and being hosted at pre-booked locations, parks or home gardens.
"In Sydney it's not a problem for some parents to drop six or seven hundred on a pre-schoolers birthday party," Mrs Derbyshire said.
University of SA sport and recreation program director Gavin Colville said the age group was an untapped market and he was not surprised to see a growing number of players.
"We used to play these games in our backyards but for a variety of reasons that's not happening so much now and we are doing more outsourcing," he said.
While the organised sport concept has been happening for school-aged kids for years, changing home circumstances were creating a growing interest for two to six-year-olds, also providing an alternative to childcare.
"There are various reasons for this happening, parents with double incomes, smaller backyards, people not being happy with their kids running around the local parks . . . there's a trend to get someone else to do this with our kids," Mr Colville said.
While more commercial enterprises appear to be entering the sector, they don't appear to be robbing not-for-profit groups of market share.
Kindergym state director Haydn Bellamy said his not-for-profit organisation had been running programs for preschool children for years. Enrolment numbers were stable with more than 8000 members in South Australia alone.
"We're promoting kindergym and gymnastics as sport for life," he said. "There's always threats out there. Playgroup is a threat to us as a rival activity . . . but we can guarantee our product."
University of SA sport financial management lecturer Chris Kandunias said the organised sport market was growing, with anecdotal evidence showing parents were booking into more programs as they became more concerned about safety.
"These places are starting to tap into the fact that there's a market there for them that no one has previously thought about," he said.
"In the past we would have just gone out with the kids and grabbed a football or stick.
"(But) I think making money is a by-product . . . it's a service to the community if kids are participating rather than sitting in front of the TV."
Mr Kandunias is observing how the AFL introduces children to the game.
"They are starting to recognise the need to get the kids into football early as there's competition for their time," he said. "The kids are getting younger running out there to play."
He points to another societal change - where fewer parents and teachers have time to volunteer for sport, creating demand for organised programs with trained coaches and instructors.
Those who were succeeding were engaging using new social networks such as websites, Mr Kandunias said.
"Organisations like Ready Steady Go Kids sound like they are listening to the people who use their programs," he said.
Credit: BELINDA WILLIS, Sport
Word count: 791
