SPORTING groups are celebrating West Torrens Council's decision to approve a major upgrade of Weigall Oval despite the project remaining unfunded.
Councillors last week approved the $7 million masterplan, which includes a separate soccer pitch and baseball fields, but committed no funds.
Adelaide Angels Baseball Club president Stuart Batchelor said the redevelopment would benefit the 300-member club as well as the Plympton community.
"All the kids are really excited ... and a lot of our members are excited," Mr Batchelor said.
"The playground is going to be better, there's going to be barbecue facilities. "We'll all just work together and make it good for everyone." Mr Batchelor said the club would consider contributing funds to get the masterplan off the ground.
Adelaide Cobras Football Club vice president Paul Soteriou agreed but said discussions were needed between the club, its sponsors and the council.
"Obviously we would like to contribute something," Mr Soteriou said. "(We're) very happy that it's going ahead, it gives us an opportunity to grow. "It's something that benefits everybody." Council chief executive Terry Buss said the council would apply for grants but would also explore other funding sources such as loans, rates or asset sales.
"At this stage council has not allocated any funding to proceed with the proposed redevelopment and the project has not been factored into any forward estimates or plans of the council," Mr Buss said.
"Timing and prioritisation for Weigall is unknown as council has committed funding to other community projects, such as Lockleys/Apex/Mellor and Camden (Oval)." A council report said the sports groups would also be encouraged to apply for state and federal funds.
The council decided in December 2011 to begin a masterplan for the site.
THE PLAN - Demolish playing fields and build separate fields for soccer and baseball - Remove the trotting track - Reduce the tennis courts from five to four - Build a new playground - Replace clubrooms with a 500sq m building- Construct a new northern carpark
Credit: Jessica Brown
Word count: 335
