MEDIA RELEASE JDRF Media release distributed by AAP Medianet.
Clipsal 500 Adelaide Supports JDRF
The Clipsal 500 Adelaide named the best event of the 2011 season - the eighth time it has been recognized as Australia's best domestic motor sport event has selected JDRF as its charity of choice in 2012.
JDRF are very excited by this wonderful opportunity to raise awareness of type 1 diabetes. Monies raised will help JDRF progress their mission - to improve the lives of those living with type 1 diabetes, ultimately finding a cure through the support of medical research.
Type 1 diabetes is a lifelong autoimmune disease that destroys the body's ability to produce insulin, a hormone vital for life. It is generally diagnosed in young people but can strike at any age. It can be passed through families or arise unexpectedly.
122,300 Australians have type 1 diabetes and there is no cure, yet. Children and adults with this disease require a daily regime of 3 - 6 insulin injections or continuous infusion of insulin through a pump, as well as 6 - 8 finger-prick blood tests, just to stay alive. Complications of this disease can include coma, blindness, kidney failure, stroke and amputation. Researchers are working hard to understand the complicated mix of genetic and environmental factors that may cause or trigger this disease. However, it is certain that going on a diet or cutting down on sugar doesn't stop type 1 diabetes.
JDRF hopes to raise $100,000 over the 4 day event and make an impact on JDRF's investment in Australian medical research to help the 122,300 Australians currently living with type 1 diabetes.
V8 supercar fans are encouraged to find a JDRF volunteer or Jasper, JDRF's giant Jelly Baby Mascot at the track and place a gold coin in the bucket, purchase an item of merchandise, take a taxi ride around the track or have their child entertained by Ready Steady Go Kids on the Concert Oval. In news just out JDRF will be holding a Race for a Cure Raffle with first prize being a FORD FG MkII Falcon XR6 EcoLpi valued at up to $46,833. Tickets are $10.00 each and will be available from volunteers and marquee locations at the Clipsal 500 Adelaide
For Greg Murphy of Greg Murphy racing his world was turned upside down when Ronan his son then aged 18 months was diagnosed with type 1 diabetes
"My wife and I had no understanding of what this meant and how it would affect our lives. It was a huge shock to find out what was ahead of us and to come to grip with the fact that there was no cure. Injecting an 18 month old 3-4 times a day is not much fun for anyone and the management of the whole process is at times exhausting. To then have our second son Cormac then diagnosed when he was 26 months was even more of a shock! 2 kids under 6 with diabetes was a handful. Fortunately both boys were put onto insulin pumps around 5 years ago which has definitely helped keep control of their blood/glucose levels, but the management of their diabetes is still incredibly time consuming. Type 1 is a huge responsibility and it is very difficult to put that responsibility onto other people, therefore my wife and I don't spend much time away from the kids together.
"To have JDRF as the official Charity of this year's Clipsal 500 is so important for the continued progress to make more people aware of the disease. The large majority of people are just like I was when I found out about diabetes, the awareness of it is near on non existent. People think that it is the same as type 2 and that it is because your kid is overweight!!! They also think that they grow out of it! The focus on Type 2 Diabetes where poor health and a lack of exercise is the key cause definitely impacts negatively on the understanding of what type 1 diabetes is all about. Hopefully this alignment will make more people aware of what thousands of families have to deal with 24/7"
"A Cure would mean that our kids wouldn't have to prick their fingers up to 8 times a day to check their Blood/Glucose levels, it would mean that they don't have to live with a small electronic Pump connected to their body 24/7 which needs to be refitted every 3-4 days. It would mean that they wouldn't have to know what effect every single bit of food that they eat is going to have on their blood/glucose and make sure they cater for it. It would mean that they don't have Low's and High's which are potentially fatal if not treated properly. The list goes on, but it would also mean that no one would have to go through what tens of thousands of people go through unnoticed every day"
For Jack Perkins, son of Larry Perkins (Jack Daniels Racing) type 1 diabetes has been an enormous part of his life since 2006. "At first it was a shock to the system, learning how to inject yourself multiple times a day with insulin and also managing your Blood Glucose Levels by pricking your finger and measuring blood samples. It takes a lot of discipline and management to ensure you maintain a healthy and productive lifestyle, but it will never stop me from achieving my life goals and ambitions".
"As an ambassador for JDRF it is truly fantastic that they have been chosen as the official charity for this year's Clipsal 500 in Adelaide. The Clipsal 500 is South Australia's biggest event, it's the first event of the 2012 V8Supercar season, and it's also the favourite event for most of the teams and drivers in pit lane. It will be a fantastic opportunity for creating further awareness about JDRF, type 1 diabetes and the ongoing commitment to improving lives and finding a cure".
"The event attracts nearly 300,000 people across four days and it is a tremendous sporting event. A cure for type 1 diabetes would be a miracle. The thought of travelling through each day without continuous Blood Glucose Level checking and multiple injections would make life a breeze and it would make my V8Supercar Racing just a little bit easier"
Mike Wilson CEO of JDRF, urges everyone who is affected by type 1 diabetes to support JDRF at this year's Clipsal 500 Adelaide by making a donation to provide essential support for vital medical research in Australia to improve the lives of those living with type 1 diabetes and ultimately to find a cure."
"Australia has one of the highest rates of type 1 diabetes in the world and the rate of new cases in children in this country is rising by 3% every year. This situation is urgent."
JDRF and the Clipsal 500 Adelaide, South Australia Thursday to Sunday 1 - 4 March 2012 All welcome to support JDRF at the Clipsal 500 Adelaide. http://www.clipsal500.com.au/ Interview and Photo Opps available with: - Greg Murphy - Pepsi Max Racing
For more information about the Clipsal 500 event and JDRF's participation please call Tamara Aitchison on 0402 810 069.
SOURCE: JDRF NNNN
27-02 1307
Word count: 1211
