A NEW course designed to help entrepreneurs make the leap to business owners will start at Flinders University next year.
Venture Dorm will be run by the University's commercialisation arm, Flinders Partners, starting in March.
Participants will take part in 10 sessions over 12 weeks, where they will be workshopping their business ideas.
The first intake will be about 10 people, however that number is flexible.
Flinders Partners managing director Anthony Francis said the new course, which has State Government support, will offer a high level of practical outcomes in terms of financing and networking. "Our focus will be around networks and sales - the chief aim of the course will be to help bring business plans to life," Mr Francis said.
"The emphasis will be very much on the practical, rather than the theoretical. With the momentum around the new development at Tonsley Park, it is a very good time to step up assistance to emerging and existing SMEs in the south."
Mr Francis said Venture Dorm would draw on Flinders Partners' experience of setting up numerous successful spin-off companies. "These are hi-tech, high growth companies, so we can point to these as a track record," he said.
Mr Francis said the course will also benefit from expertise within the Flinders Business School and from existing business and enterprise topics taught within the University's science and engineering degree programs.
There would also be a field trip to visit a US business incubator group specialising in new ventures. Mr Francis said the US visit would encourage entrepreneurs to "think big" by providing insights into international finance, investment and marketing opportunities for business ideas.
Emma Beames from Flinders Partners said "hi-tech, high growth" ideas were the focus. "Applicants don't have to have a business idea now, it might be that they want to join someone else's team," she said.
"They might have skills that could help someone else, they might be a really good app developer and they want to come and do the course and see if someone has a good idea for a mobile app business.
"Before the course starts we're going to have a matching up session."
The course will be run in collaboration with MEGA, a State Government-managed program aimed at creating opportunities for new products and services.
Ms Beames said application forms were available on the Flinders Partners website.
Strategiize is web-based software designed to assess, develop and report on ideas with commercial potential.
The Retimer device can reduce the effects of a range of conditions caused by a mis-timed body clock, including sleeplessness, winter blues, shift work and jet lag.
Modulek's Wire By Click product is a modular wiring system designed to meet market demand for an easier and more cost efficient solution for electrical wiring installations.
Clevertar is a virtual assistant for people who are new to computers, to enable them to connect with family and friends.
Credit: CAMERON ENGLAND, Technology
Word count: 498
