COMMERCIAL research, innovation and entrepreneurial activities are the latest buzzwords in the corridors of South Australia's three universities as they try to outdo each other on the state's push towards becoming a knowledge-based economy.
The start of the month has already seen a big-name venture capitalist and a high-profile university representative, both from the US, being hosted for a week in Adelaide as new and old university executives settle into newly-created positions.
The city itself is now home to a number of entrepreneurial activities, hubs, co-working spaces, accelerator programs and small start-ups.
There is money in pushing entrepreneurship now, with the state budget outlining almost $80 million to support innovation, entrepreneurship, and hi-tech industries, including $50 million for an SA Venture Capital Fund, $10 million for the SA Early Commercialisation Fund and $4.65 million for the Adelaide Gig City Project to connect innovation precincts with ultra-high speed internet.
Yesterday, the State Government announced $7.5 million for UniSA's Future Industries Institute at Mawson Lakes to foster innovation and collaboration.
The momentum with which the universities are zoning in on the "new game" to connect and collaborate with industry for a mutually beneficial relationship is welcome, says Margaret Ledwith, Flinders Partners' innovation partnerships director.
After decades of relying on mining and manufacturing as drivers of the economy, there is now an all-round push to build on innovation and knowledge across Australia.
"The environment is fundamentally changed even in Adelaide just in the last three years - even in the few months that I have been here," said Ms Ledwith, who was formerly with the Innovation Academy in Ireland.
She moved here in January in a new role created to bridge the gap between research and industry at Flinders University's commercialisation arm.
"Researchers are being driven towards being more commercial minded and to look at the impact of their research. That's the new game," Ms Ledworth said.
"What is missing is a very coherent approach to enabling them to do that as fast as they need to and that will take consistent effort and time." She said the three strong universities couldn't survive solely by increasing international students.
"With university-led research and commercialisation, the return on investment is really through three avenues - industry-funded research, licensing and spin-outs," Ms Ledworth said.
"The first two are great but when you create spin-outs, the economic impact is much higher, resulting in longer-term return on investment in research and education." She is not fussed by the talk of competition among the universities. "I think it is OK for universities to compete on entrepre-neurship and innovation, but that does not exclude collaboration.
"It's a falsity to think that you are going to create a huge competitive difference just by offering capabilities that are standard.
"What's important is how you take those and apply it together by speaking a common language." Universities and the government needed to work with small and medium entrepreneurs to "surface their innovation challenges and translate it into research while also identifying current research efforts that could apply to challenges".
"Also, we need global partners in our move towards creating a knowledge-based society when many of our global competitors are already there," she said.
"We need to leverage their experience and expertise to leapfrog, otherwise we will continue to lag." Flinders Partners is in early stage discussions with the IC[sup 2] Institute at the University of Texas at Austin on collaborations, with deputy director Dr Greg Pogue spending a week in Adelaide to kick-start talks.
Dr Pogue leads research, instructional and implementation programs surrounding technology commercialisation, early venture creation and entrepreneurship at the world-renowned institute.
"Adelaide's an evolving spot with an attractive environment to be in, with affordable living, which is essential to cash-strapped entrepreneurs," Dr Pogue said.
"IC[sup 2]'s goals in being here are simple - to explore Adelaide's entrepreneurial eco-system and work on collaborations to identify gaps and build strategies.
CONTINUED PAGE 58 Buzzing with big ideas for innovation FROM PAGE 57 "The questions being asked are around how do we build enterprises that create new industries, involve SMEs and make this place a magnet for entrepreneurs, networks and funding." Dr Pogue met with other universities and government representatives when he visited earlier this month.
In the same week, the University of South Australia's Centre for Business Growth unit hosted leading US venture capitalist Brad Feld, a friend of centre director, US-born Jana Matthews.
The managing director of the Foundry Group and co-founder of accelerator program Techstars also met government representatives and spoke at forums and workshops for students and entrepreneurs.
Ms Matthews said Mr Feld's insights and experience would be valuable for start-ups and established entrepreneurs.
At the University of Adelaide, Entrepreneurship, Commercialisation and Innovation Centre, director Noel Lindsay has taken on a half-time new position of Pro Vice-Chancellor (Entrepreneurship).
The role involves managing new and existing entrepreneurial programs across all disciplines, directly supporting university research students.
"We are setting up an innovation hub in the CBD which will have an incubator, accelerator, Fablab by February," Professor Lindsay said.
Another hub is due to open in France in November. "The idea is to build a global entrepreneurial network for our students and staff while also introducing businesses from both markets to each other." Talk of creating magnets to attract partners and investors is common across universities, industry, business groups and the government with free and paid support across the board.
It could be possibly the best time in a decade to give that next big business idea a go.
SUCCESSFUL UNI RESEARCH SPIN-OUTS Adelaide University: Biofuel producer Muradel, surveillance software maker Snap Network Surveillance, plant breeding company Australian Grain Technologies.
University of South Australia: Autonomous transport communications technology company Cohda Wireless, satellite maker Myriota, medical device company Ferronova,
Flinders University: Medical tech company Clevertar, sleep-regulating glasses maker Retimer, healthcare planning company FlinCare.
IN THE MONEY - $50m Venture Capital Fund.
- $10m for the SA Early Commercialisation Fund.- $4.65m for the Adelaide Gig City Project.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 1008
