WEST Torrens Council has wiped a $5000 debt owed by a soccer club that lost $10,000 in revenue last year because of flooded-out matches and trainings.
Adelaide Cobras Omonia Football Club had to pay to hire fields at the last minute when the ground was too wet to play on after rain, because of poor drainage.
Councillors last week voted to waive the last $5000 of $25,000 lent to the club to pay for lights at Plympton's Weigall Oval in 2009.
A report to the meeting said the Cobras had to pay $10,000 last year to hire fields when the ground was soaked.
The club also lost revenue from food and drinks not sold during 12 home matches and trainings moved or cancelled last year.
Cr Arthur Mangos told the meeting the debt should be slashed as a gesture of goodwill. "The club did not use the oval at times due to drainage issues and the poor condition of the oval and it ended up costing them $10,000 to use another field of play," Cr Mangos said.
"The soccer hierarchy wouldn't let them play there, which is really unfortunate." The council last month allocated $1 million for the first stage of a $7 million redevelopment of Weigall Oval Reserve. The first stage includes moving tennis courts and a carpark at the southern end of the 5.6ha park and installing a new playground.
The next $6 million - which has not been budgeted for - would be spent on removing the trotting track at the reserve and building a baseball diamond and soccer pitch.
Currently, the Adelaide Angels Baseball Club and the Cobras share the same field; baseball using it in summer and soccer using it in winter.
The drainage will be overhauled as part of the upgrade.
Soccer club president Simon Panayi welcomed the council waiving its debt. "As you can imagine, being a sporting club, funds are hard to come by," Mr Panayi said.
"We would have preferred those funds to go into junior development."Apart from having to move matches, he said drainage issues at Weigall Oval meant matches could only be held at the ground every second week.
Credit: Eugene Boisvert, David Penrose
Word count: 366
