ELAINE Stead has quit as manager of the $50 million South Australian Venture Capital Fund, despite her continuing employment being mandated in an ongoing tender process.
The State Government is just weeks away from appointing a new overarching manager of the SAVCF, to replace Ms Stead’s former employer Blue Sky Alternative Investments, which failed last year.
The Government called for expressions of interest for financial services companies to take over management of the fund last year, with the stipulation they were willing to retain Ms Stead and her team.
Companies involved in the bidding process were asked to meet Ms Stead, and employ her and her fellow investment manager if their bid was successful, tender documents said.
Ms Stead would not comment to The Advertiser.
Her LinkedIn profile makes no mention of her previous role with the fund, and lists her main employment as managing director at Human VC – a venture fund she set up herself last year. She also holds a number of board roles.
Treasurer Rob Lucas told The Advertiser last year that the SAVCF Management Committee, led by prominent businessman Raymond Spencer, believed the continuing employment of Ms Stead was preferable.
Yesterday, he told The Advertiser the committee had advised him that Ms Stead’s decision to part ways with the fund had not distorted the tender process.
“I am advised the ability and willingness to retain Ms Stead was one of nine requirements that bidders were required to demonstrate in their application to manage the SAVCF,’’ he said.
“I am advised a number of applications were received from bidders that did not include Ms Stead as part of their proposed management team, with some of these applications progressing through to the short list and interview stage of the tender process.” It is understood an interstate firm is the frontrunner to win the tender.
Mr Lucas said the identity of the currently identified preferred applicant could not be disclosed because the process was ongoing.
“Subject to successful due diligence on the preferred applicant and the purchase approval delegate approving the purchase recommendation, it is expected that the new SAVCF manager will be appointed by the end of February 2020,’’ Mr Lucas said.
In December, Ms Stead launched a defamation action against the Australian Financial Review and its columnist Joe Aston claiming a series of columns in the newspaper made her look “stupid” and “reckless”. The suit, filed interstate, alleges Fairfax Media (now Nine Entertainment Co.) imputed she was” a cretinously stupid person” and “wilfully destroyed the capital of business ventures with which she was associated causing enormous losses to unitholders’’.
That matter is continuing and the AFR is yet to file a defence. The fund has, since its inception in July 2017, invested $6 million in just three companies, which the Government says has leveraged a further $18.09 million from co-investors.BSVC Pty Ltd – the Blue Sky subsidiary managing the fund – was to be paid management fees ranging up to $1,045,568 a year.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND BUSINESS EDITOR
Word count: 503
