WEIGALL Oval sports clubs are calling on West Torrens Council to proceed with a plan to create their field of dreams.
The council this month deferred a decision on drawing up detailed designs for a $7 million redevelopment of the Plympton reserve to include a separate soccer pitch and baseball fields.
Adelaide Angels Baseball Club president Chris Frick said the 300-member club spent six weeks each season managing the handover to and from Adelaide Cobras Football Club, which happens every six months.
"We cannot stress how much the upgrade to the facilities is required," Mr Frick said.
"Our club, like most baseball clubs, is growing and the youth market is very attracted to our game.
"We have reached a stage that without an upgrade to the facilities we will not be able to continue to grow our junior programs." Mr Frick said the area had a lot of young families.
"It would be disappointing to turn their children away from our sport because we are not able to facilitate their needs for space," he said.
"The proposed plan is good for the community and provides a good opportunity for the clubs to grow their respective sports." Cobras president Michael Malandris echoed the need for the redevelopment. "The upgrade would be an enormous boost for the club as we would have a facility we could utilise all year round," Mr Malandris said.
"Having a stable base will help us attract more senior and junior players and better quality players to add to our list of teams.
"We would like the upgrade to happen as quickly as possible." West Torrens decided in December 2011 to begin a masterplan for the site. The Weigall Oval Trainers' Association has a lease of the trotting track until 2017 and West Torrens councillor Arthur Mangos said a redevelopment would be unlikely to start before then.
Cr Mangos, who pushed for more time to discuss the masterplan before progressing to the detailed planning which would cost $500,000, said councillors wanted to make sure they were doing the right thing.
"We want to review it and work out a time frame on when it's going to be done," Cr Mangos said.
He said discussions would take about three months and the development would be paid for through borrowing or the sale of council assets.
WEIGALL OVAL REDEVELOPMENT Public consultation on the masterplan late last year received about 250 responses and came up with a preferred option which included: - Building separate playing fields for soccer and baseball; - Removing the trotting track; - Replacing the existing clubroom with a 500sq m multipurpose building further north; - Building a new northern carpark; - Reducing the number of tennis courts in the south-western corner from five to three; and,- Relocating the playground.
Credit: John Stokes
Word count: 466
