SA Venture Capital Fund manager Elaine Stead has filed a defamation suit against Fairfax Media, alleging it imputed she was “a cretinously stupid person” and “wilfully destroyed the capital of business ventures with which she was associated causing enormous losses’’.
The Federal Court claim, lodged against Fairfax Media and Australian Financial Review columnist Joe Aston, relates to several columns the paper published over the past two years that were critical of Ms Stead and related to her role as a director of collapsed investment firm Blue Sky Alternative Investments.
One article also called into question the judgment of the State Government, and Premier Steven Marshall in particular, for continuing to employ Ms Stead and requiring that she be employed by any future manager of the state’s $50 million venture capital fund.
Ms Stead told The Advertiser she had filed the suit “in order to restore my reputation’’. Her lawyers wrote to the AFR in November about a column published the previous month, demanding it remove it from its website and apologise, according to her claim. Fairfax’s lawyers wrote to her, saying the company “stands by the stories as published”.
Ms Stead, pictured, who lodged her case the following month, is also suing over another column as well as a Twitter post by Mr Aston. The claim says two columns carried the imputation that she: “RECKLESSLY destroyed the capital of business ventures with which she was associated causing enormous losses to unit holders”, and was; “A VENTURE capitalist, who made stupid investments in two worthless companies, Shoes Of Prey and Vinomofo, which had no business and no prospects of success’’.
Ms Stead also claims she was made out to be “untrustworthy” and “wantonly lost millions of dollars’’. She claims she suffered “enormous damage in both her personal and professional reputation”.
Ms Stead was an executive director of Blue Sky, which failed in May last year after Glaucus Research released a scathing report into the company’s business affairs. Blue Sky was the manager of the SA Venture Capital Fund, and Ms Stead and her team have continued to manage it following Blue Sky’s demise.
Treasurer Rob Lucas said the SAVCF committee had advised him it was about a month away from making a decision on a new manager for the fund.
Nine Entertainment, which now owns Fairfax, declined to comment.PAGE 52: BUSINESS DAILY
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND BUSINESS EDITOR
Word count: 397
