Grants to encourage small businesses to employ more people, invest in innovation and entice companies to relocate to South Australia are key planks in the South Australian budget.
As the state continues to struggle with the nation's worst unemployment rate, SA Treasurer Tom Koutsantonis has announced several initiatives in an attempt to stimulate growth.
The theme continues on from last year's budget which focused on small business.
Announced today in Adelaide, grants from a $109 million scheme will offer small and medium-sized businesses up to $10,000 over two years for each new full-time position created.
Small business and start-up grants of up to $4,000 over two years will be available for each new job of 22 hours or more per week created by eligible businesses which do not pay payroll tax.
The Treasurer's push to modernise the economy as the state moves towards losing its tradition manufacturing base with the looming closure of Holden includes an $80 million support package to start and retain businesses in the state.
Under the measure, a $50 million South Australian Venture Capital Fund (SAVCF) will be used to promote innovation to support new business, attract capital and encourage companies to move to the state.
Other measures include:
$10 million to assist start-ups to better position themselves to attract long-term investment
$7.5 million for the University of South Australia's Future Industries Institute to encourage innovation and new industry; and,
$4.7 million towards ultra-high speed broadband for business to use within the CBD.
These measures come on top of a previously announced extension of payroll tax concessions for up to 2,000 small businesses with a payroll of $1.2 million or less until 2020.
Mr Koutsantonis said ideas were often developed in the state but were "dragged" where venture capital was located in the eastern states or overseas.
He said the focus was on offering entrepreneurs support towards commercialisation.
"This funding is significant and will foster our innovative culture, providing our young entrepreneurs with the support necessary to not only start up in South Australia, but stay in South Australia."
Unemployment rate 'unacceptable'
Mr Koutsantonis said unemployment hurt the whole community not just the unemployed and he hoped small businesses would take up the grant opportunities.
"This is not available to Coles and Woolworths and BHP, this is for the small-to-medium-sized enterprises, the engine room of the South Australian economy, and lately it's been spluttering a little bit," he said.
"Our unemployment rate is unacceptable and this is a way of us helping them go out.
"Some of this money could help with weekend penalty rates, some of this money can help with overtime, some of this money can just make it that little bit more affordable to hire that South Australian worker."
He described the payroll tax rebate was part of a "three-pronged" attack to tackling the state's unemployment woes.
"Our unemployment rate which I think every South Australian would agree is unacceptably high given what we have to consume with the loss of Holden, which was forced upon us - we didn't ask for it."
"High unemployment is bad for everyone.
"It hurts our community as a whole, not just the people who are unemployed, it hurts everyone.
"By tackling unemployment and incentivising job creation, everyone is assisted in our economy - whether you're a pensioner or a low income earner."
Word count: 557
