With rising input costs and concerns about global supply, farmers looking for more tools for their toolbox to control weeds can focus on a proven Australian innovation in the Seed Terminator.
There is the opportunity to take advantage of the Seed Terminator early order program that is running until February 28.
This is Australian designed and manufactured technology that has had 11 years of development.
Independent testing has confirmed it has a mechanical kill of 99 per cent of weed seeds that enter the mill.
The machine helps to reduce the weed seed bank so there are fewer weeds in the paddock each year.
It targets herbicide-resistant weeds that have survived in-season control, taking the pressure of pre-emergent herbicides.
The Seed Terminator has long-lasting mill components and there were more than 400 of these machines in operation during the 2021 Australian harvest.
With supply issues and input costs rising, tackling the issue of weeds being spread out of the back of the harvester to grow next year, seems an obvious place to start - especially as this is when weeds are most vulnerable.
When the crop is cut and the chaff and grain have been separated, the harvester flings the chaff back onto the ground.
This includes the seeds of weeds that have escaped or resisted the various in-season controls.
In other words, these are the toughest weeds of all.
WA-based extension agronomist Peter Newman said it seemed crazy that farmers spent a lot of time and money killing weeds all year round only to reward the survivors at harvest and spread them out to spray the next year.
Attached to the back of the combine harvester, the Seed Terminator mechanically pulverises the chaff and weed fraction and kills 99pc of weed seeds, including ryegrass - which is one of the toughest to kill.
Ned Jeffery, the Victorian Commercial Manager for Seed Terminator - said mechanical seed control was not a silver bullet.
"But it is an incredibly useful tool in the toolbox in preventing or dealing with herbicide-resistant weeds by reducing the weed seed bank for carry-over to the next year," he said.
Seed Terminator has proven its technology after working closely with farmers during 900 harvests on three continents. Independent weed kill testing has also been completed several times during development, with recent benchmark studies done in 2021 confirming the highest kill rate at 99pc of Australian ryegrass.
Standard features include a magnet tray made of rare earth magnets, each with 9.2 kilograms of pulling force, to keep unwanted metals from entering the mills.
Mill escape doors and flexible flails allow the Seed Terminator to digest, pass and terminate stones.
With a 24-month driveline warranty and 12 month warranty, excluding wear items, the Australian-made Seed Terminator is the proven solution to weed seed control.
Mark Bastian, commercial manager for South Australia, has found with wider adoption, the industry knowledge of harvester setup and paddock preparations is allowing farmers to get the best performance from these machines.
Buying Australian-made just got better, with access to quality Seed Terminators right through to harvest.
The new Seed Terminator Lonsdale factory ensures uninterrupted supply of the proven platform - offering quality, availability and prompt shipment of spare parts.
Chief executive officer Paul Sandercock said sourcing Seed Terminator components was done up to 12 months in advance.
"We're in a fortunate position to be uninterrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic interruption to supply," he said.
"The consolidated distribution and integration of operations into a new facility at Lonsdale, with the capability of distributing up to 600 machines per annum is very exciting.
The Seed Terminator can be fitted to select CLAAS and Massey Ferguson models, New Holland CR models, all flagship Case IH models and all John Deere S series machines.
More information: Contact Mark Bastian on 0428 517 316; or find your local dealer at www.seedterminator.com.au
CREDIT:
Word count: 644
