METAL sheet fabrication company Rowlands Metalworks has unveiled a $500,000 investment – its first robot in 65 years.
Business owner and managing director Cameron Johnston bought the robot, Arcemy, from ASX-listed AML3D, a fellow South Australian business.
“The exciting thing about our robot, Arcemy, is that it is certainly new technology to us, but it’s also unique in the SA steel fabrication scene,” Mr Johnston said.
“It just puts Rowlands in a much better place to attract a high calibre of jobs, so that instead of combating for the nearest cent on normal steel fabrication jobs we can elevate ourselves because we are technically more capable now of delivering a more sophisticated product.
“That is important for typically defence clients who are looking for higher levels of engineering capability than what you can make in a kitchen sink.” The business signed a widely-publicised memorandum of understanding with $45bn future frigates builder BAE Systems’ supply chain partner, Raytheon Anschutz, in 2018.
That agreement, which covered the delivery of navigational bridge consoles for nine frigates, is expected to translate into millions of dollars of work for the Lonsdale company, but there is no definite contract yet.
“I think it’s fair to say I think it is a done deal and it is highly likely that in the ships’ consoles this machine might make some special mounting brackets, which are very light, very strong and quicker to make,” Mr Johnston said.
BAE Systems said it had not yet contracted Rowlands, and declined to comment further.
It has been supportive of Australian industry developing innovative, advanced manufacturing techniques that are transforming the naval shipbuilding industry.
Rowlands Metalworks’ major customer is agribusiness Seed Terminator, which uses a specially designed machine, fitted on the back of its harvesters to help farmers get rid of weeds and so avoid the need to spray crops.
That customer is likely to be the first recipient of machines made using Arcemy, which can be programmed for traditional robotic welding jobs but also has the capability to 3D weld.
“Traditionally Rowlands has cut bits of steel, folded and welded them together to make the machines – which we will still do,” Mr Johnston said. “But the robot will focus on heavily repeated elements of that product or machine … and in time we may start laser printing pulleys and components inside it.”
CREDIT: ROBOTICS VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 396
