THE team behind the Seed Terminator technology hit a 100th installation milestone prior to harvest on Kangaroo Island last year, with that figure almost doubling by this seeding season.
The technology fits onto the back of combine harvesters and pulverises weed seeds, thereby reducing the need for herbicides.
KI's Nick Berry invented the Seed Terminator and founded the company with his uncle Mark Ashenden.
The 100th machine was installed on to Michael, Tracy and Alan Mills' John Deere S680 combine harvester on KI in July last year.
During harvest, Mr Mills said they noticed the Seed Terminator took a bit of horsepower in thicker cereals, but didn't notice it in beans or canola.
"Everything comes at a slight cost, you can't run something like that without using some horsepower," he said.
The Mills family are aiming to reduce their reliance on chemicals to control problem weeds such as ryegrass and wild radish.
Michael Mills said opening rains had been spot on so far and have resulted in a great start to the season.
Fellow KI farmer Travis Bell and cropping manager Shaun Trickey have run the Seed Terminator on their CLAAS combine for the past two seasons, and are very happy with the technology.
"You can see where the Terminator has been versus the other header," Mr Trickey said.
"It's the way of the future, it just needs to be an option on the header when you buy one."
The Seed Terminator is a multi-staged hammer mill that is driven off the harvester's engine, pulverising 99 per cent of weed seeds and distributing the processed material as mulch back into the paddock.
University of Adelaide weed science researcher David Brunton said mechanically killing weed seeds was an important way of incorporating non-herbicidal forms of weed control into today's farming systems.
"Whatever returns to the weed seed bank will, in the following year, be selected by herbicides and we want to reduce that," he said.
Lucindale graingrower Peter Williams invested in the technology when ryegrass and other weeds became increasingly harder to manage.
"Due to our heavy stubble loads and long-season rainfall, weeds, especially ryegrass, have always been a problem, but after two very wet winters it became even more difficult," he said.
"It became obvious we had to do something other than rely on chemicals.
"Not being able to windrow burn and preferring not to go down the chaff cart path, mechanical weed seed control seemed a good choice."
CREDIT: Stan Gorton
Word count: 412
