Manufacturing of a machine invented on KI that pulverises weed seeds as grain crops are harvested is ramping up to a full commercial launch.
KI farmer Dr Nick Berry, 31, invented the Seed Terminator and founded the company of the same name with his uncle Mark Ashenden.
Seed Terminator will produce 100 of its machines ahead of this year's Australian grain harvest.
The Seed Terminator is now in its fourth year of production following the release of nine pilot units in 2016, a further 23 in 2017 and 50 last year, which have resulted in 121 full field trials on a range of crop types in major grain growing regions of Australia. One machine was also trialled in Canada last year.
The machines are already in use on Kangaroo Island with Bellevista Farms having the first CLAAS Seed Terminator on KI for its last harvest.
The Seed Terminator can be retrofitted to new and used John Deere, CASE IH, Massey Ferguson, Claas and New Holland Class 7, 8, 9 and 10 harvesters and retails for about A$115,000.
The Seed Terminator uses a multi-stage hammer mill to pulverise weed seeds, spreading the sawdust-like debris behind the header. Tests by the University of Adelaide's Weed Science Research Group have shown a 96 to 100 per cent kill of rye grass seeds using the machine.
South Australian Grains Industry Trust funded research conducted by Trengove Consulting in 2017 found rye grass weed seed kill was 93 per cent at 2250 rpm and increased to 98 per cent or greater at normal operating speeds (2500-3000 rpm). Results also showed 99 per cent control of several other species including wild radish, brome grass,wild oat, bifora, bedstraw and tares.
Mr Ashenden said the product, which has undergone design improvements after every season so far, was ready for full commercial production.
He said the latest round of upgrades for the 2019 model included further improvements to wear and power draw and the addition of a "Turn On Turn Off" system for John Deere models.
"We think this year is our first true commercial release after three years of trials with a growing number of partners," Mr Ashenden said.
"We're designing a manufacturing plan around making 100 units this year and of that about 10 will be for export, 10 purely for research purposes and 80 for domestic sales in Australia.
"We've also now engaged multiple dealers of all different brands across Australia and the information they are feeding back to us is brilliant."
The "one-pass solution" spreads the nutrient-rich pulverised weed seed debris 10 to 12 metres behind the harvester to act as a fine mulch for soil improvement. It also reduces the need for herbicides and labour intensive burn-offs to keep weeds at bay. Testing has been focussed on rye grass seeds because of their minuscule size and the fact they are notoriously difficult to kill.
Seed Terminator has at least doubled its production every year, beginning with nine units in 2016 and is working with four manufacturers in SA and WA.
Written by Andrew Spence and published with permission after appearing on The Lead SA website
Word count: 521
