WITH eight prototypes successfully completing the recent harvest, a new weapon in the war against weed seeds is about to be released.
The Seed Terminator is a multi-stage hammer mill to pulverise weed seeds coming through harvester sieves and is suitable for Class 7 to Class 9 machines.
Founded by SA agricultural engineer Nick Berry and business partner Mark Ashenden, the Seed Terminator will be marketed at a reasonable price, has a low power draw and is available for fitment to most common harvester brands.
The eight models in the field at harvest had extremely high destruction rates - mimicking lab results of more than 90 per cent.
Dr Berry said the results "tell us to get this technology into farmers' hands".
"On-farm trials show the machine performed beyond our expectations at commercial harvest rates in a wide range of conditions across the country," he said.
The multi-stage mill is fitted with patented systems the company calls Aero-IMPACT low-turbulence impact technology, combining aerodynamics and brutal impact to kill seeds.
The mechanical drive system incorporates Smooth Feed technology to prevent material from feed-in blockages. Mechanical drive was chosen to minimise moving parts and is claimed to be highly efficient and minimise power loss.
Three-stage screening also improves throughput, ensuring higher material flow through the hammer mill.
The efficiency of the mill design, combined with the drive system, allowed the Seed Terminator to work on smaller Class 7 harvesters.
"We are investing heavily in research and development to work out optimal parameters to target different weeds without using too much power," Dr Berry said.
"You want to be right on the edge of the performance you want because extra performance uses power, so you need to find the balance."
The price is also an attraction with the company focused on introducing the technology to as many farmers as possible; as soon as possible, and as affordably as possible at a ticket price of about $100,000.
Prototypes were fitted to John Deere, Case IH and New Holland harvesters.
"It has been valuable trialing the units in real harvest conditions, especially in a good year such as this," Dr Berry said. "The field trials were about checking the capacity and whether the harvester will handle it.
"We saw some pretty crazy material from frosted grain in the west to wireweed in the east. When you don't see any grains coming out the back, because all the volunteer seed is getting destroyed, it is always reassuring."
A limited release will see units for the 2017-18 harvest, with arrangements for manufacturing and assembly ironed out and production set to begin next month.
Word count: 436
