With footy finals upon us and spring just around the corner, the countdown is on for the 2018 Hart Field Day to be held on Tuesday, September 18, at the Hart Field-Site between Blyth and Brinkworth.
The Hart team has been working hard behind the scenes to pull together another huge line-up of informative and practical agronomy speakers and displays for this year's event.
Hart Field-Site Group chairman and Spalding farmer Damien Sommerville said he was thrilled to announce the key lunch time speaker will be Canberra-based consultant Rohan Rainbow - well known in the Mid North district, having been based in Clare for 17 years.
"Rohan will speak on 'Putting new technology in farmers' hands', giving an insight into his work on chemical use, regulation and new technologies on-farm," Mr Sommerville said.
"Rohan will be part of a really strong program for 2018, which will also include Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development (DPIRD) WA research officer Georgie Troup who will team up with one of our stalwart presenters, SARDI principle oat breeder Dr Pamela Zwer to talk oaten hay, and improving yield and quality.
"We'll also hear from Spalding grower Darren Longmire and agronomist Stuart Sherriff on the Harrington seed destructor and seed terminator.
"And a really timely topic will be the construction of the new weather station network for the Mid North and what it means in terms of access to more information for local growers."
Be the first to hear about new lentil and faba beans with three new varieties to be launched at the field day by Pulse Breeding Australia, SARDI and The University of Adelaide.
New research on precision planting will be the focus for Stefan Schmitt from Ag Consulting Co and Emma Pearse from the Hart Field-Site Group.
Sponsored by Rocky River Ag Services, the Hart Field Day gets underway on Tuesday, September 18, with gates open at 9am and an official opening at 10am. The first session starts at 10.30am sharp.
Admission is $35 (students $5), or online early bird price of $30, and includes access to all 19 sessions and more than 30 specialist speakers, as well as a comprehensive, full colour Hart Field Day guide with articles and information from each of the sessions.
Full catering is available throughout the day (cash sales only) and a refreshment tent will operate after the event.
Held on the Hart Field-Site Group's trial site - 10 kilometres north of Blyth, just off the Blyth to Brinkworth road - visitors will get a first-hand look at how the trial crops have performed so far in the 2018 growing season.
To register or for more information take a look at the Hart Field-Site Group website hartfieldsite.org.au or contact Sandy Kimber on 0427 423 154 or email admin@hartfieldsite.org.au
While early registrations are encouraged, online registrations will remain open until lunchtime on the 18th, so if you decide on the day to head along it is easy to sign up before you arrive.
Word count: 497
