As head of the Federal Government’s Accelerating Commercialisation program, Larry Lopez casts his eye over many of the nation’s most impressive growth opportunities. Here he talks to Luke Griffiths about South Australian recipients and his time in Silicon Valley.
You recently spent time in Adelaide meeting with entrepreneurs across many fields. What did you take from the visit?
There is a deep entrepreneurial spirit in the state. Unlike some regions that focus on the past, SA appears to have a very forward-looking attitude.
The local market is very strong and entrepreneurial across numerous sectors. We have recently seen excellent projects that include energy storage, mining equipment, defence, high-speed 3D metal printing and agri-tech.
This diversity will ultimately lead to some great outcomes, and is a little surprising when considering the size of the local economy in a global context.
There also seems to be a very high level of collaboration and co-operation between the various players and participants in the ecosystem.
This not only results in very constructive dialogues, but access to the different resources that early-stage projects need.
How does SA compare with other states in terms of Accelerating Commercialisation funding?
The state is a strong contributor to the program. Since it started in 2015, 32 projects totalling more than $15 million have been funded – about 13 per cent of the total value of all the grants.
I attribute this to a number of factors including the strong local ecosystem and the great Department of Industry team based in Adelaide, including the three outstanding commercialisation advisers in the market.
What are the most common issues your advisers face when guiding SA businesses? A common theme – and it is not unique to SA – is the lack of true marketing thought processes.
We often find that applicants lack an understanding of their value proposition from the perspective of each stakeholder in the value chain, and how this perspective aligns across target sectors and markets. We are looking for solutions to identified problems that customers are willing to pay for.
Along similar lines, many applicants do not demonstrate a clear understanding of the market structure and dynamics, or cannot define how they will gain access to the target market, let alone make a sale.
Additionally, we often find that applicants underestimate timing and don’t allow for inevitable delays and surprises that are part of the start-up journey.
You have to expect the unexpected and build in some “wiggle room” for when this inevitably occurs.
Many applicants know they will have to scale their work-force, but do not adequately plan or establish an effective HR plan and hiring process as they scale.
What are Accelerating Commercialisation’s standout success stories in SA? A tough question. It’s almost like asking which are your favourite children. Generally, the SA portfolio is a very high-performing book and I have very high expectations that we are going to get some real winners in the region.
While it is always dangerous to make predictions, three of our portfolio companies that seem to be doing very well right now in terms of getting traction in their target markets are Sine, Seed Terminator and Portalink.
That being said, there are number of other very exciting projects that are getting ready to launch that I don’t want to jinx by naming, but I think could be world-beaters.
You spent many years in Silicon Valley as an investor. What were some of the highlights there?
Obviously I had the chance to work with some very interesting companies and teams that ended up becoming global success stories.
That being said, I am counting on that happening with some of the companies I have had the pleasure to work with in Australia over the last few years.
The biggest highlight was working at Silicon Valley Bank during a time of incredible growth in our target market.
When I started, there were about 60 employees in four very small offices in Silicon Valley. Over the years we established offices in most of the places associated with innovation and worked with companies and investors in countries across the globe.
Our core business of financing start-ups was a huge challenge, both from operational and regulatory standpoints.
What we did was very innovative for a bank and so unique that most outsiders – including the regulators and the stock markets – thought what we were doing was very risky, and caused a lot of grief.
However, we never lost faith in ourselves.
Ironically the only time we got into real strife was with our real estate portfolio, which was a hangover from the early days of the bank, when we tried to mitigate the perceived risk in our loan portfolio by making secured real estate loans.
Aside from contributing to the growth and success of the bank, our platform allowed me to actively participate and experience the wild growth that Silicon Valley has experienced over the last 30 years.
I have met so many interesting and creative business people that have helped me develop a very clear vision of what it takes to be successful in the innovation game.
How do Australians compare with their attitude to investment risk? I really don’t see that big of a difference in terms of investment risk appetite.
The big difference is the quantity and quality of deal flow in certain other regions, which makes it easy to build the kind of track record that investors need to see.
If you look at two big but different markets – Silicon Valley and Israel – they did not happen overnight and in the case of Silicon Valley, it took a long time for it to become a global powerhouse.When I was growing up in the 1960s it was mostly agriculture and defence, which should bode well for the prospects of SA.
CREDIT: Larry Lopez
Word count: 943
