A $US35 million injection from global private equity giant KKR in handheld devices company Signostics will be used to fast-track research and development activity at its SA operations.
Signostics chairman David Keogh said the 50 per cent equity buy-in would help create a "centre for excellence in R&D and medical technology manufacturing" at its Tonsley operations. "We are ecstatic".
Signostics, founded in Adelaide in 2005, redomiciled from Australia to become a Delaware-based corporation headquartered in Washington ahead of the transaction.
It has 22 employees - 17 at Tonsley in SA, including co-founder and chief operating officer Stewart Bartlett, and five in the US, including chief executive Kevin Goodwin.
The deal was a result of fundraising activities being spearheaded by Mr Goodwin, a global ultrasound pioneer who joined Signostics earlier this year.
"This partnership means the company is now funded to continue expansion and development of current and new products here in Australia, which means more jobs for skilled workers in SA," Mr Keogh said.
He said KKR, which will have two positions on a revamped Signostics board, was backing Mr Goodwin's vision and that of the Adelaide team.
"We expect we will be able to offer more positions in the software engineering side of the business," he said.
"The number of jobs are still being worked out." The company, which is launching a new bladder scanner next year, said it would look at moving some hardware manufacturing overseas over the next few years.
It was previously using SA-based Ellex Medical Systems to assemble its products before bringing it all in-house at Tonsley last year.
Since launching its first product in 2009, Signostics has remained focused on the development of handheld ultrasound technology and enjoyed taxpayer support through commercialisation grants.
Its SignosRT ultrasound system and the SignosRT Bladder systems have been sold in Australia and overseas.
"We feel very fortunate to have gained the support of KKR as we set out to build on our work in this field over the last decade," said Mr Goodwin.KKR's health care investing team principal Justin Sabet-Peyman said the group was investing in a "visionary and accomplished team" to support them in their continued development of innovative products.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 377
