MEDICAL technology company Signostics is on the verge of launching an ultrasound machine which will revolutionise patient diagnostics across the world. The company, which established its head office in Adelaide in early 2005, will launch its machine late this month and will begin medical trials in US hospitals in June.
Chief operating officer and company founder Stewart Bartlett says the device is much cheaper and smaller than any ultrasound equipment currently on the market.
"We're targeting the general practice and primary care areas," Bartlett says. "Ultrasound has traditionally been used by radiologists, but we're taking ultrasound to segments that traditionally haven't been able to afford it."
The Signostics machine is about the size of an iPod and can easily be carried around, compared to the current laptop-sized or trolley-based systems used in hospitals and specialist medical rooms.
By selling a smaller machine at a cheaper price, more doctors will be able to afford to buy the equipment, and therefore take the pressure off overworked radiologists, he says.
"For a radiologist, using ultrasound is like counting from one to three, it's pretty basic," Bartlett says. "Radiologist should be spending their time doing more complicated things, and they're overworked. We believe with our device there will be less of that occurring."
Signostics' three founders, Neil and Stewart Bartlett and Glenn Costa, all from Perth, decided to set the company up in Adelaide after being given a $250,000 federal government Bis grant and a $125,000 BioInnovations SA grant. The company has also taken advantage of other Rann Government funded initiatives, such as leadership programs.
The encouragement to move to South Australia enabled them to employ extra staff and run the business with lower overheads and greater cost efficiencies. In three years the company has grown to 26 full-time staff.
"If we didn't have that BioInnovations grant we wouldn't have had enough money (to get started)," Bartlett says. "Because most of our business is overseas -- initially we're going to be targeting the US and then on from that Europe and Asia -- location doesn't really matter to us."
A chance to work on a revolutionary piece of medical technology has attracted other skilled staff to move to Adelaide from interstate, including the company's three directors and clinical and research manager John Brydon.
The former UK resident, who migrated to Australia in 1988, moved to Adelaide after stints in Sydney and Melbourne four years ago.
After spending time working at ResMed (sleep apnea treatments) and Cochlear (bionic ears), Brydon moved to Adelaide to work for the University of South Australia.
The electronic engineer founded an associate degree at the university aimed at training senior technicians in the defence industry, before deciding to return to the medical industry and a position at Signostics.
He now heads a research team which looks at future developments and improvements to the ultrasound machine. He co-ordinates clinical trials, and provides the liaison between the design engineers and customers.
Brydon says he was attracted to South Australia to work in the university sector and medical technology industry, needing to escape from Sydney's big city lifestyle and ever-increasing housing costs.
Knowing only one person in Adelaide, Brydon thought moving to Adelaide was "a bit of a gamble". "It is very different from the east coast cities, I think the people are quite different. I look at them as being a bit more English, European. There's a degree of subtlety of politeness that makes business go well and dealing with people go well."
Brydon recently bought a house in Ovingham, on the fringe of the dress circle suburb of North Adelaide.
"A fortnight before I moved in the owners had a barbecue and invited all the neighbours so I could meet them," he says. "It's the little things like that which make Adelaide lovely."
Ovingham is only a stone's throw away from Signostics's Thebarton research campus base, allowing Brydon to walk to work. It is a far cry from his inner-city Sydney pad and hefty mortgage.
"If I had known about Adelaide earlier I would have come here earlier, and used it as a base."
Word count: 684
