ADELAIDE medical devices company Signostics is raising just under $6 million from existing shareholders to boost marketing and sales of its handheld bladder scanners, after winning regulatory approval in the US.
The firm received clearance from the US Food and Drug Administration for the SignosRT Bladder, which will be officially launched at a major urology conference in May.
Signostics is also preparing to target European markets in March. Part of the capital raised will also go towards working capital needs and product development.
Signostics chief operating officer and co-founder Stewart Bartlett said revenues grew 200 per cent to $3.89 million in one year to the end of September. "99 per cent of this came from our SignosRT ultrasound product," he said.
The green light in the US holds promise of a further boost to revenues from the bladder scanners, which have been received very positively and have a range of applications, including in aged care, home nursing, midwifery, urology and palliative care.
The bladder scanner is approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration for sale in Australia and New Zealand.
The SignosRT Bladder uses ultrasound technology to automatically and non-invasively calculate bladder volume in patients suspected to have urinary retention. Technology improvements have made bladder scanners popular over the use of catheters, which can cause infections.
Royal District Nursing Service South Australia (RDNS SA) - an arm of WA-based Silver Chain Group - has purchased units to be used in home nursing visits, which retail for $7000 per unit.
Mr Bartlett said the product addressed the growing need for mobile medical devices that enabled better diagnosis and care at the bedside.
Established in 2005 by Stewart Bartlett, his brother Neil and Glenn Costa with the help of Federal and SA grants, Signostics launched a portable, handheld ultrasound product, Signos, in 2009.
Its second generation version, SignosRT, was launched a couple of years later. Signostics today has about 80 shareholders as an unlisted public company.Parts of the devices are contract manufactured in Adelaide by Ellex Systems, with some of the materials being manufactured interstate and overseas.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 358
