SOUTH Australian biotechnology companies received $23 million in private equity funding and Federal Government grants in the past 12 months - down by 50 per cent on the previous year, Bio Innovation SA chief executive Jurgen Michaelis said.
The State Government-funded organisation has assisted six start-up companies in the past year and has plans to expand on its Thebarton BioSA incubator, which opened in October last year.
"There are six companies in the incubator employing 75 staff - 26 new jobs in the past year," he said.
BioInnovation SA is now looking for expressions of interest to fund and build Stage 2 of the precinct project, a 9200sqm facility expected to cost $30 million and triple the size of the current incubator.
Bio Innovation SA's mission is to enable the creation of 50 new bioscience companies and 2500 jobs by 2010. Dr Michaelis said the state's BioSA precinct at Thebarton was starting to attract supplier and support companies to the area.
He also expected the imminent relocation of a biotechnology company from another state because of the precinct drawcard.
"It's important to provide an environment that others want to be part of. We've got 90 companies within the area - hi-tech companies - and we're starting to see those first service providers moving in," he said.
Dr Michaelis said the average time to create a biotechnology cluster was 10 to 15 years and there were signs of the momentum growing in SA operation after eight years.
PASSING THE TEST
Highlights for the year include:
* University of Adelaide bacterial diseases expert Professor James Paton won a $9.1 million federal grant for a five-year program to help combat pneumonia, meningitis and gastroenteritis and other infectious diseases.
* Centre for Pharmaceutical Research raised $2.5 million in capital from Terra Rossa Capital to expand its bioanalytical and clinical service provision.
* Signostics, received U.S. and Australian regulatory approval for its portable ultrasound device.
* Six start-up companies assisted by BioInnovation SA, including heart researcher Neoviva Pharma and orthopaedic device developer Surgical Research Australasia.
Credit: MEREDITH BOOTH
Word count: 353
