South Australia is home to many diverse industries. From smaller independent operations to large-scale international projects, our state is loaded with people doing world-class and, in many cases, ground-breaking work. Despite operating on the world stage, so many market-leaders still choose to call South Australia home, writes Belinda Willis
Catherine Davis is likely to be on many a mobile phone contact list owned by residents living in the Adelaide Hills towns of Callington and Kanmantoo.
Working as the Hillgrove Resources environment manager for the Kanmantoo copper mine since June 2008, she’s been committed to being accessible to the local community.
“Most inquiries or concerns about the mine generally come to me,” Ms Davis says. “And then it’s about demystifying what we are doing at the mine. In most cases we’ll encourage people to come to the mine – we’ll grab them from the gate and show them around.” It’s been this open-door approach by Hillgrove Resources that has led to a well-recognised relationship between the copper mine operator and the community surrounding its operation.
In 2016, the Hillgrove Resources and Kanmantoo and Callington Community Consultative Committee won a Premier’s excellence award. Hillgrove Resources also sponsors local events and sporting teams, and each quarter holds a public meeting alternately at the Callington or Kanmantoo town halls.
The hardworking consultative group, predominantly made up of local resident members, is also developing a regional master plan. It’s one that reaches far beyond the rehabilitation of the mine once work ends, with creative plans to celebrate the region’s history, native vegetation and prized Kanmantoo bluestone.
“This is a vision of the community, how might this land be used after mining to leave a positive legacy after it finishes being an employer and generator of wealth in the region,” Ms Davis says.
At the moment, 85 per cent of the Kanmantoo mine’s 200 staff and 60 contractors live in the local region, including nearby towns from Murray Bridge to Mt Barker. The mine is recognised internationally for its geotechnical and geochemical practices and for its broadacre approach in converting cropping and farming land into native revegetation.
Hillgrove Resources is also exploring groundbreaking plans for a pumped hydro energy storage project on site by 2021.
General manager Lachlan Wallace believes this could be the lowest capital cost per megawatt pumped hydro facility in Australia.
“It could provide a much-needed energy storage solution and network stability for SA’s electricity grid,” he says. “We are looking to build a facility that would store over 14 times the energy of the much-talked-about Tesla battery in the state’s north, for only double the cost.” Ms Davis says being on a smaller scale mining lease presents a range of complexities, all of which required better systems for monitoring and management.
“Certainly, the proximity of the local community and being in the Adelaide Hills drinking water catchment in a very dry state, makes it important to get things right.” AGRONOMIST FRANK TWIGDEN MITOLO GROUP Having worked extensively on the potato side of the business, FRANK TWIGDEN is turning his focus toward the 243ha of onions grown by South Australian produce company the Mitolo Group.
The Riverland-based agronomist is now keeping busy monitoring crop rotations, water quality, fertiliser, chemical use and harvesting of onions.
“I don’t favour a crop, but moving more into onions it’s more challenging, but at the end of the day it’s also more rewarding,” Mr Twigden says from the company’s farm at Woolpunda, just over 200km from Adelaide.
The crops are planted in a pivot shape with a cover crop like barley to protect the plants from wind, soil erosion and rain which can be devastating around harvest time.
“Pretty much every mistake can cost you a certain percentage of your crop,” he says.
Mr Twigden joined the leading potato and onion packing company, which also owns ‘ollo’ extra virgin olive oil and Mitolo Wines, three years ago, having worked in horticulture since leaving school.
He grew up in Waikerie, where Mr Twigden’s father grew rockmelons, stonefruit and citrus. The Riverland region is particularly well suited to growing potatoes and onions, he says, with the company owning other properties at Overland Corner, Pyap, Nildottie and Pinnaroo.
The Mitolo Group farming operations started in 1989 and now has some 19,020ha of land, and a facility in Virginia.
ENGINEERING ANDREW NIEMIEC AIML INSTITUTE When ANDREW NIEMIEC finished a double degree in Electrical Engineering and Physiology at Monash University in Melbourne, he heard about an innovative Adelaide company pioneering work in ultrasound diagnostics.
“I found a job in Adelaide when Signostics Ltd was starting out in 2005,” the biomedical engineer says.
“I was initially going to live here for a year or two, get some experience and move back but I realised I quite liked Adelaide – the beaches, wineries, and cycling culture are great.” Mr Niemiec is currently working with University of Adelaide-based research centre Artificial Intelligence Machine Learning Institute on Signostics’ latest ultrasound system to automatically detect bladder volumes.
The advanced technology is likely to help cut hospital stays and improve in-home medical care.
The device can reduce infections, patient discomfort and medical workloads by reducing the need for catheters to remove urine as regularly.
Mr Niemiec says his role as senior research and development engineer combines his two key interests, and means he gets to work with doctors, nurses and distributors to explore how the team can improve its product.
“The industry in SA isn’t as big as Melbourne or Sydney but there are definitely a few other companies here that do this kind of work,” he says.
“And the University of Adelaide researchers we work with are top notch in their field of imaging algorithms; we’ve also done great collaborative work with Flinders University and the University of South Australia.” SOUND AND FILM JOSH WILLIAMS SOUND RECORDIST JOSH WILLIAMS’ path to sound recording on feature films was given a kick-start by late-night DJing with hip-hop band Illiance in pubs and clubs around Adelaide.
When his first son was born 16 years ago, the wild nights were swapped for a job at Blockbuster Video where Mr Williams began learning about the world of film and TV sound.
“When my son was four years old I quit my job and bought a whole lot of recording gear not knowing anything and started voluntarily working on small, short films,” Mr Williams says.
“I kept rocking up for very little or no money and a sandwich until they stopped asking me to go away and eventually I could start talking to people about paying me.” Now the sound recordist and boom operator finds himself working on feature films like Charlie’s Country for the likes of renowned Dutch Australian director Rolf de Veer, and on the Wolf Creek series.
He loves the job that attracts a diverse range of creative people on set from make-up artists to actors like Aussie David Wenham – or allows him to spend a week travelling in Tokyo, Japan, with his son to record background sound for a movie shot in Queensland.
“My most recent project as a recordist is a film coming out called The Merger, a comedy starring Damian Callinan,” Mr Williams says.
MEDICINE & FERTILITY DR JONATHAN HALL LIFE WHISPERER Couples experiencing the emotional rollercoaster of creating human life may soon see their odds improve with the help of artificial intelligence created by Adelaide startup Life Whisperer.
Co-founders DR JONATHAN HALL and Dr Michelle Peruginiare working on getting their cloud-based image analysis system into fertility clinics to improve the selection of viable embryos for IVF implantation.
It involves clinics uploading microscope images of embryos so Life Whisperer can use proprietary algorithms based on machine learning, statistics and physics to analyse and then identify the healthiest embryos.
“Our main partner we’re working very closely with is a US-based fertility clinic chain called Ovation Fertility,” Dr Hall, a computational physics and image analysis expert, says.
The company is working on plans to win approval to use the product in the tough US health market, and Dr Hall says it then hopes to get its product into Australia and New Zealand. Dr Hall says the product, through a non-invasive process, can make the IVF process faster, less expensive and less stressful for hopeful parents.
“This brings together the work of computer scientists who have all of these great tools and biologist who have all of these problems to be solved but no tools,” Dr Hall says.
In 2016 Dr Hall entered the idea in the Australian eChallenge program, winning both the medical innovation and research commercialisation categories, and meeting mentor Dr Perugini along the way.
They have since joined forces with her husband,Dr Don Perugini, an academic, entrepreneur and internationally renowned expert in automation,analytics and the commercial application of artificial intelligence.
CREDIT: Belinda WilliS
Word count: 1467
