THE state's leading seed investor in technology start-ups, Playford Capital, will be closed down by the State Government.
Science and Information Economy Minister Jack Snelling last night said he aimed to wind up Playford by the end of 2012.
"We think that Government having equity in start-ups is not the best way that Government can assist companies," he said.
The recurrent operating cost of about $1.7 million a year could be better spent elsewhere, he said.
"Being wholly owned by the State Government makes Playford Capital less able to secure long-term private investment capital which is generally designed to support the development of privately based venture capital fund managers in Australia," he said.
The role of Playford Capital would be fulfilled by others such as the SA Life Sciences Advancement Fund and the Trans Tasman Commercialisation Fund - "both of which are privately managed with some limited State Government funding support", Mr Snelling said.
Last month, Playford celebrated the investment of $100 million in start-ups - about $20 million from Playford and $80 million from co-investors. It said it contributed about half of all formal early-stage investment and 80 per cent of ICT investment in SA.
"Our success has served as an example to private investors," chief executive Amanda Heyworth said at the time.
Playford's portfolio includes food processor Cavitus, power saving device manufacturer Embertec, medical device maker Signostics and water trading platform Waterfind.
"This decision is a blow to SA start-up businesses who looked to Playford for seed funding," Opposition information economy spokesman Martin Hamilton-Smith said.
"This cut comes on top of cessation of funding to other business investment and assistance vehicles such as Innovate SA, and major budget cuts to Bio Innovation SA."
The cuts were not a recommendation of the Sustainable Budget Commission and were not revealed in the Budget.
The move was one option from a review by Economic Development Board member Leanna Read. The Government is yet to develop a wind down plan but pledged to honour commitments with investee companies and the Federal Government.
Playford has five full time equivalent jobs.
Ms Heyworth and Playford chairman Ian Kowalick deferred comment to Mr Snelling.
Credit: BUSINESS EDITOR CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 374
