ADELAIDE medical firm Signostics has signed a "game-changer" international manufacturing agreement for its handheld ultrasound device.
It will result in the product entering the lucrative healthcare markets in Japan, the US, China and India.
Signostics announced its deal with Japanese digital products giant Konica Minolta Medical & Graphic and launched its new-generation Signos RT, which delivers ultrasound images in real time, at the Australian Academy of Technological Sciences and Engineering conference yesterday.
Under the other equipment manufacturer (OEM) agreement, Signostics will manufacture the Signos RT and deliver it to Konica Minolta Medical & Graphic Inc to be sold under Konica's brand, Sonimage P3.
Konica will promote and sell the devices using their existing supply channels in both the human and veterinary markets.
Konica has committed to a supply of 2000 units per year, which are being supplied at approximately $3000 a unit.
The "brains" of the unit, which makes up 60 per cent of its cost, is made in SA by Ellex for Signostics; the box, probe and imaging screen are supplied by a Victorian company.
The partnership with Konica Minolta will help supersell the devices into key markets and comes after 18 months of hard work, Signostics chief executive Warren Ortmann said.
"An OEM partnership of this kind will greatly assist our growth and be a real game-changer for Signostics in terms of distribution and international sales."
Signos RT is expected to attract interest from doctors, healthcare professionals and veterinarians globally.
The product has been validated at the Flinders Medical Centre and Modbury Hospital and has attracted interest from SA Health.
The UK is currently the largest buyer of the Signos RT.
Signostics received a $1.9 million Early State Commercialisation grant from Commercialisation Australia in August 2011 to help position the company to capture a larger slice of the growing personal ultrasound market, estimated to be worth $3 billion globally.
Commercialisation Australia chief executive Doron Ben-Meir told attendees at yesterday's conference it was exactly the boost needed.
"Signostics has secured a multinational calibre deal that brings manufacturing expertise to this state and establishes a reputation for SA," Mr Ben-Meir said.
Konica Minolta Medical & Graphic Inc president Atsushi Kodama said the group was excited about selling the portable and flexible point-of-care tool.
"Signostics has developed a revolutionary product which we believe will have a significant impact across our global markets."
Manufacturing, Innovation and Trade Minister Tom Kenyon said "It's a great example of what can be achieved when industry, researchers and government work together."
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 429
