A STRONG and robust social media policy is essential for business owners when managing employee use of sites such as Facebook and LinkedIn.
Intellectual Property, technology and media partner at Adelaide Commercial law firm Finlaysons, John MacPhail, says more businesses are seeking professional advice about drafting technology and IP policies.
Increased use of social media platforms, such as professional networking site LinkedIn, means small to medium enterprise owners need to consider potential legal issues that may arise from their misuse.
Mr MacPhail says a recent decision by the Fair Work Commission highlights why SMEs need to be proactive about social media policy.
In that case, a man made an unfair dismissal claim against his former employer after he was terminated for using LinkedIn to solicit clients for his own business.
The commission dismissed his claim because he was found to have breached the terms of his employment contract. It said he had acted "in clear breach of his obligation to put the interests of his employer before his own interests".
Mr MacPhail says this case shows the importance of implementing "watertight" contracts with employees and a clear social media policy.
"The kind of cases where an employer is going to have a (legal) fight with an ex-employee . . . is going to be dictated by what are the terms of the contract," he says.
"If you have got a good, watertight contract that you have entered into before the employment relationship began, you are going to be in a far better position." He says it makes sense for businesses to take steps to protect their IP. "It's going to save you a lot of grief and money down the road," he says.
"It's like a good pre-nuptial agreement - you don't think you are ever going to need it, but you will be glad when the time comes that you do." SA medical devices firm Signostics provides staff with a comprehensive technology policy that addresses social media use. Signostics quality and regulatory manager Stewart Bartlett says the policy is important to clarify boundaries for employees.
"Before a new employee starts they receive an induction pack that includes important policies," he says.
"Within two weeks of starting, the employee is trained.
"The employee's training record is filled in with the policy names and revisions, and signed by the employee and trainer." Mr Bartlett says the policy outlines prohibited activities and the terms of using a company email account.
"It also prohibits excessive personal use during working hours, including online chat and social media," he says."The policy clarifies that the company email account provided for the employee is owned by the company and all emails sent and received are company records and will be retained and archived."
Credit: ALEXANDRA ECONOMOU TECHNOLOGY
Word count: 471
