SOUTH Australian medical devices company Signostics has launched a hand-held bladder scanner, which it says is likely to cut hospital stays and improve in-home medical care.
The SignosRT Bladder uses ultrasound technology to automatically and non-invasively calculate bladder volume in patients suspected of having urinary retention.
Technology improvements have made bladder scanners popular over the use of catheters to detect urine because it can cause infections.
Royal District Nursing Service South Australia (RDNS SA) - an arm of WA-based Silver Chain Group - has purchased units to be used in home nursing visits, which retail for $7000 a unit.
"We've also delivered our first sales to overseas customers, and see a significant opportunity for the product where urinary tract infections are a signif-icant problem in hospital, the community, and long-term care facilities," said Mark Thyssen, Signostics' global sales and marketing manager.
The bladder scanner is approved by the Therapeutics Goods Administration for sale in Australia and Signostics is hoping to build on exports.
He says the product addresses the growing need for mobile medical devices that enable better bedside diagnosis and care.
Established in 2005 by Stewart Bartlett, his brother Neil and Glenn Costa with the help of federal and SA grants, Signostics first launched the world's smallest portable, hand-held ultrasound product, Signos, in 2009.
Its second generation version, SignosRT, was launched a couple of years later. Mr Bartlett says SignosRT Bladder is a completely new product with the same hardware design but new software.
The company will initially target production of about 100 units per month. Parts of the unit are contract manufactured in Adelaide by Ellex Systems, with some other components manufactured interstate and overseas.
Mr Tyssen said the product addressed a niche in local and international markets in community nursing, geriatrics, in-hospital maternity care, and long term care.
"With a rapidly ageing population, the home health- care market is expanding. "Portability and affordability are key for bladder scanner adoption. Our bladder scanner weighs just 400g and fits into the palm of your hand so it's an easy tool for doctors and nurses to carry anywhere." RDNS SA, which provides home healthcare to 25,000 clients in SA, trialled the units before buying them.RDNS SA case co-ordinator Rachel Roberts said the scanners' affordability, low annual maintenance costs, ease of use, and measurement reliability were key factors.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 401
