AN Adelaide manufacturer of medical pipettes used for in vitro fertilisation is planning to be the first in Australia to commercially produce the specialist device for export.
Thebarton-based The Pipette Company was awarded $40,000 in state government funding for developing a working prototype of a hand-held applicator and specialised packaging for denuding pipettes to be used by embryologists in IVF laboratories.
Company business manager Johnathon Matthews said the pipettes were used to strip away the cells that are attached to the outside of a human egg or embryo. "It's part of the IVF process to make it easier to inject a sperm into an egg," he said. "This project will result in the first commercial manufacture of this type of pipette in Australia, creating a new export product in the growing IVF field."
There were an estimated 1.4 million IVF cycles performed globally each year, he said, and this number was expected to continue to rise. State Industry and Trade Minister Tom Koutsantonis said the company had been supplying high-quality micro manipulation pipettes since 2000 and was one of five companies to share in $118,200 funding under the new Medical Device Commercialisation Program.
The State Government also awarded $33,200 to Thebarton-based Signostics to support clinical tests of its hand-held ultrasound system for needle guidance applications used in medical injection procedures.
Under the Medical Device Research Grants, Pasadena-based Lear Medical Devices was awarded $15,000 to provide pre-manufacturing design assessment of a new patient lift device, aiming to deliver improved patient care and reduce OH&S related injuries to healthcare workers.
Klemzig-based TEKS Australia was awarded $15,000 for its plan to engage Adelaide University to research and provide independent third party evaluation of its resistance-based exercise equipment used in physical rehabilitation. Thebarton-based Soniclean was awarded $15,000 toward third party evaluation of its new Ultrasonic Washer Disinfector, being developed for cleaning and disinfecting surgical instruments.
Credit: BELINDA WILLIS
Word count: 324
