TOYOTA's decision to cease manufacturing in Australia was a body blow to workers and the supply chain - and both require assistance in transition.
With Holden's announcement still ringing in our ears, the combined impact will be felt throughout the state. Diversification, innovation and up-skilling workers will be cri-tical to our future economy, but we also need to play up to our existing strengths. We need to capitalise on our expertise in resource development, defence, agriculture, advanced manufacturing and medical research.
Last week, I took part in two timely industry forums where we discussed these very issues - and a consensus was clear.
With our Roadmap for Unconventional Gas Project, we were the first state to create a comprehensive plan that highlighted to explorers that we were well-organised and open for business. We have five joint ventures competing to develop unconventional gas including large international companies and downstream players experienced in managing gas sales price risks.
The Roadmap provides a clear outline to the community and explorers where we want to take the petroleum industry - and we are only just beginning to scratch the surface of our state's oil and gas potential.
Our Mining Industry Participation office has just returned from hosting a supplier tour to Houston, Texas, introducing local companies to the unconventional gas market in the US. Our aim is to identify ways in which local service providers can take advantage of opportunities presented by the resources sector. We've done a similar thing in the south east where we have been working with VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland on a roadmap to drive the transformation of our forestry industry. This is a significant piece of work based on cellulose fibre to help create new, high-value timber products.
We've also been developing an ICT Roadmap for minerals and energy resources to improve productivity and explore how technology can add value in the decades to come. This Roadmap identifies approaches that can significantly decrease costs and improve productivity. And then there is the state's manufacturing strategy - Manufacturing Works. This is not a publication gathering dust; it's a catalyst for change and a blueprint for transitioning the sector.
Some recent activity has seen local manufacturers tour the Institute for Photonics and Advanced Sensing at Adelaide University, led by Professor Tanya Monro, with a number of leads on potential project ideas in emerging laser and sensor technologies.
We've also been working with industry to create an advanced manufacturing hub at Tonsley; we welcomed Basetec Services, Signostics Limited, ZEN Energy Systems and MAN Diesel and Turbo Australia to the site last week. The four companies manufacture composite pipe products, medical devices and solar and hybrid energy products and join Siemens, TAFE SA, Flinders University and ICT company Tier 5 in committing and investing in the project.
When government works in direct partnership with industry and community, the opportunities are considerable - no matter how big the challenge. For our industry Roadmaps: www.dmitre.sa.gov.auGEOFF KNIGHT IS CHIEF EXECUTIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF MANUFACTURING, INNOVATION, TRADE, RESOURCES AND ENERGY.
Credit: GEOFF KNIGHT OPINION
Word count: 521
