AMANDA Heyworth's career has taken many turns, not least her guest appearance this month at a European Commission venture capital conference in Portugal.
The chief executive of Adelaide equity investor Playford Capital will speak about her experiences running a seed capital company "outside the mainstream" of the economy.
"I was asked because most of the venture capital activity in Australia revolves around Sydney and Melbourne," Mrs Heyworth says.
"Playford Capital has become a successful model for venture capital, and is finding plenty of opportunities in the South Australian market.
"The European Union is interested in the model we have used to successfully attract more than $60 million to a region which has not traditionally attracted a lot of venture capital."
Mrs Heyworth was born in Woomera in 1964, the daughter of a Defence Science and Technology Organisation rocket scientist.
Fresh out of an accounting degree in Adelaide, she took a graduate traineeship with a large computer corporation in the U.S. in Detroit, under an international exchange
program.
She has used her accounting skills as a springboard to move on to a range of finance-sector jobs as an accountant, investment banker, economist, academic, IT entrepreneur and professional investor.
In 2004, after completing an MBA with the Australian Graduate School of Management, she became one of just a handful of women to head an early-stage investment fund in this country.
"I really did not have a career plan," Mrs Heyworth says. "It was more a case of recognising opportunities when they came up.
"I am driven by curiosity about how things work and am very motivated to help make new things happen."
"One of the things about this job is that every time we make an investment you have to get your head around how a different industry works and how the company can find its market."
This year Playford sold one of its first stakes in Adelaide satellite communications technology group DSpace when it was bought by U.S. NASDAQ-listed group EMS Technologies for a reported $6.6 million.
Playford focuses on early-stage investments in technology-based ventures. In the past year it has directly invested $1.6 million in six companies and helped raise $14 million from other investments, adding to more than $60 million co-invested in SA start-ups since 2001.
Supported by nine staff, Playford Capital's most recent investment achievements include:
HELPING ultrasonics group Cavitus raise funds from interstate investors in the food and wine sector.
INVESTING in search engine marketing group e-Channel online and finding internet industry identity Phil Alexander as chairman.
DEVELOPING business plans and strategies with Signostics as it works towards commercialising its hand-held medical device.
Mrs Heyworth's accounting background adds to one of the key roles Playford plays in getting SA technology on to the world stage - keeping a "tight eye" on finances.
"It's always a bit of a roller-coaster ride," she says.
"When you invest equity in these early-stage, high-risk companies, you need to track their runway path.
"They are spending investors' money on getting the product to market and have a certain amount of time to find sales and lift off.
"We help companies set up systems to track sales, cash and profit margins.
"Good financial reporting is important to avoid nasty surprises for founders and investors."
As well as financial management, the Playford team kicks in with marketing, recruiting and other advice.
Mrs Heyworth says the strong defence and electronics sectors in SA are supporting technology entrepreneurs and new investment propositions for Playford Capital.
"It's been very vibrant in this state for the past few years," she says.
"I think we are becoming more sophisticated, able to understand global markets and getting more experienced mentors and business coaches to encourage entrepreneurs.
"We also know the traditional manufacturing base is on the decline, so I think it is important to support young growth companies."
Mrs Heyworth says SA has a lot to offer her sons, aged five and seven.
"I think it's incredibly important to be building an economy with vibrant new companies offering job opportunities in future," she says.
"Adelaide is a great place, and I'd like to give my boys a chance to live and thrive here when they grow up."
Word count: 740
