Plunging commodity prices and an uncertain economy nationally and globally made doing business in SA tough in 2015. As our executives put their feet up for a well-earned rest after a challenging year, Cameron England looks at some of the biggest business storiesolas during the past 12 months
SHRINKING ELEPHANT THE biggest game in town got a lot smaller over the past year as the plunging oil price coupled with a massive debt load conspired to strip billions from the value of the state's largest listed company.
While Santos had a big win in bringing its Gladstone liquified natural gas plant online, that will be cold comfort for investors who have watched as the value of their shares has plummeted more than 50 per cent since May.
The company also shed more than 450 staff over the year and large cuts to capital expenditure in areas such as the Cooper Basin mean the real impact, including contractors, would be much wider.
The turmoil led to managing director David Knox being ousted in August. New boss Kevin Gallagher, who will start early in 2016, has the job of trying to first ensure the company survives, then try to rebuild value for long-suffering shareholders.
UPSIDE: Chairman Peter Coates was paid an extra $45,000 a month "extra services and special exertion fee" on top of his half million dollar a year salary while he conducted a review into the company.
MINING JOBS GO IN DOWNTURN THE steel town of Whyalla had a particularly rough year with Arrium, which mines iron ore in the hinterland and runs the blast furnace in the regional city, starting the year off by cutting 600 jobs.
The company had been on an expansion trajectory but a much-weakened iron ore price led to the closure of the Southern Iron operations near Coober Pedy, with the last ore sold in June.
Another 305 job cuts were announced by the middle of November, along with rolling cost-cutting measures.
The company is trying to sell its profitable mining consumables business but the future of the steelmaking business is looking uncertain, with that uncertainty reflected in the 5.9c share price, down from a high of 25.8c in January.
UPSIDE: The mining business is running very lean, so would benefit from an upturn in iron ore prices.
WHOLE TOWN THREATENED WORKERS at Alinta Energy's Leigh Creek coal mine had last drinks in mid-November, much sooner than expected, after Alinta announced mid-year it would be closing the mine, followed by the Northern and Playford B power plants at Port Augusta by March 31.
In all, 478 employees are set to lose their jobs, with 132 having the right to return to the public sector under a pre-privatisation deal. The closure not only put hundreds of people out of work, but has put the very existence of the town of Leigh Creek in jeopardy.
UPSIDE: Leigh Creek coal was pretty grotty stuff, so we'll all be breathing a bit easier.
OUTBACK UP FOR GRABS IF you've ever wanted to own almost 2 per cent of Australia (and had a spare $300 million) here was your chance.
Following the death of family matriarch Anne Kidman in 2013, the 58 shareholders of pastoral company S. Kidman and Co decided to put it on the market.
Founded in 1899 by Sir Sidney Kidman, the company included the nation's largest landholding, a herd of at least 155,000 cattle, 17 vast pastoral leases, a feedlot property at Sedan in SA and a cattle stud at Roma in Queensland.
There was strong interest from buyers, but the front-runners, understood to be Chinese, ran foul of the nation's national security interests.
In November Federal Treasurer Scott Morrison rejected a bid by an undisclosed foreign company for the entire Kidman operation, leading to moves to carve out Anna Creek Station in SA, which accounts for about a quarter of the landholding. This would mean land in the Woomera Prohibited Area would not be included in the sale.
UPSIDE: A final deal is still being worked on.
MARCH OF NEW TECHNOLOGIES THE former Mitsubishi site at Tonsley was earmarked by the State Government as an "innovation district" which would drive the state's transition to advanced manufacturing.
Tonsley is now home to global engineering giant Siemens, which opened a $5 million centre there in July, and has been joined by a number of other companies including Signostics, ZEN Energy Systems, MAN Diesel and Turbo Australia, Micro-X, Radical Torque Solutions, Simulation Australasia, and it is home to the Hills Innovation Centre.
Flinders University has its school of computer science based there and the $30 million state govenment drill core library is also based there.
While there is still plenty of space for new companies, and the later-stage residential elements of the development are yet to come, it appears to be well on the way to achieving the Government's vision.
Interest:There is a pool onsite where submarine engineers can test submersible vehicles.
HARD AT WORK UNDERWATER JAPAN, Germany and France were all due to put in their submissions to build Australia's Future Submarines by the end of November, in a process which should result in the return of some shipbuilding jobs to SA.
It's a been a topsy-turvy year for the $50 billion process, with Japan tipped early on as the front-runner although the odds on their Soryu class submarine being selected have lengthened as the year went on.
It's been nothing if not a lengthy and complicated process. In 2009, the Labor federal government declared in a defence white paper that Australia needed 12 submarines. And they should be designed and built "without delay".
Not much really happened, and eventually the Coalition won power in 2013 after promising to build 12 submarines in Adelaide - then backed away from that promise. Early this year a "competitive evaluation process" was announced, with three countries in the running.
A decision on which country gets the gig is likely to be made as early as March. However, any real jobs for Adelaide will still be some years off.
Analysis: Don't hold your breath waiting for jobs to flow from this program.
SOLAR POWER FOR TOMATOES More than 100 workers have been working on Sundrop Farms' 20ha, $175 million solar-powered facility 15km southeast of Port Augusta. The company will use the power from 23,000 mirrors and a 115m-high solar tower to grow tomatoes in four 100m long greenhouses. Sundrop has a 10-year exclusive contract with Coles for more than 15,000 tonnes of tomatoes annually, creating jobs for up to 175 people. UPSIDE: Will provide vital jobs following the closure of the Alinta power station and Leigh Creek mine.
CONTINUED PAGE 84
Picks of the crop for 2015 FROM PAGE 83
INVESTORS HANGING ON WHO said investing in debentures is boring? Certainly not those who put their money into Angas Securities' $220 million fund.
The Adelaide firm, headed by Andrew Luckhurst-Smith and Matthew Hower, spent large sums on Federal Court proceedings, one involving the wording of an explanatory letter to its largely mum and dad investors.
In August, investors overwhelmingly voted in favour of Angas managing the fund's "run off" - rather than a third-party - with interest to be paid at the reduced rate of 4 per cent.
However, it failed to make its first capital repayment in full on the agreed date (October 30), coming up $8.7 million short, which was ultimately passed on to investors.
Upside: Angas's directors are adamant that every investor will receive 100 per cent of their money, plus interest.
CREDITORS OUT OF POCKET THE state's building industry was rocked in June when contractors, some owed hundreds of thousands of dollars and who had gone without payment for months, downed tools on a shopping centre redevelopment in Murray Bridge and walked off the job.
Liquidators were appointed the following day, with 50 jobs at Tagara lost immediately.
It later emerged that about 750 creditors were owed $21.6 million, with a creditors' meeting in July hearing any payout would be months away, and at least one creditor not hopeful for more than 10c in the dollar.
Tagara briefly emerged from liquidation in October to be placed in voluntary administration but has since been placed back in liquidation.
UPSIDE:The crisis spurred discussion about how subcontractors can be better protected in such dealings.
CHEEKY ON THE AIRWAVES MIDDLETON Securities took top prize for the most brazen advertising campaign of 2015.
In October, the financial services firm launched a radio ad that lined up Prescott Securities - a company that Middleton's directors previously worked for - and its spate of staff losses.
It was indeed an eventful year for Prescott Securities after being acquired by the Melbourne-based Findex Group in January.
As it went about repositioning itself as the "family office", redundancies and resignations were plentiful.
This included former Prescott boss Darryl Gobbett, who in November was unveiled as the head of Baillieu Holst's move into Adelaide.Upside: Strong competition bodes well for consumers.
Credit: Cameron England
Word count: 1507
