TARGETED investment activity to attract overseas and interstate players into Tonsley will begin at the end of the year, says the strategic director of the precinct.
Megan Antcliff has been instrumental in delivering early milestones at the 61ha former auto manufacturing site, which is being redeveloped as a collaborative and high-value industry, education and residential precinct over 20 years.
"Until now, we have been pretty much a construction site, not enough of an operational environment. But by the end of the year, we have plans to start aggressively marketing the site," she said.
Ms Antcliff worked on the master plan for the $253 million investment project through her former employer Woods Bagot and then joined the state government to see it take shape.
In recent weeks, she has helped global giant Siemens set up its $5 million service centre and has won over Radical Torque to invest in a $2 million move to the site.
Another South Australian company was close to finalising its move to the precinct, she said.
"It's been fantastic to see the plans shape up and demonstrate to the world that this is a bold city; it can do interesting stuff." The Sydney-born accredited architect from France has worked on global projects, including in Malaysia and San Francisco, but now calls Adelaide home.
"I was looking to move back to Australia to a place which offered me a good job and 12 years ago, that was Adelaide.
"I had to bring love and family with me. Adelaide's a great place to live and the state seems to me to be on the cusp of greatness." Ms Antcliff said SA needed to not just be innovative at the start and lead the pack, but "follow through and own the success of some of our innovations".
She said Tonsley was one such innovation and justified the government's role in developing the precinct.
"This has to be eventually industry-led and it won't be government-run forever, but we need to be in the room long enough to build the value proposition," she said. "Eventually, the founding partners of Tonsley, like Siemens and Flinders, will operate the site." She described Tonsley as an operating environment for business that helped them grow through innovation using research, education and training.
"The residential aspect (11ha being developed by CIC Australia) is also an economic development opportunity to bring an innovation district to life." The government expects the precinct will attract close to $1 billion over the 20 years, but it's early days. "This site is partly about retaining businesses, growing them and also using Tonsley as an investment attraction - and we are close to meeting these objectives," Ms Antcliff said.
She said 825 people were working on-site and another 200 would come on-site in the next few months.
Employment projections are expected to total 6300 during the life of the project and the site will accommodate 8500 students each year. Ms Antcliff said the Tonsley model was unique, where businesses were matched to the precinct and offered help on a case management basis, including networking, research connections and state and federal support - all for no fee.
"We don't attract companies with investment subsidies and there are no tax-based or other direct incentives," she said. "We are at market in our land sales and where we add value is in how we help them grow." She said the launch of co-working site Co-HAB in May had helped companies to experience Tonsley before committing to it.
WHAT'S THERE Mitsubishi Motors Australia (includes warehouse space) Bedford Medical Clinic TAFE SA Signostics ZEN Flinders University Onshore Petroleum Centre of Excellence Hills Innovyz Siemens Hegs Pegs Drill Core Library (under construction) Radical Torque Solutions (end of next year) Retail Funk Cafe Three Little Pods Cafe Sakura Sushi Convenience Store Co-HAB18 active tenants
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 649
