A LEADING agri-business executive and an international finance and change management expert have been appointed to the state's Economic Development Board.
The appointments of T & R Pastoral chief executive Darren Thomas and SA Health and Medical Research Institute chairman Raymond Spencer will broaden the skills of the board.
Announcing the appointments, Premier Mike Rann said he was pleased to gain the services of Mr Spencer, who was born in Adelaide and studied at the University of Adelaide before forging an international career.
"He has spent the past 35 years living and working in the US, India and Europe, gaining invaluable experience in international business, management planning, technology and finance," Mr Rann said.
As well as SAHMRI, Mr Spencer holds several private sector board positions.
He chairs the financial services business unit of consultancy company Capgemini, a $3 billion firm that operates in 40 countries. The software company he founded in 1989, Kanbay International, was bought by Capgemini.
"I've done a lot of consultancy in change management and strategic planning processes," Mr Spencer said.
With the institute, Mr Spencer expects to appoint an executive director before the end of the year.
"It's going very well," he said. The institute would build on SA's strengths and attract international researchers.
"Bringing it together into one organisation is going to be very powerful," he said.
Mr Spencer also chairs Adelaide medical devices start-up Signostics where he will be a mentor and governance guide.
EDB chairman Bruce Carter said Mr Spencer would bring a great depth of international experience to the board.
"He is regularly plugged into the international markets," Mr Carter said. "He has real perspective on a global picture, on the bigger picture aspects."
Mr Carter said Mr Thomas would bring to the board a younger viewpoint as well as an understanding of the regional sector.
"He's the chief executive of one of SA's largest exporters, one of the largest employers in regional areas," he said.
"T & R is a great SA company and Darren is a young, successful CEO. We're building the state for his generation as much as anyone and it'll be great to have his input."
The appointments partly replace three members who have stepped down.
Former New Zealand prime minister Mike Moore has become ambassador to the US; Justin Milne has taken on new career challenges since resigning from Telstra in March and professional company director Helen Nugent has completed several years on the EDB.
"A strength of the EDB has been rolling over its membership," Mr Carter said.
Credit: BUSINESS EDITOR CHRISTOPHER RUSSELL
Word count: 437
