TECHNOLOGY company Hills will move its Adelaide operations into Tonsley Park in a strategic step to growing its medical devices' research and manufacturing business.
Hills will lease space in Flinders University's $120 million new building in Tonsley while it gathers momentum for its own premises in the technology-clustering precinct.
"Our objective is to build a medical technology development and manufacturing facility," Hills managing director Ted Pretty said. Hills now has two innovation centres - the Lance Hill Design Centre and the Hills D-Shop - at its Port Rd premises. Shared-services staff also work from Port Rd.
They will all move to Tonsley to be close to academic researchers and other high- technology medical device companies such as Signostics.
The Flinders building is due to open in January next year.
Hills will apply for state and federal government automotive transformation funding.
"The idea behind that is to go dollar-for-dollar on development of a med-tech facility," Mr Pretty said.
"We'll be resident in the Flinders building until such time as we can work our way through that. Then we'll look to secure our own site." Mr Pretty said a med-tech facility in Tonsley would complement the biomedical/health precinct on North Tce which includes SAHMRI, the new Royal Adelaide Hospital and universities.
Hills works with all three major SA universities.
"My longer term objective is to get some international partners to come in alongside us," Mr Pretty said.
Flinders University vice-chancellor Michael Barber said Hills' presence would facilitate interaction with students and academic staff.
"The co-location of Hills will accelerate opportunities for Flinders," he said. Biomedical Engineering professor Karen Reynolds said Hills was a good fit with the university's teaching and research capability in disabilities, allied health and aged care.
Manufacturing and Innovation Minister Susan Close welcomed Hills' move. Mr Pretty said the State Government was providing no financial incentives for the Tonsley move beyond the $2.5 million committed in May this year to establishing the two innovation centres.
Hills moved to its Port Rd office in 2011 with a 10-year lease. It will sublet the office to Anglicare, which is consol-idating its operations.
Mr Pretty said Port Rd had about 3000sq m of space - but Hills now only needed about half that since it changed focus from a holding company for a group of steel manufacturers into a technology firm.Hills will hold its annual general meeting today.
Credit: CHRISTOPHER RUSSELL
Word count: 413
