THE mind is willing and the legs are still blessed with ample speed. But champion SA sprinter Clay Watkins will call time on his celebrated career next weekend, knowing a new phase of life awaits.
The 33-year-old, who won the 2005 Bay Sheffield, has enjoyed a peerless career in pro running, having also taken out the 2015 Camden Classic, the 2013 Loxton Gift and Tasmania’s 2009 Burnie Gift.
“Thirty-three is old in athletics terms,” he said.
“I tell people at work I’m retiring and they look at me as young. “I’ve been doing it very seriously since I was 17, so it feels like a long time. “But it’s becoming increasingly difficult with work and my wife and I are looking at starting a family as well.” Watkins was a talented junior cricketer who fell into running as a means of recovering from a debilitating back injury as a teenager.
His sprinting improved exponentially, he won the Bay Sheffield as an 18-year-old and never donned the cricket whites again.
“I’m thankful I found it,” he said of athletics and pro-running. “When I did, I didn’t possess the character qualities I think I now have. They’ve come about as a result of athletics. It teaches you discipline, commitment and I guess it’s a funny thing because it’s an individual sport but camaraderie as well.
“You rely on your training partners. It’s pretty tough to come out, you’ve got no ball skills to master it’s just how conditioned you can get in order to do one lap of a track or sprint up the middle as fast as you can.
“And the people you meet are a really great collection of people who have come across my path and influenced me heavily and I’ll now take on as friends through life.” Watkins will run the 550m race at the Port Adelaide SAAL meet this afternoon, then bow out at the Nippy’s Loxton Gift next Saturday.
IN A DIFFERENT LEAGUE THE first domino has fallen in what may be a significant revamp of footy on the Eyre Peninsula after a merger proposal between Wudinna United and Central Eyre football clubs was as good as confirmed this week. The clubs will unite under a new committee on March 1. The clubs have competed in the Mid West League but the merged club is understood to be heading to the Eastern Eyre League, with an application to be formally heard on March 7.
It will leave the Mid West League with just four clubs in 2021 and ongoing residual pressure to be absorbed into other competitions.
The geographical size of the Eyre Peninsula has traditionally meant it has required five leagues to cover its entirety but the SA Community Football League has been working with the region for almost two years on a long-term sustainability program.
MAGIC MILESTONE DIONNE Biddell underlined her status as a legend of South Australian softball when she played her 800th club game for the Sturt Falcons yesterday.
Biddell has been one of Sturt’s finest servants and has in part achieved such an incredible milestone by routinely offering to suit up for multiple games a week whenever the Falcons’ playing stocks are a little thin.
She broke the club’s games record in 2019 and joins Walkerville’s Karyn Dale in the 800 games club.
Biddell, above, is easy to spot on the diamond. Renowned for her superstitions, she always plays with her socks down around her ankles.
TOP SCORE THE East Torrens Cricket Club recognised club scorer Geoff Sando on officiating in his 250th Premier first grade match last round.
Sando is renowned as one of SACA Premier Cricket’s sharpest experts, having penned Grass Roots – 100 Years of Adelaide District Cricket, more than 20 years ago.
The Reds are also aiming to beef up their active past player numbers with a gathering during the Quinn Cup clash against West Torrens at Campbelltown on March 13.
Contact Greg Size on 0419 185767.
CELEBRATE IN STYLE LOXTON Amateur Basketball Association’s 70-year anniversary is such a significant event, organisers have spread celebrations over two nights.
On Friday, March 26 the Association will host an exhibition match at Loxton’s new two-court facility. Then the following night a celebratory dinner has been booked in.
For past players and supporters of Riverland basketball, more details can be found by emailing laba70anniversary@gmail.com
GREAT HONOURED THE Adelaide Angels are in heaven.
The Angels’ home base at Weigall Oval in Plympton has undergone an incredible facelift, which was formally opened last week.
The club has honoured many of its greatest names around the new facility, with the main playing diamond named after Norman ‘Chalky’ White.
A legend of Adelaide and SA baseball, he represented the state in 10 consecutive Claxton Shield series between 1947 and 1956 and was selected for Australia in 1952 and 1953.
Incredibly, White was offered a contract with Boston Redsox in the mid-1950s but declined the chance as he was married with two children and had just bought a new home.
GOLDEN AGE FLINDERS Park Cricket Club welcomed a debutant with a difference last weekend. Serge Minervini has been a scorer and volunteer for the Reds for about 30 years but had never actually played a game. Until last weekend.
With Flinders Park a little stretched for numbers, Minervini pulled on the whites for the first time.
With son Vince a team-mate in the Reds’ B3 team facing Rostrevor, Minervini batted at No. 11 and was left stranded on 0 not out when the final wicket fell.
For the record, Serge is 72.
STAR ALLROUNDER BETTER known as a Port Adelaide AFL player then Sturt SANFL premiership star, Sam Colquhoun can also wield the willow.
Colquhoun was part of the Barossa and Light team for the SA senior men’s country cricket carnival this week and was even selected in the Team of the Year.
Colquhoun knocked up 149 runs in four matches at an average just under 50 to lead Barossa and Light to a grand final triumph over Yorke Peninsula.
COUNTRY CROWS IT will come as no surprise to learn many elite South Australian schools put a lot of money and resources into developing their football-playing students as potential recruits to the big league.
But it might come as a surprise to learn that, as far as AFLW is concerned, the Adelaide Crows’ most productive school for young talent is Minlaton District School on Yorke Peninsula. Minlaton has an enrol-ment of roughly 260 students but four old scholars are now on the Crows’ list. Sisters Rachelle Martin and Hannah Button, pictured, along with Chelsea Biddell and Jess Sedunary, all hail from Yorke Peninsula and attended Minlation.
CREDIT: BEN HOOK
Word count: 1115
