THE wheels of progress are turning faster at South Australia's Tonsley precinct with the launch of Siemens' $5 million national service centre today - and champion cyclist Cadel Evans is along for the ride.
The German multinational company, which committed to the investment in 2012, says the facility is a vote of confidence in the state as it transitions to a new manufacturing future.
The opening of the centre on the former Mitsubishi and Chrysler plant site is being marked with a muscle car leading a 60-strong cycling peloton including Siemens Ambassador and Tour de France winner Cadel Evans.
The centre will maintain and research equipment for the resources and energy projects around the country, including Siemens' Snowtown wind farm - bringing SA work that would previously have been done overseas.
"A long-term viable manufacturing and technology sector matters to South Australia and also matters to Siemens," said chief executive Jeff Connolly, who is in Adelaide today for the launch.
"With this facility in Tonsley we are in a unique position to partner with the state on a diverse range of critical industries and projects." Designed using a lean manufacturing methodology, the centre is flexible in terms of production set-up and delivery and has a faster turnaround time.
"The facility will be able to overhaul larger equipment for the oil and gas industries that previously would have been sent offshore," said Mr Connolly.
"We will now be much closer to our customers and can provide greater responsiveness for critical local industries." The opening of the service centre coincides with the completion of the $10 billion acquisition by Siemens of Dresser-Rand, boosting workflow at Tonsley.
Siemens' Lonsdale facility will be closed as a result, with 25 employees to be based at Tonsley.
It joins ZEN Energy Systems, Innovyz, Signostics, Basetec Services and MAN Diesel and Turbo at the precinct expected to build a new collaborative economic future for the state.
Yesterday, Radical Torque announced it would move into the precinct before the end of next year.
Treasurer Tom Koutsantonis said the investment in Tonsley by global technology giant Siemens demonstrated the growing confidence in the future for SA.
"Tonsley offers great potential for innovation and industry collaboration, bringing together complementary businesses with leading academic institutions," he said.
"It represents a new future, with a net economic benefit to the state of $492 million."I put a call out last year for companies to be bold and take South Australia into a high-technology, digital age, and Siemens has answered that call, with Tonsley providing a platform for their efforts."
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 440
