TONSLEY should be seen as a 61ha “playground” for industry to test and trial innovation in a real setting by involving the community, says precinct director Philipp Dautel.
Home to more than 70 businesses, including start-ups, and now attracting about 1000 workers and students, the site is being developed as a collaborative working and living space for students, researchers and businesses.
German optical and optoelectronics firm Zeiss will move from Lonsdale to Tonsley in April next year, taking up the largest spot – about 4000sq m – under what’s known as the Main Assembly Building.
Siemens, Signostics, Micro-X, Flinders University, TAFE SA, Zen Energy Systems, Simulation Australasia, Radical Torque Solutions and the State Drill Core Reference Library are on site.
Retail food outlets and cafes are also on site – but there is more room to grow.
The growth has followed a $253 million investment commitment by the State Government to redevelop the automotive manufacturing site formerly used by Chrysler and Mitsubishi.
The vision to transform the whole area, which was only officially named in February, will be complete in 2027.
The State Government’s target is to transform the site into 110,000sq m of commercial land and 130,000sq m of high-value manufacturing activity.
“We have the critical mass now, but I think it’s time to get more bold about this project,” Mr Dautel said. “We just don’t want to bring the right businesses into the precinct; we need to create the future of transport, of living and of working – a model really for other states and regions to follow and learn from.” The site already has gigabit internet connectivity as a foundation for businesses to take advantage of a digital economy.
There is plenty of room to grow though, with the empty Western Plant building, the disused Boiler House and other areas within the Main Assembly Building (MAB), which are all being marked by Renewal SA.
About 40 per cent of the tenancies under the MAB are leased, with formal negotiations underway for another 20 per cent.
It is understood some companies that are already a part of Tonsley and some adjacent businesses have bought more land to expand.
Two global companies are currently in discussions to move in.
“Housing is undoubtedly the missing piece of the vision we have for Tonsley,” Mr Dautel said.
The Peet Group, which includes CIC Australia, has won the tender to build medium- to-high-density development within the precinct, delivering more than 850 homes for about 1200 residents over seven years.
It is expected to soft launch the project later this year and start development work in 2018.
“Residential spaces within the precinct will really make it more than a nine-to-five precinct and hospitality offerings like a micro-brewery or pub, more cafes, will really add more vibrancy.” Tonsley, described by the Australian Industrial Transformation Institute director Dr John Spoehr as an “institutional building block” for the state, is expected to attract more than $1 billion in private investment and create jobsand businesses of the future.
CREDIT: Words Valerina Changarathil
Word count: 506
