The need for flexibility from the boss will ramp up in 2013-14, Cara Jenkin reports
WORKERS are prizing flexibility over job security and looking to work at places that allow them to better juggle their work and social lives.
Research reveals workers are less concerned than in previous years about where their next pay cheque will come from, despite job losses, business closures and tight company purse-strings caused by a sluggish economy.
Increasingly they are being made aware that it is a jobseekers' market as only 5.5 per cent of the labour force is unemployed and good employees will always be in work.
They also understand many employers may not be in a position to reward them financially, so they seek bosses willing to go the extra mile on flexible work arrangements.
Recruitment firm Randstad says workers are prioritising strong work/life balance this year. Its latest Randstad Award research, which outlines what workers find most attractive in an employer, reveals just 17 per cent of workers highlight long-term job security, a decline from 26 per cent from the same survey a year ago.
Eleven per cent of workers claim good work/life balance is more attractive three times more than in 2012.
The top measure of attractiveness is still competitive salaries and benefits, favoured by 20 per cent of workers.
Client solutions director Mike Roddy says more business leaders need to consider what workers want and that it may not be about money.
"We've seen a noticeable shift in priorities toward competitive salaries and a strong work/life balance," he says.
"While some organisations may not be in a position to increase salaries immediately, it's important to remember employees can be rewarded in many ways and will accept a range of different benefits if they cannot be compensated financially. For example, flexible working arrangements can be used to barter.
"It's important to remember that employees have worked hard over the past few years, working longer hours, with smaller pay packets and tighter deadlines. Now the market is picking itself back up, people are demanding to be repaid for their faith."
Recruitment firm Robert Half says flexible work arrangements are among the most highly prized elements of a work environment for employees and one of seven key strategies employers should use to retain staff.
Workplace provider Regus reports almost a third of working parents in Australia (32 per cent) get up early or go to bed later to manage personal and work commitments.
So being offered more flexible work arrangements would help them better juggle the balance, be better rested and work more effectively.
Fifteen per cent of workers also missed their child's school play or birthday party because they were stuck at work.
Regus Australia country head Jacqueline Lehmann says workers report that a shorter commute and greater flexibility of work location would give them more time to spend with their families and extra time to attend to work or personal tasks.
"There really is no need for people to sacrifice family commitments," she says.
"By helping workers take control of their daily schedules, businesses can promote a healthy work/life balance and boost employee productivity. "Thanks to technology, such as cloud computing and video-conferencing, work is something you do, not somewhere you go.
"With sleep disorders costing the country more than $5 billion a year and the average Australian saying they need an extra 58 minutes sleep a night to stay mentally and emotionally engaged each day, it is evident that lack of sleep is a serious workplace issue for both workers and their employers."
Diversity Council Australia research last year found that having the chance to manage work and family life was a top-five work issue for men.
Law firm Finlaysons believes men are under growing pressure to share caring responsibilities in dual-income families.
Senior associate Fiona Tillmann says under the Fair Work Act employees can ask their boss for more flexible working arrangements if they are responsible for caring for children under school age. Other workers who do not want to reduce their hours but, for example, want to be able to coach their child's sport team one afternoon a week, can ask for an Individual Flexibility Agreement (IFA).
She says changing working conditions have to be worked out case by case and the employer is not automatically obliged to agree to all requests if reasonable business operational needs can't be met.
Hessel Group founder and director Tanya Cole says supporting people is central to its business philosophy so offering workplace flexibility puts that belief into practice.
"For us, it was the logical step given our company ethos. But more than that, I believe it has worked for all concerned," she says. "We care for our people and will always try to create a happier and more dedicated workforce, one that's able to achieve the desired work and family balance and be free from damaging guilt."
HOW TO GAIN FLEXIBILITY
1 See if your employer has a flexible workplace policy, then try to find out if anyone else is working part time, from home or on reduced hours.
2 Have an informal discussion with your manager about possible changes to your working hours to see if they can work for both of you.
3 Think about who will look after the children if you work from home and the suitability of your home office.
4 Put your request for flexible arrangements in writing, setting out all the reasons you need the changes. Your employer has 21 days to respond in writing to your request.
5 Consider discussing an Individual Flexibility Agreement (IFA) that might enable you to make small changes eg. starting earlier or finishing later to accommodate regular family or personal commitments.
Source: Finlaysons
WHAT THE BOSS THINKS
>>83 per cent of employers believe being flexible better retains staff.
>>74 per cent of employers believe employee morale increases because of flexible arrangements.
>>70 per cent of employers believe employee engagement improves.
>>64 per cent of employers feel absenteeism is reduced when flexible working arrangements are in place.
Source: Rubicor
50 per cent of organisations have a formal flexible work practice policy
Fewer (29 per cent) full-time staff have an agreement to work flexible hours than part-timers (34 per cent)
40 per cent of workers have some say in their start and finish times
Flexible working arrangements include working fewer hours or changing start or finish times; working split shifts or job sharing; or working from another location.
Fair Work Commission
FLEXIBILITY PROVIDES QUALITY FAMILY TIME
STEWART Bartlett can work overseas and long hours in his role as quality and regulatory manager at medical device company Signostics.
So he takes time out every Thursday morning to read with his daughter, Rosie, during her Year 2 lesson at Walford Anglican School for Girls.
It gives him regular bonding time with his daughter and helps her with her learning.
"Our workplace is a flexible workplace. We are a relatively small company and we deal internationally so it's not uncommon for me to go overseas travelling or be away or work late and nights because of the time zones," he says.
"There's never a question of `you're 30 minutes late, you have to work 30 minutes later' because the demands of the job are quite high.
"It's give and take the expectation goes both ways."
Head of Junior School Rainer Mayer says it is encouraging to see the number of dads who are rearranging work and commitments to take their daughters to school and spend quality time with them in class.
"Once a conspicuous absence, the number of dads coming into the classrooms has risen in recent times and the trend is to be welcomed," he says. "It is quite common to walk into a junior primary class in the morning and see a significant number of adults helping a student find a reader and listening to them."
School principal Rebecca Clarke says the teachers are as keen as the students to have parents involved in their child's learning.
CARING BOSS CUTS THE COMMUTE
AN EMPLOYER with a flexible attitude helped Kathrine Cruickshank keep a job she loves at Hessel Group.
Cruickshank (pictured on the cover with her sons), a marketing co-ordinator, was wondering how she would cope with a longer commute when the company moved headquarters from Marden to Fullarton, adding more than 30 minutes to a one-way trip.
At the time she was working three days a week and needed to be readily available to care for her sons, Aiden, now 9, and Lachlan, now 6.
It was her employer who came to her to suggest flexible working arrangements, rather than the other way around.
Cruickshank says she was "completely floored" by the support to help her juggle her work and family commitments.
"(My boss) says she realises the distance (between home and work) is quite great and she doesn't see why I can't work from home," she says.
"I had friends who said `why don't you get something closer' but I thought `you've got to be kidding, it's great'." She has expanded her hours in the past two years since beginning to work from home.
She now is in the office two days and working at home for two days.
She was provided a laptop, which is equipped with remote server access and the software programs she needs.
MORE JOBS
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION ABOUT THE ADVERTISER AND CAREERONE'S WE'RE FOR JOBS IN SA CAMPAIGN, SEE CAREER CHANGE
Credit: Cara Jenkin
Word count: 1591
