The sector could eventually replace the automotive industry
WHEN Anne Trimmer reads the steady flow of news headlines lamenting the slow death of Australian manufacturing, she sees an opportunity rather than a problem.
While traditional manufacturing, such as automotive, clothing and textiles, has been in decline since the 1960s, there is a sector within the industry that is doing quite well.
And, according to Trimmer, it has the ability to have a long-term impact on the country's economic growth.
The former commercial lawyer is the chief executive of the Medical Technology Association of Australia, a group representing manufacturers and suppliers of critical and life-saving devices, machines, implants and other widgets to the healthcare industry.
With a combined revenue of $8 billion -- or $9.7bn if dental products are taken into account -- the industry is not dissimilar in size to the automotive manufacturing industry, which generated $11bn in sales last financial year, or the wine industry, with $7bn in annual revenue.
It comprises more than 500 companies, ranging from global successes such as Cochlear and ResMed to fledgling operations that have yet to break even, and employs more than 17,500 people.
But despite this, the medical technology industry in Australia has not benefited from the same degree of government attention.
"We think that this is an industry that can grow -- not through cash hands-outs -- but through the creation of policies," Trimmer says.
"A lot of the fundamentals are already there. Australia has a really good research base, a really good public health system and public hospitals that can be used for clinical trials. And we have an existing capability in manufacturing and a sound financial system."
The MTAA is calling on the federal government to shift its focus to potential growth sectors, such as medical technologies, and devise a cohesive national strategy to help the industry to develop to its potential and prevent further manufacturing jobs heading offshore.
In a white paper released earlier this year, the association argued that national leadership was critical to fostering growth in a sector that could contribute not only to the management of Australia's increasing health needs but to the future employment of a skilled manufacturing workforce at a time when other industries were winding back.
Trimmer believes the right policies would effectively create an "ecosystem" for the industry, enabling better collaboration between the research sector, corporations, the investment community and governments in a bid to support product development.
She points to the Australian Securities Exchange-listed Cochlear as an example of a local company started within a university research department that had benefited from government focus and public investment in hearing health.
The now multinational sold more than 23,000 of its cochlear implants last year, bringing in $779 million in revenue. Trimmer says urgent action is required to lift the adoption rates of innovative Australian products in the health system.
Currently, Australia suffers from a net deficit in trade in medical technology -- importing significantly more than it exports.
"There's currently no commitment by the health system to use these products, some of which are nurtured and developed in our own health institutes," she says.
"There's a complete absence of a commitment to Australian-developed products . . . it's really a very big challenge for Australian companies with innovative products to get uptake in our health system."
Then there's the regulatory challenges facing Australian-based companies seeking to have products listed here through the Therapeutic Goods Administration. A long and costly process, it is often quicker and easier for an Australian firm to seek registration in the EU, manufacture their products overseas and then import back into Australia with minimal oversight by the TGA.
A review of the system is currently underway, with the MTAA pushing for the introduction of TGA-approved third-party assessment bodies to help oversee the regulatory process.
Another area of focus, is Asia, which, because of its proximity, is a big market opportunity for Australian businesses.
An emerging middle class now demands quality healthcare, creating opportunities for companies to seek out arrangements to export, either directly or through locally based distributors.
But the potential is not just limited to developers of high-end or niche products. Many Asian countries continue to seek affordable healthcare solutions that could be used in lower-resourced areas.
The Adelaide-based Signostics, which created a portable, hand-held ultrasound device sold in Australia and the US, is in the process of expanding into India and Southeast Asia, where the device could be used by doctors in remote locations without access to state-of-the-art hospitals.
Back in Australia, the MTAA has been promoting the industry as a potential solution for the job losses sparked by the recent shut down of some automotive supply companies.
Trimmer says many of the core skills in the automotive industry complement those used in the manufacture of medical technologies. She highlights Detroit where many car part makers turned their skills to medical devices, after the global financial crisis crimped their orders from the big car makers.
While she doubts her industry could fill the void left by the automotive sector in the short-term, she sees opportunities for retraining and redeployment.
"What a vibrant medtech manufacturing sector can provide, however, is employment for the skilled workers in the auto industry, particularly in component manufacturing, who can continue to use those skills to manufacture products . . . that provide good medical outcomes for Australians and for export," she says.
"In the longer term it is possible that the industry could take the place of automotive manufacturing, but with a much more diverse product range."
When Trimmer gave up her legal career -- which included a stint as president of the Law Council of Australia -- to join the association in 2006, she set an objective to lift the profile of the industry, bringing it to the attention of policymakers.
And it seems that progress is starting to be made, evidenced by the recent report of Julia Gillard's Manufacturing Taskforce, which recommended the creation of innovation hubs and procurement initiatives for small-to-medium manufacturers among a raft of ideas to promote innovative manufacturing.
While the NSW government has also recognised "innovative manufacturing" as a potential growth sector.
"I think sometimes you need government to draw breathe and look at what's already available here in Australia," Trimmer says.
"Other economies are building and investing in this space and to date Australia hasn't really grasped hold of the potential of the medical technology industry.
"Australia is a smart country but we're not very smart at making the best of what we have."
Australia's medical technology industry
* More that 500 medical technology companies
* Employs more than 17,500 people
* Is responsible for more than 35,000 medical devices listed on the Australian Register of Therapeutic Goods
* Largely located in NSW (55%), followed by VIC (21%) and Queensland (11%)
* Total annual revenue of about $8 billion
* Imports products to the value of $3.3 billion and exports products to the value of $1.2 billion
* Spent $388 million on research & development in 2008-09
Source: MTAA
Credit: REBECCA URBAN, INNOVATION
Word count: 1181
