MEDIA RELEASE SIGNOSTICS LTD Media release distributed by AAP Medianet.
Signostics Raises $5.5 Million to Advance Handheld Ultrasound Device
Signostics Ltd, an Australian medical device company, has successfully closed a $5.5 million capital raising to help commercialise its new palm-sized ultrasound product.
The `Signos' is the smallest and most affordable handheld ultrasound device in the world and has been designed by Signostics for convenient point-of-care use by medical practitioners globally.
The fully subscribed capital raising was underwritten by South Australian stockbroker Baker Young.
Signostics Chief Operating Officer Stewart Bartlett said the funds raised will provide extra working capital to assist the company to grow into key target segments.
"The additional capital will help us further develop our products and enable the company to build its brand and distribution channels in Australia and internationally," said Mr Bartlett.
"This is an exciting milestone for the Signos device, which moves beyond the stethoscope and allows clinicians to see where they could only hear or touch previously.
"What makes the Signos so appealing to general practice, primary care and emergency medicine physicians is that it's a cost-effective solution enabling them to provide a higher level of service to their patients.
"For example, the product can be used to find free fluid at the point-of-care, enabling physicians to take immediate action, resulting in improved patient care and health system efficiencies."
Baker Young joint Managing Director Alan Young AM said investor response to the Signostics capital raising was exceptional.
"Many emerging companies in Australia have found it extremely difficult to raise investment capital, particularly in light of the recent global financial crisis, so this is an outstanding result for Signostics," said Mr Young.
"Given the product's extraordinary capabilities and global potential, we're not surprised that investors have rushed to support the company."
The company has now raised more than $21 million from venture capital firms, government grants and private investors including doctors and radiologists to fund the development and commercialisation of the Signos.
"In an environment where health spending is constantly being re-evaluated, we believe there are tremendous opportunities for more cost-effective medical devices that improve patient outcomes, including ultrasound technology," said Mr Bartlett.
"The worldwide personal ultrasound market is estimated to be worth around US$3 billion and we're confident the Signos can capture a significant slice of that market."
Signostics was established in Adelaide in 2005 with a vision to be the world leader in fast and affordable point-of-care medical devices. After opening its sales and marketing office in Palo Alto, California, the company launched its first product into the veterinarian market last year before gaining regulatory approvals to enter the human medical device market in Australia, the United States and Europe.
For more information visit www.signosticsmedical.com
FURTHER INFORMATION: Stewart Bartlett, Signostics Chief Operating Officer, on 08 8152 9400 or 0403 951 272
ISSUED BY HUGHES PUBLIC RELATIONS: Kieran Hall on 0422 147 151 or kieran@hughespr.com.au
SOURCE: Signostics Ltd
NNNN
25-03 1019
Word count: 488
