It was the ideal nudge to take my Viking bride up the freeway to the Adelaide Hills then repeatedly say to each other: “This is great, we must do this more often, it’s so easy,” et cetera.
The turn off at Verdun saw us cruising along the Onkaparinga Scenic Drive past signs for things like Hans Heysen’s studio/home to our base at Birdwood with plenty of stops on the way.
Micham Cottage, picked at random off Airbnb, turned out to be a clean, comfortable and spacious retreat, with some beautiful wood furniture pieces and plenty of light thanks to skylights as well as windows.
The self-contained apartment, attached to the owners’ house but completely private, has one large bedroom with queen bed and open-plan kitchenette and dining area flowing to a lounge room.
A gentle ramp entry, no trip-hazard rugs on the hard floors and rails in the bathroom makes it friendly for guests who may be frail or in a wheelchair.
The large bathroom has a washing machine as well as roomy shower but no bath. There’s no backyard, but the front garden has multiple seats and tables.
Breakfast provisions rounded out a cosy getaway in a fascinating part of the world.
We had headed to the Hills to explore and there was plenty to see, including areas around Woodside and Lobethal where bushfire flames had clearly licked at the towns’ edges.
In some places burnt sheds, melted fences and scorched gardens surround houses which survived, showing maybe fickle wind, maybe homeowners’ efforts, but probably the magnificent work of the Country Fire Service.
You can fit a lot into a two-day trip. Wineries such as Bird in Hand and Artwine near Woodside both lost vines but are firmly open for business with tastings and lunches with views.
There are loads more wineries which warmly welcome visitors. Just google “Adelaide Hills wineries” for a list of 60 or so cellar doors, maps, opening hours and so on.
Prefer beer? Breweries such as Left Barrel Brewing at Balhannah and the Lobethal Bierhaus – where a paddle of eight tasty beers is $15 – showcase local brewing talent.
The Bierhaus beer garden doubles as a putting green. Again, a google search will show more Hills craft beef places such as the Prancing Pony at Totness, Uraidla Brewery, Gulf Brewery at Hahndorf and Silver Bark Brewery at Mount Barker, depending on your time and inclination.
There are also distilleries such as the Chesterfield Whisky Firm at Woodside offering whisky cocktails – look out and see blackened land where the bushfires were literally at the back door.
There are great cafes, bakeries and country pubs in each town for meals and snacks such as Lovells Bakery at Woodside, a town which was still cheerfully adorned in TDU paraphernalia such as teddy bears on bikes when we visited.
The upbeat Blumberg Hotel in Birdwood (the town used to be called Blumberg) for dinner was a genuine find – superb rump steak, excellent chips and a great mixed salad for me, and Viking bride gave the chicken schnitty a double thumbs up.
While the Hills are famous for wineries there is plenty for families. Gumeracha’s famous Big Rocking Horse with its toy factory, animal sanctuary and cafe is a rite of passage for children, delectable Melba’s Chocolates and neighbouring Woodside Cheese Wrights with its artisan cheeses cannot be missed, and the National Motor Museum at Birdwood is fascinating.
#BookThemOut and have a chat.
Reviews are unannounced and paid for by SAWeekend.
This review was first published in February 2020 and had details updated in March 2021.
53B Shannon St Birdwood
airbnb.com.au
LOCATION Main street of Birdwood in the Adelaide Hills, about 45km northeast of Adelaide CBD
ACCOMMODATION One-bedroom self-contained cottage, sleeps three with sofa bed.
FACILITIES Queen bed, sofa bed, open-plan kitchenette and dining area flowing into a lounge room, breakfast provisions, pod coffee machine, Wi-Fi, flat-screen TV, airconditioner, washing machine.
PRICE $150 plus Airbnb service fee of $21.
Word count: 638
