A POPULAR South Australian business grants program that has helped more than 50 technology start-ups – including mini satellites maker Myriota and IVF artificial intelligence company Life Whisperer – has been put on hold.
The $10 million SA Early Commercialisation Fund was set up in 2016 to help new SA technology companies to take their products to market, especially on an international scale.
The grants program has attracted more than 300 applications, with 52 companies receiving more than $7.5 million after being assessed by an independent panel, which included SAGE Automation’s founder Andrew Downs.
SA government agency TechInSA, headed up by chief executive Joe Thorp, was managing the applications and funds to the program.
In a message on its website, TechInSA said the state government “is currently reviewing all industry assistance programs, including grants”.
“Until the review is completed no new applications for funding under programs will be assessed. Any applications currently submitted and undergoing assessment will be placed on hold, subject to the outcome of the review,” the statement said.
Mr Thorp declined to comment further, deferring questions to the minister. The state government review is part of its commitment to “reducing the costs of doing business so that South Australian businesses are nationally and internationally competitive”.
Industry Minister David Pisoni has been contacted for further comment. Around 20 per cent of the projects that TechInSA has funded through the SA Early Commercialisation Fund are developing products and services for the agriculture, food, wine and fishing industries.
Space-focused Myriota won $300,000 in funding from the program last year to build its internet of things (IoT)-enabled transceiver for use by businesses in remote areas or those that transport goods over long distances.
The program, due to run until 2020, provided staged grants of up to $500,000 per project.
Myriota co-founder and chief executive Alex Grant said the SAECF grant gave the company “a massive head-start to grow at a very critical point in our journey”.
“The support from the SAECF helped us develop our product to enter market much faster, and to get the company to the point to secure $20 million of external private investment, including significant overseas capital – which in turn is helping us create to more high-quality jobs here in Adelaide.” Myriota expects to create 50 high tech jobs over the next five years in SA. “Bridging the gap between early stage idea, and securing scale-up investment is very important for start-ups in South Australia,” he said.
“Commercialisation of deep tech is hard, and it is vital to have a supportive environment for start-ups to succeed. We are excited to see what new initiatives the new state government will launch,” Mr Grant said.
The SAECF program was part of an innovation package installed by the former state government, which also included the $50 million venture capital fund.
In March, Myriota was named the first recipient of money from the VC fund, but the amount was not disclosed.
A government spokesperson said the VC fund, currently being managed by Blue Sky, is “continuing to operate”.
TOP RECIPIENTS ■ Bzpay Holdings — $300,000.
■ Ferronova — $500,000.
■ GPN Vaccines — $300,000.
■ Inovor Technologies — $500,000.
■ Jackson Care Technologies — $324,000.
■ Life Whisperer Diagnostics — $250,000.
■ Myriota — $300,000.
■ Safe Ag Systems – $498,000.
■ Sine Group – $350,000.
■ Somark — $500,000.■ Turbine Aeronautics Holdings — $300,000.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 569
