An international company that develops identification technology for mice used in medical research will create 48 jobs over the next three years when it sets up a base in Adelaide.
The jobs announcement came on the same day new figures showed South Australia had the worst unemployment rate in the nation.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics showed the unemployment rate fell to 6.7 per cent last month, from 6.8 per cent in August, in seasonally-adjusted terms.
Somark Innovations - which creates systems and technology to analyse the animal's data for pre-clinical research - has announced it is building its laboratory and office at the old Mitsubishi site in Tonsley, Adelaide's south, next month.
Chief executive Adrian Knight said the company was working towards creating a system that used visual identification, micro radio-frequency identification chips, data readers and software to analyse the complete data of pre-clinical trials.
"There's real concern about the accuracy of the data coming from pre-clinical research," Mr Knight said.
"So having a system that collects the data accurately every time, in a way that's better for the welfare of the animals, is going to be crucial."
While the company will still have a presence in London, Boston, San Diego and Sydney, Mr Knight said creating a hub in Adelaide made perfect business sense.
"We have a collaboration with SAHMRI [South Australian Health and Medical Research Institute] which is very exciting and one of the biggest reasons we wanted to set up here in Adelaide," he said.
"The amount of investment the [State] Government's put into that whole environment with SAHMRI and the new hospital … that shows how serious they are about developing our types of technology."
Move to niche high-paying jobs
Health Minister Jack Snelling said the lab and office would not replace the thousands of jobs lost through car making but could help create a new manufacturing scene in South Australia.
"Rather than one big company, you employ hundreds if not thousands of people … smaller companies like Somark and Micro-X and Hydrics [are] employing - individually - small numbers of people but collectively, thousands of people," he said.
"Yes, they're more niche but they also provide higher-paying jobs and they provide greater wealth - this is the direction that out economy's got to move."
He said the "Somark Ecosystem" being developed in Adelaide would help pharmaceutical and biotech companies, academics and research organisations around the world.
Word count: 403
