SOUTH Australian investors have put strong backing behind a new $10 million-plus fund launched by Access Capital Ventures, which has a pipeline of about 450 pre-vetted companies in its sights.
Fifteen South Australian-based investors have contributed more than $3 million to the fund, with the Southern Angels group putting in almost $2 million.
Prominent SA businessman and Angels member Geoff Rohrsheim is involved, and says it is great that a new fund with a local presence has been launched.
“It’s vital for our economy’s future that we support and encourage early stage technology businesses; they are our next generation of employers,’’ Mr Rohrsheim said.
“I’m very happy to be an ­investor in Access Capital ­Ventures.” Adelaide-based Doug Adamson is a partner with Access, along with Allan Aaron, Larry Lopez and Steve Davis.
Mr Adamson’s experience includes six years with SA-based venture capital fund Playford Capital and for nine years he was a commer­cialisation adviser to the ­federal ­government’s Accelerating Commercialisation and ­Commercialisation Australia ­programs.
Mr Adamson said the fund would only invest in companies that had been through the Accelerating Commercialisation program, which now numbered more than 450.
The fund plans to invest alongside other VC funds at pre-Series A and Series A ­stages, as well as having the ­capacity to participate in ­future rounds.
“We have unique insight into these companies as we worked alongside them when they were at a much younger stage and still finding their path to market and building their teams,’’ Mr Adamson said.
“We are excited by the opportunity to invest in some of these businesses to help them grow and increase scale.” Mr Adamson said the fund had already identified its first three investments, one of which was an SA company.
The fund will be sector-­agnostic, in keeping with the pool of companies it is selecting from.
“We’re broad in that regard and we’ve agreed internally on our first three investments, so we’ve made the first capital call to our investors,’’ Mr Adamson said.
“We’re off and running, and making investments.’’ Mr Adamson said most of the initial investments would be in the range of $150,000-$400,000, while larger sums would be considered for follow-on rounds.
“That could be another million or so,’’ Mr Adamson said.
The Accelerating Commercialisation program is designed to help small and medium businesses, entrepreneurs and researchers bring a product or service to market with support through expert advice and funding.
Since 2015 more than 70 South Australian companies – and more than 450 nationally – have been through the ­program. Mr Lopez, who was a director of the program from 2016-2020, said there were some brilliant tech entrepreneurs who had been part of the program “and our vision is to invest in these business to truly help them achieve the scale they deserve’’.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 468
