A GROUP of South Australian high net worth individuals has invested $277,500 in Carina Biotech to help it progress its new cancer treatments.
Not-for-profit group Southern Angels, which has 14 members, has invested more than $1 million in three companies since it started in late 2018.
Carina is developing treatment options for solid cancers using the patient’s immune system, after delivering results against blood cancers.
Carina’s focus is on engineering chimeric antigen receptor T-cells, or CAR-T cells, made from a patient’s immune cells (T-cells) to attack cancers. The engineered T-cells, named after a mythical Greek fire-breathing monster, are grown in the lab before being injected into the patient to find and destroy cancer cells.
Carina managing director and co-inventor of its lead CAR-T cell, CNA1003, Dr Justin Coombs said the funding comes at a “crucial time”.
“(It) will allow us to keep our CAR-T technology development pipeline moving.” CNA1003 is attacking a wide range of solid cancers (20-plus cancer cell lines across 12 cancer types so far) in vitro, including high-incidence cancers and rare/paediatric cancers.
Early in vivo results demonstrate that CNA1003 also exhibits anti-cancer and tumour-suppressive activity in animals. Headquartered in Adelaide, Carina Biotech was spun out of the Cooperative Research Centre for Cell Therapy Manufacturing in 2016, and is led by a group of scientists based at the University of South Australia, the University of Adelaide, the Women’s & Children’s Hospital and the Seattle Children’s Hospital in the US.
Southern Angels said it was excited to invest in cutting-edge SA companies that hold significant intellectual property and can contribute to improved health outcomes worldwide.
“Carina’s impressive team has developed world class CAR-T cell technology that has the potential to improve outcomes for an unusually broad range of cancers,” Southern Angels member Dr Nick Haan said.
Southern Angels chairman Professor David Saint said that membership of the early stage investment group was on the rise.
“We have invested $1.1 million across three companies in 2019 and grown membership by 56 per cent to 14 members,” Mr Saint said.
“Our members invest time, money and expertise to support the most promising early stage start-ups from SA.
“As our membership grows, so does our breadth of expertise and our ability to write bigger cheques.”Southern Angels members are ‘tech-agnostic’ but have expertise in biotech, medtech, engineering and AI. So far, they have reviewed 65 start-ups for investment.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 399
