Despite an explosion of billion-dollar tech success stories, Australia’s early-stage start-ups are being forced to seek funding from overseas, the country’s leading innovation festival has heard, with the local venture capital industry still behind much of the world in terms of risk appetite and the amount of capital deployed.
Speaking at Adelaide’s Southstart festival, Tom Humphrey, principal at Australia’s largest venture capital firm Blackbird, said there were now more software developers in Australia than baristas and hairdressers combined, but those tech workers were often let down by an overall lack of capital investment that was holding the sector back. The most recent statistics from Fundsquire show that 60 per cent of Australian start-ups fail within their first three years, with 30 per cent of those failing because they run out of investment funds.
The recent State of Australian Startup Funding report found that ongoing lockdowns and border closures did not reduce overseas investors’ interest in Australia, with 75 per cent of professional start-up investors reporting that overseas investors were more active in the local market in 2021 than the year before.
“When I left in 2011 there wasn’t an Atlassian, there wasn’t a Canva, there wasn’t these household names,” Mr Humphrey told attendees.
“And now there are 830,000 Australians that work in the tech industry today. “That’s the good stuff. The bad stuff is that the reality of venture capital in Australia is that we’re still catching up – we’re still so far behind.” Before relocating to Australia Mr Humphrey worked as a start-up founder in Colorado, which he said had deployed $7bn in venture capital start-up investment in the past year, compared to $5.5m for the entirety of Australia and New Zealand. “We shouldn’t be waiting; we should be doing more and our industry should be going even harder. There’s so much we can should be working on.” Gabrielle Munzer, principal at the CSIRO-linked deep tech venture fund Main Sequence Ventures, said that Australian venture capital investors were too risk-averse, particularly when it came to ‘‘deep tech’’ or research-intensive initiatives such as quantum computing.
“The really big surprise to me is just how much white space there is in deep tech in Australia,” she said.
“There are these wide open fields that we just do not compete at all. And I find that extraordinary, because maybe for the first time, Australian venture investors actually have confidence that we do need deep tech, on the one hand, because we need to tackle these hugely important local challenges, and also build these hugely valuable new industries.
“But more investors just aren’t participating in that part of the start-up economy and the role investors are playing just isn’t ­commensurate with the opportunities.” Ms Munzer said that quantum computing start-ups had been forced to turn to overseas VC firms funding, because local investors either didn’t grasp the opportunities presented by supercomputers, or didn’t have the risk appetite to wait for more than a decade for their investments to pay off.
“Q-CTRL is probably the world’s most brilliant company in quantum computing, and yet they’ve had to go around the world for funding,” she said. ”A small cheque of $20,000 or $50,000 into a science-based company is not going to get you to wherever you need to be – it doesn’t get you to clinical trials – that cheque needs to instead be $5m to $8m.
“And SaaS (software-as-a-service) businesses and e-commerce businesses can’t solve climate change. You can’t feed 10 billion people with software. You can’t get the best quality healthcare with software. So our ambition needs to be about embracing harder investments, not despite them being harder, but because they are.” Southstart, now the nation’s largest innovation festival, will continue for at least another three years after the South Australian government committed to fund the event through to 2025. Adelaide is a growing start-up base, home to a $66m Space Manufacturing Hub along with Lot Fourteen, a tech hub hosting global giants including Salesforce and Amazon Web Services.
“Southstart will now grow into something nationally significant,” South Australia Premier Steven Marshall told The Australian.
“The start-up community is integral to our strategy for South Australia, and indeed the strategy for Australia. “This is a fantastic event and I’m very happy to lock in three more years of funding. We’ve attracted some of the world’s biggest companies here but there’s much more still to do.”
CREDIT: DAVID SWAN
Word count: 736
