New MPs hit not-so-super difference
DISGRUNTLED members of State Parliament are in revolt about what they call the unfair and inequitable superannuation benefits available to retiring or defeated members.
But they've got no hope of having the system upgraded. State Cabinet realises it would be political suicide to try to enhance the fringe benefits available to politicians.
The trouble has surfaced because State MPs have three separate super schemes, with vastly different benefits depending on how long members have been in Parliament.
Members who entered Parliament before 1997 will receive generous benefits largely financed from the state purse when they leave Parliament.
A new system was then introduced that watered down benefits and prevented outgoing members from accessing the funds until they turned 55. Members elected after 2004 are entitled to even less generous benefits, the result of initiatives forced on the Federal Parliament by the-then opposition leader Mark Latham.
Because of the slow accumulation of benefits, the current scheme means short-term members will receive virtually no benefits.
The disparity is most marked at Cabinet level, where ministers doing identical work will receive markedly different payouts on retirement or defeat. The new system has reduced the independence of members, who are reluctant to speak out, either publicly or at party meetings, against issues for fear they will lose pre-selection.
Because benefits accrue slowly it is making it harder for major parties to attract qualified candidates. And it encourages existing members to become long-term seat-warmers to gain maximum benefits from their salary and super.
The down day you
had to have
IF you thought you've just had a bad week there's a reason for it.
British psychologists have officially declared January 21 as the gloomiest day of the year.
Psychologist Cliff Arnall has devised a mathematical formula that identifies the worst days.
His formula, which doesn't quite apply in South Australia, is based on weather, debt, time, personal failure, motivation and the need to take action.
On January 21 the weather in Britain is generally cold and bleak, the Christmas credit card bills are trickling in, three weeks into the new year the monotony of work is setting in, most people have failed to maintain their New Year resolutions and motivation levels after the festive season are low.
People recognise they need to take action to climb out of the slump - but they can't be bothered.
Commonsense
a key issue
WHEN colleague Ron Wilkinson dashed into the office briefly last week he parked in a short-term zone in neighbouring Bentham St.
He returned to his car a few minutes later but couldn't find his keys. He rushed back to the office where he thought he might have left them, but without luck. When he returned to his car a parking inspector had placed the dreaded plastic sleeve under his windscreen wiper.
Ron eventually got a spare set of keys sent from home and a couple of days later peeled the sticker off his wiper to pay the fine.
To his surprise there was no sticker but a polite note which read: "Your keys are at Wakefield St police. You left them in the passenger door. Parking officer, ACC."
Full marks to the anonymous parking inspector. It's nice to know there are still some people with commonsense in our community.
Trotting out a
brainteaser
A READER who attended an Adelaide Angels' baseball game at Weigal Oval, Plympton, recently is puzzled by a sign on the oval fence.
It says no person should cross the trotting track to enter the oval before 10.30am on any Sunday - or 10.40am on any Saturday.
He's taken a lot longer than 10 minutes pondering the reasons for the crucial 10-minute difference.
Keep the green
scene clean
HOUSEHOLDERS are creating chaos for the compost industry by dumping inappropriate materials in their garden organic bins.
Zero Waste communications manager Marcia Hewitt says it is amazing what turns up in bins, which should be used exclusively for green waste like lawn clippings, garden prunings, leaves and twigs.
She says dead dogs, lumps of concrete, nappies, car batteries, medical waste, plastic pots, plastic bags, bin liners, electronic appliances and even a toilet cistern have been found in the green bins.
"Pity the poor blokes who work in the industry who have to manually sort through the garden waste and pick out the nasty bits before the stuff is processed," Marcia says.
"Who wants bits of plastic and glass in the bags of compost and mulch they get from the gardening shop? That's why we say, `If it grows it goes into the green bin'."
Since when have
roads been SExy?
READER Phillip Rollas notes the State Government has abbreviated the working name of the Port River Expressway to PRExy. The new Northern Expressway has become NExy.
Which, he assumes, means the Southern Expressway is SExy.
Be a doll and
help the kids
CAN I have the attention, please, of people who collect antique and modern dolls.
The Australian Plangon Club - doll collectors all - will celebrate its 40th anniversary in April.
Club president Jeannette Mossop says Plangon started in SA and is the oldest club of its kind in Australia. Plangon meets on the first Saturday of every month and this year members will be raising funds to assist charity CanDo4Kids.
"We're hoping to contact some of our past members to get them along to our April meeting to help us celebrate," Jeannette says.
If you're an ex-member or are interested in joining call 8344 3804.
Camera finder
not so candid
DALLAS Chew lost her Pentax camera at the recent Schutzenfest at Bonython Park.
Because Dallas and her husband Matt had a few special events where they needed a camera they scoured camera shops and the internet looking for a replacement.
As an afterthought Matt rang the German Club, the driving force behind the Schutzenfest.
One camera had been handed in. It was given to police. And sure enough it was the Chews' treasured Pentax. They are grateful to the honest, if anonymous, finder.
joryr@adv.newsltd.com.au
Word count: 1008
