HUNDREDS of founders and funders will descend on Adelaide this week as the SouthStart start-up conference returns, with participants keen to get out from behind the Zoom screen and network face-to-face, co-director Craig Swann says.
More than 70 investors will travel here from around Australia to take part in events spread over three days and venues ranging from Seppeltsfield in the Barossa Valley, to Adelaide’s top restaurants, and the Atlassian-sponsored Impact Summit at the National Wine Centre.
Speakers include Michael Fox, co-founder of plant-based meat-alternative company Fable, Rachel Neumann, co-founder and partner with Flying Fox Ventures, and Chris Liu from Horizon Ventures. The line-up also includes actors, winemakers and social entrepreneurs such as OzHarvest’s Ronni Kahn.
The theme of the conference, which starts on Wednesday, is “revival”, and Mr Swann said while businesspeople had adapted quickly to the online world during the pandemic, nothing beat face-to-face contact to build connections and spark new ideas.
For example the “Funders and Founders” event at Seppeltsfield would bring hundreds of people together in various forms over the course of a day.
“We decided to create a lot of intimate experiences, so they get the whole day connecting with people by industry type, sector type – really connecting the right people to the right people,’’ he said.
“The day itself is structured in that we have two big kind of halo conversations – one that’s really a state of the union about what’s happening in the investment community here in Australia and how that compares globally, and one that’s tailored to founders that’s really focused on different ways to raise money and how to raise money in this climate.’’ Participants have a variety of options for the afternoon of that day, followed by numerous focused and broad sessions over the next couple of days.
Mr Swann said the start-up community had not come together physically in a big way nationally for some time, probably since SouthStart itself last ran, and the conference had sold out quickly. “I think it’s testament to the fact that, yes, you can do a lot of stuff through Zoom but nothing can change the dynamics of sitting down for a coffee or a wine with a couple of investors to really get that valuable just-in-time knowledge and network connections happening,’’ he said.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 387
