Isabella Taylor, nine years old, of Crafers, is a talented artist with a focus on the ocean and space, who has interviewed some of the state’s top entrepreneurs and artists as part of her “Inspired By” video series.
Some of the people Isabella has interviewed include culinary trailblazer Maggie Beer, actor Tilda Cobham-Hervey, space entrepreneur Flavia Tata Nardini of Fleet Space Technologies and director, writer and producer Daniel J. Phillips.
Isabella started the project three years ago, inspired by the stories of high-achieving people her mother Sara was reading to her.
“I was so inspired by what I was hearing I said to mum, ‘ we can do this’,’’ Isabella said.
“I wanted to help young people follow their dreams … and that’s how it began really, to inspire young people to follow their dreams regardless of their circumstances by sharing stories of inspirational people.’’
The first person Isabella interviewed was culinary icon Maggie Beer, who has become a national treasure through her passion for food, which has evolved in recent years into a drive to ensure people in aged care facilities have access to tasty and nutritious meals.
“She was lovely. When you see these icons it really tells you a lot about the reasons they say yes,’’ Isabella said.
“They’re not just icons, they’re motivationally kind, they’re giving of themselves and that’s what gets them to the position they are.’’
Isabella and her mother Sara contact people via email to request interviews, and Sara said they had been overwhelmed by how generous people have been with their time.
“They’ve been really supportive from that perspective,’’ she said.
Isabella will be making a keynote address and taking part in a panel discussion at the Southstart conference’s Bright Ideas Summit, which is a collaboration with Adelaide University, Hacker Exchange, Future Anything and the State Government.
The summit will take place at the National Wine Centre on May 4, with 300 students to attend, and be streamed to classrooms nationally.
Other speakers include SA’s chief entrepreneur Andrew Nunn, Adelaide Lord Mayor Sandy Verschoor, and the founders of Ripple GL, HEX, Future Anything and Sticky Pronk.
Isabella said in terms of her art, the ocean and space were inspirations for her.
Trailers for Isabella’s Inspired By interviews are available on her Facebook page and her interview with Ms Tata Nardini will air on Channel 44 on June 6 8pm.
You can view her art at her website isabellataylor.com.au
For more information on Southstart visit southstart.co
Word count: 397
