Ms Denholm, who was chief operations officer then chief financial officer at Telstra before stepping down to take up the role at Elon Musk’s electric car company, will be speaking alongside Start-up Aus chief executive Alex McCauley, Australian Space Agency chief technical officer Aude Vignelles and Sage Automation chief executive Adrian Fahey.
Ms Denholm will be appearing in-person to speak on the topic “Terraforming the future”.
“Join us as we delve deep into the delta of where we are and where we could be,’’ the conference promotional material says.
“We’ll explore the intersection of sovereignty and science - technology and trust - in an understanding of the resources of tomorrow that will have real, and lasting meaning.”
The festival will be held from May 3-6 and will also include a start-up ecosystem summit. Event director Craig Swann said the start-up showcase would enable up and coming companies to pitch at a live event to more than 30 general partners from Australia’s leading venture capital firms.
Mr Swann said the Southstart team, which had been running virtual events last year, was looking forward to getting people together physically.
“While virtual events have been our focus - and a necessity - for the past year, Southstart at its heart has always been about human-first experiences; with state borders open and the COVID-19 vaccine currently being rolled out, this year will see many dinners, parties and real-life conversations take place - those moments for organic connection and a chance to unlock unexpected knowledge and networks that can only happen face-to-face,’’ he said.
“We will hear from the voices we need to hear, and explore the pressing questions and opportunities for Australia and beyond.”
Minister for Innovation and Skills David Pisoni said the government-supported festival was integral to creating new opportunities for South Australians.
“Southstart’s unique program enables the entrepreneurship ecosystem to come together, share stories, pitch ideas to investors, and create new opportunities for collaboration and knowledge-sharing,” Mr Pisoni said.
“The Southstart festival is a key action under the Marshall Liberal Government’s FIXE Strategic Action Plan which is designed to grow the culture of entrepreneurship in South Australia.”
For information visit the Southstart website.
Word count: 350
