ADELAIDE’S premier start-up and scale-up conference, SouthStart, will return with a hybrid model, a new partnership and another stellar line-up of speakers as it addresses a world which has changed immeasurably over the past 12 months.
The conference will hold a three-day “State of the Re:Union” event next month, when the main program was usually held, and come back for the start of festival season with a broader line-up for February 17-19.
The conference has also attracted $500,000 in State Government funding, which Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni says aligns with the government’s vision for entrepreneurship in South Australia. While the conference suffered the same uncertainty which hit all events as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic, event director Craig Swann said the team was determined to go ahead.
“We didn’t want to see the opportunity of coming together as a local community in 2020 to pass, particularly while SA is seeing an ease of restrictions,” Mr Swann said.
“So, we’re putting on a range of local events, including a leadership summit for start-up ecosystem leaders, a hybrid panel and keynote discussions with leading national and international voices, and a 200-plus-person dinner gathering at Golden Boy.
“It will bring together many of South Australia’s most influential leaders, investors and founders.” Speakers for the November 18-20 event include Fleet Space co-founder and chief executive Flavia Tata Nardini; Aubrey Blanche, director of equitable design and impact at CultureAmp; SA's chief entrepreneur Jim Whalley; and Sweat co-founder and chief executive Tobi Pearce.
Mr Pearce said the global pandemic had accelerated digital transformation for many businesses here and around the world.
“As SA builds to become a more attractive location for global and digital businesses, it’s important to create an ecosystem that encourages critical conversations, drives innovation and highlights and celebrates building new capabilities that enable start-ups to thrive,” he said.
“SouthStart is playing a key role in doing just that.
“SouthStart continues to provide the start-up community in SA with the opportunity to learn, share and connect with one another, and I am thrilled to be part of the conversation this year and share some of my learnings from building SWEAT as a global digital business in SA.” The conference has also struck a partnership with Women in Innovation SA’s the Winnovation Awards, which will be part of the November event line-up.
WIINSA president Nicole Swaine said they welcomed the chance to be involved. “Our usual gala night simply isn’t possible this year but instead we have planned a hybrid event at Lot Fourteen where we can extend our virtual audience nationally,’’ Ms Swaine said.
The November events will include keynotes addresses discussions and digital experiences, and will be held both in-person and virtually. For more information and tickets for the November events, visit southstart.co
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 467
