Keeping creative ideas flowing, taking risks and fostering a culture of empowerment and trust are key to business success, according to tech entrepreneur Marc Randolph, writes David Swan.
A USTRALIAN START-UPS need to forget about pretending to be Silicon Valley and instead lean into what makes them uniquely Australian, according to Netflix co-founder Marc Randolph, who helped build the company from a small California tech company to a global streaming giant.
Speaking in an interview at the Southstart innovation festival in Adelaide, Randolph – who co-founded Netflix in 1997 back when the company mailed out physical DVDs to customers – said he was impressed with Australia’s culture of innovation and perseverance.
“There are certain aspects of Silicon Valley that are imitable. But to think that you need to be like that is ridiculous,” he says.
“You have the educational talent here. You have the risk-taking in Australia, and you’re lucky to have that culture of risk-taking. You’re building a lot of infrastructure that you need.
“And the fact that now the internet has democratised this, there’s no reason to have to be in Silicon Valley for your tech company. One of the things that Covid has shown us is that you don’t even need to be in the same office.
“I’ve spent a lot of time in Australia and some tremendous start-up successes have come out of your country, and there’s no reason that more massive tech companies can’t come out of there.” Netflix was the top performing stock in the S&P 500 stockmarket index over the last decade, with a total return of 3693 per cent, and users all over the world are glued to the likes of Friends, Master of None and BoJack Horseman.
The company almost didn’t happen, however, with Randolph pitching multiple harebrained subscription ideas to co-founder Reed Hastings.
“The two of us used to carpool to work together brainstorming ideas,” Randolph says. “One of our ideas was personalised shampoo. You cut off a lock of your hair, you mail it to me and my team of hair scientists, we’ll formulate a custom shampoo just for you, and you’ll subscribe to it.
“I pitched that idea to Reed in the car, and of course with his analytical mind he shot all kinds of holes in it. And I pitched him another one that was custom dog food. We formulate that for your individual pet based on its breed, gender, age, climate, whatever. And he shot that down, too. And eventually one of the ideas I pitched him was selling videos by mail.” “That will never work,” Randolph was told, along with, “that’s the stupidest thing I’ve ever heard.” He says a key lesson for the company’s early days is that Netflix made 98 per cent of its revenue from selling DVDs, and while renting them only contributed two per cent, the company realised that rentals would ultimately become the more sustainable and successful business model.
“We walked away from 98 per cent of our revenue,” he says. “But that was the repeatable, scalable business.” For Randolph, being brave and scrappy is what building a start-up is all about. Companies like Netflix don’t grow to their size and scale without failing a few times first.
Netflix was originally directly competing against Blockbuster and in a major sliding doors moment nearly sold to the multibillion-dollar incumbent, which in the early 2000s was a dominant force in video rentals across the US and globally.
“We had about 100 employees and were on track for maybe $5m in revenue, but we had spent $50m to get there. We decided we needed to seek strategic alternatives, which is basically code that we wanted to ‘sell the sucker’,” Randolph says.
“Blockbuster were 60,000 employees, they had 9000 stores, and we thought they would be a great fit to buy us. We did that prudent thing you do when you’re $15m in the hole, which is charter a private jet.
“We entered a massive conference room the size of a football pitch, and the Blockbuster suits are sitting there in their expensive outfits. And they asked, ‘How much?’, and I said ‘$50m’. And they laughed at us. “The lesson is if you happen to be the dominant player in the space, you’re a $6bn category leader, but you never have any idea who’s going to come after you. Because they’re not going to look anything like you. So you do need to keep disrupting yourself.” As for Netflix’s “special sauce” – the thing that has helped the company not only survive but become a global streaming phenomenon – Randolph puts it down to one thing. “The special sauce is the culture,” he says. “Fundamentally, companies can’t scale up unless they have found their culture. A lot of the things that we set up at the very beginning have never changed. And the most important aspect of that is culture.
“Culture is not what you say, it’s what you do. We didn’t care about command and control BS, we didn’t check in on our employees, ask for status reports, or ask them to clear their expenses. There was no time for that.
“The model at the beginning was, ‘Here’s what you need to do, I’ll meet you again in two weeks’ and that was it. ‘I expect you to achieve all the things you were charged with achieving and I don’t care how you did it.’ We’d rather build a company that was built for people with good judgment than put up all kinds of guardrails to protect the company from people who have bad judgment. “That Netflix culture is what made it so special.”
CREDIT: David Swan
Word count: 945
