Entrepreneurs Week 2015 "IF I could turn one company in Adelaide into a multi-billion dollar company like Facebook, that's goal accomplished," says Chhai Thach, organiser of next week's SouthStart Conference for entrepreneurs in Adelaide.
"I haven't found it yet. I think we are about one or two years away from it." About 600 participants, 50 exhibitors and more than 20 speakers - most with a technology or innovation background - are expected to meet at the Adelaide Convention Centre on February 4-5 to share their ideas on making SA an entrepreneurial hub.
One of the speakers hoping to fire up imaginations is inventor and space engineer Flavia Tata Nardini, who heads up Launch box in Adelaide to help students explore space using satellites.
A former propulsion test engineer with the European Space Agency, she helped students launch eight model mini satellites or CubeSats on balloons from Mount Barker in November.
The CubeSat kits were made in Adelaide using local contractors, sold to eight schools and prepared by its students.
The satellites that touched the edge of space and returned have generated information being used as part of the learning program in these schools.
"It was exciting to launch our pilot here in Adelaide. Making kids reach out to space is absolutely amazing because I just love space," Ms Tata Nardini said.
She moved to Adelaide in 2012 for family reasons and is excited about sharing her plans for the future at SouthStart next week.
SouthStart, founded by Mr Thach in 2013, is run by co-working space provider Majoran Distillery with the help of sponsors, including News Corporation, publisher of The Advertiser. The two-day conference has annual support worth $50,000 from the State Government.
"Right now it's the best time to start a business in Adelaide," Mr Thach said. "I haven't seen the opportunities and support here before.
"There is a lot of vibrancy in the entrepreneurship ecosystem now." SouthStart features workshops, conference, expo and a pitch competition showcasing six new budding ideas.
Mr Thach has at least four start-ups to his name, including Payhero, a PayPal-like service for businesses set up in October with Sydney-based business partner Steve Barrett.
Mr Barrett and Mr Thach are also co-founders of software company GetYo, start-up investment company Furio and messaging service company Oi!.
Mr Thach established Majoran with co-founder Michael Reid in 2012. A refugee kid from Vietnam, Mr Thach spent eight years in a camp in what he describes as the "worst thing that can happen" before relocating to New Zealand.
"That sort of hardened me up a bit. The hardest thing of being an entrepreneur is fear of failure and I am not afraid of failing. I can never see the worst again." He hopes there will be a few high-net worth South Australians at the event this year.
"The hardest bit is getting investment but investors need to take a bit of risk and stay for the long term to back those great ideas out there," he said.
SouthStart speaker Jordan Green's Jemsoft has attracted angel investors in Chris Stathy and Dr Paul Dalby, which will help in the first trials of a new retail crime prevention initiative called Project Portcullis.
Mr Green, a university student who describes himself as a robotics hobbyist, has written a software program that uses artificial intelligence and computer vision technology to prevent a potential criminal from entering a store.
"Working in a liquor store I was held up many times, once at gunpoint, and this in a subliminal way led to what I have developed," he said.
Jemsoft, which won $50,000 from the State Goverment and UniSA's joint Venture Catalyst program, will run service station trials of its program this year.It was exciting to launch our pilot here in Adelaide
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 640
