SOUTHSTART is poised to come back bigger than ever this year with the State Government kicking in $350,000 to help the start-up conference expand.
SouthStart was relaunched last year with the team at The Moonshine Lab putting on an event for about 800 people.
It attracted big names such as Canva co-founder Cameron Adams, Swedish electric car manufacturer Uniti’s chief executive Lewis Horne and Tobi Pearce from Adelaide fitness technology company Sweat. As well as the event held at the Adelaide Town Hall in November, the program involved satellite events including a Peel St street party.
The Moonshine Lab’s entrepreneur in residence Craig Swann, said the aim was to take the conference to the next level.
“Some of the differentiation this year will probably fall around giving it a masterclass kind of angle, a lot of workshops, trying to bring in some world-class educational stuff that brings in what you might not get from university here or incubators.
“Things like international-level design thinking, making sure that there’s not just an inspirational look at that, but a real hands-on aspect.’’ Other issues which could be addressed were the relevant legal frameworks for start-ups and intellectual property issues.
“Understanding founders agreements, thinking about an exit at the beginning of the process, how to build things up, thinking about how you are going to properly tell your story,’’ Mr Swann said.
“A lot of these ‘sprint’-type things that are typical in other ecosystems and trying to bring some of that best of breed teaching here. And we’re trying to source local people who have that set.’’ Minister for Innovation and Skills David Pisoni said the government would kick in $350,000 through the Research, Commercialisation and Start-up Fund.
“SouthStart has brought fresh ideas and great value to the local innovation ecosystem and makes a welcome contribution to the State’s economy,” he said “(It provides) delegates a fantastic opportunity to learn from world-leading business and innovation leaders about their journeys and global trends that will be vital for businesses to survive and thrive.” In coming weeks more details will be announced and expressions of interest from speakers, workshop presenters and sponsors are invited. It will be held in the week starting November 18.
WHAT THEY SAID “All the team at SouthStart did an amazing job of making me feel welcome in their city, and the event itself was one of the most organised I’ve had the privilege of being involved in. It’s really inspiring to see startup hubs around Australia realising the value that they have to offer to the world and pulling together as a community. The spirit of sharing and collaboration in Adelaide is palpable and SouthStart has a key role in ensuring its future.” – Cameron Adams, co-founder of Canva “Wine, tech and talent. South Start is now firmly the leading technology gathering in Australia. The connections with fellow entrepreneurs, financial partners and amazing speakers makes this a must for Sine to attend. Being able to hear from so many talented visionaries in one cool setting with a glass of SA’s finest wine, just all works. The total closer for us is the ability to tell our story, recruit and grow.”- Antony Ceravolo, chief executibve/founder of Sine
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 539
