A TWO-day annual event, targeted at SA start-ups and previously regarded as the “jewel of Entrepreneurs Week”, has found life again under new management as a separate conference later in the year.
This year’s SouthStart conference will be held on November 22 and 23 at the Town Hall by new organisers, the Moonshine Lab, which will raise funds for it.
The Moonshine Lab, a start-up incubator, acquired the event from former founders Chhai Thach and Steve Barrett, who last year pulled the plug on the event and all other entrepreneurial support activities run by the group, citing lack of state government support.
At the time, SouthStart co-director Steve Barrett had lashed out at the former state government’s “rhetoric” on making Adelaide an entrepreneurial hub.
“There is a lot of talk around making the city a technology and innovation hub, but there is no support on the ground, no financial or other help,” Mr Barrett said.
The conference, which started in 2013, was supported by $400,000 in state funding over four years.
The Moonshine Lab’s general manager Barnaby Scantlebury said the organisation was “an active ambassador” for the SA start-up scene, including running the SA chapter of Startup Grind.
“Our focus is on helping unite and celebrate the start-up ecosystem, and when we heard that there was a chance Southstart wouldn’t go ahead, we reached out to Steve and Chhai to offer help,” he said.
”There has been a flurry of interstate and international investment activity in local success stories like Vinomofo, Myriota and Fleet Space reinforcing South Australia’s reputation for innovation, liveability and a really strong university R&D ecosystem.
“An event like SouthStart is a vital part of continuing the growth of the sector in Adelaide.” On funding and the challenge of historic lower than expected attendances, event director Craig Swann said the lab was “centrally placed in the eco-system”.
“(This) gives us the ability to use our networks, from founders to investors and both the public and private sectors, to provide an inspiring and exciting event that takes people offline to be part of a cross-pollination of technology, ideas and business,” Mr Swann said.
“We know we’ll need to work hard to both make a statement and to remain sustainable, but we’re well on our way and we certainly welcome organisations who are interested in getting involved, to reach out to the team to learn more about our vision for the event.” Mr Swann said SouthStart provided a stage and a platform to share and celebrate the incredible innovation that is happening in SA.
“With a focus on showcasing the people, companies and technology that are world leading we can begin to attract interstate and international attention, investment and partnerships,” he said.
“It’s an opportunity to not just stop but reverse the brain drain, and there is some amazing tech coming at the world from SA.” Mr Swann said organisers were working with the new government, which was really supportive of the sector.
“We looked at November as an opportunity to showcase the state with a stand-alone event. It logically might attract other complementary activities but November gives us the time we need to do it properly.”Topics at this year’s conference will include machine learning, gaming, defence, blockchain, space, SaaS and IoT alongside a workshop program and investor showcase.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 554
