THE value of this year’s SouthStart conference will be in the connections made over a series of events showcasing the state’s vibrant business and cultural ecosystem, according to its new organisers, Moonshine Labs.
The two-day ticketed event, to be held on November 22 and 23 at the Adelaide Town Hall, is targeted at start-ups.
Previously regarded as the “jewel of Entrepreneurs Week”, it will include a Peel St party and dinners at Africola and the D’Arenberg Cube and Star of Greece in regional SA.
Event director Craig Swann said the event would “celebrate the collision of people, ideas and technology”.
“It will not just showcase some of the best minds in SA, interstate and world, but also expose the vibrancy of SA not just in the startup sense, but also cultural and entertainment sense,” he said.
“We are doing everything we can to create connections.
“The value of these events is connections. You can listen to inspirational talks and attend amazing workshops and access great information, but this is about finding people to connect with — finding your business partner, find someone to do a joint venture, and so on.” Mr Swann said about 30 speakers were signed up to speak at the event which would focus on “deep technology”, including those being developed in SA.
“We want to facilitate conversations around some of the world-leading work we’re doing here in space, agritech, transport and mobility and put up something that can help the state put its best foot forward,” he said.
“Longer term, we see SouthStart representing the Southern Hemisphere in what is now a ‘white space’ in the market.
“For this one though, my goal is to fill the Town Hall with as many amazing people as possible. I have a love for bringing people together.” In May, Moonshine Lab acquired the event from former founders Chhai Thach and Steve Barrett, who last year pulled the plug on the event, citing the previous Labor State Government’s lack of support.
At the time, Mr Barrett lashed out at the Government’s “rhetoric” on making Adelaide an entrepreneurial hub. The conference, which started in 2013, was previously supported with $400,000 in funding over four years.
Telstra is the naming partner for this year’s event, supported by other sponsors, including News Corp in SA, publisher of The Advertiser.
Headline speakers announced so far include Life Whisperer co-founder Michelle Perugini, Canva co-founder Cameron Adams and Swedish electric car manufacturer Uniti’s chief executive Lewis Horne.
Ms Perugini said SouthStart would provide a “mandate to open the conversation for change” in SA.
“The line-up includes something for everyone. For instance, from Canva we’ll learn what it’s like to grow a company from an idea to something that’s impacting millions of people,” she said.
Canva’s online design platform now has more than 10 million users across 190 countries.
“Uniti lends an excellent international perspective on the conversation that’s already happening here in SA on the future of transport,” Mr Swann said.
Other event speakers include Adelaide-based Tobi Pearce, who launched Bikini Body Guides with fiance Kayla Itsines in 2012, encouraging people to transform their bodies over 12 weeks.
SouthStart’s “kick-off” night is at Flinders University’s NVI Icebreaker speed networking event at Tonsley.■ Visit www.southstart.co for details on speakers, events and tickets.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 549
