ADELAIDE is taking on its eastern states counterparts in backing IT start-ups - with an inaugural conference pulling in some of the big names in the industry.
Organiser Chhai Thach decided to push ahead with the SouthStart 2013 conference next month at the Adelaide Festival Centre after attending SydStart this year.
He believed Adelaide was probably "two years behind Sydney" and a year behind Melbourne in terms of developing the industry.
"People are very keen to see Adelaide have a good startup system - it's going to be the big economic driver in Australia, not just Adelaide," he said, adding: "We hope it will be the next stage of job creation." Mr Thach is certainly taking the task seriously, having been instrumental in establishing co-working space Marjoran Distillery in August last year. He attracted at least a dozen startups to the new incubator in the city.
However, it so quickly out-grew its original office space that it was moved to a larger 330sq m site in Grenfell Street last December.
There were now 50 members, with Mr Thach also working on his own start- up, getyo, that is waiting on Apple store approval.
"Adelaide is a growing and vibrant entrepreneurial city but there is a different subset of challenges that come from not being in Silicon Valley, or even Sydney," Mr Thach, who is the SouthStart director, said.
"SouthStart is addressing these challenges by providing a platform for entrepreneurs to connect with venture capitalists, angel investors, potential partners, media and key industry players." He said the October 4 conference hoped to attract "pretty much everyone in the startup business".
That includes development agencies, web designers and companies, small businesses, people who are thinking of starting a business, investors, and entrepreneurs who want to be inspired". Premier Jay Weatherill would make an opening address, as would the Lord Mayor of Adelaide, Stephen Yarwood.
The conference would also involve a pitch competition, an expo and a line-up of speakers who've made it in Adelaide, Australia and overseas.
They include Adelaide's Alan Noble, Google's dir- ector of engineering for Australia and New Zealand - a serial entrepreneur and executive with 25 years in software technology manage-ment experience.
He also holds seven US patents. Peter O'Neill from App Majik and Jock Gordon from MenuPad/ Netstart are also on the list.
Mr Thach is also keen to see investors attending, with Blue Sky investment director Elaine Stead, venture capital firm Blackbird Ventures' managing director Niki Scevak, and Matthew Salier, director of New Venture Institute, a Flinders University entrepren-eurial initiative, all speaking.He added SouthStart was about sharing lessons learned -and stressed it was geared towards providing startups with the opportunities to make the right connections.
Credit: BELINDA WILLIS START-UPS
Word count: 464
