THE South Australian start-up community is being urged to back itself and support next week's celebration of entrepreneurship.
Chhai Thach, local serial entrepreneur and founder of SouthStart 2016 -- an anchor event of Entrepreneurs Week -- said most people needed to "commit to the cause" more wholeheartedly to drive the event's success.
"It's our third year for SouthStart with a fantastic range of 25 keynote speakers, pitches, expos and workshops, but ticket sales are down on last year.
"It's frustrating because the event is well supported by the state government and sponsors, making the tickets cheap." About 450 tickets were sold last year, but the tally this year is just half that number at a standard entry cost of $138, and the expo is free too, Mr Thach said.
"I'm at that stage again when I begin thinking that perhaps SouthStart conference isn't important to Adelaide's start-up ecosystem.
"We have already gathered support from sponsors and enough tickets are already sold to make it a reasonable turnout. But just 'reasonable' is not my aim, it's a complete failure in my view." Mr Thach said support was critical when people were doing something to build an entrepreneurial environment in Adelaide.
"I feel we are going backwards not forward in the start-up community," he said. When we started, everyone was committed and contributing. Now people are tired because a lot of the entrepreneurs fail and then go back to their day job/corporate job.
"But we need to keep trying and investors will only come if we build the right attitudes and invest-able companies." Mr Thach has at least four start-ups to his name, including Payhero, a PayPal-like service for businesses set up in October with Sydney-based business partner Steve Barrett.
Mr Barrett and Mr Thach are also co-founders of software company GetYo, start-up investment company Furio and messaging service company Oi!
Mr Thach established Majoran with co-founder Michael Reid in 2012. SouthStart, founded by Mr Thach in 2013, is run by co-working space provider Majoran.
Barossa Valley-born, Sydney-based Wink Models and Theright.fit founder Taryn Williams is one of the speakers at this year's SouthStart conference. One of Australia's top young female entrepreneurs, named as a Finalist in the 2015 Female Entrepreneur Awards and SmartCompany 30 under 30, she will be part of a panel discussion on "how to disrupt an industry".
"The start-up community has evolved so much since the launch of my first business nearly 10 years ago," Ms Williams said.
"Adelaide has worked really hard to support their local start-ups and put themselves on the map and SouthStart is a fantastic opportunity to expose the local start-up scene to national advisors, mentors, investors and other entrepreneurs."- Entrepreneurs Week, including SouthStart 2016, is supported by Brand SA, Adelaide City Council, the State Government, News Corp Australia, publisher of The Advertiser and Sunday Mail, and other sponsors.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 489
