ADELAIDE has the potential to be a “satellite city” providing expertise and an offshore business base to Silicon Valley companies, entrepreneur Mohan Koo believes.
Mr Koo is the co-founder and chief technical officer of cyber security company Dtex Systems, and is also a member of the State Government’s seven-person Entrepreneurial Advisory Board, led by chief entrepreneur Jim Whalley.
Using his experience with Dtex as an example, Mr Koo believes strongly that finding a good customer base is vital for a start-up ecosystem.
“The longer it takes you to get to a customer, the longer it’s going to take you to get to the capital you need to scale, the longer it’s going to take to get to the markets that are scalable and global,’’ he said.
Finding a solution to this conundrum, and promoting Adelaide as a start-up and scale-up hub, are key elements of the work Mr Koo, who was also heavily involved in SouthStart last year, is doing with the EAB. Mr Koo came back to Adelaide from Silicon Valley, where Dtex is now based, with an invitation to join the EAB and work towards building projects such as Fixe and Lot Fourteen.
“Clearly right now the opportunity is huge,’’ he said.
“No-one is going to deny Adelaide is the capital of Australia for defence. The second one is the space agency. We will be the pre-eminent centre for space in the country.
“Across those two areas you have AI and machine learning, and data scientists are a big part of that.’’ Mr Koo said Adelaide had “world class” talent coming out of its universities and the opportunity was there to grasp. Mr Koo said the feedback from a recent inbound delegation from Silicon Valley had been very positive.
Mr Koo said the cost ratio was “at least half” for skilled staff in Adelaide compared to the US, which was compelling.
“I really do believe that we have the ability to turn Adelaide and Lot Fourteen into a bit of a satellite city for Silicon Valley, where Silicon Valley companies, not small ones but scale-ups, the ones that are going from $10 million in revenue to beyond $100 million, can get involved.’’ Mr Koo said he wanted to work with large organisations to teach them how to engage with early-stage companies.
“If the customers are on board and supportive, the capital follows,’’ he said. Mr Koo said US companies were keen to identify areas outside Silicon Valley where they could have outposts, and SA fit the bill from a lifestyle, cost and skills perspective. Mr Koo said Dtex had its origins in Adelaide in 2000, “before cyber security was thing, it was information security back then’’.
“We developed a piece of software that would track and trace what people were doing on computer systems. It was started out of the schools environment, back when teachers didn’t have a handle on IT, but kids did.’’ Mr Koo’s vision was to take the software developed in Adelaide and apply it also to government and business.
Dtex now counts clients such as the Formula One team Williams and global banks and telecoms as customers. Rather than focusing on external threats, the company helps other organisations ensure internal threats, such as their own staff, are not posing a security threat. It does this by using software which detects anomalous behaviours, then ranks them and flags possible nefarious conduct, across thousands of employees.“Our biggest customer in the world is Citibank,’’ Mr Koo said.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND BUSINESS EDITOR
Word count: 586
