Wednesday February 4 Wonderful Wednesday Yoga Class A yoga class designed for beginner and intermediate students. Classes include a brief meditation and are held every Wednesday evening. Theosophical Society, 310 South Tce. 6.30pm-7.30pm. Two classes $20. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com.au
Book launch: Love and Fear Adelaide writer Gail Bradwell is launching her new book. Guest speakers include Carol Brewer and Steve Lewis from Digital Print Publishers. South Terrace Croquet Club, South of the cnr South and East Terraces, Adelaide, 5.30pm-7pm. Purchase the book for $20. Bookings essential. Free.
Details: 8223 3487 or email gailbradwell@bigpond.com
Lego Club Anyone can come along and let their imagination run wild, brick by brick. City Library, Rundle Place, Rundle Mall, 5pm. Also on Sunday, 2pm. Free.
Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com
Thursday, February 5 SouthStart Conference and Expo 2015 SouthStart is for entrepreneurs, investors, hackers and service providers. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 9am-5pm. Cost: $100.
Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com
Sunrise Yoga @ Whitmore Square Start the new year by building your strength and flexibility. This yoga session will aid balance and weight loss. Whitmore Square, Adelaide, 6.45am-7.45am. Cost: $10. Bookings essential.
Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com
Family Storytime Sessions Interactive sessions of stories, songs and rhymes for babies and children aged up to five years. City Library, Level 3, Rundle Place, Rundle Mall, Adelaide (Enter via Francis St), 10.30am. Also on Hutt Street Library, 235 Hutt St, Adelaide, on Tuesday 10.30am and Saturday 10.30am. Free. Bookings essential.
Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com
Friday, February 6 Renew Adelaide's Meet The Maker Fair Rundle Mall, Gawler Place canopy, Adelaide, noon-9pm. Stalls featuring some of the jewellers, bakers and candle makers supported under the Renew Adelaide program from Regent Arcade to Rundle Place. See live screen printing, jewellery making and pot plant decorating plus snack on cupcake treats from Fakery Bakery and smoothies from Juice Lovers Juicery.
Details: renewadelaide.com.au
The Searchers The English band will perform all their hits including Sweets for My Sweet, Needles and Pins and other great classics. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 8pm. Tickets from $74.90.
Details: bass.net.au
Mark & Jay O'Shea - The Famine & The Feast This husband and wife team release their latest album The Famine & The Feast. The Promethean, 116 Grote St, Adelaide, doors open 7.30pm, show at 8pm. Tickets: $28.60. Details: oztix.com.au or theprom.com.au
PRESENT hosted by RAW Adelaide A one night emerging arts showcase featuring more than 30 of Adelaide's best emerging talent spanning genres such as fashion, music, visual and performing arts, and photography. The Producers, 235 Grenfell St, Adelaide, 7.30pm. Tickets: $16.50 plus booking fee, $20 on the door. Details: 0407 711 029
Ebenezer Night Market Feast your senses on edible delights, homewares, designer clothing and jewellery all as you enjoy the vibes from DJ Teags. Ebenezer Place, 5.30pm-10.30pm.
Details: splashadelaide.com.au
Saturday, February 7 Leo Sayer: The Restless Years Tour Leo is touring Australia for the first time in four years to celebrate the release of his latest CD Restless Years. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 8pm. Tickets from $69.90.
Details: bass.net.au
Flinders Street Market Handmade, home grown, unique and vintage stalls. 230 Flinders St, Adelaide, 9am-3.30pm. Also on Sunday. Free.
Details: flinderstreetmarket.com
AFTA Sunday Mail Holiday Expo Information and deals from airlines, tour operators, retail travel agents, rail, coach and cruise companies. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 10am-5pm. Also on tomorrow, 10am-5pm. Cost: Adults $10, conc $9.
Details: adelaideholidayexpo.com.au
Sunday, February 8 The Secret World of Haute Couture As the highest echelon of the fashion world, haute couture is widely revered but little explained. This fascinating documentary takes you on a journey to meet the millionaire customers that keep the handcrafted industry alive. Art Gallery of SA, Radford Auditorium, North Tce, Adelaide, 2pm. Free with Fashion Icons exhibition admission: Adult $25, conc $20.
Details: artgallery.sa.gov.au
Music for Organ and Percussion Adelaide percussionist Andrew Wiering will team up with expatriate Australian organist Brett Leighton, to perform rarely-heard music for organ and percussion. Pilgrim Uniting Church, 12 Flinders St, Adelaide, 2.30pm. Tickets: $20.
Details: 8212 3295.
Dennis Rodman Bad Boy Tour NBA Hall-of-Famer Dennis Rodman, renowned as one of sports' most colourful and controversial athletes, is heading down under. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 7pm. Tickets from $49.
Details: bass.net.au
Monday, February 9 Talk: Iridescence in Art and Culture An exploration of iridescence through art and culture around the world. Pacific Cultures Gallery, Mezzanine, South Australian Museum, North Terrace, Adelaide, 6pm. Free, but bookings essential.
Details: 8207 7500 orsamuseum.sa.gov.au
Tuesday, February 10 Lunchtime Talk Senior curator of prints, drawing and photographs Julie Robinson speaks about a Rembrandt landscape. Art Gallery of SA, North Tce, Adelaide, 12.30pm. Free.Details: artgallery.sa.gov.au
Word count: 769
