WEDNESDAY Kaurna Ceremony This special ceremony is held at dawn nine days before the Adelaide Fringe opens in Victoria Square/Tarntanyangga to acknowledge the Kaurna nation -- the traditional custodians of the lands we gather on in Adelaide/Tarndanya. Victoria Square, King William St, Adelaide. Free. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com
Tech makerspace at Ramsay Place Come along to Ramsay Place to check out the cool gadgets from the library. See the 3D printer in action and learn about the online library. Ask expert librarians your technology-related questions. Ramsay Place, Noarlunga Centre, 11am-1pm. Details: 8384 0655.
THURSDAY SouthStart Conference and Expo 2015 SouthStart is for entrepreneurs, investors, hackers, aspiring entrepreneurs, hustlers, service providers, ecosystem supporters, founders and co-founders, and YOU, even if you're just thinking about starting and running your own business. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 9am-5pm. Cost: $100. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com FRIDAY Ebenezer Night Market Feast your senses on edible delights, homewares, designer clothing and jewellery all as you enjoy the vibes from DJ Teags. Ebenezer Place, 5.30pm-10.30pm. Details: splashadelaide.com.au
Australian Baseball League Championship Series Coming to South Austarlia for the first time in 34 years, this championship series will give spectators the chance to see Adelaide Bite host the final round of playoffs. Norwood Oval (Coopers Stadium), 4 Woods St Norwood. 7-11pm Friday, Saturday and Sunday (if necessary). $5 to $129. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com.
au SATURDAY Beat This Rock and Blues benefits concert starring Chris Finnen and friends Rick Bland, Rockfellas, Rocks in yer Head ... and more. The Arts Centre, Port Noarlunga, doors open 6.30pm. Tickets $35 online or over the phone. Detail: 8326 5577.
Activate Ramsay Place launch Come to the official Activate Ramsay Place launch for some great family fun and activities. Highlights include painting with Aboriginal artists, jumping castle, sausage sizzle and entertainment including drumming and barbershop harmonies. Ramsay Place, Noarlunga Centre between Colonnades Shopping Centre and Onkaparinga Council Office, 12 noon -- 2pm. Free. Details: onkaparingacity.com/ramsayplace/activate
AFTA Sunday Mail Holiday Expo It's on again with the biggest and the best deals and information from airlines, tour operators, retail travel agents, rail, coach and cruise companies. With over 150 exhibitors, there are also books, maps, guides and luggage for sale. Stop dreaming and start planning your next holiday this weekend. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 10am-5pm. Also on tomorrow, 10am-5pm. Cost: Adults $10, conc $9. Details: adelaideholidayexpo.com.au
Carnevale Food, wine, fashion, cars, entertainment for all ages, cooking demos, the Carnevale Cup (soccer for Under 12s), exhibitions, kids' corner, forums, bocce, youth stage and more! A fun filled weekend of everything Italian. Adelaide Showground, Goodwood Rd, Wayville, 9am-11pm. Also on tomorrow 9am-10pm. Cost: Adults $15, conc $10, children (5-15 years) $8. Details: carnevale-adelaide.com
SUNDAY Dennis Rodman Bad Boy Tour NBA Hall-of-Famer Dennis Rodman, renowned as one of sports' most colourful and controversial athletes of highest, is heading down under for a rare insight into his highly publicised life. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 7pm. Tickets from $49. Details: bass.net.au
Come and try stand up paddle boarding Onkaparinga residents aged 10 and over can come and try a free stand up paddle boarding lesson. Bookings essential. Meet under the footbridge at Weatherald Tce, Port Noarlunga South. Two sessions: noon to 1pm (session 1) or 1.15pm to 2.15pm (session 2). Details/bookings: Craig at craig@surfingsouthaustralia.com.au
Word count: 546
