WEDNESDAY Kaurna Ceremony This special ceremony is held at dawn nine days before the Adelaide Fringe opens in Victoria Square/ Tarntanyangga to acknowledge the Kaurna nation -- the traditional custodians of the lands we gather on in Adelaide/ Tarndanya. Victoria Square, King William St, Adelaide. Free. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com THURSDAY SouthStart Conference and Expo 2015 SouthStart is for entrepreneurs, investors, hackers, aspiring entrepreneurs, hustlers, service providers, ecosystem supporters, founders and co-founders, and you, even if you're just thinking about starting and running your own business. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 9am-5pm. Cost: $100. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com FRIDAY Campbelltown Moonlight Markets This free, family friendly event features over 100 artisan stalls. Campbelltown Food Trail stalls, live entertainment, kids activities, free parking and more. Thorndon Park, Hamilton Tce, Paradise, 6pm-10pm. Details: facebook.com/CCC moonlightmarkets Australian Baseball League Championship Series Coming to South Austarlia for the first time in 34 years, this championship series will give spectators the chance to see Adelaide Bite host the final round of playoffs. Norwood Oval (Coopers Stadium), 4 Woods St Norwood. 7-11pm Friday, Saturday and Sunday (if necessary). $5 to $129. Details: adelaide citycouncil.com.au SATURDAY AFTA Sunday Mail Holiday Expo It's on again with the biggest and the best deals and information from airlines, tour operators, retail travel agents, rail, coach and cruise companies. With over 150 exhibitors, there are also books, maps, guides and luggage for sale. Stop dreaming and start planning your next holiday this weekend. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 10am-5pm. Also on tomorrow, 10am-5pm. Cost: Adults $10, conc $9. Details: adelaide holidayexpo.com.au
Wattle Street Market A pop up garden market in the heart of the Eastern suburbs which brings together an eclectic mix of stalls from handmade kids and adult clothing and accessories to food. 77 Wattle St, Fullarton, 9am-4pm. Free entry. Details: 0438 806 983.
Carnevale Food, wine, fashion, cars, entertainment for all ages, cooking demos and more. Adelaide Showground, Goodwood Rd, Wayville, 9am-11pm. Also on tomorrow 9am-10pm. Cost: Adults $15, conc $10, children (5-15 years) $8. Details: carnevale-adelaide.com
Leo Sayer: The Restless Years Tour Leo is touring Australia for the first time in four years to celebrate the release of his latest CD Restless Years. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 8pm. Tickets from $69.90. Details: bass.net.au SUNDAY Dennis Rodman Bad Boy Tour NBA Hall-of-Famer Dennis Rodman, renowned as one of sports' most colourful and controversial athletes, is here for a rare insight into his highly publicised life. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 7pm. Tickets from $49.
Details: bass.net.au
Market Republic Held every second Sunday of every month, there will be stalls, entertainment, exhibitions, food and more. Furlan Function Centre, 69 Briar Rd, Felixstow, 9am-5pm. Details: whatsonforadelaidefamilies.com.au
Red Umbrella Market Combining new locally handcrafted items, preloved fashion for both adults and children and things to eat. Goodwood Community Centre, 32 Rosa St, Goodwood, 10am-3pm. Details: whatsonfor adelaidefamilies.com.au MONDAY Talk: Iridescence in Art and Culture An exploration of iridescence through art and culture around the world. South Australian Museum, North Terrace, Adelaide, 6pm. Free, but bookings essential.
Details: 8207 7500 or samuseum.sa.gov.au TUESDAY Lunchtime Talk Guest speaker senior curator of prints, drawing and photographs Julie Robinson Art Gallery of SA, North Tce, Adelaide, 12.30pm. Details: artgallery.sa.gov.au
Word count: 537
