THE contributions of the state’s Italian community, in fields ranging from business through to arts and culture, will be recognised later this year as part of a new annual awards event.
The South Australian Italian Association (SAIA) has launched its inaugural awards program, inviting nominations across four award categories – business, culture and art, research and development and innovation, and young achiever.
First and second-generation Italo-Australians and their businesses are eligible. An awards committee, including San Remo chairman Maurice Crotti, Fleet Space Technologies chief executive Flavia Tata Nardini and The Andy Thomas Space Foundation chief executive Nicola Sasanelli, has been assembled to assess nominations.
Professor Sasanelli said the awards program had been designed to inspire a new wave of innovation and achievement across the state’s Italo-Australian community.
“The awards have been designed to celebrate distinguished individuals and organisations in the community,” he said.
“However, we recognise that the term ‘distinguished’ will have a different look and meaning, depending on industry, background and purpose.
“As a result of this, we are looking for individuals who have made a tangible impact on the South Australian community, whether that be through their work commitments or philanthropic or community engagements.
“We are looking for individuals who have risen above hurdles to make positive contrib-utions to the community.” SAIA was founded in 1949, as the Catholic Italian Welfare Association, to support the growing population of post-war migrants arriving in South Australia.
Professor Sasanelli said that while many post-war migrants continued to make valued contributions to the state, a new wave of Italian migrants were also making their mark.
“Australia, and particularly South Australia, are lucky to boast a rich and innovative pool of Italian expats, whose impact on our state is immeasurable,” he said.
“Distinguished community members such as Flavia Tata Nardini, CEO of Fleet Space, who having moved to our state in 2012, raised $US26m last year, has provided more than 100 local jobs and has been a phenomenal contributor to inspiring and encouraging members of the community, particularly women, to follow STEM pathways.
“Similarly, second-generation Enrico Palermo, head of the Australian Space Agency, is playing a leading role in this important industry for South Australia.” Nominations close on September 15, ahead of a gala awards night on November 12, at the Convention Centre.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 383
