WEDNESDAY Kaurna Ceremony This special ceremony is held at dawn nine days before the Adelaide Fringe opens in Victoria Square/Tarntanyangga to acknowledge the Kaurna nation -- the traditional custodians of the lands we gather on in Adelaide/Tarndanya. Victoria Square, King William St, Adelaide. Free. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com THURSDAY SouthStart Conference and Expo 2015 SouthStart is for entrepreneurs, investors, hackers, aspiring entrepreneurs, hustlers, service providers, ecosystem supporters, founders and co-founders, and YOU, even if you're just thinking about starting and running your own business. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 9am-5pm. Cost: $100. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com FRIDAY Waugh in the West This Twenty 20 all-star cricket match features the Grange Cricket Club taking on Steve Waugh and the St Clair All Stars. Bring a picnic and chair and settle in for an evening of family entertainment, including food stalls and children's activities. New St Clair Oval (formerly Woodville), Actil Ave, St Clair, 4.30-8.30pm. Free. Details: St Clair on 131 878
St Jerome's Laneway Festival Enjoy live music and delicious food from the comfort of grass and shade. For the first time, this event is open to those aged 16 and older. Harts Mill, 11am-11pm. Tickets $130. Details: adelaide.lanewayfestival.com SATURDAY Wrestle Rampage: Meltdown Bring the family down for a big night of wrestling. This event will showcase some of the best wrestlers in Australia, battling it out for more than two hours. St Clair Recreation Centre, 109 Woodville Rd, Woodville, 7-9.30pm $20 (adults), $15 (children), $55 (family of two adults, two children). wrestlerampage.com
AFTA Sunday Mail Holiday Expo It's on again with the biggest and the best deals and information from airlines, tour operators, retail travel agents, rail, coach and cruise companies. With over 150 exhibitors, there are also books, maps, guides and luggage for sale. Stop dreaming and start planning your next holiday this weekend. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 10am-5pm. Also on tomorrow, 10am-5pm. Cost: Adults $10, conc $9. Details: aelaide holidayexpo.com.au Carnevale Food, wine, fashion, cars, entertainment for all ages, cooking demos, the Carnevale Cup (soccer for Under 12s), exhibitions, kids' corner, forums, bocce, youth stage and more! A fun filled weekend of everything Italian. Find all the action at Adelaide Showground, Goodwood Rd, Wayville, 9am-11pm. Also on tomorrow 9am-10pm. Cost: Adults $15, conc $10, children (5-15 years) $8. Details: carnevale-adelaide.com SUNDAY
Wild at Hart Markets Designed as a market with "thoughtful produce for mindful people" these markets feature about 20 stalls selling organic and rustic produce as well as delicious coffee. Harts Mill, Mundy St, Port Adelaide. Details: portenf.sa.gov.au
Arts in Our Port Our Port is offering an exciting range of free art workshops over the next few months. They are being conducted by artists who live in the Port Adelaide Enfield area. This week's is titled Paint like Picasso. 27 North Parade, Port Adelaide, 2-4pm. Bookings essential. Free. Details: Port Adelaide Visitor Information Centre on 8405 6560.
Dennis Rodman Bad Boy Tour NBA Hall-of-Famer Dennis Rodman, offers an insight into his highly publicised life. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 7pm. Tickets from $49. Details: bass.net.au
MONDAY Talk: Iridescence in Art and Culture An exploration of iridescence through art and culture. Pacific Cultures Gallery, Mezzanine, South Australian Museum, North Terrace, Adelaide, 6pm. Free, but bookings essential. Details: 8207 7500 or TUESDAY Lunchtime Talk Senior Curator of Prints, Drawing and Photographs Julie Robinson speaks about Rembrandt, Landscape with a cottage and haybarn, 1641. Etching, drypoint on paper. Art Gallery of SA, North Tce, Adelaide, 12.30pm. Free. Details: artgallery.sa.gov.au
Word count: 581
