OZHARVEST founder Ronni Kahn will be in Adelaide next week to share lessons from her 15-year journey as an entrepreneur and food rescuer – and reveal details of her new venture, For Purpose Co.
Starting in 2004 in Sydney with one van, donated by Goodman+ Foundation, Ms Kahn delivered 4000 meals in the first month.
Today, the not-for-profit operation operates nationally, rescuing more than 180 tonnes of food each week from in excess of 3500 food donors including supermarkets, hotels, airports, wholesalers, farmers, corporate events, catering companies, shopping centres, delis, cafes, restaurants, film and TV shoots and boardrooms.
“We’ve forgotten the value of food and how precious it is,” she told The Advertiser.
“But we don’t want to be rescuing food for ever, so that has now grown to include education and skills, including for vulnerable people.” While that is happening, Ms Kahn has also started For Purpose Co., a new social for-profit business that will raise money and support new social start-ups.
Ms Kahn is a speaker at the SouthStart conference from November 20-21, which is one of a number of events for entrepreneurs being held across the state as part of SouthStart.
OZHarvest will also be raising funds during SouthStart dinners next week. Ms Kahn is among a stellar line-up of speakers, including space industry veterans and executives like NASA director Christyl Johnson, Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency chief Dr Megan Clark, Kfir Damari from SpaceIL, Myriota’s Dr Alex Grant and Fleet Space’s Flavia Tata Nardini.
Other speakers include Culture Amp founder Didier Elzinga and d’Arenberg winemaker Chester Osborn, Shark Tank’s Steve Baxter and Google Creative Lab director Tea Uglow. Students and seniors have free entry at SouthStart.
Separately, the University of South Australia’s Innovation & Collaboration Centre (ICC) also kicked off its Techstars Startup Weekend yesterday. About 40 aspiring entrepreneurs will vie for three spots to secure ongoing support to launch their businesses.
Each of the three ICC Entrepreneurs in Residence; Kirk Drage, Terry Gold and Prof Richard Turner will be at hand to provide guidance and ideas.
Winners will be announced on Sunday evening.MORE DETAILS ABOUT THE EVENTS ARE AT SOUTHSTART.CO/
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 358
