WEDNESDAY Storytelling for Pre-Schoolers Hallett Cove Library, Zwerner Drv, Hallett Cove, 10.30am. A wonderful opportunity to have fun together, meet new friends, listen to stories and take something home to stick on the fridge. Also at Park Holme tomorrow. Details: 8375 6755.
Kaurna Ceremony This special ceremony is held at dawn nine days before the Adelaide Fringe opens in Victoria Square/Tarntanyangga to acknowledge the Kaurna nation -- the traditional custodians of the lands we gather on in Adelaide/Tarndanya. Victoria Square, King William St, Adelaide. Free. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com THURSDAY Kate Llewellyn 'A Fig at the Gate': Meet the Author In A Fig at the Gate, Kate, now in her seventies, embraces a new phase in her life, asking the question, 'how does one live well? Domain Theatre, 287 Diagonal Rd, Oaklands Park, 2pm. Details: 8375 6785.
SouthStart Conference and Expo 2015 SouthStart is for entrepreneurs, investors, hackers, aspiring entrepreneurs, hustlers, service providers, ecosystem supporters, founders and co-founders, and YOU, even if you're just thinking about starting and running your own business. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 9am-5pm. Cost: $100. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com FRIDAY Ebenezer Night Market Feast your senses on edible delights, homewares, designer clothing and jewellery all as you enjoy the vibes from DJ Teags. Ebenezer Place, 5.30pm-10.30pm. Details: splashadelaide.com.au
Australian Baseball League Championship Series Coming to South Austarlia for the first time in 34 years, this championship series will give spectators the chance to see Adelaide Bite host the final round of playoffs. Norwood Oval (Coopers Stadium), 4 Woods St Norwood. 7-11pm Friday, Saturday and Sunday (if necessary). $5 to $129. Details: adelaide citycouncil.com.au SATURDAY AFTA Sunday Mail Holiday Expo It's on again with the biggest and the best deals and information from airlines, tour operators, retail travel agents, rail, coach and cruise companies. With over 150 exhibitors, there are also books, maps, guides and luggage for sale. Stop dreaming and start planning your next holiday this weekend. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 10am-5pm. Also on tomorrow, 10am-5pm. Cost: Adults $10, conc $9. Details: adelaide holidayexpo.com.au
Carnevale Food, wine, fashion, cars, entertainment for all ages, cooking demos, the Carnevale Cup (soccer for Under 12s), exhibitions, kids' corner, forums, bocce, youth stage and more. A fun filled weekend of everything Italian. Adelaide Showground, Goodwood Rd, Wayville, 9am-11pm. Also on tomorrow 9am-10pm. Cost: Adults $15, conc $10, children (5-15 years) $8. Details: carnevale-adelaide.com
Leo Sayer: The Restless Years Tour Leo is touring Australia for the first time in four years to celebrate the release of his latest CD Restless Years. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 8pm. Tickets from $69.90. Details: bass.net.au SUNDAY Dennis Rodman Bad Boy Tour NBA Hall-of-Famer Dennis Rodman, renowned as one of sports' most colourful and controversial athletes of all-time, is heading down under for a rare insight into his highly publicised life. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 7pm. Tickets from $49. Details: bass.net.au MONDAY Talk: Iridescence in Art and Culture An exploration of iridescence through art and culture around the world. Pacific Cultures Gallery, Mezzanine, South Australian Museum, North Terrace, Adelaide, 6pm. Free, but bookings essential. Details: 8207 7500 or samuseum.sa.gov.au TUESDAY Lunchtime Talk Senior Curator of Prints, Drawing and Photographs Julie Robinson speaks about Rembrandt, Landscape with a cottage and haybarn, 1641. Etching, drypoint on paper. Art Gallery of SA, North Tce, Adelaide, 12.30pm. Free. Details: artgallery.sa.gov.au
Word count: 557
