WEDNESDAY Enfield Library Preschool Storytime This session introduces children and caregivers to a wide variety of books. Join in with others to enjoy stories, songs, finger rhymes and craft activities. Enfield Library, 1 Kensington Cres, Enfield, 10.15am-10.45am. Free. Suitable for children aged 1-5.
Details: 8405 6530.
Greenacres Library Baby Bounce Introduce your child to the joys of language with nursery rhymes, finger plays, songs and stories. Greenacres Library, 2 Fosters Rd, Hillcrest, 10.30am-11am. Free. Suitable for children aged 0-2. No bookings required.
Details: 8405 6540.
Kaurna Ceremony This special ceremony is held at dawn nine days before the Adelaide Fringe opens in Victoria Square/ Tarntanyangga to acknowledge the Kaurna nation -- the traditional custodians of the lands we gather on in Adelaide/ Tarndanya. Victoria Square, King William St, Adelaide. Free. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com THURSDAY SouthStart Conference and Expo 2015 SouthStart is for entrepreneurs, investors, hackers, aspiring entrepreneurs, service providers, ecosystem supporters, founders and co-founders, or anyone thinking about starting and running a business. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 9am-5pm. Cost: $100. Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com FRIDAY Twilight Concert Series Activities for children and youth including jumping castle and giant games complementing the music focus of the event. Tonight it's Party in the Park with Santana tribute band Soultana. Memorial Gardens, off Menzies Cres, 6.30pm. Details: whatsonfor adelaidefamilies.com.au
Australian Baseball League Championship Series Coming to South Austarlia for the first time in 34 years, this championship series will give spectators the chance to see Adelaide Bite host the final round of playoffs. Norwood Oval (Coopers Stadium), 4 Woods St Norwood. 7pm-11pm Friday, Saturday and Sunday (if necessary). Cost: $5 to $129.
Details: adelaidecity council.com.au SATURDAY AFTA Sunday Mail Holiday Expo It's on again with the biggest and the best deals and information from airlines, tour operators, retail travel agents, rail, coach and cruise companies. With over 150 exhibitors, there are also books, maps, guides and luggage for sale. Stop dreaming and start planning your next holiday this weekend. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, Adelaide, 10am-5pm. Also on tomorrow, 10am-5pm. Cost: Adults $10, conc $9. Details: adelaide holidayexpo.com.au
Carnevale Food, wine, fashion, cars, entertainment for all ages, cooking demos, the Carnevale Cup (soccer for Under 12s), exhibitions, kids' corner, forums, bocce, youth stage and more. Adelaide Showground, Goodwood Rd, Wayville, 9am-11pm. Also on tomorrow 9am-10pm. Cost: Adults $15, conc $10, children (5-15 years) $8. Details: carnevale-adelaide.com
Leo Sayer: The Restless Years Tour Leo is touring Australia for the first time in four years to celebrate the release of his latest CD Restless Years. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 8pm. Tickets from $69.90.
Details: bass.net.au SUNDAY Dennis Rodman Bad Boy Tour NBA Hall-of-Famer Dennis Rodman, renowned as one of sports' most colourful and controversial athletes of all-time, is here for a rare insight into his publicised life. Her Majesty's Theatre, 58 Grote St, Adelaide, 7pm. Tickets from $49.
Details: bass.net.au MONDAY Talk: Iridescence in Art and Culture An exploration of iridescence through art and culture around the world. SA Museum, North Tce, Adelaide, 6pm. Free, but bookings essential. Details: 8207 7500 or samuseum.sa.gov.au TUESDAY Lunchtime Talk Senior Curator of Prints, Drawing and Photographs Julie Robinson speaks about Rembrandt, Landscape with a cottage and haybarn, 1641. Etching, drypoint on paper. Art Gallery of SA, North Tce, Adelaide, 12.30pm. Free. Details: artgallery.sa.gov.au
Word count: 548
