THIS year’s SouthStart conference is shaping up to be a watershed moment in our state’s future as we shift gear and embark on a new journey with entrepreneurship at the heart of the state’s economic game plan.
Entrepreneurs are society’s creative problem solvers who generate jobs and wealth for our economy along the way. We need more people aspiring to be entrepreneurs – and SouthStart offers that inspiration with the quality of speakers assembled this year.
The 2018 program features some of our nation’s top talent across a diverse range of fields – people who have tried, failed, picked themselves up, and tried again.
We need to share these stories of success and failure because it’s through example that we gain inspiration and motivation to follow our dreams.
SouthStart presents speakers from Canva, Australia’s latest start-up unicorn, and Sweat, the brainchild of Adelaide power couple Kayla Itsines and Tobi Pearce.
Attendees will also hear from researchers who have attracted venture capital, as well as start-ups in the growing sectors of space, internet of things, artificial intelligence, and machine learning.
An international focus is critical if South Australia is to take the leap from where we are now to being a truly world-class destination for developing successful businesses. That’s why SouthStart has secured enterprises which have their sights set on global customers and are already taking SA innovation to international markets.
In addition to an international focus, SA needs the domestic infrastructure to grow innovative ideas into successful businesses.
It’s this entrepreneurial capacity that is being developed through the new Office of the Chief Entrepreneur at Lot Fourteen and the four entrepreneurship schools due to start next year. It’s an exciting time to be an entrepreneur in SA, but there’s no denying that starting and developing a successful business is one of the hardest things a person can ever do.
Entrepreneurs shouldn’t have to face this journey alone. They need to get out and connect with others who have already braved the journey and can offer valuable business lessons and personal advice.
SouthStart provides the platform for entrepreneurs and aspiring entrepreneurs to come together and share their stories, to celebrate their successes, and to commiserate when things don’t go to plan.
I am truly looking forward to this year’s conference, and encourage the entrepreneurial community nationwide to visit SA and connect with some of the Australia’s leading entrepreneurs.
■ Jim Whalley is SA’s Chief Entrepreneur. He will deliver a speech, “Driving entrepreneurship and future industries in South Australia”, on November 22.
CREDIT: JIM WHALLEY
Word count: 424
