FIVE South Australian start-ups with solutions to solve real-world problems from farm to cloud will bid for a cash prize, industry support and investors at the SouthStart conference on Thursday.
A highly anticipated event at the conference, the finalists for this year's Start-up Pitching Competition are online art seller Bluethumb, sports betting platform Betswaps, cloud systems developer Link4 Australia, solar hothouses farmer Platfarm and robotic microscopy systems maker Frontier Microscopy.
"We had a very high calibre of start-ups apply to pitch this year with seven teams tied at the top spots, making the judges' decision very hard," said Chhai Thach, founder of SouthStart.
"The finalists have either proven a product market fit by having a lot of paying customers or have demonstrated innovative solutions to solve real-world problems with a huge potential global market." The competition is a chance for the companies to present their products to a panel of investors, founders, and commercialisation experts and the local community.
Also up for grabs is a cash prize of $5000 provided by Oracle and $3000 worth of professional services from PwC.
Betswaps recently secured $200,000 in funding support through the Shark Tank TV program.
Robotic microscopy systems developer Frontier Microscopy is in talks with universities and industry to work on its first product - an automated microscopy analysis system for the asbestos air monitoring industry.
Co-founder Jordan Gallagher-Gruber, a mechatronic engineer, said Frontier's solution was "more reliable and accurate" and would also ensure people safety in tackling a serious problem across Australia.
Bluethumb co-owner Edward Hartley said the online art business - first started in Brisbane and subsquently bought by Adelaide-based Mr Hartley and his brother - was growing strongly with the concept now ready for global markets.
"We have configured our Australian website to build in logistics for potential sales in the US and other markets.
"Besides networking and further investment avenues, the conference will also enable us to secure funding to progress that further," Mr Hartley said.
Link4 Australia, now six months in the making, is developing a web solution to link existing cloud-based accounting systems, improving business efficiency and product-ivity, co-founder Robin Sands said.
"Over 600,000 businesses in Australia use cloud-based accounting systems that don't talk to each other; our business will bridge this gap," he said.
Platfarm co-founder and wine grapes grower Oli Madgett wants to set up solar-powered seawater greenhouses to grow high-value fruit and vegetables in arid environments - similar to SundropFarms' greenhouse operation near Port Augusta.
Mr Madgett says he is partnering with UK pioneer Charlie Paton, who initially worked with Sundrop, and has identified locations around SA - on Torrens Island, Dry Creek and Lonsdale - that would be ideal for his proposed $3 million capital projects.
The winning pitch will be decided by PwC grants and R&D director Paxton Cook, Upload VR's entrepreneur in residence Robert Scoble, Signal Ventures Atlanta Daniel and Follow the Seed founding partner Andrey Shirben.
SouthStart is part of Entrepreneurs Week, supported by Brand SA, Adelaide City Council, the State Government, News Corp Australia and other sponsors.
ENTREPRENEURS AND THEIR CLEVER PRODUCTS Bluethumb: An online marketplace to uncover Australian artwork, the business started in Brisbane before being bought by two brothers Adelaide-based Edward Hartley and George Hartley.
Betswaps: An online social network, founded by Michael Timbs, that brings together sports betting and racing enthusiasts for punts based on tips and expertise. It recently secured $200,000 in funding through TV series Shark Tank.
Link4 Australia: Partners Robin Sands and Sam Hassan, also partners in digital business GrowthWorx, are developing a web solution that allows users of one cloud accounting software system to send invoices to customers with many different types of cloud software solutions.
Platfarm: Founder Oliver Madgett is partnering with UK inventor Charlie Paton on modular, scalable and sustainable greenhouses that use solar energy and seawater for high-value horticulture.Frontier Microscopy: Mechatronic engineer Jordan Gallagher-Gruber and business partner R C Gayathri G T Rajendran have developed a robotic microscopy system technology to help monitor asbestos and is in talks with universities and industry to commercialise its product by the end of the year or early next year.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 702
