Jane Danvers – who also is the presiding head of the SACE Board and chair of the Jam Factory – will move to Sydney to take up a position at Kambala, an all-girls’ school in Rose Bay.
As a born and bred South Australian, Ms Danvers said it was bittersweet to be leaving.
“But I must practise what we preach as educators and be true and courageous,” she said.
She said her twin daughters lived in Sydney and she was looking forward to spending more time with them.
Looking back on her tenure, Ms Danvers said she was proud of the educational direction at the all-girls Wilderness School.
“It’s about preparing young women for their professional lives and their future,” she said.
“I love the quote which says we should be educating children for their future and not our past.
“That’s been the mantra and for young women, in particular, the world is full of new opportunities.”
Many Wilderness graduates were forging careers based on the digital economy, cyber security and design technology foundation they had learnt at school, she said.
Ms Danvers was also proud of how Wilderness students interacted with other schools internationally and the substantial capital investments made at the school.
Wilderness governing council chair Shanti Berggren announced the change.
“Throughout her tenure, Jane has built a strong and thriving community,” she said.
“Wilderness has grown and prospered. We are recognised as a leading girls’ school both within SA and further afield and our academic results have consistently placed us amongst the top schools in the country.
“Our girls enjoy world-class facilities and participate in a forward-thinking and dynamic curriculum that truly equips them to succeed in each stage of their life’s journey.“
Education Minister John Gardner thanked Ms Danvers for her service, especially on the SACE Board.
“While we are sorry to see her leaving our state, she will leave the SACE organisation in a strong position when she moves interstate, and can be proud of her contribution to education in SA,” he said.
The Advertiser’s Chris Russell explains what the 2021 SA state budget means for education.
Ms Danvers will continue at Wilderness and on the SACE Board until the end of the year, giving time for successors to be recruited.
She is about half way through her term heading the Jam Factory, which promotes artists in craft and design.
Ms Danvers also serves on the Andy Thomas Space Foundation Education advisory board.
She has been on advisory boards for the SA chapter of Committee for Economic Development of Australia, Adelaide University’s humanities, health, and medical sciences and the SA Health and Medical Research Institute.
Established in 1884, Wilderness is one of SA’s oldest schools. Fees start at $15,576 at Reception, increasing progressively to $27,336 at year 12.
Its annual income is about $22 million.
Kambala has recurrent income of over $33 million a year, with fees around $35,000 according MySchool data.
Kambala has recently attracted nationwide attention through the work of graduate Chanel Contos who has led a campaign to improve sex education and understanding of consent.
“She has been a brave young woman to focus our attention on what is necessary in this day and age to support all people, boys and girls, to make really good decisions and treat each other respectfully,” Ms Danvers said.
Word count: 528
