Wednesday, October 15
Memento Mori ASO Grainger Studio, 91 Hindley St, Adelaide, 7pm. The Adelaide Symphony Orchestra celebrates the works of Peter Sculthorpe, an Australian composer. Tickets: Adult $30.
Details: aso.com.au/products/special-events/memento-mori
Everybody Sing!
Adelaide Festival Centre, Banquet Room, King William Rd, Adelaide, 1.30pm. Sing for Joy Choirs of older people combine with Cirkidz to present a concert with tricks. Tickets: $26. Booking essential.
Details: 8721 2504
Remember Me: The Lost Diggers of Vigna Court State Library of South Australia, North Tce, Adelaide, 11am. Take a guided tour of travelling exhibition from the Australian War Memorial and hear stories of WW1 soldiers. Bookings essential. Free.
Details: 8207 7215
Thursday, October 16
Grace Barbe Adelaide Festival Centre, King William St, Adelaide, 8pm. Seychelles islander Grace Barbe's soulful music reflects and celebrates the diverse cultural influences of her Indian Ocean heritage. Tickets: Adult $35, conc $30. Details: bass.net.au My Fair Lady The Arts Theatre, 53 Angas St, Adelaide, 7.30pm. Until October 18 and October 21-25 (matinees on Saturdays at 1.30pm). The Metropolitan Musical Theatre Company of SA presents the classic show about Eliza Doolittle. Tickets: Adults $32, conc $26.
Details: metmusicals.com.au
Friday, October 17
Japanese Film Festival Mercury Cinema, 13 Morphett St, Adelaide. Until October 19. Screening the best of contemporary Japanese cinema, from anime to action. Tickets: Adult $18, conc $15. Details: japanesefilmfestival.net
Adelaide United v Melbourne Victory Adelaide Oval, War Memorial Drive, Adelaide, 7.10pm. Soccer will return to Adelaide with an Adelaide United FC blockbuster against Melbourne Victory for round two of the Hyundai A-League 2014/15 Season. Tickets from $25.50.
Details: ticketek.com.au
Lawrence Mooney is a Stupid Liar Adelaide Festival Centre, Dunstan Playhouse, King William St, Adelaide, 7.30pm. The host of ABC2's Dirty Laundry Live is back with a hilarious show of tales, fibs and theories. Tickets: Adult $39.90, conc $34.90.
Details: bass.net.au
The Organic Life film screening Studio One, City Library, Rundle Place, Adelaide, 6pm. A year in the life of a hopeful organic farmer and his skeptical girlfriend reveals that a changing climate, financial insecurity, demanding physical labour, and corporate agriculture threaten the sustainability of one of the world's most traditional livelihoods in modern-day America. Free.
Details: adelaidecitycouncil.com
Changemakers Festival 2014 Launch Party Hub Adelaide, Peel St, Adelaide, 6pm. The Festival is all about uniting people all over the country who are passionate about driving change and making the world a better place. Free.
Details: changemakersfestival.org
Saturday, October 18
Myer Designer Workshop with Wayne Cooper Myer Adelaide, Rundle Mall, Adelaide, 1pm. Seek out this season's wardrobe essentials with inside tips from one of Australia's most loved designers. Free. Other Festival events include: Behind the Seams Q&A Workshop - Hotel Richmond, 128 Rundle Mall, Adelaide, Sunday, October 19, 4pm-6pm. Ever wanted to go 'behind the seams' in the fashion industry? Listen and interact with key guest speakers - including our own Fashion Editor Anna Vlach - from different areas of the industry and gain an insight into what is involved in their roles. $45 per person (includes canape's and complimentary beverage on arrival).
Details: adelaidefashion-festival.com.au SouthStart Hackfest Weekend Majoran Coworking, level two, 14 Grenfell St, Adelaide, 11am-3pm. Until October 19.
This inaugural event gives teams two minutes to demonstrate their product or tool to industry experts and investors. Free. Details: majoran.co
Sunday, October 19
Gallery Shop Story Time Art Gallery of South Australia, North Tce, Adelaide, 11.30am. A new children's title is featured each week. Free.
Details: artgallery.sa.gov.au
Monday, October 20
Italian Film Festival Palace Nova Eastend Cinemas, 3 Cinema Pl, Adelaide. There are three screenings today as the end of the festival nears - 1.30pm: The Mafia Kills Only in Summer; 6.30pm: The Art of Happiness and 8.30pm: The Fifth Wheel. Tickets for each movie: Adult $19.50, conc $16.50.
Details: italianfilm-festival.com.au
Tuesday, October 21
Cardio Tennis Hindmarsh Square, Pulteney St, Adelaide, 12.30pm-1.30pm. Held on Tuesdays until December 2. A coach will be on hand for these free tennis workout sessions. Free.
Details: adelaidecity-council.com Saturday, October 18
James Morrison at the Con -- The A to Z of JazzElder Hall, Adelaide University, North Tce, Adelaide, 7.30pm. For one night only, Australia's foremost jazz artist and musician extraordinaire leads us through a century of jazz. Tickets: $38. Details:music.adelaide. edu.au/ elderhall/tickets
Word count: 700
