TECHNOLOGY heavyweights from across the globe – including online product designers and leaders in the space and transport industries – will converge in Adelaide in November.
Tech-focused start-up event, SouthStart, has announced headline speakers, including Cameron Adams; co-founder at online design company Canva, and Lewis Horne; chief executive of Swedish electric car manufacturer Uniti.
Tickets are now on sale for the November 22-23 event, with 20 speakers already signed up to appear at the Town Hall.
Event director Craig Swann said the program, backed by the State Government, would expose SA’s entrepreneurial and technological feats to the world stage through workshops, activities and keynote speakers.
“We aim to inspire, connect and unite and a lot of that’s through the story telling of the people who have been through the journey before, and sharing their stories, good or bad,” Mr Swann said.
“We’re looking to do a really good job of connecting the local start-up ecosystem.” The conference – geared towards entrepreneurs, investors and students – would also attract interstate and overseas investment.
Artificial intelligence, space and future transport technologies were among the key themes. Mr Swann said Cameron Adams’ company Canva was an excellent case-study for emerging entrepreneurs.
“They’ll provide context on what it’s like to grow a company from an idea to something that’s impacting millions of people,” he said.
Canva’s online design platform now has more than 10 million users across 190 countries. Organisers were also keen to draw on the interest in emerging transport technology in SA through showcasing Uniti’s achievements. “(Lewis Horne) lends an excellent international perspective on the conversation that’s already happening here in SA,” Mr Swann said.
Start-up incubator The Moonshine Lab, in May, announced it would take over the annual event, after its former founders moved on to other endeavours. Also among the event’s speakers is Adelaide-based Tobi Pearce, who launched Bikini Body Guides with his fiance Kayla Itsines in 2012, encouraging people to transform their bodies over 12 weeks. Mr Pearce also launched fitness and health company SWEAT, which has become one of Apple’s largest grossing apps. Industry and Skills Minister David Pisoni said SouthStart would add to the state’s “opportunity rich” business environment.The night before the conference, Flinders University’s New Venture Institute will run Icebreaker – a speed networking event. Super Early Bird tickets cost $149. Visit www.southstart.co.
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE
Word count: 391
