Businesses do not know how much it will cost to access the $4.65 million GigCity Adelaide high speed internet service as frustration emerges over perceived delays to the rollout of the highly publicised project.
The State Government has refused to tell The City who has been selected as the preferred provider of the publicly funded service, which will be connected to 14 precincts in Adelaide and offer speeds of up to 10 Gbps - or 100 times faster than the best possible NBN service.
Manufacturing and Innovation Minister Kyam Maher said in a statement that negotiations were continuing with the preferred tenderer and that a contract will be "signed soon" to enable services to be available in the middle of this year.
Tenders for the rollout were launched in December after the government announced six months earlier it would invest millions to become Australia's first Gig City by using the existing SABRE Net optical fibre network. The paper has learned that late last month government representatives told one potential recipient of the service that the official internet provider had been chosen. However they did not disclose to the person who the provider was nor could they give an indication of the potential costs of accessing the service.
One business chief, speaking on the condition of anonymity, has told the paper his tech firm is considering relocating from its city building because of perceived "delays" in accessing the Gig City network.
"We are strong supporters of the government in this area ... however we are at the point where we are pretty disappointed in the whole process and the lack of decent internet is seriously hurting our business, being in tech services," he said.
"Not only are there delays, we have not seen any costs or internet speeds or anything like that so we are not even sure it will be worth the wait in the end.
"We have begun looking into our own wireless internet solutions and a potential move to our own premises in the city in the very near future."St Paul's Creative will be the first site to be connected to the service, which will be progressively rolled out to Tonsley Innovation Precinct, Technology Park, Techport, Thebarton Bioscience Precinct, the Majoran Co-working Space, Adelaide Smart Studio, Hub Adelaide, the Stretton Centre, SouthStart Co-work, Science Park, SA Film Corporation, The Mill and Carclew's Fifth Quarter.
Credit: Renato Castello
Word count: 399
