SOUTHSTART is not a conference for Adelaide, it is a celebration of Australian talent and success stories and a mandate to open the conversation for change.
It is the meshing together of innovation, people and a burgeoning culture for innovation that is building in Australia.
The event will bring together investors, innovators, Government, and private enterprise with the intention to build greater connectedness between these somewhat siloed networks.
There is an amazing line-up of local, national and international speakers talking about their successes, challenges, and an agenda to build a new industry premised on deep technology and a harnessing of the new digital age.
The intention is not to have a bunch of people talking about what they have done and how South Australia is the perfect innovation or start-up environment.
It is meant to open an honest conversation about what we could be doing better and getting the right people to assist in affecting change.
I am so excited to be part of the line-up of speakers at SouthStart. My session will focus partly on the exciting opportunity for our state to build a new digital industry, of which Life Whisperer and Presagen will be a core part.
But it will also portray an honest view of what isn’t going so well in this state and some of the major challenges we need to overcome if we are going to compete on the world stage. Some of this has to do with culture and mindset, government policy, building a supportive local environment with international connections, and driving investment funding and capital to prevent a brain drain.
SouthStart is going to kickstart a great conversation with all the right people in the room to make the change.
The only way we can build a new industry is together. We need everyone to get involved.
Start-ups will have the opportunity to pitch to investors, and investors will see a showcase of amazing opportunities.
Our new Government will have the opportunity to speak about their vision for SA. Everyone should get involved and get excited about the amazing opportunity we have to build locally but be successful globally.■ Michelle Perugini is co-founder and managing director of Presagen and Life Whisperer
CREDIT: MICHELLE PERUGINI
Word count: 372
