As the founder of SA’s globally-renowned couture house Paolo Sebastian, Paul Vasileff has one key take-home message for start-ups.
And that’s to always listen to your inner voice rather than anyone who says your business idea won’t work.
The 28-year-old will be explaining how that has worked for him at this week’s SouthStart start-up conference where he is a guest speaker.
Now recognised as one of SA’s greatest fashion success stories, Vasileff was just 16 when he staged a CanTeen fundraiser to launch Paolo Sebastian 11 years ago.
Literally starting as a one-man show, Paolo Sebastian, which now employs 18 staff, has well and truly gone global.
International clients now account for 50 per cent of all orders, with Vasileff dressing some of the world’s biggest celebrities including Katy Perry and the Kardashians.
Vasileff’s achievements include being the first Australian designer to have a gown on the Oscars red carpet and being named the 2017 Young Australian of the Year.
He also made history as the first South Australian to show in Paris with his Gilded Wings collection, launched in La Maison Champs Élysées in 2016. And what makes Vasileff’s triumphs all the more remarkable is that everything – including the creation of his handmade gowns – happens in Adelaide where Paolo Sebastian has its headquarters in Gouger St.
“So many people said it wouldn’t be possible for me,” Vasileff said of his dream to build a couture house in his hometown.
While acknowledging he was being given “sound advice” from those who suggested he focus on ready-to-wear designs or work for an existing fashion business, Vasileff was committed to his vision.
“I had to keep in mind that I was breaking new ground,” he said. “I was doing something new and different and there was nothing to go by in the state or the country. I took a leap of faith and had no option but to make it work.” Vasileff said traditional and social media had also made it possible for him to be a trailblazer without leaving SA, with many of his overseas clients travelling here to see him.Paolo Sebastian founder Paul Vasileff will present ‘The journey establishing a global fashion house from Adelaide’ at Adelaide Town Hall on Friday, November 23, 4.25pmDetails at southstart.co
CREDIT: ANNA VLACH
Word count: 382
