FIVE start-ups have access to a $125,000 pool of funds and expert advice from 30 successful SA-based or SA-linked tech entrepreneurs as part of a new accelerator program.
Venture capital firm Acumen Ventures' partner Shane Cheek yesterday announced the new SouthStart Accelerate program at an Innovation Bay breakfast event featuring SA-born, Melbourne-based millionaire entrepreneur and angel investor Bevan Clark.
The four-month SouthStart Accelerate program, starting in September, offers a $25,000 investment and intensive mentoring from 30 successful technology entrepreneurs, access to their global networks, and a focus on getting paying customers sooner rather than later.
Entrepreneurs will be based free at the Majoran co-working space in the city to participate in the workshops, speakers' sessions and other aspects of the program.
The funding will be distributed through an investment vehicle set up for the contributions from the entrepreneurs in return for a 6 per cent equity in the start-up.
Mr Cheek said the founders will get to meet investors here and overseas with the program organisers "taking them to the most sensible, logical place for them to raise further investment and find customers".
Mentors include well-known South Australian supporters Vinomofo founders Justin Dry and Andre Eikmeier, Google Australia engineering director Alan Noble, co-founder of Strategic Data Management and Kloud Solutions Geoff Rohrsheim and Intelligent Software Development founder Don Perugini.
"While accelerator programs have been here for sometime, it's the first time we are bringing together valued local connections to offer start-ups a deep bench of mentor talent which have been through the same learning curves," Mr Cheek said.
The start-ups need to have at least two founders, one with a strong technical background, and a focus on software or internet product or digital idea.
Applications can be made via www.southstart.co from today and close August 5. The launch of the program marks another step in the evolving entrepreneurial scene in Australia, offering opportunities not accessible to Renmark-born Mr Clark, who set up coupons website Retailmenot.com in Melbourne with business partner Guy King in 2006.
A majority stake in RetailMeNot was sold to a US-based venture capital-backed WhaleShark Media for "north of $100 million" in 2010 and it was listed on the Nasdaq in 2013.
Today, it is worth more than $600 million with millions of customers and 400 employees.Mr Clark is now an investor in 20 Australian early-stage companies, including wi-fi enabled LED smart bulb maker LIFX and online independent Melbourne and Sydney grocery delivery company YourGrocer.com.au.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 421
