To get a feel for how co-working actually works, The City reporter Sophie Perri took a hot desk at Hub Adelaide on Peel St, a space where individuals and small businesses can rent out desks and offices for a month or more.
After tapping away on my iPad for about 20 minutes, I stop to take in my surroundings.
Most of the light is natural and comes from the windows overlooking Peel St., a pleasant change from the fluro glow of most offices. There's a cubby house with big red cushions. Words like "branding", "numbers", "YouTube" and "webcast" are being thrown around by a headphone-wearing man deep in a phone conversation behind me.
People slowly file in and greet each other as they set up their laptops and work on their respective projects.
"Sophie, did you want to pay $10 for mixed bag lunch today?" says Hub Australia's community cultivator Jan Stewart, who is holding a clipboard with a long list of names.
"Would you like chicken or pumpkin pasta?"
Adelaide's thirst for co-working has grown exponentially over the past four years. In 2012, The Majoran Distillery on Grenfell St was the first to introduce the city to the innovative, open-plan system that sees individuals and small businesses work alongside each other. Then came Hub Adelaide in 2013, which moved into the former home of artist-run initiative Format (now on Hindley St) with a $1 million boost from the State Government.
But co-working really started to boom in countries such as the US and Europe in about 2005 in response to the economic downturn which prompted people to go out on their own in line with a growth in businesses hiring workers on a contractual basis rather than fulltime.
Shared workspaces first started as an informal arrangement, with freelancers leasing office space together as it was more affordable. But the benefits of this type of work environment quickly became obvious - offering a ready-made professional community, interaction and co-operation, affordability and flexibility.
Now, Adelaide is home to 16 co-working spaces.
Not only do these spaces have the usual office amenities (kitchens, meeting rooms), there's also plenty of "fun stuff", like the ping pong table at St Paul's Creative Centre, to the arcade video game and communal Thursday lunch program at Hub.
But it's not all about pumpkin pasta and ping pong. Though the physical spaces are often inspiring aesthetically it's the people working within those spaces that make the magic.
Sitting on the couches near the Hub's kitchen area, I strike up a conversation with two of the space's 150 members: Matthew Wright-Simon, creator of sustainability consultancy EcoCreative, and Robin Freeth, a business coach who is helping manage TEDx Adelaide.
Wright-Simon, one of Hub's original tenants, moved his four-person business from a 160 sq m office in the city to a 12 sq m office at The Hub, which costs $2500 a month plus GST.
Wright-Simon and Freeth both know the feelings of isolation that come with working from home. Freeth had been working in his home office for five months before coming to the Hub a year ago. "The first month or two at home you think, this is great, I can wander around in my T-shirt and thongs, but it's quite a romantic idea and the reality is quite different," he says.
"I had too many distractions and not enough people contact. I work best with having other professionals around me and I've been much more productive here." Through working alongside each other, Wright-Simon and Freeth have been able to collaborate and share their networks with one another.
"The benefit of being here is that you see people frequently and it allows you to fast-track those relationships."
Over on the second floor of the old Tattersalls building on Grenfell St is Majoran Distillery, which has a strong focus on the tech start-up community.
Michael Reid, a chartered accountant, and Chhai Thach, a software engineer, started Majoran in a 72 sq m office on Pulteney St in 2012, after working on projects at each other's houses and realising they needed an office.
Six companies wanted in as well, so three months later they moved to a larger HQ on Grenfell St.
Managing director Steve Barrett, also one of Majoran's founding members, says the building will be renovated this year to include better meeting rooms and facilities.
They have raised more than $13,000 for the renovation through a crowd-funding campaign, and have secured financial support from the Beyond Bank Community Entrepreneurs Grant.
The co-working hub is also set to host SouthStart, the Adelaide version of Sydney start-up conference Sydstart, again this year.
Over on Angas St, 37 artists drift in and out of gallery and office space The Mill every day.
Erin Fowler, who opened the space with Amber Cronin in 2013, says the popularity of co-working has brought more attention to the artistic process.
"I think that's the nature of artists, we are collaborative and often change who we work with so the model is naturally suited to artistic work," Fowler says. "But I think it's exciting that co-working is becoming more seen and understood by the public. I think they're excited to come into co-working spaces and see more of it, so that's what is kind of changing." Leticia Mooney, a member of Majoran, sings the praises of co-working but understands it's not for everyone.
It was at a start-up weekend that she developed the idea for AnySpace Global, an initiative that aims to make use of the city's 200,000 sq m of underused and vacant office space. The website allows for people who need space, and have space, to find each other. "It stemmed out of the idea that co-working didn't work for everybody; there were issues where people grow out of co-working, or might need a new space," Mooney says.
Mooney, who says she "found her tribe" at Majoran, acknowledges each co-working space has its own culture.
"It's about finding your tribe, so if you don't feel like you fit into any of those things it can be pretty tricky," she says.
It's why Sasha Dragovelic, who is also behind AnySpace Global as well as young entrepreneurial program Bosscamp, has started an event called EntrepreTour.
The tour sees Dragovelic take a group of 20 people to around six of Adelaide's co-working spaces, where they can get a feel for each spot.
Though co-working spaces run tours of their own, group tours can be a more relaxed way for people to be introduced to co-working, Dragovelic says.
"Sometimes people feel a little uncomfortable approaching a single place by themselves because they don't know how to go about it and they feel there might be an obligation for them to sign up to a particular space," he says.
Dragovelic, who is developing a "senior-preneaurs" lounge at the Seniors Information Centre on Currie St in March, says popularity of the tours shows Adelaide's co-working community is indeed growing, and will continue to grow.
CO-WORKING SPOTS IN CBD - Intersect Adelaide, 161 Wakefield St and 167 Flinders St - business - Majoran Distillery, 2/14 Grenfell St - tech and start-ups - St Paul's Creative Centre, cnr Pulteney and Flinders streets - arts/creative industries - Tuxedo Cat, 54 Hyde St - tech/startups/creative - Hub Adelaide, 5 Peel St - business professionals- The Mill, 154 Angas St - art and design
Credit: Sophie Perri
Word count: 1233
