SMALL start-up business Maj-oran has become a key player in helping develop the rapidly changing Adelaide workforce.
It is assisting young entre-preneurs to build their own companies and engineer a new working life in Adelaide.
Started by Michael Reid and Chhai Thach in August 2012, the Majoran Distillery has grown from six to 37 young tech and creative people - while encompassing a broader entre-preneurial community in the hundreds through its events.
Under its business model, Majoran rents a floor of the old Tattersalls building on Grenfell St - and then sublets it to a community of like-minded tech start-ups and established businesses.
Mr Reid said the Majoran community was playing an increasingly important role in Adelaide business as a catalyst to get people out of their homes and immersed in a culture of inde-pendent working.
It also exposes them to various learning opportunities, where they gain tech, business and creative skills.
"I would like to think the community that gravitates around Majoran and similar spaces such as Hub Adelaide and, in a sense the ANZ Innovyz START accelerator program, is helping people build Adelaide into the place they want it to be and the place they wish they'd grown up in," he said.
"These communities are helping develop the city into a more compelling place for young people to stay, while attracting interstate and inter-national creatives and businesses.' ' Mr Reid said technology meant the state's economy was exposed to more global competition and displacing jobs across the spectrum - both blue and white collar.
"There is an underlying commercial reality that tech-nology is disrupting the way that work is performed and structured," he said.
"You only need to walk down Pirie St to see how its mostly empty. The for-lease signs are everywhere.
"If we're smart about it, we can harness technology to work for us, not against us, and we can use it to help address issues such as our ageing population." Mr Reid said Adelaide needed technology to enable the remaining workforce to be more productive, otherwise the future would be more difficult.
Mr Reid, who is a chartered accountant, said he worked in that business for five years, plotting his escape to another working life because tax was never his thing.
He is confident that Majoran will double in the near future, based on the experience of similar spaces interstate and overseas.
Majoran is modelled on other successful working technology communities - including Fish-burners, the York Butter Fac-tory and Inspire9 in Sydney and Melbourne. Mr Reid said he had seen a big change in the per-sonal development of people in the Majoran community.
Majoran offers co-workers use of its amenities, including desks, chairs, meeting rooms and provides WiFi, but also offers many opportunities for struc-tured and unstructured learningthrough events it runs and hosts.
It runs regular events on the second Tuesday of every month. It has just finished hosting a two-day start-up bootcamp run by Pollenizer and other events such as SouthStart, a start-up conference.For more information go to http://majorandistillery.com
Credit: NIGEL AUSTIN SILENT ACHIEVER
Word count: 521
