INNOVATING SOUTH AUSTRALIA NEWS CORP has launched a partnership with Adelaide's innovative co-working space for the tech community, Majoran, to support the state's growing start-up sector.
The move is expected to boost opportunities for innovative start-ups using the space that now houses about 30 members in Grenfell St.
Majoran managing director Michael Reid said it was "a perfect fit" for the tech and creative freelancers co-working at the site he established with Chhai Thach in August, 2012.
"It will help start-ups that need a hand with getting the word out there and an opportunity for more potential work to flow through the space," Mr Reid said.
"It will enable us to link up with Fishburners (another co-working space supported by News Corp) in Sydney and mentoring is the missing piece that Adelaide needs." While Fishburners was the largest tech co-working space in Australia with 115 start-up businesses, Majoran also had grown dramatically in the past two years.
It had moved from its first co-working space into the larger building in Grenfell St where its members had increased their turnover.
"I'm constantly amazed at the collaboration that goes on," Mr Reid said. News Corp supports Majoran's mentoring program, had two desk memberships and would host two Corporate Challenges per year.
"News Corp in SA recognises the critical importance of the small business and entrepreneur community in driving South Australia's economic wellbeing," said regional director of News Corp South Australia, Ish Davies.
"With this in mind, we are determined to take a proactive leadership role in supporting our start-ups, innovators and entrepreneurs as they develop their fledging businesses." Last week's Southstart Adelaide conference for tech start-ups and investors was a spin-off from the space, with about 600 people attending the event founded by Mr Thach in 2013.
"I think that Adelaide can be a little bit sleepy. One of our best assets is our comfortable lifestyle but it is also a little bit of our Achilles heel," Mr Reid said.
"The sense of urgency that sparks a bit of innovation is only just happening when we have news like Holden closing or concerns about subs work.
"Detroit hit rock bottom (when its car industry collapsed in the United States) before they got their act together - we don't have to do that."Mr Reid believed there was much opportunity in Adelaide and this was about encouraging start-ups and entrepreneurs to "take the first step".
Credit: BELINDA WILLIS
Word count: 415
