ADELAIDE nano-satellite start-up Fleet Space Technologies will pitch for funding from billionaire businessman and investor Elon Musk to supercharge growth of the engineering company.
Chief executive and space engineer Dr Flavia Tata Nardini says the Beverley firm – founded in 2015 – has been selected to pitch a business case to investors, including Mr Musk, at the International Space Station Research and Development Conference in Washington DC this month.
The event, at which Mr Musk is keynote speaker, will be part of a two-week investor roadshow for Fleet.
Fleet will next year launch its first satellite, carried on-board a rocket owned by Mr Musk’s rocket manufacturing company, SpaceX.
A second satellite will be launched from New Zealand and Fleet plans to have a network of more than 100 nanosatellites by 2020, creating a network-enabling low-bandwidth free global satellite connectivity for “internet of things” devices.
Italian-born Dr Tata Nardini, who was a space engineer for the European Space Agency, said it will be a “dream” to meet with Mr Musk.
“For us it will be fantastic to see his keynote and sticking around to pitch our ideas,” said Dr Tata Nardini, who presented at the SouthStart 2017 conference in Adelaide on Thursday.
She said her company was working with several partners on pilot projects across transport, oil and gas, mining and agriculture and government sectors to provide communication solutions where connectivity was limited.
Among the projects are measuring the health of the Great Barrier Reef and the Amazon rainforest.
In April, Fleet raised $5 million in a Series A round led by Blackbird Ventures and with backing from Earth Space Robotics, Silicon Valley’s Horizon Partners and Atlassian’s Mike Cannon-Brookes.
She said it was “amazing’” that South Australia was home to two of the leading satellite communications companies, in Fleet and Chesser St based Myriota, which was named best industrial start up at the world’s largest IoT conference in San Francisco this year.
“It just tells you a lot of SA’s position . . . it’s quite fascinating,” she said.
Dr Tata Nardini last month called for a national space agency to provide a strategy for a “complex and currently fractured industry” arguing risked falling behind other developed countries in the “innovation race” threatening its future prosperity.
“It will change, I’m sure as so much is happening this year with the conference (Aeronautical Space Congress in Adelaide) and space start-ups being funded . . . there are so many companies doing well,” she said.
“There’s been about $13 million investment in the past six months just in space start-ups, it’s fascinating.
“It’s good momentum and the big conference in September, it’s time to understand that Australia is playing a giant role in the space community.” Fleet has grown from three staff to 17 since 2015, with all research and development done from Adelaide. It has offices in Sydney with directors based in the US and Netherlands.“If I had a penny for every time someone said you have to move to Silicon Valley I would be the richest person,” she said.
CREDIT: RENATO CASTELLO
Word count: 497
