I REMEMBER sitting in my “office” in the garage on Hay Rd, Linden Park, in 2006, with my brother-in-law searching for website domain names for a new start-up company we were so excited about.
We didn’t call it a start-up, because we didn’t know such a thing was a thing, and we weren’t founders, we were just starting a new business.
And although we were filled with hopes and dreams and convinced this idea for an online wine community would change the world, we very soon felt alone, isolated, and way out of our depth.
We felt like we were the only people in the world going through what we were going through.
In the years since then, this incredible ecosystem has blossomed around us all – the start-up world, with all its leaders and feeders, as American entrepreneur Brad Feld so cleverly put it. A global community that anyone with a vision and the drive to bring it to life can be a part of.
It’s extraordinary, it’s empowering, and it’s helpful.
I’ve been in Adelaide for 13 years now, and I’ve seen the Adelaide start-up community come together.
I’ve seen people listening to a talk I’ve given come up to me four years later to tell me about the business they’ve created. I’ve been inspired by someone else’s story. I’ve been privileged to be connected with some extraordinary people who have created wonderful things.
A couple of months ago, I left Vinomofo to start my own new venture, Cult Tribal, and now I’m working with some phenomenal Adelaide companies. I’m working out of co-working spaces, I’m learning and sharing and connecting and finding support from this community, all over again. It’s a hell of a lot easier not doing it alone. And better for the soul.
SouthStart is one of those benchmark moments in the Adelaide start-up community.I know the people who’ve taken it on — they’re good, and smart. I’ve even seen walls covered in ideas and sticky notes, and I’m excited about it, not only to share my stories, but to share and learn from everyone.
CREDIT: ANDRE EIKMEIER
Word count: 354
