TWO Adelaide inventors are taking their hi-tech 3D Voxiebox printer to the next level after winning funding to make a commercial prototype.
William Tamblyn and Gavin Smith have patented the technology to bring Star Wars-like holographic 3D projections to life by layering thousands of tiny light beams inside a clear box.
They have been working through the Fab Lab 3D printing hub at the Adelaide College of the Arts and Majoran Distillery, and now plan to use a $25,000 grant through the AMP Tomorrow Fund to progress to the commercial stage.
This would include bringing an industrial designer on board to tweak designs. Two years ago, Mr Tamblyn and Mr Smith joined forces with three partners in New York to form the company Voxon and to commercialise the Voxiebox.
"We've been in Adelaide doing R & D work and building new stuff and our partners have been demonstrating from their base in New York," Mr Smith said.
This month, the product also had been chosen to feature at Wired Magazine's prestigious New York pop up store, showcasing some of the best new technology offerings.
"It's a showcase for hi-tech companies to show off their latest gadgets and we were invited to participate," Mr Smith said.
Last year, they won the SouthStart pitching competition in Adelaide that gave them support through the mega program based at the Marjoran Distillery.
Mr Tamblyn, a software engineer, and Mr Smith, a data base administrator, invented the idea at their regular backyard lab inventing sessions six years ago.
Their latest prototype developed during the past six months had been kept under wraps until patents lodged in the United States last week came into effect.
The American team had been demonstrating the Voxiebox at gaming shows around the United States along with individual meetings with companies, with Mr Smith saying they were initially planning to target the gaming market.
Its ability to bring 3D images to life created the option of an interactive game - but it also had clear potential for 3D mapping for resources companies, as an educational tool or for medical imaging applications for the health industry."We've got tonnes of interest from people who say if you can make it a bit bigger and a bit brighter and bring us the finished product we definitely will be interested," Mr Smith said.
Credit: BELINDA WILLIS TECHNOLOGY
Word count: 403
