Festival to give start-ups a leg up
A FESTIVAL celebrating the energy and creativity of start-up companies is running nationally until October 9.
The three-week Startup Spring is being organised by StartupAUS and aims to inspire the next generation to become entrepreneurs and innovators rather follow traditional paths such as medicine, banking and law. "Australia has film festivals, music festivals and wine festivals, which are a tremendous celebration of our culture. Now it's time for the country's first start-up festival," a StartupAUS spokesman said. "With today's focus on how Australia can maintain its wealth beyond the resource sector, there's never been a better time for Australia to become the creators, rather than just the consumers, of technology."
StartupAUS board member Stephen Baxter said the sector had the potential to contribute $109 billion and 500,000 jobs to the Australian economy by 2033.
Sydney events include the StartUp Weekend in Sydney, which aims to teach entrepreneurs the basics to launch successful ventures, a Google women's event on Tuesday and a crowdfunding masterclass on Wednesday.
Brisbane will host a game developers forum on Monday and in Melbourne on Tuesday there will be a Nightowls meeting for people who work at night.
For events nationally, refer to www.startupspring2013.org.
Gen Xers on top
A STUDY of human resources professionals undertaken by consultancy firm Directioneering has identified Generation X as the hardest working cohort of workers, outpolling baby boomers and Generation Y.
Directioneering surveyed 170 HR directors and senior managers across Australia as part of its 10-year trend study, finding that 45 per cent of those polled identified Gen Xers -- those born between 1963 and 1980 -- as being the hardest working.
Of those surveyed, 25 per cent identified baby boomers as the hardest working, followed by only 3 per cent nominating members of Generation Y. The survey found 79 per cent thought baby boomers to be the most loyal, but lacked ambition and were least comfortable with change. Directioneering's study identified Gen Y workers as the most likely to want clear career progression and ongoing training, and 51 per cent identified the younger generation as the most mercenary. They were also seen as the most willing to accept change and the most likely to want to be challenged.
Directioneering International's managing director Nick Plummer said the results emphasised the need for a more personalised approach to talent and career management, given different generations brought different skills and attributes.
"HR professionals are recognising that employees of different generations have different needs and aspirations and therefore need a tailored approach to talent and career management rather than a one-size-fits-all strategy," he said.
The survey also found 94 per cent of HR professionals expected technology to have an impact on their business over the next decade, and 82 per cent said a more competitive environment would be a key challenge over that period.
One in five of those surveyed named social media as a potential corporate risk, and 81 per cent had implemented social media guidelines.
Tips for success
GOOGLE Australia and NZ's engineering director Alan Noble will give Australian start-ups his top tips on becoming a success at the SouthStart event in Adelaide on October 4.
Mr Noble, and SouthStart founder and app developer Chhai Thach, will talk about start-up trends and how they are being seen as an alternative for young people to jobs in the mining industry and other struggling sectors.
Mr Noble said his top tips for start-ups included making decisions, going big or going home, auditing and experimenting with ideas, admitting when things were not working, and adapting ideas if experiments failed.
"Everyone has creative ideas for the next big thing, but the difference between making it big and staying still is the decision to make a go of it and committing 100 per cent," Mr Noble said.
Mr Noble recommended setting lofty goals, saying big ideas came from visionaries who were not afraid to give something a try. He said it was important to experiment to see whether ideas worked, with Google trying more than 5000 experiments annually, but likely to adopt only about 1 per cent.
Mr Noble said being able to try something new also meant accepting when things went wrong, adapting and recognising a need to change.
Word count: 764
