ADELAIDE has the potential to become a global hub for defence and space start-ups, according to the head of StartupAUS, who says the state should focus on its economic strengths as part of its innovation drive.
Speaking at the SouthStart conference in Adelaide yesterday, StartupAUS chief executive Alex McCauley identified the two industries as the key areas where the state had a competitive advantage, and where the State Government and local start-up community should focus its short-term efforts.
“Part of the really exciting thing about the South Australian model is that it’s a strategic approach,” he said.
“The idea is to find a really identifiable strength and then have the benefits flow onto the rest of the ecosystem.
“Obviously in South Australia you have a huge strength in defence. The push in South Australia and the early successes in building a defence and space centre of gravity are pretty strong.” StartupAUS lobbies for regulatory and policy changes aimed at supporting growth of the national start-up community. The group yesterday launched a report, South Australia – Crossroads Spotlight, identifying Lot Fourteen as having the potential to attract global interest in the state’s burgeoning start-up sector.
Local satellite communications start-up Myriota is already a tenant at the innovation precinct. “It’s a 23,000sq m innovation precinct,” Mr McCauley said.
“In context the Sydney Start-up Hub, which is one of the biggest start-up hubs in the southern hemisphere, is 17,000sq m. Station F in Paris, which is one of the biggest start-up hubs in the world, is 36,000sq m – so it’s genuinely a world scale precinct.” The Crossroads report welcomed the pilot of an entrepreneur visa in SA. “Adelaide offers excellent lifestyle and affordability, but while these elements are important they are neither necessary nor sufficient to attract a thriving innovation scene,” the report says.“Instead South Australia needs to build on these strengths while showing that it is able to nurture businesses that are scaling rapidly, that it can compete globally for talent and customers, and to convince globally relevant businesses they need to have a presence in South Australia in order to tap into what’s happening on the ground.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 363
