ADELAIDE start up Set In Motion is a crowdfunding platform determined to play a part in the success of its clients.
Most crowdfunding platforms could not care less if you succeed or not - they are simply for raising money and offer little in the way of support.
But founder Lan Nguyen said Set In Motion offered an end-to-end approach that helped clients plan a campaign, execute it then plan for how to turn a successful campaign into an ongoing business.
It does this by offering one- on-one consultation and workshops on how to create a successful crowdfunding campaign.
While crowdfunding has been lauded as a way to allow start ups to raise early cash more easily, Ms Nguyen said thousands of campaigns raised no money at all, or very little.
Set In Motion aims to help its clients avoid that fate.
"We want to be able to work with people from the get go, in terms of sitting down with them and working out a plan," Ms Nguyen said.
"Our workshops are quite detailed in terms of letting people know the stages they go through.
"We are also currently coordinating a post-campaign workshop where anyone who has done a crowdfunding campaign or is looking to do one can learn about how to then increase their business skills and take it from a single product into a sustainable business." Ms Nguyen said most people who contribute to crowdfunding campaigns did not just stumble across them, but were enticed there by some form of marketing.
This meant that participants needed to think about how to get their message out. Ms Nguyen also previously worked with co-working space Majoran as community manager and is one of the organisers of the SouthStart innovation and start up conference in Adelaide.
She said she sees crowdfunding as an evolving business model. "Crowdfunding is still relatively new, we want to work on how we can do it better. One insight is that many people who used the bigger platforms were surprised at how little interaction they had from the platform owners.
"We want to break that down and provide great customer service and value. "It isn't easy (to run a successful campaign), but the rewards can be amazing and you're building a community of supporters." Set In Motion is working with Majoran on a crowdfunding campaign to be launched soon and is the key SA representative for the Crowdfunding Institute of Australia.cameron.england@news.com.au
Credit: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 420
