AUSTRALIA is well placed to become a global leader in the development of wine technology, according to participants in a “world-first” wine and tourism technology acceleration program run by Flinders University.
As part of the Foment program, which kicked off earlier this month, seven start-ups from across the country are taking part in six intensive boot-camp sessions and mentoring across three weeks at the Tonsley Innovation Hub.
South Australian participants include Chinese micro-influencer marketplace Rover Journey and vineyard mapping and monitoring platform Gaia, which is part of the Consilium Technology group.
WA company Cellr, which has developed packaging technology to limit counterfeit wine, is also taking part.
Speaking at the SouthStart conference yesterday, its co-founder Chris Braine said Australia was “perfectly placed to lead the charge in wine tech”.
“What we have to really focus on is elevating everything to do with wine tech and the companies that are coming through, we need to elevate the ability to get to market quick, we need to elevate all of the skill sets that go in line with running a technical business,” he said.
“All of that means we’re going to start attracting and retaining the world’s best tech talent, which is something we really struggle with over here.
“I think the wine industry can really play a part in generating a significant amount of technical jobs for industry specialists.” The State Government contributed $80,000 in grant funding to the Foment program, which is a collaboration between Flinders University’s New Venture Institute, Wine Industry Suppliers Australia and Hydra Consulting.
Flinders University’s Carla Dias Wadewitz, who’s facilitating the “world-first” program, said organisers would gather feedback from the pilot ahead of a global launch in the second half of next year.
“We’re expecting to attract 24 teams of national and international start-ups that will come to Adelaide and participate over five weeks in more than 10 boot camps across Adelaide and perhaps other regions such as the Barossa (Valley),” she said.
“This will attract experts from around the world, from Australia, and will put South Australia and Australia in the wine and tourism tech scene.
“Hopefully, it will start to be recognised as one of the most important wine and tourism tech hubs in the world.” Consilium Technology chief marketing officer Sarah Hibbard said Gaia used multispectral, high-resolution satellite imagery to map and measure every vineyard in Australia. Combined with machine-learning technology and cloud computing, and following a global roll-out, it would allow the platform to monitor the health and development of grape crops across the world.
“Couple that with all of the future analytics we’ll be able to provide, with the end game hopefully being able to predict yield,” Ms Hibbard said.giuseppe.tauriello@news.com.au
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 453
