A Robe start up business has been accepted into Flinders University's eNVIsion Venture Dorm.
Almost two years has passed since the Robe SA app was developed and published. Thanks to the support of local businesses it has now grown to include Great Ocean Road, Kangaroo Island, Barossa Valley and Limestone Coast apps all published to iTunes and Google stores.
With over 3500 subscribers downloading the apps, users are increasing daily. Goingtoplaces.com is now registered with the SA Tourism Commission Media Gallery to use the best images and media for promoting South Australia.
In July 2017, founder Geoffrey Dening participated in SouthStart Conference and Expo at the Adelaide Convention Centre. A very positive two days of presentations, meeting other innovators in the industry, was a beneficial experience.
Information received in August from David Furness of the LC Regional Development Association, on the plan to establish a contemporary workspace in Mount Gambier by Flinders University's, New Venture Institute was particularly encouraging.
Geoffrey attended the public launch on December 7 in Mt Gambier and met with the management of the program.
Goingtoplaces.com was one of the earliest accepted into their first 20 startups for the Incubator. The eNVIsion Incubator is a collaborative, co-working space.
Working at eNVIsion connects your business to a global network and a wealth of expertise that can help you to achieve your goals. Blending a vibrant, collaborative workspace with award-winning startup and innovation programs, eNVIsion helps new ventures to be globally competitive.
That enables a regional business to access the tools, resources and expertise to scale and reach international markets much faster.
Even before starting with the Venture Dorm next month, opportunities have been made possible through the connection, already participating in the invitational "TechChat" at the Department of Industry, Innovation and Science on February 21.
Next is a Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade seminar on March 21 in Adelaide. From watching the first steps on the moon on July 20, 1969, at Robe Primary School, Geoffrey is developing projects involving people building the launch and flight systems of tomorrow's space ships.
Ahead of their arrival in the Limestone Coast with the eNVIsion Incubator, New Venture Institute is bringing the long-running Entrepreneurs in Conversation series to Mt Gambier on Monday, March 19.
Join in and hear Louise Nobes, Dru Reschke and Ashlee Kalantarian discuss their successes, failures and top tips in navigating the start up journey.
Word count: 398
