ADELAIDE tech entrepreneurs Chhai Thach and Steve Barrett have offloaded their online payment platform Payhero to ASX-listed software company 8common.
The pair have been scaling back their expanding portfolio of ventures in recent months, including the SouthStart co-working space, which closed its Grenfell St doors for the last time on Friday.
Mr Thach said the business partners wanted to focus on growing their Teamgo business, which had developed an automated visitor sign-in tool used in workplaces in Australia and overseas.
“They (8common) were one of our customers. They’d been using our system to collect payments from their clients, and Nic (8common executive chairman Nic Lim) who’s a good friend and mentor of ours came to us with an interest in acquiring the business,” he said.
“We’ve had three businesses running at the same time and wanted to offload some of the businesses and have more focus.
“Teamgo is going to be our baby – we want to grow the company, and because we’re not venture capital funded, it gives us the freedom to drive the business the way we want.” Mr Thach said a growing number of State Government departments and local, national and overseas companies used the Teamgo tool, which automates the visitor sign-in process with the use of an iPad terminal.
Teamgo has been funded by Mr Thach, Mr Barrett and an angel investor who has a 5 per cent stake in the company.
“The majority of our customers are in Australia but 30 per cent are in the US and Canada and we have customers in New Zealand, China and Singapore,” Mr Thach said.
“We have salespeople in the US at the moment and there’s massive opportunity there, but there are also lots of opportunities here as well. The advantage we have over our competition is that Teamgo is customisable. Every business has their own branding and wants the product to have the same look and feel.”Payhero was launched in 2015 with the support of Sydney’s AWI Ventures (now H2 Ventures) accelerator program. The PayPal-like platform allows small and medium size businesses to accept payments through an online subscription service.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 357
