The commercial possibility of space travel has been opened
IT started on Facebook.
Yariv Bash, who I vaguely knew at the time, posted a question: “Who wants to go to the moon?” The idea was inspired by a Google competition, which set a challenge to land a privately funded spacecraft on the moon.
Well, what greater challenge is there than trying to reach the moon? Naturally, I told Yariv that, if he’s serious, I’m in. We met with another friend, Yonatan Winetraub, sat down in a pub and started drawing how the spacecraft was going to look like.
We wanted to be the first Israelis to reach the moon.
The year was 2011, and we believed it would take about two years to put the spacecraft on a launch pad.
I planned to propose to my girlfriend on the flight.
Our initial plan was to build a 5kg spacecraft at an estimated cost of $8 million. But, as time progressed, it became clear the ship and support team would have to be bigger.
From 8kg, the spacecraft grew to over 500kg. It took eight years and just short of a $100 million to send our spacecraft, Beresheet, to the moon.
By the time it was ready to be launched the competition’s deadline had expired and I was married (to my former girlfriend) with two kids.
We were the last team to join the competition, but the first to sign a launch agreement, and the only one to actually reach the moon.
But it was far from a smooth ride. During the race to meet the deadline of preparing for lift-off, we believed the time between launch and landing would be a walk in the park.
Once again, reality hit us hard. Even though the launch was successful, our celebration was cut short by a malfunction that presented itself right from the start.
With some faulty equipment, the greatest space experts from around the world advised us to abort the mission.
But, against all odds, the resilience of our team of engineers, together with Israeli aerospace industries engineers, made this journey.
As we progressed the challenges kept presenting themselves and urgent solutions were required. On April 4, 2019, we were successfully captured by the moon’s gravity, making Israel the seventh country to reach the moon on the first privately funded spacecraft to do so.
Even though a combination of malfunctions resulted in an unsuccessful soft landing, we successfully put an Israeli flag on the moon. The commercial possibility of space travel has been opened, something which can inspire South Australians as they start a space industry.
And, importantly, we’ve personally met more than one million children and inspired their imagination. No dream is any longer impossible.SPACEIL CO-FOUNDER KFIR DAMARI WILL SPEAK AT SOUTHSTART CONFERENCE ON NOVEMBER 21
CREDIT: KFIR DAMARI
Word count: 470
