START-UPS operating in Australia’s burgeoning space sector are well placed to secure global investment, according to industry experts, as the country’s reputation for innovation continues to accelerate.
Speaking at the SouthStart technology and start-up conference in Adelaide yesterday, Fleet Space Technologies founder Flavia Tata Nardini, pictured, said Australian start-ups were firmly on the radar of international venture capital (VC) firms, who were increasingly seeking to invest in space companies.
“I remember four years ago, when I came here, we were raising money ... there were no space investments, no VC invested,” she said. “Now, every single investor, the big ones, have space investment.” Speaking as part of a panel session, Myriota chief executive Alex Grant said there was no longer a need to set up a base in Silicon Valley in order to attract investor interest.
“People asked me ... back when I was involved with starting Cohda Wireless back in 2004, ‘Why don’t all of you just go to Silicon Valley?’” he said.
“You have to engage with the global eco-system, but one of the things I really want to see is examples of stuff happening here that kind of legitimises us, and repetition of that legitimises us – that’s what we’re seeing here hopefully.” Representing the investor community, Horizon Ventures adviser Chris Liu said space was a global industry, in which start-ups from across the world could succeed.
“Talking to founders like Flavia, talking to founders like Alex, no one wants to move to the US for this because this is a really great place to be,” he said.
“Everyone wants to be here and I see this as a tremendous opportunity given where Australia is at, and the nascent space industry that is now forming, to be able to call in really large global investment into some of these companies.” Main Sequence Ventures partner Martin Duursma said while space start-ups typically required more time and investment before generating commercial returns, there was demand from patient investors.“We’ve got some great examples of great technology companies that have been built in Australia, that are globally significant” he said.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 353
