FUTURE colleagues, friends and business partners will meet for the first time at a major networking event at Tonsley next week.
Flinders University’s New Venture Institute will host Icebreaker on Wednesday, November 21, in an effort to help people broaden their business networks.
Kathryn Anderson, the institute’s deputy director of enterprise says organisers asked Kale Needham, founder of artificial intelligence tool MapRunner, to create a bespoke algorithm based on participants’ survey responses.
It would be used to organise a seating pattern linking people with other attendees they could benefit from meeting.
Ms Anderson hoped that among the tables of 20 would be about five people an attendee would be interested in catching up with in the next week, five within the next month, five they could add to their wider networks and five who they would be interested in talking to on the night.
“It takes out some of the social awkwardness that comes with networking sometimes,” she said. “If you’re a bit shy, it’s all worked out through a process for you.” Icebreaker would be unlike many other networking events, Ms Anderson said, at which participants tended to naturally gravitate towards others they already knew.
Ms Anderson said the business areas represented on the night would be diverse, including health, analytics, IT and defence.
The evening was about creating “personal innovative ecosystems” – networks allowing participants to do their job, or grow their business, to the best of their abilities.
“Whatever your job is, it’s about expanding your personal network with amazing innovators,” Ms Anderson said.
“For example, someone who’s starting a health food company, if they said they wanted to meet potential clients, that’s only one side of the coin.
“They probably also want to meet some researchers, they might want to meet some marketers and maybe someone that could be a mentor or adviser to them and probably some end users.” The last Icebreaker event attracted about 1200 people.
About 700 were expected to attend this year as the focus had shifted towards making lasting, quality connections, she said.
“We wanted to make it a bit more intimate than last time,” Ms Anderson said. The event is at the Tonsley Innovation District, 1284 South Rd, Tonsley, on Wednesday, November 21, from 5-8pm.Icebreaker is held the night before SouthStart, which runs from November 22-23, exposing SA’s entrepreneurial and technological feats to the world stage through workshops, activities and keynote speakers.
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE
Word count: 406
