FRANK Lowy, the nation's richest man, has gone on the offensive and assured FIFA that there is plenty of money to be made should Australia host the 2022 World Cup.
Australia's bid chairman condemned a report from management consultants McKinsey, which was commissioned by FIFA and claimed Australia's would be the least profitable of the 2022 bids.
Maximising revenue is high on FIFA's priority list, with the World Cup accounting for more than 90 per cent of its turnover. Lowy pointed to an FFA-commissioned report recently released that suggested Australia would be able to capitalise on the 2022 tournament by benefiting from the rapidly growing Asian economy.
"I don't want to give you a lesson in economics or population but let me tell you, if it gets to Australia then 2022 will be a very, very profitable venture for FIFA," Lowy said.
"We also had a study produced. It paints a picture that awarding the World Cup to Australia would be very profitable for FIFA.
"We need to take into account that we are a gateway to (Asia), either from the front yard or the backyard.
"And if you look at the growth of Asia - Japan, China, India and the rest of the countries - in the last 10 years, what will happen in the next 10 years is unbelievable in the numbers of people, wealth creation, in spendable dollars.
"I think those things overwhelm whatever McKinsey can say."
The PriceWaterhouseCoopers report Lowy was alluding to painted a rosy picture for Australia in 2022.
The key points included:
ASIA only trailing Europe in TV rights deals for the 2010 World Cup; and FIFA being able to generate broadcast revenues in excess of US$1 billion once Asian figures reached world levels (within 5-8 years), while the Asian GDP should be twice that of Europe or North America by 2022.
McKinsey rated the US as the biggest World Cup cash cow of the 2022 competitors, giving it a 100 per cent score, well ahead of Australia on 68 per cent.
Japan was second with a 73 per cent rating, followed by South Korea (71), Qatar (70) and then Australia.
Credit: DAVID DAVUTOVIC, ZURICH
Word count: 372
