INCREASINGLY sophisticated loyalty programs are driving up the profit margins of big business but it is simple, old-fashioned schemes that are offering customers the best value for money, new analysis shows.
The insights by national market research company IBISWorld come on the back of a warning this month by the ACCC that businesses are using loyalty schemes to gather and resell customers’ data.
The commission tips as many as 80 per cent of Australian consumers are either currently, or have previously been, part of a loyalty scheme with the average consumer signed up to at least four or six memberships.
According to financial comparison website finder.com, four in five Australians (82 per cent) are part of a supermarket loyalty program.
IBISWorld senior analyst Michael Youren said there had been a marked increase in the number of multiple-partner schemes.
“At its purest form, a loyalty program makes you choose one company over another, but it has got a lot more complex than this recently and increasingly (is geared towards) rewarding providers rather than members … companies have become more sophisticated in using them to generate revenue,” he said.
“The biggest area of growth we are seeing is in coalition points-based schemes, in which providers sell points in their own loyalty programs to other companies. These have grown rapidly over the past five years.” He lists Flybuys, Qantas and Velocity frequent flyer programs as examples. “(There are) companies now looking at spinning off some of these programs into their own businesses just because of how profitable they are,” Mr Youren said.
Qantas and Virgin Australia’s frequent-flyer programs accounted for about 25 and 29 per cent of their parent company’s profits, according to their 2018-19 results.
Even telecommunications companies, such as Optus and Telstra, have begun using loyalty programs to position themselves as a “premium service” with other associated benefits, allowing them incur additional costs.
“Some consumers might benefit from this, say those that are paying for a large (sports) streaming subscription but I would be cautious around these as usually you pay for the benefits with higher prices on services presented as a more premium product,” Mr Youren said.
Measuring the return you get on each dollar spent is one way to judge a scheme’s value.
“Look at two different frequent-flyer programs, possibly two different rewards cards, and look at the value of the rewards in terms of the dollar amount,” Mr Youren said.
“You will also be wanting to think about what your particular preferences are … some people, for example, might be more likely to take holidays at random times when frequent-flyer seats are available, others might find these hard to use and need to go during school holidays.” He warns the promotion of reward levels can be a red flag.
“Many schemes use rewards and tiered membership levels to encourage customers to spend unnecessarily,” he said.
“Often, they scale these types of programs based on average customer spend (and) if you are looking to go up a level, you are probably going to have to be spending a bit more than the average customer would.
“In many cases, buying a product outright is cheaper than spending the extra money required to attain a reward or higher membership level … some good deals do exist but loyalty program providers constantly monitor and update their offerings to ensure any loopholes are closed.” Mr Youren said the best value for money could come from traditional, local loyalty schemes such as those offered by cafes in which customers buy a certain number of coffees and get the next one free.
It is a point not lost on Adelaide mum of two Cat Mikutta.
“I have loyalty cards for all my local coffee shops, clothes, butcher, Hoyts and Bakers Delight” the 52-year-old said. “I would have to say my favourite are my coffee cards – where I buy five and get one free, I have four of them. It’s nice to be rewarded for your loyalty.” Finder.com surveyed more than 2000 shoppers and found 54 per cent exchanged points for “money off shop” in store to save on their grocery bill, focusing on the nation’s two biggest store rewards programs – Woolworths (Rewards) and Coles (Flybuys).
“To get the best value from these, convert your supermarket points into frequent-flyer points – that offers a much better return than the standard $10 voucher you get with these schemes,” finder.com’s Angus Kidman said.
“And keep an eye out for bonus offers – these can give you thousands of points for no extra spend.” Installing a loyalty scheme’s smartphone app can help, too.
“This makes it easier to track what you’ve earned,” Mr Kidman said. However, he said analysis by his company showed the major supermarket duo returned only 50c for every $100 spent, with other rewards programs offering better value.
“(For example) Hoyts Cinemas has one of the best rewards programs in the country, returning 10 per cent of money spent to customers – every $10 spent at Hoyts is returned as $1 spendable value on your Hoyts card,” Mr Kidman said. Of the non-entertainment brands, Priceline Pharmacy comes out on top on finder.com analysis, returning to members $3 for every $100 spent.
But SA Commissioner for Consumer Affairs Dini Soulio cautioned people to look beyond a loyalty program’s value to its privacy policy.
“In exchange for the rewards, loyalty schemes will often benefit by collecting your data (and this) can then be used to build a profile of your spending habits and purchasing behaviour,” he said.
Mr Youren agreed, saying his No.1 tip for people is always to remain “really cautious and sceptical”.
“You just don’t know where you data might be used (and goes beyond) email addresses for mailing lists … although many companies state the data they use and sell is de-identified, many consumers aren’t aware that personal data can also be gleaned from other sources (and used in) more elaborate analysis,” he said.
FINDER.COM ANALYSIS OF LOYALTY SCHEMES ON OFFER AT THE BIG RETAILERS RETURNS FOR EVERY $100 (OR EQUIVALENT) SPENT
Hoyts Rewards $10 ($13 annual fee) Village Cinemas Vreward $9.25
Myer one $2 David Jones $0.75
Woolworths Rewards $0.50 Coles Flybuys $0.50
The survey of 2033 Australians reveals 54% of people exchange points for “money off shop” in store to save on their grocery bill
Four in five Aussies (82%) are part of a supermarket loyalty programAlmost one in five consumers (18%) aren’t signed up to a supermarket rewards program or don’t bother to cash in their points
CREDIT: REBECCA BAKER
Word count: 1091
