PLANNING on building a full-service investment bank in Australia? Join a noisy queue. There's such a scramble round the door that we suspect some of the more elephantine applicants may take so long to get set up they'll miss the next boom. One exception is the Andrew Pridham-John Steinthal joint venture, Moelis & Co, which has about 30 staff, from a standing start in March, and in between times bought small broker Foresight Securities, obtaining a licence and what they call an Equity Platform in short order. Not only have they picked up small-cap specialist analysts Ian McKenzie, Todd Guyot and Adam Michell and support staff with the Foresight purchase, but they've followed that up in recent days by picking up three small-cap specialist investment bankers in Alex Unsworth (ex-UBS), Peter Dixon and Paul Yeo (both ex-Macquarie). "We want to be a full-service operation," said Pridham yesterday, although he's not giving away his target headcount. By hiring in the small-cap space he has marked out the fact that while Moelis's New York partner is a property specialist, and so is he, the local operation aims to have a lot more arms than one.
Bankers on the loose
TALKING of Macquarie exits, we hear there are "a lot of resumes around", put out by Macquarie bankers, particularly in Europe, looking for a change of scene after collecting a bonus that was more about escrowed stock than spendable cash. Not that the Macquarie bosses can complain, having been a talent magnet for years while the times were good and the model worked like a Swiss watch. You needn't start feeling sorry for the potential departers yet, either. There's no shortage of likely hirers here, including Nomura (reportedly now around halfway to its headcount target) Barclays Capital (which recently hired more than five merger and acquisition specialists) , and the perennially growing Commonwealth Securities, spun out of online broker CommSec. CLSA is also out there hiring as, coincidentally, is established local player Morgan Stanley. And yesterday's rumour was that giant Japanese debt house Daiwa has "around a billion dollars" to spend worldwide on analysts this year. They can't all be fixed-interest specialists and on that expenditure proposal Daiwa will just have to spend something in Australia. If you apply Australia's traditional 2.5 per cent MSCI weighting, that's $25 million here alone.
Ferguson for lunch
IF you are taking on an enemy, it's usually best to do it in their own territory. On Friday Martin Ferguson, the Rudd government minister who's perhaps least doctrinaire about how the new resource super-profits tax should be drafted, will make himself available for cross-examination over dinner at the toney Penfolds Magill Estate restaurant outside Adelaide. This will follow today's address in Canberra in honour of Minerals Week, in the absence of both PM Kevin Rudd and Treasurer Wayne Swan. Organised by an outfit called Progressive Business, the Friday function's menu may feature lamb with goats' milk fromage ($45) or a choice from the degustation or a la carte menus. Our choice of wine would be a glass of the 2003 Grange for just $125. Progressive Business may sound like a Liberal Party front, but it insists it is "a forum designed to ensure Labor and business remain in touch with each other's views and aspirations for South Australia". Corporate membership is a snip at $2500 to $10,000, which includes "twilight briefings for up to three company representatives involving senior ministers". That brings us back to familiar territory.
Profits tax showdown
TOP attraction today in Canberra will be a National Press Club debate between Queensland maverick Clive Palmer and AWU national secretary Paul Howes on the obvious topic: the resource super-profits tax. Palmer doesn't have a miner at the moment, but he is chairman of mine developer Mineralogy Group and, after a silence perhaps encouraged by other mining companies, he has been vocal again in recent days suggesting in some cases the RSPT could be a "70 per cent" tax. In caucus yesterday afternoon the Prime Minister said Palmer was "well known in Queensland and it's a good thing he's gaining a national profile". For those outside Canberra, it should be broadcast live by the ABC and Sky Business.
Stickers in demand
MANAGERS of a listed Queensland industrial company had a big hit in Sydney yesterday when they visited an unnamed investment bank and started handing out bumper stickers bearing the slogan "Rudd is a dud". They're not even miners.
____________________________
>> mainan@theaustralian.com.au
Credit: Andrew Main
Word count: 757
