The quest to determine which city reigns supreme as Australia’s most innovative, entrepreneurial, and future-focused has until recently been a foot race between Sydney and Melbourne. But in 2016, Brisbane surprised everyone and burst onto the scene, and now it’s Adelaide’s turn.
I am not a big fan of state-on-state rivalries and would rather see everyone band together to showcase Australia’s technological capabilities. But credit where credit is due. And that’s where Adelaide comes in.
Adelaide, and more broadly South Australia, have significantly upped their innovation game already. It doesn’t hurt that Elon Musk recently announced the world’s largest lithium-ion battery storage project will be in South Australia. This alone, bolsters Adelaide’s international presence. Musk’s relationship with Adelaide has formed part of the state government’s $550 million energy plan, and is raising hopes the City of Adelaide will be carbon neutral by 2025. This is a trifecta of foreign industry, state and local government working together.
The state government, much like Adelaide start-ups HappyCo, TeamGo and Proviso, is reaching out to international markets. For the start-ups, this means survival, with a state population of 1.9 million. Even with a national population of 25 million, the opportunities for true scale means having international customers from the beginning. For the state government, it helps them differentiate and build up local capabilities.
Techstars, a US accelerator program, just launched its first APAC accelerator in Adelaide. The inaugural cohort includes local and international start-ups, but the focus aligns with the state’s competitive advantages; primarily defence, big data, robotics and IoT.
The newly announced state government initiatives are a mix of short-term benefits and long-term outcomes. One of these initiatives, GigCity will connect entrepreneurial hubs to a 10 gigabit internet speed. The long-term play, mentioned by the City of Adelaide Mayor Martin Haese at SouthStart 2017, is to have fast data as an infrastructure tool to attract foreign and interstate businesses to Adelaide.
Another initiative, the South Australian Early Commercialisation Fund, will see businesses with matched funding receive grants of up to $500,000, an opportunity for early stage businesses to get that injection their business needs.
It’s also open to university research commercialisation organisations with no clear line on whether those organisations will have to repay the grant. It will be interesting to see how the kitty is distributed, as three of Adelaide’s universities are ranked within the top 30 universities in Australia for 2016-17, and all have a strong presence in the emerging technologies lifecycle.
Jenny VanDyke, CEO of Startup Adelaide, a membership organisation representing the South Australian start-up community, notes the partnership approach between the South Australia Venture Capital Fund (SAVCF) and Blue Sky Venture Capital has been well received by community.
The SAVCF, which is looking to invest in eight to 12 local start-ups over a 15-year period, comes at a time where Adelaide is seeing an increase in deal flow. Uniti Wireless, a local start-up, raised over $5 million in the last year and Vinomofo (who now have offices across Australia), just closed a $25m round with Blue Sky Ventures.
While it’s easy to focus on what is happening in the Adelaide CBD, it’s important to recognise that 20 per cent of start-ups are not located in the major city of their state and it’s imperative to ensure those communities are not being left behind. Especially when state and local councils have illustrated the speed and efficiency they can operate under when there’s a recognised need or an offer on the table.Monica Wulff is CEO and co-founder Startup Muster.
CREDIT: Monica Wulff
Word count: 582
