AN experienced US entrepreneur whose company once supplied software to the world's top companies has been named as inaugural head of the Adelaide-based Techstars accelerator program.
Terry Gold will start his role as managing director of the Australian-first program immediately. The US native will be joined by Chris Chang, an existing Techstars employee who will move to Adelaide from San Francisco to act as program manager.
Aainna Rahman, the one-time head of the Majoran co-working space and more recently director of Startup Adelaide, is also part of the leadership team as lead associate.
Mr Gold moved to Adelaide last year after being appointed entrepreneur-in-residence at UniSA's Centre for Business Growth. That followed a brief stint four years ago as a mentor of the Innovyz program.
"I fell in love with Adelaide and thought that it'd be great to live there some day, and here I am," he said.
With a defence industry focus, Adelaide is the first Asia-Pacific base for Techstars despite it having launched just shy of 100 programs previously.
Ten start-ups will be connected to an established network of mentors, investors and corporate partners, including leading defence companies such as BAE, Rheinmetall, and DCNS.
"I'm looking for companies that will be of interest to the Australian military, but also have a broader purpose," Mr Gold said. "I expect there'll be some great South Australian companies, but we will almost certainly be bringing some companies here from around the world.
"This is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for founders who want to develop and commercialise technologies such as internet of things, big data, sensors, drones and robotics." Mr Gold is best known as co-founder of Gold Systems, a Boulder-based software firm that provided speech recognition technology and applications to more than half of the Fortune 20 companies.
Mr Chang, who holds a masters in entrepreneurship and management from the University of San Francisco, has previously been a Techstars manager in the US and Canada.
Techstars co-founder David Cohen described the duo as a "dream team". "Terry is a legend in the Boulder start-up community," he said.
"His hands-on tech and entrepreneurship expertise, coupled with his on-the-ground knowledge of Australia's start-up ecosystem, makes him the perfect point person for this program." Mr Gold said 90 per cent of Techstars graduates are either still in business or have been acquired.
Applications are now open for the 13-week program, which kicks off in July.Techstars Ventures, the venture capital arm of Techstars, has $US265 million of funds under management. It have invested in companies such as Uber, Sphero, Twilio and SendGrid.
Credit: LUKE GRIFFITHS
Word count: 418
