THROUGH his passion for Adelaide and a strong desire to help improve the financial environment, Chris Hooper is gaining a strong reputation among the Adelaide business community.
Hooper, 27, was named the Young Citizen of the Year as part of the City of Adelaide's 2014 Australia Day Awards and has also just gained a place in the Australian Institute of Management's AIM 30, which recognises 30 outstanding managers under 30 years of age.
"It was quite an honour to be named the Young Citizen of the Year in recognition of the work I do in the community because my role at Startup Adelaide Inc is a volunteer job," Mr Hooper said.
Mr Hooper is a partner at accounting firm Cirillo Hooper & Company where he is receiving plaudits for his innovative approach to the profession, while playing a key role in Adelaide's burgeoning start-up community.
He was just 24 when he and friend Markus Cirillo saw the potential to transform a traditional bookkeeping firm owned by his father Giulio Cirillo into a hi-tech accounting practice using cloud technology.
Cirillo Hooper has expanded rapidly to more than 200 clients and nine employees, achieving 80 per cent year-on-year growth.
It has adopted a new business model for the accounting sector, which the partners believe is more efficient and quicker, ditching time-based billing for monthly retainer billing, which suits their business and their clients by providing an even cash flow. In Mr Hooper's public roles, he helped found the Startup Club in 2008 and subsequently co-founded Startup Adelaide 12 months ago.
He serves as executive director of Startup Adelaide, a peak industry body which runs Startup Weekend, a global movement of entrepreneurs and start-up companies.
Startup Adelaide has more than 300 members and thrives on the hard work and expertise provided by its members in helping to build the organisation.
"The cool thing that came out of the Startup Club is it got young people out of the basement and networking," he said.
The objectives of Startup Adelaide include raising awareness about entrepreneurship and increasing the number of start-up companies in Adelaide.
"Fortunately, those objectives are in tune with the current economic climate in Adelaide," Mr Hooper said.
"People are finally starting to realise that entrepreneurship and technology are going to be critically important for the future of South Australia.
"I'm thrilled that the Labor Party and Liberal Party have made entrepreneurship a big thing in their election campaigns." Mr Hooper said the sale of Whatsapp for $US19 billion in the United States last week highlighted the type of technology that Startup Adelaide was interested in promoting.
"It's a classic example of the power of mobile and internet technology," he said.
He believes the structure of the Adelaide economy has changed rapidly from the days when everyone had a job to a much greater focus on more people running their own businesses.
Two of the big changes he anticipates are the trend towards remote working using cloud technology and augmented reality where meeting remotely becomes easy and an everyday occurrence.
"The job isn't going to change, rather it's how and where that will change," he said.He also praises the entrepreneurial start-up ecosystem that has sprung up in Adelaide to help young business people, including the technology focused Majoran Distillery in Grenfell St and Hub Adelaide.
Credit: NIGEL AUSTIN SILENT ACHIEVER
Word count: 568
