Leticia Mooney is determined to meet 100 people for coffee this year – she tells us why
We should be unafraid to have conversations with strangers. Real conversations that go beyond the weather, at least. It’s why entrepreneur Leticia Mooney has made it her mission this year to have in-depth coffee meetings with 100 locals.
The woman behind content strategy start-up Brutal Pixie has had 52 catch-ups so far with all types of people, from lawyers to tech developers, all with the motivation to connect with her fellow human.
Mooney was inspired by an idea from Startup Adelaide director Jenny Vandyke, who advised that planning coffee meetings with 100 people could help entrepreneurs gain traction faster.
“I said to her, ‘I’m going to take your idea and run with it but instead of using it for business purposes, which I could easily do, I want to have 100 interesting conversations and see where it goes. And that’s how the whole thing started.” Soon, it became less about who she thought she should talk to and more about who others thought she should talk to.
“There are so many interesting people here doing really cool things that no one knows about,” Mooney says.
“They don’t go to events, they’re not out in public, they don’t get media coverage, they just do their own little thing.
“But everyone has their own passion project and is learning cool things about themselves.” Mooney says the project has made her realise how many interesting things are brewing behind-the-scenes in Adelaide.
“It kind of has made me think about the city in a different way, because there’s a dominant narrative here that you have to go somewhere else to do cool stuff or meet cool people. Or that people building great things are in Sydney or Melbourne or Brisbane or anywhere else,” she says.
“But I’m starting to learn that’s not the case. We just don’t see them or take the time to learn about them.” The former music journalist – who is busy running her four-year-old business, training tour guides for the nRAH and writing a book on running a business according to moon cycles – says she’s gained incredible insight from the people she’s met.
From a resilience trainer, she gained new perspectives on how humans communicate by understanding how sick trees pick up nutrients from healthy ones through the soil. From a developer, she learned about the cognitive benefits of cold showers.
Mooney adds Adelaide is notorious for people getting into business with their friends, making industries tougher to crack. But she thinks there’s power in that – just make more friends. And it starts with a conversation.
“I think people should be unafraid to have conversations with people, like in a really meaningful way beyond the weather or what was in the paper yesterday or what’s happening on social media,” she says.
“It turns us into goldfish.
“The takeaway from this is to be unafraid to ask someone to connect you to someone who’s interesting.” Leticia is also drinking more tea now.
For more info on Leticia (who also has a podcast) visit brutalpixie.com
HIGHLIGHTS Leticia tells us more about some of her favourite meet-ups and what she learnt from each one ...
Tony Kerin, solicitor at Maurice Blackburn Lawyers.
Who: A lawyer who is really passionate about personal injury and how it affects lives when poorly handled.
Key takeaway: No matter where you are in your career, you will find yourself doing new things that challenge you – and if you embrace that, it can be an amazing thing.
Guy Moore, developer at Palo Alto Networks.
Who: A man driven to improve himself as much as he can.
Key takeaway: So many! I’ll just pick one. Cold showers are amazing, everyone should try it. (He’s right, they are, and they should.)
Patrick Deruvo, chief innovation officer at Accodex.
Who: An enthusiastic thinker with the unusual capacity of being able to let things unfold.
Key takeaway: We can be certain about nothing, including things about which we have fixed ideas, and that should encourage us to keep exploring possibilities.
Robyn Clissold, marketing manager at Andersons Solicitors.
Who: A passionate seeker of the best way to do something, no matter what that is.
Key takeaway: Self-discipline can give you the freedom to do amazing things.
Clare Jobson, lawyer at CJ Legal Who: A nurse-turned-lawyer who is really passionate about minimising harm in separations.
Key takeaway: Your passion is your driving force, not the career paths you take.
Nicola Lipscombe, resilience trainer Who: Student of the ways in which we, as an element of nature, become resilient, connected and well.
Key takeaway: Communities of trees have communication and support networks, just as people do; we’re not as different from nature as we think we are.
Melissa Cooper, UX expert Who: Adelaide-born, Adelaide-expat-returns, UX consultant and former UX Lead of Eventbrite in Silicon Valley Key takeaway: Sometimes your next journey begins where you, yourself, started.
THE LOWDOWNSophie Perri found this story when Leticia asked her to be one of her 100 coffee dates – how lovely. Soph also told her about a similar idea she’d had about striking up convos with strangers – look out for that in the coming weeks.
CREDIT: Sophie Perri
Word count: 880
