SA's brightest among country's best managers
THEY are listed among the top 30 managers in the country aged 30 and under. Four young South Australians picked by the Australian Institute of Management as being among the nation's best.
Christie Brock of the Police Credit Union, Chris Hooper of Cirillo Hooper and Company, Aaron LePoidevin of PwC and Cassie McInnes from The Australian Red Cross Blood Service have all made the cut for 2014.
National chief executive officer Daniel Musson says the four were selected from a list of hundreds of applications.
"We're looking to highlight the emerging leadership and management talent we have in our membership base," Mr Musson says.
Christie Brock has just turned 30 and is the youngest executive manager in the Police Credit Union's (PCU) 43-year history.
She comes from a high-profile business lineage.
Her father, Michael Brock, is well known in real estate circles and her first job was working with him in the Harcourt group.
In her mid-20s, Mrs Brock was marketing manager for the real estate company that had 26 franchises at the time. "My age hasn't worried me, it's made me strive more to improve my knowledge, to do more research and to be able to back up what I'm saying, I haven't seen age as an issue," Mrs Brock said.
After joining the PCU in October 2010, Ms Brock has quickly moved through the ranks.
She is now executive manager of marketing, products and people at the organisation that has about 140 staff in South Australia and the Northern Territory.
She has nine direct reports and has launched a range of new products including a highly successful prepaid visa card and restructured focus saver account.
The website redesign Mrs Brock led in November last year has resulted in a 40 per cent increase in the number of unique visitors.
And, after overhauling the process of web loan applications, the PCU has seen a 200 per cent increase in online applications since August last year.
Mrs Brock has a novel approach. She also oversees human resources and established the Fun Committee two years ago to boost staff morale with competitions, random soup days in winter and bingo.
It is has been a successful move for the young manager who has driven membership satisfaction to a record high of 93 per cent.
Mrs Brock puts it simply: "If you are not having fun at work you are not going to enjoy work." At the national management institute this crop of 30 is its first ever list of young leaders to be recognised.
Mr Musson says it helps mark a significant event in the institute's 70-year history. From January 1, the institute merged its individual fiefdoms and all the states and Northern Territory - apart from Western Australia - became a national body.
It now has 16,000 personal and 3500 corporate members.
Mr Musson started work on January 2 with enthusiastic plans to oversee a new national network that could not only create national leadership advocacy and education, but also leverage our management skills and expertise for export.
Rolling out the new national under-30 list was part of a new attempt to help reinvigorate our leaders.
"The art of management is ever changing, we talk about the half-life of the MBA as being maybe every five years," Mr Musson says.
Drawing young leaders into the fold was about "encouraging young people through our organisation to bring that new thinking with them".
TOP OF THE CLASS CHRIS HOOPER, 27 Accountant Chris Hooper is a senior advisory partner at Cirillo Hooper and Company.
Mr Hooper is also executive director at Startup Adelaide and a tutor at the University of South Australia. He started an accounting firm at the age of 24.
Mr Hooper has received an achievement award in the Young Business Leaders 2013 and was a finalist in the Young Achievement Australia Small Business Award. He received an honourable mention in the Anthill Top 30 Entrepreneurs Under 30 in 2012.
Heading up the Cirillo Hooper and Company advisory division he works predominantly with technology start-ups and "tech-ready" businesses.
AARON LEPOIDEVIN, 28 Aaron LePoidevin leads the South Australian R & D Tax Incentive practice at PwC. In the past four and a half years, he has grown the revenue of his team by 350 per cent and brought in more than 70 new annuity clients to the firm. In 2012 PwC was awarded BRW Best South Australian firm.
Mr LePoidevin has chaired the Australian Institute of Management's Young Professionals Group in SA, was a member of the Young Finance Professionals Committee and a finalist in the 2010 South Australian Young Business Leaders Program.
He was a founding director of the Carbon Green Life carbon emissions reduction scheme.
CASSIE MCINNES, 30 Cassie McInnes is a national contact centre coach at The Australian Red Cross Blood Service.
In four years she has moved from answering phones to running the call centre. Ms McInnes has updated her qualifications along the way and manages coaching agents in various teams, working in the management and leadership team to improve performance.
"I strongly believe that if you want something you need to work for it," she says.
Last year, she led a team in raising money for the Make-A-Wish Foundation and previously worked in the health services team at Calvary Health Careand in statistics analysis at BankSA.
Credit: BELINDA WILLIS BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 910
