Five budding regional entrepreneurs from right across the state, including two from the Fleurieu Peninsula and one from Kangaroo Island, have given their start-up businesses a boost following the state final of the Australia Post Regional Pitchfest in McLaren Vale in late July.
After hundreds of applicants nationwide, each state and territory selected five finalists to pitch their ideas to an expert panel at the state final, with the winner taking home $5000 and earning a spot at the national gala final in Wagga Wagga New South Wales on August 18.
The South Australian state final was the last to take place and it happened at Serafino Wines in McLaren Vale.
Melissa Little of Aldinga Beach, who started Venyu, said the journey to the Regional Pitchfest final has enabled her to learn new skills while also pitching her business to a wider audience across Australia.
She said it had opened her eyes to new ideas as well as gave her a chance to meet likeminded people along the way.
"The entire Regional Pitchfest program and presentation is really polished," she said.
"We get to go in and really enjoy it for what it is and share our story with a wider audience."
The judging panel consisted of a number of high profile people in the South Australian start-up community including Startup Adelaide's managing director Jenny Vandyke and co-founder of Vinomofo Andre Eikmeier.
Selena and Matt Woodward of Moana, who started Edufolios, said the entire Regional Pitchfest experience gave them more time with other entrepreneurs and allowed them to share all there ideas and even develop working relationships going forward.
Kangaroo Island's Sally Lydia Paech found the experience as a chance to pay tribute to her homeland, which was a key component of her business Organiq, as it was where she sourced all the ingredients for her products.
At the time of going to print the winner of the state final had not yet been decided, head to www.victorharbortimes.com.au/on-the-coast to find out which of the five finalists won.
CREDIT: Harry Fisher
Word count: 340
