THE legality (and morality) of unpaid internships has recently received a lot of attention.
The most prominent example is that of David Hyde, whose seemingly sorry tale of being forced to live in a tent in Geneva while undertaking an internship at the United Nations, turned out to be a publicity stunt.
But the story highlighted issues about the exploitative nature of some internship arrangements, which appear to be on the rise given the increasing numbers of university graduates outstripping the available jobs.
Unpaid internships remain somewhat of a grey area under New Zealand law, despite being a regular feature of certain industries.
Unsurprisingly, and consistent with the type of Stockholm syndrome that can accompany such working arrangements, not many unpaid interns have the courage or the financial backing to bring a case against their employer, who might (it is hoped) hold the carrot of permanent employment.
The danger zone for employers is where the unpaid intern is performing work which produces an economic benefit for the business. That was made clear in comments by the Chief Employment Court Judge, Graham Colgan, in a 2013 case. Amber Howe-Thornley was dismissed from her role working for a Nelson mobile food cart, the Salad Bowl, after a two-day unpaid work trial.
The court upheld Howe- Thornley's personal grievance claim for unjustified dismissal, and took the opportunity to comment on the issue of unpaid work in New Zealand. The court noted that a two-day unpaid work trial was "one end of a potentially very broad spectrum of similar practices which are open to abuse".
The longer an internship goes on, and the more hours the intern is working, the greater the likelihood that the law will view them as an employee.
Where an employment relationship is found to exist, the full range of statutory obligations that go with that apply - paying minimum wage, providing for holidays, sick leave, protections against bullying and harassment, and health and safety obligations.
For businesses considering engaging an intern, the best advice is to make sure the parties' expectations are clear from the outset.
That starts with the role the intern is to perform.
If their duties extend well beyond the morning coffee run to do work that is actually integral to the business, and is work that a fully remunerated employee would otherwise be performing, that may not be deemed fair or legal.
If it looks like free labour rather than a genuine training opportunity, there's a real risk of an employment relationship being found to exist.
The next aspect is ensuring that there is mutual agreement to absolutely no expectation of payment or reimbursement for the intern's services.
This should be in writing as part of a written agreement setting out both parties' obligations. Setting out a list of the particular benefits that the intern will gain from the experience, such as education and industry experience, is a helpful starting point.
If the internship is paid, then it will be like any other employment relationship, and the usual rights and obligations apply. This would include not charging a buy-in for the opportunity to work. A controversial startup Adelaide law firm, Adlawgroup, hit the headlines recently for charging its interns $22,000 for the privilege of securing a placement.
The firm provides a two-year hybrid employment and higher education programme, aimed at meeting South Australia's oversupply of law graduates who are struggling to obtain paid, permanent roles in law firms in a saturated market.
The buy-in price is said to be both an "investment" and the price for participation in the programme, which includes a practicing certificate and continuing education, but there is no guarantee of income, which is only be derived through fees earned by the graduate in performing legal work from Adlawgroup's clients. The Fair Work Ombudsman is investigating, so watch this space.
Under New Zealand law, this kind of "guarantee money" would seem to tread dangerously close to unlawfully charging a premium for employment, which is illegal under the Wages Protection Act 1983.
Any employer doing so would potentially be liable to a penalty of up to $20,000, as well as repayment of any amounts charged as a premium.
The balancing of interests when it comes to unpaid internships is an issue that is cropping up in jurisdictions all over the world, as squeezed labour markets trend towards young people fighting tooth and nail to get a foot in the door in their preferred industry.
The issue remains a tricky one in New Zealand, but open communication and good documentation at the commencement of an unpaid internship will ensure both parties know where they stand and reduce the risk of any subsequent claim that the relationship was in reality something different. Also, not using interns as free labour would be a good start.
Susan Hornsby-Geluk is a partner at Dundas Street Employment Lawyers.
www.dundasstreet.co.nz
Credit: Susan Hornsby-Geluk
Illustration
Caption: UN intern David Hyde's story of living in a tent on some waste ground turned out to be a publicity stunt but there are plenty of real issues about unpaid internships.
Word count: 889
