MAKING it easier for landlords to manage retail fitouts is one of the top four ideas to win $30,000 in equity funding and mentoring support as part of the inaugural SouthStart Accelerate program for entrepreneurs.
Rachel Kidwell's TCPinpoint start-up is building workflow management software to manage the multitude of services and contractors involved in the delivery of new retail shop fitouts.
"There was a gap in the market with most people relying on phone calls, spreadsheets and paper to ensure retail fitouts were reviewed, approved and met design and permit guidelines," said Ms Kidwell, who set up Kidwell Coordination, a related business helping landlords to co-ordinate with tenants on actual fitouts, 10 years ago.
"It is early days but the equity funding is a validation of our idea and we are ready to accelerate and commercialise it," she said.
TCPinpoint will test its new system at the Rundle Place and Adelaide Central Plaza shopping centres in October before a launch in February.
"With over $30 billion worth of retail construction in the pipeline in Australia alone, we think retail tenancy delivery is an exciting opportunity," said Venture capital firm Acumen Ventures' partner Shane Cheek, an investor who was also part of the selection process.
The other three successful applicants - from a list of 50 - are: - RAPPSIO: a cloud platform for creating and maintaining custom web applications.
- LINK4: A cloud solution for suppliers and customer to use existing cloud accounting software to send and receive invoices instantly.
- FRONTIER Microscopy: a robotic microscopic systems developer working on its first product, an automated analysis system for the asbestos air monitoring industry.
"We believe (these firms) can grow into global companies," said Mr Cheek. "Founders with passion and focus are the key ingredients we select for. Most importantly, all four start-ups are already engaging with customers and markets so the first sparks of a real commercial opportunity are already there and it's our job to pour some more petrol on those burning embers and really get the fire burning." The four-month SouthStart Accelerate program, starting next month, offers each of the businesses $30,000 and guidance from 30 successful SA technology entrepreneurs.The funding will come from an investment vehicle set up for contributions from the entrepreneurs in return for a 6 per cent equity in the start-ups.
Credit: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 401
