A 20-SECOND culture check developed by Adelaide business Teamgage is helping improve workplaces.
A Techstars program graduate, Teamgage’s Software as a Service (SaaS) allows organisations to gather employee feedback in real-time, which then guides management decisions on ideas to help resolve issues and improve on structures.
Teamgage’s clients include the Adelaide Football Club, Microsoft, NEC, Santos, ACH Group, Australian government and defence giant Thales.
Co-founder and chief executive Ben Smit said the business had grown to employ 12 staff, who manage a growing number of national clients.
“We (co-founder Noelle Smit) have corporate experience where we have seen teams with really talented people not performing well,” he said.
“So we created a software program that gives organisations a quick and very clear idea of where things are at.
“We are working with all kinds of customers through direct sales, and working in partnership with other businesses that may be helping employers through a strategic transformation.” In the past six months, Teamgage has helped the Crows drive positive change within the football department on six chosen metrics, reflecting the club’s core values and drivers.
“It’s all about better and more immediate feedback, lower risk and cost, shorter time frames and a better outcome,” Mr Smit said.
He said the software’s aim was to foster a workplace culture of continuous improvement.
Teamgage is currently working through its own growth strategy, which could result in more jobs in the near future.
Based in the CBD, Teamgage has developed its client base significantly in South Australia, interstate and overseas, securing a place in this year’s The City Awards. Teamgage is one of the nominees in the Smart Business category.
The City Awards, supported by News Corp and Business SA, recognise the best cafes, coffee shops, attractions and service organisations across the CBD.
The awards are in their fifth year and recognise the important role small businesses play in developing SA’s economic future.More information on the other businesses nominated for the awards across different categories can be found at thecityawards.com.au. Finalists in The City Awards will be announced on Wednesday, July 3.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 351
