AT least one international company is set to relocate to Adelaide while a Victorian cyber security outfit will establish a technical base here following the completion of the first-ever Australian Techstars accelerator program.
The 13-week intensive program will climax on Thursday when the 10 participating companies – selected from hundreds of applicants from 50 countries – pitch to a room full of investors at Adelaide Oval.
The “Demo Day” will be attended by up to 300 people, according to Techstars Adelaide managing director Terry Gold.
“I wouldn’t be surprised if some (participants) are able to announce some funding that they’ve secured, new customers, joint ventures, maybe, even somebody even wanting to establish some operations in Australia,” he said.
When pressed, Mr Gold said plans were afoot for at least one of the four international start-ups that have called Adelaide home for the better part of four months to remain here.
“Some of them are still putting details on it ... I hope we have at least one announce a move on Demo Day, but I’ll leave that to them,” he said.
“They came here not knowing much about SA, but the community has been great to them and I can understand why some of them won’t want to leave.” Considering SA’s push towards being a key player in a newly created national space agency, the most likely candidate is US-based Additive Rocket Corporation, which uses revolutionary techniques to rapidly 3D print lightweight rocket engines. Co-founder Andy Kieatiwong previously worked as an intern at Elon Musk’s SpaceX.
The other possibilities are RadioMaze Inc, CRON Systems, and NZ drone company Dotterel Technologies.
Meanwhile, Melbourne-based NIMIS Cyber Security, founded by ex-Adelaide residents Priya George and Daniel Johns, plans to establish a technical base in SA.
NIMIS’ artificial intelligence technology simulates cyber attacks, helping companies identify vulnerabilities before putting additional defences in place.
Ms George said NIMIS’ goal of generating revenue from the US within 12 months would require an R&D facility – in Adelaide. “SA has some the best engineering talent in the world,” she said. “We’ve been working closely with a small team of contractors based in Adelaide, as we continue to develop the product we expect the team to expand.” Ms George spoke glowingly of the Techstars experience, particularly the access it provided to world-class mentors. This sentiment was shared by fellow participant Noelle Smit from SA company Teamgage.
Ms Smit expects Teamgage, which operates an online platform that helps foster a culture of continuous improvement within large organisations, to double its workforce to 20 people in the next 12 months.
“We’ve started our preparation to launch into the US and across Asia, so in 12 months we will have clients in both those markets, as well as continuing our expansion in Australia,” she said.
Techstars’ inaugural Asia Pacific program and 100th worldwide was focused on the defence industry. It looks set to soon be complemented by at least one other Australia-based program.
Mr Gold hinted at expansion in “this part of the world” but would not confirm specifics. “We’re also a growth company … it’s an exciting company to be in and really is the global network for entrepreneurs,” he said.
Applications for next year’s Adelaide program open in January. Globally, 90 per cent of Techstars graduates are either still in business or have been acquired.
TECHSTARS ADELAIDE’S CLASS OF 2017 ■ Additive Rocket Corporation ■ CRON Systems ■ Daitum ■ Dotterel Technologies ■ IR Sensors ■ Iridium Dynamics ■ MySky Technologies ■ NIMIS Cyber Security ■ RadioMaze Inc.■ Teamgage
CREDIT: LUKE GRIFFITHS
Word count: 579
