A ZOO KEEPER'S work in caring for and forming relationships with some of the most iconic and endangered animals is often viewed by outsiders as one of life's most rewarding careers.
But often the life of an Adelaide Zoo keeper requires field work, or working hours when most of us are asleep, allowing limited opportunity to provide important feedback to management about their concerns, their expectations or what's going well.
This is where an Adelaide technology start-up, founded by husband and wife team Noelle and Ben Smit a year ago this month, is making strides in helping companies better engage with employees and improve productivity.
Their company Teamgage has developed an app allowing staff to submit feedback in as quick as 20 seconds on various metrics, providing immediate reports to employers to guide potential improvements.
Teamgage has grown from three to eight fulltime staff and services clients including OZ Minerals, Bendigo Bank, Bank of Queensland, the Royal Children's Hospital, ACH Group and Microsoft.
Mrs Smit said the idea for Teamgage came after her team at a multinational company experienced high turnover.
"I ended up leaving as well as part of that turnover. We (Teamgage staff) had similar stories ... we reflected on what was it about that culture that was causing people to leave," she said. "We started looking at how could we use technology to solve this very human problem.
"It's (software) all in real-time, staff can submit whenever they like but we do prompt them at regular intervals, in turn, then, from a reporting point of view, all that information is visible in real-time; so from a management point of view you can certainly see how things are trending." Mr Smit said the software's aim was to foster a workplace culture of "continuous improvement". Managers can delve deeper into the data to see long-term trends.
Mrs Smit said Teamgage planned to expand overseas later this year. Zoos SA people and performance director Leonie Murphy said the zoo's native animal keepers were trialling the software with a view to rolling it out across the organisation.
"We're excited that the web based app gives us real-time feedback about how our keepers are going.," she said. "It also gives us quantifiable information to help managers make evidence-based decisions." The Innovation and Collaboration Centre (a partnership between UniSA, State Government and DXC Technology) and the Microsoft Innovation Centre based in SA have supported Teamgage.
The Advertiser JOBS SA FOR YOUR FREE AD, VISITJOBSSACAMPAIGN.COM.AU
Credit: RENATO CASTELLO
Word count: 405
