Additive Rocket Corporation (San Diego, founded 2015): Uses revolutionary techniques to rapidly 3D print lightweight rocket engines for space industry.
Seeks to enable rapid growth of the “New Space” industry by removing the largest barriers to entry: rapid production of high-performance propulsion solutions. Founder Andy Kieatiwong was a manufacturing engineering intern at SpaceX.
CRON Systems (New Delhi, 2015): Developing an IoT-based intrusion detection platform with the aim of future-proofing international borders, making them smarter, safer and more secure. Product line includes sensors and an encrypted communication network. Indian Army is a client.
Daitum (Adelaide, 2016): Cloud-based, self-service software combines AI, machine learning, and data analytics to help businesses realise the true value of their data. Applications include production planning, and workforce management.
Dotterel Technologies (Auckland, 2015): Solely focused on noise reduction and audio enablement in drones, making them quieter for various commercial uses including Defence and security. Three core technologies are acoustic shrouds, low noise propeller, and active noise filtering.
IR Sensors (Adelaide, 2014): Developed an infra-red security sensor that detects human presence, whether moving or stationary, with zero false alarms. Its patented mosaic pixel technology is poised to be a game-changer for the passive infra-red security market.
Iridium Dynamics (Brisbane, 2015): Has developed a commercial drone for inspection, mapping and surveillance over long distances and large areas.
Its long range and extended hovering capability allows operations that require up-close inspection of distant sites. Applications include aerial imaging in agricultural industry and threat checks for military.
MySky Technologies (Adelaide): Flagship product is portable, fire-and-forget counter drone technology. Also ramping up a design and production facility for super-fast military drones in Adelaide. Will also produce miniaturised detection, targeting and tracking sensor.
National CyberSecurity Institute (Melbourne, 2012): An AI penetration testing tool that simulates a cyber attack and helps protect companies from cybercrimes. Uses advanced technology to information organisations on their protection level and where weaknesses are.
RadioMaze Inc. (Cupertino, 2014): Provides low-cost home security using a Wi-Fi signal to alert smart devices for anti-intruder home detection.
Has developed a technology that transforms Wi-Fi enabled devices into motion sensors.Teamgage (Adelaide, 2013): Developed an online platform aimed at large organisations to help enhance team performance. The tool uses real-time feedback and analytical technologies to improve behaviour and help businesses drive change from within.
Word count: 371
