A WORLD of possibility awaits four South Australian start-ups that have made the final cut for the inaugural Asia Pacific Techstars program.
To be conducted in Adelaide over the next 13 weeks and focused on defence and security technology, the local companies included in the top 10 are Daitum, IR Sensors, MySky Technologies and Teamgage.
They will be joined by fellow Australian start-ups, Iridium Dynamics and National CyberSecurity Institute, while Additive Rocket Corporation, RadioMaze Inc, Dotterel Technologies and CRON Systems bring an international flavour to the intensive accelerator program.
The companies work on a wide range of technologies, including big data and analytics, sensors, unmanned aerial systems, rocket propulsion, cyber and security.
Each gains access to mentors, Techstars’ global network, a newly renovated work space on North Tce, more than $1 million worth of in-kind benefits, and a cash investment of up to $US120,000. In return, Techstars — founded by US entrepreneurs Brad Feld and David Cohen — takes 6 per cent equity in each company.
A demo day on October 12 will see each company present its case to angel investors and venture capitalists for further investment.
The Adelaide program — the 100th of its kind worldwide — is being led by managing director Terry Gold and program manager Chris Chang, both of whom have moved to SA from the US.
Mr Gold said the selection process was made particularly difficult due to the volume of strong applications from almost 50 countries. His role in the initial stages will be to introduce the overseas participants to Adelaide.
“We were hugely impressed by the depth of innovation coming from the defence and related sectors,” Mr Gold said.
“From drones to data analytics, from virtual borders to rocket science, we’ve assembled a group of the most exciting technology start-ups working in and around defence today.
“By bringing these teams together and linking them with start-up experts and industry specialists, we help them rapidly scale up their businesses.” Boeing Defence Australia, Codan Defence Electronics, SAAB Australia and Thales are among the companies to have partnered with Techstars Adelaide, while mentors include Accelerating Commercialisation’s Doug Adamson and UniSA’s Centre for Business Growth director Jana Matthews.
Daitum director Luigi Barone expects Techstars will take the Adelaide-based data analytics company to the “next level”. “We believe all businesses should have full control over the analysis and actioning of their data, without the need for the specialist skills, hefty implementation costs or time-consuming analysis,” he said.
“Being part of Techstars will help Daitum take full advantage of this global opportunity.” Mr Cohen said it was “a promising experience to launch our first accelerator program in Asia Pacific in a relatively niche sector”.The more than 1000 companies to have gone through a Techstars accelerator have raised an average of $US3.5 million ($4.5 million) in venture capital once they have completed the program.
CREDIT: LUKE GRIFFITHS
Word count: 467
