FOOTBALL: Broughton Mundoora produced an amazing last term to storm home from a 46-point deficit at three-quarter time to force a draw with Jamestown Peterborough at Mundoora yesterday.
In a game of fluctuating fortunes the fourth-placed Jamestown Peterborough led 7.4 to 0.2 at quarter time but the Eagles bombarded the goal in the second quarter to lead 7.11 to 8.4 at half time.
Again the Magpies used their turn with the wind well to grab what seemed a match-winning lead at the last change, 15.10 to 7.12. However, the Eagles kicked five goals late in the game to draw 14.16 (100) to 15.10 (100). Best for the Eagles were Nick Hewett (three goals), Daniel Baker (two goals), Anthony Richardson, Luke Anesbury (three goals) and Mark Horner. Brady Puddy kicked two goals. Best for the Magpies were Ryan Simpson, Zac Noonan (three goals), Michael Burford, Chris Lang (four goals) and Nick McInerney. Nick Stacey kicked two goals.
Second side Crystal Brook played an even brand of football to beat top team Southern Flinders by 22 points at Crystal Brook.
Brookies led 4.6 to 0.0, 6.7 to 4.6 and 11.11 to 4.8 at the changes before winning 12.14 (86) to 8.16 (64).
Shane Arbon, Ben Arbon, James Wardle (two goals), Daniel Hastings, Matt Coates and Luke Kapitola were fine players for the Brookies. Greg Phillips, Daniel Hill, Joseph Slattery and Josh Gale kicked two goals each. Best for the Tigers were Damien Hillebrand, Scott Brand, Tai Martin-Page, Lucas Chapman (four goals), Brett Ballantyne and Matt Woolford.
Bottom side Orroroo overcame a slow start to beat BMW by 32 points at Melrose. The Lions led 4.2 to 0.1 at quarter time but the roos hit back to lead 5.4 to 4.2 at half time before the Lions regained the lead at the last change 6.3 to 5.4 at three quarter time.
But the Roos lifted in the run home to win 10.11 (71) to 6.3 (39). Best for the Roos were Matthew Dignan, Jon Byerlee (four goals), Damian Ellery, Tim Byerlee, Matt Anesbury and Cody Hounsell (three goals). Will Bennett kicked two goals. Best for the Lions were Dylan McCallum, matt Foulis, Brendan Lehmann, Cameron Carling and Zac Murphy. Ryan Foulis kicked two goals.
Meanwhile, the program for the Landmark Cup was finalised by Central Zone officials during the week.
This year's series will be hosted by the Yorke Peninsula Football League at Kadina on June 12. Title-holder Northern Areas Football Association will play YPFL in the opening game at 11.30am followed by Adelaide Plains Football League versus North Eastern Football League at 12.30pm.
The finals kick off at 3pm with the two losing sides playing off for third spot and the two winning sides contesting for the Cup at 4pm.
The under-17 division starts from 9.50am and follows the same format.
Northern Areas has chosen a squad of 36 players from which it hopes to pick a final 23 who will prove good enough to defend the NAFA's hold on the Cup.
Orroroo's Justin Duffy has been reappointed as coach and will put the group through its paces at Jamestown next Sunday at 10am and Wednesday June 9 at 6pm.
Crystal Brook and Broughton-Mundoora have seven representatives each, Jamestown-Peterborough and BMW have six each and Orroroo and Southern Flinders have five each.
The training group is: Ryan Foulis, Matt Foulis, Casey McCallum, Kendrick McCallum, Shannon Larwood, Brendan Lehmann (BMW); Luke Ellery, John Nicholas, Jon Bowman, Liam O'Dea, Tim Byerlee (Orroroo); Greg Farr, Chris Stacey, Nick McInerney, Zac Noonan, Jarrod Curtis, Michael Burford (Jamestown-Peterborough); Tom Button, Nicholas Hewett, Chris Elliott, Daniel Baker, Mark Horner, Ben O'Donohue, Justin Tiller (Broughton-Mundoora); Ben Arbon, Nathan Lambert, Joel Millard, Greg Phillips, Adam Noonan, Matt Coates, James Wardle (Crystal Brook); Brett Ballantyne, Matt Woolford, Joel Palmer, Jeremy Edson, Rhys Millington (Southern Flinders).
The North Eastern Football League has chosen a squad of 56 players and replaced last year's coach Nick Ashby with ex-Eudunda A grade coach David Cluse.
The group will train on four occasions from today at Clare at 10am then on June 6, 8 and 10.
Heading the NEFL team are leading goal-kickers Nick Prokopec (North Clare) and Jarrod Gillings (Blyth-Snowtown) and experienced campaigners Ben Seymon (South Clare), Aaron Spicer and Boh Wall (Burra-Booborowie-Hallett), Ryan Darling and Nick McCormack (Blyth-Snowtown), Craig Jaeschke (North Clare), Tyson Wilmott and James Vandeleur (Riverton-Saddleworth-Marrabel United).
JUNIOR FOOTBALL: The Year 8/9 Mid North Schools Education Cooperative football team struck success in the opening rounds of the Secondary School Sports South Australia Knock Out competition for 2010 which were played recently in Port Pirie.
MNSEC won the first game against St Marks 8.7 (55) to 3.1 (19) before trouncing John Pirie school 19.8 (122) to 0.0 (0) in the second game.
Coach Darren Woolford said the best players were hard to select as all team members contributed towards both wins. Co-captains Campbell Combe - who controlled the midfield and Ryan Perkins who led the ruck division - headed the list with key forward Shaun Kapitola and Joe Heinjus who led the goal kicking with five goals for the day.
In other football news, the cream of the SANFL Central Zone under-15s will be on show today at Balaklava when Northern Areas, Adelaide Plains, Yorke Peninsula and North Eastern participate in the annual round robin series.
Credit: DENNIS GREEN
Word count: 887
