WHEN 13-year-old Nicole Groot sat down to draw something that would encapsulate the words "Feed the Mind", she didn't expect it would become the branding of next year's DreamBIG Children's Festival.
Today, Nicole has been announced as the winner of the poster competition for May's DreamBIG Festival - which has the theme, Feed the Mind - and the Year 7 student from South Downs Primary School in Elizabeth Downs, couldn't be more surprised by her win.
"I'm so proud and happy, and a little bit excited, too," Nicole, who loves animals and would love to eventually work with them, said.
"It took me about an hour to draw and I originally did two, but I liked this one better because it has more colour. I didn't expect to win because I don't win many things." Today, the biennial DreamBIG Festival - formerly the Come Out Children's Festival - unveils its 2017 program.
It includes more than 270 school shows and 126 events for the general public, 20 South Australian premieres, four Australian premieres and nine world premieres.
The festival's creative producer, Susannah Sweeney, said DreamBIG was a celebration of SA's creative kids and their incredible minds.
"This is 10 days of creativity and learning, and imaginative exploration, all wrapped up in glorious fun and entertainment," Ms Sweeney said.
She said the festival had shows for babies through to teenagers. The majority of tickets will go on sale from today, with highlights including: Jump First, Ask Later - urban dance meets parkour, for ages 10-plus. McNirt Hates Dirt - a tale of friendship staged in an earth-inspired tent in the Adelaide Botanic Garden, ages 3-6.
In a Deep Dark Forest - problem-solving theatre in a magical pop-up forest, ages 7-11.
Gone Viral - the Australian premiere of Free Range Theatrix's prize-winning play about a 17-year-old girl whose father is dying of cancer, ages 13-plus.
Following the success of the 2015 event, the Big Family Weekend will return on May 20-21.
THE 2017 FESTIVAL IS ON MAY 18-27. FOR DETAILS, VISIT DREAMBIGFESTIVAL.COM.AU
Credit: LIZ WALSH
Word count: 354
