PEOPLE power helped save the Wollongong ahm Hawks; now it's time for us to help drive our premier basketball team into the play-offs.
The Hawks will play their final home game in the regular season against the Melbourne Tigers tomorrow night.
A win will guarantee them a top-four finish; a loss will leave them in the nerve-wracking position of needing to beat Adelaide in the last game of the season on Saturday.
It's a far cry from this time last year when the team almost bowed out of the NBL before staging the most unlikely of comebacks in a community campaign led by captain Mat Campbell, with the assistance of major benefactor, Gujarat NRE chairman Arun Jagatramka.
Hawks CEO Wayne Morris said the team held the best home record in the NBL with a 12-win and one-loss record at WIN Entertainment Centre - a triumph he attributed to fans.
"The community has come out and supported this club, night in and night out, this summer and I can only hope that everyone comes along on Friday night to cheer on our Hawks for another home court victory," he said.
"We're pushing for our first play-off berth since 2006 and for the new community-owned Wollongong Hawks, we want everyone behind us as we strive for our second championship for this city."
The team has made several masterstrokes in its efforts to boost crowd attendances, bringing home Geordie McLeod as coach, resulting in the return of a lot of older fans, and reducing ticket prices to make attendance more affordable for families.
Crowds have regularly exceeded 3500; the highest was 4088 against Adelaide on New Year's Eve.
Campbell said the support had been amazing.
"As players we look around the stadium as we are warming up, we know that crowds are so much bigger than last year and we can feel the energy and excitement," he said.
As part of the evening's entertainment, two of the Illawarra's hottest performance acts - Airborne Cheerleading and Theatrix dance school - will compete against one another in the final of the Westfield Summer Talent Search competition.
With the queue for tickets stretching down Crown St on some nights, fans have been urged to get in early by either pre-purchasing or arriving 30 minutes before tip-off at 7.30pm.
GAME NIGHT
Doors Open: 6pm
Tip-off: 7.30pm
Half-time entertainment:
Westfield Summer Talent Search
Tickets Children $12, Adult $15
Family of four $50
* Tickets available from Ticketek or at the door
Illustration
Caption: Photo: People power: Hawks fans cheer a year ago when it was thought the club was playing its last game. This season the Hawks are one win from a 13-1 record at the WEC.
Word count: 474
