----- Celebs' secrets on show -----
WHEN too much juice is never enough, Confidential is set to bring Sydney's favourite gossip column to a small screen near you.
The new news, reviews and interviews show on FOX8 each week will make Wednesday nights the best night in for Australia's party people and those who love to read all about them.
We don't like to brag, but Confidential TV, co-hosted by Sophie Falkiner, will be the first homegrown show of its kind, with regular reports from the red carpet, star secrets and the inside scoop on all things celebrity.
Your Confidential spies will spill the beans each week, giving viewers a backstage pass to parties and A-list people, as well as exclusive access to TV, music, fashion, film and radio's biggest and brightest stars.
The show will combine the resources of Confidential's columns in key capital cities around the News Limited network of newspapers, and provide updates from showbiz bulletins around the world.
The Daily Telegraph's entertainment team, including music editor Kathy McCabe and TV writer Stephen Downie, will also add their expertise to the Confidential TV team.
"Sydney Confidential has a wholly deserved reputation as Australia's most entertaining and credible source of gossip and celebrity news. The Daily Telegraph is proud to have developed the Confidential brand and especially excited that it will now come to life nationally as a TV show on Foxtel," editor David Penberthy said yesterday.
Foxtel's director of television and marketing, Brian Walsh, expects the show to be "a huge hit with FOX8 viewers".
-----------------------------------------------------------------
FOX 8
Confidential TV will debut on Fox 8
at 7.30pm, Wednesdays from June 6
-----------------------------------------------------------------
----- Wedding ceremony is a real hoot -----
A LOT of blokes love Hooters -- but Anthony Richardson has taken the relationship one step further.
In a coup baffling most men, Richardson, 32, somehow convinced fiancee Jean Sun, 27, to tie the knot at the chain restaurant, which is more famous for its big-breasted barmaids than jugs of beer.
The happy couple exchanged vows at the Parramatta noshery in a special ceremony at the weekend where the bride arrive in a yellow 1964 hot rod sporting a customised "I got married at Hooters" tank top.
"We wanted a wedding that no one would forget and we love Hooters so we thought why not?" Richardson explained.
Let's just hope the marriage isn't a bust.
----- Murmurs -----
CHANNEL 7 is renowned for ensuring its talent is always fashionably frocked up, but there's nothing like grabbing a few good bargains on the side, is there Lisa Wilkinson? The Weekend Sunrise host couldn't resist joining the not-so-stylish scramble for Stella McCartney's designer threads at Target's Chatswood store on Monday. Well-groomed Wilkinson was spotted in the changerooms with armfuls of the hot threads, while down in Melbourne Kate Ceberano and Jennifer Hansen were also seen targeting a bargain in the Malvern Central store.
* * *
STILL with Sunrise, host David "Kochy" Koch better hope he doesn't bump into Big Bad Barry Hall on a dark street corner any time soon. He may be one of Sydney's better-known residents, but the Koch has turned his back on the Swannies for good after being named as Port Adelaide's No.1 ticket-holder yesterday. Barry Hall should issue detention.
* * *
SPOTTED: Jennifer Hawkins partying with girlfriends at Dragonfly on Friday night ... Mark Riddel and Eric Grothe Jr at the Roxy Parramatta on Saturday night ... Brett Finch and Brett Firman at Clovelly Hotel on Sunday.
* * *
HOLD on to your hat Lady Sonia McMahon -- your son could be getting down and dirty with the Material Girl. Ryan Murphy, creator of plastic-fantastic series Nip/Tuck in which Aussie actor Julian McMahon stars, is writing a part especially for Madonna. The queen of pop is apparently a huge fan of Nip/Tuck and keen to appear on the show -- in which virtually every starring female gets it on with McMahon's character Christian Troy. Sounds like more of a Holiday than a job, eh Jules?
* * *
THE Biggest Loser is an ever-expanding empire. From the people who brought you the TV show and the book comes the CD promising "pumping tunes" to help while away the hours in the gym. Just don't play track No. 13 -- Shakira's Hips Don't Lie -- on the scales.
Word count: 770
