THE flux capacitor is not installed yet, and the Dalek receptionist is still in the construction phase, but technology entrepreneur Simon Hackett's vision for a next-generation business incubator based on North Tce has finally taken shape.
It has been a labour of love and grand design for the founder of Internode and wife Anna, who has worked with Williams-Burton Architects on the multimillion-dollar transformation of the historic mansion at Kent Town.
Mr Hackett bought the premises in 2012 for $3.5 million and says he has spent at least the same again on transforming what has previously housed the Parkin Theological College and Pepper Studios into a modern, energy efficient working space, designed to house multiple businesses.
The address - 64 North Tce - is a particularly apt location for what Mr Hackett has named Base 64. While it might go over the heads of non-coders, Base 64 is well known within tech circles as a binary encoding scheme underpinning applications such as email.
For an uber-geek such as Mr Hackett - an appellation he'd welcome - the name has a certain poetry.
Mr Hackett had a love of technology from an early age. As a youth he'd spend an inordinate amount of time at the Angle Park Computing Centre with other Adelaide tech entrepreneurs such as Marty Gauvin (Tier 5, ex-Hostworks) learning how bits of the nascent internet fit together.
Mr Hackett went on to found internet service provider Internode in 1991, which he eventually sold to iiNet for a handsome sum in 2012.
Since then Mr Hackett has branched out, making several investments in areas such as graphite through exploration company Oakdale Resources, household energy storage via listed company Redflow, aviation software and even wine in California. He is also on the board of the National Broadband Network.
Base 64, where he also has a family office, is approaching completion physically, but conceptually is a work in progress.
Physically, the warm, copper and wood-infused design is accentuated with nods to Mr Hackett's cyber-heritage. The lobby contains a bespoke steampunk clock, run off a Raspberry Pi circuit board, which demands a certain skill for pattern recognition to read.
There is a one gigabit internet connection, with plans to expand that tenfold. What could be the wheel from a baroque cycle - in fact a scale version of a Stargate - sits in the corner of the boardroom, and a huge mural by local street artist KAB101 adorns the end wall of the rear building, which currently houses the Data to Decisions Cooperative Research Centre.
Mr Hackett had originally thought Base 64 would be a co-working space, but realising that Adelaide is now well-served on that front, the idea has evolved.
When asked what it will be, he says: "We decided to leave the answer to that question pretty plastic".
"We've moved it from being a co-working environment into being much more about a smaller number of larger organisations as a broad generalisation." As well as D2D, Base 64 currently houses online wine retailer Vinomofo's Adelaide office. Even though Base 64 has not yet been officially launched, the word is out, and businesses are keen to be involved. Mr Hackett says the eventual tenants will be carefully curated to ensure like-minded and potentially complementary businesses are welcomed in.
"One of the things I've learnt is that most of the innovation happening these days is in taking disparate fields and combining them," he says.
Mr Hackett believes that Australia has the capacity to be a crucible for the next generation of technology ideas, much as the US is, and Base 64 is part of his contribution to that vision.PAGE 30: NOW HEAR THIS
Credit: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 625
