The flux capacitor is not installed yet, and the Dalek receptionist is still in the construction phase, but technology entrepreneur Simon Hackett's vision for a next-generation business incubator on North Terrace has finally taken shape.
It has been a labour of love and grand design for the founder of Internode and wife Anna, who has worked with Williams- Burton Architects on the multi-million dollar transformation of the historic mansion at 64 North Terrace, Kent Town.
Mr Hackett bought the premises in 2012 for $3.5 million and says he has spent at least the same again on transforming it into Base 64, a modern, energy-efficient space designed to house multiple businesses.
While it might go over the heads of non-coders, Base 64 is well known within tech circles as a binary encoding scheme underpinning applications such as email.
For an uber-geek such as Mr Hackett - an appellation he'd welcome - the name has a certain poetry.
Mr Hackett had a love of technology from an early age. As a youth he'd spend an inordinate amount of time at the Angle Park Computing Centre with other Adelaide tech entrepreneurs-to-be such as Marty Gauvin (Tier 5, ex-Hostworks) learning how bits of the nascent internet fit together.
Mr Hackett went on to found internet service provider Internode in 1991, which he eventually sold to iiNet for a handsome sum in 2012.
Since then Mr Hackett has branched out, making several investments in areas such as graphite through exploration company Oakdale Resources, household energy storage via listed company Redflow, aviation software and even wine in California. He is also on the board of the National Broadband Network.
Base 64 features a warm, copper and wood-infused design accentuated with nods to Mr Hackett's cyber-heritage. The foyer contains a bespoke steampunk clock, run off a Raspberry Pi circuit board. There is a one gigabit internet connection, with plans to expand that tenfold. There's the Dalek Robot, which will become a computer receptionist. And while the flux capacitor, of Back to the Future fame, is not yet running, it has arrived, and awaits installation in the server room.
As well as D2D, Base 64 houses online wine retailer Vinomofo's Adelaide office. Even though Base 64 has not yet been officially launched, the word is out, and businesses are keen to be involved. Mr Hackett says the tenants will be carefully curated to ensure like-minded and potentially complementary businesses are welcomed."It's about trying to build a community that has technology as its underpinning but isn't limited by it," Mr Hackett said.
Credit: Cameron England
Word count: 427
