Patrick Conlon's retirement puts Elder in the spotlight as one of the key seats of the March 15 election, writes political reporter Lauren Novak.
IT may be on the opposite side of town, but voters in the southern suburbs electorate of Elder are not immune to the impact of carmaker Holden's decision to close its Elizabeth plant.
At the southern edge of Elder sits the former site of Mitsubishi's car factory. The closure of Holden in Adelaide's north stirs uncomfortable memories for southern workers laid off by Mitsubishi when it closed in 2008.
Elsewhere in the light-industrial electorate are component manufacturers who supply parts to Holden.
Liberal candidate Carolyn Habib,33, says employment is among the top issues residents raise with her.
"I've had lots of people contacting me (about employment) because they don't know what else to do," the Marion councillor said.
"I've been sent resumes, been contacted by people who have tried everything or people who are worried about jobs for their children." Labor candidate Annabel Digance, 55, said she is focused on helping small businesses to expand. "Its a very industrious area," the former community nurse and midwife said.
The State Government is building a manufacturing hub on the old Mitsubishi site which it argues will generate jobs and economic activity.
Late last month Premier Jay Weatherill opened the new Tonsley TAFE on the site, a $120 million development consolidating existing campuses from Marleston, O'Halloran Hill and Panorama. The Tonsley hub is also home to a Flinders University campus.
Electronics firm Siemens will spend $5 million to relocate there and ICT firm Tier 5 will spend $110 million to set up on the site. But the Government is under fire for delays in electrifying and duplicating the Tonsley train line, which runs behind the hub.
The railway has been closed for works for almost two years.
The state and federal governments are arguing over funding, after the Commonwealth pulled $31.5 million post the September federal election. Ms Habib argued the State Government was responsible for delays to this point.
Ms Digance said Elder residents were suffering from federal Liberal funding cuts.
"They want that transport line open again, that's something people are really angry about," she said.
Both candidates list sports facility upgrades and cost of living pressures as other key concerns for constituents.
Ms Habib, who works for an organisation which helps disadvantaged youth, said electricity, water and gas bills caused the most grief.
Ms Digance, a mother of three adult children, said parents had come to her in tears over Commonwealth plans to stop paying the school kids bonus. "That actually makes a big difference to families," Ms Digance said.
Ms Digance, who has run for the federal seat of Boothby at the past two national elections, is hoping to replace retiring Labor MP Patrick Conlon.
He quit the ministry in January last year to work part-time for law firm Minter Ellison, while continuing to receive a full parliamentary pay packet of about $150,000 a year.
The Opposition argues that Mr Conlon abandoned his electorate but Ms Digance said few people raised his decision with her.
Ms Habib said it was "up to the people of Elder" to cast judgment on Mr Conlon's decision. "Should I be elected, I would work full-time (for the electorate)," she said.
University of Adelaide Professor Clem Macintyre said Elder was "well within striking distance of the Liberal party with even a modest swing away from Labor".
"This is one of the key target seats that the Liberals will be putting a lot of time and energy into and one that Labor must hold if it is to hang on to office," he said.
ELDER Margin: 1.7 per cent Incumbent: Retiring Patrick Conlon (Lab) Challengers: Annabel Digance (Lab), Carolyn Habib (Lib) Profile: The electorate of Elder was created at the 1991 boundary redistribution. The area is a mix of suburban, residential and light industry. The average age is 38 and average weekly income is almost $900.
Lauren Novak says:Likely Liberal gain. Labor's Patrick Conlon has held the seat since 1997 but is retiring. Liberal Carolyn Habib isrunning a well-resourced local campaign and is well-known from serving on the local council. Labor contender Annabel Digance is an experienced campaigner and has a high profile from previous tilts at federal politics.
Credit: Lauren Novak
Word count: 732
