The drive to miniaturisation is sweeping through the last bastion of big IT
FOR years, the typical image of a data centre has been of a refrigerated room packed with towers of blinking lights and blue cables. But the same drive to miniaturisation and efficiency that has shrunk the power of a PC into a hand-held device is sweeping through this last bastion of big IT.
Almost every IT hardware maker now offers a data centre solution packed into the form factor of a shipping container, and some commercial data centre service providers have begun building businesses around the model.
Marty Gauvin spent eight years building Hostworks into one of Australia's premier hosting firms. Now he is looking to repeat that success with Tier 5, an Adelaide-based data centre that he is building one module at a time.
Whereas the old data centre model required millions of dollars in fit-out costs to create capacity that may not be needed for years, Mr Gauvin is using Modular Data Centres from Dell that have enabled Mr Gauvin to slash his set-up costs and time. "We were able to go from an empty shed to a fully-operational data centre in three weeks," he said.
Mr Gauvin commissioned the first unit in November last year, offering capacity of 8 MW. He says he is well on the way to filling it, with a second module ordered. The business model for Tier 5 is to implement similar data centres in cities that won't support the more common model of data centre investment.
Containerised data centres have become a key area of focus for enterprise computing hardware makers, although uptake in Australia has trailled the US.
The data centre adviser at analyst group IBRS James Turner says to date the private market has been cool on the concept.
"A number of our clients were looking at these in the early days because they liked the idea of providing an instant extension to their data centre infrastructure," Mr Turner said. "But I haven't spoken to any clients that have gone ahead and bought one."
Regardless, vendors are piling into the market. IBM has launched its Portable Modular Data Centre, which is a pre-fabricated data centre offered in a container format. IBM's executive for ANZ Data Centre Services David Yip said his company had made several sales in Australia.
"We are at the early adopter stage, where some of the innovators are looking at this solution to address a short-term need," Mr Yip said. "We are quite optimistic in the short- to medium-term that this will fulfil a relatively niche marketplace of clients who either have short-term requirements or remote-computing requirements.
"But we are starting to see a groundswell in terms of more and more people as this approach becomes more mainstream."
In one instance, Mr Yip said the client was looking for a temporary solution urgently.
"The local hosting market didn't have the capacity with the right type of space that they needed," he said.
HP is also in the market with its Performance Optimized Datacenter. HP's South Pacific group manager for industry standard servers Raymond Maisano said service providers had been attracted by the efficiencies of the model. "It allows a service provider to grow as their business grows without having to deploy bricks and mortar," Mr Maisano said, adding that the uses of the PODs had proven to be quite broad. "We have customers using it as their own data centre and putting it in places that are quite remote, and we have customers providing a warehouse and putting pods inside their warehouse."
HP PODs are forming the basis of the infrastructure being implemented by the data centre service provider Infraserve. Operating from a facility in Wyong on the NSW central coast, Infraserve implemented its first POD late last year. "When we first started this we thought we might add a POD a year," said Roy Pater, Infraserve's commercial director. "But we've seen an exponential interest coming in. We could end up putting in two or three a year. We have space for 120."
One of the benefits of the model is the power density that the POD can achieve. Mr Pater said Infraserve was able to provide 27KW per rack beyond what is possible with many older data centres.
Infraserve's director of operations Erik Nahnsen said another benefit was the POD's Power Usage Effectiveness a key measurement in assessing the efficiency of data centres. "The best advantage of the POD to a typical data centre is the low PUE," Mr Nahnsen said. "The POD has a PUE of 1.2, compared to most data centres where the power ration is between 1.8 and 2.5 . . . power is going to the major play in the future, and that's where data centres are going to fail. Power is going to become more expensive, and carbon trading is going to be an issue."
Credit: BRAD HOWARTH, INFORMATION STORAGE
Word count: 833
