BUILDING the national broadband network should cost about $30 billion, not the $43 billion suggested by the Federal Government, says entrepreneurial service provider Internode.
The Adelaide company's general manager for regulatory and corporate affairs, John Lindsay, said Internode's experience in building fibre-optic networks led him to believe the Government's early estimates overstated the likely cost.
"I think it can probably be done for less than $30 billion without the involvement of Telstra," he said.
"And I think that's scaring the Government and it should be scaring Telstra."
Addressing a Financial Services Institute of Australasia seminar, Mr Lindsay said he saw great benefit in the NBN because Telstra was the sole provider of internet services for about 30 per cent of the country.
Internode has been building fibre-optic networks in greenfield housing estates with Hills Industries' Opticomm.
Internode also has built WiMax broadband networks on the Yorke Peninsula and the Coorong, but Mr Lindsay cautioned that WiMax does not suit city centres because it did not work well with multiple users.
"WiMax is a really cool technology," he said. "It's great for delivering services to people who are in less dense, more remote rural areas. But WiMax is somewhat taxed when you try to do it in suburbia."
Prescott Securities chief economist Darryl Gobbett told the seminar the NBN should bring about $2.5 billion to $3 billion of work to SA.
He saw considerable potential in the network for SA because the state had an older and less educated population than the eastern states.
"We've got a lot of catching up to do and having much faster communication such as the NBN has the potential to help a backward state like SA more than states which are at the head of the pack," he said.
It would particularly help reduce the problem of distance that had slowed SA.
The founder of two internet-based businesses, Marty Gauvin, said the NBN would open up SA. His companies, Virtual Ark and Tier 5, would attract customers from around the world.
"In SA, the opportunities for businesses here are enormous but we have to grab hold of them," he said.
However, not everyone is as optimistic about the NBN's potential. Speaking at an Australian Institute of Company Directors function just before announcing his retirement, Liberal Senator Nick Minchin said the NBN would be "the world's great white elephant".
Yesterday, the NBN Company called for capability statements from design and construction companies wanting to work on the network.
"This is another significant milestone in the rollout of the NBN," Communications Minister Stephen Conroy said.
Credit: BUSINESS EDITOR CHRISTOPHER RUSSELL
Word count: 443
