AUSTRALIA has long been ruled by the tyranny of distance. Getting produce to consumers and raw materials to manufacturers has led to many challenges to which a range of innovative solutions have been found.
The world of information and communication technology offers new opportunities for Australian innovators. On the internet, no one can tell you're from Adelaide, or Canberra, or Tallebudgera or Kybybolite. More importantly, nobody cares either. Access to consumer markets through mechanisms such as app stores has made it possible for groundbreaking Australian companies to take on the world.
Things are not quite so rosy in the commercial market. While Australia is a fantastic place to start and build a small, innovative business, we struggle to develop businesses that matter on an international scale. We tend to think that 100 staff, in ICT, makes a business big. This is not the case. If we can overcome this and grow bigger businesses from our innovation, the spillover benefits into broader society are tremendous.
ICT businesses employ people with extensive skills on high incomes who then spend more in their local communities. Importantly, as ICT businesses are increasingly "virtual", these staff can work anywhere and therefore contribute to a range of communities.
To increase the number of large ICT businesses we must have more small, growing ones. This will require more skilled people. ICT skills have languished in Australia since the tech-wreck of 2001 but demand has never been higher. It will also require greater risk-taking and confident action from entrepreneurs.
I am what some people call a "serial entrepreneur". I've established and developed six businesses so far. These have varied in their success but they have always paid me a wage and I've had the satisfaction of following an idea through to experiences such as export sales, winning large multinationals as customers and listing on the stockmarket. You get a clear idea of whether you are adding value when you back your own ideas and become an entrepreneur.
In the past 10 years it has become clear that ICT represents the cornerstone of growth across virtually all economies and is undoubtedly here to stay. In fact, the growth in ICT has continued throughout the global uncertainty of the past few years. As a result, this sector represents excellent prospects for Australian innovators.
We must get better at selling ourselves into all markets. Taking companies to scale and taking products and services into large offshore markets are the key skills necessary in growing this important industry for Australia.
Marty Gauvin is executive chairman of Cloudtech Group Ltd, chief executive of Virtual Ark and managing director of Tier 5.
Credit: MARTY GAUVIN
Word count: 442
