CONSERVATION groups yesterday welcomed Labor's plan to protect sensitive forestry regions in Tasmania, but unions and timber companies accused Mark Latham of breaking a commitment not to sacrifice jobs.
And Tasmanian Labor MPs with timber workers as constituents have vowed to do whatever it takes to save jobs in their electorates.
The 11 areas nominated by Labor as in need of protection match a blueprint outlined by the Australian Conservation Foundation, the Wilderness Society and Greenpeace released earlier this year.
Australian Conservation Foundation chief executive Don Henry was pleased with Labor's commitment to high-conservation-value, old- growth forests.
"We believe Labor's intention to protect them is very strong," Mr Henry said.
However, the ACF had wanted old-growth forests to be protected immediately and a further wait until at least September next year was frustrating.
Wilderness Society national campaign director Alex Marr said that it was critical that bulldozers stopped as soon as possible.
He wanted further detail of when and how logging would end during Labor's proposed review period, saying the conservation value of areas was "well established".
Tasmania's timber communities described Labor's forest policy as "our worst nightmare". Labor MP Dick Adams, who holds the Tasmanian seat of Lyons by a margin of 8.2 per cent, said he was devastated at Mr Latham's decision to reopen the state's regional forestry agreement and potentially lock up large areas of old-growth forest.
"He's saying jobs will be protected but you can't compensate workers for an activity that's ceased because the capital moves on," he said.
"It puts people out of work and they lose their livelihood. If you're a 50-year-old logger, where are you going to go?"
Mr Adams said Mr Latham had made an "over-the-top" pledge to shore up marginal seats in Sydney, Melbourne, Adelaide and Brisbane.
Sid Sidebottom, who holds Braddon for Labor with a margin of 6 per cent, said he would fight within his own party to save the jobs of timber workers in his seat.
"Whatever the intentions of this plan, and whatever funds exist, sizeable that they are, I'll do everything in my power to ensure the jobs of timber workers in my region are not threatened and that an adequate and guaranteed supply of resources will exist to maintain and increase our local sawmills and veneer industry production," he said.
Labor holds all five lower house seats in Tasmania, where the Australian Bureau of Statistics says 6000 people are directly employed in cutting, sawing and dressing timber. The forest industry says there are another 4963 employed in the industry and, in all, 8000 jobs are threatened.
Most of the timber workers are in the northern and northwestern seats of Lyons and Braddon. The most marginal of Tasmania's seats is Bass, held by 2.1 per cent, where most timber workers are employed in softwood plantations and two softwood mills, unaffected by any stop to old-growth logging.
Mr Latham confronted a furious reaction from unions and logging companies to the policy.
The Construction Forestry Mining and Energy Union issued a harsh rebuke to the Opposition Leader, accusing him of breaking a personal undertaking to timber workers that no jobs would be lost as a result of Labor's policy.
Backing the union, forestry companies said Mr Latham's position put jobs and investment in Tasmania's timber industry in jeopardy.
CFMEU forestry division assistant national secretary Michael O'Connor said timber workers across Australia were "likely to vote for the Coalition" as a result of Labor's policy.
Mr O'Connor said that Mr Latham had misled workers after guaranteeing their jobs were safe during meetings in March.
"He said he wouldn't sell off our jobs to appease the Greens but that's what he's done," he said.
Mr O'Connor said Labor's policy was designed to lock up more old- growth forest areas in Tasmania. As evidence, he noted that Labor's proposed assessment omitted past criteria for social and economic consequences.
National Association of Forestry Industries chief executive Kate Carnell described Labor's policy as an "absolute sell-out to the Greens and some other left-wing environment groups".
Ms Carnell said Mr Latham had made an earlier commitment to the regional forestry agreement, and had declared he understood that displaced workers would not find jobs elsewhere. "All of those commitments obviously meant nothing," she said.
Ms Carnell said that a proposed $1 billion pulp and paper mill near Burnie was now "absolutely gone" because investors would have no confidence.
Timber Communities Australia state co-ordinator Barry Chipman said that Mr Latham would be "consigning timber communities to their death" if he became prime minister, and John Howard had an opportunity to devise an alternative that provided them a future.
FUTURE GROWTH
Old growth forests
1 Leven Canyon and Black Bluff
2 Reedy Marsh and Dazzler Range
3 Great Western Tiers
4 North East Highlands, including Blue Tier
5 Ben Lomond extensions
6 Eastern Tiers
7 Wielangta
8 Tasman Peninsula
9 Eastern boundary extensions to current World Heritage area
10 Styx Valley and Upper Florentine
11 Tarkine wilderness
Source: ACF, Wilderness Society, ALP
Word count: 886
