(ED) REVIEW: RESERVE BAN
Sydney - Friday - August 5: (RWE Aust Business News) - The Reserve Bank today put the kybosh on those who would seek to have it raise interest rates now.
In its latest Statement on Monetary Policy the central bank noted downside risks from the international scene remained heightened for the economy over the next year.
As well, it said the high exchange rate is having a significant influence on a number of sectors, including manufacturing, tourism and tertiary education.
Another important factor shaping the economy at present is the household sector's attitude to spending and borrowing.
Households remain cautious and retail spending is subdued, although growth in spending on services has been reasonably solid.
Household confidence has fallen recently and there has been little growth in household net worth over the past year.
The change in household behaviour is also evident in borrowing decisions, with recent growth in housing and credit card debt the slowest for many years.
Turnover in the housing market has declined, as have nationwide measures of housing prices, with notable weakness in the Perth and Brisbane markets after earlier large increases.
The GDP outcomes over recent quarters have been significantly affected by the extreme weather conditions in late 2010 and early 2011, and these effects will continue for some time yet.
In the March quarter, GDP declined by 1.2 per cent, with falls in iron ore and coal exports subtracting around 1.75 percentage points from growth.
While some moderation in quarterly rates of inflation is expected, it now looks likely that underlying inflation will be at, or above, 3 per cent in 2011.
In headline terms, inflation is expected to fall back below 3 per cent by early 2012 as the effects of the extreme weather events earlier in the year are reversed.
It is then expected to pick up, back to around current rates, with the carbon price estimated to add 0.7 per cent to the general price level.
Provided that inflation expectations remain well anchored and that there are no second-round effects through higher wage claims, headline inflation is then expected to decline again in 2013 as the once-off effects of the introduction of the carbon price fall out of the figures.
In view of the medium-term outlook for inflation, at its recent meeting the board considered whether it was appropriate to tighten monetary policy further.
On balance, its judgment was that it was prudent to maintain the current setting of the cash rate, particularly in view of the acute sense of uncertainty in global markets, which has contributed to heightened downside risks to global growth.
In setting monetary policy over the months ahead, the board expects to continue to look through the volatility in inflation resulting from the natural disasters at the start of the year, as well as any once-off effects from the introduction of a price on carbon.
Australian Bureau of Statistics data this week:
*The seasonally adjusted estimate of retail sales fell 0.1 per cent in June.
This follows a fall of 0.6pc in May 2011 and a rise of 1.0pc in April 2011.
In trend terms, Australian turnover rose 1.7pc in June 2011 compared with June 2010.
The following industries rose in trend terms in June 2011: Other retailing (0.6pc), Food retailing (0.2pc) and Household goods retailing (0.1pc).
Department stores (-0.4pc), Clothing, footwear and personal accessory retailing (-0.1pc) and Cafes, restaurants and takeaway food services (-0.1pc) fell in trend terms in June 2011.
The following states and territories rose in trend terms in June 2011: Victoria (0.5pc), Queensland (0.5pc), Western Australia (0.6pc) and the Northern Territory (0.1pc).
Tasmania was relatively unchanged.
New South Wales (-0.4pc), South Australia (-0.4pc) and the Australian Capital Territory (-0.6pc) fell in trend terms in June 2011.
In volume terms, the trend estimate for Australian turnover rose 0.1pc in the June quarter 2011.
*In seasonally adjusted terms, the balance on goods and services was a surplus of $2,052m in June 2011, a fall of $647m on the surplus in May 2011.
In seasonally adjusted terms, goods and services credits fell $36m to $26,405m.
Non-monetary gold fell $894m (55pc) and net exports of goods under merchanting fell $2m (6pc).
Non-rural goods rose $770m (4pc) and rural goods rose $86m (3pc).
Services credits rose $5m.
In seasonally adjusted terms, goods and services debits rose $611m (3pc) to $24,353m.
Intermediate and other merchandise goods rose $320m (4pc), capital goods rose $296m (7pc) and non-monetary gold rose $22m (6pc).
Consumption goods fell $34m (1pc).
Services debits rose $8m.
In original terms, the balance on goods and services for 2010-11 was a surplus of $22.4bn, a turnaround of $25.9bn on the deficit of $3.5bn recorded in 2009-10, resulting from a $44.0bn (17pc) increase in goods and services credits offset by a $18.2bn (7pc) increase in goods and services debits.
*The seasonally adjusted estimate for total dwellings approved fell 3.5 per cent in June following a fall of 6.3pc in the previous month.
The seasonally adjusted estimate for private sector houses approved fell 3.2pc following a rise of 0.8pc in the previous month.
The seasonally adjusted estimate for private sector other dwellings approved fell 4.2pc following a fall of 16.2pc last month.
The seasonally adjusted estimate for the value of total building approved fell 2.2pc in June following a fall of 3.6pc last month.
The seasonally adjusted estimate for the value of total residential building fell 4.1pc and the value of non-residential building rose 1.3pc.
*Preliminary estimates show the price index for established houses for the weighted average of the eight capital cities decreased 0.1pc in the June quarter.
The capital city indexes decreased in Perth (-1.0pc), Adelaide (-0.8pc), Brisbane (-0.3pc), Melbourne (-0.1pc), Darwin (-1.6pc), and Hobart (-0.1pc) and increased in Sydney (+0.4pc) and Canberra (+1.1pc).
Preliminary estimates show that the price index for established houses for the weighted average of the eight capital cities decreased 1.9pc in the year to June quarter 2011.
Annually, house prices decreased in Perth (-4.1pc), Brisbane (-3.6pc), Darwin (-3.0pc), Adelaide (-2.1pc), Melbourne (-2.0pc), and Sydney (-0.7pc), and increased in Hobart (+2.8pc) and Canberra (+2.2pc).
Private data/surveys this week:
*Business confidence of small to medium enterprises (SMEs) weakened sharply in the June quarter, consistent with the deterioration in confidence reported by larger businesses in the National Australia Bank quarterly survey.
At an aggregate level, SMEs are less optimistic than larger firms.
The high Australian dollar, cautiousness of households and concerns about the global outlook are likely to have contributed to the decline in sentiment.
SME business conditions were unchanged at a subdued level, although remain broadly in line with conditions reported by larger firms.
The most significant falls in business confidence were reported in property, construction, finance and retail, while confidence in health and business services improved.
Retail sentiment is now the weakest of all industries, while confidence is strongest in business services.
Confidence levels fell across all major states, with SA reporting the lowest level of confidence, followed by NSW and Queensland.
WA and Victoria are the most optimistic about near-term activity, although confidence even in these states is relatively poor.
Property and business services recorded the largest decline in business conditions, while in contrast, conditions improved in construction and manufacturing.
Conditions were strongest in health services and finance, and weakest in property and transport.
By state, conditions fell sharply in SA, followed by WA, and improved in Queensland and NSW. Despite improving solidly in the quarter, conditions in Queensland remained the most subdued of all mainland states, while conditions were strongest in Victoria and NSW.
Conditions improved for low-tier (turnover of $2-3m p.a.) and high-tier ($5-10m p.a.) firms reflecting improvements in profitability and employment, while conditions of mid-tier firms ($3-5 m p.a.) softened.
Consistent with general weakness in business conditions, cash flow deteriorated in the June quarter, especially in transport, wholesale, property and business services, while cash flows improved most in health services.
Cash flows were weaker across all states in the June quarter, with the exception of Queensland where they improved solidly.
Long-term decisions continue to be constrained by a general lack of demand, while tax & government policy and global economic uncertainty were perceived to be more constraining factors in the June quarter.
ENDS
05-08 1258
Word count: 1370
