While Holden's Elizabeth plant may be facing an uncertain future beyond 2017, a new TAFE campus has been officially opened on the former Mitsubishi site at Tonsley Park.
The campus on the grounds of the old car plant in Adelaide's south has capacity for more than 6,000 students learning a range of trades.
The opening comes almost six years after Mitsubishi closed its doors in March 2008 and four years after the State Government bought the site for $32.5 million.
The Government says the new TAFE will be part of a $120 million training and manufacturing hub and will centralise courses from former colleges at Marleston, Panorama and O'Halloran Hill.
TAFE SA chief executive Jeff Cunningham says the industrial nature of Tonsley Park is ideally suited to the courses on offer.
"It's the construction trades across everything. Bricklaying, carpentry, air-conditioning. Everything you could possibly think of," he said.
"Capacity is 6,500 students throughout the year. It could go up to 8,000 students at any one time."
The Opposition has criticised the Government for securing only a few tenants, but Premier Jay Weatherill says talks are ongoing with a number of businesses keen to establish a presence at the site.
"We have three very important tenants beyond the TAFE College. We have Flinders University and their school of mathematics and science," he said.
"We have Tier 5, a major ICT company which is planning to invest $110 million and of course we have our partner in this site, which is Siemens.
"This could have just ended up as a bulky goods plant but we decided we wanted to use it to transform the South Australian economy."
Opposition looks offshore for export boost
The opening came as the State Opposition unveiled an economic policy of its own, saying it wants to broaden the state's export market to create new jobs.
The Opposition will provide $3,000 dollar grants to up to 500 businesses to take part in trade delegations if it wins the March election.
Opposition Leader Steven Marshall says the policy would help local businesses find new customers in untapped markets.
"I've just come back from South East Asia and it was humiliating to meet with our senior Australian trade officials overseas. They haven't seen anybody from South Australia," he said.
"The Government has dropped the ball in terms of exports and if you think about how we're going to create jobs in South Australia, if you think about how we're going to get our economy going, if you think about how we're going to keep our young people here, you've got to grow the economy.
"To do that you need to export goods and services."
Word count: 445
