AFL CHIEF Andrew Demetriou joked about pulling off the great rugby league heist as he saw Karmichael Hunt out the door.
"I can see that Emma's mind is made up," Demetriou said. "And if your partner is anything like my wife, well I reckon you will be with us next year."
lt was a secret meeting at Demetriou's $7 million Toorak home on May 24 that helped the AFL pull off the code's biggest steal.
After helping the Broncos to a 20-18 win over the Tigers at Campbelltown, Hunt flew to Melbourne in cloak-and-dagger trip to sip tea with the AFL boss and talk about football's most ambitious move.
"He invited us over to his place for afternoon tea," Hunt said.
"He made us feel really welcome and we had a good chat. We heard his thoughts on me swapping over to AFL and his point of view."
The secret maneuvering to steal one of rugby league's biggest stars began in late February when top AFL scout Mark Browning learned of Hunt's interest in Japanese rugby.
In 2003, Browning invited Hunt to an AFL camp after watching him play schoolboy Aussie rules for the Anglican Church Grammar High School in Brisbane.
"He couldn't go because he was contracted to the Broncos," revealed a high ranking AFL official. "He has always considered him the one that got away and we never lost interest."
With Hunt contemplating the next chapter of his life, Browning called Gold Coast recruitment man Scott Clayton and told him of Hunt's AFL past.
So Clayton phoned Hunt's manager David Riollo and began negotiating what would end up being a $1 million a year deal.
"From a coaches point of view I wanted to know if he could play," revealed Gold Coast coach Guy McKenna.
"I didn't say no straight away because I knew he was an athlete but I wanted to make sure he was up to it."
That assurance came after Hunt's whirlwind trip to Melbourne which included a kicking session with Nathan Buckley and Jason McCartney.
"I spoke to Buckley after that and he said he was a better kick than Marty Clarke who has played AFL for Collingwood," McKenna said. "That was enough for me."
Hunt's parent's and partner were wined and dined in the AFL's private box during rugby league's State of Origin I in Melbourne.
"They really did impress me in their professional and they way they looked after my family," Hunt said.
"Ever since then I have had the up most respect for them and everyone involved."
THE DEAL HOW THEY GOT HUNT TO SIGN WITH THE GOLD COAST
FEBRUARY
Queensland AFL talent manager Mark Browning tells Gold Coast recruiting manager Scott Clayton that Brisbane Bronco fullback Karmichael Hunt is an AFL prospect. Clayton contacts Hunt's manager David Riolo.
SATURDAY, APRIL 4
Hunt and Riolo meet Clayton and AFL development manager David Matthews at the Stamford Hotel in Brisbane.
SATURDAY, MAY 23
Hunt flies to Melbourne and is taken by the AFL to a park in Parkville. There, Nathan Buckley, Jason McCartney and AFL talent development manager Kevin Sheehan put Hunt through 40 min of drills. Hunt's first kick hits Buckley on the chest from 40m. Buckley tells Matthews: "He can seriously kick." Matthews and Clayton drive Hunt to the Toorak home of AFL boss Andrew Demetriou.
SUNDAY, MAY 24
Hunt sits with AFL officials in a superbox at Etihad Stadium for the St Kilda v Brisbane Lions clash.
WEDNESDAY, JUNE 3
Hunt's family is entertained in the AFL boardroom at Docklands before kick-off in Game1 of the NRL's State-of-Origin series.
MID-JULY
Hunt agrees to the Gold Coast contract. A public announcement is planned for last week, but is postponed until Wednesday.
Credit: JAMES PHELPS, SYDNEY
Word count: 635
