MELISSA Little’s business idea to create an “Airbnb for weddings” was born out of frustration over a wedding venue mix-up which threatened to spoil her sister’s special day.
Three weeks before the wedding, the chosen venue called about an accidental double-booking that resulted in cold calling 200-plus venues around the state, before a suitable alternative was found.
“I couldn’t believe it was that hard and saw the huge market gap and the need to offer flexibility, choice and economy around what is such an important moment in people’s lives,” the former events manager said.
Ms Little has set up Venyu, a website, that offers couples the choice of traditional and non-traditional wedding venues such as “beautiful private estates” around South Australia, ranging from $500 to the high-end $7000 for hire.
Virtual tours of the venues – overlaid with photos of actual wedding arrangements – are being added now.
“The average price of weddings is $40,000 and half of that is on the venue alone, so it was about time couples have a choice on the price points,” Ms Little said.
Venues pay an annual fee and can opt for Venyu to manage the bookings as well as get professional training on running the event for an added cost.
Ms Little will be promoting her business to attendees of the TedX event on November 2 at Adelaide Town Hall as part of an inaugural exhibition, The Business Hive.
The exhibition is developed by BankSA and the bank is looking for more innovative new products, services and ideas to be included.
BankSA’s business bank general manager David Firth said businesses now had another platform to showcase their world-class ideas.
“TEDxAdelaide is a fantastic forum for individuals and businesses alike to hear new ideas and insights from some of our state’s best and brightest minds, and I encourage all South Australian businesses to get involved,” he said.
Mini-satellite maker and rocket scientist Flavia Tata Nardini is one of the star attractions for the TedX event.
Applications for businesses to exhibit in The Business Hive at TEDxAdelaide close on October 8.DETAILS: TEDXADELAIDE.COM.AU
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 340
