Melissa Johannsen & Conor Harnischfeger Married at Antechamber Bay Retreats, Kangaroo Island
CONOR had a plan to make the day of Melissa’s 12-week ultrasound “ultra-special’’.
After the memorable experience of glimpsing their daughter on the sonographer’s screen, the couple visited Noarlunga Beach where Conor popped the question at sunset. “When Ivy was about five months old we celebrated our engagement with a garden party at my family home in Alice Springs,” Melissa says.
They tied the knot on Kangaroo Island with a beach ceremony conducted by celebrant Zella Taylor-Watts. Their destination wedding continued with a reception at Antechamber Bay Retreats. “Our wedding day was very relaxed and everything that we could have hoped for,” Melissa says. “It was a beautiful way to celebrate our love. A big highlight was the dancing, we didn’t want the night to end.” Melissa’s custom gown by Paolo Sebastian featured handmade lace covered in stars which included the names of herself, Conor and little Ivy. The bride says wedding planner Melissa Ardern, of Venyu, was “amazing”. The couple sourced local KI suppliers for their wedding favours of Ligurian honey and artisan fudge from Eden on Kangaroo Island, catering from Kangaroo Island Source and their cake by Little Green Mixer.
The bridal party was largely close family, with Georgia Lauren Johannsen, Jessica Lauren Johannsen, Steven Harnischfeger, Samuel Nastasi. The adorable junior attendants were Ivy Delores Harnischfeger, Demi Johannsen, Isabella Brown, Lexi Kittle, Coco Johannsen, James Kittle and Hudson Johannsen.
The newlyweds – who met at a Carnivale party in Alice Springs – will move back to their new home in the NT this year.
Conor is the son of Cheryl and Michael Harnischfeger, of Mareeba, Queensland. Melissa is the daughter of Vicki and Kurt Johannsen, of Alice Springs, Northern Territory.
BRIDAL STYLEDress Paolo Sebastian Honeymoon New Caledonia and Vanuatu cruise Photography Simon Cecere
CREDIT: Tara Nash
Word count: 311
