TO the Kaurna people, it was Karrawirraparri, the fertile riverbank that provided food and shelter for thousands of years.
It was Colonel William Light who labelled the area Lot Fourteen, as he planned his visionary new city, and, within just a few short years, work had started on building a hospital for the people of the fledgling colony. The hospital served South Australia for more than 150 years before it was moved down the North Terrace boulevard to its current location, leaving behind a collection of unused buildings that once might have found themselves on the wrong side of a developer’s wrecking ball.
Instead, the area is being rapidly transformed into a neighbourhood where ideas rule – a hub of innovation and science, and a place where technology and art can rub shoulders.
You still need a little imagination when walking through Lot Fourteen today. There are wide expanses of bare dirt that are in the process of transformation. New buildings are going up, old ones are being repurposed. A central park-style open space will eventually bring the surrounding green space into the heart of the development, and work is yet to start on what promises to be the beating cultural heart of the precinct, a new Aboriginal Art and Cultures Centre.
And while the construction work is ramping up, inside the operating hubs the hard work has already begun.
The Australian Space Agency has moved in, as has Australian Institute for Machine Learning. Inside the Stone and Chalk building, tech types sip coffee and discuss ideas.
Away from the communal area – which looks more like a cool cafe than an office – newly formed start-ups are working away on ideas with the potential to revolutionise their industries.
Start-ups such as financial technology company Apxium, an Adelaide outfit that is now serving some of the largest accounting practices in the US, Canada, Britain and Europe.
Apxium’s founder and managing director Jeremy Coombe said moving into Lot Fourteen was a no-brainer.
“We were part of the opening cohort of tenants at Lot Fourteen,” Mr Coombe said. “Adelaide’s always had this undercurrent of technology and innovation, but there’s never been a way of coming together as a collective. We wanted to part of a like-minded community, and that’s what we have here.” Mr Coombe said Apxium’s aim was to become a truly global entity but he said the company had no plans to leave Adelaide.
“We’ll stay here, this is our home,” he said. “If the pandemic has shown us anything, it’s that with the internet and capable team, you can operate from anywhere in the globe.”
OUR LOT What it will deliver: ■ $722m in state and federal government investment ■ $1.2bn in private sector and nongovernment investment ■ More than 100,000sq m workspace ■ 20,000sq m cultural space ■ 35,000sq m open space ■ 6000 researchers, innovators, entrepreneurs and students ■ More than 350,000 visitors a year
CREDIT: NATHAN DAVIES
Word count: 492
