AN Adelaide mum has launched an app to help parents struggling with feelings of isolation during the coronavirus lockdown.
Originally developed by Adelaide University PhD candidate Tiffany De Sousa Machado for new mums suffering from post-natal depression, the Village Foundation app has been expanded to cater for all families.
“I created Village to bring people together for advice, mentorship, and connection, and those things are a much-needed commodity right now,” Ms De Sousa Machado said.
“With many parents who would usually work full-time currently faced with spending all day locked away with their children at home, many are seeking content to keep themselves sane, stimulated, active and connected.” Ms De Sousa Machado’s choice to research postnatal depression for her psychology PhD research was driven by personal experience, after the birth of her first child nine years ago.
“Feeling extremely isolated and alone, I would often really crave the advice and mentorship of someone who had children and had been through what I was going through. I developed this app as a way to alleviate isolation, to create a village.
“At the moment, the isolation and loneliness that would often be felt by new parents is magnified as they can’t go for a park visit or to library, or to meet up for coffee.
“This is also the case for many experienced parents who are now at home, battling full-time work with full-time children. I’m getting calls daily from people who are struggling.” Ms De Sousa Machado said while the app, which uses geographical mapping, was originally designed to connect people face-to-face, it can be used also to chat one-on-one.
Widening the app’s use in the wake of COVID-19 makes perfect sense to Adelaide clinical psychologist Kaitlin Harkess who sought support through the app after having her first child, daughter Charlie, 16 months ago.
“I was part of a beautiful mothers’ group but this gave me the opportunity to connect with parents who had been there before,” she said.
“It was useful in terms of normalising and validating what I was experiencing away from what Google was telling me.”For details: www.villagefoundationapp.com
CREDIT: REBECCA BAKER
Word count: 354
