AS a new mum, Tiffany De Sousa Machado felt isolated and desperate to talk to others who had been through the same life-changing experience.
But her mother had died and she didn’t click with the women in her mother’s group, so she became increasingly distressed. “I didn’t have many friends or extended family to help me,” the now 42-year-old mother of two said.
In the end, it wasn’t health workers or psychologists who helped most but “people who’d been there and could … show me that what I was going through was normal”.
That time after the birth of her first daughter, Faith, now eight, was the inspiration for an app Ms De Sousa Machado has created to help new parents. The Village Foundation app uses location data to link nearby users so they can meet in person “for a coffee or to have a play at the park”, she said.
It is also part of a broader program matching new mums and dads returning to work with mentors in their workplace, who are also parents, for up to a year.
The intention is to create a “workplace parental village”, Ms De Sousa Machado said.
Staff at Adelaide’s InterContinental Hotel have begun the program, which also involves in-house training, and workers from Westpac and BankSA will soon join.
Ms De Sousa Machado will also evaluate the use of the app and program by Scotch College staff to inform a PhD on the topic, which she is due to complete next year.
“I’m hoping it acknowledges that a certain amount of distress is normal when you become a new parent because it’s a complete change of your life but, by sharing experiences and making it more accepted, I hope we can buffer the effects,” she said.
Experts estimate about one in five new mums and one in 10 new dads experience postnatal depression across Australia.
Ms De Sousa Machado said she had spoken to five women in the past couple of days “who have broken down and cried because the pressures (of being a new parent and working) are just so great”.
“In my experience, it seems like every new parent who is working experiences distress,” she said. “The balancing act can feel impossible.” Find the free The Village Foundation app on iTunes or Google Play.FOR SUPPORT, PHONE THE PERINATAL ANXIETY AND DEPRESSION AUSTRALIA HELPLINE ON 1300 726 306.
CREDIT: LAUREN NOVAK SOCIAL POLICY EDITOR
Word count: 405
