A FORMER Sturt footballer turned burns campaigner, a humanitarian advocate, a woman who runs orphanages and a theatre producer are vying for the title of South Australian of the Year.
Speaking from Cambodia, Sunrise Children's Village Foundation founder Geraldine Cox, 65, said she was thrilled to be shortlisted as a finalist.
"But what I really hope this does is give recognition to Sunrise and the work that we do," she said.
Julian Burton, who suffered life-threatening injuries in the 2002 Bali bombings and subsequently established the Julian Burton Burns Trust, echoed Ms Cox's views after hearing he had also made the cut.
"I was definitely surprised and humbled, but it's a real team effort," he said.
Finalists for awards in four categories were announced yesterday.
The winners will be named at a presentation on Wednesday night and compete for the national title on January 25.
Also nominated for the top award are Windmill Performing Arts founder Cate Fowler and Anglicare SA chief executive and former premier Lynn Arnold.
Renowned cook and restaurateur Maggie Beer, Stolen Generation campaigner Brian Butler and Tony Hutchison, who allowed students to speak to astronaut crews in space, and sleep physician Dr James Martin will contest the Senior South Australian of the Year title.
Ovarian cancer survivor Felishia Abbott's decision to establish a fundraising program for the Flinders Centre for Innovation in Cancer brought her nomination for Young South Australian of the Year. "I couldn't believe I was even nominated, so to be named a finalist is quite a shock," 29-year-old Ms Abbott said.
Volunteer Scott Bradbrook, actor Danielle Catanzariti, and sheep shearer Johnathon Dalla were also nominated in the young category.
In the SA Hero category, Edgar Agius was a finalist for his work as a Maltese community advocate. Volunteer firefighter Mike Coddington, Berri volunteer Michael Cook and workplace injury supporter Rosemary McKenzie-Ferguson join him.
National Australia Day Council director Tam Johnston said the diversity of the finalists reflected the different role models throughout SA.
"We all have different notions of heroes and inspirational role models and this year's SA finalists really demonstrate that," she said.
Full list of
finalists
adelaidenow.com.au
Credit: CALLIE WATSON
Word count: 369
