ADELAIDE technology company Voxon Photonics has won work with defence giant BAE Systems to support naval systems research in Australia and the UK.
The company’s 3D volumetric display technology will provide 3D visualisation for research and technology programs undertaken as part of the Hunter-class frigate project and within BAE’s UK submarines business.
It will support the testing of situational awareness, systems integration and specialist engineering design applications.
BAE has engaged Voxon as part of its Global Access Program, which was established in 2012 to create export opportunities for Australian companies across the company’s $17bn global supply chain. Voxon chief executive Gavin Smith said the program was enabling local SMEs to tap into opportunities across the world.
“The team has been highly engaged with us from the beginning and established connections for us with the broader BAE Systems international business,” he said.
Late last year Voxon, BAE, Flinders University and the University of South Australia were together awarded a Defence Innovation Partnership grant to support the advancement of Voxon’s 3D battlespace-visualisation tech­nol­ogy.
Future activities will focus on scalability, ruggedisation and specific operating functions that will have multiple applications in defence – across maritime, air, space and land.
BAE Systems Australia chief executive Gabby Costigan said Voxon was developing “truly disruptive, world leading technology”.
“Our collaboration with Voxon has and will continue to explore opportunities for the integration of the company’s technology across our programs and has the potential to significantly influence a suite of sovereign industrial capability priorities,” she said.
“The Global Access Program is providing ongoing support to Voxon and has also implemented new initiatives that will expedite Voxon’s research and development efforts.” The prototyping phase of the $45bn Hunter Class frigates program began in December, and will involve the construction and assembly of five representative ship blocks at the Osborne shipyard.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 306
