TOWNSVILLE audiences are in the box seat for the world premiere of a technological marvel created by a collaboration ­between artists on opposite sides of the country.
Before relocating to Townsville to become Dance North’s artistic director six years ago, Kyle Page was based in Adelaide, where he formed a connection with artist Jacob Logos.
Mr Logos works for Voxon Photonics, creator of the world’s leading 3D volumetric display (holograms), capable of being viewed from all ­angles, in real time, without glasses.
Seeing the huge potential in connecting his artistic content with Voxon’s cutting-edge, visionary technology, Mr Page successfully applied for a Regional Arts Development Fund grant through Townsville City Council, ­allowing him to fly Mr Logos to Townsville.
“What you can do is film by 3D capture technology live performance dancing, and it can instantly be represented in this 3D volume as a hologram,” Mr Page said.
“So you can witness the live performance, the dancer moving through time and space, and at the same time you can witness this virtually augmented, 3D holographic image of that dancer performing within the volume of the technology.
“It’s quite an incredible intersection, really, between live performance and holographic or volumetric science.” He said Dance North was the world’s first arts organisation to connect with technology in this way, and it could not wait to present dance via this new digital media, with Townsville audiences promised the first glimpse.
“At the moment, we’re working towards additional time in the studio together before the end of 2021, and a world premiere of this new digital content in 2022, at a local site here in Townsville,” he said.
“There is lots of interest from national and international partners for the presentation of these ideas into the future from 2022 onwards.” Mr Page was upbeat about the future of Townsville’s ­artistic community. “Townsville is such a thriving hub of creative ­energy and the cultural sector here is in this incredible phase of growth,” he said. “I feel as though the more that we can support regional artists to be creating regional content that is presented regionally, the more we will see Townsville emerge as the cultural capital of regional Australia.
“And it’s something I’m ­incredibly passionate to support through the work we do here at Dance North.” Townsville City Council is encouraging the city’s artists and creative industries to apply for the latest round of the Regional Arts Development Fund. Details are on the council’s website.
CREDIT: Leighton Smith
Word count: 415
