ADELAIDE tech company Voxon Photonics has attracted global attention after completing the world’s first international holographic video call – between Adelaide and London.
And with the right corporate partner on board, the company believes it can deliver a mainstream roll out the holographic video call technology to the public within 18 months.
The world-first event was broadcast live on BBC’s Digital Planet radio program in London, where Voxon co-founder Gavin Smith conversed in real-time with a 3D holographic image of business partner Will Tamblyn.
Early Wednesday morning (SA time), Mr Tamblyn, who was set up at the company’s New Venture Institute HQ at Flinders University, appeared in hologram form before a panel of tech experts and a studio audience of 300 people in BBC’s London studios.
Mr Tamblyn said the call “could not have run any better”, after last-minute concerns that political events in the UK would force rescheduling at the country’s public broadcaster.
“The thing we were most concerned about was (Prime Minister) Boris Johnson calling an election an hour before the show – the whole show would have been cancelled,” he said.
“But it could not have run any better. There were no glitches whatsoever, it went absolutely perfect.” The two Voxon founders joined forces about 12 years ago, inspired by a vision to re-create the 3D holograms made famous in the original 1977 Star Wars movie.
The holographic video call milestone was delivered with the use of a specialist 3D camera in Adelaide – similar to those found in the Xbox – and displayed on the company’s VX1 platform.
“We take that image (from the 3D camera) and put it into our software package,” Mr Tamblyn said.
“It slices up the image and then we can transmit it through a cloud server to London where the image is reconstructed and displayed in the BBC studio.” Tech expert Ghislaine Boddington, who was on a panel of experts in the studio, said she was excited by the technology.
“It’s fantastic to see this real- time hologram; it takes streaming between families to a whole new level,” she said.
“And when this comes through into phones and into screens ... the fact that there’s no equipment on the body, no wearables, no headset, it’s teleportation really, isn’t it?” With the technology proven and in place, Mr Tamblyn’s believes holographic video calls could soon compete with the likes of Skype as a mainstream communications channel. “If we can find the right partner, it can happen very quickly - within 18 months,” he said.
“We have all the tech; the software and hardware works. We need someone with an existing network and customer base – someone like a telecommunications company or someone with a hardware platform.” Mr Tamblyn said other potential applications for Voxon’s technology included in gaming, education, engineering and medical imaging.In June, the company launched the world’s first 3D holographic arcade machine, the Z3D, which Mr Tamblyn said delivered “a whole new dimension in gaming”.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 499
