ADELAIDE boutique investment bank Fortis Ago has this year pushed the value of deals it has closed in the past half a dozen years above $800 million, with six of those worth more than $100 million.
Co-founder Marcus Bailey says the company has built a strong book of deals – which it takes on the basis it only gets paid on the successful completion of a deal – and he is optimistic about the future for South Australia.
So far Fortis Ago has closed 23 deals with a total enterprise value just under $825 million.
Mr Bailey and co-founder Tennyson Wickham established the company in 2011 and have worked for firms as diverse as water companies, racetrack operators, education companies, solar companies, shopping centre owners, health companies and mining sector companies.
“A run rate of just shy of four successfully closed deals a year is very, very fast-paced,” Mr Bailey said. “The team has worked incredibly hard over the past six years and we don’t see that slowing down any time soon.
“When we first started we were probably trying to do anything and everything; we were doing a lot of cold calls, sending out a lot of introductory emails, and just really trying to establish a name and a presence.
“We’ve probably morphed to now being really selective about the deals we take on, the size, the sector and the likelihood of success. We are fortunate to now say ‘no’ to more opportunities than ‘yes’.
“That’s the biggest change. We’ve noticed there’s a lot more bigger companies and bigger deals out there than what we thought when we first set up. In total we’ve done six deals above $100 million now and the average deal size is continually increasing.’’ Mr Bailey said there were a lot of quiet achievers among the business community in SA, with a lot of large companies preferring to play their cards close to their chest. But that didn’t mean the deals available were modest.
“Certainly the runway of deals we’ve got at the moment, most of them would be well above $50 million,” he said.
Mr Bailey said the business also offered more than merger and acquisition expertise, with many businesses seeing the value in having someone with their expertise look at their own deals or business operations.
“When you apply M&A skill-sets to other sectors you can add value in a number of ways,” he said.
“So increasingly what you are seeing in the market is investment banks doing non-traditional activities such as running the tender for TV rights for sporting deals; we’ve spotted a few opportunities where we thought there was a big opportunity to use our skills to re-cut certain deals.’’ A local example was Fortis Ago running an eye over Star Pharmacies’ wholesale supply tender contract.
“Because we only charge on results, if we don’t get results we don’t get paid, so our hearts and skills are most certainly in it. It’s a good outcome for most parties,” Mr Bailey said.
Mr Wickham said in addition to advising on larger corporate transactions, the firm also looked at investment and raising capital for emerging companies with big ambitions.
“Coming off the success of an investment into Vinomofo in 2013, Fortis Ago recently led a $1 million investment into Adelaide hi-tech company Voxon Photonics. Voxon is now in the early stages of generating revenue and is engaging with global companies such as Harvard University and Moet Hennessy,’’ Mr Wickham said.
“Voxon is a great examble of emerging SA companies that have global apirations that we like to get behind and hopefully will become the big companies of the future” Mr Wickham also sees opportunities in the resource and infrastructure sectors and recently participated in a deal with listed company Thor Mining, which is looking at low-impact methods for restarting copper mining at Kapunda through a company called Environmental Copper Recovery SA.“Mining and resources is one sector that has had its recent difficulties but I see a lot of potential value and development opportunities emerging”.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 661
