A VENTURE capitalist who’s invested in one of Adelaide’s brightest start-up prospects is buoyed by the state’s growing number of tech entrepreneurs, but says access to early-stage funding remains a key challenge for many to overcome.
During a visit to Adelaide last week, Right Click Capital partner Benjamin Chong encouraged SA entrepreneurs to reach out to venture capital, angel and other investors during the early stages of their start-up ventures.
In March, Right Click Capital backed Adelaide nano-satellite company Myriota as part of an $18.5 million funding round led by Blue Sky Venture Capital and aviation giant Boeing HorizonX Ventures.
With most of the Australian venture capital funds run out of the eastern states, Mr Chong said building relationships early was key for Adelaide-based entrepreneurs.
“You don’t want to go and ask for investment when you have the final dollar in your bank account and you need the money tomorrow,” he said.
“Building relationships with potential investors is key – understanding what’s currently in their portfolio, what they say they’re looking for and keeping them abreast of any updates.
“For Adelaide businesses, when they go on business development trips, carve some time out if they’re in Melbourne or Sydney to develop some relationships.” According to Right Click Capital’s Internet DealBook, the Myriota capital raising was the second biggest start-up transaction in South Australia’s technology sector last financial year, behind KKR’s $35 investment in Signostics and ahead of Tic:Toc’s $11.5 million capital raising.
Fleet and Voxon Photonics rounded out the top five transactions, with $5 million and $1.5 million investment deals.
“I think there is a lot of early-stage optimism in Adelaide but clearly there’s this big gap from $35 million to $1.5 million,” Mr Chong said.
“I’m hoping that over the next couple of years we’ll hear of more companies receiving funding, but also I’d love to see more companies exiting – whether by way of IPO or by way of acquisition.
“Because that then allows second generation entrepreneurs to come back into the system, to invest and mentor and hopefully start another company and do it all again.” Mr Chong met with Myriota last week, as well as a number of other Adelaide start-ups and the State Government’s TechInSA agency.
Myriota’s satellite technology is currently in trial with farmers and logistics companies, and the launch of its own nano-satellite into space is understood to be imminent.
“They’ve got a positive trajectory, and they’ve also been able to on-board more customers, so I think for them it is about spending the investment funds wisely,” Mr Chong said.
Mr Chong said Right Click Capital – a member of the global US$1.8 billion Draper Venture Network – was looking to invest in companies employing emerging technologies, including the Internet of Things.“Whether it’s the data analytics or whether it’s communications such as Myriota, we think there is opportunity there,” he said.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 484
