THE year the Beatles made their one and only trip to Adelaide, 1964, Chrysler Australia opened its national car manufacturing plant to the south of the city.
It produced cars there for 16 years before Mitsubishi began a 28-year stint that ended in 2008 and appeared dead in the water before the State Government picked up a $253 million redevelopment tab a few years later. The 61ha Tonsley site was, if not back in business, on its way back.
The site was earmarked by the State Government as an innovation hub, designed to "support the transformation of South Australia's manufacturing industry by providing a high quality, people-focused and knowledge-driven environment".
For innovator and inventor Scott Boocock, it's a mission statement close to his heart, and the site is soon to be a base for his fast-growing business.
Mr Boocock, the man behind the Heg - the plastic peg with a hook - will early next year usher his new "Hegquarters" into the centre of a rectangular pod in the midst of the Tonsley redevelopment, a 250sq m office bookended by Flinders University to the north and TAFE to the south. Siemens on one side and an Adelaide CBD rail link on the other complete the layout but the real impact is in the possibility.
"In 12 months' time, 50 per cent of this manufacturing assembly space will be filled," says James Young, head of Colliers International SA, the agents charged with bringing in the businesses to match the ambition.
The ambition is immense. Indeed, 12 months ago the Tonsley corporate population was modest by comparison. The chance to work alongside, and be inspired by, fellow innovators is what pulled Mr Boocock in, he said.
"For me it's a collaboration of space. We just didn't want to be in a high rise, it's about being around Sage Automation and Siemens ...
"There's a variety of businesses here. At the end of the day we all have to have our financial services and marketing and PR and so on. We have 22 different functions coming out of Hegs that operate our business, chain supply, industrial design engineers. I'm super excited to see what comes." With a five year lease freshly signed, a mark of intent says James Young, Mr Boocock is already working on his next business. Or two, or three.
His Australia's Best Ideas television production, which will sit alongside the Hegquarters and its eight core staff (there are another 50 people helping with manufacturing at other sites), is emblematic of the innovation in Tonsley.
"It will be a TV show filmed all over Australia to help people with their IP (intellectual property), marketing and more. There is no area we will not be touching. I hope it will inspire people to manufacture in Australia, that's the idea behind it, the whole purpose of the show." CONTINUED PAGE 54 He's got it pegged thanks to neighbours of note FROM PAGE 53 YouTube is the likely initial destination he said, grabbing a global audience imperative to reach and scale.
"We want to sell products globally. We get approached by two or three people a day with ideas, we want to inspire people to turn their ideas into action." Indeed, ideas from Mr Boocock are unrelenting.
There's his first book, an autobiographical tome, The Aussie Innovator, out last week.
Then there's the museum.
Below the Tonsley site lies an empty, 1600sq m cavern in need of a good clean, Mr Boocock says. At $5 million or so for a clean and upgrade it's not cheap, but as the mooted site of his Australia's Innovation Museum, it's a no brainer he says.
"I want this to be an innovation museum in product -- politics, wine, immigration, buildings -- innovation in its entirety. Dual flush toilets were invented in South Australia but it doesn't sit in an innovation museum anywhere. It's worldwide and we don't even showcase the fact we built the bloody thing." With a credible board, part assembled, and funded by sponsorship, an opening date of late 2018 is feasible, he says.
The platform for progress across the board has been laid, James Young said. "It's a 20 year project, Renewal SA have done the groundwork but we are only at quarter time," he said.
Carsten Dethlefsen, commercial development manager for Tonsley, agrees. "Tonsley has won design awards but innovation has been hidden," he said. "Some of the ideas coming out of here are phenomenal." It's an impressive array.
Elsewhere on-site there's Micro-X, a hi-tech Melbourne company that moved to Tonsley six months ago and makes portable, lightweight X-ray machines.
More eye-catching still is Voxon, whose Voxiebox pumps out 3D holograms of Star Wars-like surrealism from nearby Flinders University and is deep in talks to move to Tonsley.
Then there's Specialised Solutions, a Netley company making prefabs (including a Clipsal 500 grandstand) with a small facility at Tonsley that might be expanded to allow it to assemble a treetop walkway destined for the new and old parts of Flinders University.
Collaboration, and what it engenders, is the key, is the mantra. Flexibility too, Mr Dethlefsen said, was paramount, an on-site sporting arena underlining the point.
Squash SA will set up a temporary and see-through, demonstration court only a hit away from the Hegs innovators.
Parameters were in place across Tonsley, said Mr Dethlefsen, but the court could be moved to fit future incomers as and when called for.
Innovation even at its most simple, to the fore.
FIFTY-TWO YEARS IN THE MAKING 1964 -- Chrysler Australia opens its Australian car manufacturing plant at Tonsley.
1980 -- Mitsubishi Motors buys Chrysler Australia, including the Tonsley site and produces cars until 2008.
2009 -- SA Government buys the 61ha site to establish a smart technology mixed-use precinct.
2012 -- SA Government commits $253 million to redevelop Tonsley. 2014 -- Tonsley site Stage One construction works finish.
2015 -- Flinders (Tonsley) School of Computer Science, Engineering and Mathematics opens.
2016 -- Peet Group wins contract for an 11ha residential and mixed-use development to deliver more than 850 homes and 1500sq m of commercial floor space and generate about $265 million in housing investment.2017 -- Early in the year innovator Scott Boocock will set up his "Hegquarters" at Tonsley.
Credit: RICHARD EVANS
Word count: 1056
