Note: Spills to facing page (5) photos page 5
Several promising Hunter tech start-ups are kicking off innovative new ideas with Slingshot, writes PENELOPE GREEN
FOR someone with plans to rock the recreational boating world, Mike McKiernan is notably calm.
The 23-year-old was hand-picked late last year to take part in the second intake of Slingshot, the Hunter-founded accelerator, or seed-funding program for tech start-ups, that is bankrolling the nifty ideas of the nation's most promising entrepreneurs.
His brainwave is Deckee, a website that promises to be the Trip Advisor of boating by literally offering a sea of information to boaties to help make their travels easier.
"I don't want to get ahead of myself at all but I think there's an opportunity there for the global market, to be the website that is the starting point for every boating holiday," says the self-effacing McKiernan.
Somewhat surprisingly, the Nelson Bay-raised, eldest child of Lea and Steve does not know how to sail.
But a five-year stint working as a dockmaster for d'Albora Marinas, the nation's leading supplier of marinas, was enough to fuel his belief that boat owners need Deckee.
"I helped more than a thousand boat owners and I lost count of how many times someone said, 'Where's the best place to go to today' or 'Who's the best guy to fix this problem'," McKiernan says.
"It gave me an understanding of their requirements, particularly those who travel about, and the difficulty that they have at the moment when it comes to finding cruising information and reliable service providers, they basically only rely on word of mouth."
While still being tweaked, the Deckee website and app will include detailed location guides, allowing boaties planning a trip to type in their destination and get information ranging from the rules and regulations of the waterway to a list of services available.
With a background in journalism and graphic design, McKiernan has teamed up with Callan Bush, a web developer and IT graduate at the University of Newcastle, to get Deckee afloat.
Both are close to completing the 12-week Slingshot program, which second time around is being run in conjunction with the University of Newcastle, timed to allow students take part during their holidays.
"We see the university as a key source of entrepreneurs, as well as a key enabler of innovation in the Hunter," says Slingshot co-founder Trent Bagnall.
Acting Deputy Vice-Chancellor (Research) Nick Talley says the University's partnership with Slingshot will contribute to the development of national and global start-up ecosystems.
"The graduates of the program, and the business they grow, will become part of the creative ecosystem which includes the university's own research and innovation cluster in the creative industries, and many other fantastic innovation enterprises across the Hunter," Professor Talley says.
While start-up accelerators like Slingshot exist in many Australian capitals - Startmate and muru-D in Sydney, Angel Cube in Melbourne and Innovyz in Adelaide - they are few and far between compared to the "advanced" US market, says Slingshot co-founder Craig Lambert.
Citing the emergence of new players like VentureCrowd, a crowd-sourced funding model where sophisticated investors can select to make small investments, he says the next stage of investment are the likes of Sydney Angels and Hunter Angels.
"They typically invest at the next stage when a business can demonstrate traction either through revenue or customers," he says.
For McKiernan and Bush, Slingshot is
"I've learnt a thousand things a day, and that in reality technology comes last, because you can design the best system in the world but if the customer doesn't want it, it's useless." Callan Bush
simply an opportunity to receive invaluable guidance from mentors, and tough business love to help them turn their ideas into a viable product.
"I've learnt a thousand things a day and that in reality, technology comes last because you can design the best system in the world but if the customer doesn't want it, it's useless," says Bush.
"We could be dead in the water tomorrow or up in the sky tomorrow, but obviously we'll try the best we can and make the most of our time here."
LAUDED for "bringing the cool to Newcastle" by BRW, Slingshot was launched last March by Bagnall, the former chief of ASX-listed IT company QMastor, and fellow Novocastrian Lambert, a co-founder of Yahoo! in Australia.
Both wanted to live and work in the Hunter, and both saw an opportunity to invest in its capital, uncover its growing wealth in digital smarts and, said Lambert at the time, "drive the new economy in town".
Backed by Artesian Capital Management, who are raising a $10 million fund exclusively for the project, Slingshot champions disruptive innovation and the lean start-up models pioneered by entrepreneurs and universities such as Stanford and Harvard in the US.
In effect, it takes lots of little wagers on the ideas of companies, perhaps not picking a runaway winner but trying hard not to back losers.
During and after the 12-week Slingshot program, which has major sponsors in Fairfax Media, Sparke Helmore, PwC, the University of Newcastle, Newcastle Innovation and Hunter TAFE, Bagnall and Lambert are busy mentoring their talent and drumming up further venture capital for their prodigies in Australia or in the more lucrative US market.
The eight companies who beat 150 applicants to take part in the first Slingshot program last year have not disappointed.
"The investor community is impressed that seven out of eight investments continue to grow as businesses and after spending time with them all recently I felt extremely proud of the work Slingshot has done to establish such a group of impressive entrepreneurs," says Lambert.
Choosly, the online retail platform created by former Air Force employees Rory Houston and Lucas Taulealeausumaiin in cahoots with software developer David Boyd, won early support from a company backed by Australian basketball star Andrew Bogut.
The platform allows brands to upload unique content, including video and text, which retailers can then access and use on their websites or upload content themselves.
Houston and Taulealeausumaiin are continuing to refine the platform and at least one major national retailer has shown interest in adopting it.
BuyitRideit, an online shop for action sports retailers and consumers founded by Novocastrian siblings Ben and Josh Barter, is in the final stages of a partnership deal with one of the nation's biggest media companies.
Shaon Diwaker and Herbert Yeung, the Sydneysiders behind Newsmaven, a search engine that guides readers to online articles and content, have pitched to the likes of Yahoo! boss Marissa Meyer and are launching a retail arm which provides recommendations to online shoppers.
Whispa Music, a platform that allows musicians to connect online and create virtual music, is also humming along.
Having raised more than $100,000 in funding for the core platform, co-founder Tim Hodgkinson has drummed up interest from record labels for an exclusive "co-collaboration space" for their artists.
"It will allow artists to work together on one platform, which is far easier than them having to text or email one another, and it also ensures the label's IP is protected," he says.
The 360 Mall, an online virtual shopping centre created by Sydneysiders Alex Danieli and Jon Valentino, has piqued the interest of major retail centre groups in Australia and the two founders are now deciding on who to partner with to build what they say will be the first virtual shopping mall.
Work shift and productivity tool Fewzion has picked up paying contracts with sites in two large international mining firms, with the software also winning the prestigious Sydney Angels pitch competition.
Replacing the old spreadsheets and whiteboards widely used in the mining industry, Fewzion expects to pick up more blue-collar industry contracts.
Some of the companies in the first Slingshot intake were in Newcastle last month to talk to the program's second batch of fresh-faced recruits, all of whom have at some point studied at the University of Newcastle.
"Part of the original concept for Slingshot was to develop an alumni-style collective that would both seed the Hunter with great start-ups and see past intakes' entrepreneurs become future program mentors," says Bagnall.
The advice the first group imparted to the second, he adds, was direct: embrace the program and work hard on getting customer traction.
"Early stage investors invest for one reason, the fear of missing out on a great opportunity," says Bagnall, "and early rapid growth heightens that fear."
SPREAD around classroom tables in an artificially bright room in University House's Auckland Street digs, the brains trust of the second Slingshot intake collectively averts its gaze from laptops.
As part of the program's weekly mentoring session, Jessica Sullivan, the University of Newcastle's digital public relations specialist in higher education, has popped in to talk marketing and branding.
The fledgling start-ups will graduate on Tuesday, when they will take the stage at the Newcastle conservatorium of music and pitch their start-up concept to a crowd including potential investors.
"Demo Day" has come quickly for Nadine Barry and James Turner, part of the team behind new-wave media monitoring solution Impact Race.
"We have a lot of development work to do compared to the other companies here, we're still very conceptual," says Barry, the first-ever female participant in Slingshot.
Impact Race, whose other co-founders are student Kurt Lancaster, the university's former professor of public policy Scott Holmes and his son Jack, combines traditional and new media to form an "impact map" for clients.
Businesses increasingly need to know what their brand reach is, and Barry says Impact Race can help both corporates and SMEs make better decisions in media strategies and day-to-day operations.
Barry, who completed a communications degree at the university and is now doing her masters in marketing, says Slingshot has been a steep learning curve.
"It's not just what you are doing here," she says, "but it's going home and reading more."
Ground Up Medicine is the crowd-sourced educational website developed by medical students Ned McNamee and Alex Tridgell.
The pair came up with the idea last year when they ran a tutoring program and saw a "big need" from students for simpler information on complex medical concepts.
In their minds, a third-year med student like themselves may arguably be better placed to impart the fundamentals to a second-year student than a professor or online tool.
"We want to make Ground Up Medicine the first resource students turn to, to get a good understanding of the basics," says Sydney-raised McNamee.
The duo are creating a team of the nation's best med students, with a one-semester subscription costing about the same as a textbook, and plan to gain revenue from sponsors and advertising.
"We're building the model around medicine because that's what we know, but our hope is to be able to convert it to suit law, engineering, and any other tertiary models," says Tridgell.
Adds McNamee: "We only wish someone had thought of this before to help us!"
A desk away is Sean Hillman, one third of NewIPRA, a website that promises to provide a more reliable and accurate rating system than models on the market.
With colleagues Rukshan Athauda and Ilung Pranata, Kahibah-raised Hillman says early testing of NewIPRA against other rating systems have found it to be up to 30 per cent superior.
Some advantages are that it detects malicious raters with high accuracy and provides personalised ratings and reviews for users.
"That means customer confidence increases and it will drive their engagement with a brand and lead to more online traffic and transactions for business," Hillman says.
NewIPRA has already attracted interest from NIB, which recently launched its online rating website White Coat for doctors, optometrists and physiotherapists.
The Hunter-founded health fund has had discussions with other "Slingshotters", and chief executive Mark Fitzgibbon says it's important the region backs the program to unearth its rich talent and innovation.
"As a leading Hunter business focused on innovation and providing world-class products and service, there is a lot we can share as well learn from the next generation of business innovators and leaders," says the NIB boss.
"With the support and infrastructure provided by Slingshot and its project partners, there is no reason why the next Facebook can't or won't be born right here in the Hunter."
Gabriel Waterford and Josh King are half of the team behind iSaveLocal, a DIY advertising tool and app that allows small businesses to create online offers cheaply, simply and instantly. The idea came to Waterhouse, manager of Lizotte's restaurant in New Lambton, when he was running a restaurant in Alice Springs and grappling to find an effective way to advertise.
"The idea is to make advertising for SMEs pain free - we feel that they are alienated from the potential of the web because they don't have the resources or time for it," he says.
Similarly trying to make life easier for small businesses is Flindle, an online booking system that allows them to effortlessly connect with their customers.
For McKiernan and Bush, whose plans for Deckee include premium content that allows boaties to get advice from "Decksperts", the Demo Day is just one berth on their way to conquering the lucrative world of leisure boating.
"We'd like to have everything up and running Australia-wide by mid-year but it's quite a lot of information to get together," says McKiernan, adding that Deckee is on the hunt for "tech-savvy pirates" or local boaties to help build its local guide content.
"Boating is big here but there's so much opportunity in Florida, Singapore, the Caribbean . . . going global is something we need to do as soon as possible."
Demo Day for round two of Slingshot is on Tuesday, March 4, from 6pm to 8pm, at the Conservatorium of Music Concert Hall, Newcastle. To register go to bit.ly/1fg3Uyp, or for more information go to slingshotters.com.
Illustration
Caption: INNOVATION STATION: Craig Lambert and Trent Bagnall, who launched Slingshot early last year; Creators of Flindle, top right, Allan Smith, Michael Woods, James Kaiser, Tom Hanlon, Thomas Wood and Thom Wheeler; and Nadine Barry, creator of Impact Race. Photos by Jonathan Carroll, Phil Hearne, Darren Pateman
Word count: 2356
