PICK OF THE DAY DOCO STAN LEE'S SUPERHUMANS: UNBREAKABLE ABC2, 7.30pm THIS isn't a new sci-fi drama from X-Men creator Stan Lee - it's better than that. Inspired by his comic-book heroes, Lee sends contortionist Daniel Browning Smith (aka the world's most flexible man), pictured, to search the world for real-life superhumans whose abilities and mental strength will astound you.
Tonight, sit back and be baffled, but rest assured everyone involved in this series does live to see another day. Smith goes to Kuala Lumpur, where he meets a Shaolin monk who can withstand smashing steel on his head and spears in his throat.
In San Diego, a man holds two airplanes from takeoff. Find out if Smith's tests can explain how they do it.
MUSIC ROCKWIZ SBS ONE, 8.30pm WHAT do Tex Perkins' parents call him? Darling, apparently. Yes, Tex makes a return to the 'Wiz tonight. You should watch it just to hear him sing the best bit of the Rolling Stones' Emotional Rescue. There is also a really good story by another guest, Mia Dyson, who went to America and hooked up with a manager (Eurythmics' Dave Stewart actually) who tried to make her an androgynous act called Boy.
DOCO BONDI VET CHANNEL 10, 7.30pm MANY people have an emotional reaction to the sight of a cute critter but swap it for a sick creature and those happy endorphins are replaced with sorrowful sighs. But it's a sad fact that Dr Chris Brown knows too well - the animal kingdom is not immune to misfortune and illness. Tonight, Dr Brown checks on Mal, a 30-year-old spider monkey who has a massive lump growing inside his mouth that has started to bleed.
MUSIC RAGE ABC1, 10.30am/11.20pm THIS could be interesting. Or not. Rage has given in to election fever and this morning and tonight it's not rock stars choosing their favourite videos, but politicians. There's Deputy Prime Minister Anthony Albanese, the Deputy Leader of the Opposition Julie Bishop, pictured, and Adam Bandt, the Deputy Leader of the Greens, all getting some time on the Rage couch. Will Bishop dust off her trademark death stare?
MOVIE THE WAITING CITY CHANNEL 10, 11.30pm A COUPLE'S relationship is tested by immersion in a foreign culture in Sydney director Claire McCarthy's mystical love story. When high-powered lawyer Fiona and her musician partner Ben (Radha Mitchell and Joel Edgerton, pictured left) travel to India to collect their adopted baby, their fragile marriage starts to crack even further as they struggle to deal with red tape in their bid to become parents.The tension is only compounded when a woman from Ben's past (Isabel Lucas) shows up. While the film starts slowly, The Waiting City eventually delivers and, like its name, rewards viewers' patience with a powerful second half.
Word count: 475
