What's in a name?
DURING Bob Carr's tenure as premier of NSW, the state's annual literary awards were known as the Premier's Awards. His successor, Morris Iemma, changed the name to the NSW Literary Awards and isn't saying why: it was suggested he thought the previous moniker was too closely aligned with Carr. Arts Minister Bob Debus announced the short list this year while Iemma was in Rome. He said that when he was minister assisting the premier for the arts four years ago, there were 605 nervous contestants, hoping for "earthly honour and transient wealth"; this year there are 715, showing, says Debus, "that the life of the mind has become more important and more sought after in a time when it is so much, and so often, and of late so unjustly under attack". Asked about the name change, Debus planted tongue firmly in cheek. The Premier, he said, had advised him from Rome that Pope Benedict XVI had approved of the revision.
Brits target the Queen
WHAT happens if Britain becomes a republic before Australia? Republic, a group of British individuals working towards the "democratic replacement of the monarchy in Britain by an elected head of state", is on the warpath as the Queen approaches her 80th birthday. It's the hapless Prince Charles who is getting up their collective nose. Campaign co-ordinator Graham Smith says the Queen is passing on some of her duties to her son and, with the popularity of Charles at an all-time low, a succession by stealth cannot be permitted. "She's been given a job for life -- if she is no longer up to it, she should retire." Chairman Stephen Haseler added his two bob's worth, saying that it is time to debate the future of the monarchy before it is too late. When the Queen visited China in 1987, the Chinese government wished her a 100-year reign. She must sometimes feel it has been that long already.
Moon that boat
THE Queen Mary 2 berthed for the first time in Brooklyn, New York, at the weekend and well-heeled passengers received what can only be described as an Australian-style early-morning welcome from patrons of a local bar. As the world's largest ocean liner nudged into its berth at the Red Hook terminal, local Chris Piscitelli, heroically evoking the spirit of the Eureka Stockade and Boston Tea Party, declared to his buddies at the all-night Pioneer Bar, "We have to moon that boat." A moon to an American is what a brown-eye is to an Aussie, so those who set their alarms early to see the Statue of Liberty and Manhattan's skyline at dawn were greeted by something, well, entirely different. The passengers took it with good humour, applauding the performance and taking photographs of natives in the wild, as it were. Interestingly, the QM2 docked on the 96th anniversary of the sinking of the Titanic. Make of that what you will.
Bishop tucking in
THREE months after she filled Brendan Nelson's shoes as federal Education Minister, Julie Bishop has been putting her stamp on the portfolio. There's no doubt she's a hard worker, and she jogs the 5km from home to Parliament House to recover from the weekly Perth- to-Canberra flight. But there's a lighter, self-deprecating side to Bishop. Interviewed by the ABC's Sunday Profile about growing up on a cherry orchard in the Adelaide Hills, she said her childhood role model was Robin Hood. She and her two older sisters would re-enact the story of the man who robbed the rich to pay the poor, but she never got to play Hood; that role went to her eldest sister and Maid Marian went to the other. They insisted she play Friar Tuck, because of her pudding-bowl haircut.
Pop dinger
BRITISH pop star George Michael had a smashing time in London over the long weekend: he crashed into three cars while trying to park in London. Police said the four-wheel-drive had been found and the driver had not been identified, but there were witnesses, who told the Daily Mirror yesterday they had recognised Michael. His agents went into overdrive, swiftly saying the singer had tried to contact owners to reimburse them for damages. The 42-year-old former Wham! singer, whose hits include Careless Whisper and Wake Me Up Before You Go Go, was arrested in London two months ago on suspicion of possessing drugs after being found slumped at the wheel of a car. He spent the night in custody before being released, and said in a statement: "It is my own stupid fault, as usual." Encore.
strewth@theaustralian.com.au
Word count: 786
