ELIZABETH JACKSON: As the Federal Government pushes ahead with plans to hold a national plebiscite on the issue of gay marriage, conservative groups within Australia's Anglican Church want new laws giving devout Christians the right to discriminate against same-sex couples.
Next month the synod of the Anglican Church's Sydney diocese will consider a report from a senior bishop which argues that wedding service providers should have the "religious freedom" to refuse to cater for gay couples.
Others say that's a dangerous precedent, but Australia's human rights commissioner argues that the rights of both groups can be protected.
Nick Grimm reports.
NICK GRIMM: The Anglican Bishop of South Sydney, Robert Forsyth, acknowledges he's personally opposed to the concept of gay people getting married to each other.
Even so, he's busy preparing for the day when he anticipates the Australian Government may make same-sex marriage legal.
Bishop Forsyth heads up the 'Religious Freedom Reference Group' within the church's conservative Sydney diocese. And, as he explained to AM this morning, he wants any new laws to offer an opt-out for those opposed to extending the institution to non-heterosexuals.
It's what he calls "justifiable discrimination".
ROBERT FORSYTH: Some people accuse the Church of raising this issue to stop same-sex marriage. I understand why they might say that, but this is a genuine separate issue from whether or not you think same-sex marriage should be authorised or not.
Bishop Forsyth says there will be Anglican clergy who'll refuse to conduct wedding ceremonies for same-sex couples.
But as Adam Webster from Adelaide University's law school explains, under current laws, they can already refuse to act as celebrants when they wish.
ADAM WEBSTER: Nothing in the Marriage Act imposes an obligation on a minister of religion to solemnise any particular marriage.
NICK GRIMM: What's less clear is the position of those who hold strong religious beliefs in the general community; in particular, wedding service providers like caterers, photographers and florists, who may object to providing their services to gay customers.
In the United States, there have been high profile cases of businesses copping huge fines, and there was even the Kentucky county clerk sent to jail recently for refusing to give gay marriages her blessing.
Bishop Forsyth again.
ROBERT FORSYTH: If you hold conscientiously that the redefinition of marriage is wrong, and you are involved in the marriage business, you're a cake maker, a photographer, a wedding provider, you're put in a very difficult situation if the law was changed.
You'd be effectively forced by the law to either pull out of your business, or even find yourself being sued for not conducting, for not engaging in such weddings.
NICK GRIMM: Pro-gay marriage advocates question where will Bishop Forsyth's "justifiable discrimination" opt-out scenario end?
Rodney Croome is the national director of Australian Marriage Equality.
RODNEY CROOME: I really think Bishop Forsyth is jumping at shadows here. This hasn't been a problem in almost all of the countries that have marriage equality. It's not a problem in New Zealand; it hasn't been a problem in Britain, in Canada, and there are only a couple of cases from the United States where wedding service providers have faced anti-discrimination action.
So I really don't think this will be a problem in Australia, and I'd urge the church to get this in perspective.
NICK GRIMM: So are you concerned that legislation that would seek to enshrine some sort of protection in this area would create more problems than it would solve?
RODNEY CROOME: I'm very concerned that a broad-based exemption from anti-discrimination law that allows wedding service providers to turn away people who don't conform to their religious values could see partners turned away if they've previously been divorced; it could see Muslim couples turned away; it could lead to a whole range of discrimination, which I think the Australian people would find completely unacceptable in this day and age.
I'm also concerned that, if this exemption is a narrow one that's only focused on same-sex couples and only allows discrimination against those couples, then that will clearly be motivated by prejudice and it will reinforce prejudice against same-sex relationships.
NICK GRIMM: In November, the human rights commissioner Tim Wilson will convene a roundtable to examine the issue of religious freedom as it pertains to the same-sex marriage legal framework.
He believes gay marriage and religious freedom can co-exist, and live happily ever after.
TIM WILSON: Undoubtedly it can happily co-exist. The question is how you design the law, and whether you design the law being mindful and factoring in the religious freedom implications that can come as a consequence of allowing same sex couples to access civil marriage.
And I think as a country like Australia, we can design a law that's more mindful of religious freedoms so we can have a solution that takes our whole country together.
NICK GRIMM: It has been suggested that service providers could simply advertise the sort of weddings that they want to provide their service for. Would that contribute to the marginalisation of and alienation of non-heterosexual couples?
TIM WILSON: Well it has that very serious risk of doing so, but people also have a right to a genuine - to act consistent with their conscience, within limits. So that's why it has to be part of a discussion of people being prepared to act consistently, if they want to act consistent with their faith, they also have to act consistent with their faith; there's no sort of opportunity for discretion where they might serve some people and not others, simply because on that day they have a different attitude.
ELIZABETH JACKSON: That's human rights commissioner Tim Wilson, ending that report from The World Today reporter Nick Grimm.
Word count: 966
