South Australia's 30-year transport plan aims to return connectivity to the city and the suburbs by tram. Daniel Wills and David Nankervis look at what the future holds for commuters.
THE FUTURIST OVER years to come, Adelaide will need to constantly review its new 30-year transport plan to ensure it keeps up with technology and responds to consumer demand, a futurist says.
Futures Foundation chairman Charles Brass is an academically-qualified commentator who spends his days predicting the ways technological and social advances will change our lives.
He says Adelaide has taken a key step toward finding a better future. It has a plan.
Mr Brass said other cities, including Melbourne, had failed to stop and consider where they were heading and often created confusion and high expense when tomorrow unexpectedly arrived.
He said a strength of Premier Jay Weatherill's 30-year transport plan was that the State Government avoided "putting all their eggs in one basket".
"It recognises that things change over time," Mr Brass said. "Adelaide made that decision 60 years ago to rip all the trams out ... that decision to rip them up was presumedly made for some reason, but it eliminated a variety of other options and possibilities.
"A read of this (new plan) suggests the Government is keeping open a range of possibilities." He said it was very likely preferences and technology would change over time. Mr Brass downplayed the likelihood that the rise of broadband Internet use and the rise of telecommuting would lead to a decline in the primacy of CBDs within cities.
"What will be centred in the CBD will be things that happen on a mass scale -- mass sport, mass entertainment and mass shopping," he said.
Forces shaping future public transport and housing choices in the coming decades would include the ever-increasing cost of petrol and a perception cities were reaching their physical limits.
Mr Brass said population growth, combined with physical and planning constraints on cities, would likely lead to cities with denser inner suburbs and city centres.
"All of the assumptions now are that more and more people will live in cities," he said. "What we're seeing in all major CBDs is the rise of a resident population." Mr Brass said this may lead to an inversion of how the city's transport routes are used.
"That may mean that the idea that the sort of radial transport system designed to bring people in from the suburbs instead works to get residents out when they want to," he said.
THE ENGINEERS TRAVELLING times for motorists will increase on the major metropolitan routes slated for tram services according to engineering experts.
Time delays caused by expected right hand turn bans, lane sharing and giving way to trams at passenger stops will also force drivers to seek alternative routes, they say.
This week the Government announced new tram routes along Unley and Belair Rds, Henley Beach Rd, Sir Donald Bradman Drive, Prospect Rd, West Lakes Blvd and the Parade as a key factor in boosting public transport patronage.
The RAA said it was generally supportive of the tram rollout but questioned the details on how it would be achieved -- especially on narrow and congested roads such as Prospect, Unley and Henley Beach roads.
RAA road safety manager Charles Mountain said the introduction of trams would require comprehensive planning involving traffic flow, signals, use of vacant land, location of passenger stops and parking restrictions. "Where trams operate on a road with traffic, then some traffic manoeuvres, such as right turns and U-turns may need to be controlled or restricted to not unduly impede following traffic and also trams (e.g. King William St), he said.
"This may mean that right turn bans may be restricted at some locations -- including into side roads -- and during peak times, for example." But will Adelaide motorists have to carry out the famous Melbourne hook turn to cope with the new trams?
Mr Mountain said: "At this stage it is not possible to say whether Adelaidians would be required to learn the hook turn." However, he is confident that the Transport Department, in conjunction with local councils and businesses, will "come up with a solution" to coping with trams.
Traffic engineering expert Melissa Mellen of Murray F Young and Associates said motorist travelling times on the new tram routes would "certainly slow".
"And many people would have to make different choices regarding their trips, as was the case with (the introduction of trams on) King William St," she said. "Unley Rd would be a challenge unless they lose a lane while the Parade would be simpler because it has a wide median strip." Ultimately the introduction of trams would provide a necessary boost to the use of public transport to ease traffic congestion across the city, Ms Mellen said.
THE ECONOMIST INFRASTRUCTURE that promotes exports and helps grow jobs must be given high priority in the state's new transport plan, a leading economist says.
South Australian Centre for Economic Studies executive director Michael O'Neil said funding the $36 billion program would be a difficult task, but not impossible.
Professor O'Neil said the State Government had spent little on infrastructure between 2002 and 2008, before unleashing large spending in the wake of the global financial crisis.
"The Weatherill Government is talking about one of the savings being about a reduction in public service numbers ... 4000 people coming off the books over four years saving about $1.3 billion," Prof O'Neil said.
"You could be looking at a big contribution from salary savings." Professor O'Neil said it was possible increasing urban densities in Adelaide would create higher volumes of people travelling on public transport and make it run more economically.
"I think you'll see higher utilisation rates as well," he said. "One of the things about South Australian transport is that we're such a spread-out city. Urban consolidation can give you those volumes." Prof O'Neil said it was possible councils and the private sector could be encouraged to invest.
"It will largely be in regions in things like rail and airports," Prof O'Neil said. "In terms of getting return on investment, any issue to do with import and export of South Australian product is priority one.
He said mining also needed greater access to deep sea ports and expansion of the resources sector could lead to greater permanent populations in major regional centres.
The Transport Department said the tram plan will be finalised once it has "received and reviewed all submissions during the extensive public consultation period".
BIG TICKET ITEMS IN THE 30-YEAR PLAN $6.9 billion: Expand ports and infrastructure connecting them to mines, including deep sea facilities on the Eyre and Yorke Peninsulas.
$5.6 billion : Finish the North-South road corridor between Gawler and Old Noarlunga. Including the Darlington Interchange and Torrens to Torrens projects.
$5.5 billion: Duplicating the Dukes Hwy, sealing the Strezelecki Track, adding town bypasses and adding additional overtaking lanes to regional roads.
$4.7 billion : Upgrade traffic lights and freight routes on the north-south corridor.
$3.3 billion: Complete electrification of the north-south train network, add underground CBD links and shift interstate trains from Keswick to the CBD.$2.9 billion: Install a new AdeLINK tram network, looping around the city and running to Port Adelaide, Prospect, Magill, Mitcham, Unley, Adelaide Airport and Henley Beach.
Credit: Daniel Wills and David Nankervis
Word count: 1236
