AUCTIONS
BARGAIN hunters waiting for "black Saturday" shouldn't hold their breath.
Increasing uncertainty means a market crash can't be ruled out, but real estate sentiment is strong enough to guarantee it'll be business as usual at auctions today and tomorrow.
Sydney, Melbourne and Brisbane agents all reported a busy week, and this in spite of last weekend's slightly weaker auctions results.
But while Reserve Bank governor Ian Macfarlane's predictions of 8 per cent interest rates may have frightened the life out of some agents, well-heeled bidders at luxury home auctions in Melbourne last Saturday showed they weren't going to let RBA boss Ian Macfarlane spoil the party.
Wealthy bidders turning up their noses at higher interest rates is just one of the tales to emerge from the auctions last Saturday - - the day the bubble was supposed to burst.
Melbourne buyer advocate David Morrell -- instructed to attend 13 auctions -- feared the worst when three clients pulled the pin by 10am, opting instead to "suck and see over the next month".
"Our first auction in Toorak was going to set the scene,"
Mr Morrell said.
"The property sold 10 per cent over the reserve. So obviously some people don't read the papers.
"Our next one in Armadale had a similar story, with the property on the market for $1.55 million and selling for $1.805 million.
"What was clearly apparent was that the upper end of the market has a complete disregard for any movement in interest rates, and the lack of quality property was keeping the bar raised higher."
At another auction, at which Mr Morrell bought on behalf of a client, seven bidders pushed the $415,000 reserve price to $480,000.
He said it was unfortunate for buyers that demand for premium, well-positioned properties showed no signs of abating. But he also said it was worth noting that, in all cases, the bidders were owner- occupiers, with hardly an investor in sight.
Melbourne had about 750 auctions last Saturday and Sunday. With similar numbers this weekend, it should maintain a clearance rate in the high 70 per cent range.
Offerings include a luxury four-bedroom house in sought-after Lower Templestowe that Philip Webb, of Doncaster East, expects to sell for up to $500,000.
The 3 Lalani Terrace property has a big backyard and even a cubbyhouse for the kids.
Richardson & Wrench, at the Sydney beachside suburb of Manly, expects 90 Soldiers Avenue, Harbord, to sell in the high $700,000s when it goes under the hammer today.
Set high on a hill, the 54-year-old home has an ocean view of sorts that would be improved with a second storey.
In Brisbane, a 50-square, five-bedroom luxury home is on offer at Kenmore Hills.
Brisbanewest.com.au expects up to $700,000 for 22 Clarkson Street, a house sitting on 1950sqm of land.
Adelaide has a $1 million sale at 8 Ifould Drive, Burnside.
The bluestone-fronted Victorian knock-off, to be sold by Toop & Toop, has five bedrooms, parquetry floors, a pool and a half tennis court.
McIntosh Maskiell Day, of Nedlands, expects bids of $800,000 and more for an executive home near Perth's Lake Karrinyup Country Club. The 10 Dwyer St property has a heated pool, gym and games room.
KG Young and Associates expects up to $300,000 for a large home in one of Darwin's best areas. 23 Gothenburg Crescent, Stuart Park, is only minutes from the CBD, Darwin Harbour and a boat ramp.
The two-level house has three bedrooms upstairs, three more downstairs and under-house parking.
Illustration
Photo: MapPhoto
Word count: 588
