AGL Energy and Wilson Parking will partner in deploying 18 ‘smart’ electric vehicle chargers across parking stations in the Adelaide CBD.
The smart chargers – mostly 22kW but also some 7kW – will maximise vehicle charging during periods of high renewable energy generation, helping to soak up potentially excess wind and solar generation while also ensuring drivers are maximising their usage of zero emissions power.
The South Australian government is supporting the rollout of the chargers with a grant of $250,000 as part of its Electric Vehicle Smart Charging Trial.
AGL’s chief customer officer Christine Corbett says the grant will enable AGL to provide subsidised electric vehicle and charging subscriptions for three community organisations. AGL Energy has begun offering its customers access to a range of electric vehicle models for use through a fixed weekly subscription.
“As a state that is ahead of the game in renewable energy, South Australians are ready to get into the drivers’ seat of an EV, and we’re proud to be supporting this initiative with more public charging options,” Corbett said.
“Through this grant from the government, we will be able to subsidise the cost of charger hardware and install as well as the electric vehicle cost, bridging the gap between electric and petrol vehicles.”
The three organisations supported in the scheme are Centacare, Uniting Communities and City of Marion with six EVs and ten chargers to accelerate their switch from petrol vehicles.
AGL offers customers the option to use electric vehicles, including models from Tesla, Hyundai, Kia, Mini, MG, Nissan, and Mitsubishi, for a weekly payment.
The subscription covers the cost of insurance, maintenance, roadside assistance, and access to AGL managed chargers, with prices ranging from around $240 to $340 per week.
Wilson Parking’s chief technology officer, Paul Sidwell, said the installation of electric vehicle chargers formed part of a broader strategy to improve the sustainability of its parking infrastructure, with the 18 chargers to be installed across three of its Adelaide car parks.
“This Trial supports our strategy to expand a National Wilson Parking EV Charging Network, which will make EV charging more accessible for our customers,” Sidwell said.
