South Australia’s energy and resources sector has got a boost from the announcement of CORE Innovation Hub: South Australia. The statement from CORE said: “Building on our success in creating a diverse community of startups, SME’s, and industry partners in Western Australia, CORE is thrilled to be partnering with the government of South Australia to bring our energy innovation hub to Adelaide. We’re looking forward to bringing even more innovators, scale ups, and entrepreneurs together to create a community of innovation and collaboration.”
Minister for Energy and Mining Dan van Holst Pellekaan announced the foundation partnership between the South Australian Government and CORE Innovation Hub at SA’s annual Copper to the World conference, and said the partnership will provide opportunities for the energy and resources sectors to work together and grow industry capabilities. “As part of the Government’s Economic and Business Development Growth Fund, the partnership with CORE Innovation Hub will provide a pivotal tool to connect South Australian innovators with the resources and energy sector at South Australia’s globally-significant innovation neighbourhood, Lot Fourteen. South Australia enjoys a reputation as a leader in the pioneering application of technology across the mining and energy sectors, and this partnership will promote innovation and technology-related collaboration between industry, researchers, private business and government, including space and defence.”
As early developments within this announcement, CORE has introduced an Innovation Ecosystem Map and Future Skills Marketplace. The Innovation Ecosystem Map is an open source digital map of the South Australian energy and resources innovation ecosystem to identify clusters of capability and stimulate greater connections, collaboration and partnerships between all levels of industry. “This is part of CORE’s commitment to support a dynamic ecosystem of innovators, government, academics, SMEs, investors, corporates and large companies – helping to break down the barriers to technology trials and commercialisation.” CORE’s Future Skills Marketplace will curate skills pathways for the resources and energy sector to accelerate its transition to Industry 4.0.
CORE will be headquartered at the Lot Fourteen innovation precinct in Adelaide’s CBD and have a satellite hub at Tonsley Innovation District in southern Adelaide, providing opportunities to connect with complementary industries. CORE will empower innovators connected to emerging industries at both locations to apply their emerging and established technologies to the resources and energy sector.
The centerpiece of the Adelaide City Deal, Lot Fourteen is a globally connected innovation precinct sitting at the forefront of technology and South Australia’s leading abilities in space, defence, artificial intelligence, future industries and entrepreneurship.
Tonsley brings together research and education, early-stage and established businesses and the wider community. Operating in four key sectors including mining and energy services, and cleantech and renewable energy, it is also home to the SA Drill Core Reference Library and the Onshore Petroleum Centre of Excellence.
