About Flinders
Our bold vision, captured in our Strategic Plan: making a Difference: The 2025 Agenda, is to be internationally recognised as a world leader in research, an innovator in contemporary education, and the source of Australia’s most enterprising graduates.
To realise this ambition, we recently made a significant organisation change to a six College structure with a professional staff and services alignment.
We recognise the key to our success is exceptional people and we’re seeking an outstanding individual to join the team of our transformed university.
Employment Type:
Fixed Term (Fixed Term)
Position Summary
Availability:
Fixed-term until June 2025 I Full-time
Compensation Grade:
Higher Education Officer Level 9
Salary Range:
$115,325 - $123,405 p.a.
Reporting to:
Director Flinders Medical Health and Research Institute
Property, Facilities and Development
Flinders University is investing in a world-class Health and Medical Research Building (HMRB) for Southern Adelaide. Co-located with Flinders Medical Centre, Flinders Private Hospital and the Flinders Centre for Innovation in Cancer, the HMRB will be a leading biomedical research facility, facilitating collaboration between researchers, healthcare and industry partners, and translating world-class research into improved community healthcare outcomes.
The Change Management Lead will play an integral role in the overall transition of College of Medicine and Public Health and College of Nursing and Health Science multi-disciplinary research teams and professional support services from existing facilitates to the new world-class HMRB, one of the University’s strategic projects located in the heart of the Flinders Village precinct.
The Change Management Lead will be responsible for developing the change management strategy and planning activities and managing the end-to-end change management of the workforce, work practices and physical spaces from current to future state.
Key Position Responsibilities
The Change Management Lead will:
Manage the change management aspects of the transition of University staff into the new HMRB and ensure that all processes and procedures are in place in accordance with the University guidelines.
Work with multi-disciplinary teams across colleges, coordinating inputs and reaching a decision for the benefit of the HMRB operations and to ensure that a smooth transition strategy is accomplished.
Work with business stakeholders to identify the interest, concerns and issues of key stakeholder groups including establishing and delivering Stakeholder engagement activities such as User reference groups or Focus groups.
Identify work practices, methods and activities that can be altered or improved.
Analyse the impact on all stakeholder groups and develop approaches for addressing change resistance and achieving support for change.
Regularly assess change readiness across all key stakeholder groups and implementers of change.
Continuously identify optimization strategies.
Comply with and support all health and safety policies, guidelines and initiatives, legislative and regulatory requirements, and report any breaches as soon as they become known-
Lead the design, development, delivery and management of the Standard Operating Procedures for the HMRB.
Evaluate, resolve and/or escalate issues in a timely manner.
Identify and manage collaboratively, anticipated resistance and be a change champion.
Plan, Program, Implement and Manage the occupancy and transition process, including ensuring all relevant certifications and the HMRB Operating manuals are in place.
Drive progress against plan, reports on status, risks and issues and attends governance meetings.
Liaise with senior stakeholders and participates in key governance forums to present change management progress and prepare monthly written reports on the progress of the transition program.
Any other responsibilities in line with the level of the role as assigned by the Supervisor and/or the University.
Key Position Capabilities
Tertiary qualifications and extensive relevant project/change management experience and/or an equivalent combination of experience and/or education and/or training.
Project management experience in a university or similar environment.
Knowledge and working application of change management principles, methodologies and tools, with a track record in applying these methodologies to deliver business outcomes and adoption of the changes required by a project or initiative.
High level strategic thinking, planning and analytical skills with the ability to actively contribute to achieve outcomes and meet the University's strategic goals.
Excellent stakeholder management skills including the ability to establish and maintain high levels of stakeholder trust, positively influence stakeholders and demonstrated experience in working in a customer service focussed environment.
Strong problem resolution and decision-making skills - able to clearly identify problems, seek alternative solutions, identify risks and benefits, seek input from others and make sound decisions based on these considerations.
High level interpersonal influence and demonstrated ability to negotiate and communicate effectively with staff and customers across a diverse organisation particularly during the transition phase to the new building.
High level written and verbal communication skills with an ability to communicate effectively with people at all levels.
Actively listening skills and the ability to deal with resistance to change.
Ability to be self-motivated, organised and work to strict timeframes and deadlines.
Prescribed Conditions for Employment
A valid National Police Certificate which is satisfactory to the University will also be required before the successful applicant can commence in this position.
Flinders University has introduced a COVID-19 Vaccination Policy that requires all new staff members to be up to date with their COVID-19 vaccinations, subject to medical exemptions and limited exemptions.
Information for Applicants:
You are required to provide a suitability statement of no more than three pages, addressing the key capabilities of the position as outlined above. In addition, you are required to upload your CV.
We are seeking to increase the diversity to improve equal opportunity outcomes for employees, and therefore we encourage female applicants, people with a disability and/or from Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islanders descent to apply
Please note, late applications and applications sent via agencies will not be accepted.
Applications Close 11:59 pm:
03 Jul 2022
