Photo: Students from Gleeson College participating in the challenge last week
Rotary Adelaide is helping to inspire the next generation of students to choose a career in STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics).
The community driven organisation hosted the annual Science and Engineering Challenge at Adelaide Basketball Arena from June 8 – 10, and it continues this week at Flinders University from June 15-16.
The Science and Engineering Challenge is a STEM outreach program conducted nationally by the University of Newcastle but facilitated locally by community organisations, such as Rotary Adelaide.
In South Australia, more than 1500 high school students in Year 9 and 10 will participate in the challenge which includes a series of science experiments and group challenges.
Schools from across the state including Le Fevre High School and Blackwood High School are taking part.
The event culminates in a final where teams will work together to build a bridge strong enough to withhold a vehicle.
Adelaide Rotarian and Chair of the Science and Engineering Committee Professor David Lewis said the science and engineering event gives students the opportunity to participate in a range of STEM challenges outside the classroom.
“Rotary Adelaide are pleased to deliver and provide valuable support to this innovative event to high school students across the state,” he said.
“We aim to inspire the next generation of students to take up a career in STEM through a series of exciting hands-on challenges.”
The Science and Engineering Challenge is Rotary Adelaide’s largest volunteering effort of the year with around 20 volunteers needed each day or around 100 Rotarians over the 5 days to successfully run the event.
For almost 100 years, volunteers from Rotary Adelaide have supported the South Australian community with a variety of projects, funding important research to packing and delivering nurture kits for Adelaide’s frontline healthcare workers during the COVID-19 pandemic.
[adrotate banner="159"]
