All images: Supplied
Pictured above L-R: Sarah Walsh (Flinders University), Malcolm Leask (Hither & Yon), Lucy Gosling (Hither & Yon), and Chantel Crossman (Flinders University)
McLaren Vale-based winery Hither & Yon has teamed up with Flinders University to become its first official Fearless wine partner. The new partnership will support and inspire the University’s innovative and emerging thinkers, as part of Flinders’ recently launched Fearless brand.
The University’s Fearless brand, bouncing off of its 2021 13-week Fearless Conversations series, aims to bring together industry leaders and Flinders researchers to discuss challenges facing our world and opportunities for SA to help.
The Flinders Fearless brand aims to deep dive into topics such as health, science, politics, the arts, the environment, and more. Ultimately, the goal is to inspire young innovative thinkers and spark future innovation across the state.
The exciting new partnership will run for at least two years and will also offer internships for Flinders University students at Hither & Yon.
Hither & Yon Director Malcolm Leask is thrilled to partner with the University – a relationship he hopes will provide sustained shared thinking between the two brands and exciting opportunities for the young and innovative leaders of the student body.
“There is a great synergy and shared philosophy between the two brands. Hither & Yon are excited to join Flinders University and its community of inspired and ambitious young thinkers. Together with Flinders University, we want to make a difference and invest in the future growth of our industry and state,” said Malcolm.
Pictured: Sarah Walsh (Flinders University) & Malcolm Leask (Hither & Yon)
Under the two-year partnership, Hither & Yon’s wine will be utilised exclusively by the University at their Fearless events, including Fearless Conversations as an inaugural ‘Fearless Partner’ and at FUMA exhibition openings. Hither & Yon and Flinders University will also work together to explore options for Flinders’ students to undertake work experience or internships with the local winery.
Sarah Walsh, Interim Executive Director, Office of Communication, Marketing and Engagement says that Flinders University is proud to be partnering with a leading local South Australian business.
“Flinders University is home to thought-leaders and change makers, and we are thrilled to be able to partner with Hither & Yon whose vision for the future and commitment to sustainability closely aligns with ours,” said Sarah.
Innovation and growth are instrumental to the values both Hither & Yon and Flinders University hold, enabling the wine brand to become the state’s first carbon neutral winery and a leader in regenerative agriculture, whilst the University is well on the way to achieving climate positive status through solar generation and a raft of sustainability initiatives.
“By partnering with such a progressive and sustainable brand like Hither & Yon, we are able to continue our commitment to connect and showcase how collaboration between universities and industry can lead to remarkable innovations and discoveries that change the way we operate,” said Sarah.
“South Australia’s food and wine sector is one of our state’s leading industries and this new partnership will provide our students with unique learning opportunities that will set them apart in a competitive job market.”
For more info, visit the Hither & Yon website.
Find Hither & Yon at 17 High Street, Willunga South Australia 5172.
[adrotate banner="159"]
