Corporate Position: the latest executive employment opportunities
Flinders University Academy is an exciting new standalone entity created by Flinders to deliver a range of pathway courses for international students across the breadth of the University’s study disciplines. Accountable to a Board of Directors and as a member of a Joint Management Committee, the Director will work collaboratively with the University to drive the establishment, growth, strategic direction and sustainability of the Academy. Overseeing the entire operation, the Director will work closely with an Academic Manager across learning and teaching and will manage highly engaged relationships with key stakeholders and partners. This is a career defining opportunity for a strategic and visionary leader with experience in managing pathway courses for international students.
The creation of new strategic leadership positions in Flinders International supports Flinders University’s ambitious strategy with an enhanced focus on international recruitment and partnerships. Reporting to the Director, International Recruitment, the Senior Manager International Recruitment is a highly impactful leadership role responsible for all aspects of strategy, marketing and international student acquisition. A highly developed knowledge of global education markets, policy, and regulatory requirements is needed. This is a continuing appointment offering a competitive remuneration package including generous superannuation contributions.
Nature Foundation is a leading not-for-profit organisation that invests in conserving, restoring and protecting South Australian landscapes, flora and fauna. Accountable to the dedicated and highly qualified voluntary Board, the Chief Executive Officer is responsible for developing the capability of the Foundation to protect more of the nature and landscape for South Australia and beyond by leading the engagement of people in nature conservation, growing the science and funding base and building significant and enduring partnerships. Applications are encouraged from appropriately qualified and experienced senior executives with high levels of financial and political acumen complemented by excellent strategic thinking, relationship building, negotiation and stakeholder management skills.
UnitingSA is looking for a Senior Manager to lead the implementation of their Great Client Experience Quality System. Applications are encouraged from versatile professionals with proven experience crafting, implementing and enhancing quality, governance and compliance frameworks with a human services or comparable environment. The role will require exceptional interpersonal skills, and the ability to understand operations and best practice and to drive client focussed outcomes across the entire organisation. A keen eye for both risk and continuous improvement opportunities will also be a valuable trait in the successful candidate.
Resthaven Incorporated has reached a unique time in its history and is looking for two managers to help it through the challenging and exciting years ahead. The Senior Manager Community Services is based at Resthaven’s head office in Wayville and reports to the Executive Manager, Community Services. This pivotal leadership role will lead and manage the Community Services program functions across both metropolitan and country SA locations. The Manager Community Services – Marion And Inner Southern Suburbs is responsible to the Executive Manager, Community Services and will have direct oversight of the Marion and inner southern suburbs portfolio responsible for a budget of $13m and a staff of around 145. Applications are encouraged from professionals with proven management experience, preferably from an aged care, health care or human services environment.
