About Flinders
Our bold vision, captured in our Strategic Plan: making a Difference: The 2025 Agenda, is to be internationally recognised as a world leader in research, an innovator in contemporary education, and the source of Australia’s most enterprising graduates.
To realise this ambition, we recently made a significant organisation change to a six College structure with a professional staff and services alignment.
We recognise the key to our success is exceptional people and we’re seeking an outstanding individual to join the team of our transformed university.
Employment Type:
Fixed Term (Fixed Term)
Position Summary
Availability:
Fixed-Term until Dec 2025 | Full-Time
Compensation:
Level A
Salary Range:
$78,340 - $94,938 p.a.
Reporting to:
Postdoctoral Research Scientist
Flinders Health and Medical Research Institute
An exciting research opportunity is available for a postdoctoral researcher in the team of Dr Yee Lian Chew, based at the Flinders Health and Medical Research Institute, Bedford Park, Flinders University (Kaurna Country).
We are looking for an enthusiastic and motivated Postdoctoral Research Scientist to support Australian Research Council (ARC)-funded research co-led by Dr Yee Lian Chew (Flinders) and Professor Justin Yerbury (University of Wollongong). This project focuses on identifying how proteostasis mechanisms contribute to neuronal ageing using protein proximity-labelling techniques in cultured cells and in Caenorhabditis elegans (nematode roundworm).
The Postdoctoral Research Scientist will drive research activities using cultured cells and C. elegans models, using a combination of protein biochemistry, genetics and microscopy. Candidates will have obtained a PhD in Molecular Biology, Biochemistry and/or Neuroscience. See ‘Essential Criteria’ for more information.
Level of supervision: the postdoctoral researcher will be expected to work under guidance from supervisors (weekly/fortnightly) but will work autonomously on a day-to-day basis.
Our team is dedicated to both promoting equity and inclusivity and acting in an equitable and inclusive way. We also celebrate and champion diversity. We are keen to support the careers of researchers who have had career disruptions or who currently or will in the future, have caring roles. We encourage women and gender diverse applicants, people with a disability, people of Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander descent, and those from culturally diverse backgrounds to apply. The work involves tasks requiring manual dexterity, visual acuity adequate to perform microscopy and dispense small volume, and a willingness to work with nematodes.
Key Position Responsibilities
The Postdoctoral Research Scientist is accountable for:
Design, planning, and completion of research projects in an efficient and timely manner, with outcomes published under lead or joint authorship in peer-reviewed journals
Contribution to team research projects
Liaising with research collaborators and key stakeholders,
Presentation of original research at national/ international scientific conferences, and as invited to seminars locally and/or nationally
Contributing to the writing, editing, and final preparation of manuscripts, reports, and other research outcomes for submission to journals and funding bodies.
Co-supervision and mentoring of students and junior research staff, including training in laboratory techniques
Assisting in the development of grant applications as required, as co-investigator if appropriate
Providing administrative support as necessary, including ordering and laboratory management, and liaising with support administrative staff as required
Any other responsibilities in line with the level of the role as assigned by the Supervisor and/or the University.
Key Position Capabilities
Essential Criteria
A PhD (or will shortly satisfy the requirements of a PhD) in a relevant discipline such as Molecular Biology, Biochemistry and/or Neuroscience (or any relevant field).
Demonstrated ability to apply skills in protein biochemistry, genetics and microscopy across a range of tasks in the completion of research projects.
Experience with protein biochemistry (western blotting, sample preparation for mass spectrometry) is highly desirable.
Self-discipline, organizational skills, and motivation to carry out autonomous research and meet deadlines.
Proven ability to work effectively in a team, including providing routine direction to junior trainees.
Evidence of well-developed written and verbal communication skills, for example, publications or submissions to scientific journals/conference presentations .
Computer skills including MS Office, Adobe suite and statistical analysis packages.
Interpersonal skills and cultural sensitivity.
Experience with tissue culture and/or C. elegans is desirable but not essential.
For application enquiries or a confidential discussion please contact: Dr Yee Lian Chew
Prescribed Conditions for Employment
Flinders University has introduced a COVID-19 Vaccination Policy that requires all new staff members to be up to date with their COVID-19 vaccinations, subject to medical exemptions and limited exemptions.
Information for Applicants:
You are required to provide a suitability statement of no more than three pages, addressing the key capabilities of the position as outlined above. In addition, you are required to upload your CV.
A valid National Police Certificate which is satisfactory to the University will also be required before the successful applicant can commence in this position.
We are seeking to increase the diversity to improve equal opportunity outcomes for employees, and therefore we encourage female applicants, people with a disability and/or from Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islanders descent to apply
Please note, late applications and applications sent via agencies will not be accepted.
Applications Close 11:59pm:
15 Jun 2022
