Reflecting its upwards trajectory in learning and research, Flinders University is expanding its Central Business District footprint onto North Terrace, becoming the anchor tenant of the new Festival Tower development.
President and Vice-Chancellor Professor Colin Stirling says being strategically positioned in the heart of the Riverbank precinct will deliver benefits to students and open up new growth opportunities.
‘Festival Tower is perfectly positioned to connect Flinders University within key medical, technology, business, government, law and arts precincts,’ Professor Stirling says.
‘This high-profile presence will both strengthen our research linkages and be a launchpad for students as we skill our future workforce of health professionals, accountants, lawyers, barristers, criminologists and government policy makers,’ he says.
‘Crucially, the location of Festival Tower adjacent to the Adelaide Railway Station means our new vertical campus will be just 19 minutes by rail to Tonsley and 22 minutes to Bedford Park, where our transformational Flinders Village development is about to take shape. Together, these initiatives will create the largest integrated health and education network in South Australia.
‘We’re adapting to what our students want with unparalleled flexibility, convenience and connectivity. For students in areas like law and commerce where many are working in the city, the move to Festival Tower will expand their options to complete or extend their studies.
‘Our business students will be on the doorstep of the city’s core commerce precinct, our students studying government will be on the doorstep of parliament, our arts students will be on the doorstep of the Festival Centre, and our health students will be connected like never before to the southern suburbs, city and northern biomedical precincts.
‘Furthermore, it sends an important signal to international students that we’re strong and growing, and readying to welcome them back. We’re committed to aiding recovery of this vital export market from the impact of COVID-19, because we understand the significant economic and social benefits to our state,’ Professor Stirling says.
Professor Stirling says Flinders University will occupy eight floors, comprising three podium levels and five other levels, and more than 11,000 m² of space in the 29-level Tower from 2024. The fit out will feature a bespoke entry and common area, and include teaching and learning spaces for students, meeting rooms and staff offices, in a building which incorporates leading edge sustainability practices.
‘This is a significant step in the ongoing transformation and growth of Flinders University. We will continue to provide world class education and spaces for our students to learn and work, contributing to South Australia’s progress as a bold and visionary place to live, learn and work,’ Professor Stirling says.
