(This will open in a new window from which you will be automatically redirected to an external site after 5 seconds)
You need to sign in or create an account to save
$100,933 to $119,391 (Level B) plus an employer contribution of up to 17% superannuation may apply.
This is a continuing/tenure-track women-only position.
The University of Adelaide is committed to proactively addressing cultural and structural impediments to equity throughout the organisation. In order to grow and strengthen the talent pipeline, our Dornwell Framework pledges to actively source and encourage more women into our recruitment processes. To achieve this goal, the Faculty of Sciences, Engineering and Technology seeks applications from women only for this appointment. This commitment is a lawful special measure under section 47 of the Equal Opportunity Act 1984.
For more information about gender equity initiatives at the University of Adelaide please visit www.adelaide.edu.au/gender-equity-diversity.
We are seeking a continuing/tenure track Lecturer in experimental particle physics with emphasis on dark matter direct detection and beyond the standard model physics. The position will support the experimental program of the newly funded Australian Research Council Centre of Excellence for Dark Matter Particle Physics - https://www.centredarkmatter.org.
During the lifetime of the Centre (until mid-2027) the successful applicant will report to the Manager of the Adelaide node of the Centre and will work in close collaboration with other Centre nodes supporting the Centre’s broad experimental program in collider physics, direct detection and detector development, with a focus on the experimental detection of dark matter and physics beyond the standard model. From mid-2027 onwards the position will become a continuing teaching and research academic position in the Department of Physics and report to the Head of the School of Physical Sciences.
The primary responsibility of the successful applicant will be to provide leadership for the Adelaide node’s contributions to the dark matter detection program, including: the SABRE experiment and other underground direct detection experiments that the Centre contributes to; R&D for future direct detection experiments including directional dark matter experiments such as CYGNUS; and the dark matter detection aspects of the ATLAS experimental program at CERN. The Centre is also involved in axion detection experiments such as ADMX at the University of Washington.
The appointee will be expected to supervise graduate students and to contribute to the Centre’s activities by pursuing relevant funding opportunities including fellowship funding.
The Department of Physics in the School of Physical Sciences hosts strong groups working on the ATLAS, Belle II, IceCube, CTA, HESS, LIGO, SABRE and Pierre Auger experiments. Close collaboration between theorists and experimentalists is actively encouraged.
To be successful you will need:
PhD or equivalent degree in physics in either dark matter detection, high energy physics or high-energy astrophysics.
Demonstrated research excellence, including relevant publications, in an area relevant to the experimental program of the ARC Centre for Dark Matter Particle Physics.
Demonstrated experience in the development of instrumentation for particle physics or expertise in relevant areas of materials science, quantum materials, electronics, and photonics.
Demonstrated ability to conduct independent research in addition to working effectively as a member of a research team in a complex setting.
Commitment to the principles of equity, diversity, and inclusion.
If you are interested in applying for this role, please submit your cover letter, resume and include at least three reference letters.
https://careers.adelaide.edu.au/cw/en/job/509781/lecturer-physical-sciences
Applications close 11:55 pm, 25 July 2022.
For further information
For a confidential discussion regarding this position, contact:
Professor Anthony G Williams
Deputy Director and Adelaide Node Manager
ARC Centre of Excellence for Dark Matter Particle Physics
School of Physical Sciences
P: +61 (8) 831 33546
E: anthony.williams@adelaide.edu.au
