About Flinders
Our bold vision, captured in our Strategic Plan: making a Difference: The 2025 Agenda, is to be internationally recognised as a world leader in research, an innovator in contemporary education, and the source of Australia’s most enterprising graduates.
To realise this ambition, we recently made a significant organisation change to a six College structure with a professional staff and services alignment.
We recognise the key to our success is exceptional people and we’re seeking an outstanding individual to join the team of our transformed university.
Employment Type:
Continuing
Position Summary
Availability:
Continuing | Full-Time
Compensation:
Higher Education Officer Level 6
Salary Range:
$81,377 - $86,765 p.a.
Reporting to:
Marketing & Communications Partner
Office of Communication, Marketing and Engagement
Working under broad direction, the Digital Content Producer will use Adobe Experience Manager (CMS), copywriting, social media and email marketing skills in the creation of content and assets for digital development and marketing that support the achievement of College strategic objectives.
This role will produce and publish content that deliver measurable outcomes which are in line with University and College priorities including student recruitment, research, stakeholder engagement, branding and culture as envisioned in The 2025 Agenda.
Located centrally and in the College, this position will have an in-depth understanding of the College’s offerings and key points of differentiation from which to develop compelling and dynamic content. This includes producing and coordinating dynamic and engaging content for key projects including website enhancement and maintenance for external and internal audiences, advertising, publications, social media, videos, events and e-Newsletters,.
The Digital Content Producer will work closely on a day-to-day basis with the Office of Communication, Marketing and Engagement Team and College Support Team, aligning plans and activity to ensure College and University priorities align.
Key Position Responsibilities
The Digital Content Producer is accountable for:
Working with the Marketing Communications Partner to implement the College Marketing and Communications Plans, ensuring content is compelling, accurate, meets deadlines and adheres to University and industry standards to create a consistent experience across multiple digital platforms.
Enhancing and maintaining College websites across external, student and staff platforms ensuring they are up to date, accurate and consistent with University brand guidelines and policies. Content must also adhere to best practice USX, UI, SEO, and accessibility standards.
Liaising with key content contributors and subject matter experts, including external bodies and partners, to source and create short and long form copy and multimedia content suitable for different customers and stakeholders and which can be repurposed across a range of channels. This includes working with College research institutes and centres to create and publish content that demonstrates impact and engagement and supporting student recruitment content across College courses.
Creating a hub of content and assets that can be re-purposed across departments, including marketing, alumni, media, OSR, FI and RDS.
Working with the Digital Marketing and Automation Lead and broader marketing team, bring to life campaigns across college website and social media channels.
Working with the Digital Content Lead, prioritise College service requests and negotiate timelines with stakeholders.
Writing, editing, and publishing communications across a variety of channels, including, webpages, social media, advertising, newsletters, and other collateral as required to engage stakeholders and effectively communicate key messages.
Supporting the Marketing and Communications Partner to deliver paid media material instructions and ensure recommended digital optimisations are applied.
Working with the central website team, support the delivery of university-wide digital initiatives, and using analytics, identify opportunities for creative content improvements to optimise user experience and performance.
Working collaboratively with the media team, assisting in the identification of news stories and repurposing media releases to create college-based content.
Reviewing systems and processes to identify, develop and implement continuous improvements that deliver high quality customer centric services.
Work collaboratively and establish good working relationships with staff across the University community to provide effective marketing and communications support.
Any other responsibilities in line with the level of the position as assigned by the Supervisor and/or the University Undertake any other duties as directed by the supervisor.
Key Position Capabilities
Completion of a degree in communications, media studies, marketing or a related discipline with subsequent relevant experience; or an equivalent combination of experience and / or education and / or training.
Demonstrated experience in writing, editing and proof-reading content for online channels tailored to diverse audiences.
Experience in Adobe Photoshop and InDesign for basic creative production.
Knowledge of best practice principles and standards for digital content across web, social and email marketing. This includes an understanding of the principals of information architecture, UX and UI, page design, content management and SEO as they relate to web production and publication.
Well-developed experience working within a CMS and CRM. Experience in Adobe Experience Manager and WordPress will be an advantage.
Sound knowledge of industry best practices and the ability interpret and apply relevant policies and procedures, including content delivery standards, usability and accessibility.
Well-developed interpersonal skills and the ability to work cooperatively in a team context and with internal stakeholders.
Significant problem-solving capabilities and organisational skills with the ability to work independently to determine and prioritise tasks and meet deadlines.
An understanding of the higher education sector is desirable.
Experience in the implementation of internal and external communications for a large organisation is desirable.
Prescribed Conditions for Employment
Flinders University has introduced a COVID-19 Vaccination Policy that requires all new staff members to be up to date with their COVID-19 vaccinations, subject to medical exemptions and limited exemptions. For more information, please review the Policy located in the Flinders Policy Library under Health and Safety.
Information for Applicants:
You are required to provide a suitability statement of no more than three pages, addressing the key capabilities of the position as outlined above. In addition, you are required to upload your CV.
A valid National Police Certificate which is satisfactory to the University will also be required before the successful applicant can commence in this position.
We are seeking to increase the diversity to improve equal opportunity outcomes for employees, and therefore we encourage female applicants, people with a disability and/or from Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islanders descent to apply
Please note, late applications and applications sent via agencies will not be accepted.
Applications Close 11:59 pm:
29 Jun 2022
