Revered Adelaide songwriter John Schumann AM and Flinders University Deputy Chancellor Stephen Hains AM lead an impressive list of 24 Flinders University graduates and former staff members who have been acknowledged with 2022 Australia Day Honours.
The Governor-General today announced Honours to 1040 Australians, featuring the highest ever percentage of women (47 per cent) among the 732 awards in the General Division of the Order of Australia.
Flinders University congratulates this especially large group of award recipients, noting that their fearless endeavours and ongoing valuable contributions to the community reinforces the core values at the heart of the University’s teachings and practices.
Mr Schumann AM, a Flinders drama graduate who won widespread success as lead singer of the band Redgum, and enjoyed a national hit in 1983 with the plaintive Vietnam War Veterans anthem I Was Only 19, received his Member of the Order of Australia (AM) for significant service to the veteran community, to music and to the community.
Mr Schumann was awarded a Flinders Distinguished Alumni Award in 2008 for his contribution to Australian music and to social justice.
Long serving Flinders University Council member and Deputy Chancellor Mr Stephen Hains AM, who is also a Flinders graduate, received his honour for significant service to local government, to education and to the community.
Four other Flinders people have received Member of the Order of Australia honours. Emeritus Professor Timothy Roberts AM received an award for significant service to environmental and life sciences as well as tertiary education, while Jan Phillips was awarded for significant service to palliative care and oncology nursing.
Awards were bestowed on former staff members Professor Gregory Crawford AM, for significant service to palliative care and to tertiary education, and Professor William Heddle AM RFD, for significant service to cardiology, tertiary education and to professional associations.
An Order of Australia Medal (OAM) has been awarded to former Flinders lecturer (1969-1986) and Warrawong Wildlife Sanctuary creator Dr John William Wamsley OAM, for service to conservation and the environment.
Other Flinders Order of Australia Medal recipients included Emeritus Professor Lawrence Mather OAM – who was Abbott Professor of Anaesthesia and Analgesia Research, School of Medicine, 1990; Associate Professor of Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, School of Medicine, 1983-1989 and also a lecturer and Clinical Associate and Flinders Medical Centre – for services to anaesthesia and pain management as a research scientist and educator.
Former staff member Pamela Cohen OAM, who was Student Unit Counsellor in 1971, was awarded for service to community health, and to the social work profession.
Flinders graduates to receive awards were Valerie Fewster OAM, for service to community health; Professor Cherrie Galletly OAM, for service to medicine as a psychiatrist; Dr Kerry Hancock OAM, for service to medicine; Heather Spence, for service to nursing; Jennifer Williams OAM, for service to women’s sport, and to sports psychology; Elizabeth D’Arcy Wilson OAM, for service to public administration in South Australia; Paige Greco OAM, for service to sport as a gold medallist at the Tokyo Paralympic Games 2020 and John Ziesing OAM, for service to hockey, and to the community.
In other Australia Day honours, the Public Service Medal was awarded to graduates Mark Connelly, for outstanding public service to achieving outcomes for the Anangu communities, and Sara Fleming, for outstanding public service to the development and provision of Paediatric Palliative Care Services.
The Australian Police Medal has been awarded to Assistant Commissioner Brian Connors; Australian Service Medals awarded to Josephine Brookes and Dr Felix Ho; Emergency Services Medal awarded to Keith O’Brien; and the Australian Corrections Medal to Bernard Kruhse.
Flinders University warmly congratulates all its achievers, whose actions speak to the world and who live true to the University ambition of taking fearless choices that truly make a difference.
A full list of recipients is available www.gg.gov.au
