Most of these kids have never been to Victoria. But in the next few years, it is hoped, they will become Australia’s northernmost VCE students, and then graduates.
The boys and girls are students of Haileybury Rendall School in Darwin, Larrakia country. It is the sixth and newest campus of Victoria’s biggest school, Haileybury, a private education juggernaut with four Melbourne campuses and a school in northern China.
Boarding students shake off the stress of the school day at Casuarina Beach. Credit:Eddie Jim
It’s week five of term, a midway point in the school calendar when feelings of homesickness hit many of these students hard. Outings such as this one, to a mangrove-lined beach on Darwin’s northern fringe, are an attempt to get the kids in a better headspace by taking them to a place that feels closer to being on Country, even if home is in fact somewhere hundreds of kilometres away for most of them.
A girl picks up a hermit crab shell from the sand, admiring its shape. The beach is blanketed with thousands of them, each one a perfect spiral. A teacher suggests a game to see who can collect the most, sparking a flurry of feet and hands in the sand.
School is out for the day, and a beach trip has been arranged for this group of Aboriginal boarding students who come from remote communities all over the Northern Territory.
The school bus stops at Casuarina Beach an hour before sunset. Twenty teenagers file out onto the grey sand, kick their thongs into the dune grass and head towards the water.
“We’re not there, but one of our school goals is to be a centre of excellence for Aboriginal kids,” says deputy principal Felicity Pearson.
They are learning how to “walk in two worlds”: Western and Indigenous. The school, in its fifth year of operation, says it is striving to be the nation’s leading boarding school for Aboriginal children, but acknowledges that it has much to learn about its students’ cultures and customs before it can make that claim.
There are 91 Aboriginal boarding students enrolled there this year. They have come from 42 communities across the Northern Territory, some so small they barely appear on a map.
The acquisition was a rescue mission, but with an eye on expansion into Australia’s north and into South-east Asia. Today, the school has more than 600 fee-paying day students, though its plan to lure boarding students from countries such as Malaysia and Vietnam have been interrupted by the pandemic.
In 2018, Haileybury acquired Kormilda College, one of Australia’s longest-running Aboriginal boarding schools, which was on the cusp of financial collapse.
The trial lasted just 10 days and then they flew back to Warruwi, at Sherelle’s urging.
Three years ago, they travelled to Melbourne on a trial scholarship at St Leonards College in East Brighton. Fresh out of primary school, they flew thousands of kilometres south to a big city with a cold climate, to stay among strangers who did not speak their language.
Relatives Vanessa Gondarra (left) and Sherelle Lalara travelled to Melbourne on a private school scholarship but returned home to Arnhem Land after 10 days. Credit:Eddie Jim
They have come from Warruwi, a small community on an island off the coast of west Arnhem Land.
Both are 14 years old, but Vanessa is Sherelle’s aunt, and in the ways of Aboriginal kinship that connection carries responsibilities. The pair have come to Darwin in “a package deal”, their teacher Jye Strugnell says.
On the beach, students Sherelle Lalara and Vanessa Gondarra climb onto a large piece of driftwood.
Indigenous students from remote communities have long had to travel far from home for an education.
“It’s so far away and I think it’s really unfair that they have to do this and there’s not another option for them,” Strugnell says. “Either they fly away when they’re 12 years old to finish year 12, or they stay in community.”
This has been official policy in the Territory since 2015. It drives hundreds of Aboriginal children from some of Australia’s most disadvantaged communities to leave their families every year.
In 78 remote Aboriginal communities in the Northern Territory, schooling stops after year 7. Children must then make a life-altering choice to leave home if they want a full secondary education.
It’s a story many of the kids on the beach could tell.
The girls spent a year learning this way. “The work was too easy,” Sherelle says. So they left home again to board at another school.
But in Warruwi the girls faced the same problem that led them to Melbourne in the first place. Their community has no secondary school. There is a primary school, but its lessons for secondary students are limited to “post-primary literacy and numeracy” .
“Too far from home, too big, too many kids,” she says, checking off reasons why she turned down a scholarship at one of Victoria’s best-resourced private schools.
Early results at Haileybury Rendall are promising. Last year, eight Aboriginal students completed year 12, up from four in 2020. Six of last year’s graduates are in further study. This year, there are 15 Indigenous students enrolled in year 12.
Ochre uses an explicit instruction teaching model that is widely used in upper primary school (“I do, we do, you do”) and when it’s complete, students are meant to have reached a level where they can join the school’s standard classes and progress to VCE and vocational subjects.
“She came to me in year 8 last year and she was reading at a grade one level,” Strugnell says. “And it’s like, how does that happen? She’s a confident kid, she’s really giggly, she’ll smile, she’ll answer your questions, but she would wag because the work was too hard, she couldn’t do it and no one was differentiating that for her.”
Boarder Rianna Ryan joined Strugnell’s year 8 Ochre class last year, having been transferred from a public school in Katherine by her parents in the hope she would cease her constant truancy.
One of seven Indigenous teaching staff at Haileybury Rendall, she teaches Aboriginal students in years 7 to 9 the “Ochre program”, an intensive course in English literacy, numeracy and other subjects that seeks to cram two years’ learning into one.
Strugnell is a Nyikina and Yaruwu woman from the Kimberley region, though she grew up all over the place: Darwin, Canberra, Derby, Broome, Tasmania, Townsville and Adelaide.
But if the trajectory is encouraging, the numbers are tiny in the face of one of Australia’s most entrenched education problems: the vast gap in attainment between Indigenous and non-Indigenous students.
An Ochre class at Haileybury Rendall, where students cram two years of learning into one using explicit instruction. Credit:Eddie Jim
Nowhere is that gap wider than in the Northern Territory, where too many students don’t even make it to class to begin with. Aboriginal students in the NT have the lowest average school attendance rates in the country, according to Australian Curriculum, Assessment and Reporting Authority data: 61 per cent. In very remote areas such as Warruwi, it dips to just above 30 per cent.
Eight years ago, in an attempt to raise these figures, the Northern Territory government enacted the recommendations of a review that argued boarding should be the default setting for secondary students from remote communities. Remote education, the review found, was “unsustainable”.
And yet today, the results are worse on all measures. Student attendance through years 7 to 10 has fallen 9 percentage points under the policy, to 57 per cent. Year 10-12 retention rates have dropped by three percentage points, to 33.2 per cent.
Dr Marnie O’Bryan is a research fellow with the Australian National University’s Centre for Aboriginal Economic Policy Research. She says that there is no evidence that boarding is yielding better results for students.
A former head of the indigenous partnership program at Melbourne’s Scotch College, O’Bryan has sought to correct this situation through her own research. What she has found is not encouraging.
Her 2020 study with William Fogarty of one remote Northern Territory community documented roughly 100 children who were sent to 38 boarding schools in every state but Tasmania. Seventy-four per cent had dropped out before the end of the school year.
O’Bryan says Aboriginal children should board because they and their families want them to, not because there are no other options.
“If a kid drops out of boarding school – and most of them do, some of them within weeks of starting – there is no alternative. So we have an invisible population that has no access to secondary education and that’s a scandal,” she says.
Federally, government investment in Indigenous education is heavily weighted towards boarding. In its 2021 budget, the former Morrison government committed $75 million – almost two-thirds of its total $126 million investment in closing the gap in Indigenous education – on setting up three boarding schools, called “studio schools”, in remote northern Australia.
But this year, the schooling situation in the Territory’s remote Indigenous communities received rare and damning scrutiny from a Coalition-dominated parliamentary committee.
Students Tinaysha Young and Deondre Mawson relax at the boarding house after another school day. Credit:Eddie Jim
The House of Representatives’ standing committee on employment, education and training tabled a report from its inquiry into adult literacy on March 31 that found too many youths from remote communities are ill-suited to boarding school, while too many schools lack the cultural competency and additional support needed to help Indigenous students thrive.
The report singled out the Territory as one place in Australia where “too many children are falling through the cracks”.
‘I just want a good education’
Jesse Butcher’s voice is whisper-soft, but he has a steady gaze and a grin that projects self-confidence. He carries an acoustic guitar around the boarding house, strumming a song fragment. He says he is teaching himself how to play. Music is part of his family legacy.
Haileybury Rendall student Jesse Butcher has come from Papunya, in central Australia, in search of a good education. Credit:Eddie Jim
“Have you heard of My Island Home?” he asks, referencing the classic Warumpi Band tune from 1987. “My grandfather played in that band.”
It’s a song co-written by his grandfather Sammy Butcher, a Pitjantjatjara-Warlpiri man, about a man from “the saltwater people” of the Top End, living with his family in the desert west of Alice Springs and yearning for home.
That desert place, Papunya, is Jesse’s home, “a good little spot” he has left because he doesn’t want to get stuck there.
Jesse wants to be a barber, maybe in Sydney, maybe back home. “I just want a good education, something good for my future.”
All the Papunya students who study well and have a good enough attendance record are sent away to board, though many “get homesick and they come back early”, he says.
“Sometimes I get homesick.”
Richard and Amy Tambling work at a public school in Jabiru, where Aboriginal students often return after an unsuccessful stint in boarding school. Credit:Eddie Jim
Educators Amy and Richard Tambling know what it’s like to pick up the pieces when a student quits boarding school.
The couple both work at a public school in Jabiru, a former uranium mining town of 1000 people, 250 kilometres east of Darwin.
Amy is deputy principal and Richard works with Clontarf, a mentoring organisation for Indigenous boys.
The school’s cohort of 150 students is mostly Indigenous. Many are transient, drawn from tiny communities in the surrounding bush. Some have boarded in big cities but found it not to their liking and returned home.
Boarding school recruiters periodically visit Jabiru, luring the most promising students – those with the best attendance and results – with scholarships.
They carry the hopes and expectations of their families with them when they go. Yet many return prematurely and withdraw behind a veil of shame, disengaging from school.
“There is nothing we can do to get them back,” Amy says. “It is so heartbreaking to watch all of these wonderful kids go away and not be supported enough, bounce back and that’s it, they’re done.”
The couple’s two children both board at Haileybury Rendall. They say Jabiru’s school lacks the resources or the range of subjects to give them a full education.
“There is only so much they can achieve out here and both kids are more academically inclined than staying at home, getting on the dole,” Richard says.
‘Not enough places’
The Northern Territory Education Department noted in its last annual report that 1318 Aboriginal secondary students were boarding last year, and 445 more were seeking to enrol in a boarding school.
Lauren Moss, until recently education minister and now youth minister in the Territory, is part of a Labor government that inherited a remote education policy with boarding at its heart six years ago.
Moss says she would like to see a viable remote secondary school system, but that reassembling one will take time.
“Boarding school should not be an inevitable consequence of remoteness,” she says.
A new program, in partnership with Charles Darwin University, is training Aboriginal teachers for remote communities. It had its first six graduates in April.
“There is still a lot of work to do, but we are coming off the back of a period of time when that strategy was first set out that really did take secondary provision backwards in quite a major way,” Moss says.
Haileybury Rendall is one of just three schools in Darwin that have an Indigenous boarding program. “I can only speak to the demand here, and yes, there’s not enough places,” Pearson says.
Deputy principal Felicity Pearson, pictured on campus, says the school cannot meet Indigenous families’ demand for boarding places. Credit:Eddie Jim
Not all parents want to send their children away to board. In Maningrida, an Indigenous town of 2700 in Arnhem Land, the local college is doing its best to support its students through to year 12. It has 500 students, enough to offer a viable secondary curriculum, including vocational subjects such as conservation and land management for senior students who want to become rangers.
“It’s rare that kids go to boarding school, like maybe one or two each year might give it a go. Not many stick it out,” says Maningrida College assistant principal Mason Scholes.
Laurie Guraylayla, a Burarra woman who has been language and culture teacher at the school for decades, says some parents “don’t want their kids to lose their cultural knowledge and understanding”.
“When they come back their brain might be full of balanda [white person] stuff from when they’re at boarding school, so we’d rather have them going to school in the community and learn both ways,” she says.
Boarding schools have educated Aboriginal children for generations. Many families place a high value on them.
Pirrawayingi Puruntatameri is an elder in his community on the Tiwi Islands. He is also a pioneer.
More than 50 years ago, when he was a teenage boy boarding at St John’s College in Darwin, he asked his family to send him elsewhere so he could escape the violence of his school environment.
“I saw a lot of fighting, I was exposed to violence among the students, so at the end of the year when I came back to Bathurst [Island], I said … I’m not happy going to St John’s.”
It was 1970, and Pirrawayingi was 13. The principal of a small Catholic primary school on Bathurst Island arranged for him to go to Monivae College in Hamilton, western Victoria. He was the first Tiwi Islander to board there.
“To be honest when I was a 13-year-old I didn’t have any thought at all or any expectations, I just went there,” he says. “I just wanted to get away from the other college.”
When he returned to Monivae the following year, a number of other students from the Tiwis followed him. A movement had started.
Pirrawayingi has continued to be a pioneer in Indigenous education, but much closer to home. Ten years ago he helped found Tiwi College, a boarding school in the Melville Island interior, deliberately remote from the islands’ coastal townships.
It is a place where Tiwi youth can leave behind the turbulence of their home lives, just as he left the violence of his school in Darwin, but not so far that they lose touch with their communities.
“That was the idea, to put it away from anywhere near our main centres, to get away from distractions of daily life and what we call humbugging - parents annoying their children and peer groups annoying each other.”
Pirrawayingi remains an advocate for sending Aboriginal students from remote communities away to school. If Indigenous youth are going to attend universities, become doctors and lawyers, they must cut the cord and learn how to live “in the mainstream”.
Haileybury’s Aboriginal student learning guide, a resource for teachers, points out that the school’s boarding students are “continuously code switching, from the moment they wake up to when they fall asleep”, between their own language and cultural norms and Western expectations.
Duane Von Senden, an Alawa-Mara man and professional mentor to the school’s Aboriginal boys, says the school sets high expectations, but with an understanding “that they’re walking into a completely different world to what they’re used to”.
Duane Von Senden, a Clontarf mentor for Aboriginal boys, says students must constantly switch between two worlds. Credit:Eddie Jim
A whiteboard inside the school’s Indigenous boys’ hangout room records each boy’s attendance. Red ink is used for those who have slipped below 80 per cent.
“It’s just so the boys know where we’d like them to be,” Von Senden says. “There are a lot of reasons for attendance being affected ... going back to community at times for sorry business and stuff like that.”
The school supports students financially and with charter flights to go home for sorry business, and also to bring them back.
Haileybury Rendall is doing a good job of keeping its Aboriginal students at the school. This year, all 91 who enrolled were still there by midway through term two. But many of the students who graduate return to their communities within months, Pearson says.
“That pull back to community is often trumping great pathways that have been opened up for the kids,” she says. “That pull back is extraordinary.”
Robin Bolga used to go to Katherine High, but was fighting and “had enemies”, so his mother sent him to Haileybury.
Robin Bolga dreams of playing football and being a ranger like his father. Credit:Eddie Jim
He dreams of two things: playing footy for the Palmerston Magpies (he brings a weathered Sherrin to class), and going back home to be a ranger like his father.Kriol, not English, is his first language.
His challenges at school aren’t limited to mastering English. Just being there raises complex feelings for the 15-year-old, an initiated man in his community. At home, his sisters “can’t tell me what to do”, he says, but here he’s one more kid in a place where teachers call the shots.
He likes the automotive mechanic and woodwork classes, which he says will help him develop the skills he needs to be a ranger.
Some ranger skills can’t be taught in a classroom. On a good day out hunting with his dad, they’ll catch a bull. “It takes a long time to cut up a bull,” he says, but it’ll feed many people.
Robin has a younger brother. When he finishes school, he wants to return to Kalano on the Katherine River, take his brother out bush and make him a man.
Year 10 student Ariana Payne, centre, with classmates Shonikqua King (left) and Makayla Noble-Webster, dreams of a big city life. Credit:Eddie Jim
Kinship is a powerful force for these students, but some do dream of a life outside of their communities. Year 10 student Ariana Payne wants to be a veterinarian in Japan.
“I love cherry blossoms so much, I like a big city life and I really want to see Mount Fuji one day,” she says. “And If I get the chance, I want to take Dad there as well.”
This article was supported by a grant from the Melbourne Press Club’s Michael Gordon Fellowships program. The program honours his memory.
