Kane Cornes has labelled the Western Bulldogs 2022 season a “disappointment” to date, declaring Luke Beveridge has had a “really poor” year.
Coming off a Grand Final appearance where they looked likely to triumph at certain points, Beveridge’s side is now in a battle to play finals footy this season.
A 13-point loss to the Cats didn’t help on Friday night, and they could be unseated from the top-eight on Sunday if Collingwood can beat Hawthorn.
Their midfield is clearly the deepest in the competition, featuring the likes of Marcus Bontempelli, Jack Macrae, Bailey Smith, Tom Liberatore, Josh Dunkley and Adam Treloar, however they recorded a loss in contested possessions (127-132) to a Geelong side missing Patrick Dangerfield.
The Dogs did record a narrow win in clearances (35-32), but it wasn’t enough to overcome a slow start at Marvel Stadium.
“What about the Western Bulldogs… their lineup is stacked. What a disappointment they’ve been this year,” Cornes told SEN’s Crunch Time.
“They played in a Grand Final last year, they’re almost winning a Grand Final (halfway through the third term) and the performance this year has just been perplexing really.
“They lost to Adelaide (in Round 6) and their wins haven’t come against the real high-quality teams.
“Look at their line-up last night, they probably had six or seven out of the best ten on the group in terms of talent that they’re stacked with, particularly through the midfield.”
It leaves the Port Adelaide Hall of Famer questioning Beveridge and his decisions on the group.
The Bulldogs weren’t switched on to start Friday night’s clash when conceding the first six goals of the game, and the decision to drop ruckman Jordan Sweet also hurt the Dogs with Rhys Stanley one of the Cats’ best.
“I think Luke Beveridge has had a poor year, I think he’s had a really poor year,” Cornes added.
“It started early, it started in the off-season, there were some grumbles from their players and it didn’t feel like a unified group to me, then the embarrassing situation a couple of times at his media conferences which I just don’t get, I’m not sure where his headspace is at.
“To go in with just (Tim) English last night, to drop Sweet, English’s preparation hasn’t been great, I know he was terrific last week but (off) a short break...
“So you’ve got (Buku) Khamis in the ruck, I can’t understand. I’ve got a lot of clips out of the first 15 minutes last night allowing kick in goals, you’ve got the (Bailey) Williams missed spoil, Bailey Dale trying to ping one through the middle of the ground when they’re three goals down (leading to a) turnover, a couple of handball receives, one to (Mitch) Duncan and one to (Brad) Close, just easy shots on goal.
“So their players aren’t switched on. I just think it’s a big story, the teams that they’ve beaten this year, Sydney was a great win in Round 3 but they’ve been North, they’ve beaten Essendon, they’ve beaten Collingwood, they’ve beaten the Gold Coast Suns.
“So I thought it was a big night for them (on Friday night)… I’d love to have their list. I know there are some deficiencies at the bookends, I get that, but I would love to have the talent that they’ve got on their list that other teams don’t.”
The Dogs now face an uphill climb to play finals, their hopes not helped by a run of six consecutive clashes with top-eight teams beginning in Round 16 against Brisbane.
