The Hubble Space Telescope has finally returned to full operations after more than a month of communications issues caused by an outage.
NASA said the ageing telescope is now operating with all four active instruments collecting science data for the first time since late October.
The space agency finally switched on Hubble's Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) on December 6, after successfully recovering another three instruments over the course of the last six weeks.
Hubble, a joint project of NASA, the European Space Agency (ESA) and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA), has been observing the universe for over three decades.
Since its launch in April 1990, it's taken more than 1.5 million observations of the universe, and over 18,000 scientific papers have been published based on its data.
It orbits Earth at a speed of about 17,000mph (27,300kph) in low Earth orbit at about 340 miles in altitude, slightly higher than the International Space Station (ISS).
Hubble is set to be superseded by the James Webb Space Telescope, which is set to launch into space later this month after a quarter of a century in development.
Scroll down for video
NASA images issued in July 2021 shows the Hubble Space Telescope drifting over Earth on May 19 2009
NASA dismissed fears the Hubble space telescope 'is beyond repair,' insisting there are multiple options to fix it weeks after a computer glitch caused it to shut down. Pictured, astronauts F. Story Musgrave (right) and Jeffrey Hoffman, inside the shuttle payload bay, during Hubble's first servicing mission in 1993
HUBBLE'S ACTIVE INSTRUMENTS - Advanced Camera for Surveys (ACS) Recovered November 7 - Wide Field Camera 3 (WFC3) Recovered November 21 - Cosmic Origins Spectrograph (COS) Recovered November 28 - Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph (STIS) Recovered December 6 Advertisement
The issue started at the end of October when Hubble experienced a glitch that caused some of its functions to stop working.
Its instruments went into 'safe mode' after it experienced 'synchronization issues with internal spacecraft communications', NASA announced on October 25.
'NASA's Hubble Space Telescope team recovered the Space Telescope Imaging Spectrograph [STIS] on Monday, Dec. 6, and is now operating with all four active instruments collecting science,' NASA says in an update on Tuesday.
Spectrographs practice spectroscopy, the science of breaking light down to its component parts, similar to how a prism splits white light into a rainbow. STIS provides Hubble scientists with detailed spectral data for a variety of celestial objects.
The first error codes on the Hubble's science instruments were issued on October 23, 'indicating the loss of a specific synchronization message', i.e. a continuous data stream between two systems.
Engineers working on the Hubble reset the instruments and science operations were resumed the following morning.
But a second set of error codes were issued on October 25, again indicating the loss of a specific synchronisation message. Subsequently, the instruments went into safe mode.
When the Hubble is in safe mode, it does not observe any celestial objects or collect data, but it is still powered up.
NASA has started to turn on parts of the Near Infrared Camera and Multi Object Spectrometer (NICMOS) instrument to look for 'potential workarounds' on why the Hubble detected a loss of specific data synchronization messages. First installed in 1997, NICMOS has been inactive since 2010
'The team has still not detected any further synchronization message issues since monitoring began November 1,' NASA says in Tuesday's update.
