Kicker Communications has announced one appointment and one promotion.
The announcement:
Kicker Communications has announced the appointment of Sweta Sewa and promotion of Rochelle Cervantes, marking a year of significant growth for the strategic communications consultancy.
The duo will support recently won accounts, including:
Neo4j – the graph data technology leader NASA, Amazon.com, Tabcorp, Woodside Energy and others use to reveal and predict how people, processes, and systems are interrelated.
MEQ Probe – an agtech business that uses spectral analysis to measure the eating quality of meat.
Zega – the intelligent cookware startup offering a range of smart, app-enabled walkaway cookware that does the cooking for you.
In her role as media adviser, Sewa brings over a decade of communications and corporate reputation management experience to Kicker. Her PR portfolio in the Middle East and India included CNN, Dell, Booking.com, Huawei, DHL, FedEx and Airbus.
Sewa will work alongside Beroze Dubash, who joined the team a few months ago as media adviser, at Kicker Sydney.
Dubash brings seven years of PR experience across the FMCG, NFP and legal sectors. She previously managed corporate communications for Nestle, Coates Hire and Metcash IGA.
Cervantes takes on the role of media adviser following her recent return from maternity leave. With seven years of experience in Australia, the Middle East and Asia, Rochelle has been based at Kicker’s Adelaide office as a consultant since 2019. She has helped technology, educational, fashion and lifestyle brands such as Samsung, Philips, Nike, INSEAD, Vans and Timberland with their communications programs,
“The past 12 months has seen growth accelerate at Kicker with clients seeking nimble, smart and effective communications outcomes. The pandemic has created new opportunities for innovation, with global tech leaders like Neo4j and high-growth startups like MEQ Probe and Zega poised to take advantage of the new dynamics within the industries they serve,” Kicker co-founder and director Ashford Pritchard said.
“We are delighted to have been able to add Sweta and Beroze to the Kicker team with their impressive combined experience, and to recognise Rochelle’s contribution and capabilities with her promotion to media adviser.”
Kicker brings together a team of experienced content, media and PR professionals to help organisations drive outcomes from strategic brand storytelling.
The consultancy’s corporate clients include Foxtel Media and KPMG Australia, technology players like New Relic and Poly, and leading startup/scale-ups such as Go1 and Myriota.
