What do you do? I currently run our music company Global League with my business partner Nick (M4SONIC), managing some artists and coaching up and coming artists on the music industry.
Why do you do it? I've always loved helping people and music, and this way I get to combine what I'm good at and what I enjoy into one, so it's great.
What do you love about the city you live in? You're never more than 20 minutes from anywhere in Adelaide; we have a great food and festival scene here (pre-COVID) and beaches all the way down the coast. You can be at the river one minute and in the hills the next.
Where did you go for your last holiday? My partner and I went to a friend's 30th in Queensland, which was great. Prior to that we spent nine months travelling overseas in Europe and Asia, but that wasn't really a holiday.
What's your favourite item of clothing? I have a couple of hoodies that get an absolute thrashing; my Global League hoodie being one of them.
What was your favourite TV show when you were a kid? Bugs Bunny without a doubt. Every night.
If you could travel back in time for a day, where would you go? Back to any day when my Dad was still alive. I'd like to sit and chat with him for awhile.
If we were coming over to your place, what would you cook us? Probably lasagne, I make a really good one thanks to Dad.
What's the best lesson you've ever learned? Life's full of surprises, you can never think you've got it figured out because that's when it will hit you with a curveball.
Tell us one thing about yourself that nobody else knows. . . I can't think of anything that nobody else knows off the top of my head, but very few people would know that I once sneezed a peanut into my sinuses and had to get anaesthetised to have it removed by a doctor.
Are you happy with your work/life balance? I enjoy what I do, so I think it's pretty good; my partner Hannah would probably say I work too much – I could probably do more things away from work.
How do you define success? If you can wake up and look forward to what you have to do that day, you have enough money to pay your bills and your friends and family are healthy, that's pretty successful I think.
What's your spirit animal? Probably a meerkat. I'm a bit erratic and have an inquisitive mind, haha.
