LONDON, May 31, 2022--(BUSINESS WIRE)--
ECR MINERALS plc
("ECR Minerals", "ECR" or the "Company")
Appointment of Adam Jones as Technical Director, Exploration
ECR Minerals plc (LON: ECR), the gold exploration and development company focused on Australia, is pleased to announce that Non-Executive Director Adam Jones will become an Executive Director with immediate effect. Adam’s new role will be Technical Director of Exploration across ECR’s portfolio of projects.
As previously announced on December 16th 2020, Adam Jones holds a Bachelor of Science degree from Ballarat University and First Class Honours from Adelaide University. Adam has over 12 years’ experience as a professional geologist in Australia, including significant experience and knowledge of regional gold exploration and production.
Adam is a member of the Australian Institute of Geoscientists (AIG) and has worked as an independent consulting geologist since 2015. His clients include or have included the A1 gold mine, Dart Mining, Nagambie Resources in Victoria and Vendetta Mining in Queensland.
Adam is a director of and has provided consultancy services to ECR’s Australian subsidiary Mercator Gold Australia Pty Ltd ("MGA") since April 2018 and has been involved in the supervision of drilling programmes and has undertaken geochemical and rock chip sampling and geological mapping campaigns.
He has considerable experience in geological interpretation, geotechnical and fault modelling, geological mapping and sampling, turbidite sequence-structural interpretations, wireframing and 3D modelling using Vulcan Software.
Adam will assume technical responsibilities for all of ECR’s projects, including the Lolworth Range project in North Queensland owned by ECR’s 100% owned subsidiary LUX Exploration Limited ("LUX"). He lives in Victoria close to ECR’s Bailieston and Creswick gold projects.
ECR Chairman David Tang commented: "Adam has been a key member of the ECR team since the day he joined, and I am delighted that he is now assuming an executive director role. I know he impressed our CEO on his recent trip to Victoria, and, looking forward, the Company will now benefit from his guidance and input on a higher strategic level."
Story continues
ECR CEO Andrew Haythorpe added: "My decision to join ECR was very much influenced by the manner in which Adam has managed the Company’s ongoing drilling campaigns in Victoria as well as the skillset and vision demonstrated in his assessment and acquisition of the Lolworth Range project. My recent trip served to confirm my early impressions, and I very much look forward to working closely with him and benefitting from his expertise as we develop our asset portfolio."
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, PLEASE CONTACT:
ECR Minerals plc Tel: +44 (0) 20 7929 1010 David Tang, Non-Executive Chairman Andrew Haythorpe, CEO Email: info@ecrminerals.com Website: www.ecrminerals.com WH Ireland Ltd Tel: +44 (0) 207 220 1666 Nominated Adviser Katy Mitchell / Andrew de Andrade SI Capital Ltd Tel: +44 (0) 1483 413500 Broker Nick Emerson Novum Securities Limited Tel: +44 (0) 20 7399 9425 Broker Jon Belliss BlytheRay Tel: +44 (0) 207 138 3204 Public Relations Tim Blythe
ABOUT ECR MINERALS PLC
ECR Minerals is a mineral exploration and development company. ECR’s wholly owned Australian subsidiary Mercator Gold Australia Pty Ltd ("MGA") has 100% ownership of the Bailieston and Creswick gold projects in central Victoria, Australia, has eight licence applications outstanding including two licence applications lodged in eastern Victoria. (Tambo gold project). MGA is currently drilling at both the Bailieston (EL5433) and Creswick (EL6148) projects and has an experienced exploration team with significant local knowledge in the Victoria Goldfields and wider region.
https://mercatorgold.com.au/
ECR also owns 100% of an Australian subsidiary LUX Exploration Pty Ltd ("LUX") which has three licence applications covering 900 km2 covering a relatively unexplored area in Queensland, Australia.
https://luxexploration.com/
Following the sale of the Avoca, Moormbool and Timor gold projects in Victoria, Australia to Fosterville South Exploration Ltd (TSX-V: FSX) and the subsequent spin-out of the Avoca and Timor projects to Leviathan Gold Ltd (TSX-V: LVX), Mercator Gold Australia Pty Limited has the right to receive up to A$2 million in payments subject to future resource estimation or production from projects sold to Fosterville South Exploration Limited.
ECR holds a 70% interest in the Danglay gold project; an advanced exploration project located in a prolific gold and copper mining district in the north of the Philippines, which has a 43-101 compliant resource. ECR also holds a royalty on the SLM gold project in La Rioja Province, Argentina and can potentially receive up to US$2.7 million in aggregate across all licences.
View source version on businesswire.com: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20220530005417/en/
Contacts
ECR Minerals plc
