share
Link copied to
clipboard
Healthcare and life sciences expert Scott Power – a senior analyst with Morgans Financial for 24 years – on what the movers and shakers have been doing in health and which ASX health stocks make Scott’s Powerplays.
Look in the mirror and like to turn the clock back? Scientists at Babraham Institute says they’ve developed a new technique to ‘time-jump’ and rejuvenate skin cells.
Based on the Nobel Prize-winning method scientists use to make stem cells, using the technique scientists have been able to rewind the cellular biological clock by around 30 years according to molecular measures, significantly longer than previous reprogramming methods.
The new technique overcomes the problem of entirely erasing cell identity by stopping reprogramming midway – allowing researchers to then find the precise balance between reprogramming cells (making them biologically younger), while still being able to retain their specialised cell function.
Although in the early stages, the research could eventually have implications for regenerative medicine, especially if it can be replicated in other cell types.
To markets….
To markets which have had a rocky week and are in need of a some rejuvenation. After large tumbles the market made up ground on Thursday and Friday.
But by 12:30pm (AEST) on Friday The S&P/ASX 200 index was still down 2.4% in the past five days, while the S&P/ASX 200 healthcare index, had fallen 0.65%.
This week we learned headline consumer prices rose 5.1% over the year – consensus was looking at ~4.6%. The Reserve Bank’s job description, among other things like maintaining low unemployment, is keeping inflation at between 2-3%.
So, rate hikes are now rather likely for Australians – the first time in a decade – when the RBA meets next week as it scrambles to put the inflation genie back in the bottle. Combined with the ongoing war in Ukraine, an upcoming Federal Election, China lockdowns… and the list goes on. Uncertainty equals volatility.
“Companies are doing really well but no one is watching so that’s the opportunity to pick up some good buys,” Power said.
Micro-X leads big week for quarterly reports
Adelaide-based cold cathode X-ray tech Micro-X (ASX:MX1) has posted one of its best quarters to date with cash receipts of $3.6 million (including grants) and net operating outflow of $3.6 million. The company has $16.1 million in cash reserves as at March 31.
The company has a portable X-ray machine called Rover and is looking beyond the health care sector. The launch of its X-ray machine Argus has been delayed by a few months and is now scheduled for customer demonstration around July.
Morgans forecasts Argus to be a major revenue/profit driver for Micro-X with simple manufacture, higher margins and fewer regulatory hurdles. It has put a 12 month price target of 51 cents on the stock and a spec buy. Shares are currently trading ~20 cents.
