Prime Minister Scott Morrison has unveiled his pick for health minister should the government be re-elected.
South Australian Senator Anne Ruston will replace the retiring Greg Hunt if the government defeats Labor on May 21.
Stream more election news live & on demand with Flash. 25+ news channels in 1 place. New to Flash? Try 1 month free. Offer ends 31 October, 2022
Senator Anne Ruston will replace the outgoing Greg Hunt as health minister if the Morrison government wins the election on May 21. Picture: Getty
South Australian Senator Anne Ruston will replace the retiring Greg Hunt if the government defeats Labor on May 21. Picture: Ian Currie
Ms Ruston – who is currently Minister for Families and Social Services – said it is an absolute honour to named as the next health minister, pending victory at the election.
“It’s a huge privilege. I follow in big footsteps and big shoes in following from Greg Hunt,” Ms Ruston told reporters on Sunday.
“I particularly look forward to building on to the great successes that Greg has had.”
Mr Morrison also thanked Mr Hunt for his service, labelling him as the finest health minister the country has ever had.
Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese earlier said Ms Ruston “made it clear” there will be more cuts to Medicare.
“I do know that the prime minister had said that this was not going to be a day of usual campaigning,” Mr Albanese told reporters in Cairns.
“And that he has chosen, the government has chosen, to make a very significant announcement today of the appointment of a new health minister, should the government be re-elected.
“Now, Anne Ruston has made it very clear that she wants to take the universal out of universal healthcare.
“She has made it very clear that, if we have an election of the Morrison government, we will see more cuts to Medicare, more cuts to Medicare over the next three years.”
Mr Hunt has announced his decision to retire from politics ahead of the next federal election after 20 years in Parliament.
The 56-year-old has served as Minister for the Environment, and Minister for Industry, Innovation and Science.
He was appointed Minister for Health in January 2017 and Aged Care was added to his portfolio in December 2020.
