The latest senior public sector appointments from across the country.
Senior Executive Service
Band 3
The new deputy CEO for Trade and Investment Canberra is Daniel Boyer.
At the Attorney-General’s Department, Cameron Gifford has been promoted to chief operating officer and Tamsyn Harvey has been promoted to deputy secretary at the Legal Services and Family Group.
Band 1
Simon Puckett has become assistant secretary at the Department of Education, Skills and Employment, coming from the Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade.
Several people have been appointed as national managers at Services Australia: Sherree Thorne, Quyen Hoang, and Matthew Walker in the Canberra office, and Penny Limnios in the Adelaide office.
First Indigenous Queensland Supreme Court judge appointed amongst two
Lincoln Crowley has become the first Indigenous Supreme Court judge for the state of Queensland.
Crowley joined the bar in 2003, and has since served as crown prosecutor for the Commonwealth Director of Public Prosecutions in Sydney and as principal crown prosecutor at the Maroochy Chambers for the Queensland Office of the Director of Public Prosecutors.
Melanie Hindman has also been appointed a Queensland Supreme Court judge.
Hindman has experience in commercial law, with expertise in building and construction litigation.
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk congratulated both appointees, calling them both ‘outstanding individuals’.
WA central regional TAFE MD named
Jo Payne has been made managing director for central regional TAFE in Western Australia, having previously been director of training services.
Payne has been appointed for a five-year term, having begun the role in May 2022.
WA education and training minister Sue Ellery welcomed the appointment, saying her experience would be invaluable.
“Ms Payne has demonstrated strong commitment to working with regional stakeholders to ensure training meets the needs and expectations of students, industry and the community,” Ellery said.
New CEO at Lotterywest and Healthway in Western Australia
Ralph Addis has been named the new CEO at Lotterywest and Healthway in WA until December 31, 2023.
Addis was previously director-general of the Department of Regional Development in 2014, and director-general of the newly formed Department of Primary Industries and Regional Development in 2017.
Both WA premier Mark McGowan and WA health minister Amber-Jade Sanderson congratulated Addis on his appointment.
“I look forward to continuing to work with Mr Addis to deliver benefits back to the WA community through the Lotterywest and Healthway grant programs,” McGowan said.
WA DPP appointed to Supreme Court
Director of public prosecutions Amanda Forrester has been named Supreme Court judge in Western Australia.
Forrester has over 25 years of legal experience, having held positions such as senior state prosecutor at the Office of Director of Public Prosecutions for Western Australia (ODPP) and crown prosecutor at the Office of Public Prosecutions Victoria.
WA attorney general John Quigley congratulated Forrester in her appointment, noting her lengthy experience, including lengthy homicide cases.
“Notably, the Bradley Edwards trial, the biggest and most complex trial in WA legal history, was successfully managed under Ms Forrester’s stewardship, highlighting her firm handle on legal processes and case management,” Quigley said.
Robert Owen will act in the role of director of public prosecutions until a replacement is found.
Chair appointed for panel in WA on reproductive and surrogacy laws
A panel has been appointed by WA health minister Amber-Jade Sanderson to review the state’s laws on assisted reproductive technology (ART) and surrogacy.
Professor Roger Hart, medical director of Fertility Specialists of WA and national medical director of City Fertility, will chair the board made of seven experts from health, law, ethics and research.
The panel will undertake consultation with key stakeholders to assist in the development of new legislation, looking into expanding the eligibility criteria for same-sex couples and single people for altruism, although the ban on commercial surrogacy remains.
“I welcome our expert panel members and look forward to working with them to deliver contemporary legislation that is safe and balances the needs of people trying to conceive using reproductive technology, the intended parents seeking surrogacy and, of course, the child,” Sanderson said.
Internal ombud role created at ABC
Following a review of its internal complaints program, the ABC has created the role of an internal ombud.
ABC chair Ita Buttrose said she welcome the outcome of the review, as the ABC looks to improve its processes.
“The board believes the program of change outlined in this review is essential to maintaining the strong bond of trust and confidence the public has in the ABC,” Buttrose said.
The ombud will be both appointed by and report to the ABC board for a fixed term, with the power to review a complaint finding.
The review was conducted by former Commonwealth and NSW ombuds Professor John McMillan and former SBS director of news and current affairs Jim Carroll.
