A new Statewide Rehabilitation Services Building at the Repat has opened as part of the $125 million revitalisation of SA’s health precinct.
The 48-bed Brain Injury and Spinal Cord Rehabilitation facility will significantly enhance rehabilitation services for patients, including a range of integrated services to support South Australians preparing for their transition to the community.
Spinal Cord Injury and Brain Injury Rehabilitation services are moving from Hampstead Rehabilitation Centre to the Repat Health Precinct today, on Tuesday February 15.
Minister for Health and Wellbeing Stephen Wade said rehabilitation patients will access the family-centred service in a newly built 24-bed Brain Injury Rehab Unit and 24-bed Spinal Rehab Unit, where all patients will have single rooms with an ensuite.
“The new Rehabilitation Services Building includes accommodation for families to stay overnight in preparation for a return to home, and access to the recently-opened sports stadium for supported access to therapy, wheelchair sports and for recreational use,” Wade said.
“The return of integrated health services at the Repat includes the Repat Veteran Wellbeing Centre which opened in June, and the Repat Neuro-Behavioural Unit, which provides care to South Australians living with advanced dementia.
Central Adelaide Local Health Network Executive Director Capital Projects and Planning, Rachael Kay, said the purpose-built Brain Injury and Spinal Cord Injury Rehabilitation facility is patient-centred and designed to complement rehabilitation services and optimise recovery.
“The new facility features lots of natural light, internal courtyards and multiple shared spaces for socialising and recreational activities where patients can be joined by family and friends, supporting a broader sense of community,” said Ms Kay.
“Rooms in our Spinal Rehab Unit are equipped with accessible desks and integrated lifting equipment, and daybeds in our Brain Injury Rehab Unit rooms, to create a functional space that supports patient wellbeing.
“The Statewide Rehabilitation Services Building will offer comprehensive inpatient and outpatient rehabilitation programs as well as a number of speciality programs delivered by a multidisciplinary team of clinicians. The move will see over 250 staff and up to 48 inpatients transition to the new facility.”
Premier Steven Marshall said the building’s opening marked another important milestone in the revitalisation of the Repat.
“This state-of-the-art facility will complement other rehabilitation services that have been returned to the Repat Health Precinct, including the recently completed sports stadium and Town Square community space,” Marshall said.
The $125 million revitalisation of the Repat Health Precinct includes $40 million of Commonwealth funding with the aim to offer South Australians better health services closer to home.
For more information on the Government’s revitalisation of the Repat Health Precinct visit sahealth.sa.gov.au.
[adrotate banner="159"]
