NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard has been targeted by “malicious” and “moronic” pranksters who falsely reported he had tested positive to coronavirus on a rapid antigen test.
Mr Hazzard accused the people behind the “joke” of undermining health workers, revealing on Tuesday he had been targeted.
Watch the video above on how to properly do a rapid antigen test
For more Health & Wellbeing related news and videos check out Health & Wellbeing >>
Residents in NSW should report positive RAT results through the Service NSW app.
“The purpose of (the reporting function) is to enable our public health team to keep track of the movement of the Omicron and Delta ... through our community and that informs the steps then that our public health team advise government in relation to,” Mr Hazzard said.
“But I am aware of reports that some people think it’s a joke to put in false reports to health and to Service NSW about somebody being positive.
Minister for Health Brad Hazzard. Credit: AAP
“I can now speak from personal experience, I received a notification yesterday and again today from Service NSW and Health that apparently somebody has put my name in there as being a positive rapid antigen test.
“It’s extremely irresponsible ... it is juvenile, it is moronic but it’s also so disappointing.”
Mr Hazzard warned anyone misrepresenting information could be hit with a $5000 fine.
“The police will come hunting and if you’re caught, you will cop a $5000 fine but worse still, when you’re telling your friends about that, they will perhaps tell you how stupid you are,” he added.
COVID update
NSW recorded its deadliest day since the start of the pandemic on Tuesday.
Another 36 deaths were recorded - 22 men and 14 women - most of whom were aged above 70.
Of the 36 people who died, 33 had received at least two doses of a COVID vaccine and three people were unvaccinated.
There are currently 2850 people with COVID being cared for in the state’s hospitals, including 209 people in intensive care.
The state recorded another 29,830 cases on Tuesday - 13,763 positive RATs and 16,067 positive PCR tests.
