Millions more Australians will become eligible to receive their coronavirus booster vaccine sooner with the interval between the second and third shot to be reduced.
Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt announced on Friday fully vaccinated people will be able to receive their booster shot just four months after their second dose from January 4.
From January 31, that will be reduced further to three months.
For more Health & Wellbeing related news and videos check out Health & Wellbeing >>
The announcement follows advice from the Australian Technical Advisory Group for Immunisation.
“These dates have been set out of an abundance of caution to give Australians early continued protection and the advice we have is that the protection as it is, is very strong against severe illness, but what we’ll see is a much stronger protection against transmission,” Mr Hunt said.
From January 4, 7.5 million people will become eligible for their booster shot, with a total of 16 million to become eligible from January 31.
A woman receives a COVID vaccination. Credit: AAP
Chief Health Officer Professor Paul Kelly said there were two reasons for bringing the booster dose forward.
“The first one is, as has been mentioned by the minister, as has always been our main aim of the program, is to protect those that are most at risk of severe disease,” Professor Kelly said.
“The second reason is because boosters at this stage can help about the transmission of the virus so the infection of people and with mostly mild or asymptomatic disease, but they can then transmit it to other people.
“We know that unfortunately, two doses does not change that ability to become infected a great deal.
Minister for Health and Aged Care Greg Hunt made the announcement on Friday. Credit: AAP
“That again wanes over time and there is a time-based process to that.
“But that protection against infection is diminished again in Omicron.
“Again, with the booster, it goes back towards the same levels as Delta.
“It will be an important part and is already becoming an important part of our control of the current Omicron wave in Australia.”
Omicron spread
Professor Kelly added that anyone who had not yet received their first two doses needed to come forward for their jabs.
“We have seen a rise in intensive care patients in New South Wales in recent days, almost all of those have been unvaccinated - not even a first dose let alone a booster,” he said.
“So that still remains the number one priority for the vaccination program.”
The major change comes as the Omicron strain of the virus is spreading rapidly across the country, forcing states to reintroduce some restrictions.
Mask mandates are back in place in New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland as the states all record an increase in cases.
NSW recorded another 5612 cases on Friday, while Victoria saw an increase of 2095 cases.
