NSW Health has announced a dramatic increase in penalties for non-compliance with health orders as more new cases of the COVID-19 variant Omicron are confirmed in Australia.
From 12.01am on December 1, penalties for non-compliance of isolation, testing and quarantine requirements jump to $5,000 for individuals (up from $1,000) and $10,000 for corporations (from $5,000).
The move comes after measures introduced from midnight Sunday, which require all overseas travellers to complete a PCR test and isolate for 72 hours at a nominated address or accommodation.
Watch the latest News on Channel 7 or stream for free on 7plus >>
People will only be allowed to leave isolation after 72 hours if they receive a negative test result.
After leaving isolation, they must then complete an additional PCR test on day six of arrival.
NSW Health has announced the government will increase penalties for non-compliance. Credit: AAP
Premier Dominic Perrottet said the measures were a necessary precaution to help keep people safe until more was known about the Omicron variant.
“We are well prepared here in NSW but it is important we take the necessary steps to protect the community and adopt measures that will allow us to learn to live with COVID,” Mr Perrottet said.
“We will continue to make any necessary changes as we receive updated information. Our overriding message, as always, is to continue to get vaccinated. It is still the best way to protect yourself and your family.”
Minister for Health Brad Hazzard stressed health officials were taking the Omicron variant “incredibly seriously”.
“I would warn anyone who can think they can skip the isolation requirements to think twice – we are taking this new variant incredibly seriously,” Mr Hazzard said.
"‘I would warn anyone who can think they can skip the isolation requirements to think twice’"
“Police and health officials will be on the front foot to ensure compliance and significant penalties will apply for anyone found to be breaking the rules.”
NSW Health Minister Brad Hazzard. Credit: BIANCA DE MARCHI / AAPIMAGE
All travellers arriving in NSW who have been in South Africa, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, Namibia, Eswatini, and Malawi in the 14 days prior to arriving in NSW must stay in hotel quarantine for two weeks, in line with Commonwealth measures.
That includes travellers who are fully vaccinated.
It comes after a new infection of the Omicron variant was confirmed in NSW on Tuesday afternoon, bringing the state’s total number of cases to five so far.
A sixth case of the variant in Australia was also identified in a returned traveller in the Northern Territory.
