A cruel Covid policy restricting family members from visiting their dying relatives or newborn babies in hospital is finally set to change after a wave of outrage.
New South Wales hospital visitation guidelines have now been updated allowing the fully-vaccinated to see loved ones who are dying, in a life-threatening condition or in labour.
For those who haven't got the jab, visitation is still not possible.
The state's Health Minister Brad Hazzard has copped a barrage of criticism over the 'inhumane' policy, particularly as concerts, public events and football stadiums are permitted to host large crowds.
Families have slammed the NSW government for keeping them away from dying loved ones in hospital (pictured, St Vincent's Hospital in Sydney)
NSW Premier Dominic Perrottet (pictured left), and Minister for Health Brad Hazzard (right) both apologised to the family of a woman who died alone while they waited for permission to see her
Last week he was forced to apologise to a woman who was prevented from seeing her dying mother while paperwork was processed.
The woman called Gayle was made to leave her mother's palliative care room at Campbelltown Hospital, despite pleas to stay beyond visiting hours.
A nurse reportedly threatened to call security if the triple-vaccinated woman didn't leave.
When she got back the next morning to see her mother she was instead made to wait five hours in the hospital car park for her visiting exemption to be renewed.
Her husband, Peter, contacted 2GB radio and said Gayle's mother had died by the time she was allowed into the hospital.
'On Saturday evening we got a call from Brad Hazzard … he was apologetic. Then Dominic Perrottet called on Sunday,' Peter said.
Even people who are fully vaccinated are being stopped from seeing dying family members in hospital (pictured, a woman getting a Covid-19 vaccination shot)
An entrance to Royal Prince Alfred Hospital in Sydney (pictured), where Antonio Coluccio died 'alone and scared', his daughter said
In light of the controversy, visits will now be allowed if it is 'beneficial for the patient's emotional or physical wellbeing'.
Visitors will need to be fully-vaccinated and hospitals still reserve the right to enact further measures is there is a 'local high risk of Covid-19 transmission'.
'However, in such instances hospitals must apply as far as practicable care and compassion, and allow visitors,' the updated guidelines state.
Up until now, families in NSW have been forced to apply for visitation exemptions that can take up to seven hours to approve to see their dying relatives - sometimes coming all too late.
Joanna La Macchia was not allowed to see her dying father Antonio Coluccio, 71, after he was admitted to Royal Prince Alfred with Covid-19 in early January.
She is fully vaccinated and begged to be allowed to see her dad in his final hours, but was not allowed.
With case numbers easing and ICU rates low, restrictions have been dropped. That now includes some urgent hospital visits (pictured, New Year's Eve in Sydney)
The state's Health Minister Brad Hazzard (pictured) has copped a barrage of criticism over the 'inhumane' hospital visits policy
'I was crying hysterically because I wasn't able to see him,' she told the 2GB radio station's Ben Fordham.
Ms La Macchia's mother was allowed to see her husband, but had to leave the room after an hour.
She was told she would have to reapply for another exemption the next day, but Antonio died before she could do so.
'They said she couldn't stay, it wasn't an option. We were told we would have to reapply for a visit again tomorrow.
'We didn't want to leave that night because we knew he didn't have much longer.'
Though people were being stopped from seeing their dying loved ones, events such as the Ashes series between Australia and England have had packed crowds (pictured on January 6)
Ms La Macchia, 43, said the process of getting approval for an exemption to visit took seven hours.
'He could've died in that time, it didn't feel like a priority at the time and we knew he was about to die,' she said.
'We are totally distraught. We have to live with the fact he died alone and scared. People should hang their heads in shame.'
Ms La Macchia said it's not right that the NSW government has opened sport stadiums and concert venues but is not allowing people to see their dying relatives.
'My father died with Covid so I understand it's so important everyone be safe and there be some sort of restrictions in place but not letting people see their loved ones, it's not right,' she said.
