Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has called on Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt to make COVID-19 PCR tests eligible for a Medicare rebate.
The Queensland government has come under fire from their federal counterpart over the $150 cost of PCR tests.
Vaccinated interstate travellers from a Queensland-declared COVID-19 hotspot must return a negative PCR test within 72 hours before they cross the border.
People seeking to enter Queensland from a state-declared hotspot will have to provide a negative COVID-19 test. (Getty)
Ms Palaszczuk said it was "disappointing" that some people are playing politics when it comes to the PCR test prices.
She said Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt needs to make the PCR test eligible for a Medicare rebate to help make it more affordable.
"He can do that with the stroke of a pen," Ms Palaszczuk said.
She said "PCR tests are the most effective" and added it is only a "temporary measure".
She acknowledged agreeing with New South Wales Premier Dominic Perrottet, who this morning said he would like to see the issue resolved at National Cabinet.
"Now's not the time to fight, now is the time to actually work together," Ms Palaszczuk said.
"I'd like to see this issue resolved at National Cabinet. Let's work together and work out our solution."
It comes after Federal Health Minister Greg Hunt sent a letter to Queensland counterpart Yvette D'Ath urging the state government to reconsider its border testing plans.
Minister for Health and Aged Care Greg Hunt during a press conference. (Sydney Morning Herald)
READ MORE: Three days of thunderstorms as tropical cyclone forms
The Queensland government will require
"I am concerned about this in two regards," Mr Hunt wrote.
"Firstly, it appears Queensland has failed to give sufficient regard to the value of rapid antigen testing (RAT) in this context, and secondly, that Queensland is proposing not to assist Queenslanders with the provision of these tests."
Mr Hunt said the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee's current advice was that "large-scale, non-targeted, asymptomatic testing in Australia should be strongly discouraged".
He said rapid antigen testing offered advantages in "cost, speed and convenience".
READ MORE: Five murder charges after Christmas Parade horror
The cost of the test is set to be passed on to the people. (Getty)
However, he saved his strongest comments for the reported proposal to put the bill for the testing on travellers, pointing out that asymptomatic testing, as done for travel, or contact tracing, was funded through the National Partnership on COVID-19 Response.
He said the federal government had provided more than $7 billion to state and territory health systems through the Partnership as of November 7.
"A fundamental principle remains, and should continue, no costs should be imposed on those requiring a test, including necessary testing associated with border crossings," Mr Hunt wrote.
READ MORE: Air New Zealand cancels more than 1000 flights
"Given there has been no change to these arrangements, it is unclear to me why Queensland would now be suggesting that a different approach should be taken.
"It is difficult to see any reason for this other than Queensland seeking to remove its responsibility to ensure the provision of testing, including bearing 50 per cent of costs, as agreed under the Partnership."
He called for Queensland to reconsider its approach and implement "appropriate and risk proportionate" testing arrangements.
Smiles and hugs as families are reunited in regional NSW View Gallery
Former deputy chief medical officer Dr Nick Coatsworth said the state governments had been "doing very well" out of the federal Medicare rebates for PCR tests.
"It is a little bit astonishing that a government would then go and charge the public for the same sort of PCR tests when they have been getting money from the Federal Government for them, for the past 18 months," he told Today.
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk is standing firm and has said she "will not apologise" for keeping Queenslanders safe.
