With COVID restrictions easing in parts of Australia, and vaccine rates increasing every day, life is starting to return to some sort of normal.
The vaccines are doing that. But their protection does lessen over time. This means for some, booster shots will be needed.
This … is why.
Watch the latest News on Channel 7 or stream for free on 7plus >>
Watch the video below to learn more about the COVID booster shots
The aim of booster shots is to top up immunity if it wanes.
On Wednesday, Australia’s Therapeutic Goods Administration provisionally approved the Pfizer vaccine boosters for all adults.
Australians will begin receiving a COVID-19 booster shot from six months after their second jab.
Minister for Health Greg Hunt and Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) head Professor John Skerritt. Credit: MICK TSIKAS / AAPIMAGE
Health Minister Greg Hunt said the booster program for the general population will begin from November 8.
First, let’s learn about why we might need a boost.
A graphic showing COVID-19 vaccine types - diagram with three vaccines for forming proteins to prompt an immune response. RNA, subunit and viral vector vaccine. In Australia, Pfizer and Moderna are mRNA vaccines, whereas AstraZeneca is a ‘viral vector’ vaccine. Credit: Dmitry Kovalchuk / Getty
Why do we need boosters?
The vaccines we have come from two different classes.
AstraZeneca - and Johnson & Johnson - are viral vector vaccines.
They use an adenovirus - which causes the common cold - to get our immune system ready to respond to the coronavirus.
The Pfizer and Moderna vaccines use mRNA-based technology.
The messenger RNA vaccines give our cells temporary instructions on how to make the coronavirus’ spike protein, which in turn teaches our immune system to protect our body if we come into contact with the virus.
Graphic illustration of how the mRNA vaccines - like Pfizer and Moderna - actually work. Credit: Alkov / Getty
Over time after the first full dose, evidence has shown there’s a decline in the antibodies, which means we’re less protected.
Let’s take Pfizer, for example.
According to a study published in The Lancet medical journal, Pfizer’s effectiveness in preventing hospitalisation and death remained high at 90 per cent for at least six months, even against Delta.
BUT its effectiveness in preventing just infection dropped from 88 per cent at the time of a second dose, to 47 per cent six months later.
We know that booster shots for vaccines help increase that effectiveness.
And the concept’s not new. For years we’ve had tetanus and whooping cough boosters.
In the US and UK, booster programs are taking shape.
Israel’s, however, is the most advanced in operation.
They offered booster shots for the general population months ago.
Their data showed that two weeks after receiving the third dose, people were 11.3 times less likely to become infected with Delta.
Which is excellent news.
Can you ‘mix and match’ vaccine boosters?
But what type is best? Can you, quote, “mix and match” vaccines?
In Australia, the official advice is that the booster shot should be an mRNA vaccine - either Pfizer or Moderna.
The Australian Technical Advisory Group on Immunisation (ATAGI) recommends sticking with the same type you had initially - if your first two doses were Pfizer, then aim for Pfizer to be your booster.
But if Pfizer is unavailable, the Moderna mRNA vaccine would also work.
They’re able to be substituted.
If you had AstraZeneca as your first full dose (of two shots), then ATAGI’s advice is to have an mRNA booster shot (either Pfizer or Moderna) Credit: undefined undefined / Getty Images/iStockphoto
If your first two doses were AstraZeneca - the advice is for your third dose to be an mRNA vaccine.
However, there may be certain circumstances where you need AstraZeneca as your third dose. For example, if you’ve had side effects after receiving Pfizer the first time.
As always, it’s crucial to speak to your doctor about this.
Australia will soon roll out COVID vaccine booster shots to the wider community. Credit: Getty
So, will we need boosters forever?
At this stage, the experts don’t know. There’s just not enough data available.
The emergence of new COVID-19 variants could influence the need for future boosters, similar to our yearly flu vaccine.
The World Health Organisation has opposed the distribution of booster shots in wealthy countries, because it may limit vaccine delivery to poorer countries.
"‘Vaccine inequity is a major concern.’ "
But Pharmaceutical companies say they are all stepping up production to account for supplying countries in need, as well as booster shots to other nations.
For now, Australia - like the rest of the world – the mission is getting two doses into the arms of every eligible person.
From there, boosters follow ... while the experts make sure the existing vaccines remain effective against Delta, and any other variant that may develop.
