The federal Labor party has again shown its support for the ‘factory of the future’ concept being developed by Flinders University in Adelaide’s Tonsley innovation precinct with a renewed pledge of funding support.
Labor has long supported efforts by Flinders’ Australian Industrial Transformation Institute which has established a campus amongst the innovative businesses housed in the former Mitsubishi assembly plant, and today pledged a further $10 million.
The factory of the future concept was established in partnership with BAE Systems Maritime Australian which is working with SMEs to test novel industrial processes to be used in constructing nine Hunter class frigates in Adelaide.
At the 2019 election Labor backed the $50 million Australian Centre for Innovative Manufacturing, a proposed 4,000 square metre site alongside the existing building (pictured) to test state-of-the-art production technology.
Then in the March state election Labor pledged $4 million to bring together up to 100 South Australian companies with university students and researchers.
Much of what was proposed has already been achieved under Flinders Pro Vice-Chancellor (Research Impact) Professor John Spoehr who today welcomed the pledge.
Spoehr said the funding would engage with over 200 small and medium sized companies.
Spoehr said: “This is an important moment for the future of manufacturing in South Australia; a turning point in the rebirth of the critically important manufacturing sector in our state.
“Located at the former Tonsley Mitsubishi assembly plant, the Factory of the Future facility is set to rise like a phoenix from the ashes of automotive manufacturing, positioning South Australia as a leader in industrial transformation.”
Professor Spoehr said it would work with SMEs to maximise their prospects of successful participation in key local supply chains, better positioning them to secure local contracts and pursue lucrative export opportunities.
‘The Factory of the Future facility is pivotal to South Australia’s fortunes as a smart state, and it’s pleasing to see the value of Line Zero being recognised federally.’
Expansion of the physical infrastructure and support for the Manufacturing Growth Accelerator Program would enable companies to test their products and systems for potential application in a range of key growth sectors.
Picture: Flinders University
Subscribe to our free @AuManufacturing newsletter here.
