"Conquering different terrains is a great feeling – hence ‘the dial that puts a smile on yours’."
Mitsubishi Motors Australia has launched the latest chapter of its Nothing can frighten a Triton campaign, highlighting the ute’s Super Select II 4WD technology.
The humorous spot, created by Richards Rose and directed by Justin McMillan from Clockwork Films, sees a grumpy old farmer begrudgingly accept a lift in new Mitsubishi Triton. Along an action-packed journey he gives directions back to his farmhouse and in doing so puts the Triton and its younger driver through their paces. Each time a new 4WD mode is selected the farmer’s mood improves, at least momentarily.
It was shot on private property within the Wingecarribee and Kiama LGAs in NSW. Richards Rose ECD Adam Rose told AdNews the teams managed Covid restrictions.
“The production had to be delayed several times over the past few months, but Clockwork did a brilliant job liaising with police, property owners and local community to ensure it was a covid-safe shoot for all.”
Rose says the ad combines functionality and feelings.
“Mitsubishi’s Super Select II 4WD is an impressive piece of kit. But rather than focus solely on its functionality we wanted to bring to life its emotional benefit.
“Conquering different terrains is a great feeling – hence ‘the dial that puts a smile on yours’. We’re thrilled with the result and sincerely thank Justin, Al and the team at Clockwork for their craft and unwavering commitment to make it happen.”
Mitsubishi Motors Australia senior manager marketing Karen Bradley says the ad is authentic yet distinctive.
“Both Richards Rose and Clockwork Films rose to the challenge and have done a fantastic job to deliver an authentic yet distinctive commercial,” Bradley says.
It’s rare to have a USP these days so with our 4WD technology, we knew we had to be bold and captivating to engage ute buyers. We are confident that the humour in this ad will leave a smile on everyone’s dial!”
The campaign is live this week on national broadcast and social channels.
Credits:
Client: Mitsubishi Motors Australia
Director – Marketing & Operations: Rob Nazarri
General Manager – Marketing & Product Strategy: Oliver Mann
Senior Manager Marketing Communications: Karen Bradley
Group Marketing Manager: Amy Hooper
Marketing Manager – Brand: Kate Sellar
Creative Agency: Richards Rose
Group Account Director: David Hallett
Founding Partner & Executive Creative Director: Adam Rose
Senior Art Director: Liam Hillier
Senior Copywriter: Dominic McCormack
TV Producer: Amber Quin
Senior Integrated Producer: Apple Stuart
Senior Finished Artist: Alistair Donald
Production Company: Clockwork Films
Director: Justin McMillan
Producer: Alan Robinson
DOP: Tim Tregoning
Editor: Mark Bennett
Post Production: White Chocolate
