Mitsubishi has released its latest campaign for the launch of the Mitsubishi Outlander, ‘Live Outlandish’, via Richards Rose.
The campaign features a diverse roster of people doing things out of the ordinary, set to Sammy Davis Jr’s ‘I’ve Gotta Be Me’.
The 60-seconds spot shows a montage of people doing off mainstream things such as a man with flowers in his beard, shuttling puppies in the trunk of a Mitsubishi Outlander, and driving mini motorcylces on a beach.
Richards Rose executive creative director Adam Rose said: “Given the importance of the new Outlander and this being Mitsubishi’s biggest ever launch in Australia, it’s fair to say the weight of expectation has been felt. However, from the very moment we hit on ‘Live Outlandish’ we’ve been fueled by an infectious energy; one that only grew in force when we secured some gold from Sammy Davis Jr. More than just a distinctive idea for Outlander, ‘Live Outlandish’ is a fun, confident new attitude for the entire brand and importantly one that Australians can make their own – especially now that we can get outdoors again.”
ADVERTISEMENT
Mitsubishi Motors Australia senior manager marketing Karen Bradley added: “The new Outlander is an exciting new vehicle and we are confident it will be well received by Australia. The new bolder and more sophisticated styling will appeal to a ‘modern family’ (whoever and however that may look) who aren’t driven by conformity. Live Outlandish has given us the opportunity to inject new levels of emotion and resonate with a diverse mix of Australians. If the Outlander pre-launch success is anything to go by, record volume of lead generation and pre-sales, this launch campaign is going to be heroic”
The campaign will also have multiple 30-seconds cuts, as well as 15-seconds and 6-seconds and will be live this week on national broadcast and social channels, as well as digital, EDMs, radio, out-of-home, press and dealership point of sale.
Richards Rose released a campaign for Mitsubishi’s Triton range a couple of months ago.
Credits:
Client: Mitsubishi Motors Australia
Director – Marketing & Operations: Rob Nazzari
General Manager – Marketing & Product Strategy: Oliver Mann Senior Manager – Marketing: Karen Bradley Group Marketing Manager: Amy Hooper
Creative Agency: Richards Rose
Founding Partner & Executive Creative Director: Adam Rose Senior Copywriter: Dominic McCormack
Senior Art Director: Liam Hillier
Head of Production: Tanya Hairman Production Assistant: Taylor Gooley Group Account Director: David Hallett
Senior Business Director: Roger Hayes
Senior Integrated Producer: Apple Stuart Senior Finished Artist: Alistair Donald
Senior Integrated Designer: Mac Archibald
Production Company: Scoundrel
Director: Scott Pickett
Executive Producers: Adrian Shapiro & Kate Gooden DOP: Tim Tregoning Edit & Post Production: Adam Wills Titles Designer: Finn Spencer
Sound Studio: Rumble
Music Supervision: Big Sync Music Photographer: Nicholas Wilson
Media Agency: Wavemaker Adelaide
General Manager: Phil Mumford
Strategy Director: Stephen Drawbridge
Planning Director: Rebekah Regan
Marketplace Associate Director: Brooke Major
Client Associate Director: Simon Keith
Client Performance Manager: Celine Le
