Following three rounds of byes, we finally have a full batch of AFL games on the horizon. Round 15 gets underway on Thursday, June 23, with a tasty top-two clash between Melbourne and Brisbane at the MCG.
On Friday, the Bulldogs face the Hawks at Marvel Stadium, while the Eagles welcome the Bombers to Western Australia. We then have the smaller matter of Geelong vs. Richmond on Saturday, before Port Adelaide and Gold Coast wrap things up on Sunday.
Keep reading to discover my Round 15 AFL predictions and betting picks, courtesy of the best Aussie Rules betting sites. First, though, we need to check out the latest AFL odds.
AFL Odds for Round 15
Melbourne (1.72) vs. Brisbane (2.10)
Western Bulldogs (1.44) vs. Hawthorn (2.75)
West Coast (2.87) vs. Essendon (1.42)
Carlton (2.00) vs. Fremantle (1.80)
Geelong (2.00) vs. Richmond (1.80)
Sydney (1.42) vs. St Kilda (2.87)
North Melbourne (4.00) vs. Adelaide (1.25)
Collingwood (1.40) vs. GWS Giants (3.00)
Port Adelaide (1.42) vs. Gold Coast (2.87)
Betway favors four teams to win on the road in Round 15. Essendon and Adelaide are the heavy away favorites, while Fremantle and Richmond are expected to beat Carlton and Geelong, respectively.
Melbourne is favored to beat Brisbane in the top-two showdown, but can the Demons snap their three-game losing streak? The Bulldogs, Swans, Magpies, and Power are also expected to win on home soil this weekend.
Let’s get stuck into my AFL predictions for Round 15, starting with the big one. Here is my Melbourne Demons vs. Brisbane Lions prediction.
Brisbane to Beat Melbourne
Brisbane and Melbourne are locked on 40 points atop the AFL ladder, along with Fremantle. A ten-game winning streak saw the Demons open up a big lead over the opening few months. However, three straight defeats have seen them surrender first place.
First place now belongs to the Lions, who have won seven of their last nine outings. Since the Dees have lost each of their previous three, I can see Brisbane securing the victory on Thursday.
Western Bulldogs to Beat Hawthorn
The Bulldogs made an inconsistent start to the 2022 season, recording three wins and five losses in their first five matches. Since then, however, they have picked up four wins in five outings – scoring 100+ points on three occasions.
On the flip side, the Hawks have lost seven of their past eight games. When you look at the bigger picture, they nine of their previous 11. You probably won’t be surprised to learn that I’m backing the Dogs to win this one.
Essendon to Beat West Coast
Essendon snapped a four-game losing run with an impressive 35-point win over St Kilda last time out. Peter Wright booted four goals as the Bombers racked up 107 points, while Jake Stringer, Harrison Jones, Matt Guelfi, and Sam Draper each kicked two.
Meanwhile, West Coast suffered a ninth straight defeat in Round 14. Having lost 12 of their 13 matches this year, the Eagles should be no match for the Bombers. West Coast suffered a ninth straight defeat in Round 14. Having lost 12 of their 13 matches this year, the Eagles should be no match for the Bombers.
Fremantle to Beat Carlton
The Dockers won seven of their first eight games in 2022 before suffering back-to-back losses. However, following three straight wins over Melbourne, Brisbane, and Hawthorn, the Western Australians are now one of three frontrunners on 40 points.
Carlton sits fifth in the standings – three points behind third-place Fremantle – after registering two defeats across the past three rounds. The Blues have gone off the boil in recent weeks, so I’m backing high-flying Freo to seal a fourth straight win this weekend.
Geelong to Beat Richmond
As Betway’s AFL odds suggest, Saturday’s clash between Geelong and Richmond is destined to be a close-fought battle. Indeed, fourth-place Geelong and sixth-place Richmond are separated by just four points on the ladder.
MOST GOALS – AFL (2022) Charlie Curnow (Carlton) – 40
Jeremy Cameron (Geelong) – 39
Tom Hawkins (Geelong) – 36
Max King (St Kilda) – 35
Aaron Naughton (Western Bulldogs) – 35
That said, it feels like the Cats have the upper hand here, as they carry a four-game winning streak into Round 15. On top of that, they have two of the competition’s top three goalkickers in their ranks.
Sydney to Beat St Kilda
The Swans remain just inside the top eight after winning three of their past five matches. Despite last weekend’s loss to Port Adelaide, they remain above St Kilda in the standings – thanks to their superior percentage.
Although the Saints have the same number of points as Sydney, they head into Round 15 on the back of two straight defeats. Having lost to Brisbane and Essendon, St Kilda looks set to struggle against Sydney.
North Melbourne to Beat Adelaide
It is no secret that North Melbourne is enduring a season to forget. I mean, the Kangaroos are second from bottom on the ladder after winning just one of their 13 games in 2022. If it weren’t for West Coast, they would be rock bottom.
Nevertheless, Sunday’s visit of Adelaide provides the Roos with the ideal opportunity to return to winning ways and get back on track. The Crows have lost six of their previous seven outings, so North will be confident of turning the tide this weekend.
Collingwood to Beat GWS Giants
No team has picked up more points than Collingwood across the past five rounds. Thanks to four straight wins against Fremantle, Carlton, Hawthorn, and Melbourne, the Magpies find themselves level with three teams in the top eight.
By contrast, Greater Western Sydney has been wildly inconsistent in recent weeks. After registering three wins and four losses across the previous seven rounds, the Giants are on course for another defeat against in-form Collingwood.
Port Adelaide to Beat Gold Coast
In all honesty, it is difficult to predict the winner of this clash. Although eleventh-place Gold Coast leads twelfth-place Port Adelaide by four points, the South Australians have won six of their last eight matches.
Granted, the Suns have won five of their previous six. But there is no denying that Port boasts a stronger line-up than Gold Coast. This is bound to be a tight game, but I can see the Power edging out the Suns on Sunday. the Suns have won five of their previous six. But there is no denying that Port boasts a stronger line-up than Gold Coast. This is bound to be a tight game, but I can see the Power edging out the Suns on Sunday.
Top AFL Picks for Round 15
West Coast vs. Essendon – Essendon (-15.5) 1.90 Carlton vs. Fremantle – Fremantle to Win 1.80 Geelong vs. Richmond – Geelong to Win 2.00 Collingwood vs. GWS Giants – Collingwood (-16.5) 1.90
I’m backing Fremantle and Geelong to win outright this weekend. Having dispatched Melbourne and Brisbane, the Dockers look like genuine minor premiership contenders. As for the Cats, they carry a four-game winning streak into Round 15.
Elsewhere, I’m backing Essendon and Collingwood with handicaps. The Bombers should make light work of lowly West Coast, while the Magpies will fancy their chances of sealing a fifth straight victory against struggling GWS.
