Adelaide, January 9
Teaming up for the first time on the ATP Tour, India’s Rohan Bopanna and Ramkumar Ramanathan won the Adelaide International doubles trophy with a hard-fought 7-6(6) 6-1 win over top seeds Ivan Dodig and Marcelo Melo here today.
Ash Barty celebrates with the trophy in Adelaide. AP/PTI
Bopanna’s excellent service returns at crucial times and Ramkumar’s all-round game tilted the match in their favour. In the contest that lasted one hour and 21 minutes, the Indians saved all the four break points they faced and broke their rivals twice. It was Bopanna’s 20th ATP doubles title and the first for Ramkumar, who was playing only in his second summit clash at this level.
Bopanna and Ramkumar had played just one Davis Cup doubles match together before this week. “When Ramkumar is serving by your side, you can finish the point early, so that was an advantage,” said Bopanna.
Simona Halep with her trophy in Melbourne. AP/PTI
Asked how different it was playing with Ramkumar than another compatriot and left-handed Divij Sharan, Bopanan said, “With Divij, we had to create a point, ensure that the first volley opportunity is taken while with Ram, the point can be finished early. I am surprised not many Indians entered this event. If anyone had landed here, would have entered the field since not many players were there.”
Bopanna and Ramkumar will split $18,700 as prize money, also earning 250 ranking points each.
Titles for Nadal, Barty
Top-ranked Ash Barty won her second Adelaide International title in three years with a 6-3 6-2 victory over Elena Rybakina today.
Rafael Nadal also added another title to his illustrious career, capturing at least one ATP title for the 19th consecutive year. The top-seeded Nadal beat American Maxime Cressy 7-6(6) 6-3 at Melbourne in one of six tournaments this week ahead of the Australian Open, which begins January 17.
Rafael Nadal with his trophy in Melbourne. AP/PTI
“Very happy to start the season with a title... and from where we are coming, it’s very special,” said Nadal. “Tonight I think I played my best match so far since I arrived here, without a doubt, against a very difficult player.”
Nadal participated in an exhibition tournament in Abu Dhabi last month but tested positive for Covid-19 on his return, further affecting his preparation for the Australian Open where he is aiming for his second title — and first since 2009.
“If we put everything together and analyse all the things that I went through the last five months, including the Covid after Abu Dhabi, of course I am happy,” he added. “Of course there have been still doubts, but even more doubts during a lot of months, if I will be able to be back.”
In a WTA tournament at Melbourne, American Amanda Anisimova beat Aliaksandra Sasnovich of Belarus 7-5 1-6 6-4 to win her second WTA title. In other tournament finals today, second-seeded Simona Halep beat Veronika Kudermetova 6-2 6-3 to win the WTA 500 event in Melbourne, and in the Adelaide International men’s final, Gael Monfils defeated Karen Khachanov 6-4 6-4. — Agencies
Canada hammer Spain to lift ATP Cup
SYDNEY: Denis Shapovalov and Felix Auger-Aliassime put in commanding performances against Spanish opponents to win their respective singles matches and fire Canada to the ATP Cup title today. Shapovalov showed plenty of aggression to beat Spaniard Pablo Carreno Busta 6-4 6-3 in the opening singles rubber to put Canada one win away from winning the $10 million team-based competition. World No. 11 Auger-Aliassime then served strongly to take down Roberto Bautista Agut 7-6(3) 6-3 and give Canada an unassailable 2-0 lead in the tie. Canada, the first team in the ATP Cup’s three-year history to have lost a tie en route to the final, were swept by the United States in their group opener and also lost their first match against Britain. Reuters
