Spread the love
Tuesday at the Australian Open will see two of the women’s quarterfinal matches at the Australian Open. We’re in for a treat, as both matches have real potential. Who do you think will win? Our writers share their thoughts. Predicting these matches are Fraser Learmonth, Nurein Ahmed, Jakub Bobro, Andrew Watson, and Johnny Connell.
Barbora Krejcikova vs Madison Keys
Fraser:
Madison Keys is on a mission to remind the tennis world that she is one of the best in the women’s game when in full flow. Her statement win against Paula Badosa in the last round has set her up nicely to take another step closer to her second Grand Slam final here. In her way os Barbara Krejcikova. The Czech is a tented player but has looked wobbly in Melbourne. An injury to Viktoria Azarenka meant she made the quarterfinal without much trouble, but she shouldn’t expect the same here. Keys can and will hit Krejcikova off the court if she is firing on all cylinders. Her play over the last two weeks suggests she will be so I’m backing the American to get it done again here.
Prediction: Keys in 2
Andrew:
This is a more difficult one to predict. Keys has a surprisingly good record against the top ten recently, winning four out of five, including in the last round against Paula Badosa. The way that the American is playing as well makes it difficult because she is hitting with such power. However, the Czech is playing such consistent tennis. What I would feel confident in is that we will see very few breaks of serve here. I feel more confident in Krejcikova’s ability to win the big points so I will predict her for the win.
Prediction: Krejcikova in 2
Embed from Getty Images
Nurein:
Since bursting onto the scene in singles competition at last year’s French Open, consistency continues to be Krejcikova’s biggest asset at Grand Slam level. But I reckon she was extremely fortunate to face an injured Azarenka in the previous round. Madison Keys is crashing every ball in sight and is rippling with confidence. Krejcikova might be the slight favorite due to her ranking. However, an upset is very much on the table in this one.
Prediction: Keys in 3
Jakub:
Krejcikova and Keys are the popcorn match here, coming in after dominant displays. Both players dropped just four games each in their fourth round matches against Victoria Azarenka and Paula Badosa respectively. This match is a coin flip for me, though Keys’ form is more intimidating at the moment as she possesses the power to take the match out of her opponent’s hands entirely.
Johnny:
A matchup of contrasting styles. The power of Keys against the versatility of Krejcikova. Keys is on a roll, but this is where her run comes to an end. Krejcikova is better than almost anyone at making her opponent feel uncomfortable, Keys is vulnerable in these types of matchups against crafty opponents. Keys got lucky in the previous round, Badosa was clearly in no shape to compete at a high level. No such luck here as Krejcikova is arguably the second best player in the world right now and is in great shape. Krejcikova’s strong return, ability to mix up the play from the baseline with her backhand slice will put a lot of pressure on Keys. Plus, Krejcikova has firepower of her own to take care of her own service games. A bad matchup for Keys. Krejcikova is just too classy.
Ashleigh Barty vs Jessica Pegula
Jessica Pegula did well to dispatch Maria Sakkari in straight sets in her previous match. The Greek wasn’t at her best but that doesn’t detract from the great job Pegula has done at finding ways to win in Melbourne. However, she now faces an apparently unsolvable puzzle in world #1 Ashleigh Barty. The Aussie has dropped just one service game so far in Melbourne and has been the best player here by a long, long way. The only thing stopping here from claiming the title here is the pressure of the occasion and expectation. If she can handle those, she wins it all.
Prediction: Barty in 2
To my own credit, I called out a deep run for Pegula in my stats preview for the Australian Open. However, it seems as though this is where that run could end. Barty is looking incredible. She is very relaxed on the court, looks like she can move the ball anywhere in the court in any way she likes. Barty’s serve is going to be the biggest difference here and it would be a surprise if the Australian didn’t move on to the semifinals.
Ashleigh Barty has had her fair share of collapses in recent years at the Australian Open. But I would be shocked if she falters against Pegula. Her serving numbers are completely off the charts. Only two women have managed to break her serve since the turn of the year, clearly implying this is a near-impossible mission for the American number 21 seed.
The World No. 1 is looking invincible so far this year, improving her undefeated record to 8-0 with a fourth-round win over Amanda Anisimova. Barty is yet to drop a set in Melbourne and it is difficult to see who of the remaining players could take her out. Trying her hand at it in the quarters will be 21st seed Jessica Pegula. The American upset Maria Sakkari in the fourth round and has now defended her quarterfinal run from last year. Pegula is a good player but it’s hard to see how she could beat Barty in her current form.
Barty looks close to unbeatable at the moment. The World #1 has barely raised a sweat through the first four rounds and is the obvious choice to go on to win the tournament. Pegula is underrated and flying under the radar. Pegula likes the quick hard courts in Melbourne and does have a style of play that could cause Barty some issues. It’s almost impossible to pick against Barty, she is full of confidence right now as she plays at her best level. Pegula could make this competitive with her solid, aggressive baseline game but will probably be outclasses in the end.
Main Photo from Getty.
