Adelaide United return to Coopers Stadium for the fourth time this season hoping to extend its winning streak to three matches and strengthen its top-four aspirations against Newcastle Jets on Friday night.
The third-place Reds kick-off the double header against a side that is unbeaten in its previous five matches and has drawn back-to-back games, most recently playing out a thrilling 3-3 tie against Canberra United.
It is fair to suggest Adelaide constructed its most complete performance of the season after downing Western Sydney Wanderers 3-0 last weekend.
The Reds have also kept two clean sheets on the bounce, a third would equal the Club’s longest streak set in November 2018.
United has won its past two games against the Novocastrians, while incidentally there has not been a stalemate in this fixture since December 2016.
Team news
Adrian Stenta again has a full squad available with no injury concerns heading into the clash. After suffering a clash of heads against the Wanderers, midfielder Dylan Holmes is fine to play after passing the necessary protocols.
What the expert says
Amy Chapman: Adelaide will be confident coming off a convincing win and two weeks of clean sheets. I would consider them the favourites. However, it is very difficult to predict form for the Jets as they have only played two games in the past 4-5 weeks- both ending in a draw. The Jets have the quality to compete, but I think the breaks have hindered their performances.
One to watch
Amy Chapman: Chelsie Dawber. In great goal scoring form, Chelsie is clinical and seems full of confidence, particularly off the back of netting two goals against WSW, who have the league’s second strongest defensive record.
Key battle
Amy Chapman: Looking forward to seeing Izzy Hodgson vs Marie Dolvik (Markussen) matchup. The Adelaide captain will have a great battle on her hands containing the Jets attacker. The Norwegian forward is really dynamic, energetic and physical and will be confident after scoring a goal of the season contender last week.
Head-to-head
Played: 23
Wins: 8
Draws: 5
Losses: 10
Last three meetings
1-2 win (A)
2-1 win (H)
2-0 loss (A)
Prediction
Amy Chapman: I think this will be a tight game, both teams are confident and positioned well to make the top four and this would be a valuable three points for either team. Hard to predict Newcastle’s form as they have played so few games in comparison. I am predicting a 2-1 win to Adelaide.
Match details:
Friday, 4 February vs Newcastle Jets
Liberty A-League 2021/22 – Matchweek 10
Kick-off 4.35pm ACDT
Venue: Coopers Stadium
Stream: Paramount+
