The sun is finally out after months of relentless rain and record floods along the east coast of Australia and some experts predict the run of wet weather is 'done'.
NSW, Queensland and Victoria will finally get the chance to dry out after the soggy conditions with fine and sunny weather all week.
'There's not nearly as many showers coming through (for NSW),' Sky News Weather meteorologist Rob Sharpe said.
'Inland there are still some thunderstorms which will wrap as we move through the day on Sunday and there will only be the odd shower on the NSW coastline.
'And so by the end of the weekend, the wet weather is done'.
Much of the country is in for clear skies this week, a welcome relief from months of rain (pictured)
The sunny weather could be a chance for hit the beach before the cooler winter weather begins (pictured: Bondi earlier this year)
Weatherzone meteorologist Andrew Schmidt agreed saying at least for the short term there shouldn't be any more intense rainfall in NSW.
'Generally speaking there'll be pretty clear skies across the board,' Mr Scmidt told Daily Mail Australia.
'It's looking mostly clear and calm for this week with very few showers or storms.
'There could be a chance of rain in the central western region towards the northern tablelands but nothing like what we've seen recently.'
He said the only parts of the country in for significant rain are the lower part of Western Australia and the northeast of the country along the Northern Territory and Queensland coast.
'A trough and front crossing in southwest WA could produce some moisture and in Queensland there could be some rain around the Mackay region and further north,' Mr Schmidt said.
'But even up north the tropical rainfalls are not looking too heavy.
'In Victoria there's some cloud and maybe a few isolated showers early in the week.'
Mr Schmidt added that while the La Nina weather pattern was still active, it was 'certainly weakening'.
He said La Nina would likely not be officially 'inactive' until June or July as the country shifted into winter and there could be more rain beyond the fine weather of the next week.
Temperatures across the rest of the country should also be fairly mild from this week.
Melbourne is in for a maximum of 27C on Sunday to keep the fine weather going for the return of the Formula 1 grand prix.
The forecast for the Australian Grand Prix in Melbourne is fine and partly cloudy. Pictured is Monegasque F1 driver and poll position holder Charles Leclerc (right) arriving at the Albert Park circuit
On Saturday a crowd of 123,247 fans gathered in the sun to see the return of the international event after two years.
Adelaide should have temperatures in the mid to high 20s, while rain is likely further west towards the WA border.
Perth could also have some showers early in the week but will clear to fine weather and should also be in for a cool change with the mercury hovering in the mid 20s.
Brisbane will be warmer with temperatures nearing 30C and should also have fine and sunny weather.
And Darwin will be warmer around mid 30s but the tropical wet season rains will ease through the week.
The sunny weather will be a welcome relief for Sydneysiders who have already endured a year's worth of rain - with nine months left to go.
The Nepean and Hawkesbury Rivers in Sydney were under flood alert on the weekend with more than 1200 residents told to evacuate (pictured: the Woronora River flooding in Sydney's south on Friusay)
NSW was hit by successive major floods in recent months, with the Northern Rivers area devastated by two deluges within weeks and Sydney enduring an almost constant drenching.
At 9am on Thursday the city reached 1,214mm of recorded rainfall for the year - equal to the average for 12 months.
Sydney also had its wettest March on record, with 537mm falling into the Observatory Hill gauge.
Hundreds of NSW residents remained under evacuation orders on the first day of school holidays, with forecasts warning saturated catchments will take days to dry off.
Heavy falls eased across much of NSW on Friday but minor flooding is likely to continue in parts of Sydney.
River rises were still being observed along the Hawkesbury-Nepean system into Saturday and evacuation orders remained across at least 10 low-lying suburbs.
Byron Bay in northern NSW was flooded in March after a deluge swept across the Northern Rivers of NSW (Pictured: People walking through floods in Byron Bay)
The State Emergency Service said minor to moderate flooding continued on Saturday at Menangle, Wallacia, Penrith, North Richmond, Windsor, and Sackville.
Rising water levels were observed along the Upper Colo River and minor flooding still a factor at Putty Road, with a similar situation possible along the Macdonald River.
Water continues to spill at Warragamba Dam.
On the opening day of the Easter school break, about 1,200 people were abiding by evacuation orders and another 1,500 had been warned they may still need to leave.
