The former Le Cornu site at 10 Anzac Highway Forestville has been unused since October 2016. Photo: Thomas Kelsall/InDaily
Renewal SA purchased the vacant 3.6-hectare plot in Adelaide’s inner south for a reported $38.2 million in September 2020, after German retailer Kaufland abandoned plans to build a supermarket on the sprawling site.
The land located 3.5km south-west of the CBD has been vacant since October 2016 when furniture store Le Cornu ended its operations in South Australia.
Renewal SA ran an expression of interest process from March 30 to May 25 last year seeking developers who could fulfill the State Government’s vision of an “innovative, sustainable and connected residential mixed-use development” comprised of a minimum 15 per cent affordable housing and 12.5 per cent “high-quality integrated public open space”.
The authority’s “Forestville, Frequently Asked Questions” page stated that the “successful developer will be announced in the second half of this year, 2021” and stakeholder/community engagement on the draft masterplan would begin at the same time.
However, to date, neither of these steps have been completed.
A spokesperson for Renewal SA confirmed to InDaily the agency has chosen a “preferred partner” for the site but would not give details.
“The former Le Cornu site in Forestville is one of the last remaining vacant land parcels on the city fringe, representing a significant opportunity for mixed-use redevelopment (retail/commercial/residential) and revitalisation,” the spokesperson said.
“Renewal SA has chosen a preferred partner whose vision aligns with this expectation.
“We are still in negotiations and finalising details with the Preferred Proponent. This has taken longer than expected, but we expect to make an announcement shortly.”
The Advertiser reported in November that a consortium involving local developer Buildtec, WA residential developer Peet and the Chapley family – operators of the Pasadena and Frewville Foodland stores – had been selected as the preferred bidders.
Buildtec and Peet did not respond to InDaily’s requests for comment. The Chapley family’s company, Adelaide’s Finest Supermarkets, said it was unable to comment at this stage.
Renewal SA has also pushed back its indicative timeline for when construction will commence on the project, with a spokesperson saying it now anticipates works beginning “in late 2022/early 2023”.
Earlier public information from Renewal SA projected works beginning in “mid to late 2022”.
“Once a developer has been appointed, we will build on the engagement undertaken in 2021, and community feedback will be sought on the draft master plan,” the spokesperson said.
Outgoing Treasurer Rob Lucas, who is responsible for Renewal SA, said an announcement from the authority on the preferred developer is “imminent”.
“For the last few weeks, they’ve just been dotting i’s and crossing t’s on the agreement with the preferred proponent they’ve been negotiating with for a few months now,” he said.
“Prior to the election, I had been advised there may well have been a concluded agreement during this particular period leading up to March 19, but the advice we got [on Wednesday] is that it’s not going to happen before the weekend.
“But it’s imminent. It’s highly likely next week or the week after is their estimate at this particular stage.”
Badcoe MP Jayne Stinson said it was disappointing plans for the site were still under wraps, and she would be advocating for a higher percentage of green space and tree canopy than 12.5 per cent “no matter who forms government”.
“We were all expecting to see plans before Christmas and locals are pretty skeptical that maybe the announcement has been held off until after the election to avoid controversy,” the Labor MP said.
“Whatever’s built there will impact Forestville, Everard Park and surrounds and locals deserve to be told what’s going on.”
But Lucas batted down suggestions the timing of the election has played a role in the delayed announcement.
“If it was timing of the election you’d actually announce it beforehand – it’s an exciting development proposal,” he said.
“If it was the government’s decision it’d been announced as soon as possible and you’d see what a fabulous proposal it’ll be.”
Local News Matters Media diversity is under threat in Australia – nowhere more so than in South Australia. The state needs more than one voice to guide it forward and you can help with a donation of any size to InDaily. Your contribution goes directly to helping our journalists uncover the facts. Please click below to help InDaily continue to uncover the facts. Donate today Powered by PressPatron
