The Oakden project is expected to contain 1500 dwellings.
Renewal SA has chosen Villawood Properties to replace the former Hillcrest Hospital Strathmont Centre and adjoining aged care and mental health complex, in Adelaide’s north east, with a major housing estate.
Renewal SA recently appointed Quintessential Equity to develop an Adelaide CBD office.
The 52 hectare Oakden parcel is earmarked for c1500 dwellings – a mix of standalone homes, townhouses and four level apartment complexes.
Parks and a neighbourhood activity centre with retail, are also mooted.
As part of its submission, certain essential services groups – healthcare professionals, emergency services personnel and teachers – could receive a $20,000 discount on dwellings.
In March, Renewal SA appointed another Melbourne group – Quintessential Equity – to construct an office, as part of the Lot Fourteen employment precinct, abutting Adelaide Botanic Garden.
Busy year for Villawood in SA
Melbourne-based Villawood entered the South Australian housing market last year, with the poaching of executives Alan Miller, Stuart Headland and Peter Gatsios from Delfin/Lendlease and CIC/Peet.
It is proposing another community at Golden Grove which, like Oakden, is expected to accommodate c4000 people in 1500 dwellings (story continues below).
Another major estate, Roseworthy, is earmarked for Gawler Belt – in the outer north east.
Premier Steven Marshall said the Oakden project – which has a 10-15 year construction timeline – will contribute $460 million to Gross State Product in the short term.
“It is a significant development that will deliver a fantastic new community with more quality options for South Australian homebuyers while at the same time creating hundreds of jobs,” according to the politician.
Renewal SA chief executive Chris Menz added “to have Villawood…establishing a permanent presence here on the back of this project is great news – it demonstrates confidence in the South Australia and our economy”.
The Hillcrest Hospital Strathmont Centre and neighbouring aged care facilities closed in 2017.
Oakden is about 10 kilometres from the CBD.
Subscribe to our newsletter at the bottom of this page.
Share or Recommend article
