Neoteric
Art is the focus of Adelaide Festival-supported exhibition Neoteric – not just the works featured, but the practice of making art itself. An artist-led, artist-focused initiative, the survey exhibition spans photography, painting, installation, sculpture, video, sound, mixed media and ceramics from mid-career South Australian artists; a career level typically identified as lacking in opportunities within the local arts ecosystem. Exclusive commissions by 20 artists – including Bridget Currie, Anna Horne, Henry Jock Walker, Brad Darkson and Ray Harris – and 20 arts writers make up the exhibition, on display at the Adelaide Railway Station in partnership with Renewal SA. From March 1 to April 10 at North Eastern Concourse, Adelaide Railway Station. Free entry. neotericexhibition.com Adelaide Biennial of Australian Art: Free/State
Australia’s longest-standing survey of contemporary Australian art is back. This time around, in a collection of works curated by Sebastian Goldspink, 25 leading Australian artists – including Tracey Moffatt, Julie Rrap, Abdul-Rahman Abdullah, Reko Rennie and Sera Waters – have explored alternative ways of viewing the world. Featured works include Moffatt’s 1997 short film Heaven, a voyeuristic montage of male surfers at Bondi Beach; handcrafted knives by Loren Kronemyer; and Strange Days, a new piece by Laith McGregor that features more than 1000 bottles filled with real messages of hope from the public, which were gathered in recent months. The Biennial is also an opportunity to see work from Hossein Valamanesh (in collaboration with Angela Valamanesh), whose sudden passing in mid-January sent shockwaves through the art community. Their collaboration reflects on their notions of home.
From March 4 to June 5 at the Art Gallery of South Australia. Free entry. agsa.sa.gov.au Ten Thousand Waves and A Marvellous Entanglement
For 25 years, renowned artist and filmmaker Isaac Julien has produced ambitious moving image works that exist in the space where art and film meet. As part of Adelaide Festival, two of Julien’s key works will be displayed at the Samstag Museum of Art: Ten Thousand Waves and A Marvellous Entanglement. The former, a nine-screen installation – spanning the height of the Samstag Museum’s two-storey atrium – was created in 2010 in response to the 2004 Morecambe Bay tragedy (when 23 Chinese migrant labourers were drowned by an incoming tide after picking cockles off the Lancashire coast). It’s a poetic exploration of unfinished journeys, and the movements people make across countries and continents. Julien’s other work on display is A Marvellous Entanglement, a three-screen installation that traverses a collection of visionary modernist buildings by Brazilian architect and designer Lina Bo Bardi. Julien’s works will be accompanied in the gallery by local artist Helen Fuller’s ceramics (with exhibition design by Adelaide design royalty Khai Liew) and a seven-hour performance by choreographer and dancer Daniel Jaber. From March 4 to May 27 at the Samstag Museum of Art. Free entry. unisa.edu.au/samstagmuseum Yayoi Kusama: The Spirits of the Pumpkins Descended into the Heavens
There’s a reason why Japanese artist Yayoi Kusama’s “infinity room” is one of the most photographed works of contemporary art in recent memory. The immersive installation – comprised of polka dots, mirrors and pumpkin sculptures – is equal parts dizzying and expansive, hinting at the infinite, while existing solely as an illusion. Presented in partnership with the National Gallery of Australia, The Spirits of the Pumpkins Descended into the Heavens features a mirrored box creating the feeling of limitless space, as well as a peephole that reveals a field of multiplying black and yellow pumpkins reflected back at you. From April 1 at the Art Gallery of South Australia. Free entry. agsa.sa.gov.au
