Photo: Tony Lewis/InDaily
Slight increase in SA COVID cases, hospitalisations
South Australia has recorded four COVID-related deaths, 1138 new cases and a small increase in hospitalisations. There are 18 people in intensive care and five on ventilators.
Speaking a short time ago, chief public health officer Nicola Spurrier said South Australia had recorded another 1138 cases today from a total of 6852 PCR tests.
Today’s numbers are slightly up from the 1027 cases reported yesterday.
There are currently 219 people in hospital, compared to 214 on Monday, with 18 people in ICU and five on a ventilator.
Today’s deaths include a man in his 70s, a woman in her 60s, a woman in her 90s and a woman over 100.
There are 13,292 active cases in the state.
Spurrier said the state’s daily caseload remained “on the lower side” although authorities are observing an increase in infections in children as the full return to school gets underway.
“We are seeing slightly increased numbers of children turning positive out of those testing numbers, which is not of course unexpected,” she told reporters this morning.
“But things are going in the right direction.”
Work begins on interconnector project
Major construction work has begun on the South Australian component of the 900-kilometre electricity interconnector with New South Wales with the installation of the first transmission poles at Robertstown today.
Project EnergyConnect includes 206 kilometres of new transmission line in South Australia along with a new substation at Bundey and upgrades to the existing Robertstown and Tungkillo substations.
The $2.28 billion project will connect South Australia with Wagga Wagga in New South Wales, via Buronga with an additional line between Buronga and Red Cliffs in Victoria.
Construction work in South Australia is expected to be completed in late 2023 and is forecast to create more than 200 regional jobs and approximately 250 ongoing jobs across the local economy.
ElectraNet interim chief executive Rainer Korte said Project EnergyConnect was “of national significance” and would improve the affordability, reliability and security of electricity supply for South Australians and strengthen the National Electricity Market.
He said construction in South Australia would use 15,000 cubic metres of concrete and more than 11,500 tonnes of steel across about 380 new transmission towers.
“Once completed and energised, Project EnergyConnect will deliver an expected annual bill saving of around $100 for a typical South Australian residential power customer, while larger customers can expect greater savings, depending on their power use,” Korte said.
“Its route passes through high-quality renewable energy zones, facilitating the transition of more renewable energy into the National Electricity Market – in South Australia, the new interconnector will enable more wind, solar and battery projects to connect to the network.”
BHP posts $13 billion half-year profit
Australian miner BHP Group has delivered a massive $13.2 billion ($US9.4 billion) first-half profit partially off the back of its iron ore operations.
The 2021/22 interim result, which excludes the petroleum business being offloaded to Western Australia’s Woodside Petroleum, was up 144 per cent from the same period in 2020/21.
“BHP has a strong first half,” CEO Mike Henry said this morning.
“We mitigated the impacts of COVID-19 and significant adverse weather events to turn in a solid performance, particularly from our flagship Western Australian iron ore business.”
BHP operates South Australia’s largest mine, Olympic Dam, which produces copper, gold and uranium.
Henry said BHP was well-positioned, barring further potential impacts from the pandemic during the second half.
BHP, which recently ditched its UK listing to unify under its Australian parent company, is anticipating a better economic performance in China – one of its biggest customers.
“We anticipate that the headwinds that buffeted China will diminish as the 2022 calendar (year) proceeds,” it said.
The miner has previously warned about the difficulties thrown up by labour shortages for its Pilbara operations in WA – where the state border remains effectively shut to most travellers – and rising costs.
“We expect cost headwinds due to supply bottlenecks to remain challenging in the 2022 calendar year, with only tentative signs of easing by the end of the period,” it said.
The interim results include an after-tax loss of $1.2 billion ($US821 million) related to a settlement for the damage caused by the 2015 Samarco dam disaster in Brazil that killed 19 people.
BHP has now set aside a provision of $4.4 billion ($US3.1 billion) for the disaster
The miner will pay a dividend of $US1.50 per share for the six months ended December 31, up from $US1.01 previously.
Australian grain growers brace for Russia-Ukraine uncertainty
Tensions between Russia and Ukraine are creating uncertainty for Australian grain farmers ahead of this year’s sowing season as global wheat prices trade near decade highs.
Australian grain farmers are preparing for the main sowing season as global wheat prices trade near decade highs over concerns a Russian invasion of Ukraine would disrupt global exports.
Russia and Ukraine account for about one-third of grains and oil seeds traded globally, which means any disruption to shipping caused by conflict and sanctions would send ripples through the market.
GrainGrowers Australia chair Brett Hosking said the tension was creating uncertainty but it was unlikely to impact what growers planted.
“Potentially, what is a good market opportunity at the moment may not be in a period of time,” said Hosking, who runs a farm in Victoria.
Australia is one of the world’s biggest wheat exporters, with many grain farmers recently harvesting back-to-back bumper crops after years of drought. The planting window for the upcoming wheat season opens around April.
Hosking said that while there was likely to be a short-term bump in wheat prices for Australia, that pricing could change significantly between now and when crops are planted and harvested.
He said with commodity prices high, “any crop is a good choice at the moment”.
Global currency, commodity and equity markets have been impacted by the increasingly tense situation on the Russia-Ukraine border, where troops are stationed, with investors seeking out safe-haven assets. US officials have warned an invasion could happen at any time.
Rabobank agricultural analyst Dennis Voznesenski forecasts that global wheat prices could rise by 50 per cent or more if there is a full-scale conflict and grain exports from the Black Sea region are stripped from the already tight global market.
Voznesenski said wheat was very price sensitive because buyers can’t readily substitute it for alternatives.
“We are at multi-year highs for wheat prices already so this has been another factor that adds to that,” he said
Global wheat prices are trading at levels last seen in 2013 when dry weather dented production, especially in the US.
Family First pledges SA-based religious freedom laws
The revived Family First has pledged to introduce a state-based Religious Freedom Bill if it gains a foothold in state parliament after next month’s election.
The Morrison Government last week failed to pursue its bid to overhaul religious freedom laws in the senate, leaving the controversial legislation in indefinite limbo.
But the conservative Christian party – which is seeking a political comeback under its lead candidate Tom Kenyon, a former Labor Party minister – says bringing similar legislation into state parliament will be the first order of business “once elected at the March state election”.
“South Australians of faith must have their religious freedoms safeguarded as a matter of urgency,” he said in a statement.
“They cannot rely on the Liberal Party, which is hopelessly divided on commonsense issues of conscience and religious freedom.
“Neither can Labor be trusted, following its betrayal of undertakings to support religious freedom in Canberra last week.”
Last week’s attempted legislation proved deeply divisive as the Morrison Government sought to ban discrimination based on religious beliefs and activities, with some Government MPs joining Labor and crossbench members to seek protections for transgender students at church schools.
Kenyon said the “failure of both major parties to support religious freedom was a stark reminder that Christians, and all men and women of faith, must take direct action to safeguard their rights.”
“Voting for Family First at the state election in March is direct action that will make a difference,” he said.
“A Religious Freedom Bill will be the first move I take as a Family First MLC… and we will go further than the failed attempt by the Liberals.”
He said the rights “of religious organisations to practise their religion freely, and employ staff who hold the same values, need to be protected”.
“The Bill will not seek to change current protections to students from discrimination,” he said.
Kenyon highlighted the “heavy toll” for people who have declined COVID-19 vaccines on religious grounds.
“People of good will can have different views on whether to take the vaccine – personally I am vaccinated and so is my family – but when governments punish good people because of their faith-based decision not to be vaccinated, then action must be taken,” he said.
Cross Rd junction closed, residents evacuated after gas leak
A major gas leak has forced part of Cross Rd to be closed this morning.
SA Police said Cross Rd was closed between Goodwood and Winston roads, after reports that an excavator ruptured a gas pipe shortly after midnight.
Residents within a 100 metre radius were evacuated.
The major arterial road is expected to be closed for much of the day.
Premier apologises for disability care failings
Premier Steven Marshall has apologised “unreservedly” after an independent inquiry found “serious failings” in the care of a man with disabilities left in squalid conditions at a government-run facility.
The case was first revealed by InDaily last year after the man was rushed to hospital from the Transition to Home (T2H) care service run by the Department of Human Services at Hampstead Rehabilitation Centre.
Paramedics and doctors were so concerned about his condition they lodged complaints about his alleged neglect.
In a report released yesterday following an investigation, Health and Community Services Complaints Commissioner Grant Davies revealed that the man had an infected pressure wound, appeared to be malnourished and was left to sit in faeces and urine for long periods.
Davies made a series of recommendations to improve care for other vulnerable South Australians and demanded authorities apologise to the man and his family.
T2H is a step-down facility for people with disabilities who have been discharged from a long stay in hospital and are awaiting more permanent accommodation.
Responding to the report yesterday, Marshall said there was “no doubt that we have let this patient down and we apologise for that”.
“I unreservedly apologise to this patient and his family,” he told reporters.
“We have fallen well short of the standard which is acceptable and we will take action to ensure this never happens again.”
Marshall said the Government would implement “every single one” of the Commissioner’s recommendations.
“And if there’s need for overall system change then that will be put into place,” he said.
“There are already things identified in this report which I think will lead to improved outcomes for all patients that are in that transitional accommodation.”
City drones ban forces Fringe event Sky Song to head south
A centrepiece event of the Adelaide Fringe has been moved from the Adelaide Showgrounds to McLaren Vale and its dates changed after flight restrictions meant its hundreds of drones could not be flown near the city.
Sky Song involves 300 drones flying in formation above a 70m wide screen projection with lighting and music to tell First Nations stories, narrated by Archie Roach.
It was meant to be staged at Wayville from February 18 to March 20, but aviation restrictions on the drones have forced its relocation.
Sky Song will now be performed at Leconfield and Richard Hamilton Wines at McLaren Vale, 35 minutes south of the city, from Friday, March 11 to Sunday, March 20.
Fringe organisers said all tickets already purchased will be valid for the new venue dates and ticket holders will be emailed direct.
Labor promises to review Brompton gasworks decision for Crows
Labor says that if elected in March it will review the decision to reject the Adelaide Football Club’s bid for a new base at the former Brompton gasworks site and has called on the Marshall Government not to sign any contracts before the March 19 poll.
The Marshall Government last month announced that the Crows’ application to build a new base and oval was unsuccessful and that Melbourne-based MAB Corporation would be allowed to remediate and develop the 5.8ha, government-owned site with hundreds of homes and apartments, a hotel, retail, office and open space.
Treasurer Rob Lucas said that the interstate proposal offered great economic benefit while “reducing the state government’s liability and therefore the risk to taxpayers”.
But the Opposition today said that if elected it would consider the potential of reopening the process for development submissions, as long as no contracts were signed before the election caretaker kicks in.
Labor treasury spokesman Stephen Mullighan said the MAB proposal had greater density and less open space than the Crows’ submission and appeared to have been chosen for its benefit to government coffers rather than the best community outcome.
“The detail for the Crows’ proposal looks exceptional and I can understand widespread community disappointment that their proposal was rejected,” he said.
“I am concerned about the lack of transparency surrounding this decision by the Marshall Liberal Government, which makes it difficult for the public to judge whether the right decision has been made to reject the Adelaide Crows’ proposal.
“That is why, if no contracts are signed, we will launch a review of the criteria with the option of reopening submissions, subject to the findings of that review.”
Diplomacy continues as 130,000 Russian troops mass along Ukraine border
The Kremlin has signalled that it is ready to keep talking with the West about security grievances that led to the Ukraine crisis, offering hope that Russia might not invade its beleaguered neighbour within days.
But questions remain about Russian President Vladimir Putin’s intentions, and countries around Europe are evacuating diplomats and on alert for possible imminent war amid the worst East-West tensions since the Cold War.
On a last-ditch diplomatic trip, Germany’s Chancellor said there are “no sensible reasons” for the build-up of more than 130,000 Russian troops on Ukraine’s borders to the north, south and east, and urged more dialogue.
Despite warnings from Washington, London and elsewhere that Russian troops could move on Ukraine at a moment’s notice, Monday’s meeting between Putin and foreign minister Sergey Lavrov suggested otherwise.
Lavrov argued that Moscow should hold more talks with the US and its allies despite their refusal to consider Russia’s main security demands.
Moscow, which denies it has any plans to invade Ukraine, wants western guarantees that NATO will not allow Ukraine and other former Soviet countries to join as members.
It also wants the alliance to halt weapons deployments to Ukraine and roll back its forces from eastern Europe, demands flatly rejected by the West.
The talks “can’t go on indefinitely, but I would suggest to continue and expand them at this stage”, Lavrov said, noting that Washington has offered to conduct dialogue on limits for missile deployments in Europe, restrictions on military drills and other confidence-building measures.
He said possibilities for talks “are far from being exhausted”.
His comments, at an appearance orchestrated for TV cameras, seemed designed to send a message to the world about Mr Putin’s own position: namely, that hopes for a diplomatic solution are not yet dead.
-With AAP and Reuters
Local News Matters Media diversity is under threat in Australia – nowhere more so than in South Australia. The state needs more than one voice to guide it forward and you can help with a donation of any size to InDaily. Your contribution goes directly to helping our journalists uncover the facts. Please click below to help InDaily continue to uncover the facts. Donate today Powered by PressPatron
