City of Adelaide’s Ten Gigabit Adelaide network is now connected to 40 buildings in the city’s CBD, with another 140 soon to be finalised.
The fibre optic network is a joint initiative of the City of Adelaide and TPG Telecom, designed for businesses and corporate big data users in Adelaide CBD, available at a price accessible to all businesses in the area.
“We have been inundated by registrations from businesses wanting to plug into Ten Gigabit Adelaide and, from today, businesses are being connected and will immediately reap the benefits,” City of Adelaide lord mayor Martin Haese said.
“It will not only ensure local businesses have access to 21st century big data and communications enabling services, it will also attract new investment and business from interstate and overseas, furthering our reputation as a connected, smart, entrepreneurial and intelligent city.”
CRN Pipeline 2022 Join Australia’s most influential channel partners at CRN Pipeline 2022 to reconnect after two extraordinary years of change! Register to attend
The rollout is aimed to connect 1000 buildings to Ten Gigabit Adelaide progressively within the next two years. Connecting to the service will start at $399 plus $39.90 GST per month.
City of Adelaide said it is targeting interstate and offshore organisations that require ultra-fast, secure data speeds in the hopes of relocating their operations to the city.
“We are proud to be partnering with the City of Adelaide on this exciting infrastructure project – the first network of its kind in Australia,” TPG group executive of corporate, government and wholesale Mark Rafferty said.
“In addition to connecting these 40 buildings, our team is already out in the field installing the fibre optic extensions to additional buildings.”
Haese added that the network will particularly benefit data-intensive industries such as creative, biomedical, finance, defence, advanced manufacturing, information management and cyber security.
He also believes it will underpin future innovation in areas such as robotics, artificial intelligence, way-finding, 3D printing and augmented reality.
“Ten Gigabit Adelaide is all about helping Adelaide retain, grow and attract new businesses, creating jobs, driving innovation and delivering economic and social returns for our city,” Haese said.
“The Australian Institute of Business is just one example of the type of organisations and industry sectors that will benefit from this transformational new fibre network.”
City of Adelaide appointed TPG in December, as reported by the ABC.
Earlier this month, the South Australian government announced a separate 10 gigabit network powered by local ISP EscapeNet, connecting organisations in 15 precincts across Adelaide through its Gig City fibre intiative, as reported by iTnews.
