TPG Telecom has announced three group executive appointments as it looks to maximise the growth potential of the company across its three strategic priorities of owned infrastructure, enterprise and households.
All three roles report to the Chief Executive Officer:
Craig Levy (above) is moving to the newly created role of Group Executive New Business Development with responsibility for the group’s on-net strategy, including fixed wireless.
Global technology executive, Jonathan Rutherford (above), will join TPG Telecom on 27 July as Group Executive Enterprise and Government.
Ana Bordeianu (above) is taking on the newly created role of Group Executive Customer Operations and Shared Services with responsibility for customer service operations across the group.
TPG Telecom CEO Iñaki Berroeta said the appointments leverage the specialised talent and expertise within the TPG Telecom group and its global shareholders.
“As we focus on our strategic priorities of driving growth in enterprise, households and NBN alternatives, the appointments will build on the significant momentum already underway in these key opportunity areas,” Berroeta said.
“Now that we have completed our foundational year following the merger, these are strategic changes to ensure we have the best people in the roles which will take the company forward into the future.”
Mr Berroeta said Mr Levy will lead the group’s on-net strategy to bring more customers onto the company’s owned infrastructure, with a focus on product innovation.
“Craig has played a leading role in launching our 5G home internet product last month and the rapid growth in our 4G home wireless offering,” he said.
“He will be responsible for leading the increased focus on this significant opportunity area and driving continuous innovation to meet customers’ needs in a rapidly changing environment.”
Mr Berroeta said Mr Rutherford will be responsible for driving growth in the business, enterprise and government segments for the group.
“Jonathan is known for building high-performance, customer-focused teams across the UK and Europe, and I welcome him to TPG Telecom,” he said.
“The Enterprise team is making good in-roads in the market, and Jonathan’s twenty years of experience will enable him to step into the role and build on this momentum.”
Mr Rutherford’s appointment follows the recent appointment of senior enterprise leader, Christine Russo, to the role of General Manager Enterprise & Government Customer Sales and Strategy.
Mr Berroeta said Ms Bordeianu will lead an integrated customer operations function to better meet customer needs across our brands.
“Ana has a strong track record in delivering exceptional customer service, including driving Vodafone’s low complaints rate, and will now have responsibility for ensuring a consistent customer experience across our brands,” he said.
“Working closely with Group Executive Consumer Kieren Cooney, Ana and her team will work to drive household growth with an enhanced end-to-end customer journey.”
Mr Levy and Ms Bordeianu’s roles are effective Monday 19 July.
