Will Bishop is 16 years old, lives at home in the Adelaide foothills, and his latest app for the Apple Watch just made the number-one slot on Apple’s USA App Store. What did you achieve in your school holidays? Bishop’s new release, Chirp, hit the market less than a month ago and has already amassed 21,000 users. It allows Apple Watch owners to access Twitter – which seems like something they would be able to do straight out of the box. But Twitter (along with Instagram, Facebook and other social media sites) recently pulled its official Apple Watch app. Frustrated by this, Bishop created Chirp to fill the void. Importantly, Chirp also includes accessibility features for vision-impaired users. Bishop already had a similar app available for users who wanted to access forum website Reddit from their Apple Watch. Nano for Reddit debuted on the App Store back in April and made a small ripple through the scene, clocking up 13,000 downloads.
“People started asking me to make a Twitter app,” Bishop tells Broadsheet. He was hesitant at first. “I thought, ‘I’ve got school, I’ve got this other app up’ … But I started making it anyway and 11 days later, it was finished.” The turnaround represents a mountain of a learning curve. Nano for Reddit was five months in development, but Bishop built and released Chirp over the winter break. “Programming is like a way of thinking,” Bishop says. Essentially, you’re learning a new language, and it gets easier as you become more familiar.” Bishop took basic programming in school but is self-taught when it comes to making apps. He says his process involves “A lot of Googling” – hours scouring the internet for forums and tutorials, laying down each stepping stone towards his end goal. He also hits up other developers directly, asking how they achieved this or that. “There’s a very friendly community around [developing], and that really helps out,” he says. “Watch apps are built on workarounds,” says Bishop. Apple is notoriously protective of its frameworks and certain functions, so independent developers have to pull together often-disparate functions into a cohesive product.
