In 2021/22, The Mitchell Park Sports and Community Centre (MPSCC) underwent a multi-million dollar redevelopment, which will provide a quality venue for sports players, teams, officials, volunteers as well as local residents and families.
This Saturday, the City of Marion Mayor Kris Hanna will be hosting the official opening of the MPSCC – a free community event that will be running come-and-try sessions and family-friendly entertainment.
Participate in all-ages fitness sessions, cultural activities and arts and crafts, as well as watch sports games, including football, rugby, volleyball and basketball.
In addition to the come-and-try sessions, there will be live music, face painting, roving performers and a variety of food and coffee available throughout the day.
The renovated community centres is one of four neighbourhood centres in the City of Marion, designed to provide provides a large range of workshops, programs, services and events for the community, including low-cost room hire options.
Facilities of the MPSCC includes two large upstairs function spaces, two indoor courts, facilities for football, tennis, rugby, netball and cricket, as well as a fitness area, kiosk, bar, local dog obedience club, and a radio controlled car track.
Function room one and two can accommodate 100 and 260 people respectively, both of which overlook the main oval. There’s also a range of hireable, flexible multi-use rooms that feature LED screens, projectors and AV for meetings, education or coaching sessions.
The upstairs bar and balcony will welcome guests from 5pm on Tuesday-Friday nights, and from 11am on weekends. Bistro dining will also be available on Thursday, Friday and Saturday nights from 5:30pm.
To check out the newly renovated community centre and find out more, be sure to visit the opening celebration this weekend. Details below:
When: Saturday 25 June, 10:00am – 4:00pm
Where: Moreland Avenue, Mitchell Park 5043
Cost: Free
To find out more, visit the City of Marion website.
[adrotate banner="159"]
