Southerners aged five and up will take to the pitch at the brand-new home of the Cove Football (Soccer) Club for the first time today, following the official opening by Premier Peter Malinauskas.
The Southern Soccer Facility on Majors Road at Trott Park features three turf pitches with sports lighting – with space for a fourth pitch – plus a new clubroom and an extensive car park.
It is the new home for the Cove club which will be playing its first game at the facility in the afternoon with its men’s team taking on Modbury Vista in the State League 2 and its women’s team competing against Elizabeth Grove in the Women’s State League.
The State Government provided $2.5 million in funding towards the project, while the City of Marion contributed $4.75 million to meet the growing demand for soccer pitches in the south.
Saturday’s opening kicks off with a MiniRoos Gala Competition in the morning with special guests invited to an official launch ceremony.
Quotes
Attributable to Premier Peter Malinauskas
Grassroots sport plays an important role in bringing communities together, encouraging active lifestyles and promoting health and wellbeing.
I’m excited to see local clubs grow and flourish with the new and improved facilities and becoming bigger and better than before.
Attributable to City of Marion Kris Hanna
I can recall meeting with the then South Australian Treasurer, Tom Koutsantonis, about this project six years ago.
Mr Koutsantonis’s passion for soccer and this particular project was matched by his surprise that Marion Council was willing and able to match any State Government funding.
Funding was indeed set aside in the 2016-17 State Budget and now the dream is a reality here at the Southern Soccer Facility.
For many years Cove Football Club had to make do with a single pitch. With their huge growth in player numbers, they well and truly outgrew their previous home ground.
Now they have three pitches, room for a fourth, and a facility that is accessible to the wider community.
