Vanessa had spent around 6 years working in HR roles across a variety of industries, and Ally spent around 7 years working as a .NET Developer for creative agencies in Scotland and in Melbourne.
We’re both still active in our respective areas, Ally frequently takes on development projects, and Vanessa is actively involved in HR as a Committee Member of the Australian HR Institute Diversity Network.
What made you want to start your own business?
Ally: At the very beginning we referred to Code Like a Girl as a passion-project, or an initiative. We’d been pumping so much of our time and energy for over a year before we made the transition from ‘project’ to an established and registered ‘business’. We knew that in order to create the change we wanted to see we had to go big or go home.
Vanessa: We’re both pretty aligned with our goals and how we’d like to balance our lives. We both enjoy the freedom having your own business brings - you can choose what you want to work on, how you want to work on it, what values are important, and where and when you choose to work.
How did you come up with the name?
Vanessa + Ally: There was a campaign in the States which played on the idea of doing something like a girl - throwing like a girl, running like a girl. It was deeply powerful and provoked viewers to pause and question when and why we became complacent in allowing the idea of doing something “like a girl” to be an insult and used to denigrate and humiliate girls from a young age. By using the name Code Like a Girl we gave much-needed strength to women that yes you might be a coder, and you might be a minority, but who you are and what you do is not lesser than because of your gender.
Describe the staff/ownership structure of Code Like a Girl?
Vanessa and Ally are the co-founders of Code Like a Girl. We’re supported by a wonderful group of volunteers that hold a diverse spread of skills and experience that are the driving force of the work we do.
Did you require investment to start your business? Where did that come from?
Vanessa + Ally: Code Like a Girl is a social enterprise model so we don’t have investors. We run our events for free and our workshops very low cost, and as such we have a number of corporate partners who provide financial support for us to provide accessible opportunities for Australian girls to learn about coding.
What kind of advice did you get before you started and from who?
Ally: I received a great framework from Erica Bagshaw to use when networking or pitching to partners: Why this? Why me? Why you? Why now? - it turns awkward networking situations into meaningful conversations that result in a true exchange of value for both parties.
