Our goal was to generate a reliable and high-quality trait database with ultimate transparency and flexibility, while minimising error prone manual or ad hoc data conversions. For example, some data compilations only report converted data (e.g. watts for metabolic rates), without providing the raw data and the conversion equation. This not only limits the utility of the data, as they cannot be converted back to their original form, but it also prevents any form of quality control associated with converting the data.
Our database compilation process consisted of the following steps:
1. Data selection: identifying sources of trait data from peer reviewed papers. 2. Transcription: manually extracting the data and transcribing them into a comma-separated values (CSV) file (a ‘raw’ data file), retaining the measurement units as published. 3. Standardisation: programmatically reading all raw data files, converting to standard units for each trait, performing data validity checks, and combining into a single CSV file of standardised observations (performed in R, scripts available in auxiliary material). 4. Quality control: performing additional data quality checks (see below) on the standardised observations; correcting any processing errors and excluding problematic data from the database.
To build the trait database, we collected measurements of body mass, brain size and metabolic rate from published, peer-reviewed data sources. Not all three variables had to be reported in the original source to be included in the database. Any units of body mass or weight were acceptable for recording body mass in the raw files. Brain sizes were recorded as either volume or mass. We accepted raw metabolic rates expressed as rate of CO 2 production, rate of O 2 consumption, or rate of energy transfer, i.e. power measured in watts or joules/sec. Both mass-specific metabolic rate (consumption of energy per gram of body mass per unit of time) and whole-body metabolic rate (consumption of energy for the whole body per unit of time) were recorded from the source data. Mass-specific metabolic rate was converted to whole-body metabolic rate (or vice versa) when the data source provided a value for body mass. We further recorded the method used to measure metabolic rate, e.g. basal or resting metabolic rate (metabolic rate of an inactive, fasting animal in its thermal neutral zone), standard metabolic rate (resting metabolic rate of an ectotherm), or field metabolic rate (average respiration rates of free living animals). In the database (‘metabolic rate- method’ column), we recorded the type of metabolic rate measured as specified by the original researchers.
We created one raw file for each source data publication (Table 1), with all observations transcribed into a predefined set of columns (raw data columns are described in the Template.xslx spreadsheet in the auxiliary material). Each row contained a single trait measurement. Each measured entity (i.e. an animal or a group of animals measured together) was assigned an object identifier that was unique within the raw file. This meant that when multiple traits were measured for a single entity (such as both body mass and metabolic rate), those measurements shared the same object identifier. To minimise transcription or unit conversion errors, values were transcribed into the raw file as originally reported in the source document, along with the reported units. When a paper described multiple treatment groups, we collected data from the control or the ‘least manipulated’ group. We also recorded the temperature at which metabolic rate was recorded and the applicable respiratory quotient (if reported).
Table 1 Summary of the traits contained in the Animal Trait Database and the primary source for the data. Full size table
Whenever possible, we collected traits measured from a single individual; however, we also allowed mean values with sample sizes or a range of values to be specified as ‘min – max’ (together with a sample size). During standardisation, ranges were reduced to their midpoints, although the minimum and maximum values were also standardised and recorded in the database. In the current release of the database, two data sources (49 observations) specified a range for body mass, and no other traits were specified as range. If a user prefers not to use range reduction to midpoint for an application, such rows can be manually filtered from the database before use by selecting non-empty minimum or maximum values. Measurement units allowed optional additional information within round brackets, e.g. ‘(CO2) ml’ or ‘(O2) l’ for metabolic rate measured as either millilitres of CO 2 produced or litres of O 2 consumed, respectively.
Standardisation
The standardisation step consisted of compiling R scripts14 that read the raw data CSV files, performed various checks, transformed the values into standard units, then wrote the result to a single CSV file of standardised observations. We included the following checks: trait type was ‘body mass’, ‘metabolic rate’, ‘mass-specific metabolic rate’ or ‘brain size’; units were known and interpretable (detail below); and scientific names were defined by the R package taxize15. In addition, we checked the binomial names against several databases (see auxiliary material) and corrected any flagged spelling errors. We updated any binomial name changes that we were aware of and encourage readers to contact us with further updates.
The automated conversion process was implemented to avoid a class of errors potentially introduced by manual conversion of values during data entry. Preserving the source units makes it simple to double-check for transcription errors by comparing the transcribed raw data files with the source data. Base units were converted using the R packages units16 and udunits217. Some traits required additional, non-standard unit conversion handling. Units sometimes contained a numeric factor (prefixed by ‘x’), which was multiplied with the trait value (e.g. ‘x6.4e-5 mm3’) during the standardisation step.
We converted raw units of body mass to kilograms during the standardisation process. Mass and volume measures of brain sizes were standardised to mass in kilograms. While users can apply their own statistics to convert brain volume to mass, we included this step as an additional service to users applying published conversion metrics with an assumed density of 1.036 g/mL e.g.18,19. This conversion factor is based on gravity measurements of fresh vertebrate brain tissue.
All metabolic rates were converted to watts. To achieve this, CO 2 production was first converted to the equivalent consumption of O 2 . This conversion was only possible when the respiratory quotient (q) was specified in the original data source and recorded in the raw CSV file. Conversion of CO 2 production to O 2 consumption used the equation
$${O}_{2}=C{O}_{2}/q$$ (1)
Rate of O 2 consumption was converted to watts by multiplying by a conversion factor of 20 J/ml12. Non-endothermic metabolic rates, q, measured at a temperature other than 25 °C were transformed to their equivalent at 25 °C, q 25 , with the equation
$${{\rm{q}}}_{25}={\rm{q}}\times {Q}_{10}^{(25-T)/1{0}^{\circ }C}$$ (2)
where Q 10 is the temperature coefficient; the factor by which the metabolic rate changes for each change of 10 temperature units. We used Q 10 = 2.21 or 2.44 for amphibians and reptiles respectively, and 2 for all other non-endothermic taxa (which were arachnids, insects, crustaceans and myriapods)12. Q 10 values can be updated in light of more specific values becoming available in future. The standardisation parameters follow Makarieva et al.12, however they can be modified and the database recompiled by users wishing to use different parameters or output units (see Usage Notes).
Both mass-specific and whole-body metabolic rate were handled by the standardisation process. Mass-specific metabolic rate was converted to whole-body metabolic rate (and vice versa) if the observation also included a value for body mass.
