Flinders University’s Sturt campus will be closed for deep cleaning after a student who attended the facility in recent days tested positive to COVID-19.
The Adelaide university was advised that a student who attended an independent English Language provider class on campus had returned a positive result.
FULL LIST: EVERY COVID RESTRICTION CHANGE HERE
For more Health & Wellbeing related news and videos check out Health & Wellbeing >>
Flinders University’s main Bedford park, campus, Tonsley campus and Victoria Square campus remain open with business as usual.
“We are working closely with SA Health and (Intensive English Language Institute) IELI as further information emerges,” Deputy Vice-Chancellor Professor Clare Pollock said in a message to staff and students.
“At this stage no Flinders staff or student has been identified as a close contact and there are no confirmed cases amongst Flinders University staff or students.”
The Sturt campus is expected to be closed for the rest of the week, with students advised to study at home.
File image of Flinders University. Credit: Flinders University
The infected student is not believed to have visited other areas of the campus.
Hotspot locations
The case comes as Adelaide’s Parafield COVID cluster grew to 20.
The outbreak prompted SA Health authorities to put a list of locations on alert, including:
Thomas More College, Salisbury Downs – 12 or 13 November
Roma Mitchell Secondary College, Gepps Cross – 12 or 13 November
Mawson Lakes School and Preschool - 11, 12 or 13 November
Lyell McEwin Hospital Emergency Department - 5.30 pm 13 November to 8.00 am 14 November
The Aquadome, Elizabeth - 11am – 1.30 pm, 14 November
Holy Family Catholic School, Parafield Gardens – 13 November
Goodstart Early Learning Child Care Centre, Parafield Gardens – 13 November
Anyone who visited these locations on the specified dates is advised to isolate for two weeks and seek testing.
Anyone who visited the Woodville Pizza Bar is also urged to isolate immediately and get tested for the virus.
More than 4000 people are already in quarantine.
