Are you a Uni or Tafe student? This one’s for you!
Yo-Chi is giving away its popular frozen yoghurt for free next week for local University and Tafe SA students to make your return to study extra sweet.
From March 8 to 11, all students across University of South Australia, Flinders University, University of Adelaide and Tafe SA will be treated to the free Yo-Chi up to $10.
Students can redeem the free frozen yogurt on specific dates depending on which school they’re based at.
Score your free frozen yogurt on Tuesday March 8 if you’re a UniSA student; Wednesday March 9 if you study at Flinders University; Thursday March 10 if you’re at University of Adelaide; and Friday March 11 if you’re a Tafe SA student.
A free cup of Yo-Chi mid-essay sounds like the perfect study break to us.
To be able to score a $10 cup, you’ll need to show you’re student ID with one redemption per student. If you’re frozen yogurt exceeds the $10, students will need to pay the excess.
With three stores across Adelaide in the CBD, Norwood and Glenelg, you won’t have to travel far to redeem your $10 off.
The Melbourne-based favourites opened their first Adelaide store on the Parade in Norwood in March 2021 and has expanded across the city since. It’s grown to be a popular destination to satisfy sweet cravings ever since.
They are a locally owned, proudly Australian business, and all Yo-Chi signature flavours are rotated seasonally and determined by what can be sourced locally.
Yo-Chi has a self-serve system that makes the frozen yoghurt experience even more fun. They have a variety of frozen yoghurt flavours to choose from with a Yo-Chi for every taste, and their extensive range of flavours include gluten-free, dairy-free and vegan options perfect for the entire family.
Decorate your swirl with the many toppings ranging from house-made items, fresh fruit, and of course sweets, chocolates and biscuits.
Prices vary on the weight of the bowl, so you can enjoy as much or as little as you want.
And with the $10 off for students, it’s an even better excuse to you can load it up.
Yo-Chi is located at 41 Gouger Street, Adelaide, 171A The Parade, Norwood and 53 Jetty road, Glenelg.
You can find out more about the offer here.
[adrotate banner="159"]
