About Flinders
Our bold vision, captured in our Strategic Plan: making a Difference: The 2025 Agenda, is to be internationally recognised as a world leader in research, an innovator in contemporary education, and the source of Australia’s most enterprising graduates.
To realise this ambition, we recently made a significant organisation change to a six College structure with a professional staff and services alignment.
We recognise the key to our success is exceptional people and we’re seeking an outstanding individual to join the team of our transformed university.
Employment Type:
Fixed Term (Fixed Term)
Position Summary
Availability:
Fixed-term until December 2024 I Full-time
Compensation Grade:
Research Academic Level B
Salary Range:
$99,827 - $118,135 p.a.
Reporting to:
Senior Lecturer in Public Health Regulatory Science
College of Medicine and Public Health
Location:
Adelaide (preferred) or Sydney (upon negotiation)
The Research Fellow will provide statistical and analytical expertise for a program of research in kidney disease. They should be familiar with a major statistical package, such as STATA and/or R statistical programming language. The Research Fellow will be involved in aspects of project management and research activities across the program of research, but with a focus on data linkage analysis and research outputs.
The Research Fellow will be part of a team of clinical researchers aiming to understand the emergence of chronic disease among Aboriginal and non-Aboriginal young people. Working with the investigators and research teams, the position will contribute to project design and implementation, analysis of data and the preparation of manuscripts for publication.
The Research Fellow will actively report on new and current research related to the research program, through generation of high-quality publications, conference presentations, and communication with community stakeholders. In addition, the position will contribute to the preparation of applications for externally funded research funding.
The position will take a role in the preparation of competitive applications of external research funding and may assist in the supervision of postgraduate students, and other projects with direction from the supervisor.
Key Position Responsibilities
The Research Fellow in Biostatistics is accountable for:
Actively contributing to the research project by collaborating with the Research Team to successfully deliver project milestones and Key Performance Indicators.
Independently contributing to the planning and execution of research by offering new and innovative ideas, reviewing relevant literature and other sources of information, actively participating in the production of data, and contributing to the writing of grant applications.
Independently contributing to ethical, high quality and innovative research and evaluation through activities such as scholarship, publishing in recognised high-quality journals, and assisting the preparation and submission of bids for external research funding.
Establishing and maintaining collaborations within the University, and at State, national and international levels to improve research outputs and publications.
Some out of hour’s work (including weekends) as well as regional/interstate travel, may be required.
Any other responsibilities in line with the level of the position as assigned by the Supervisor and/or the University.
Key Position Capabilities
Completion of a PhD in medicine, public health, or other health sciences field relevant to Aboriginal health.
Demonstrated experience in quantitative research methodology.
Demonstrated ability to perform complex statistical analyses of large datasets.
Demonstrated ability to use STATA or R statistical software.
Demonstrated research experience, with a track record of high-quality publications, attraction of external competitive grants and presentations at a national and/or international level in public health.
Demonstrated ability to critically review the literature in relevant fields.
Demonstrated well-developed interpersonal skills and experience in collaborating and engaging with diverse stakeholders and industry partners.
Demonstrated experience delivering project targets on time.
Demonstrated excellent oral and written communication skills in an academic environment.
Demonstrated experience working with Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples (desirable).
Demonstrated experience in geospatial analysis (desirable).
Demonstrated experience in qualitative and/or mixed methods research (desirable).
For more information regarding the position, or to have a confidential discussion, please contact: Dr Jacqueline Stephens
Prescribed Conditions for Employment
Pursuant to Child Safety (Prohibited Persons) Act 2016 (SA) this position has been deemed prescribed. It is an inherent requirement of the position that the successful candidate maintains a current Working With Children Check which is satisfactory to the University.
Flinders University has introduced a COVID-19 Vaccination Policy that requires all new staff members to be up to date with their COVID-19 vaccinations, subject to medical exemptions.
Information for Applicants:
You are required to provide a suitability statement of no more than three pages, addressing the key capabilities of the position as outlined above. In addition, you are required to upload your CV.
A valid National Police Certificate which is satisfactory to the University will also be required before the successful applicant can commence in this position.
We are seeking to increase the diversity to improve equal opportunity outcomes for employees, and therefore we encourage female applicants, people with a disability and/or from Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islanders descent to apply
Please note, late applications and applications sent via agencies will not be accepted.
Applications Close 11:59 pm:
22 Jun 2022
