If there’s anything that can top Australian hospitality, it’s the country’s world-class education. As one of the most enduringly popular study abroad destinations, Australian universities are widely-recognised for their teaching excellence, and are accredited according to the highest industrial benchmark globally.
Business schools in Australia are on par with some of the best institutions in the world. With the country set to become the world’s 13th largest economy in 2022, the land Down Under is an international commercial hub in various booming sectors such as tourism, consumer goods, and finance — making it a place ripe with endless employment opportunities post-graduation.
One way to get a head start in your career? A postgraduate business education, whether that means going down the Master of Business Administration (MBA) route or other graduate qualifications that can elevate your entrepreneurial flair in the current job market.
If you’re ready to stand out in the workforce, here are four Australian business schools that can help you get there [for professional mileage]:
James Cook University: College of Business, Law and Governance
Ranked among the top 300 universities worldwide, with 5 Stars awarded for full-time employment and graduate salary by the 2022 Good Universities Guide, James Cook University (JCU) is the ideal launchpad for you to flourish in the competitive global workforce.
Located in tropical North Queensland — a tourist hotspot where nature meets a vibrant culture — learning at JCU entails hands-on experience at stunning landmark sights such as the Great Barrier Reef and the Australian Outback. Since 2014, the College of Business, Law and Governance (CBLG) has empowered future leaders with career-ready skills through postgraduate programmes that match industry demands in international business.
JCU students in the two-year MBA programme, for instance, acquire a thorough understanding of areas such as sustainable enterprise, corporate strategy and management, as well as innovation and entrepreneurship. The programme’s emphasis on leadership centres around 10 core subjects in wide-ranging topics, with an option to choose from one of five majors offered.
As a JCU student, you’ll benefit from the opportunity to expand your professional network and develop soft skills through internships, field trips and individual projects to boost career readiness. JCU graduates are highly-sought after: nearly 95% of its Business and Management graduates are employed full-time within four months of graduation.
JCU’s location within Australia’s top sights pairs fittingly with its Hospitality and Tourism Major within its Bachelor of Business offering. Ranked among the top 100 programmes of its kind in the world, JCU students can readily apply their theoretical knowledge within industry settings alongside their studies with various tourism venues close at hand.
For international students, JCU is a welcoming haven where top-rated student support and an enriching cultural experience awaits. Those who are based in Cairns and Townsville can apply for additional post-study work rights, which the Australian government offers to international students based in regional areas. For more information about programmes at JCU, click here, and follow the university on Facebook, Instagram, LinkedIn, Twitter and YouTube.
Charles Darwin University: Asia Pacific College of Business and Law
Real-world experience underpins the Asia Pacific College of Business and Law at Charles Darwin University (CDU). The College houses four disciplines under its roof: Business, Accounting and Finance, Law, and VET Business. Its robust campus network in locations like Sydney, Alice Springs and Casuarina enables students to participate in multi-city learning, which adds another meaningful layer to their studies at CDU.
Each field equips graduates for successful professional practice through internships and industry opportunities built within the programme. One of CDU’s career-boosting degrees is its MBA, complete with a six-month built-in internship through the Professional Practice Programme (PPP) to ensure students receive experiential learning that translates into permanent employment.
Those with established careers seeking to upskill their talents can opt for the online study mode, which is also offered across CDU’s Sydney and Darwin Waterfront Centres. Drop in for a class, or study online according to your schedule — all with the same networking perks as full-time on campus students.
Flinders University: College of Business, Government and Law
Founded in 1966, Flinders University is a modern institution based in Adelaide that is known for its reputation in research and academic excellence. The university’s College of Business, Government and Law is renowned for its future-focused programmes known for groundbreaking ideas in fields such as business, commerce, public policy, and law.
Here, success is cultivated through hands-on projects and industry placements that propels graduates towards a foolproof career path. Its Business and Management courses are ranked first in Australia for overall educational experience according to the 2021 Good Universities Guide. A Flinders business degree unlocks a world of opportunities for students, especially with its innovation and enterprise electives to supplement their major.
The MBA programme at Flinders is built to be flexible with an online study option, and has sustainability integrated within its course modules as a nod to the long-term goals of Industries 4.0 and 5.0. Graduates are equipped with tech-first skills in business, finance, and leadership, which makes them even more ready for an industry that is fast shifting with increased digitalisation.
University of Tasmania: Tasmanian School of Business and Economics
If you veer south of Australia’s mainland, the Tasmanian School of Business and Economics — the country’s fourth-oldest university — is a centre for excellence spearheading research in the field to improve the lives of others at the regional and global scale.
Study with exceptional academics in an environment that fosters novel ways of thinking with technological advancements and collaborative connections that enhance one’s perspectives. The MBA (International) programme is a platform for you to obtain a globally-recognised qualification, grow your network and cross-cultural business skills that equip you for an international career.
Other postgraduate courses offered include the 18-month Master of Professional Accounting (MPA) designed for those without formal qualification in the field, and the Master of Marketing Management degree, a data-driven course that arms students with the latest marketing insights on top of digital literacy in business. Additionally, the Corporate Internship Programme (CIP) allows students to utilise their theoretical knowledge in real-life workplace settings as preparation for their professional careers after graduation.
*Some of the institutions featured in this article are commercial partners of Study International
