Children should be taught about both the good and bad aspects of the British Empire, the equalities minister said yesterday.
Kemi Badenoch said when she was growing up in Nigeria the legacy of the Empire was taught in a ‘nuanced’ way.
She urged schools to emulate this and teach about both the positive and negative aspects.
Conservative MP and equalities minister Kemi Badenoch (pictured) said that children at school should learn about both the positive and negative aspects of the British Empire
Mrs Badenoch said the choice to deny chair of the Commission on Race and Ethnic Disparities Tony Sewell an honorary degree would have a negative impact on the ability of black people to speak out
Cancel culture 'like a tightrope' Dame Jacqueline Wilson has defended her new book over claims of wokeness Dame Jacqueline Wilson has compared today’s ‘scary’ cancel culture to ‘walking a tightrope’. The children’s author, 76, said while anybody could say something with no intention of causing offence, it can be ‘taken out of context’. Dame Jacqueline – who has just published her 114th book, Baby Love – said she felt ‘sad’ for JK Rowling, who has been accused of transphobia, ‘because she made such a difference to children’s books’. She told the Sunday Telegraph: ‘It’s quite scary, particularly for older people who don’t want to offend, how easy it can be [to offend]. But you have to write what you believe.’ The author defended her rewrite of the Enid Blyton classic The Magic Faraway Tree, which she insisted is not a modern update. Advertisement
Last week, Mrs Badenoch published the Government’s strategy on tackling racial disparities, which includes plans for a new model history curriculum.
Yesterday, she told Times Radio she believes race is often exploited for political reasons and it was not her reality that all black people are victims.
She said the decision by Nottingham University to deny race report author Tony Sewell an honorary degree would have a ‘chilling effect’ on the ability of black people to speak out.
Mrs Badenoch said schools should tell both sides of the Empire story: ‘History isn’t about trying to enforce a particular narrative. It’s about telling the truth about things that happened.
‘There were terrible things that happened during the Empire. There were other good things that happened. When I learned about it in Nigeria, we got a very nuanced picture. But there wasn’t any sort of attempt to describe the Empire as having just oppressed them.
‘I think my upbringing in another country has really influenced the way that I look at these things.’
She said she did not agree with ‘teaching young people to see themselves as victims rather than just the latest generation of an ever-evolving story’.
Mrs Badenoch said that although colonialism was wrong it had happened throughout history and it did not help to ‘point fingers’.
The minister said she had faced online abuse from black people over her views. She added: ‘And it’s not as many... white nationalists. A lot is actually from people who think that I’m betraying my race.’
