Renting a desk in a cool shared space sounds so appealing. Office banter and jokes, cups of tea and digestive biscuits – we've missed being amongst others just for the fun of it and the friendly company. Not to mention the benefit of being able to brainstorm ideas, collaborate and network.
And it doesn't cost too much either. You don't have to worry about long-term leases, business rates or anything else that adds to having your own office. Sure, these expenses might be passed on via the cost of a coworking desk. But it'll never be as much. Besides, do we really want to move from a home office into a lonely space? Thought not.
If you're ready to find a desk and some human company, too, we asked the creative community for their suggestions for coworking spaces across the UK. Here's our pick of 55 of the best.
South West England
1. Raw Space, Bristol
Located at 111 Gloucester Road, Raw Space started with a mission to bring together local businesses and artists. With collaboration, community and productivity at their core, they strive to make their dog-friendly, relaxed and comfortable space a home away from home for members and offer a social and business events program. Prices start at £15 for a day pass, or £59 p/m for 30 hours a month.
2. Gather Round, Bristol
Gather Round is a growing family of creative workspaces designed to foster a positive community of like-minded creative people through an open and supportive culture. Its spaces at its Brunswick Square and Cigar Factory locations are made up of flexible areas with fixed and casual desks, private studios, meeting rooms, hang-out areas, communal kitchen tables and quiet rooms for headspace. Prices start at £125 p/m (+VAT) for two days a week.
3. The Guild, Bath, Somerset
The Guild is Bath's best-known coworking space, established in 2013 at The Guildhall right in the centre. It's primarily aimed at tech and creative people but welcomes anyone who does cool stuff and wants to join a friendly community. Day passes are £30 and hot-desking starts at £130 p/m for five days a month.
4. Pentire House, Newquay, Cornwall
Pentire House is a coworking and innovation centre in Newquay town centre, spread over four floors with sea views, high-speed fibre internet, a rooftop terrace, chill out space, a kitchen and a yoga & event space. There are regular networking events and drinks evenings, and prices are available on enquiry.
5. The Work Box, Penzance, Cornwall
Workbox Penzance is a purpose-designed work hub on the waterfront, where you can rent an office or desk to run your business without paying over the odds. It is close to the train and bus station, opposite a car park that offers parking from 96p a day. Day passes are available for £20 + VAT, and memberships start at £120 p/m.
6. Fastnet House, Falmouth, Cornwall
Fastnet House is a dynamic space for enterprising businesses at Church View Business Park, Falmouth. Here you'll find beautiful, high-end design, light, bright communal spaces, ultra-fast fibre broadband, a fully-equipped kitchen and a dedicated video and photography suite. Prices on application.
7. Waffle Work, Axminster, Devon
Waffle Work is a community interest company and non-profit based in Trinity Square, Axminster. It has six booths and 12-15 desk spaces that can be booked out for as long as you need them, at no cost. You'll get a fibre internet connection, individual power access, and tech support on hand, not to mention a Pacman machine!
8. Harbour Studios, Torquay, Devon
Close to Torquay Harbour, Harbour Studios is a thriving coworking space designed to foster connection and enhance productivity. There is a two-storey car park close by, you can print up to A3, and the light-filled waterfront office space and lounge are perfect for an informal coffee with clients. Hire a desk for £15 a day, and get a dedicated desk for £260 p/m + VAT.
9. THIS Work Space, Bournemouth, Dorset
Located on Albert Road, Bournemouth, THIS is a coworking and office space aimed at helping creative thinkers work with their neighbours in new and exciting ways. You can hire a desk for £30 a day, and membership starts at £175 p/m.
Gather Round, Bristol
London and the South East
10. Central Working, White City, West London
Central Working offers flexible workspaces that support businesses of all sizes, from young startups and fast-growth companies to established biotech and scientific research organisations. Staff are renowned for their helpfulness, and facilities are first-rate. Based in Wood Lane, White City, it's easy to reach via tube or bus, and close to the Westfield Shopping Centre. Prices are available on enquiry.
11. The Co Dalston, Dalston, East London
Located on Dalston's iconic Kingsland Rd, this friendly coworking space offers hot desks, a meeting room, an event space and a shared kitchen. Their 'Tasty Day Pass' costs £20 and includes a gourmet sandwich plus a coffee or hot drink from Chicha Bakery. You can also get a flexible five-day pass for £90.
12. Paddington Works, Central London
Handy for the trains into London's major train station, Paddington Works has invested heavily in health and safety measures. They're particularly proud of their air change, which in the smallest rooms is every two mins and in the larger spaces, is every 22 minutes. You can hire a desk for £25 a day, and from £350 p/m.
13. Uncommon, Fulham, South West London
Fulham is perfect for creative inspiration with its greenery and riverside walks, independent cafes and boutique shops. Uncommon is based on the New King's Road, a short walk to King's Road, Parsons Green and key transport links. This dog-friendly space boasts an on-site cafe, wellness areas, focus zones, a Zen garden, bike storage, showers, and complimentary fitness classes, and it even has its own app. Day passes are £40 + VAT, and hot desks start from £249 + VAT p/m.
Uncommon, Fulham, South West London
14. Hatcham House, South East London
Located in New Cross, Hatcham House is run by the Facework Group, a community interest company that supports people in facing the changing world of work. Their space is based in the old Liberal Club building on Queens Road, which has been beautifully renovated. You can rent a desk here for £12.50 a day or part-time for a £40 annual fee.
15. Platf9rm, Brighton & Hove
PLATF9RM is Brighton & Hove's largest independent coworking community of businesses and creative entrepreneurs. One thousand members enjoy access to 30,000 sq feet of space, spanning two sites across the city; North Road, Brighton and Church Road, Hove. Known for its lively and collaborative culture, it hosts a busy cultural programme of events, including monthly conferences with guest speakers. One-day access costs £25, and plans start at £105 a month for 40 hours of coworking.
16. Projects Beach, Brighton & Hove
Projects Beach is a community for entrepreneurs, freelancers and businesses, offering coworking spaces, serviced offices, meeting rooms and venue hire in Brighton Lanes. They offer video conferencing facilities, speedy WiFi, full printing and scanning capabilities, private phone booths for your calls, and bookable meeting room spaces to impress your guests. Prices start at £100 for a 40-hour flexible monthly membership.
17. Rockhouse, Hastings, East Sussex
Rock House is an ambitious mixed-use project that breathes new life into a previously underused building in the White Rock area of Hastings town centre. Its nine floors are home to living space, workspace and a community hub. Those who live and work here must meet certain criteria of need, enthusiasm and contribution to the building and the wider community. Pay-as-you-go work desk space on the Ground Floor costs £170 p/m.
18. Fora, Reading, Berkshire
Fora is three floors of contemporary workspace set within Reading's Thames Tower, just across the road from the main train station. This building is equipped for every requirement, with bookable event spaces and tech-enabled meeting rooms to host, collaborate and workshop – both remotely and in person. Prices are available on enquiry.
19. Wonderhub, Maidstone, Kent
The first of its kind in Maidstone, the WonderHub combines communal coffee areas, private desks, offices and event spaces to create a positive environment for entrepreneurs, startups and scale-up companies. Located on Middle Row, it offers coworking memberships from £120 p/m on a rolling monthly contract.
20. Fruitworks, Canterbury, Kent
Fruitworks is an award-winning company offering Kent's most established coworking space, with conference rooms, private studios, a dedicated events space and public coffee shop. Just 30 seconds from Canterbury's high street, they're based in a beautiful Victorian warehouse that we carefully restored themselves. Plans start at £60 p/m for one day of hot-desking a week.
21. The Space, Farnham, Surrey
The Space is naturally designed to be a low-density coworking, clean air environment. Located on East Street, the building is light, airy and safe and features 15 spacious hot-desks, three meeting rooms, breakout areas and an A3 printer and scanner. Annual membership costs £35 + VAT per year. Once a member, a day pass is £33, and desks start at £165 p/m for six days.
Patch's Public Reception and Library. Photography by Philipp Ebeling.
The Midlands & East of England
23. Ziferblat, Coventry, West Midlands
Ziferblat is a pay-as-you-go community and working space in the heart of Coventry. Based on Spon Street, it's halfway between a cafe and an office, as WiFi, food and drink are unlimited; you just pay for your time. That costs 8p per minute for the first hour, then 5p per minute after that, with a payment cap of £13.80, or four hours.
24. Melting Pot, Digbeth, Birmingham
Melting Pot is a 10,000-square foot, independent workspace divided into hot desks, artist studios, workshops and a multi-purpose exhibition hall. The space is tailor-made for the creative industries and is situated in Meriden St, Digbeth. Hot-desking starts at £10 a day, and you can rent a single desk for £150 p/m.
25. The Wheelhouse, Newcastle-under-Lyme, Staffordshire
The Wheelhouse coworking space in Newcastle-under-Lyme offers full-time desk, hot-desking and meeting rooms in a light and airy setting in the beautiful old RBS building on the high street. The space features large desks, ergonomic chairs, and great coffee and breakout areas. Hot-desking starts at £79 p/m.
26. Cubo, Derby
Nestled within Derby's Cathedral Quarter, on the northern side of Victoria Street with a return frontage onto St. James' Street, Cubo is housed in 'The Old Post Office', a beautiful Victorian building with historical features and impressively high ceilings. Inside you'll find a large and modern coworking space, as well as six meeting rooms and two floors of private office space. Prices are available on enquiry.
27. Cobden Place, Nottingham
Cobden Place is an independent creative coworking hub located within the hidden urban courtyard of Cobden Chambers. Spread over four floors of a sympathetically restored old lace factory, the building plays host to a vintage shop, cafe, and coworking spaces spanning the top two floors and boasts high-speed WiFi, heating, and endless tea and coffee. You can become a community member for £2.99 a month or £30 a year.
Makers' Yard is an award-winning, dynamic, inspiring workspace for creative entrepreneurs. Located on Rutland Street in Leicester's cultural quarter, this listed building is the oldest surviving hosiery factory in the East Midlands, sensitively restored into ten studios which house a growing creative community of artists and designer-makers. Rent a studio for £110 p/m, and you'll benefit from lots of natural light, practical flooring, period features, and stripped-back painted walls.
29. The Bradfield Centre, Cambridge
Housed in a stunning building at the heart of the Cambridge Science Park, The Bradfield Centre is designed to appeal to entrepreneurs, researchers and students and is home to innovative high-growth startups and scale-up businesses. Coworking desks and private offices are available, with prices on enquiry.
30. Square Feet, Northampton
Oxford House in Cliftonville, Northampton, is a beautiful Victorian villa that's close to the town centre and fully refurbished with everything you need to get working. Allocated parking is available, and there are both pay-as-you-go or membership options, with prices on enquiry.
St George's Works offers a variety of stylish offices and coworking desks to rent in Norwich's Shoe Quarter. Its flexible workspaces suit businesses of all sizes, from young startup enterprises to established and expanding companies. Coworking starts at £8 daily, and offices are available from £190 p/m.
32. Patch, Chelmsford
Patch's home in Grays Yard combines design-led workspaces with a public events venue right in the centre of Chelmsford. Home to a dynamic community of freelancers, businesses, and organisations, it's a place to come to meet new people and explore new ideas. Membership begins at £24 + VAT p/m for one day-a-month access to Patch's work, communal and social spaces.
33. Unicorn Studios, Ipswich
Unicorn is a new coworking space in Ipswich for people who need a break from home working. Located on Orwell Place, it offers friendly and affordable desk space and has a thriving community housed in a beautiful listed building. Plans begin at £60 p/m for one day's hot-desking per week.
North West England
34. Beehive Lofts, Manchester
Beehive Lofts claims to be "Manchester's most luxurious shared workspace". Set across nine lofts in the centre of Ancoats Urban Village, this space spans two 1800s cotton mills, thoughtfully renovated to bring a perfect balance of industrial luxury. All-inclusive membership costs £285 p/m.
35. Baltic Triangle, Liverpool
Baltic Triangle Co-working Space is a large, modern, fully furnished coworking space. It's home to over 40 creative, digital, media and music companies alongside a fantastic coffee shop, all in the heart of Liverpool's creative district on Jordan Street. Hot desking is not available, but all-inclusive desk leases are priced at £175 + VAT per calendar month. This cost includes superfast 1GB internet, use of the 12-person meeting room, use of the two-person meeting pod, A3 & A4 printing and 24/7 access.
Beehive Lofts, Manchester
36. Society, Preston
Society1 is a vibrant coworking space on Cross Street, Preston, just five minutes walk from the main train station. Here you'll find state-of-the-art stylish office space at low rates. Plans start at just £15 a month, including a one day pass.
37. The Guild, Carlisle
The Guild is a shared office space in Carlisle offering coworking and hot-desking. Located on Abbey Street, it's a 10-minute walk from the train station, and there is a range of excellent food vendors on the doorstep. They also have their own coffee shop, tuck shop and shared kitchen, and are dog-friendly. Hot desks start at £130 + VAT p/m for eight days' access.
38. Somewhere Different, Blackpool
Somewhere Different offers a combination of coworking and co-living for digital nomads on Lonsdale Road in Blackpool. One week's stay costs £170, and the price per day drops for longer stays, so four weeks costs £350, or £12.50 a day. For that, you get your own room, a dedicated coworking desk, a 1,000 Mbps connection, a shared kitchen and coliving space and weekend excursions.
Duke Studios, Leeds. Photography by Amy Heycock
Duke Studios, Leeds. Photography by James Abbott-Donelly
North East, Yorkshire and The Humber
39. The Egg Factory, Hebden Bridge, West Yorkshire
The Egg Factory is a creative coworking space in Hebden Bridge, West Yorkshire. Situated on Victoria Road, its members write, draw, knit and manage their businesses from our shared workspace and have fun doing it. If you're a photographer, lights, tables, and a light tent are available. Coworking prices start at £12 for a half-day and £18 for a full day.
40. Duke Studios, Leeds
Duke Studios is an open, collaborative space on Sheaf Street in the centre of Leeds. Coworking membership includes free meeting rooms, free Yorkshire tea, soundproof phone booth access, free use of pool bikes, kitchen access and more for £145 p/m.
41. K2 Bond Street, Hull
High-end offices sit alongside contemporary coworking facilities in this new concept workspace for Hull, located on Bond Street, within easy walking distance of the train station and a full range of amenities. Hot desks start at £75 p/m.
42. My Bureau, York
Based on Micklegate in York, the My Bureau coworking space is free to use. There's no need to book. Just turn up and fill in the registration sheet, and you can make use of its coworking desks and business class WiFi all day during cafe opening times (8am to 4pm), subject to desk availability.
Northern Ireland
43. The Foundry, Belfast
The Foundry is a coworking space based on Newtownards Road. Established by East Belfast Enterprise, it offers bench desking for up to 21 people and ten small offices designed with a young and fresh startup in mind. Memberships provide 24-hour access, 365 days a year for £99 + VAT per month, with a one-month commitment only.
44. Headspace, Belfast
Headspace offers flexible workspace in one of the most prestigious office buildings in Belfast at a fraction of the cost you might have previously thought. Situated on Adelaide Street, it boasts ergonomic chairs and desks, comfortable seating areas, high-speed internet, and excellent natural daylight. Prices are available on enquiry.
45. Loftspace, Belfast
Loftspace offers a stress-free work environment, all the facilities of a traditional office, plus a social atmosphere and sense of community. Its 2,050sqft space is designed to offer a mix of creative workspaces, breakout areas and a kitchen with tea and coffee making facilities. Hot desking plans start at £80 p/m for 35 hours' access.
The Distillery, Glasgow
Scotland
46. The Melting Pot, Edinburgh
The Melting Pot is Scotland's Centre for Social Innovation and one of the oldest coworking communities in the world. Based on Edinburgh's Calton Road, it offers freelancers, remote workers, small businesses and large organisations flexible, safe and creative solutions for this new era of working. Prices are available on enquiry.
47. Tribe Porty, Edinburgh
Tribe Porty is a community coworking and creative events space based in Portobello, Edinburgh's seaside. From photographers to translators, graphic designers to environmental consultants, they have over 140 members and provide offices, studios, permanent desks and hot-desking. The latter starts at £30 p/m for two days a month.
48. The Distillery, Glasgow
The Distillery is a dedicated coworking space for freelancers, startups and creatives, including artists, designers, photographers, cultural producers and software developers. Located on Dawson Road, Glasgow, membership is all-inclusive and runs on a rolling monthly basis, allowing you to turn up, switch on and start working. The day rate is £20, and hot-desking memberships start at £60 p/m for five days.
49. Clockwise, Glasgow
Clockwise in Glasgow sits over 11 floors in a 1970s high-rise tower transformed into bright, airy contemporary offices and a shared workspace. The building also boasts a hidden 5,000 sq ft outdoor terrace and murals by local artists in the stairwells. Day passes start at £15, and you can get a dedicated desk from £175 p/m.
50. Flour Mill, Dundee
Flour Mill is a dynamic coworking and serviced office space on Commercial Street in Dundee's city centre. This 1800s building has been lovingly restored and brought back to commercial use with coworking space, private offices, studios and more. Day passes are £25, and memberships start at £50 p/m based on 32 hours' access.
Rabble, Cardiff
Wales
51. The Sustainable Studio, Cardiff
The Sustainable Studio is set within an industrial warehouse repurposed to include an immersive space for performance, exhibitions, photo & video shoots, 20+ affordable studios, a community swap shop, a refill station and communal space. Located on Curran Road, all the studios are made from reclaimed materials, and all furniture, fixtures and fittings have had a previous life elsewhere. Prices are available on enquiry.
52. One Fox Lane, Cardiff
Based in the Adamsdown area of Cardiff, One Fox Lane is a creative coworking community providing a unique space for your work to flourish in a friendly, non-corporate, cooperative environment. Prices begin at £50 p/m for five days a month, including WiFi, tea, coffee and toast.
53. Rabble, Cardiff
Rabble Studio is a community-focused, member-led coworking space for freelancers, small businesses and remote workers. Based at the Cardiff Bay end of Bute Street, it offers a range of membership plans, starting at £60 p/m for part-time coworking (six days' access).
54. Techhub, Swansea
Techhub is working to be the most diverse, inclusive and collaborative home for startups worldwide. Situated on Swansea's high street, its staff and members aim to create strong relationships to help you give and receive support, build a valuable network and generate business opportunities. Day passes cost £10, and memberships start at £60 p/m based on up to 20 hours per week of access.
Costigan's believes in the power of coworking and providing amazing spaces for people to work and connect with others. Based on Bodford Street, Rhyl, it offers day passes for £20, and memberships start at £49 p/m for one day's access per week.
