Australian innovations and community leadership are enabling energy generated from a single solar system on a communal roof to share electricity to multiple residents within the same developments.
Until now, it has been difficult for the residents of apartment buildings to take full advantage of solar power in their homes.
South Australian company Suntrix has partnered with Allume to install an innovative technology in the CBD, which integrates with standard PV solar systems and batteries.
A rebate for shared solar of up to $20,000 per site is available from the City of Adelaide through the Sustainability Incentives Scheme.
The partnership won the Achievement in Energy or the Built Environment award at last night’s Carbon Neutral Adelaide Awards 2021.
Held every two years, the Carbon Neutral Adelaide Awards acknowledge key players in the city’s transition to a low carbon, liveable city.
This includes reducing emissions through technological change, entrepreneurial endeavour, and sustainable business practices.
Another inner city community of 27 apartments and townhouses in Christie Walk was also recognised several times in the awards.
The eco-city development was named Carbon Neutral Adelaide Ambassador 2021, and its founders, Urban Ecology Australia, won the Community Leadership Award.
The Sturt Street site is a showcase for high-density, communal and carbon neutral living, with an annual carbon footprint of around one tonne for each resident compared with the Australian average of 17 tonnes.
Giving people the means to reduce their individual carbon footprint was also highlighted with wins by Mister RYE and iO Energy.
Mr RYE is an alternative to plastic drinking straws and is made using the by-product from organic cereal rye crops grown in South Australia.
All products are processed by hand without using additional energy and can be composted.
Finding new ways to profit from waste reduction and reuse is an emerging trend worldwide, and now Adelaide is home to and attracting companies working within the circular economy.
Mr RYE’s founder Marion Vigot is a French entrepreneur who moved to Australia to focus on sustainability and packaging innovation.
iO Energy is a 100% carbon neutral electricity retailer giving South Australian customers the opportunity to pay less for clean energy by becoming smarter consumers.
The start-up’s customers often have a net negative CO 2 e impact through their electrical usage, reducing CO 2 by up to 73 per cent by shifting their use times.
Makerspace on Franklin Street is also enabling individuals to reduce their own footprint and participate in the circular economy via hands-on workshops and low-cost access to tools and equipment.
Lord Mayor Sandy Verschoor congratulated the recipients on being leaders in the community.
“Adelaide has a reputation as a clean and green city that prioritises a low carbon economy, all the winners and nominees are helping position Adelaide as one of the world’s most liveable cities,” Lord Mayor Verschoor said.
“They are helping society transition to environmentally friendly products and services which also creates strong economic benefits for our city and state.”
The innovative capabilities of Adelaide’s engineering community was also on show at Carbon Neutral Adelaide Awards.
Zero Automotive won for their battery electric light vehicle (bELV) for mining companies in their journey to zero emissions.
GPA Engineering won for their role in the hydrogen production and blending facility at Tonsley.
This Australian-first is a five-year demonstration project, introducing 5 per cent renewable hydrogen to natural gas in the existing gas network and providing 100 per cent renewable hydrogen to industry nationwide.
The full list of last night’s winners and finalists can be found at:
www.carbonneutraladelaide.com/Awards-2021
Share Linkedin Email
