Hop into NOLA this Easter long weekend and sip on some new chocolate-flavoured brews!
A special tinnie hunt will run all Sunday featuring some of South Australia’s favourite independent brewers.
Visit the bar to grab some fun and colourful easter themes cocktails running all weekend and satisfy your sweet tooth with a host of chocolate treats for an Easter feast.
Get your hands on some egg-cellent new tapped Easter Beers from Australian breweries including:
‘All Things Nice’ hot cross bun brown ale from Bowden Brewing:
The liquid alternative to our favourite Easter treat. An English-style brown ale with spice and dried fruit aromas… YUM!
‘Eggster’ Triple Chocolate Ale from Bridge Road Brewing:
Referred to as an ‘easter egg in beer clothing’, a mixture of rich chocolate ale and creamy mouthfeel. Talk about holiday!
‘Lux Deluxe’ Chocolate Honeycomb Luxury Stout from Little Bang:
The premium mix of chocolate and honeycomb notes for the perfect Easter treat.
If beer’s not your thing, NOLA has a wide range of whiskey, cocktails and wines for those who like an Easter buzz. With a list well over 200, NOLA has something for every Whiskey, Rye and Bourbon enthusiast. The bar also features a rotating list of 16 tap beers, showcasing the very best of independent and craft brewed products.
During this month, NOLA will also be teaming up with Prancing Pony to raise funds for the Drought Angels Farmer Flood Appeal.
Drought Angels provides support to farmers hit hard by natural disasters such as draught, fire, mouse plague and flood. They offer personalised services for farming families in need.
Proceeds from every Prancing Pony Summer Ale pint will be donated to Drought Angels – the perfect way to celebrate Easter and support our South Australian farmers.
NOLA is celebrating this Easter weekend from 12pm Friday 15 May through Sunday 17 May. No bookings are required.
For more information, visit the NOLA website, or check out its Facebook and Instagram.
NOLA is located at 28 Vardon Avenue, Adelaide 5000.
[adrotate banner="159"]
