Wong takes over the portfolio from Marise Payne. Wong was first elected to the Senate for South Australia in 2001. Finance Minister Katy Gallagher, Treasurer Jim Chalmers, Minister for Foreign Affairs Penny Wong and Deputy Prime Minister Richard Marles during their swearing-in ceremony. Credit:Alex Ellinghausen Jim Chalmers, treasurer Chalmers takes over the portfolio from Josh Frydenberg. Chalmers was first elected to the seat of Rankin, Queensland in 2013.
Katy Gallagher, minister for finance, minister for women, minister for the public service Gallagher takes over the finance portfolio from Simon Birmingham and the women portfolio from Marise Payne. Gallagher was first elected to the Senate for ACT in 2016, but was ruled void under section 44 of the constitution. She was re-elected to the Senate in 2019. Loading Don Farrell, minister for trade and tourism, special minister of state, deputy Senate leader Farrell takes over the portfolio from Dan Tehan. Farrell was first elected to the Senate for South Australia in 2007. He was defeated at general elections in 2013 and re-elected in 2016.
Tony Burke, minister for employment, minister for industrial relations, minister for arts Burke takes over the employment portfolio from Stuart Robert, industrial relations from Michaelia Cash and arts from Paul Fletcher. Burke was first elected to the seat of Watson, NSW in 2004. Tony Burke. Credit:Alex Ellinghausen Mark Butler, minister for health and aged care Butler takes over the portfolio from Greg Hunt. Butler was first elected to the seat of Port Adelaide, South Australia in 2007. He is now the member for Hindmarsh, South Australia after an electoral redistribution in 2019.
Chris Bowen, minister for climate change and energy Bowen takes over the portfolio from Angus Taylor. Bowen was first elected to the seat of Prospect, NSW in 2004. He is the member for McMahon following the electoral redistribution in 2010. Tanya Plibersek, environment and water minister Plibersek takes over the portfolio from Sussan Ley. Plibersek was first elected to the seat of Sydney, NSW in 1998. Tanya Plibersek. Credit:Jessica Hromas
Catherine King, minister for infrastructure, transport and regional development King takes over the portfolio from Barnaby Joyce. She was first elected to the seat of Ballarat, Victoria in 2001. Linda Burney, minister for Indigenous Australians Burney takes over the portfolio from Ken Wyatt. She was first elected to the seat of Barton, NSW in 2016. Linda Burney. Credit:Brook Mitchell
Amanda Rishworth, social services minister Rishworth takes over the portfolio from Anne Ruston. Rishworth was first elected to the seat of Kingston, South Australia in 2007. Bill Shorten, minister for NDIS and government services Shorten takes over the portfolio from Linda Reynolds. He was first elected to the seat of Maribyrnong, Victoria in 2007. Bill Shorten. Credit:Joe Armao
Mark Dreyfus, attorney-general Dreyfus takes over the role from Michaelia Cash. He was first elected to the seat of Isaacs, Victoria in 2007. Brendan O’Connor, minister for skills and training O’Connor takes over the portfolio from Stuart Robert. O’Connor was first elected to the seat of Burke, Victoria in 2001. He is now the member for Gorton, Victoria after an electoral distribution in 2004.
Jason Clare, minister for education Clare takes over the portfolio from Alan Tudge. Clare was first elected to the seat of Blaxland, NSW in 2007. Julie Collins, minister for housing and small business
Collins takes over the housing portfolio from Michael Sukkar and small business portfolio from Stuart Robert. She was first elected to the seat of Franklin, Tasmania in 2007. Julie Collins. Credit:Alex Ellinghausen Michelle Rowland, minister for communications
Rowland takes over the portfolio from Paul Fletcher. She was first elected to the seat of Greenway, NSW in 2010. Madeleine King, minister for resources and northern Australia King takes over the portfolio from David Littleproud. She was first elected to the seat of Brand, Western Australia in 2016. Madeleine King. Credit:Alex Ellinghausen Murray Watt, minister for agriculture, fisheries and forestry, minister for emergency management
Watt takes over the agriculture portfolio from David Littleproud and the emergency management portfolio from Bridget McKenzie. He was first elected to the Senate for Queensland in 2016. Ed Husic, minister for industry and science Husic takes over the industry portfolio from Angus Taylor and science portfolio from Melissa Price. He was first elected to the seat of Chifley, NSW in 2010. Ed Husic. Credit:Alex Ellinghausen
Clare O’Neil, minister for home affairs and cybersecurity
