The Government will invest in 51 FTE (full time equivalent) paramedics to expand the SA Ambulance Service’s capacity in response to increasing demand.
The $30 million investment will see the paramedics on the road within 12 months to boost the number of ambulance officers in South Australia.
Premier Steven Marshall said the increase will help support the paramedics through the COVID-19 pandemic.
“Today’s investment is based on the advice of SAAS regarding what is needed to support the demand for our ambulance service going forward,” Marshall said.
Minister for Health and Wellbeing Stephen Wade said the 51 FTE increase is a key investment to support the ambulance service.
“We have worked closely with SAAS to boost resources to the ambulance service, particularly in response to the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the strong advice is that these 51 FTE paramedics will provide an additional 40,000 crewing hours to help respond to demand going forward,” Minister Wade said.
“This investment will enable SAAS to establish additional 10.5 hour shifts to ensure more ambulance and paramedics are on the road at times of peak demand as an expansion of the new shift model it has recently introduced.
“We have also hired more Triple Zero call takers and formed a standby workforce of up to 100 final year paramedicine students to support patient transport through the COVID-19 pandemic.”
Marshall said the boost in paramedics builds on a similar increase in crewing hours that was achieved in 2021, as well as a doubling of SAAS’ regular paramedic intake last year and in 2022.
“Together with our record $2.8 billion hospital build program and the establishment of capacity for up to 500 dedicated COVID beds across the health system, our investment has helped see ramping reduce by a quarter in South Australia since October, in the midst of the Omicron outbreak,” he said.
Wade said the Government will be making further announcements on ambulance services during the campaign.
[adrotate banner="159"]
