New South Wales Health Minister Brad Hazzard has reminded residents to remain vigilant as he announced that COVID-19 cases were expected to surge in the coming months.
Speaking on Tuesday the Health Minister said researchers at the University of NSW who had predicted the January surge were expecting another wave to hit in the coming weeks with the arrival of the Omicron sub-variant BA.2.
“We can see an uptick quite substantially very soon in COVID cases and that by the middle of April we could be looking at double the number of cases we’ve got now,” Mr Hazzard said.
The Health Minister then called on residents to take three simple steps to avoid the virus as the new Omicron strain spreads.
NSW Minister for Health Brad Hazzard gave residents three steps to stay safe from COVID-19 as he revealed case numbers were expected to double. Picture: NCA NewsWire / Adam Yip
Stream the latest news on COVID-19 with Flash. Stream more than 20 global & local news sources. New to Flash? Try 1 month free now.
Mr Hazzard reminded the public to wear a mask when social distancing was not possible, stay at home when feeling unwell and to wash your hands.
“Doing all the basics that we’ve learnt in the two years of the pandemic,” he said.
“What we’ve know from overseas is this pandemic hasn’t gone away its well and truly amongst us, some people are kidding themselves that it’s not around of course it’s around.”
The state reported 10,689 positive COVID-19 cases on Tuesday, 8,911 on Monday, 13,093 cases on Sunday, 12,850 cases on Saturday and 14,034 cases on Friday - a big increase of infections numbers compared to the previous week.
Speaking to Sky News Australia host Peter Stefanovic on Monday, Mr Hazzard was unable to say whether restrictions would be reintroduced when case numbers rise.
“We have to look at the entire effect on our community the epidemiologists the public health physicians usually look at the narrow perspective viral effect on the community but as health minister… we’ll be looking at all the effects,” he said.
“What’s the effect going to be on mental health, what’s the effect going to be on young people, what’s the effect going to be on the economy.
“Whilst I’ve had some preliminary advice… I’m not at all keen to be heading back down that path and I think most the community is tired, we’ve had it, we’ve really had it.”
Mr Hazzard also advised the large number of people who had not yet received their booster shot to go out and get their third vaccine dose.
“It really does worry me and it should worry the individuals who haven’t actually gone out and got their boosters,” he said.
“There’s roughly 40 per cent of the eligible population over the age of 16 who have not gone and got a booster.
“It’s about time that everybody got real and went and got vaccinated and got their boosters as quickly as possible.”
