The Novavax vaccine has finally been made available in Australia and is being rolled out at general practices, community pharmacies and state clinics across the country.
Health minister Greg Hunt on Monday announced the protein-based formula - which authorities hope may finally persuade some of the remaining vaccine-hesitant to get the jab - will begin being distributed this week.
'Despite high vaccination rates in Australia, there has been a demand for a protein-based formula,' Hunt explained. 'For some people, the arrival of Novavax will be the extra push they need to get their first jab and kick start their protection against COVID-19.'
Australians can make a booking to get the Novavax vaccine via the Covid-19 Vaccine Clinic Finder.
Medical laboratory scientist, Anielia Sobel (pictured), tests serology samples from the Novavax phase 3 Covid-19 clinical vaccine trial. Novavax will be available in Australia this week
Australia ordered 50 million doses of the Novavax vaccine, which is preferred by many because it is the first traditional protein-based vaccine, whereas the likes of Pfizer and Moderna use the more novel mRNA technology.
Australians aged 18 and above will be given two doses of Novavax three weeks apart.
The vaccine will not yet be available as a booster shot or for those under the age of 18.
On December 21 the World Health Organisation (WHO) said data on the safety and efficacy on the use of Novavax in pregnant women was not yet available.
The Minister for Health Greg Hunt (pictured) has announced a start date of February 21 for the Novavax vaccine in Australia
'WHO recommends the use of the Covid-19 vaccine in pregnant women when the benefits of vaccination to the pregnant woman outweigh the potential risks,' it said.
Epidemiologist Catherine Bennett told Daily Mail Australia Novavax was more of a 'conventional' approach to vaccines as the receiver was being injected with a protein.
'The viral protein segment that they're using as a trigger for the immune system is produced in a laboratory,' she said.
'Whereas with the other vaccines, it's actually getting our cells to produce the protein and then your immune system sees it and reacts to it.
Novavax (pictured) is more of a 'conventional' approach to vaccines as the receiver is injected with a protein
'(Novavax) is doing that bit of work up front, before it's injected.'
Ms Bennett said because the protein was produced in a lab, researchers had to work hard to ensure there was no contamination.
'So what goes into you is a bit more complex because it includes a protein,' she added.
'You still have then the production of antibodies (with Novavax).'
A woman (pictured) is seen receiving a Covid-19 vaccination. Novavax is the latest vaccine to be made available in Australia
Novavax differs from mRNA vaccines like Pfizer and Moderna but all have similar side effects after a person is jabbed.
These include soreness around the site of injection, fatigue, headaches and muscle aches.
The vaccine, which is the fifth to be approved in Australia, is able to be stored in a normal fridge for up to three months, unlike other doses which must be kept at very low temperatures.
The vaccine has been proven to have 90 per cent efficacy rate against mild, moderate and severe disease, WHO said.
