Federal Labor Senate Leader Penny Wong, a former care worker herself, has signed the ANMF (SA Branch) campaign pledge to fix aged care.
In signing the pledge, Senator Wong discussed how difficult it was accessing aged care services in Australia and reflected on how more difficult this would be for members of our culturally and linguistically diverse community. She expressed her concerns with Australians who have English as a second language, and lack the relevant computer skills, would experience many difficulties navigating the convoluted aged care system.
Senator Wong told ANMF (SA Branch) CEO/Secretary Adj Associate Professor Elizabeth Dabars AM that not a lot had changed with staffing and skills mix in the sector since her university student days when she worked as a casual care worker in aged care.
READ MORE: Shadow Minister for Health and Ageing commits to aged care
The ANMF campaign is asking for support for four key actions:
1. RN 24/7 – at least one registered nurse on site at all times
2. Minimum mandated care hours and the right skills mix
3. Greater transparency – funding tied to care
4. Improved wages and conditions
“The aged care industry has for far too long failed to provide quality care to vulnerable Australians, through no fault of the dedicated staff but rather through lack of resources, adequate staff numbers and appropriate skills mix,” said Ms Dabars.
READ MORE: St Basil’s Fawkner shocking details during COVID, whereas St Basil’s Randwick found wanting by aged care watchdog
“The ANMF campaign is calling on our politicians to right the many wrongs in an industry so woefully dysfunctional that the Royal Commission found a staggering two-thirds of nursing home residents are either malnourished or at risk of malnourishment.’’
Other politicians who have also signed the ANMF (SA Branch) aged care pledge include Mark Butler, Member for Hindmarsh and Shadow Minister for Health and Ageing; Steve Georganas, Member for Adelaide; Rebekah Sharkie, Member for Mayo; South Australian Senator Marielle Smith; Louise Miller-Frost, Labor candidate for Boothby; and former ANMF (SA Branch) President Marisa Bell, Labor candidate for Mayo.
