One of the most important state ministers in the country has ignored Today show hosts Karl Stefanovic and Allison Langdon and instead gone on a rant about Covid-19.
NSW Minister for Health Brad Hazzard was questioned about the flood crisis in the state, first being asked 'who stuffed up here?' by Langdon.
Instead of giving a straight answer, Mr Hazzard said the question was 'the sort of commentary you'd expect sometimes from some people in the community, particularly the media actually'.
NSW health minister Brad Hazzard (pictured) refused to answer a straight question on the Today show
He added that 'I think when there's a major crisis you've got to expect that people are going to be working flat chat and working as well together as you can, which is effectively in a war,' but then veered far from what he was asked, but continued with the war theme.
'From past experience, working certainly through the Covid war in the last two years the teams, federal and state work very well together.
'It depends on the information you have as at the day as to what decisions are made, and of course a week or two later everyone is an instant expert.
'So I'm going to stay out of that one and talk about Covid.'
Stefanovic then put it to the minister that unlike him, the commissioner of the SES was prepared to accept responsibility.
'She says the buck stops with her and its ultimately NSW who have got to react to this stuff and your government is to blame,' said the TV host.
The flooding was so heavy in Sydney that Roseville Bridge between the city and the Northern Beaches flooded, leaving cars floating
Manly Post Office, which is close to Brad Hazzard's Northern Beaches constituency, flooded during the storm
Mr Hazzard then implied that he was asked on the program under false pretences.
'I was asked to do an interview on Covid. I will talk about Covid. I have given you my views on (the flooding crisis), let's move on to Covid,' he said.
Stefanovic then asked the minister why he can't 'bounce on to something else, this is your government.
'You're a senior minister in the government and you can't answers questions about people being left in their homes about not getting the right emergency, about the level of coordination between the state and federal governments dropping the ball? You can't answer questions like that?' he said as Mr Hazzard shook his head in frustration.
A woman is pictured being helped to higher ground in Lismore, NSW on Monday, February 28, 2022
Residents evacuate as flooding occurs in the town of Lismore in north-eastern New South Wales
The minister refuted that, saying he had 'just answered it' and that the different levels of government 'worked together extremely well'.
'I think that trying to cast blame is not actually helpful. There will be a review and that will indicate whether there is further learnings that will happen in the future for any other similar situations,' he said.
Mr Hazzard then complained again about the line of questions, saying he didn't 'need to have all of that thrust at me'.
He said he was there to speak about Covid and the forecast that the number of cases could double in the next four to six weeks.
NSW Minister for Health Brad Hazzard has warned that Covid has not gone away. Pictured are people wearing masks in a pub
The minister encouraged people got get a vaccine booster shot, especially if they are immunocompromised.
Langdon then asked him if NSW could see some Covid restrictions coming back.
Mr Hazzard was visibly relieved that he had managed to steer the conversation back to what was, for him, safer territory.
He said NSW Chief Health Officer Dr Kerry Chant and he had said many times 'when you're in close proximity with others it still makes sense to wear a mask'.
The minister then decided he could mix two topics, both Covid and the floods.
NSW health minister is encouraging people to get a booster shot as it emerges that two million people eligible for a booster have not yet got it
'The pandemic has not gone away,' he said, adding that though the floods are 'terrible', we also 'need to remember that we are still in the middle of a pandemic and it's a one-in-100 year pandemic with potentially grave consequences if you get it.'
Mr Hazzard said that the BA2 variant of Covid is taking over from BA1 and that it's much more transmissible, though not necessarily more dangerous.
'So we are expecting that more people may get it ... potentially that means more people in hospital and more people potentially in ICU and possibly dying,' he said.
The minister said there were 958 people in hospital in NSW, 8,911 cases and 47 people in ICU.
In NSW on Monday, there were 958 people in hospital with Covid, 8,911 cases and 47 people in ICU. Pictured is a person getting the Pfizer Covid-19 vaccine booster
Stefanovic then asked the minister why so many are hesitant to get a vaccine booster shot in NSW, where more than two million people eligible to have it have not yet done so.
Mr Hazzard said a lot of people are confused, thinking if they have had the virus they think they don't have to have a booster.
'But the reality is you do have to have a booster and it should be around four to six weeks after you've actually had the virus, or about three months after you've actually had your second dose,' he said.
