Mitsubishi Motors Australia will build a new national headquarters within the Adelaide Airport precinct for the business to move into from late 2020, Mitsubishi Motors Corporation COO, Trevor Mann, announced yesterday.
The announcement comes following an extensive national search to find a suitable head office location which would support the brand’s future business requirements.
Mann said while a relocation of the company’s headquarters interstate was considered, Adelaide Airport was the smart choice for the future of the business.
“Mitsubishi Motors Australia Limited (MMAL) is successful in Australia and we know that the workforce are a key factor in that success, which is why we are keeping the national headquarters in South Australia, and creating a new facility located within the Adelaide Airport precinct to ensure MMAL can more efficiently support its dealers and staff interstate, “ Mann said.
MMAL CEO, John Signoriello said the new head office will provide state-of-the-art facilities and easier access for collaboration with the company’s teams across Australia.
“MMAL is a national team that relies on collaboration with our regional staff and dealers to get our job done, therefore Adelaide Airport proved to be the logical place for our new headquarters,” Signoriello said.
Mitsubishi’s COO and CEO met with the South Australian Premier, Steven Marshall, to advise him of the decision to keep the Mitsubishi Motors Australia head office in South Australia and to thank the state government for their support.
As part of its investment in South Australia, the state government offered a grant of $2 million to assist MMAL in the construction and fit out of the new facility.
Premier of South Australia, Steven Marshall, said he was delighted that Mitsubishi Motors Australia has shown confidence in the future economic prosperity of South Australia by deciding to keep its headquarters in Adelaide.
“South Australia has been home to Mitsubishi for over 38 years and in that time has contributed significantly to our state and likewise, South Australia has been a major supporter of Mitsubishi,” said Premier Marshall.
“This decision is a significant vote of confidence in South Australians and the state government looks forward to continuing a productive and positive partnership with Mitsubishi.”
The new Mitsubishi Motors Australia headquarters will be located at the entrance to Adelaide Airport allowing efficient access for interstate dealers and staff to attend conferences and use the sales and after-sales training facilities.
Construction of the new headquarters will commence in 2019.
