VFACTS January 2022: Car sales hit reverse fourth month in a row as stock shortages continue
The new-car sales race has become a battle of sourcing vehicles amid ongoing semiconductor shortages, production slowdowns, and shipping delays – and it has had a wild impact on the results scoreboard.
New-car sales across Australia hit reverse in January 2022 for the fourth month in a row – after 11 months in positive territory – as the industry continues to grapple with chronic semiconductor shortages, production slowdowns, and interruptions to shipping routes.
The average waiting time for a new car in Australia has now blown out to three months – say industry analysts – while showroom representatives for some key models are quoting delivery times of six to 12 months.
Last month, 75,863 new motor vehicles were reported as sold nationally, down 4.8 per cent compared to the same month the prior year, according to data released today by the Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries (FCAI).
All states and territories posted new-car sales declines in January 2022, except for Tasmania which saw an increase of 15.4 per cent in deliveries.
Automotive analysts say the Tasmanian sales figures are likely to be buoyed by an increase in rental car deliveries as the tourism industry prepares for a return to frequent air travel to the island state. Rental car sales increased by 11.9 per cent nationally, but specific data for Tasmania is not yet available.
As further confirmation of our changing buyer preferences, SUVs continued to dominate car sales nationally, representing more than half (52.2 per cent) of all new vehicles reported as sold last month.
Utes and vans (24.1 per cent of total vehicle sales) picked up where they left off last year, outselling passenger cars for the month of January 2022 (20.7 per cent).
The spike in ute sales has been driven by the construction boom and an increase in buyers shifting to vehicles better suited to holidaying at home amid international travel restrictions.
Demand for vans went through the roof due to the increase in parcel deliveries throughout the pandemic.
While the top two selling vehicles outright – the Toyota HiLux and Ford Ranger utes – continue to duke it out, the rest of the Top 10 rankings are a reflection of which brands could source inventory.
Chinese manufacturer MG had two cars inside the Top 10 for the first time ever, Kia outsold its South Korean sibling Hyundai for the month, and former top-sellers such as the Toyota Corolla and Mazda 3 fell outside the Top 10.
The Mazda CX-5 SUV ranked third behind the Toyota HiLux and Ford Ranger after picking up buyers who were tired of waiting for a Toyota RAV4, according to dealer sources.
The all-time monthly sales record for the Mazda CX-5 helped Mazda carve out a 12.9 per cent slice of the total new-car market, its highest ratio ever (ahead of its previous record of 11.9 per cent market share in January 2016).
However, Toyota – market leader in Australia for the past 19 years in a row – maintained its commanding lead, with 20 per cent market share or one-in-five of all new vehicles sold.
The Mitsubishi Triton returned to form, ranking fourth – placing three utes inside the Top Four – after receiving an intake of stock from the factory after a year in the wilderness.
“This is an issue impacting markets all over the globe. Despite this, consumer interest, inquiry, and the fundamental demand for new cars in Australia remains strong.”
“I wish I had better news,” said James Voortman, the CEO of the AADA. “I know these supply shortages have been with us for 18 months now – and must seem never-ending to consumers – but dealers are doing the best they can under circumstances largely beyond their control.”
Mr Voortman said he remains “hopeful there is light at the end of the tunnel, and that the supply of new vehicles will return to normal in the not too distant future.”
The dealer association repeated its earlier advice to car buyers, to “place an order and get in the queue” so they can take delivery of their vehicles ahead of the next holiday season.
Even luxury brands have been hit hard by the crisis – sales of Volkswagen and Audi are down by more than 40 per cent.
Japan remains the largest source of motor vehicles in Australia (36.2 per cent) ahead of Thailand (23.6 per cent) and South Korea (14.7 per cent).
However, China continues to rocket up the charts, and last month accounted for 8.2 per cent of all new motor vehicles sold in Australia – its highest proportion to date. New motor vehicles from Germany (3.2 per cent) and the US (2.3 per cent) were next on the list of source countries.
MG ranked seventh outright in January 2022 with a 46.9 per cent sales gain, while fellow Chinese brand Great Wall Motors Haval posted a sales gain of 51.2 per cent, and LDV was up 36.6 per cent.
Sales of electric cars more than doubled (up 109.8 per cent from 296 in January 2021 to 620 in January 2022) excluding Tesla , which does not provide monthly sales data.
However, hybrid vehicles remain the driving force on the road to electrification, with close to 5000 examples reported as sold, the biggest January result to date – representing 6.5 per cent of total vehicle sales.
Joshua Dowling has been a motoring journalist for more than 20 years, spending most of that time working for The Sydney Morning Herald (as motoring editor and one of the early members of the Drive team) and News Corp Australia. He joined CarAdvice / Drive in late 2018, and has been a World Car of the Year judge for 10 years.
Read more about Joshua Dowling
