The West Coast Eagles didn’t get the win in Round 14, but they got the next best thing with their performance against Geelong.
Up against a team who many predict will finish in the top four come the end of the season, the Eagles hit the front in the third term and despite not being able to hang on, put forward an effort not seen from them this year.
Coming into the clash, Adam Simpson’s men had lost seven of their last eight games by more than 50 points, but Saturday’s performance now gives renewed optimism for the back half of the season.
Pavlich was impressed by the way the Eagles looked to move the ball quicker against Geelong, as well as the side putting forward a four-quarter performance.
“It was a four quarter effort, they didn’t drop off,” Pavlich told SEN WA Breakfast.
“They’ve been good for a quarter, they’ve been good for a half here and there. The performance against Adelaide (in Round 12) was better, they hung in there and came back.
“I think you saw a team that can start to get some momentum in the back half of the season which is so important because you can’t just throw the season away.
“We mentioned this a number of times with the Eagles, they’ve had such a disastrous first half of the year, they need to finish the season well.
“Nine games to improve, nine games to move the ball quicker.
“You can see they’ve readdressed that at the bye and said, ‘No, this is how we’re going to play, we’re going to hit the last nine games well and propel ourselves into the back half of the season and into pre-season.”
Plenty of experienced names returned from injury in Round 14, but before that West Coast seemed destined to come in the bottom two.
Many predict they’re facing a lengthy rebuild given their ageing list, and Simpson’s side could certainly be boosted by the addition of a number one draft pick.
However, Pavlich cautioned against playing for the draft order, labelling that idea “ridiculous”.
“The notion that, ‘we’re not trying, we’re going to tank’, that’s just ridiculous in my view because if you’re drafted and you’re in an AFL program, you’re competitive, you’re made to be competitive and you should have been competitive anyway,” he added.
“You’re out there to do your best, and the leaders of their own team, for their own pride and enjoyment, you want to be in the battle, you want to be up for the contest.
“You saw that on the weekend, some of their leaders (were really impressive).
“They’ll still get a really high draft pick, whether it’s one, two, three or four it doesn’t matter because as history shows, you can (get them wrong).
“You’ll get a very good player in that first half a dozen picks.”
The Eagles play five top eight sides in their run home, including a Derby against Fremantle in Round 22.
