Matt Walsh and Jake Michaels from the EPSN Footy Podcast discuss whether the new umpire dissent rules will cause havoc in Round 1. (1:45)
It's that time of year where we look into our crystal balls and attempt to predict the AFL season ahead. Who will win the premiership? Who takes home Charlie? What are our BIG calls of the year?
Our football experts have answered all of these questions, and many more, ahead of the 2022 home and away season.
Rohan Connolly
Premier: Western Bulldogs
Runner-up: Melbourne
Biggest riser: Hawthorn
Biggest slider: Geelong
Wooden Spoon: Collingwood
Brownlow Medal: Marcus Bontempelli
Coleman Medal: Harry McKay
Rising Star: Jason Horne-Francis
BIG call for the year: After years of expectation not met, 2022 will be the year scoring really does improve, with more teams following the attacking leads of the likes of the Bulldogs and Lions.
Jake Michaels
Premier: Melbourne
Runner-up: Brisbane
Biggest riser: Carlton
Biggest slider: West Coast
Brownlow Medal: Christian Petracca
Coleman Medal: Jeremy Cameron
Rising Star: Nick Daicos
BIG call for the year: Carlton to make a preliminary final.
Matt Walsh
Premier: Port Adelaide
Runner-up: Western Bulldogs
Wooden Spoon: North Melbourne
Brownlow Medal: Jack Steele
Coleman Medal: Bayley Fritsch
BIG call for the year: Bayley Fritsch wins the Coleman Medal kicking 75 goals and being a nightmare to match up on.
Can Port Adelaide go all the way in season 2022? Daniel Kalisz/Getty Images
Jarryd Barca
Runner-up: Richmond
Wooden Spoon: Adelaide
Brownlow Medal: Patrick Cripps
BIG call for the year: Mitch McGovern will be an All-Australian defender in 2022.
Christian Joly (Champion Data)
Biggest riser: Collingwood
Brownlow Medal: Zak Butters
Coleman Medal: Tom Hawkins
BIG call for the year: Zak Butters to win the Brownlow and Norm Smith Medals.
Our AFL experts expect the Eagles to be the biggest slider of 2022. Albert Perez/Getty Images
Chris Doerre
Biggest riser: Richmond
Wooden Spoon: West Coast
Coleman Medal: Max King
BIG call for the year: Noah Balta to take the keys from Dustin Martin and become Richmond's new franchise player.
Marnie Vinall
Biggest riser: Essendon
Biggest slider: GWS
Wooden Spoon: Gold Coast
Brownlow Medal: Clayton Oliver
Rising Star: Josh Rachele
BIG call for the year: Essendon break their finals win drought.
Results:
Premier: Port Adelaide (3), Melbourne (3), Western Bulldogs (1)
Runner-up: Melbourne (3), Western Bulldogs (2), Brisbane (1), Richmond (1)
Biggest riser: Carlton (3), Hawthorn (1), Collingwood (1), Richmond (1), Essendon (1)
Biggest slider: West Coast (5), Geelong (1), GWS (1)
Wooden Spoon: Collingwood (2), North Melbourne (2), West Coast (1), Gold Coast (1), Adelaide (1)
Brownlow Medal: Jack Steele (2), Marcus Bontempelli (1), Christian Petracca (1), Patrick Cripps (1), Zak Butters (1), Clayton Oliver (1)
Coleman Medal: Harry McKay (2), Jeremy Cameron (2), Bayley Fritsch (1), Tom Hawkins (1), Max King (1)
Rising Star: Jason Horne-Francis (3), Nick Daicos (3), Josh Rachele (1)
