Spread the love
It’s semifinal time at the Adelaide International, a WTA 500-level event which featured eight players ranked inside the world’s top 15. There have been quite a few upsets along the way, we’re still left with an interesting mix of major champions, rising stars and underdogs heading into the weekend at the Memorial Drive Tennis Club. Who will advance to Sunday’s championship match?
WTA Adelaide Semifinal Predictions
Elena Rybakina vs Misaki Doi
H2H: Doi 1-0
Misaki Doi has been the big surprise this week in Adelaide. The draw opened up nicely for the 30-year-old and she’s certainly taken advantage. A 6-3 3-6 6-1 opening round win over Kristina Kucova was followed by a 7-6 6-3 win against Anastasia Gasanova. Doi booked her spot in the final four in dramatic fashion when she saved a pair of match points in a 6-3 4-6 -7-6 win over Kaja Juvan in a match lasting just under 3 hours. Can Doi keep her fairy-tale run alive?
Elena Rybakina hasn’t been at her best this week. Nevertheless, the world #14 has managed to get the job done, something she has made a habit of doing so over the last few years. The Kazakh started her season with a 6-4 1-6 6-1 win over Storm Sanders. There were better signs in a 6-3 6-4 victory against Marie Bouzkova and a gutsy 3-6 6-3 6-2 comeback over Shelby Rogers.
Doi prevailed in the only previous meeting between the pair, a 4-6 6-4 6-4 win on clay in Bastad back in 2019. Rybakina has rocketed up the rankings and improved dramatically since their last meeting and is expected to prevail on this occasion. Doi is at her best when she’s able to dictate with her forehand, she will have limited opportunities to do that against the powerful Rybakina on a relatively quick hard court. Doi has already surpassed all expectations and hasn’t faced an opponent of Rybakina’s level this week, expect Rybakina to be too strong.
Prediction: Rybakina in 2
Embed from Getty Images
Ash Barty vs Iga Swiatek
H2H: 2-0
A blockbuster semifinal sees a pair of Roland Garros champions go head-to-head under the lights in Adelaide. Matchups don’t get much tougher than this on the WTA Tour, two of the best players in the world right now.
Ash Barty enters Saturday’s semifinal on the back of a sublime serving display in a 6-3 6-4 win over Sofia Kenin. The World #1 blasted 17 aces past the American and lost just one points behind her first serve. It was a vastly improved performance from her first outing of the week where she battled past Coco Gauff 4-6 7-5 6-1 after trailing by a set and a break.
Iga Swiatek is unbeaten in Adelaide, her winning run has been extended to 8 matches. The defending champion cruised through her first few matches, easily beating Daria Gavrilova 6-3 6-3 and Leylah Fernandez 6-1 6-2. Swiatek didn’t have things all her own way in the quarterfinals but dominated when it mattered as she outlasted Victoria Azarenka 6-3 2-6 6-1.
Tough match to predict, it really comes down to who executes best on the night. If both play at their best, then it’s going to be a great match with little to separate the pair. I’ll give the slightest edge to Barty, the Aussie’s serve was clicking in the previous round and is generally more reliable than Swiatek’s, this could be key in what should be a close match.
Prediction: Barty in 3
Main Photo from Getty.
