We’re 20 per cent through the 2022 AFL season. If it were a movie, we’d be through the establishing phase and approaching act two.
So what have we actually established so far?
Well… here’s where things sit:
Tier 1 (The top of the mountain)
Melbourne
Melbourne is the best team. This is not a controversial take.
You can’t score on them from general play without perfect ball movement, and any mistake usually ends in Bayley Fritsch taking a mark on the lead up the other end.
Steven May and Jake Lever have not conceded 100 points playing together in their time at the Demons. Their midfield has the ability to go supernova for 20 minutes and crush the opposition’s spirit.
There’s not a whole lot to analyse here. They obliterated everyone in the finals last year and have not missed a beat. 2018 Richmond vibes anyone? 2008 Geelong? 2011 Collingwood? (Yes I know they all have something in common).
Tier 2 (Contenders)
Brisbane
Sydney
Hello again Brisbane, welcome back to the top four club. Please take your usual seat by the window. We’ll bring out your drink shortly.
Get yourself comfortable and we’ll see you in September. Nothing else matters for you until then given your last three finals collapses.
The Lions are legit. They’re ticking every box and the sailing is much smoother than this time last year, but we know how their last three seasons have ended.
Sydney is tough. Do they belong here in tier two? Beating the tattered remains of West Coast into a bloody pulp doesn’t really change much.
These two teams meet in Round 7. They can stay in the comfy chairs until then and we’ll reassess after.
Tier 3 (Contenders?)
Western Bulldogs
Geelong
Was ready to park Geelong in tier two with the big boys and then they decided to play two quarters of footy on Easter Monday.
Now they can sit here with the Western Bulldogs in the “probably going to be fine, but you never know!” club.
So far this year they’ve: Smashed Essendon, weren’t good enough to beat Sydney, should’ve lost to Collingwood, beaten Brisbane and lost to Hawthorn.
Another team to reassess in five weeks with a bit more data.
As for the Western Bulldogs, you can slaughter a Kangaroo on a holy day as much as you like, but it doesn’t move this needle.
They play Adelaide on Mars, Essendon, Port Adelaide, Collingwood, Gold Coast and West Coast in the next six weeks so they’ll probably be 8-3 heading into the second half of the year when they usually do their best work.
Tier 4 (Can’t trust them yet)
St Kilda
Fremantle
Carlton
Richmond
Are the Saints going to finish top four? Or are they going to fall away and miss the eight?
Is Fremantle going to finish top four? Or are they going to fall away and miss the eight?
Is Carlton going to finish top four? Or are they going to fall away and miss the eight?
If you simulated the 2022 season from this point onwards 100 times you’d probably get the widest variation of finishes from these three teams.
Richmond’s probably looking around wondering how they ended up with these guys. Losing to the Blues, Saints and Crows will do that. And now Melbourne awaits.
Tier 5 (Plucky underdogs)
Hawthorn
Collingwood
Adelaide
Gold Coast
If you went through everyone’s tips for the wooden spoon in the pre-season, these four teams would have been right up there with North Melbourne.
Hawthorn and Adelaide have managed to beat good teams, led by their young players, while Gold Coast is doing their usual pre-Easter thing.
Collingwood is this year’s Essendon in that they’re not a young team whatsoever, but we’ll keep calling them that because they have a new coach and a few kids coming through the system.
None of the four are playing finals this year and will probably lose steam as the season goes on, but they’re certainly giving their supporters something to gloat about at work the next day.
Tier 6 (Bit of panic)
GWS Giants
Essendon
Things are quietly and slowly escalating for GWS. They’re 1-4, they've barely fired a shot all season, they’ve publicly put off contract talks with their coach and now they’re about to be thrust onto the Friday night stage.
Toby Greene’s return couldn’t be any more timely. They’re desperately needing someone to steady the ship.
As for Essendon, they’re teetering on the edge of dropping down another tier. If the Bombers think things are bad right now, wait to see what it looks like if they lose on ANZAC Day.
Mick Malthouse tipped the Dons to win the flag in the pre-season. Given their complete lack of a forward line and their reliance on another strong year from Jayden Laverde and James Stewart as key defenders, it’s hard to see exactly what he was thinking with that one.
Tier 7 (Lots of panic)
Port Adelaide
0-5 coming off multiple deep finals and a coach already being talked about in the past tense?
This one doesn’t need a whole lot of explaining.
Thankfully for Port fans they get the Eagles at Adelaide Oval this weekend. A perfect opportunity do break their duck.
Tier 8 (Leave them alone)
West Coast
North Melbourne
No seriously, just leave them alone.
