US expansion is on the horizon for the entrepreneurs behind Australian technology company Checkbox.
Established in 2016, founders James Han, Paul Wenck and Evan Wong may still have a long way to go before reaching their ambition of achieving unicorn status, but will be delighted to secure US$4.5 million ($6.3 million) in pre-Series A funding.
Sydney-based Checkbox is a disruptive technology that allows users on its platform to build apps that automate high-volume, low-value expert tasks without the need to write code or seek significant IT support.
Through its no-code platform, Checkbox's AI technology allows legal, human resources and risk and compliance teams to better focus on higher value and strategic work.
Used by the likes of Allianz, Telstra, Air New Zealand, PwC and Coca-Cola, as well as government agencies in Australia, New Zealand, Asia and the US, Checkbox's intuitive drag-and-drop interface requires no technical knowledge.
"Since entering the market three years ago, we have helped organisations in Australia, New Zealand, Asia, and the US restore hundreds of thousands of hours in productivity," says co-founder and CEO Evan Wong.
"Our customers have used the Checkbox platform to create thousands of apps and automate hundreds of thousands of processes and documents, all without writing a single line of code."
The company secured funding from Sydney-based Tidal Ventures and Sequoia India’s Surge – a rapid scale-up investor for start-ups in India and Southeast Asia.
“The funding from Sequoia India’s Surge and Tidal enables us to accelerate our go-to-market strategy to amplify consistently high growth, retention and customer expansion we’ve experienced in the last few years, and scale our team to cater to the demand we’re seeing in markets abroad,” says Wong.
“We have a product that is globally applicable and segment agnostic in the high-growth no-code technology space, representing an extraordinarily vast market opportunity.”
In addition to opening a new office in the US, Checkbox will use the funding to expand its footprint in Australia and Asia. The capital will also fuel R&D and introduce a product-assisted growth strategy.
"Checkbox built its first repeatable use case in the legal sector but has already seen consistent organic expansion across multiple business divisions," says Tidal general partner Andrea Kowalski/.
“We see an enormous global market opportunity for tools that help expert knowledge workers build their own automation software without needing to code.
“We think Checkbox can be famous for enabling its users to quickly spin up a piece of software that automates some of their own workflows, striking that perfect balance between comprehensive technical capability and ease of use."
Christy Capili of Coca-Cola Europacific Partners highlights what Checkbox has meant for her company's efficiency.
"Coca-Cola Europacific Partners has been creating solutions using the innovative Checkbox platform for almost three years, primarily across our Legal, Procurement and People & Culture functions in Australia, the Pacific and Indonesia," Capili explains.
"During that time, over 500 employees have created over 5,000 unique documents across various solutions, with our NDA automated solution reducing completion times by approximately three days and saving at least 30 minutes per activity on over 170 documents."
