QUARANTINE bins across South Australia will be monitored in real time under a hi-tech plan to avoid future fruit fly infestations.
As the state battles outbreaks of the pest in Adelaide and the Riverland, South Australian tech company Opensensing this week secured State Government funding to develop a hi-tech system that would allow authorities to constantly monitor the levels of waste in fruit quarantine bins.
Opensensing received the grant after pitching its quarantine bin monitoring project through the Go2Gov program, which calls on local innovators to respond directly to public sector challenges.
The company’s general manager, Leo Gaggl, said the monitoring system would use a long-range wide area network that allowed data to be processed and communicated in real-time, without using SIM cards or telecommunication providers.
Mr Gaggl said his company was also working to develop bin-surround monitoring technology, which would be used to alert staff from the Primary Industries and Regional Development (PIRSA) of dangerous levels of fruit build-up around bins.
Primary Industries and Regions Minister David Basham said the government was doing “everything we can to protect SA’s horticulture industry”.
“This is why we are excited to partner with local start-ups to explore new technologies and innovation, which could improve biosecurity and better protect our state from the threat of fruit fly,” Mr Basham said.
Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni said Opensensing’s grant would accelerate the company’s idea, with a view to the government becoming a paying customer once completed.
PIRSA staff have been scrambling in recent weeks to get on top of several fruit fly outbreaks across Adelaide and the Riverland – threatening the state’s $1.3bn horticulture industry.
Cases recently spiked in Prospect and Stepney, with PIRSA staff going door-to-door to help residents strip their fruit trees and begin bait spraying.
Stone fruit was pulled from the shelves of the state’s major supermarkets this week following reports of fruit fly larvae.
PIRSA has created several fruit fly zones across Adelaide.
Residents in the “red” zone are not allowed to take most store-bought or homegrown fruit away from their properties, including in children’s school lunch boxes. Exempt fruit includes melons and pineapple.
CREDIT: GABRIEL POLYCHRONIS
Word count: 359
