THE WRITE STUFF FICTION, SELF-HELP, FANTASY, HISTORY, GRAPHIC NOVELS AND MORE — YOU NAME IT, WE’VE DEVOURED THEM ALL WITH RELISH THIS YEAR  The joy of curling up with a good read has been a mood booster for many Australians isolating at home.
And online book sales have skyrocketed following the closure of independent bookstores and local libraries hit by shelter-in-place orders.
Australian book market sales are already more than $835 million, up 5 per cent to the same time last year, according to Nielsen Bookscan Australia research.
Fiction book sales, including graphic novels, science fiction, fantasy and historical and mythological genres have risen significantly as people escape into the worlds of The Witcher, House of Earth and Blood, Dune and Demon Slayer.
Adult nonfiction is also up by $8.5 million with books Mind, Body & Spirit, The Resilience Project and The Body Keeps the Score the top favourites among buyers.
Australians have also been stocking up on cookbooks, with an additional $6 million in sales.
When schools closed during the pandemic, sales of preschool and picture books and textbooks and study guides had also increased.
Gemene Heffernan-Smith bought a handful of books for her seven-year-old daughter Mabel when schools shut down in March.
“Nothing beats reading from a physical book and I couldn’t resist ordering The Baby-Sitters Club books for Mabel, a series that I adored as a child,” she says. “Books are incredibly important to a child’s brain development. Not only is it a lovely way to spend time together, but it’s also exposing kids to new experiences and words along the way.” Recent research suggests reading a book reduces stress by 68 per cent, which is more than having a cup of tea or taking a walk.
Australia Reads chair Louise Sherwin-Stark says books have provided people with escape, comfort and companionship.
“It’s enabled us to switch off from the world for a while and reboot our imaginations,” she says.
“A bedtime story six days a week can put kids almost a year ahead when they start school, and having books in the home is a better indicator of a child’s success in later life than their socio-economic background.” Countless Australian authors were reeling from lost income resulting from cancelled book tours and workshops. Some turned to virtual events and homeschooling while others focused on their next bestseller.
“I’ve been writing like crazy for the past few months, trying to shape my next book into the book I want it to be,” says crime novelist and The Ruin author, Dervla McTiernan.
As restrictions begin to ease, she recommends visiting your local bookshop or library.
“Choose something you just know is going to be a rollicking read and then give yourself the gift of time to enjoy it,” McTiernan says. Dr Helena Popovic, best-selling author and leading authority on neuroplasticity and improving brain function, says reading creates new pathways in the brain and improves problem solving.
“Immersing ourselves in something completely different from our work activates regions of the brain we are not in the habit of using,” she says. “Also, finishing a book provides a sense of accomplishment and a healthy dopamine hit.” Families are being encouraged to get involved in Australian Reading Hour (hosted by Australia Reads) and read their favourite book for an hour this month. There will be three virtual events to celebrate reading’s benefits, with guest appearances from Andy Griffiths, Dervla McTiernan, Peter Helliar and more.
Visit australiareads.org.au
Literature literally benefits the brain ■ Functional MRI scans demonstrate that when we read about a character’s experiences, the same regions of our brain are activated as if we were in the situation ourselves. This enhances our capacity to empathise with others in real life.
■ Reading different styles of literature for different purposes (for example, relaxation versus critical analysis) activates different regions of the brain. Both types of reading are advantageous.
■ Reading for pleasure helps us unwind, reduce stress and deal with uncertainty. In addition to switching off unproductive rumination, reading fiction improves information processing and creativity.
■ Whether we are young or old, challenging ourselves with complex literature stimulates the growth of new brain cells. This sharpens our thinking and reduces the risk of Alzheimer’s disease in later life.
■ Reading can also be a way of accessing feelings we try to hide from ourselves. Throughout life there are times when we suppress negative emotions because we feel pressured to put on a brave front or stay upbeat for the people around us. Reading a moving story gives us permission to get in touch with buried emotions and cry if we need to. Dr Helena Popovic
CREDIT: PATRICK TADROS
Word count: 778
