THE challenges and opportunities facing South Australia at a critical historical crossroads were spelled out starkly and effectively yesterday at The Advertiser’s Building a Bigger, Better South Australia event.
The cost of three decades of uncompetitive economic growth, versus the rest of the country, has been $29bn, or almost 250,000 jobs.
However, if SA’s economy can grow at the national average for the next 30 years, we would generate another $57bn, grow the population by 460,000 and create almost 300,000 jobs.
Seizing this opportunity to build prosperity, increase wages and boost living standards should be a central issue of the campaign of the March 19 state election.
Challenged on this yesterday, both Premier Steven Marshall and Opposition Leader Peter Malinauskas repeated their respective mantra of luring hi-tech firms to Adelaide and growing skills through improved education.
But Mr Marshall courageously declared growing the population to two million was a reasonable target and entertained seeking to achieve that by 2030.
Mr Malinauskas, however, suggested this was unsustainable, adopting the risk-averse tactic of branding a two million target “a reckless number” and a “pretty dangerous proposition”.
But the Labor Leader was more adventurous about the prospect of developing a significant nuclear industry in SA to capitalise on the planned construction of nuclear-powered submarines at Osborne Naval Shipyard as part of the AUKUS agreement.
Mr Marshall rejected any consideration of going beyond the civil nuclear industry necessary for the sub­marines but Mr Malinauskas said there was “a lot of merit” in developing the sector.
As The Advertiser’s campaign has highlighted, now is the time to seize the gains of recent years and creatively target future job growth sectors, like space, defence and renewable energy. We live in a great state. Let’s make it even bigger and better. Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Gemma Jones, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 313
