South Australia has the potential to become a major exporter of clean energy based on its current trajectory, according to recently released modelling by the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO).
It's on the back of key renewable projects in the region, including the SA-NSW Interconnector and the Marshall Liberal Government's Hydrogen Action Plan, which could see Whyalla become a hydrogen hub.
The AEMO modelling reveals that the state is quickly progressing towards the government's aim of net-100 per cent renewable energy by 2030, with the interconnector pushing generation towards 84 per cent.
State Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said the state's increased clean energy output was also driven by the acceleration of electric vehicles and hydrogen by the Electric Vehicle and Hydrogen Action Plans.
"This positions South Australia as a major exporter of clean energy, with a massive increase in renewable energy projects and associated employment," he said.
"The market operator's projections show that the faster pace of change being driven by the Marshall Government's policies will also deliver thousands of jobs in new renewable energy projects."
Mr van Holst Pellekaan said the government had taken strides towards driving investment investment in hydrogen in SA since the election, including:
Becoming the first state in the Green Ammonia Consortia with Japanese partners Launching the hydrogen export modelling tool and prospectus Attracting Mitsubishi Heavy Industries to invest in H2U's project at Cultana Signing an MOU with Europe's largest port in Rotterdam to investigate exports Securing the Australian Hydrogen Centre to work on transitioning the domestic gas network to clean hydrogen Securing $37 million to support Port Bonython's long-term future as a hydrogen hub "This is the vision behind our net-100 per cent renewables target - to turn ourselves from an importer to an exporter. The SA-NSW Interconnector, which Labor opposed at the last election and has since back-flipped on, is central to our plans," Mr van Holst Pellekaan said.
"That's why we're accelerating the SA-NSW Interconnector with early works funding. We've got more than $3 billion in projects under way or committed in South Australia, and the SA-NSW Interconnector can take that to over $5 billion."
It comes as Giles MP Eddie Hughes pushes for a hydrogen hub to be located in Whyalla as part of Labor's election pitch, with Port Bonython serving as key infrastructure for exporting hydrogen locally.
CREDIT: Louis Mayfield
Word count: 392
