The former Ford and General Motors Holden sites will soon become part of a network of rooftop solar farms and grid-scale batteries as part of a joint venture between Australia's largest commercial and industrial real estate owner and a renewable energy company.
The chairman of the property giant Pelligra Group, Ross Pelligra, said his organisation would give CEP Energy access to 10 million square metres of rooftop space it owns around the country, allowing the group to sell discounted energy directly to tenants engaged in power-hungry manufacturing processes, and to sell excess power to the grid.
Mr Pelligra said the scheme would help the group keep industrial tenants, some of whom have gone offshore over recent years owing to concerns about the cost and reliability of energy in Australia.
Morris Iemma, the former NSW premier who is now CEP Energy chairman, said the larger sites owned by Pelligra were particularly well-suited to solar energy projects because they provide large amounts of space close to cities and industrial centres. They do not need expensive grid connections to be built, as is often the case with renewable developments in regional areas. Eventually, rooftop solar could be deployed at thousands of sites around the country, but the first grid-scale sites to be developed include the former Ford plant in Geelong, Victoria, the General Motors Holden plant in Elizabeth, South Australia, and another undisclosed site in the Hunter Valley, NSW.
Within five years CEP Energy aims to build capacity to generate 1500 megawatts of power, with 1000 megawatts of battery storage - enough to power about 600,000 homes.
By comparison, the ageing Liddell coal-fired power station in the Hunter Valley has a power capacity of 1680 MW, while South Australia's "big battery" has a capacity of 100 MW.
According to Mr Iemma, while Australia leads the world in domestic rooftop solar, it lags in larger industrial and commercial areas, in part because property management companies do not have the expertise or interest in using roof space for renewables.
Because Pelligra owns so much property around the country, that disconnect has been overcome in this deal, he said. CEP Energy also recently finalised a 30-year, $40 million rooftop power plant and onsite battery agreement with the Narellan Town Centre in Sydney's south-west, which is jointly owned by the Vitocco and Perich families.
Mr Pelligra said the deal made commercial sense for the group, but was also in line with the family company's outlook.
"One of the things the family has always believed in is that we need a safe, clean environment to continue as a company and as a community. Apart from doing the right thing for the planet, we are actually helping our tenants. They will not just get cheaper power but they will get reassurance of reliability on those days there is a shortage in the grid."
He said that as manufacturing was becoming increasingly automated, cheap, reliable power was becoming more important than large, cheap workforces. If industrial sites can provide that power, he believes Australia can attract more manufacturers to open or reopen plants.
Chris McLean, a PwC partner who has provided advice to CEP Energy, said the project had benefits over other renewable and battery projects due to its scale and location. "It's scale is comparable to, if not bigger than, traditional solar and wind farms, meaning its cost to produce and store renewable energy is relatively cheap. It is certainly cheaper than other rooftop businesses," he said. "The location of its assets means that it avoids the grid issues plaguing [traditional solar and wind farms/utility scale solar and wind farms] and it delivers energy efficiently - energy is being consumed where it has been generated."
Earlier this week, Origin Energy Limited announced it had taken further steps in its plan to build a battery at Eraring Power Station in NSW, with an overall capacity of up to 700 MW and a dispatch duration of four hours. Origin executive Greg Jarvis said: "A large-scale battery at Eraring will help us better support renewable energy and maintain reliable supply for customers, by having long-duration storage ready to dispatch into the grid at times when renewable sources are not available."
  CREDIT: Nick O'Malley | National environment and climate editor
Word count: 707
