ENVIRONMENT Minister David Speirs wants a change of portfolio, saying “crazy leftie activists” are wearing him down.
“There’s only so many times you can deal with the Greta Thunbergs of South Australia,” he told supporters at a private Liberal Party fundraising event on Monday night.
Mr Speirs (pictured) suggested supporters who thought he was destined for higher things to lobby for him, after he lost the ballot for deputy leader to Dan van Holst Pellekaan.
“I like this (environment) portfolio but if you want to have a quiet chat with the Premier about other opportunities then I am happy for you to do so,” he quipped.
He told supporters the problem with the portfolio was “the crazy leftie activists”. “They do wear you down after a while, so I think every few years you need to see a bit of a refresh because there’s only so many times you can deal with the Greta Thunbergs of South Australia,” he said.
In candid comments, Mr Speirs said climate change activism was full of “noise and crap” promoted by left-wing activists, but he strongly promoted the practical work the government had done to deal with the issue including the switch to renewable energy.
“There’s a lot of noise and crap around climate change because all the ills of the world are put in the climate change basket by the left of politics,” he said.
“There are a lot of myths and nonsense.” But he stressed there was firm science about the need to reduce emissions in order to reduce warming.
“Of course the worry is we get our house in order but major polluters like China and India and the US to an extent are real laggers on this.” “People say to me that’s a reason for not doing anything. I think it is quite the opposite, we can show leadership.” He also called parklands activists “elitists”, saying the green belt should attract people with sport and culture.
Labor’s environment spokeswoman Susan Close said the revelation of Mr Speirs’ “disparaging” comments about people who cared for the environment were “incredibly embarrassing” for him and showed he was not fit for the portfolio. Mr Speirs replied in parliament practical solutions were better than activists gluing themselves to roads.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 379
