ENVIRONMENT Minister David Speirs wants a change of portfolio, saying “crazy leftie activists” are wearing him down.
“There’s only so many times you can deal with the Greta Thunbergs of South Australia,” he told supporters at a private Liberal Party fundraising event on Monday night.
Mr Speirs (pictured) suggested supporters who thought he was destined for higher things should lobby for him, after he lost the ballot for deputy leader to Dan van Holst Pellekaan.
“I like this (environment) portfolio but if you want to have a quiet chat with the Premier about other opportunities then I am happy for you to do so,” he quipped.
He told supporters the problem with the portfolio was “the crazy leftie activists”.
“They do wear you down after a while, so I think every few years you need to see a bit of a refresh because there’s only so many times you can deal with the Greta Thunbergs of South Australia,” he said.
In candid comments, Mr Speirs said climate change activism was full of “noise and crap” promoted by left-wing activists, but he strongly promoted the practical work the government had done to deal with the issue, including the switch to renewable energy.
“There’s a lot of noise and crap around climate change because all the ills of the world are put in the climate change basket by the left of politics,” he said. “There are a lot of myths and nonsense.” He said South Australia was “leading the nation and indeed the world on climate change”.
But “activists are unfortunately too busy gluing themselves to city streets and vandalising public and private buildings to recognise real, practical action when it’s happening right in front of them”.
“We can always do better and should challenge ourselves to do so, but South Australians can and should be proud of our leadership in climate and conservation policy,” he said on Tuesday.
Labor’s environment spokeswoman Susan Close said the revelation of Mr Speirs’ “disparaging” comments about people who cared for the environment were “incredibly embarrassing” for him and showed he was not fit for the portfolio. A spokesman for Mr Speirs later said the Minister was “not actively seeking a new portfolio but has little time for activists”.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 377
