Who is Jo Dyer?
APART from Jo Dyer applying for GoFundMe donations, just what are her credentials to be elected in the seat of Boothby?
It seems her main claim to fame is her criticism of former attorney-general Christian Porter, which has been well published. But what does she stand for?
She obviously has leanings to the left, so her selection would favour Labor. But, apart from being outgoing Adelaide Writers’ Week director, which means she is big into fiction and people who produce it, what are her policies?
I guess we will find out when she publishes the list of her crowd-funding contributors.
A. BOWERS, Glenelg North Making vaccines HAS our Prime Minister’s love of all things American, and Australia’s east coast, cost us again?
South Australia’s BioCina’s pharmaceutical facility is a major player in mRNA vaccine research and development (“SA vax lab foiled by Moderna”, The Advertiser, Wednesday).
Vaccine manufacture could have been up and running much faster than Moderna’s greenfield proposal in Victoria.
But no, the federal government backed Moderna’s greenfield proposal. Premier Steven Marshall, maybe there is a lesson to learn here. Yes, Moderna’s proposal won the feds over and Victoria had its $50m war chest.
But, just maybe, it was the Victorian government’s commitment to innovation and research by having a dedicated innovation and medical research minister that won it the deal.
Forget the $660m city stadium. Invest in real life-changing opportunities. ROB ROYAL, Clare Larrikins surf on AS a life member of the West Beach Surf Life Saving Club, which I joined in 1957, I was somewhat amused and maybe a little concerned that Surf Life Saving Australia has taken exception to Matthew Benns’ humorous Nick and La Contessa holiday crime mystery Death Between The Flags.
And also, being an ex-boatie I can absolutely confirm that I, and my fellow boaties, were always intelligent enough to recognise that, when a brick was thrown at the bar, one of us was quick enough to catch it and heave it back to those rescue and resuscitation perpetrators (Opinion, The Advertiser, Monday).
A larrikin sense of humour still exists in surf life saving circles, which is recognised at two-monthly lunches I attend.
One with members of my own club and the other with members from most clubs in South Australia.
Many of these members are now older than 80 and will tell stories, sometimes much enhanced, that clearly demonstrate a larrikin sense of humour is alive and well.
And that it is all part of the camaraderie we share and need. Surf life saving in Australia is also alive and well, and may it’s larrikin sense of humour continue. And may us old boaties continue to catch those bricks at the bar.
NEIL HODGES, Craigburn Farm Sprawling ’burbs THE state government and planning experts suggested urban infill was the only way to stop urban sprawl. A drive either north, south or east would suggest the developers weren’t copied into that announcement, and the sprawl goes on.
Housing blocks are being created where some of the richest farming land, and market-gardening land, was once used to provide us with fresh food.
A drive along Prospect Rd would suggest urban infill is also proceeding at an increasing rate.
Three consecutive houses, containing a total of nine bedrooms, have been bought, to be replaced by an apartment complex containing 54 bedrooms.
Now that is urban infill at its most outstanding best.
M. SWAN, Prospect Assange support AT last, through Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce, the federal government is making positive moves on a long-overdue intervention regarding WikiLeaks founder Julian Assange’s possible extradition to the US.
GLEN CHENOWETH, Goolwa North School star WHAT a delightful front page photo of 18-year-old Lucas Scroop (“In a class of his own”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
Congratulations on your perfect SACE score young man. It is a mighty effort. It is apparent from Clare Peddie’s fine article on Lucas that, apart from his lofty academic achievements, he is also blessed with a good work ethic and a strong commitment to his part-time employer.
Impressive credentials indeed.
KEN MADIGAN, Port Pirie Climate leaders I AM most perplexed as to why Brian Measday considers the opinions of some obscure UK politician regarding Australia’s use of coal should carry any weight at all in our country (“Climate critic”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
We elect our own governments to run Australia, thanks Brian. The suggestion is especially laughable when we remember the UK government’s embarrassment on the world stage on the eve of the October 31 Glasgow climate conference. It was forced to fire up coal generators it had shut down because the government was desperately scrambling to keep the lights and heating on.
That humiliating backdown was made unavoidable due to the UK’s over-reliance on wind and solar electricity generation.
How deliciously ironic.
Australia cannot afford to make the same mistake of shutting down reliable and affordable baseload power generation to gamble on fickle renewable energy. ROGER HANCKEL, Glenelg
Word count: 830
