IT is a second homecoming for Peter Hoj as he becomes Adelaide University’s new vice-chancellor.
He returns to Adelaide – the city he fell in love with when he first moved here in 1994 – after eight years in Queensland and an earlier stint in Canberra.
“After I left, my children and their friends lived in our house for eight years and it’s being renovated now, because that’s what happens,” Professor Hoj said. “Keep-ing the house was the clearest indication I always wanted to come back. Our two children are here, they’re Adelaide University graduates, and we have two grandchildren now, so that was a key driver for coming home. I have always told people I wanted to come back to South Australia and make a contribution.” Prof Hoj, 63, starts his job at Adelaide University on Monday, having finished as vice-chancellor at Queensland University.
In SA, he first worked at Adelaide University in viticulture and oenology, before moving to Canberra as chief executive of the Australian Research Council.
He came back as vice-chancellor of UniSA from 2007-12, saying “it’s better here”. Timing is again fortuitous now, with the Adelaide University role vacant since Peter Rathjen resigned last year, shortly before the Independent Commissioner Against Corruption made damning findings against him.
Before being approached by headhunters in October, Prof Hoj was surveying other chief executive roles, including in renewable energy, using his track record in making Queensland the world’s first university to produce more electricity than it consumed.
He had a serious discussion with his wife, retired academic Mandy Thomas, “because these jobs are all-consuming”.
“She wants to write novels so she probably doesn’t want me hanging around at home,” he quipped.
He moves from an operation with $2.2bn revenue at Queensland to about $1bn at Adelaide.
His pay will be lower than the $1.2m a year at Queensland and, arguably, far below what he could command in the private sector.
When he left UniSA in 2012, he was very disappointed that merger talks with Adelaide failed. “If we don’t get structural change, we won’t be able to take the next leap as a university city,” he said at the time.
Now he is cautious but clear, saying “a vice-chancellor would never determine whether a merger would go ahead; that determination is a matter for the board”.
He noted a merger was on the political agenda, with the Labor Party promoting the concept and Adelaide chancellor Catherine Branson saying the governing council was open to discussions.
At a protest this week, about 60 Adelaide students and supporters were warned Prof Hoj was likely to pursue a merger, which the Student Representative Council opposed.
Prof Hoj said “freedom of speech is fundamental to higher education in Australia”.
“Universities should be places where all students can protest and share their views peacefully and respectfully,” he said.
Ms Branson said as well as academic leadership, Prof Hoj had a “strong social justice agenda”.
An Adelaide Uni spokesman said Prof Hoj led by example, having donated $100,000 at UniSA and $355,000 at Queensland to create scholarships for regional and Indigenous students.
He has initiated successful philanthropy campaigns, including getting businessman Andrew Liveris and wife Paula to give $13.5m to Queensland University.
He has faced pain and hardship, losing his first wife, Robyn van Heeswijck, to breast cancer in 2003, and experiencing poverty as a child growing up in Copenhagen when his father’s small business collapsed.
“My father told me the best defence against hardship was to get a good education,” he said.
He joins Adelaide at a time when morale has been hit by ICAC’s findings over Rathjen’s sexual misconduct.
Commenting on a Human Rights Commission survey, Prof Hoj said when it came to sexual harassment incidents, there was “only one acceptable number and that is zero”.
At Queensland, Prof Hoj was criticised for being too close to China, but also over the uni accepting millions of dollars from the private Ramsay Centre to run courses promoting Western Civilisation.
Prof Hoj said he had always been “utterly transparent” on international interaction. “When people say that I have acted in the interests of one particular nation, they are right, because that nation is Australia,” he said. “China remains an extremely important market for many Australian industry sectors, universities included, and we need to continue to engage with them but in a clear-eyed way which at all times adheres to our values.
“It is not, and has never been, the only international market we should be focused on.” While at UniSA, Prof Hoj travelled to India with a Federal Government delegation to try to repair damage to Australia caused by racist attacks on students in Victoria. He champions research that delivers commercial outcomes, a stance for which he was recognised when awarded a Companion of the Order of Australia.
As a biochemist, he worked at the Australian Wine Research Institute on a long-term study comparing corks with other stoppers.
The project was instrumental in proving quality was maintained with screw caps on wine bottles.
A keen cyclist, at UniSA he also forged partnerships with the Tour Down Under and rode for the “Governor’s 10” team that raised funds for cancer research. He confesses to being “somewhat slower” these days. “But I have already been up to Marble Hill and Mount Lofty a few times,” he said.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 894
