Religious fervour INCREDIBLY, state Liberal Party chiefs want to boot out members who share Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s Christian faith, while presumably hanging on to pagans, atheists and calathumpians (“Angry Libs to fight party ban”, Sunday Mail, June 13).
ScoMo’s Sunday worship style is enthusiastic, but doesn’t seem to have hurt his popularity. He has a loving wife and family, comes from the ’burbs, and believes in Liberal Party values.
One of those values is support of the fundamental freedoms of speech and belief – a value not apparent in the SA Liberal Party executive.
LINDSAY DENT Campbelltown
Hospital emergency THIS is regarding the article “Fully furnished”, where the Le Cornu site may become luxury penthouse suites (Sunday Mail, May 30).
Hearing on the radio and television practically every day how ambulances are ramping at our hospitals, I have a solution. Build an emergency-only hospital at the Le Cornu site.
The location is ideal and we need this facility, not penthouse suites. Surely the state government could see this opportunity.
MICHELLE D’IORIO Warradale
Jab roulette AS an older Australian I am concerned about the AstraZeneca vaccine. Side effects, in my opinion, are things like headaches or being nauseous for a day or two at the most. But not serious blood clots.
The federal government and our so-called health experts are playing Russian roulette with older citizens.
Pharmaceutical companies will make billions of dollars in profits from this joke of a vaccine. They are laughing all the way to the bank.
TOM LOFTUS Port Noarlunga
GP fully booked LUCKY Matthew Abraham that he was able to be vaccinated at his local GP (“Jab is painless, unlike life in Paranoid Plaza”, Sunday Mail, June 13).
I’ve been told to “call back in July” as my clinic doesn’t have enough vaccine or resources to do anything faster. And as for vaccination actually allowing you any more freedom, as you can still catch the virus and spread it around, those freedoms will be a long time coming. But more to the point, why is Matthew handing over his cash to German businesses rather than supporting locally owned supermarkets?
JUDY SZEKERES Hove
Living with Covid-19 WE have learnt to live with the flu each year. Now the same is needed for Covid-19.
All viruses mutate. It’s part of their life cycle. We have to accept this the same way we have different flu strains each year. Time to get on with living.
Dr SUE CORY Edge Hill, Queensland
Try twin polls MILLIONS of dollars would be saved and voters would not be inconvenienced if our state election date was rescheduled to coincide with the federal poll date. Sadly, I believe the advantages of separate polls, as seen by those in power, would outweigh the financial and convenience benefits of a dual election.
PETER SEARCY Mile End
Cheque’s in the mail ON June 3, I received from my health fund a bill for more than $660 to be paid by the June 6. The notice was issued on May 17. Not happy Pam!
PAM MOYLE Edwardstown
Centre of the country WHY are we called South Australia anyway? Tasmania and Victoria should merge and be called South Australia, we change to Central Australia and NSW and Queensland can be Eastern Australia.
GREG TRENOWDEN Andrew’s Farm
Fog of war I AM the wife of a Vietnam veteran who has experienced the returning soldier with mental and physical problems from his war experience. Finally, 46 years later, he has reached the point he no longer needs medication to cope with life.
Therefore I am compelled to speak strongly against political interference in so-called war crimes.
Many innocent people have died during wars. They should not be brought to the courts to be analysed with accusations made.
When you do not know if the person approaching you, not necessarily on the battleground but while on the streets, is friend or foe, and is likely carrying a grenade or similar, you are super cautious.
South Vietnamese were forced to carry out atrocities because the Vietcong were holding some of their family to ransom. So you never knew who to trust.
On the battlefield the same applies – kill or be killed. As time has progressed man has devised more devious ways to kill (IEDs when you do not know if a step you take will be your last). With war, no matter where, it will happen.
DOROTHY BOWLES Mount Barker
Aussie manufacturing ONE has to question why governments are keen to subsidise fossil-fuel-to-hydrogen projects involving export of a fuel that’s destined to be used by other nations to make steel from Australian iron ore (“Hydrogen dream a step closer”, Sunday Mail, June 13).
This competes with a far better opportunity to boost Australian manufacturing: Harnessing our world-class renewable energy resources to produce “green” steel here, cost-effectively, cleanly, and with local jobs. Another obvious priority is reducing our reliance on importation of transport fuel by electrifying transport.
We need to back the resources, technologies, policies and programs that best fit our need for a resilient future. With the global movement for climate action, there are plenty of signs that reliance on fossil fuels isn’t a sustainable vision for Australia.
JIM ALLEN Panorama
Clarification THE editorial in yesterday’s edition of The Advertiser incorrectly made reference to the unsuccessful prosecution of police detective Peter Dawe Martin in the context of failed prosecution cases linked to the Independent Commissioner Against Corruption.
The prosecution case against Detective Martin stemmed from an SA Police anti-corruption branch investigation, not an ICAC one. The Advertiser wishes to clarify the record and apologises to ICAC for the error.
Word count: 939
