TALK about fake news. I read a Liberal premier lost the South Australia election on Saturday, and this is a big warning to Scott Morrison.
Well, no. The premier who got smashed on Saturday was no real Liberal. But yes, that’s exactly why it’s a warning – too late! – to the Prime Minister. Before he became a one-term premier, Steven Marshall asked me for advice. I suggested (not entirely joking) he post a film clip of himself blowing up a wind generator, over the slogan: South Australia – open for business. It was the last time we would speak.
Marshall, alas, instead became as green as Labor. He didn’t challenge the great global warming scare, but pushed it, promising net-zero emissions by 2050, a 50 per cent jump in renewable energy in five years and $3000 bribes to buy electric cars.
The only things I saw blown up when he was premier were old coal-fired power stations.
True, Marshall did lift South Australia’s insane ban on genetically modified crops, but he imposed an equally insane ban on fracking for gas in his state’s southeast.
What could his poor state be earning now, with gas prices through the roof? That ban led to the absurd sight during the election campaign of a Liberal leader running a green scare against Labor, claiming it would overturn his ban on a safe mining technology.
When the Liberals are more irrationally green than Labor, it’s time to check your compass.
Marshall also failed to defend small business from the most absurd Covid hysteria and Big Government over-reaction. He once locked down Adelaide in the wild belief the virus could be transmitted on pizza boxes.
Nor did Marshall fight back in the culture wars that threaten conservatives most. In fact, his government even subsidised this month’s Writers’ Week, which gathered cultural leftists including Grace Tame, Kevin Rudd, Malcolm Turnbull, Jo Dyer and Richard Flanagan to deliver wall-to-wall abuse of the Liberals.
Marshall also backed the new apartheid of the left, promising to create the nation’s first Indigenous Voice to parliament – an Aboriginal-only body to advise the parliament that actually represents us all.
I could go on, but what exactly was so “Liberal” about Steven Marshall’s government? Why would any conservatives donate a dollar to save it? It’s much the same problem with the Morrison government. Why should conservatives vote for the Liberals, when they’re offering what sounds too much like a Labor agenda?
CREDIT: ANDREW BOLT
Word count: 413
