Port Bonython has been tipped as one of three potential sites for a hydrogen hub in South Australia, with the potential to export industrial-scale green hydrogen to Whyalla and Port Augusta.
The state government's recently-released hydrogen prospectus details three hydrogen hubs which could be located at Port Bonython, Port Adelaide and Cape Hardy/Port Spencer.
Just one hydrogen hub would double the current installed capacity of solar and wind farms in South Australia, and Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan says hydrogen is a 'game changer' in the fight against climate change.
"Our aim is to get the cost down so that it's a commercially attractive option for heavy transport, power generation and use by industry," he said.
"This prospectus reveals that South Australia can become a national and international exporter of clean power, while achieving the goal of net-100% renewable energy.
"The hub at Port Bonython in the Upper Spencer Gulf could export industrial-scale green hydrogen around Whyalla and Port Augusta."
The Hydrogen Export Modelling Tool and Prospectus was launched during the State Government's Clean Energy Month webinars held earlier this week.
"This new Prospectus and modelling tool cements our credentials as a world-class place to do business and leading renewable hydrogen producer and supplier to the world," Mr van Holst Pellekaan said.
Member for Giles Eddie Hughes said the next step for establishing a hydrogen hub in Whyalla would be securing an expression of interest from a company keen on pursuing a hub in the steel city.
"We have the only potential export facility in the state, and when you look at Whyalla's advantages compared to Cape Hardy or Port Spencer in the Southern Eyre Peninsula, there's no industrial infrastructure down there," he said.
"Whyalla is blessed with very strong national grid connection as well as rail, road and port infrastructure...a skilled workforce and plenty of land.
"We've got not just an export facility but a potential customer in the long term at the steelworks, so we tick a whole range of boxes that nowhere else in the state ticks."
Mr Hughes said bringing a hydrogen hub to Whyalla would create more local jobs and help diversify the steel city's economy.
CREDIT: Louis Mayfield
Word count: 365
