The hospital at the heart of Brisbane’s latest outbreak has been sent into lockdown in response to the virus skipping containment.
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says the next 48 hours are critical as she refuses to rule out extending snap lockdown. She has unveiled new rules that mean unvaccinated health workers won’t be able to treat Covid patients as the state records eight new cases of COVID-19. NSW, meanwhile, recorded no new cases as Premier Gladys Berejiklian warns the state to ‘brace’ for future infections. It comes as Scott Morrison named Marise Payne his “prime minister for women” in a wider-than-expected ministerial reshuffle.
AFP11.20pm:Berlin city halts AstraZeneca jabs for under-60s
The city of Berlin suspended vaccinations with the AstraZeneca jab for under-60s, amid reports of further cases of blood clots among people who had received it.
“We are provisionally stopping vaccinations with AstraZeneca for under-60s,” the German capital’s health minister, Dilek Kalayci, said on Tuesday , adding it was a “precautionary measure” while the city awaited an official recommendation from federal health authorities.
READ MORE:ALP’s tax-free ride for electric cars
Jess Malcolm11.15pm:Pfizer vaccine production boost
German pharmaceutical company BioNTech says it will be able to ramp up its production of the Pfizer vaccine this year to 2.5 billion doses by opening a new plant in Marburg, Germany.
This would be an upgrade of 25 per cent more than expected.
The company said the boost would help address increased demand, as countries race to contain new, more contagious coronavirus variants.
The recent launch of a new production site in Marburg is now one of the largest protein-based vaccine plants in the world.
The first batches from the plant will be delivered in the second half of next month, and over the first half of this year the company expects it to churn out 250 million doses.
BioNTech said improved efficiency and new cooperation agreements with outside partners had also helped lift its vaccine target, as had the regulatory nod allowing vaccinators to extract six instead of just five doses from a single BioNTech/Pfizer vial.
READ MORE:Aussie virus hunter blames bats
Jess Malcolm10.40pm:Lifesaving competition on alert list
A surf lifesaving competition attended by thousands of people is among the latest COVID-19 tracing alerts issued by Queensland Health.
Anyone who attended the 2021 Queensland Senior and Masters State Championships at Tugun Beach between 12.30pm and 2pm on Sunday, March 28, has been advised to get tested immediately and quarantine until a negative result is received.
More than 1500 people are estimated to have attended the event, which is among a swathe of venues added to the list by health authorities on Tuesday night, including supermarkets, cafes and restaurants, gyms and shopping centres.
NSW has also ordered people from 13 venues in Byron Bay, Ewingsdale and Suffolk Park into isolation until it could assess the transmission risk.
This included Byron Beach Hotel, and The Farm in Byron Bay, both popular tourist destinations.
READ MORE:Fears Covid horse has bolted after Byron hen’s party
Jess Malcolm10pm: Laming’s accuser goes to the cops
The woman who accused Liberal MP Andrew Laming of photographing her while she was bent over has made a formal complaint to Queensland police.
In a statement released on Tuesday afternoon, Queensland police said: “A formal complaint has now been received from a 29-year-old woman in regards to an alleged matter which occurred in 2019. This matter is being assessed by detectives from Cleveland.”
Crystal White alleges Dr Laming took the photo, showing her underwear exposed, while she was filling a fridge at a landscaping business in Brisbane in 2019.
FULL STORY
Jamie Walker9.30pm: Zero confidence in our hapless health authority
So there we have it. Nearly three million people are in lockdown across Greater Brisbane, Easter holidays are being cancelled from one end of the country to the other, and it’s down to what?
The failure of managers at Brisbane’s second-largest teaching hospital and their masters at Queensland Health to ensure that those who should have been at the very front of the vaccine queue — doctors and nurses treating COVID-19 patients — actually got the jab.
All sorts of excuses have been trotted out for the breach of containment at Princess Alexandra Hospital that happened not once, but twice — initially when an unvaccinated doctor who dealt with a contagious returned traveller tested positive on March 12, then when an unvaccinated nurse contracted the virus before venturing to Byron Bay for a hen’s party last weekend.
FULL STORY
Jess Malcolm8.50pm:Cruise pause extended
P&O Cruises Australia has extended its rolling pause in operations as the company works with governments and health authorities to establish a way to safely return to service.
The company said the current rolling pause will impact cruises scheduled from June 18 to July 30 this year.
P&O Cruises has also cancelled voyages to Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands for the remainder of the year due to uncertainty around international borders.
“We are sorry that some of our guests will be unavoidably inconvenienced by these changes to the existing schedule at a time when we remain optimistic about returning to service as society keeps opening up,” President of P&O Cruises Australia Sture Myrmell said on Tuesday.
Guests and travel agents will be contacted directly, the statement added.
“We are continuing our discussions with governments and health authorities to develop a framework for the staged resumption of cruising.
“As those discussions continue, today’s changes are necessary as we take a practical approach to the current environment and continue to look forward to better days ahead.”
READ MORE:Powerful union cuts ties with Labor
Charlie Peel, Mackenzie Scott8.30pm:Doom and gloom as Easter looms
Queensland businesses are already counting the cost of Brisbane’s snap three-day lockdown as tourists and diners cancel holiday and restaurant bookings and business owners brace for extended restrictions.
Travellers have already scratched flights into Brisbane and accommodation bookings have also recorded cancellations but it is the unknown affect the lockdown will have on the Easter long weekend and the school ­holidays that have business owners most worried.
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said the prospect of the lockdown going beyond 5pm on Thursday would depend on “what we see over the next 24 to 48 hours” but acknowledged it was likely that more cases of ­community-based transmission would be detected.
“In terms of the Greater Brisbane region, we just have to take this day by day,” she said.
“The big question will be whether or not we see unlinked community transmission.”
Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young has not ruled out extending the lockdown beyond Greater Brisbane. Gladstone, the Gold Coast and Hervey Bay regions are all on high alert after it was revealed some of the people infected with the virus had been there before testing positive.
FULL STORY
Tom Kington 7.55pm:Young people stoke the third wave in Italy
Young patients with the UK COVID-19 variant are driving Italy’s third wave, a senior doctor has claimed as intensive care wards approach record occupancy.
“They are the new element in this third wave,” said Massimo Andreoni, scientific director of the Italian society of infectious and tropical diseases.
“They may have got infected in the first and second waves but now, for some reason, they are.”
Italy has 3700 Covid sufferers in intensive care, close to the peak of 4063 reached at the height of Italy’s first wave a year ago, and enough to take up 40 per cent of beds, well above the safety limit of 30 per cent set by the government. In Rome there are more intensive care COVID-19 patients — 370 — than at any time last year.
FULL STORY
Jill Rowbotham 7.35pm:Aussie virus hunter points the finger at bats
The virus that led to the explosion of COVID-19 in Wuhan, China, last year most likely originated in bats, according to the Australian member of the World Health ­Organisation team that investigated the outbreak.
“The most likely scenario is that this has come across from bats into some sort of intermediate animal, into humans,” medical virologist and infectious diseases expert Dominic Dwyer said of the joint WHO-convened Global Study of Origins of SARS-CoV-2: China Part study conducted in January and February.
“The issue of when exactly that happened, of course, is unknown.”
The report by 17 Chinese and 17 experts from other countries was inconclusive in identifying a clear source of the outbreak that led to a global pandemic but talked in terms of possibility and likelihood.
The team explored four possible pathways and found the ­“intermediate host” theory to be “likely to very likely”, direct transmission from an originating animal or animals to humans (zoonotic spillover) as “possible to likely” and transmission through contaminated food, refrigerated or frozen was “possible”.
By contrast, a “laboratory incident” was considered to be ­“extremely unlikely”.
While lab accidents happened, they were rare, the report said, and there was “no record of viruses closely ­related to SARS-CoV-2 in any laboratory before December 2019, or genomes that in combination could provide a SARS-CoV-2 ­genome”.
FULL STORY
Mackenzie Scott, Jess Malcolm7.02pm:Brisbane hospital locks down amid Covid outbreak
The hospital at the heart of Brisbane’s latest outbreak has been sent into lockdown in response to the virus skipping containment.
The Princess Alexandra Hospital in the city’s south was locked down on Tuesday afternoon as a “precautionary measure”, according to a statement from Queensland Health.
The hospital - which is one of the state’s largest - is only taking patients in emergency situations in a bid to slow the spread of the growing outbreak.
Staff were alerted on Tuesday afternoon that if they have worked at the PA Hospital Campus from noon, then they should not work in another Metro South Health facility until the lockdown is removed.
They were also ordered to get tested immediately.
“If you have been in ward 5D since 18 March 2021, then you should be tested and receive a negative result before working in another facility,” the directive said.
The Princess Alexandra Hospital is the source of two cases of COVID-19 which forced the nation’s third largest city into a three-day snap lockdown.
Jess Malcolm 7.00pm:Laming accuser has made formal complaint to police
Queensland Police have confirmed a woman has made a formal complaint about Liberal MP Andrew Laming allegedly photographing her while she bent over at work.
In a statement released on Tuesday afternoon, Queensland Police confirmed the matter has progressed into the initial stages of allegations.
Three Liberal MPs are now on medical leave after Andrew Laming's decision to resign from politics following his admission to online harassment of women. He was forced to apologise for taking a photo of a women as she was bending over and for trolling two female constituents online. “The common thread of the last week has been not demonstrating anything close to understanding how my actions affect others. I intend to own those mistakes,” he said. The Queensland MP will not contest the next election but will remain in the Coalition party room. Prime Minister Scott Morrison will call a major cabinet reshuffle today in a bid to quell the culture crisis engulfing his government. Mr Morrison is expected to shift Defence Minister Linda Reynolds and Attorney General Christian Porter into different portfolios and Peter Dutton is tipped to be promoted into the Defence role.
“A formal complaint has now been received from a 29-year-old woman in regards to an alleged matter which occurred in 2019.
“This matter is being assessed by detectives from Cleveland.”
Crystal White alleges Dr Laming took the photo while she was filling a fridge at a landscaping business in Brisbane in 2019.
Dr Laming has apologised for the photograph but has denied that it was taken in a sexual nature.
Jess Malcolm6.14pm: NT shuts border to Byron Bay amid Covid cluster
The Northern Territory has declared the Byron Shire Council as a hotspot on Tuesday evening.
Anyone returning from the area since March 27 is required to take a COVID-19 test within 72 hours and self isolate until a negative test is received.
New South Wales Premier Gladys Berejiklian says the state should brace for new infections linked to the Brisbane cluster. Health alerts have been issued for popular holiday destination Byron Bay as Easter getaway plans are thrown into chaos.
Health authorities are scrambling to trace two new cases who attended a bachelorette party in the popular tourist destination, as the virus threatens to spread further into NSW.
Byron Bay is the latest addition of declared hotspots of Brisbane, Ipswich, Logan, Moreton Bay, Redland and Toowoomba.
Olivia Caisley 6.00pm:ETU free trade agreement amendment fails
The Electrical Trades Union has failed to get its free trade agreement amendment across the line with Labor moving to support Madeleine King’s proposal to make the striking of trade deals more “transparent, consultative and subject to the processes of the parliament.”
Under the new policy Labor will need to undertake formal consultation with affected unions about the impact of any proposed trade agreement and will commit to campaigning against any trade agreements that do not comply.
The amendment will also require the Commonwealth to conduct rigorous independent economic analysis and debate the merits of the agreement in the Parliament.
The amendment passed with 345 votes for and 30 against.
Max Maddison 5.55pm:Powerful union cuts ties with Labor
One of the most powerful unions and biggest political donors in NSW has disaffiliated itself from the state Labor Party, saying it doesn’t believe the party represents “value for money”.
Two weeks after the Health Services Union and Australian Workers Union released polling which showed Labor’s primary vote at 23.9 per cent, lower than the disastrous 2011 election, the Health Services Union announced it would withdraw funding and part ways with the party.
“The Health Services Union has today resolved to disaffiliate from NSW Labor. A meeting of the Union Council determined it was dismayed with NSW Labor’s recent performance and saw little prospect of improvement,” a statement said.
Read the full story here.
Rosie Lewis5.25pm:Stoker rules out run for Andrew Laming’s seat
Queensland Liberal senator Amanda Stoker has ruled out running for Andrew Laming’s lower house seat of Bowman, after the MP announced he would quit politics at the next election following revelations he took an inappropriate photo of a woman and trolled female constituents online.
“Despite media speculation to the contrary, I do not seek preselection for the seat of Bowman,” Senator Stoker said. “I confirm that I am seeking pre-selection to represent the Liberal National Party as a senator for Queensland at the next federal election. My application is currently with the LNP secretariat and if approved I will seek endorsement for a Liberal position on the LNP Senate ticket.”
READ MORE: PM won't banish Laming to crossbench
Olivia Caisley5.11pm:ETU slams Labor ‘hypocrisy’ on free trade agreements
The Electrical Trade Union’s Queensland state secretary, Peter Ong, has called out hypocrisy among Labor’s ranks and said there needs to be greater transparency when it comes to the party’s position on free trade agreements.
Mr Ong said Labor should not publicly speak out against free trade agreements but then support them in private.
“In 2018, this ALP conference endorsed changing their platform to require the PLP to oppose substandard trade agreements, whether they are in government or in opposition. Now, they want us to reverse that decision when we currently still have the same outcomes being delivered with free trade agreements.”
Mr Ong said the Morrison government continued to sign inadequate agreements, which “sold off Australian sovereignty” by displacing local workers through the outsource of labour to countries that carry-out human rights abuses.
“Why would the ALP please speak publicly against the content of free trade deals, only to then support them by voting for the enabling legislation?” he said.
There is a vote underway to decide whether Mr Ong’s amendments, which would force Labor to automatically oppose any legislation that contradicts certain principles, will become party policy.
James Hall5.00pm:FitStop, Brisbane cafes, pubs among latest venue alerts
Health authorities are urging visitors of 11 venues to go into quarantine for 14 days, regardless of a negative result, as Queensland grapples with an escalating COVID-19 outbreak.
The state reported eight new locally acquired cases on Tuesday after Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk plunged Brisbane into a snap three-day lockdown from Monday at 5pm.
But the directive is more severe for anyone who visited any of the close contact exposure sites listed on Queensland Health’s website, who are being urged to quarantine immediately for 14 days from the time they attended those venues even if they receive a negative COVID-19 test.
For the complete list of venue alerts, click here.
CLOSE CONTACT SITES
Saturday March 20: Shinobi Ramen Noodle shop, Westfield Carindale, 12pm – 2.16pm
Saturday March 20: Black Hops Brewery, East Brisbane, 12pm – 2pm
Sunday March 21: Mamma’s Italian Restaurant, Redcliffe 12.30pm – 3.10pm
Saturday March 21: Green Beacon brewing Co. Teneriffe 2pm – 3.12pm
Saturday March 20: Eatons Hill Hotel, Eatons Hill 3.44pm – 5.30pm
Monday March 22: PCYC Pine Rivers, Bray Park 7.16am – 8.10am
Friday March 26: FitStop Gym, Morningside 6.50am – 8am
Friday March 26: Spinnaker Park Café, Callemondah 10.22am – 11.23am
Friday March 26: Niche & Co Café, Tugun 1.40pm – 1.55pm
Friday March 26: Chempro Chemist (staff only), Tugun 1.55pm – 2.10pm
Friday March 26: Auckland House, Gladstone Central 7.23pm – 9.30pm and Saturday March 27 between 7.33am and 8.20am
READ the full story here.
Adeshola Ore4.47pm:Commonwealth concern over stockpiling vaccine doses
Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly says the commonwealth is reserving second doses of COVID vaccines, after Queensland’s health authorities signalled they were stockpiling some of their vaccine supplies.
Earlier today, Queensland Health Minister Yvette D’Ath said the state had held back some of its COVID vaccines for second doses, despite the commonwealth reserving these doses.
“From the beginning, we have been very clear from the commonwealth how much vaccine is coming and how much is being distributed to the places where the vaccine can be given, including each state and territory,” Professor Kelly said.
“There is no need for a state or territory to be keeping any vaccine aside for that purpose. That is the commonwealth’s responsibility.”
Adeshola Ore4.35pm:Commonwealth declares Greater Brisbane hot spot, offers help
Chief Medical Officer Paul Kelly says the commonwealth has declared Brisbane a COVID hotspot and has offered the Queensland government assistance.
Eight new cases of COVID-19 were detected in the community as Brisbane entered its first day of lockdown. Six of the cases were close contacts of already confirmed cases and two are under investigation. The health authorities have identified two separate clusters, both related to the UK variant or the virus.
“We will be watching very carefully what happens in Brisbane over the coming days and indeed in northern NSW where we know that some of those cases were last weekend while infectious,” Professor Kelly said.
READ MORE: ‘Hens entertainer’ linked to Qld outbreak
Olivia Caisley4.20pm:Skills, training keys to COVID economic recovery: Gallagher
Labor Senator Katy Gallagher has told the party’s national conference that Australia needs to invest in skills and training and put fairness and security at the centre of the nation’s COVID-19 economic recovery
She accuses the Morrison government of wasting billions of dollars of taxpayer money on dodgy deals, pork barreling and “jobs for mates.”
“It has to be about the country’s long term future. It has to be about getting the big decisions right for the Australian people, protecting jobs, providing business with the confidence to invest in employ and keeping unemployment and underemployment as low as possible,” she says.
Senator Gallagher says Labor will manage the nation’s finances prudently and responsibly in a way that still allows them to invest in the Australian people.
“This is a challenge we’re here for and we are ready for,” she says. “Together we can make a better future for our children, and this is what Labor governments do when no one is held back, and no one is left behind.”
READ MORE:Rivals unite as issues hit virtual event
Patrick Commins4.00pm:Post-pandemic plan ‘lacks ambition’, ALP conference told
Opposition Treasury spokesman Jim Chalmers has said “snapping back” to the “economic weakness” of pre-COVID Australia wasn’t good enough, as he used an address to the ALP National Conference to accuse the Morrison government of a lack of ambition in its post-pandemic reform program.
Speaking to delegates from lockdown in his kitchen in Brisbane, Mr Chalmers said Australians were owed “an economy, a society and a country stronger after COVID than it was before”.
“The best they hope for is a return to the defining features of the economy they mismanaged well before we’d heard of coronavirus: record low wages growth fuelling inequality; insecure work and high underemployment; business investment at historic lows; communities and regions left behind; and a budget riddled with rorts,” he said.
Mr Chalmers said Labor’s policy platform would be more ambitious when it came to wages and business investment.
He listed a number of party priorities, including “secure and better paid jobs with fair conditions” and “growing and leveraging our retirement savings, not raiding and thieving workers’ super”.
“It means cleaner and cheaper energy to grow jobs in traditional and emerging sectors, not the policy chaos that is already costing thousands of jobs. It means teaching and training our people to keep up with technological change and turning Australian ideas into Australian jobs. And it means genuine support for SMEs and our strategic sectors – not overlooking primary industries, neglecting the care economy and destroying our manufacturing capacity”.
Earlier this morning, leader Anthony Albanese announced a $15bn national reconstruction fund, which Mr Chalmers said was “all about a recovery made in Australia”.
READ MORE:Livelihoods crumble as JobKeeper ends
Ellen Ransley3.55pm:Fears lockdown could extend across Easter
Less than two weeks after Queensland’s top doctor promised there would be no more citywide lockdowns, health authorities have backflipped – instating a three-day lockdown and hinting it could be extended.
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk announced on Monday that Greater Brisbane, encompassing the Brisbane, Logan, Ipswich, Redlands and Moreton Bay council areas would be locked down from 5pm for three days.
Today, Ms Palaszczuk would not rule out the possibility the lockdown could be extended, potentially through the Easter long weekend.
“In terms of the Greater Brisbane region, we just have to take this day-by-day,” she said.
Residents of Greater Brisbane are facing the possibility of spending their second Easter in a row in lockdown, as two “concerning” clusters continue to grow.
Eight new COVID-19 cases were detected in the community as of Tuesday, and health authorities now believe the 15 locally acquired cases of recent weeks are related to two “distinct” clusters, both of which have originated from the Princess Alexandra Hospital.
When pressed on whether the lockdown might be extended until Tuesday to “give people more certainty”, the Premier said it all “depends on what we see over the next 24-48 hours.”
“The big question will be whether or not we see unlinked community transmission.”
On March 19, chief health officer Jeannette Young said in the event of any future clusters, only the state’s most vulnerable people would be locked down.
When a Princess Alexandra Hospital doctor tested positive to COVID-19 in early March after treating an overseas acquired case, only the city’s aged care homes, hospitals and disability accommodation providers were locked down for a number of days.
At the time, she said now that check-in apps were being used widely, contact tracers could work at a fast enough pace to prevent any other citywide lockdowns like the city saw in early January.
“There’s no need to go into lockdown when we’ve got responses like this,” she said on March 19.
But, just ten days later, she stood alongside Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk on Monday as she announced the snap three-day lockdown, and has refused to rule out extending it.
READ the full story here.
\\
Greg Brown 3.25pm:Harder line on China as Albo avoids foreign policy debate
Anthony Albanese has avoided a contentious debate on foreign policy at the ALP national conference, with deals finalised between the factions ahead of the event which sees Labor take a harder line on China.
The deal has ensured Labor remains committed to recognising Palestine as a state but has also criticised China over its treatment of Uyghurs and Tibetans, while criticising China over its policies in Hong Kong and the South China Sea.
“There is a growing number of reports of the mass arbitrary detention of China’s minority Uighur population and other violations of human rights including forced labour, forced sterilisation, sexual assault and restriction of movement in Xinjiang and across China. These are not the actions of a responsible global power,” the resolution says.
“A future Labor Government will ensure that Australia stands up for human rights in China and work with the international community to hold China to account for its international commitments.”
The amendments and resolutions, which were first foreshadowed by The Australian last Monday, also raises concern about China’s interference in Hong Kong and calls for “the maintenance of the status quo concerning Taiwan and China”.
“Labor supports long-standing Australian policy regarding the preservation of civil and human rights in Hong Kong under the negotiated treaty between China and Britain,” a resolution says.
“It calls on the authorities in Hong Kong to reverse the new national security law to release all prisoners goaled under this law and to allow democratic elections for the Hong Kong legislature.
“Labor notes with concern China’s increasing interference in the affairs of Hong Kong in contravention of the Treaty.
“In particular, Labor notes that China has disqualified elected legislators in Hong Kong, engaged in behaviour to harass and curtail voices critical of China or advocating Hong Kong independence, and introduced the Hong Kong National Security Legislation which it has used to arrest and detain protesters and stifle protest and free speech.”
There was also a resolution that states the South China Sea “belongs to no one country”.
“We call for the South China Sea to be a zone of peace, with complete freedom of navigation for all countries. We call on all countries in the region to refrain from unilateral acts, militarization, and other policies,” the resolution says.
A resolution also criticses China for the lack of ability for its workers to join trade unions.
An amendment says Labor will week to “strengthen economic, security, social, cultural and educational ties with countries including Japan, Korea, India and Indonesia based on mutual respect and a sense of genuine partnership in our own Indo-Pacific region”.
L
Adeshola Ore3.15pm:Recognising Palestine a ‘principled’ approach
Labor’s foreign affairs spokeswoman Penny Wong says the conference’s resolution to support formally recognising Palestine as a state reflects a “principled” approach to statehood.
The party’s policy platform will be amended to call on the next Labor government to recognise Palestine as a state, a shift that brings it in line with Labor’s policies ahead of the 2019 federal election.
“It reflects our belief that Israelis and Palestinians deserve to prosper in peace, behind secure and recognised borders,” Senator Wong told the ALP conference.
“It reflects the leader’s long-standing position that any lasting resolution to the conflict cannot be at the expense of either Palestinians or Israelis.”
Greg Brown3.10pm:Former leadership rivals unite at virtual event
Bill Shorten hails Anthony Albanese as the ‘next prime minister’, as Labor’s first online national conference is plagued by tech issues. Read more here
Kieran Gair3.05pm:Labor’s paid parental leave scheme ‘aspirational’
Tanya Plibersek has championed Labor’s proposed six-month paid parental leave scheme as “aspirational” at the party’s national conference in western Sydney.
“This is a policy that has actually been in our national platform as an aspiration for some time,” Ms Plibersek said from the Revesby Workers Club, which is the headquarters for the conference.
Asked whether the policy would favour wealthier women, Ms Plibersek said Labor would “prioritise the people who need the most help.”
The primary carer of a newborn can currently receive up to 18 weeks of taxpayer-funded parental leave, which is paid at the national minimum wage of $150.78 per day.
Labor wants to overhaul the current scheme by paying new parents 26 weeks of leave at their normal salary, including superannuation.
Opposition indigenous Australians spokeswoman Linda Burney said the ambitious policy would be “fully costed” and “fully articulated” before the next federal election.
“we have 26 (weeks) paid parental leave with superannuation and on full pay,” Ms Burney said. “What Labor takes into the next election would be fully costed and fully articulated before that election.”
Ms Burney said she wasn’t “interested in comparing and contrasting” Labor’s policy to former prime minister Tony Abbott’s “signature” $5.5b paid parental leave scheme that was eventually axed in 2015 amid concerns about the cost.
“It’s something we’ve looked at very closely, we’ve looked at other suggestions,” Ms Burney said. “What I’m interested in, is what we are putting in front of the party, and that it’s fully paid.”
The party’s draft policy platform would be co-funded by government and employer contributions.
Paid parental leave was introduced in 2011 under Labor prime minister Julia Gillard and that scheme has since remained in place.
Adeshola Ore2.55pm:Wong: Australia has to regain leadership in region
Labor’s senate leader Penny Wong has told the party’s national conference that Australia must help shape the future of a prosperous and stable Indo-Pacific region.
Senator Wong told the party’s special platform conference that Labor governments in the past had secured Australia’s international interests and safety.
“We have to return to our leadership role. Being the partner of choice in our region and helping our neighbours,” she said.
“We have to act to shape the world and the region we want. One that not only respects sovereignty, but is stable and prosperous.”
She said Scott Morrison “only governed for himself” and put his personal interests ahead of national interest.
Greg Brown2.50pm:ALP plans to protect public service jobs
An Albanese government will “unwind the privatisation and rebuild public service capacity” under a resolution passed by the ALP national conference.
The Labor Party conference has begun in a clear move to signal party unity around Anthony Albanese as former leader Bill Shorten introduced his successor recognising the “pain” of the 2019 election failure. The Labor Party National Conference was planned to go ahead in 2020, but was cancelled due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The two-day conference will now go ahead virtually as 400 delegates battle over the platform the party will take to the next election. Former leader Bill Shorten introduced his successor in a planned move to indicate the party’s full support for its current leader Mr Albanese. Mr Shorten detailed how winning government from opposition is “hard” pointing to how only three opposition Labor leaders have won elections since World War Two. “All of us still live with the pain of 2019,” he said.
The resolution, pushed by Labor MP Julian Hill, hits out at the Morrison government’s “’privatisation by stealth’ of the Commonwealth public service, through cutting more than 12,000 jobs”.
“The Morrison government’s push to privatise is also apparent in its obsession with attacking and undermining key national institutions such as the ABC, CSIRO and the ANAO,” the resolution says.
“Conference recognises that a future Labor government will need to undo the damage wrought by the Morrison government’s policies, and indeed, to deliver on the promise of the Labor platform, Labor will need to unwind the privatisation and rebuild public service capacity and capability.”
James Hall2.40pm:‘Male entertainer’ linked to Qld Covid cluster
A tradie by day and ‘male entertainer’ by night who worked at a Byron Bay hens party has plunged the Gold Coast into high alert. Read more here
Adeshola Ore2.25pm:Reynolds, Porter take part in swearing-in
Embattled ministers Linda Reynolds and Christian Porter, who have been dumped from their senior ministerial roles, both appeared on video during the virtual ceremony.
Mr Porter, who is due to return from medical leave on Wednesday, made his first virtual public appearance since he denied a historic rape allegation against him. Mr Porter was sworn in as the Industry, Science and Technology Minister.
Senator Reynolds, who is also on medical leave, was sworn in to the government services and NDIS portfolio.
Greg Brown2.15pm:Labor looks to bolster sexual violence crackdown
Labor women are speaking on a resolution that aims to strengthen the party’s commitment to cracking down on sexual violence.
Four women, including senators Jenny McAllister and Marielle Smith, spoke in favour of the resolution.
The resolution, formed with the input of female MPs, party members and union figures, commits an Albanese government to creating a national plan to prevent violence against women, with sexual violence being the central focus.
An Albanese government would also work with state and territory governments to fund “age-appropriate programs educating people about respectful relationships and consent”.
The next Labor government will lead a “law reform process to consider harmonisation of criminal laws governing consent”.
“Violence against women must end so that women and their children can be safe at work, in their homes, on the street, in their communities, when socialising — everywhere,” the resolution says.
Adeshola Ore2.10pm:Prime Minister swears-in new ministry
Scott Morrison is swearing in the new appointments to his cabinet in a virtual ceremony in Canberra.
On Monday, Mr Morrison unveiled a ministerial reshuffle which increased female representation in the cabinet. The Prime Minister also announced Women’s Minister Marise Payne and three senior female ministers would lead a cabinet taskforce focused on improving the economic, health and safety conditions for women.
Mr Morrison and Governor-General David Hurley are participating in the swearing-in ceremony in Canberra.
Richard Ferguson2.05pm:Labor vows renewed push for gender equality
Opposition social services spokeswoman Linda Burney says the past month’s revelation of mishandled rape allegations and boorish behaviour in Parliament will drive Labor to improve life for Australian women.
Ms Burney told the ALP special platform conference that Labor “renewed” its commitment to gender equality and will back domestic violence leave and action on the gender pay gap.
“We renew our commitment to gender equality. Recent events have shown the importance of Labour’s long held commitment to affirmative action, ensuring our representatives more accurately reflect the people we serve,” she said in Revesby.
“From our commitment to tackling the gender pay gap ... to ending violence against women, and national scourge as a national disgrace, women have the right to be safe: safe from violence, safe from sexual harassment and assault, safe from discrimination.
“We will legislate a right to 10 days paid family and domestic violence leave.”
Richard Ferguson1.55pm:Union loses bid to shut out private health system
Opposition health spokesman Mark Butler has scuttled the Health Workers Union’s attempts to commit Labor to offering no assistance to the private health system.
Mr Butler’s amendment to the HWU’s anti-privatisation motion was supported by more than 300 ALP delegates to 22 against.
The opposition health spokesman earlier said at the conference that while he supported some principles of the HWU’s wider motion against privatisation, he could not support moves to completely cut off the private health sector considering many Australians rely on it.
The HWU has reserved the right to take the ALP to court and invalidate any motion at conference.
Nicholas Jensen1.45pm:SA to continue plans on easing restrictions
The South Australian government is set to enact a tentative easing of its COVID-19 restrictions following a decision to maintain the transition timeframe established earlier this year.
Despite the Queensland outbreak, indoor venue limits will ease, permitting three people per four square metres.
As of midnight, cafes, restaurants and pubs will be able to operate at approximately 75 per cent capacity.
Churches and cinemas will be permitted to hold 100 per cent capacity, but patrons must wear face masks.
SA Acting Police Commissioner Linda Williams said authorities would continue to monitor the situation in Queensland and make updates to where appropriate.
“There was obviously a healthy level of discussion regarding what’s occurring in Queensland, but there was no tension and the public activities direction will come into effect as I said as of one minute past midnight.”
Chris Kenny1.30pm:Panicked premiers overseeing states of chaos
The overreaction of states and their premiers outside of NSW is appalling and callous. South Australia, Western Australia, Victoria, and now Queensland twice, have imposed lockdowns, restrictions and border closures that epidemiologists point out have delivered no additional benefit over normal contact tracing and isolation measures. Read more here
David Penberthy1.15pm:Premier heckled at China consulate opening
Hundreds of protesters descended on the normally peaceful Adelaide suburb of Joslin to shout down Premier Steven Marshall as he formally opened China’s controversial South Australian consulate on Tuesday. Read more here
John Ferguson1pm:ALP warhorse faces move to axe him
Veteran Labor powerbroker Kim Carr is facing the fight of his nearly 30-year career amid moves to dump him from the federal parliament. Read more here
Richard Ferguson12.45pm:Health union warns it may oppose Labor proposals
Health Workers Union secretary Diana Asmar has warned Labor’s national conference she is reserving her right to invalidate any motion put up by ALP members, a day after her union threatened the entire event with an injunction.
Ms Asmar also tried to move a motion calling on Labor to oppose any privatisation of health care and aged care, but opposition health spokesman Mark Butler opposed her.
The Australian revealed on Monday that lawyers representing the HWU had written to ALP national secretary Paul Erickson, threatening an injunction against the conference unless the union’s voting numbers are bolstered.
“2020 was the year from hell for our members. They are the heroes on the front line, and they deserve to be heard. Also from the outset I reserve my legal right to challenge ourselves, if my motion is not accepted,” she said.
“I have reached out to the National Executive this morning, outlining my concerns, indicating that this is not a proper, constitutional national conference. And that we reserve our right to seek that any motion at this conference be invalidated.”
The union claims it has been unjustly treated in its representation for the event.
The Australian understands that the ALP national executive rejected the HWU’s claims.
Mr Butler said he supported some of the principles of Ms Asmar’s motion on privatisation but he had some serious concerns.
“The sentence that says private health providers will not be supported by the Australian government. The health system depends so clearly on private general practitioners, in part private hospitals, and private health insurance. I simply can’t support a statement like that.”
Richard Ferguson12.31pm:We can’t go back to pre-pandemic economy: Wong
Labor senate leader Penny Wong has told the ALP special platform conference Australia cannot go back to the pre-pandemic economy.
Senator Wong said in Revesby that an Albanese Labor government would tackle insecure work and low wage growth.
“The pandemic made us see more clearly than ever the weaknesses in our society and in our economy. Where Australia’s most valuable resource – our people – were being held back and left behind, without thought to the cost,” she said on Tuesday.
“As we emerge from the pandemic, we can’t go back to that. We can’t go back to the real Scott Morrison.
“We can’t go back to insecure work, disrespect for essential workers, flatlining wages, unaffordable childcare and education, neglectful aged care. We can’t go back to ignoring science and the hope it offers. We can’t go back to the self-serving and the rorts, that so diminishes the integrity of government.”
READ MORE:Climate change offers chance of China reset
Nicholas Jensen12.23pm:NSW Health outlines Byron Bay exposure sites
NSW Health has provided more information on Byron Bay sites, urging anyone who attended a close contact venue to immediately get tested, self-isolate and remain in isolation for 14 days.
Close contacts
• March 27: Byron Bay, Mokha Cafe, 2 Lawson Street, 11am – 12pm (Patrons seated in laneway of Feros Arcade)
• March 27: Betty’s Burgers & Concrete Co., 2 Lawson Street, 11am – 12pm (Patrons seated in laneway of Feros Arcade)
Casual contacts
• March 27: Byron Bay, Mokha Cafe, 2 Lawson Street, 11am – 12pm (Patrons seated inside or outside the venue – not in the laneway of Feros Arcade).
• March 26 – 28: Suffolk Beachfront Holiday Park, 14 Alcorn St Suffolk, 4pm – 8.30am
NSW Health said the COVID-19 cases spent time at a shared outdoor laneway in Feros Arcade, where they have now identified two venues of concern.
Anyone who attended the outdoor sections of both restaurants is considered a close contact.
Anyone who attended the indoor section of Mokha Cafe is considered a casual contact, with all individuals seated indoors at Betty’s Burgers & Concrete Co not considered at risk.
READ MORE:Virus spike sends NRL to level two limits
Adeshola Ore12.09pm:Laming has owned his actions: Payne
Women’s Minister Marise Payne says disgraced Liberal MP Andrew Laming has owned his actions, as the Prime Minister refuses to direct the parliamentarian to the crossbench following allegations of harassing women.
The MP is accused of abusing female constituents online. It has also been revealed he took photos of a young Brisbane woman while she was bending over and her underwear was exposed. Crystal White, who Dr Laming photographed in 2019, has made a police complaint against him.
Three Liberal MPs are now on medical leave after Andrew Laming's decision to resign from politics following his admission to online harassment of women. He was forced to apologise for taking a photo of a women as she was bending over and for trolling two female constituents online. “The common thread of the last week has been not demonstrating anything close to understanding how my actions affect others. I intend to own those mistakes,” he said. The Queensland MP will not contest the next election but will remain in the Coalition party room. Prime Minister Scott Morrison will call a major cabinet reshuffle today in a bid to quell the culture crisis engulfing his government. Mr Morrison is expected to shift Defence Minister Linda Reynolds and Attorney-General Christian Porter into different portfolios and Peter Dutton is tipped to be promoted into the Defence role.
Senator Payne said Dr Laming had “taken responsibility for his actions”, pointing to behavioural training that the MP has committed to undertake while on medical leave.
“He has also indicated that he has taken the very serious decision to leave the parliament at the completion of this term,” she told 2GB radio.
“I hope it shows to others who seek to engage in this type of activity that it is completely unacceptable and that it must change.”
Senator Payne said she “understood” why some colleagues, such as Liberal senator Sarah Henderson, had voiced their discomfort about sharing a party room with Dr Laming.
“I do think we need to acknowledge that it is a big decision to say you’re going to leave the parliament … It is also important to be the person who can say I own these behaviours, these behaviours must change.”
The Morrison government would be plunged into a minority if Dr Laming left the party.
READ MORE:Where has this MP been hiding?
Greg Brown12.03pm:Labor can replicate Biden’s win over Trump: Swan
ALP President Wayne Swan says “we simply have to win” the next election as he speaks at the party’s first online national conference.
The former deputy prime minister said Australia needed a Labor government to rebuild the nation following the COVID-19 pandemic.
He said Labor could replicate Joe Biden’s effort in beating Donald Trump at the US election last year.
“Winning is going to take hard work, the courage of our convictions, and unity of purpose,” Mr Swan said.
“But we simply have to win. There is no alternative. Defeat can’t be an option for us.
“The nation looks to us again – as it always does when the going gets tough.
“Australia is right now weathering several simultaneous health, climate, economic and social emergencies.
“Disease, floods and unemployment threaten us. A lack of progress for women, First Nations people and others divides us.
“And all our government has in response is political spin. More marketing.”
Mr Swan said the Morrison government was on the wrong side of history.
“It can’t see that the world it exists to serve no longer exists. That our planet’s climate is heating up,” Mr Swan said.
“That women will no longer be silent in the face of inequality and danger. And that the economy isn’t working for everyone. Let’s ignore reality, the Morrison government says, and it will just go away. Let’s live in the past.
“Donald Trump tried the same strategy. And look how that ended up.”
The conference will run over two days, with 400 delegates representing unions and Labor members to vote on policies for the party’s platform it will take to the next election.
Key debates on Tuesday will include women’s issues, foreign policy and industrial relations.
Anthony Albanese and deputy leader Richard Marles will be based in the Revesby Workers Club in Western Sydney.
Mr Swan said national conferences were “festivals of ideas and celebrations of democracy”.
“They bring us together, to debate, to find agreement and to organise for victory,” Mr Swan said.
“Sadly, we can’t all be together in one place today.
“But through technology we can reach our members and supporters and the millions of voters who so desperately want us to put an end to a Coalition government that is falling to pieces in front of our eyes.”
Richard Ferguson11.51am:‘We are on your side’: Albanese’s rallying call to voters
Anthony Albanese has called on Australians to remove Scott Morrison’s Coalition at the next election, saying women’s voices are being unheard under this government.
In his first speech to the ALP Special Platform Conference, the Opposition Leader accused the Prime Minister of having no post-pandemic plan for women, jobs, climate change, and First Nations People.
Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese says Labor’s virtual National Conference will celebrate “Australia’s oldest and greatest political party” and present a full sweep of policies ahead of the next federal election. Labor's National Conference will go virtual with hundreds of delegates dialling in to decide the party's policy platform at what is being touted as the biggest online political event in Australian history. Mr Albanese said the ALP was a “participatory party” which drew its strength from trade union affiliates and members. “People are participating all around the country,” he said, adding it has been the “right decision” to make the conference a virtual event. The full sweep of policies will be debated over the next two days as the Labor Party celebrates 130 years of existence.
“The pandemic laid bare some unacceptable truths, about an aged care system in crisis, about millions of Australians in jobs that simply aren’t safe or secure, millions more in jobs that don’t pay enough or have enough hours,” he said in Revesby.
“Women’s voices going unheard, a voice for First Nations people being denied, and the realities of climate change being ignored. A government so addicted to marketing spin that it is now spinning itself and the country into the ground. They have no plan for the future, none.
“My question for the country is this: After such a year of sacrifice, is this all they can offer us? In return, Labor will offer more. We will say to Australians, we are on your side.”
Mr Albanese also used the speech to unveil a $15bn National Reconstruction Fund that will partner with business and super funds to “support investments that demonstrate they will grow the economy and increase employment”.
READ MORE:Unions push pro-gas policies
Paul Vieira11.46am:Canada pauses AstraZeneca jab for under-55s
Canadian authorities recommended Monday a halt on administering the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine on people under the age of 55 in light of evidence from Europe on potentially serious side effects targeting younger women.
The change in guidance marked a sharp shift from Canadian health officials, who up until now have said the AstraZeneca vaccine was safe for people of all ages — a point they emphasised earlier this month when governments in Europe paused the vaccine’s use amid worries over blood clotting. This also marks the latest setback for the British-Swedish drugmaker, which has faced pushback from governments, regulators and the public about the rollout of its vaccine.
The European Union's Internal Market Commissioner Thierry Breton said on Friday that vaccines produced by AstraZeneca within the bloc will stay there until the company returns to fulfilling its delivery commitments. Maha Albadrawi has more.
Health Canada, the country’s drug regulator, has ordered AstraZeneca to conduct a detailed risk-benefit analysis on the vaccine by age and gender. The information, officials said, would help determine whether specific demographic groups might be at higher risk.
Read the full story here.
Richard Ferguson11.36am:Coalition one scandal away from ‘losing control’: Shorten
Former Labor leader Bill Shorten has opened up Labor’s special platform conference, saying Scott Morrison is one more scandal from losing control and the ALP can win.
Mr Shorten introduced his successor Anthony Albanese in the first session of the conference and said many still felt the pain of his election loss in 2019.
But the now-opposition government services spokesman said the Prime Minister’s government was now weak enough to beat.
“One more scandal. One more bone headed disgrace. One more backbench troll sent off to study how to impersonate being a human being and Morrison will have lost control of the government altogether,” Mr Shorten said in Revesby.
“So the starting point for all of us at this conference must be the knowledge and belief that Labor most assuredly can win the next election.”
READ MORE:Unions push pro-gas policies
Nicholas Jensen11.15am:NT ‘ultra-cautious’ with Toowoomba hotspot
The Northern Territory will continue to identify Toowoomba as a Queensland hotspot, despite QLD Health saying it was not an area of concern.
On Monday Acting Chief Minister Nicole Manison said that after “careful consultation with the Australian Health Protection Principal Committee, the NT has decided to declare Toowoomba a hotspot”.
The town has been identified as a hotspot due to a “major exposure incident that occurred at a pub in the regional city on Friday”.
However, earlier today, Queensland Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young clarified the Northern Territory’s listing of Toowoomba, saying their government’s approach was to be “ultra-cautious”.
“We know that there was quite a large group of people from Toowoomba, who came down to that pub here in Brisbane and then went back to Toowoomba. We’ve not had any positive cases among that group, but they were at one of the venues of concern.
“He has even more cause for concern given the make-up of his communities in the Northern Territory,” Dr Young said.
“This doesn’t actually mean I’m particularly concerned about Toowoomba, but it’s an area we’re looking at, as we are the entire state.”
READ MORE:‘Hens entertainer’ linked to COVID-19 outbreak
Adeshola Ore11.09am:Price to focus on regional women in taskforce
Defence Industry Minister Melissa Price, who is set to return to the Morrison government cabinet, says she will prioritise issues facing regional Australia women as part of a new gender taskforce.
On Monday, Scott Morrison unveiled a ministerial reshuffle which increased female representation in the cabinet. Ms Price will retain the portfolio of defence industry, which has been elevated to cabinet.
The Prime Minister also announced Women’s Minister Marise Payne and three senior female ministers would lead a cabinet taskforce focused on improving the economic, health and safety conditions for women.
“I’m really pleased that we have this taskforce … My particular interest is in respect to regional and rural women. They have a particular set of obstacles to overcome, whether it comes to violence in the home or safety on the street. So that’s going to be my focus,” Ms Price told Sky News.
“The time now is for action. That is what the women of Australia are demanding from us and we will deliver on that.”
READ MORE:Part of problem is type of man attracted to politics
James Hall11.00am:Tough new vaccine rules after outbreak
The Queensland Premier has revealed a new mandate to vaccinate frontline health workers after two outbreaks in the Sunshine State were linked to an unvaccinated nurse and a doctor.
The change to the jab rollout comes after the state recorded 10 new cases on Tuesday, with eight of those infections locally acquired.
All Queensland hospital staff treating COVID-19 patients will be mandated to receive the first dose of the vaccine. Queensland Chief Health Officer Dr Jeannette Young said as of Wednesday only those staff who have received their first dose of either the Pfizer or AstraZeneca vaccine can “work directly” with confirmed cases. It comes as Queensland recorded eight locally-acquired cases of COVID-19 in the past 24-hours with 78 active cases of the virus currently in the state’s hospitals. The premier also announced the existence of a further COVID cluster, with one now linked to the Princess Alexandra Hospital doctor and the new cluster linked to the hospital nurse. The Queensland government set a target to vaccinate all workers in phase 1a in four to six weeks from the beginning of the vaccine rollout, but Dr Young announced the state has “reached that." Dr Young said given all staff in phase 1a have “had the opportunity to be vaccinated,” it will be mandated that only staff who have received the jab can work with COVID-positive patients.
Under the new rules, any health worker who has not had their first dose of the vaccine will not be allowed to work with COVID patients.
“There will be some new mandates coming into effect in terms of health professionals dealing with these COVID-positive cases,” Annastacia Palaszczuk told reporters on Tuesday morning.
“Already 41,000 of our frontline health workers and people looking after hotel quarantine have been vaccinated, which is around 89 per cent.
“And we expect that to be completed over the next 48 hours.”
Read the full story here.
Mackenzie Scott10.38am:Queensland to accelerate vaccine rollout
Queensland’s vaccination program will be accelerated in response to the latest outbreak.
“We are at that critical mass point,” state health minister Yvette D’Ath said on Tuesday morning. In the past week, 20,000 doses were given.
A total of 65,129 vaccines have been administered since the vaccine rollout began. So far, people have 41,472 received their first jab, with 4918 people being given their second dose.
“We had to wait for the consistency of supply and keep some in reserve for the second vaccination,” Ms D’Ath said.
READ MORE:Queensland records eight new local cases
Adeshola Ore10.20am:Labor’s automotive plan to boost manufacturing
Anthony Albanese says Labor’s automotive plan, to be unveiled today, will boost Australia’s manufacturing industry.
The plan would provide $15bn in grants and loans to Australian businesses under a Labor government to ensure more products are made domestically.
“I think there’s a great opportunity for the automotive industry going forward,” the Opposition Leader said.
“One of the things that happened, of course, under this government was that they dared the car industry to leave. Now there are a range of manufacturers who are still here in the transport sector.
“Boeing’s second largest area of operation is right here in Australia.”
READ MORE:Labor’s computer crash
Nicholas Jensen10.13am:Taylor ‘surprised’ Turnbull took energy board position
Energy Minister Angus Taylor says he is “surprised” that Malcolm Turnbull, a former prime minister, accepted a NSW emissions reductions board appointment.
Speaking on 2GB radio in Sydney, Mr Taylor also pointedly noted he “won’t be working with Malcolm Turnbull” and would instead deal directly with the Berejiklian government.
Mr Turnbull was put forward as a nominee to chair the Net Zero Emissions and Clean Economy Board by NSW Energy Minister Matt Kean, who said he “welcomed Mr Turnbull’s intervention in the public debate”.
The board will provide strategic advice on the design proposals for the state’s inaugural $1 billion “Net Zero Plan”.
Sky News host Alan Jones says a "rejection" of NSW Liberal MP Matt Kean's nomination of former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull to head the NSW Climate Policy board, is "precisely" what the state government "ought to do". Mr Jones said Mr Kean "ought to declare" whether any of Mr Turnbull's family have interests in renewable energy. "He ought to declare an interest; does any of Malcolm Turnbull's family have a financial interest, yes or no, in renewable energy," he said. "I think this is beyond extraordinary and if Matt Kean thinks it's going to win votes for the Liberal Party, he's kidding." "If it's to go before the cabinet today, I would suspect this has been deliberately leaked in order to make it very difficult for the government to reject the nomination. "But the rejection of the nomination is precisely what the NSW government ought to do."
“I was a bit surprised that Malcolm took on this role, a former prime minister,” Mr Taylor said this morning. “But we’ll work with the NSW government to do the work we really need to get more gas into the market.”
Asked whether Mr Turnbull’s appointment would hamper his government’s long-term climate policies, Mr Taylor avoided the question, saying “we’ll continue to work with the NSW government”.
“They’ve made commitments to us on this. They need to keep those commitments,” Mr Taylor said.
Responding to questions that he and Mr Turnbull had previously clashed, Mr Taylor said “I won’t be working with Malcolm Turnbull. This is an appointment by the NSW. What I’ll be doing is working with the New South Wales government to make sure they keep their commitments on gas.”
READ MORE:Turnbull to head climate board
Mackenzie Scott10.11am:Queensland records eight new local cases
Eight new cases of COVID-19 have been detected in the community as Brisbane enters its first day of lockdown.
Six of the cases are close contacts of already confirmed cases, while two are under investigation.
Two distinct clusters have been uncovered – one connected to the doctor from the Princess Alexandra Hospital who tested positive two weeks ago and another linked to a nurse working a COVID-19 ward in the same facility.
More than 14,500 tests were carried out yesterday.
Seven cases have emerged from the Princess Alexandra nurse cluster after members of the bachelorette party she attended over the weekend also test positive.
Dr Young said health authorities are working on the theory that the nurse contracted the virus from a returned traveller who tested positive three days prior to her March 23 night shift.
The nurse then passed the virus to her sister. A further five cases diagnosed overnight after she attended a three-day bachelorette party in Byron Bay.
A Gold Coast entertainer who contracted COVID-19 while working the bachelorette party at Byron Bay attended an aged care facility while infectious.
The man, who also works as tradie, is one of the five members of the party diagnosed overnight, connected to the Princess Alexandra Hospital nurse.
All at the aged care facility had already been vaccinated. Staff are now getting vaccinated.
Genome testing has linked 10 of Queensland’s cases over the past to two weeks the northern suburbs cluster, which originated from the Princess Alexandra Hospital doctor in mid-March. Two historical cases have also been identified, which Dr Young believes is also connected to the cluster.
All cases are the highly infectious UK variant.
READ MORE:Full list of exposure sites
Adeshola Ore10am:Labor to announce ‘proactive’ policies: Albanese
Anthony Albanese says the Labor Party will announce “proactive” policies in the lead up to the federal election, acknowledging the opposition has learnt from its election loss in 2019.
The Opposition Leader was speaking in Sydney ahead of the Labor Party’s virtual conference which begins today.
Former South Australian premier Jay Weatherill and former Labor MP Craig Emerson, undertook the key review into the Australian Labor Party’s 2019 election loss. The findings concluded that Bill Shorten’s unpopularity and the party’s failure to formulate an cohesive election narrative that unified Labor’s policies were the key reason behind the loss.
“One of the things we’ve done from the Emerson-Weatherill review is to learn one of the errors which was pointed out. Which was we lost the 2016 election, we kept all of the policies in place and just built on them for 2019,” Mr Albanese said
“We haven’t done that. We will be announcing our proactive policies in the lead up to the election … we’ve already said that we won’t proceed on any policies on franking credits, for example.”
Adrian McMurray9.55am:Palaszczuk to provide update on cluster shortly
Annastacia Palaszczuk will speak shortly. The Queensland Premier is due to front the media at 9am in Brisbane (10am AEDT), and you can watch the press conference live at the top of the blog. Earlier this morning, Ms Palaszczuk said she expects the number of cases to grow, while The Courier Mail reports that there have been two new local cases overnight.
Adeshola Ore9.30am:You will see strength from women in cabinet: Andrews
Incoming Home Affairs Minister Karen Andrews says she will speak to women across her agency and in the wider community to ensure issues of importance are tackled in a new taskforce that will focus on gender equality.
On Monday, Scott Morrison unveiled a ministerial reshuffle which increased female representation in the cabinet. Peter Dutton was promoted to the defence portfolio, with Ms Andrews shifted to home affairs. The Prime Minister also announced Marise Payne and three senior female ministers would lead a cabinet taskforce focused on improving the economic, health and safety conditions for women.
“I think it is important and I will be the first woman to hold this portfolio. That is important. The more women we have in senior roles who are highly visible, the better it’s going to be so that we can be role models,” she told Sky News.
“What you’ll see around the cabinet table is a lot of strength from those women.”
READ MORE:Morrison's ministry of women
Nicholas Jensen9.20am:‘We must brace ourselves’: NSW Premier’s warning
Gladys Berejiklian says NSW should brace for the detection of local transmissions, as concerns mount that Queensland’s cluster has continued to grow.
“I hope we do not have any cases arise in NSW but I would not be surprised if we did, so we must brace ourselves,” the NSW Premier said this morning.
Overnight more than 7300 tests were received across the state, with NSW recording no new cases of local transmission.
Premier Gladys Berejiklian has warned New South Wales is bracing for new COVID-19 infections despite recording zero new cases overnight as the Queensland cluster evolves. She confirmed just more than 7,300 tests were conducted in the past 24 hours “and we’re really keen to get that number of tests up so that we can be sure that we haven’t missed any community cases of transmission.” “I hope that we do not have any cases emerge in NSW but I won’t be surprise if we did so we need to brace ourselves,” she said. “The NSW government is confident we have the provisions in place to get on top of it. “We are expecting more cases from Queensland and hopefully most of those cases will be people in isolation, although we have to assume this is an evolving situation.” The premier also urged state residents to be on alert and keep checking health alerts for venues – asking that anyone who attended a potential infected site get tested and self-isolate for the full 14 days. She flagged there was also an expectation to receive a second test toward the end of the isolation period. Ms Berejiklian also reminded anyone returning to NSW from Brisbane after March 20 adhere to Greater Brisbane’s three-day lockdown measures.
Ms Berejiklian has asked that more people come forward for testing in the coming week.
“The NSW government is confident that we have provisions in place to get on top of it if any cases are revealed.
“But I want to say the situation is evolving and if cases are identified in NSW, we will have to respond. I’m hoping it doesn’t come to that but, given that we did have two infected people at a number of venues in NSW, we should brace ourselves.”
Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant urged people in the Byron region to come forward for testing and to self-isolate if they show any symptoms.
READ MORE:NSW records no new COVID cases
Jamie Walker8.57am:Cluster grows in locked down Brisbane
The COVID-19 emergency that drove Brisbane back into lockdown has escalated with the revelation that an infected nurse passed on the virus to another two people.
The Courier-Mail reports that the new cases emerged overnight and are linked to the unvaccinated nurse who treated COVID patients at the Princess Alexandra Hospital and also infected her sister before they spent last weekend partying in the northern NSW tourist centre of Byron Bay.
It takes to nine the number of confirmed cases in the cluster, linked to an outbreak earlier this month involving an unvaccinated doctor from the same hospital on Brisbane’s southside.
Queensland Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young insisted on Monday she was not convinced there had been a containment breach at the hospital as the nurse had tested positive while on leave.
The other six known cases in the current cluster are connected to a Stafford landscaper who came down with the virus last week. Dr Young has said genomic testing had tied the young man’s infection to the female doctor, diagnosed on March 12.
Queensland Health would not comment on the reported new cases, saying an update would be provided later on Tuesday.
READ MORE: Lockdown a tipping point for business
Nicholas Jensen8.47am:‘We thought we had this under control … now we might lose it’
Australian Medical Association Vice President Dr Chris Moy has criticised the pace of the country’s vaccine rollout, saying the acceleration of the inoculation program is the best way out of the pandemic.
“We’ve got a problem: just when we thought we had this under control, that we might be winning this game, now we might lose it. So we’ve got to control it,” Dr Moy said.
Dr Moy told Sky News this morning it was important that states remain vigilant and continue to handle any outbreaks, which will eventually help the acceleration of the vaccination program.
“I think people have to remember what happened in the UK and Europe when they relaxed over summer and they thought they had it under control, and it was exactly that that has caused problems because the cases were not under control.
“We’ve got our first step – close it down – make sure you handle those cases out there and then get that vaccine out because it’s gonna be a lot easier to do without the cases.”
READ MORE: Vaccine supremo tipped for foreign affairs role
Nicholas Jensen8.24am:We anticipate more cases today: Palaszczuk
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has defended her government’s decision to impose a snap three-day lockdown across Greater Brisbane, saying “it’s very important that we put in place these measures, it’s absolutely vital that people do the right thing, because the last thing we want to see is more community transmission”.
“We have to do this because it is the highly infectious UK strain.”
Speaking to the ABC this morning amid rumours of additional cases of community transmission, the Premier said “I’m getting a briefing in the next half hour, so will be doing a press conference at around 9am Queensland time”.
However, Ms Palaszczuk said “we do anticipate that we will probably see more cases today. I mean, it would be highly unlikely not to see more cases.”
“The reason we have so many COVID positive people in a hospital,” she said, “is because of the large number of international arrivals.”
“I thank the Prime Minister for halving those numbers of international arrivals. We’ve got 73 active cases in our hospitals at the moment, about a month ago it was about two or three.”
Asked to respond to an AMA survey that suggested more than 40 per cent of public health doctors in Queensland have not received their first jab, Ms Palaszczuk said: “We have 41,000 of our frontline health and our hotel quarantine staff who have received their first vaccine. That’s around 89 per cent.”
“My understanding is that over the next couple of weeks we will see 100 per cent of people vaccinated, and around 7000 people getting their second vaccinations.”
READ MORE: Travel fury at Brisbane lockdown
Nicholas Jensen7.56am:Albanese flags Labor’s ambitious economic package
Ahead of the Labor Party’s virtual conference today, opposition leader Anthony Albanese has said he wants to drive an ambitious economic package that would benefit Australians by “lifting the investment we need in existing and new and emerging industries”.
Mr Albanese told Channel 7’s Sunrise program he wants to outline a plan that will see development in regional Australia, create secure jobs, revamp paid parental leave and diversify the economy.
“We need to be a much more resilient economy. We have had some of our weaknesses exposed during the pandemic and this fund is aimed at national reconstruction just as we had reconstruction after the Second World War,” Mr Albanese said.
Asked about how he would fund paid parental leave, he said: “We are going to finalise a policy for six months paid parental leave at full salary … This is the same policy in the platform that we had at the last election.”
“It is an aspiration of where we want to go in the medium term. We will fully cost out that policy and put a time frame on it in government.”
READ MORE:Labor’s computer crash
Nicholas Jensen7.50am:Cabinet reshuffle sends ‘powerful message’: Payne
Minister for Women Marise Payne says she is confident the government is taking the right steps forward in elevating more women following Monday’s cabinet reshuffle.
Responding to the challenges of the new cabinet and what it means for newly promoted female members, the minister told the Today show: “We have a lot of work we have to do and I think after the very difficult events of recent weeks – the allegations that were made in the parliament – it’s difficult for everybody but no more difficult for anyone than those women.”
“There’s no doubt that it’s a big job. These are issues that our workplace has to face up to, as other workplaces have, not just around Australia but around the world.
“Unfortunately, it is past time to do that,” she said.
Asked if the cabinet reshuffle signalled a meaningful step forward or simply “a fix for the prime minister’s recent troubles”, Ms Payne said the new cabinet will address major issues affecting women in contemporary Australia.
“It is absolutely about putting these issues at the centre of government. This has never been done, to the best of my knowledge, in any government in Australia.
“I think it’s a very powerful action and a very powerful message.”
READ MORE:Where has this fluent, self-confident MP been hiding?
Nicholas Jensen7.20am:European ‘green pass’ for travel ready in June
The European Parliament says it will be ready to ratify the EU’s COVID-19 “green pass” in June, signalling a change to the bloc’s travel restrictions over the summer.
The proposed vaccine pass was proposed earlier this month by the European Commission as tourist hotspots on the continent pushed to save their ailing economies.
The pass is aimed at facilitating travel for individuals who have been vaccinated, tested negative or who have already been infected with the virus.
MEPs agreed last week to fast-track their consideration of the “digital green certificate” to help accelerate the approval process.
Parliament Committee Chief Juan Fernando Lopez Aguilar said that a time frame had been “pushed forward”, with the potential for approval during the June 7 and June 10 sessions.
Mr Lopez Aguilar insists that the protection of personal data is a high priority, ensuring there would be a “sunset clause” limiting how long the pass would be needed.
The plan has faced resistance from some European capitals, especially over fears of discrimination against those still waiting for a vaccine, as the EU’s inoculation program continues to struggle.
READ MORE:Vaccine supremo tipped for vital foreign affairs role
Nicholas Jensen7.05am:Lockdown to cost business up to $50 million
Chief executive of Australia’s Restaurant & Catering Industry Association, Wes Lambert, says Queensland’s snap-three day lockdown will damage businesses and hurt consumer confidence.
“We expect that Queensland’s restaurant cafe and catering industry will lose about $50 million in revenue,” Mr Lambert told Sky News Australia this morning.
“What this means is that people will have to chuck out produce, because they would have already had that on hand for Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Friday.”
Asked what impact the circuit-breaker lockdown will have on the tourism and hospitality industries, Mr Lambert said “ultimately this is just going to destroy consumer and business confidence going into the Easter long weekend and school holidays”.
“Many people are now telling us that they’re going to be cancelling their trips to Queensland, because they’re worried about getting stuck here.”
READ MORE:Lockdown a tipping point for business
Nicholas Jensen6.45am:Brisbane outbreak ‘happening very quickly, evolving’
Queensland health officials are racing to contain the state’s growing COVID-19 cluster, as millions of Greater Brisbane residents wake to a snap three-day lockdown.
On Monday, Queensland Chief Health Officer Dr Jeannette Young confirmed the number of infections had risen to seven following the first case, involving a 26-year-old Brisbane landscaper, emerged last week.
“We now have significant community transmission,” Dr Young said. “This is happening very, very quickly. It’s evolving.”
The seven cases of local transmission have been identified as the UK variant of the virus.
From 5pm yesterday, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said all residents in five local government areas would enter a circuit breaker lockdown, including Greater Brisbane, Ipswich, Logan, Moreton and Redlands.
Greater Brisbane residents have spent their first night under a snap three-day lockdown triggered after Queensland recorded four new community cases of COVID-19.
“We have done it before, we have got through this together and I’m sure, if everyone does the right thing, we will be able to get through it,” she said.
Residents are only permitted to leave their homes for essential shopping, provide care, exercise in their local area and work or study that cannot be done from home.
Masks are now mandatory outside the home. Schools will be closed from Tuesday, except for vulnerable children and the children of essential workers.
The Queensland government is due to review the lockdown on Wednesday evening.
In response to Greater Brisbane’s growing cluster, state and territory governments have revised travel advice and, in some cases, re-imposed border restrictions.
In Western Australia, all arrivals from Queensland will need to complete 14 days of self-quarantine, as well as present for COVID-19 testing.
States and territories across Australia have moved quickly to reclassify the threat posed by the Queensland outbreak and adjust borders accordingly.
South Australia has declared Greater Brisbane a “COVID hotspot”, enacting a hard-border shutdown from 4pm yesterday.
Only South Australian residents, essential workers and people relocating to SA will be permitted to enter in and must isolate for 14 days.
The Northern Territory, Victorian and Tasmanian governments have designated Greater Brisbane, Ipswich, Logan, Moreton and Redlands as a red zone or hot spot.
Travellers from these areas are instructed to self-quarantine for a fortnight. Other parts of Queensland are considered “green”, but all interstate travellers entering the Northern Territory, Victoria and Tasmania must apply for a permit.
Meanwhile, NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian said her government will not declare Greater Brisbane a hotspot, despite the advice given Ms Palaszczuk to her state counterparts.
New South Wales Premier Gladys Berejiklian has once again bucked the trend and announced her state will not be closing its border to Queensland.
NSW Health has instead ordered anyone who has been in the Greater Brisbane region in the past nine days to enter a three-day lockdown.
Anyone who has been in a “close contact venue” must not travel, unless a NSW resident.
NSW Health is advising people against non-essential travel to the Greater Brisbane area, with Ms Berejiklian encouraging people to holiday in NSW if they want to travel.
NSW Health has named two “at risk” locations in Byron Bay:
■ Friday, March 23: Byron Bay Beach Hotel, 7.15pm-8.30pm
■ Sunday March 28: The Farm Byron Bay, 8am-9.30am
Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant 1321 individuals had been contacted in relation to the Byron Bay Beach Hotel, with 166 individuals contacted in relation to The Farm in Byron Bay.
“Anyone who has attended the venues at these times are asked to get tested immediately and self-isolate for fourteen days,” she said.
Sky News Political Editor Andrew Clennell says the federal government isn’t too happy about the Brisbane lockdown.
Following yesterday’s four new cases of local transmission, Queensland Health has added 19 new sites to its exposure list on Monday.
QUEENSLAND EXPOSURE LIST
Close contacts
■ Friday, 26 March — Spinnaker Park Café, 222 Alf O’Rourke Drive, Callemondah 10.22am-11.23am;
■ Friday, 26 March — Auckland House, 60 Flinders Parade, Gladstone Central 7.23pm-9.30pm; and
■ Saturday, 27 March — Auckland House, 60 Flinders Parade, Gladstone Central 7.33am-8.20am.
Sky News host Peter Gleeson says the tourism industry is in turmoil due to the lack of certainty on state borders.
Casual contacts
■ Sunday, 21 March — Liquorland, Dolphins Central Shopping Centre, Ashmole Road and Klingner Road, Kippa-Ring 4.40pm-4.50pm;
■ Monday, 22 March — Bunnings Rothwell, Cnr Anzac Avenue and Bremner Road, Rothwell 7.14am-7.27am;
■ Tuesday, 23 March — Redcliffe Train Line, Kippa-Ring to Lawnton, Kippa Ring to Lawnton 7am-8am;
■ Tuesday, 23 March — Redcliffe Train Line, Lawnton to Kippa-Ring, Lawnton to Kippa Ring 2pm-3pm;
■ Wednesday, 24 March — Redcliffe Train Line, Lawnton to Kippa-Ring, Lawnton to Kippa Ring 2.30pm-3.30pm;
■ Thursday, 25 March — Gin Gin Bakery, 41 Mulgrave St, Gin Gin 1.26pm-1.33pm;
■ Thursday, 25 March — Gin Gin Public Toilet (male) opposite Gin Gin Bakery, Gin Gin 1.25pm-1.50pm;
■ Thursday, 25 March — Miriam Vale Road Star Roadhouse male toilet, Miriam Vale 2.35pm- 2.45pm;
■ Thursday, 25 March — Redcliffe Train Line, Lawnton to Kippa-Ring, Lawnton to Kippa Ring 5.45pm-6.45pm;
■ Friday 26, March — Coles, Stockland Gladstone, Gladstone Central 12.09pm-12.33pm;
■ Friday, 26 March — Redcliffe Train Line, Lawnton to Kippa-Ring, Lawnton to Kippa Ring 2.30pm-3.30pm;
■ Friday, 26 March — Woolworths Kippa-Ring, 272 Anzac Avenue, Kippa-Ring 3pm-3.20pm;
■ Friday, 26 March — Byron Beach Hotel, 1 Bay St, Byron Bay NSW 7.15pm-8.30pm;
■ Saturday, 27 March — IGA Redcliffe, Redcliffe 12.50pm-12.55pm; and
■ Sunday, 28 March — The Farm Byron Bay, 11 Ewingsdale Road, Ewingsdale NSW 8am-9.30am.
Sky News host Paul Murray says the Brisbane lockdown is an admission yet again that Queensland’s contact tracing doesn’t work.
Low risk
■ Tuesday, 23 March — Outside Westpac, Peninsula Fair Shopping Centre, 272 Anzac Avenue, Kippa-Ring 3pm-3.30pm.
READ MORE:‘Sheer lunacy’: travel fury at Brisbane lockdown
Jamie Walker5.20am:Easter mayhem as states flinch at Brisbane lockdown
Easter and school holiday travel for hundreds of thousands of Australians has been up-ended by a COVID-19 outbreak that forced Brisbane into lockdown, compounding the hit to battered tourism operators and small businesses as the federal government’s JobKeeper scheme winds up.
Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk issued the snap stay-at-home order to the Queensland capital’s 2.6 million residents after four new community-acquired cases of the hyper-infectious UK variant emerged, dashing hopes the cluster had been contained.
Western Australia immediately closed its border to Queensland while Victoria and South Australia introduced tough restrictions on travellers from Brisbane, ordering them to self-quarantine for a fortnight. NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian advised holidaymakers heading north to reconsider their plans.
Despite Australia’s “extraordinarily lucky” position on COVID-19 in comparison to 12 months ago, we haven’t been able to “move the conversation or the response” forward, according to 6PR’s Oliver Peterson.
Read the full story, by Jamie Walker and Mackenzie Scott, here.
Jess Malcolm5.10am:Ellis ‘knew of allegations’ against Labor MP
Former federal Labor minister Kate Ellis has revealed she was aware of an allegation of serious sexual assault and misconduct by an elected ALP MP during her time in politics.
The MP has not been named, but Ms Ellis has revealed her knowledge of the incident as she spelled out her experience of the toxic workplace culture for women in Canberra, following a swath of similar allegations in ­recent weeks.
Ms Ellis spent 15 years in federal parliament after being elected in 2004 as the member for the seat of Adelaide when she was 27 years old.
As a staffer, Ms Ellis said she heard allegations of what she ­described as “serious sexual assault and misconduct” from an elected Labor MP, adding that she suspected there were hundreds more.
“This is something that isn’t new,” Ms Ellis said in an interview aired on ABC’s Australian Story on Monday night.
“We’ve seen a number of ­stories recently, but I suspect that there are hundreds and hundreds more. But I know of much worse stories. Certainly when I was a staffer and a volunteer, I saw a lot of things but I also heard alle­gations of what I’d call serious sexual assault and misconduct from an elected Labor MP.”
Read the full story here.
Geoff Chambers5am:Scott Morrison reveals his new ministry of women
Scott Morrison has declared ­Marise Payne the “prime minister for women” under a wider-than-expected ministerial reshuffle that increased female cabinet representation, set up a gender-­equality taskforce and shifted embattled ministers Linda Reynolds and Christian Porter.
In a bid to neutralise the ­Coalition’s sexism row, the Prime Minister on Monday announced a Senator Payne and three senior ­female ministers would lead a cabinet taskforce focused on improving the economic, health and safety conditions for women.
The ministerial shake-up, which promoted six women, was triggered by criticism of the government’s handling of rape allegations and sex harassment claims. It increases female representation in cabinet to 30 per cent.
Peter Dutton was promoted to Defence while Karen Andrews moves to the Home Affairs portfolio. Mr Morrison returned Defence Industry Minister Melissa Price to cabinet, increasing female representation to seven out of 23, and created three new female-­focused roles for Jane Hume, Anne Ruston and Amanda Stoker.
Senator Ruston will move into Mr Morrison’s leadership team, with Michaelia Cash promoted to Attorney-General and Industrial Relations Minister, taking over from Mr Porter.
Sky News Political Editor Andrew Clennell says Marise Payne is “clearly a very strong performer” but has a reluctancy to appear often in front of the press.
Read the full story here.
Word count: 13196
