The state government late last year released what it says is the most powerful vision for climate action of any South Australian government in history.
The goal is to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by at least 50 per cent by 2030 and achieve net zero emissions by 2050.
Two projects on Kangaroo Island - the construction of a new desalination plant at Penneshaw and also ongoing hazard reduction to minimise bushfire risk - have been listed as key components.
SA Water last month held an information night at Penneshaw to discuss the $19.8 million plan to expand the existing desalination plant.
More information sessions were being held on Kangaroo Island this week, namely to discuss opportunities for property owners in four local towns to connect to SA Water's drinking water network and receive supply from the proposed new desalination plant.
The Islander has submitted a list of questions to SA Water, including the new plant's location, its power usage and supply, as well as plans for its byproducts.
The other KI component regarding ongoing collaborative hazard reduction burning to reduce fuel loads has also been covered in recent weeks in The Islander.
The state government will spend $28 million over four years to undertake more hazard reduction burns in the Mount Lofty Ranges and in Kangaroo Island, as well as on private conservation lands in collaboration with landholders and the Country Fire Service.
On KI, hazard reduction activity in recent months focussed on Parndana and the Dudley Peninsula, with mixed results due to weather issues. Parndana township was a success, while burns on the Dudley were cut short.
Environment and Water Minister David Speirs meanwhile said the Climate Change Action Plan 2021-2025 provided an ambitious practical approach to dealing with a changing climate, built a strong green economy and further reduced greenhouse gas emissions.
The plan includes 68 actions, across seven focus areas, that build on South Australia's leadership in renewable energy to increase investment and jobs in low emissions and climate resilient business and industry over the next five years.
South Australia's transformation to a net zero emissions economy and a national and international exporter of clean energy could mean achieving a level of renewable energy that is more than five times the current local grid demand by 2050, he said.
Mr Speirs said the Action Plan had been developed with input and advice from renowned climate change expert Professor Ross Garnaut AC and the Premier's Climate Change Council.
CREDIT: Stan Gorton
Word count: 413
