Work has commenced on the Goyder wind farm in South Australia which will provide renewable energy to the ACT well into 2040.
The ACT government has signed a long-term power-purchase agreement with the provider to deliver 100 megawatts of energy over 14 years.
Stage one of the renewables project will involve the construction of 75 turbines located near Burra in South Australia's mid north.
Development approval has been granted for 1200MW of wind generation, 600MW of solar generation and 900MW of battery storage, making it the state's largest renewable project.
The Goyder contract was one of four the ACT government awarded to Neoen, a French producer of renewables with Australian headquarters in Canberra.
Work on the company's ambitious Capital Battery project began in December, to provide the ACT with its first large-scale power station.
ACT Minister for Sustainability Shane Rattenbury said the Goyder wind farm contract meant Canberra's electricity supply will continue to be sourced from 100 per cent renewable electricity in the coming years.
"This will allow us to accommodate a growing population, support renewable energy initiatives such as electric vehicles and transition our economy off fossil gas," Mr Rattenbury said.
READ MORE:
Why Canberrans are Australia's worst food wasters Conservation groups slam revised Defence housing plan for Lawson Consumer city calculates high emissions from imported goods and services Neoen CEO Xavier Barbaro said Goyer was the company's most ambitious project yet.
Mr Barbaro said the company now had 5.4GW of assets in operation or under construction and was confident in achieving its target of 10GW in 2025.
In a statement, Neoen said it was committed to sharing benefits with regional communities.
The Goyder project includes annual funding for community building and sustainability initiatives, as well as remuneration to Ngadjuri traditional owners, Neoen said.
Our journalists work hard to provide local, up-to-date news to the community. This is how you can continue to access our trusted content:
Bookmark canberratimes.com.au Download our app Make sure you are signed up for our breaking and regular headlines newsletters Follow us on Twitter Follow us on Instagram
CREDIT: Alex Crowe
Word count: 347
