Meet the people running for Stuart
We caught up with the candidates for Stuart in the state election on March 19 to keep people informed on who they could be voting for.
Geoff Brock: Independent
Geoff Brock has served as the Member for Frome and is now running for the seat of Stuart.
Mr Brock worked at the Port Pirie smelter for 30 years before being elected as mayor of the town in 2003.
His involvement in local government for 20 years put him in a good position to be elected in Frome in 2009.
He has been in the Frome seat for 13 years and said he does not call it a job as it is a very enjoyable thing to be able to bring something back to your community.
"Sometimes it is challenging and other times it is very emotional when you hear lots of stories from people out there, but is is very rewarding when you can get some sort of satisfaction for the people," he said.
Mr Brock said he would be very honoured and privileged to represent the new boundaries of Stuart which include both Port Pirie and Port Augusta, where he lived for some time.
Mr Brock said his number one priority for the election is health. He has identified health issues including doctor shortages and lack of specialised services visiting the region.
Mr Brock said he will also be working very closely with Nyrstar Port Pirie to enhance the diversification of metal processing, e-waste and hydrogen.
Beth Leese: Greens
Greens candidate Beth Leese will be balancing her studies with her campaign.
"I have recently completed my double degree in Laws and International Relations and I am currently completing my GDLP so that I will be able to practice law," she said.
"I am interested in working in industrial relations law as I believe this is one area of practice where I can make a positive impact on people's lives and help ensure that people feel safe to show up to work and, most importantly, make it home."
Ms Leese said she and The Greens were fighting for the balance of power in the Upper House so they can hold whichever party forms government to account.
"We have a bold plan make big banks, mining corporations and land developers pay their fair share in tax which will allow us to build 40,000 public houses right across South Australia, bring back the South Australian Housing Trust, introduce publicly-owned renewable energy, reverse electricity privatisation, invest in conservation jobs, make public education free and invest in electric manufacturing," she said.
"South Australians deserve better and deserve to have a Parliament that is fighting for the best interests of people and planet, not their mates."
Dan van Holst Pellekaan: Liberals
Liberal candidate Dan van Holst Pellekaan has been the Member of Stuart for 12 years and was named South Australia's Deputy Premier in November.
"Immediately before being elected as a parliamentarian, I worked in Port Pirie for three years developing mountain bike trails and tourism in the Southern Flinders, which continue to benefit the area," he said.
"Before that I was an owner-operator of roadhouses throughout the outback living at Pimba, just north of Port Augusta for seven years, worked in transport, logistics and marketing with BP Australia for 10 years, played four seasons in the NBL and did labouring and hospitality work in my teens and early 20s."
Mr van Holst Pellekaan has been the Minister for Energy and Mining under the existing government for four years.
"Representing local people and regional development is what drives me," he said.
"Since coming to government we have significantly increased funding for regional health, roads, education, environment and more and the benefits are starting to be seen.
"Strong economic growth, low unemployment, healthy and safe communities, upgraded roads, improved local facilities and services are all starting to shine through.
"Having recently been elected Deputy Premier, our electorate is even better represented now than ever before and I don't want people in our area to miss out this important opportunity to benefit."
Andrew Wright: Labor
Labor candidate Andrew Wright is an employment lawyer, business owner, former Australian Army soldier and an active Defence Force Reservist in the Navy Legal Corps.
He previously lived in Crystal Brook and works in the region with offices in Port Pirie, Port Augusta, and Whyalla.
On the COVID-19 outbreak in Port Augusta, Mr Wright said the issues faced by Aboriginal Australians were well known to the Liberal Party.
"The current government didn't plan to protect the community in advance which is extremely sad and disappointing. I believe this mishandling is a breach of the government's duty of care," he said.
Mr Wright emphasised that Labor would look to improve local childcare and education.
"I am passionate about this. It is not easy to retain the current workforce or attract a new workforce to a region without sufficient services," he said.
Mr Wright explained how young people can be retained locally, too.
"UniHubs must continue to be developed as they keep young people feeling seen and supported. Mature-age students can also access university without travelling to the city," he said.
"Labor's announcement of the new tech school in Port Augusta is another indication of how serious we are about education."
Mr Wright said Labor supports ongoing investment in roads, green infrastructure and renewable energy.
"The $590 million hydrogen plant in the Upper Spencer Gulf will encourage a cleaner environment and increase jobs," he said.
*Other candidates for the seat may become known in coming days and will be featured in articles in The Transcontinental.
CREDIT:
Word count: 938
