M. F. Horton, Adelaide, SA
In just two hours, Meghan Markle scored the trifecta: playing the gender, race and mental health cards.
John McLeod, Sunshine Coast, Qld
Meghan missed a trick: she didn’t get climate change in; yet.
Stephen Tucker, Auchenflower, Qld
If I lived in Sydney, the government would pay half my fare to Cairns, Proserpine, Maroochydore, Gold Coast, Melbourne Avalon, Launceston, Alice Springs, Uluru or Broome. From Perth, Alice Springs is all that’s offered. You bewdy, thanks Scott (“Put half your holiday on us: PM”, 11/3).
Greg Paull, Subiaco, WA
If the federal government can spend even more borrowed money to stimulate the economy by subsidising tourism airfares, why can’t it invest money in building clean coal electricity generation to ensure more reliable and cheaper electricity?
Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT
Stop calling it an energy market (“ ‘Higher bills, blackouts’ from coal plant closure”, 11/3). It is a government subsidised entity hellbent on replacing reliable 24/7 electricity availability with dependence on fickle weather.
Gordon Thurlow, Launceston, Tas
It is blindingly obvious that NSW and Victoria should have started to build nuclear power stations at least 10 years ago to supplement their dash into variable renewable energy. No reason not to start now, otherwise the situation will be even worse in another 10 years’ time. But first, the government must remove the unwarranted prohibition of nuclear power.
Don Higson, Paddington, NSW
Who are the anonymous accusers of Christian Porter? Declare yourselves.
Robin Saltmarsh, Stratford, Qld
The play on words where The Australian newspaper depicts former PM Julia Gillard receiving her COVID-19 vaccine with the headline “Taming of the Flu” is offensive (Strewth, 7/3). Most would read this as “Taming of the Shrew”, where a woman who dares to voice her opinion is forced into submission.
Celia Bradford, Warrawee, NSW
More than any words, the appalling image of a nun kneeling on the road in the face of armed police (11/3) expresses the horror we feel about the brutal crackdown in Myanmar.
Helen Scheller, Benalla, Vic
Word count: 321
