CopperString 2.0 revealed yesterday it had secured a $17 million financing agreement with Korea Zinc Company Limited after the federal government recently announced $11m in funding.
The move brings 750 construction jobs across northwestern Queensland closer to reality.
In Townsville, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk said her government had also been a long-term supporter of the job-generating proposal to construct a 1100km transmission line to connect the North West Minerals Province to the national electricity market.
MORE NEWS>>>
• Townsville to have one of the first COVID-19 vaccine hub
• Hundreds of jobs available at Queensland Country Bank Stadium
• HMAS Adelaide warship sits off Townsville coast after Fiji aid mission
“That’s why I announced my government had entered into an implementation agreement with CopperString late last year to provide certainty for the project and the jobs it provides,” the Premier said.
“It’s big projects like this that will help in Queensland’s economic recovery and long term growth opportunities. CopperString 2.0 will also open up land for the development of more solar and wind generation and support renewable generation capacity for a hydrogen export industry.”
Yun Choi, vice chairman of Korea Zinc, said he saw great potential for CopperString to strengthen the industrial and clean energy ecosystem across the Townsville to Mount Isa corridor.
“This regional economic development opportunity is important to Sun Metals and Korea Zinc.
“And it is a strong element of our interest in supporting the CopperString project,” Mr Choi said.
“We look forward to continuing our collaboration with the Palaszczuk government and CopperString in relation to minerals processing, renewable energy and hydrogen development.”
Managing director of CuString, Joseph O’Brien congratulated the Queensland government for the collaborative approach to the tripartite arrangement with CuString and Korea Zinc and for backing innovative infrastructure solutions to help steer Queensland back to prosperity after the COVID slowdown.
Resources Minister and Member for Townsville Scott Stewart said the International Energy Agency’s latest prediction is that 80 per cent of growth in electricity demand will be in renewables to 2030.
“That means more worldwide demand for critical minerals including cobalt, copper and vanadium,” he said.
“Queensland has the metals needed for renewables and computers, tablets and mobile phones that will be in higher demand.”
Word count: 354
