So, before the Australian Energy Market Operator implements its plan to stop using coal by “as early as 2040”, could we not look again at what others are doing?
Doug Hurst, Chapman, ACT
Well, it certainly brought a wry smile to those of us primitive souls chipping away at the rock face of the civil construction materials indus­try to learn of impending delivery disruptions to supermarkets due to shortages of a key component of diesel that fuels trucking movements all over the wide brown land (“Diesel taskforce to ensure trucks keep on rolling”, 10/12).
Infrastructure development will also grind to a halt because scrapers, bulldozers, front-end loaders, graders and of course heavy vehicles all run on diesel. Already there is insufficient trucking capacity and driver availability to transport construction materials (in particular) to project sites.
Further, as the redoubtable Robert Gottliebsen points out (“Food security v pollution”, 10/12), the minds of ordinary citizens will very quickly be concentrated not on imminent planetary collapse caused by the use of fossil fuels but on how basic goods and services become scarcer than a Thunbergian activist truck driver. I don’t believe supply chain logistics forms a major part of the Extinction Rebellion imagination.
In all this chaos, chairman Xi Jinping must be reflecting on the ongoing follies of the West, as by happy coincidence his country dominates the supply (as with rare earths required to construct the renewables industry) of urea, the basic raw material in question.
Ashley Georgeson, Adelaide
I’ve been watching with concern the effects of truck driver short­ages in the UK. With our vast continental spread, we Australians are even more vulnerable to supply chain disruption. This may not be a glamorous issue, but it demands close attention.
JP Fogarty, Perth
It is alarming to learn of the Australian Energy Market Operator’s radical plan for coal-fired power stations exiting the electricity grid three times faster than expected because of rampant renewable energy supplies. The AEMO is living in a fantasy world if it thinks renewables can do the job of coal. Renewables may be cheap but they cannot guarantee reliability, and reliability is the bedrock of the nation’s energy system.
The only reason wind and solar have been able to gain a foothold in the nation’s electricity grid is because of massive subsidies and the fact whenever they down tools, due to the whims of the weather, coal-fired power stations are there to ensure the nation gets the reliable, dispatchable power it needs to continue functioning.
Without these energy workhorses delivering 70 per cent of our daily electricity needs, the wheels of industry would grind to a halt, businesses would shut down and the lights would go out.
Dale Ellis, Innisfail, Qld
Our policy settings on gas must be wrong. We are the world’s largest exporter of gas but we are running out of gas inside the country and the gas prices on the east coast are causing essential industries to shut down.
The government may prefer laissez-faire management but sometimes the strategic needs of the nation must take precedence. Frankly it should be the same with dispatchable electricity. Allowing subsidised renewables – using all imported equipment – to cause our coal-fired units to shut down is not good governance.
And don’t let me start on diesel supply security
Brian C. Povey, Churchlands, WA
It’s about time our National Energy Market provided more detailed costings on our future electricity generation mix. They’re very strong concerning reductions in the use of coal but very weak on the maintenance of reliability. This is dismissed by noting the necessity of “significant investment in storage and firming generation”.
Surely the NEM is above the trickery of transferring consequential costs to the poor taxpayer; indeed, anywhere as long as they don’t get reflected in electricity price increases?
Gordon Thurlow, Launceston, Tass
Word count: 618
