The energy company has been working on plans for the battery at Eraring Power Station.
Eraring is Australia’s largest power station, supplying about one quarter of the state’s energy needs, and is Origin’s only coal-fired operation.
Origin has also lodged a connection inquiry with TransGrid, the NSW transmission network service provider, that would allow the battery to connect to the national grid via the Eraring substation.
The battery would have an overall capacity of up to 700 megawatts, and would be able to supply energy to the grid for up to four hours, making it the biggest battery under consideration in Australia.
Origin Energy executive general manager Energy Supply and Operations, Greg Jarvis, said the development would be a step toward the company’s and the NSW Government’s renewable energy targets.
“We recognise we have an important role to play in positioning Origin’s electricity generation portfolio to support Australia’s rapid transition to renewables,” Mr Jarvis said.
“A large-scale battery at Eraring will help us better support renewable energy and maintain reliable supply for customers, by having long duration storage ready to dispatch into the grid at times when renewable sources are not available.
“The deployment of this battery at Eraring will support Origin’s orderly transition away from coal-fired generation by 2032, while complementing the policy objectives of the NSW energy road map.”
The battery would be built in three stages, with the first expected to be operational by late next year.
An Origin spokesman said based on other projects in Victoria and South Australia, the company anticipated there would be significant interest from suppliers to produce the battery.
Member for Lake Macquarie described the plan as a “game changer” for renewable energy within the state.
“We’ve been able to produce renewable energy for a long time but one of the challenges has been being able to store it,” Mr Piper said.
“To be able to store it, but also to be able to balance the grid ... it’s one of those technologies that we’ve really been waiting to get to.
“The fact of the matter is thermal power will stop being produced at Eraring in 2032, but we want to see the infrastructure that’s there used for a purpose, for energy production.”
French company Neoen has lodged plans for a 500 megawatt battery at the former Energy Australia coal-fired power station at Wallerawang, near Lithgow.
The two batteries would be worth a combined $1 billion.
Word count: 389
