The rapid growth of renewables and the early retirement of coal is happening much faster than even the most bullish scenarios modelled in recent years.
South Australia is at the forefront of the change, including having to make stopgap measures like switching off household rooftop solar when it feeds too much energy into the grid – an outcome which is “not great for customers”.
The comments were made by the Energy Security Board which has been commissioned by the nation’s energy ministers to plan an overhaul of the system.
The board on Friday will publish a list of options ahead of making recommendations to the ministers by mid-year.
While too early for the board to estimate costs, the changes will involve many tens of billions of dollars of investment.
“The rapid spread of large-scale wind and solar, along with rooftop photovoltaic across Australia means our energy system is experiencing the fastest and most substantial change in the world,” board chair Kerry Schott said.
“Our generation mix is changing fast, but the physics of our power system cannot change in the same way.
“This is the best chance we have of setting up Australia’s energy system for the future.
“We can’t kick these challenges any further down the road.”
Dr Schott said the options aimed to:
UNLOCK benefits for consumers of technological change.
ENSURE coal-fired generators retire in an orderly way, including closing earlier than expected.
CREATE sufficient back-up power.
PAVE the way for more cheap, large-scale renewables by promoting investment in transmission links.
The change in the system was unprecedented, Federal Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor said.
“We must get this right to protect consumers from high prices and reliability risks as technologies in the energy sector change,” he said.
“With the strong growth in variable renewable energy, the post-2025 reforms will strengthen investment signals to encourage dispatchable capacity and deliver a reliable and secure electricity system with lower emissions.”
The board said consumers need to be rewarded for playing a more active role, such as varying the times they use energy, allowing an external agent to turn their appliances like airconditioners on or off remotely, or supplying power from their solar or battery.
The plans expect consumers to be offered multiple products and services and for households to deal with several different companies rather than a single retailer.
The importance of more transmission is highlighted by the example of Project EnergyConnect, the planned $2.4bn link between SA and NSW.
It is rated at 800MW but 10,000MW of power projects are proposed in SA.
Wind generators average about 40 per cent of their capacity at night and 30 per cent in the day, while solar averages close to 90 per cent at midday to zero in the dark.
This meant there would always be times of congestion in transmission because it would be uneconomic to build for short-lasting maximums.
It sees a changing role for batteries from mostly providing system stabilisation to also providing energy like a conventional generator – but sees even more uses at a local level to balance supply and demand.
It said there would be “substantial benefits” from hydrogen, if the growing sector was integrated cleverly with the market.
Word count: 511
