–
Friday June 11
Perspectives on colonisation in the far north
Works that explore themes of colonisation and mining and their effects on First Nations people are part of a new exhibition that has opened at Charles Darwin University Art Gallery in Darwin.
You Are Here, by Darwin-based artist and CDU graduate Therese Ritchie is about white culture, Ms Ritchie said. “We don’t really get together and talk about how our forefathers and mothers actually came to be settled on Aboriginal land.
“We have not really taken it on board the lengths … our culture went to, to push Aboriginal people off their country. To work out who we really want to be, we will need to understand this part of our history and own it.”
The gallery’s curator, and curator of the exhibition, Joanna Barrkman that beyond profiling Ms Ritchie’s art, the works would foster “broader discussions around truth-telling in the Northern Territory”.
“We hope this exhibition and its associated public programs will connect the public with research regarding these important issues,” Dr Barrkman said.
The public programs will include talks by Ms Ritchie and panel discussions with other local artists and researchers from the university.
You Are Here will be on display from 10 June until 17 July. CDU notes the exhibition’s content “may cause distress to viewers — especially Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people”.
–
ATSE awards showcase brilliant applied science
A team that has developed a new class of inhibitors to arrest the proliferation of cancer cells and cut a licensing deal with pharmaceutical company Pfizer has won the Clunies Ross Award for Knowledge Commercialisation.
The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute’s Anne Voss and Tim Thomas, together with Monash Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences’ Jonathan Baell were recognised at the Australian Academy of Technology and Engineering’s annual awards, which celebrate the application of Australian research.
The other Clunies Ross awards went to Everledger founder and chief executive Leanne Kemp, for strengthening the integrity of global supply chains via the use of blockchain technology to create a secure and permanent record of an object’s provenance (Entrpreneurship) and IND Technology founder and CEO Alan Wong for early fault detection technology that pinpoints areas in power networks at risk of fire (Innovation).
RMIT University’s Kate Nguyen was recognised for engineering excellence; CSIRO’s Lindsay Bell and Nourish Ingredients’ Anna El-Tahchy for achievements in agrifood; Omni Tanker’s Luke Djukic for improving the safety and efficiency of transporting dangerous goods; and the Ezio Rizzardo Polymer Scholarships for PhD students went to Monash University’s Georgia Hunter and Newcastle University’s Hayden Robertson.
–
Thursday June 10
–
US plans huge $250bn boost to research
Australian universities and research institutes can only look on with envy as the United States progresses toward making a huge investment in research to fend off competition from China in technology development.
The US Senate approved the US Innovation and Competition Act 68-32 with bipartisan support and the bill will now go to the House of Representatives. While the House is likely to want changes, the significant Republican backing for the bill makes it almost certain that the US will soon inject a large quantum of money into government-supported research and development.
Read the FULL STORY
–
Wednesday June 9
–
New Multiversity offers scholarship incentives
The new Multiversity in western Sydney is offering 100 scholarships, each worth $2,000, for students doing either undergraduate certificates or diplomas.
Courses begin in second semester this year. They are in areas expected to be in demand in the future economy including cyber security, data engineering, renewable energy, mechatronics, IT and construction management.
The first 50 student enrolments via industry will receive $2,000 when they complete the first four weeks of study. Half of the scholarship will be given to each enrolling student, and the remaining $1,000 will go to the employer who will have the option of passing it on to the student. An additional 50 scholarships will also be available for general enrolments.
The Multiversity, part of the new Western Sydney Aerotropolis based around the new airport, is a joint venture of UNSW, the University of Newcastle, the University of Wollongong, Western Sydney University and TAFE NSW.
The courses offer advanced standing into higher level courses at all four universities.
–
New appointments
Charles Darwin University has created a new role — associate vice-chancellor (Central Australia) — to renew its focus on its Alice Springs campus.
Local Territorian Jay Walker will fill the position, saying his priorities are to bring campus life back to Alice Springs and create new course options.
He said CDU Alice Springs would look at expanding its local vocational education and training offerings and look at introducing short and evening courses across a range of disciplines such as hairdressing, creative industries and the trades.
“Our staff have a detailed cultural understanding of the place and people, many have Indigenous backgrounds and experience and are a key part of the community’s fabric,” he said.
In other new appointments:
● Monash University has appointed its senior vice-provost (research), Rebekah Brown, to be deputy vice-chancellor (research). She takes up the role on June 21.
● University of Queensland chief financial officer Andrew Flannery becomes the university’s chief operating officer from July 5.
● Charles Darwin University has also appointed Jodie Summers as its new regional operations manager at the Alice Springs campus.
–
New podcast series from the Go8
Today the Group of Eight universities launch their new podcast series Debate@Go8 which will explore issues in higher education, discuss government policy and showcase research discoveries.
The first episode, featuring Go8 chief executive Vicki Thomson discussing foreign interference in universities, is live today. Topics coming up soon include the post Covid-19 economic recovery, and research successes such as work that has secured the livelihoods of cocoa farmers in Vanuatu, and University of Adelaide research that has the potential to protect the global wine industry from the impacts of bushfires.
–
Tuesday June 8
–
Can I resist? Online cheating became easier last year, students say
Cheating was more common among Australian university students in 2020, say one in three respondents and one in three also believe they know someone who did so, according to newly released research from online study support company Studiosity.
The survey of 1021 students, conducted in 2020, revealed 69 per cent believed the uptick occurred because that it was easier to get away with cheating in online exams which became the norm during Covid-19 lockdown, while 19 per cent believed it was due to students’ losing confidence due to studying alone.
However when asked if knowing another student had cheated would predispose them to do likewise, 82 per cent said it would not, and 16 per cent said they would feel sorry for those who did.
Studiosity chief academic officer Judyth Sachs said cheating was a symptom and in the last decade factors that had played a part were “higher costs of attending university, easier access to online and particularly large international cheating and/or answer-sharing services, as well as larger student populations which comes with the perception — or reality — that there is less support and sense of belonging”.
“In particular, Covid-19 saw students forcibly or conceptually removed from communities,” Professor Sachs said.
“Part of the solution must be continued education around academic integrity and increasing support, and equitable training around that support for all students equally, including doing better for geographically and digitally remote students.”
–
Training the next generation of Indigenous business leaders
The first master’s of Indigenous business leadership has been introduced at Monash University, with 14 students enrolled in a program designed around the core elements of the traditional MBA but tailored for Indigenous students.
It will be delivered face-to-face in intensive sessions, aiming to avoid the disruption of long absences from jobs, families and communities. Pro-vice chancellor (Indigenous) Jacinta Elston said many Indigenous leaders had had very limited opportunities to engage in formal education and business training.
“As a result, we created [this course] to cultivate the next generation of Indigenous business leaders to shape Australia’s public, private and community sectors,” Professor Elston said.
One of the first intake, National Association of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Health Workers and Practitioners chief executive officer Karl Briscoe, said the course was “on the cusp of Aboriginal terms of reference of how we do business with organisations and includes the latest, evidence-based research”.
“That’s really one of the major differences between a mainstream MBA and what we’re doing,” Mr Briscoe said.
–
Monday June 7
–
Susan Elliott to be the new provost at Monash
Monash University has appointed Susan Elliott provost, promoting her from her current role of deputy vice-chancellor (education). Professor Elliott has led the education portfolio since joining Monash in March 2017.
Vice-Chancellor Professor Margaret Gardner said the appointment, which begins on June 21st was “a testament to the talent and capability within the senior executive team at the university”.
Professor Elliott, a medical doctor, was deputy provost and DVC (international) at the University of Melbourne before joining Monash.
Recently she has led the development of partnerships with Online Education Services, the Cranlana Centre for Ethical Leadership and the McKinnon Institute for Political Leadership, and has been instrumental in the development of key digital education ventures.
–
Conor King to leave the IRU
Innovative Research Universities’ long-time executive director Conor King is departing the role in July. Over more than 10 years Mr King has managed the affairs of the group, which now numbers seven: Charles Darwin, Flinders, Griffith, James Cook, La Trobe, Murdoch and Western Sydney.
Looking ahead, “apart from the sector’s adjustment to a smaller international cohort, the next five to six years will be about the tools and technology issue and really making the most of that opportunity”, Mr King said.
He said the true impact of the new Job-Ready Graduates Package which realigned fees and courses, would not be clear until 2023. “But I also believe that students and universities will find ways to get education delivered, regardless of whatever the funding system is.”
Mr King said he intended to have a break before exploring the possibility of resuming work in the sector in some advisory or part time capacity.
His previous roles before joining the IRU included consulting work, advising on institutional strategy at Victoria University and eight years at the Australian Vice-Chancellors’ Committee (now Universities Australia).
–
Backlash to Mark Vaile’s university appointment
A member of the University of Newcastle’s governing council, who was part of the unanimous vote to appoint former deputy prime minister Mark Vaile as the university’s next chancellor, resigned on Sunday saying she was concerned about Mr Vaile’s links to the coal industry.
Jennifer Martin, a member of the university council elected by the academic staff, said she felt that Mr Vaile’s appointment did not take account “of the multiple stakeholder concerns about the background of the candidate, including links to the coal industry”.
Mr Vaile, who is chair of Whitehaven Coal, was announced on Friday as the next chancellor and chair of the university’s governing council as of July 1.
Professor Martin, who holds the chair of clinical pharmacology at the university, explained her earlier vote for Mr Vaile to be chancellor saying: “In some way I felt pressured to this outcome”.
“The council members who had misgivings were not given an opportunity to manifest those during the selection process,” she told The Australian,
She said that concerns about the selection process and the choice of Mr Vaile were brought to the council by herself and others.
“The appointment was not felt to clearly align with the university’s strategic plan nor commitment to the Hunter Region’s economic transition, which were highlighted by recent community engagement of the university with ex chief scientist Dr Alan Finkel and ex prime minister Malcolm Turnbull,” Professor Martin said.
She said the choice of Mr Vaile appeared to represent the past rather than the future of the university and its constituency.
Professor Martin had served one year of a two-year term as an elected representative of academic staff on the university council.
–
Events coming up
2021 Skills Conference (16 June). Dockside Darling Harbour, Sydney
2021 will be a critical year for the long term viability of VET. The Skills Conference will look at the recovery strategies being put in place to establish the next generation of nation builders.
ITECA National Skills Summit (June 25). Hilton, Sydney
A series of panel discussions led by industry stakeholders, skills sector opinion leaders and students will consider the strengths of Australia’s skills sector focusing on where improvements can be made to ensure students get the training and skills that employers require.
Community Colleges Australia National 2021 Adult and Community Education (ACE) Summit(June 29). The Mint, Sydney, and online
A showcase for ACE providers’ innovative programs and pathways that can help governments succeed in meeting Australia’s economic, employment and social challenges in the wake of the pandemic-induced economic downturn.
Word count: 2064
