Australia's power grid is set up to cope with coal's continued decline over the next decade, the market operator said, even as a flood of cheap electricity from solar and wind farms undercuts traditional power plants' profits.
Fossil fuel-based generators have been under financial pressure over the past year as renewables drive down daytime power prices to levels where coal and gas struggle to compete.
South Australia's Victoria's Yallourn Power Station is set to shut four years early in 2028, one unit at NSW's Eraring Power Station will shut in 2030, and South Australia's Torrens Island B gas plant is set to mothball one unit next month.
State and federal governments are working on contingency plans for more early power plant closures amid concerns sudden exits could disrupt electricity supply.
The influx of wind and solar power, coupled with the boom in rooftop solar and investment in new transmission lines, is expected to fill the void because it will be backed by investment in dispatchable power projects - providing on-demand energy from new gas, batteries or pumped hydropower.
"Over the next five years we've got sufficient supply to meet the required reliability standards," the Australian Energy Market Operator's (AEMO) chief executive Daniel Westerman said, noting that power projects in the pipeline were progressing well.
The market operator forecasts rooftop solar would continue its boom and by 2026 could meet 77 per cent of daytime grid power demand, eroding the business cases for traditional power plants.
"Australia's love of rooftop solar is going as strong as ever, so the minimum operational demand is likely to cause us the biggest challenges by 2025," Mr Westerman said.
"Without additional operational tools, we may no longer be able to operate the (electricity market) securely in all periods from 2025 due to a lack of security services when demand from the grid is so low."
A reform being investigated by state and federal governments may help address this, Mr Westerman said. Under the proposal for a "capacity mechanism", retailers would pay generators to guarantee future supply by remaining in the grid or investing in new assets.
AEMO's latest upgrade has also lifted expectations for renewables penetration into the grid.
"Australia's energy transition really does continue at pace and now our base case forecast by 2025 is the national electricity market can be supplied by 100 per cent renewable energy," he said.
CREDIT: Mike Foley and Nick Toscano
Word count: 402
