TRENDS HOW TO UNLEASH YOUR INNER TOP GUN Soaring through the sky in a fighter jet and channeling your inner “Maverick” is on the rise as Australians seek heart-pumping action before the anticipated release of the Top Gun sequel.
More than 36 years since the first film starring Tom Cruise, joy flight operators say extreme adventure travel has increased – and they anticipate even more demand for these experiences once Top Gun: Maverick is released on Thursday.
In the past month, Adrenaline has seen a 22 per cent increase in people going on jet fighter experiences and a 31 per cent uplift in sales.
Across Google, there has been a 12 per cent increase in people searching for jet fighter flights and aerobatic experiences.
Adrenaline brand manager Toni Westlake says it’s the younger generations looking for action.
“Our data shows that males and females between 25-35 years old are seeking adventure in the skies, including aerobatic flights, flying lessons and jet fighter experiences,” she says. “Over the coming months, we expect to see spikes in demand across search and a second wave, once people start to see their friends and family posting their experiences via their social channels.” These experiences will inspire you to fly and dress like a Top Gun graduate: REACH FOR THE SKY From aerobatic flights to flying lessons and jet fighters, Adrenaline and RedBalloon offer a wide range of flying adventures that will have you feeling like Maverick.
Highlights include the Jet Fighter Flight in Bathurst, which allows thrill-seekers to experience real G-forces and accelerate to speeds of up to 800km/h.
“You can even live your Top Gun dreams in the skies with one of our flying lessons,” Westlake says. “A trained pilot will take you through the basics of flying and hand over control of the plane. Our Light Aircraft Flying Lesson in Melbourne is a bestseller.” In the lead-up to Top Gun: Maverick, Alex Spurzem of Air Combat Experiences Sydney says the business has created a Wingman experience allowing any missions to be shared by two passengers in a two-ship military style formation flight.
If you’re not high on the sky, experience the thrill of flying inside a realistic flight simulator.
Jet Flight Simulator Adelaide will have you doing barrel rolls, engaging with enemy aircraft in dog fights with full use of the laser-guided weapon systems and machine guns.
The Air Combat Centre in Queensland offers 30min and 60min sessions inside a F/A 18 Super Hornet simulator. Hit the skies and bomb ranges, take on enemy fighters or target drones.
Ace Combat 7: Skies Unknown on PS4 brings the enjoyment of flying jets to your living room and allows VR players to strap into the pilot’s seat and get going.
Jet flight to cloud nine WITH a background in aerospace engineering, Thomas Lapid says flying in a a fighter jet was a dream come true. Here’s his recollection: “The experience can only be described as out of this world! From meeting the pilot and climbing into the cockpit to the actual flight — it was surreal.
“After taking off, we cruised around before jumping into some low G-force manoeuvres. At first, when the pilot told me about the aerobatic moves that I would be experiencing mid-flight, I was quite nervous.
“But after we dived into some 2G wingovers, a move that involves a steep climb followed by a vertical flat-turn and short dive to level out, I was hooked.
“This was followed by a barrel roll, which was an amazing way to see the world upside-down, and a loop, a 4G manoeuvre that was nothing like I’ve experienced. You can really feel the weight (apparently 4x my actual weight!) and the G-force during this move.
“Overall, my fighter jet flight was nothing short of incredible. From the aerobatic moves to feeling the real impact of the G-force in the skies, I would recommend this to all adventure-seekers who are looking for a new thrill.” Once you’ve locked in your experience, it’s time to dress the part. From aviators to a basic white T-shirt, getting the look has never been easier to nail down.
You can look fly like Tom The jacket: Vogue Australia’s fashion features director Alice Birrell says biker jackets are back and popping up on runways.
“Prada’s version comes with a ready-made worn-in patina, as does Acne’s (pictured) – and has seen people digging out the classic from their wardrobes,” she says.
Websites such as Alpha Industries, The Iconic and Myer sell leather bomber and biker jackets at fair prices. And fashion stylist Donny Galella suggests adding patches for the “Maverick” look.
T-shirt and glasses: “If you just want to dip a toe in, a white T-shirt and a pair of aviators (The Row do the best versions of the latter) are effortlessly timeless,” Birrell says.
Galella recommends visiting your local retailer or jumping online for accessories. “Ray-Ban aviator-style sunglasses remain a style that is always in fashion because of their cool simplicity and elegance,” he says. “Choose a colour lens that best complements your hair colour and complexion.” Jeans: A pair of classic Levi’s 501 button fly jeans are also key. “These looser and relaxed style jeans are back in fashion thanks to all things late ‘90s trending again. Maverick opted for medium blue stonewash colour,” Galella says. Boots: “He also wore cowboy boots. Choose a nice pair of brown leather boots, which will be more versatile with items in your wardrobe.”
CREDIT: PATRICK TADROS
Word count: 914
