They also placed emphasis on the ability to support long-term growth while delivering performance and service. Projects in NSW such as the Sydney Harbour Bridge with eight traffic lanes, twin track rail and the Warragamba Dam have supported, without much augmentation, the growth of Sydney’s population from one million to five million.
Today, engineers get accused of gold-plating by politicians and economists alike, which means that, instead of getting projects that create the future, we get ones that deal with the past. Just look at the NSW bypasses at Nowra, Burrill Lake and Batemans Bay.
As an engineer, I once foolishly remarked that politicians had the right to listen to professional advice and then ignore it. But I didn’t think they’d take me seriously.
Peter Thornton, Killara, NSW
In selling the benefits of Queensland’s renewable energy program, the CSIRO states that wind and solar are the cheapest source of electricity generation.
In the next breath, and with more realistic assumptions, coal, gas and potentially nuclear are all claimed to be cheaper than renewable energy. Should we be confused?
David Crommelin, Strathfield, NSW
Senator Matt Canavan’s objection to net zero as a dangerous green pursuit from the get-go was principled. Now it is prescient.
Canavan’s commonsense observations cover the mission-impossible aim of net-zero carbon dioxide emissions, the national sovereign risk in signing up to international rules made by unelect­ed bodies, as well as his advoc­acy for coal and nuclear energies. The views have resonated far more than former prime minister Scott Morrison’s technology-not-taxes ever did.
Indeed, the truth is, having lost office by being Labor-lite, Morrison should now concede his net-zero foray was the wrong call – for the Liberal Party and for the nation.
Mandy Macmillan, Singleton, NSW
It will be a great pity if the energy problems of today subtract in any way from the fact that renewable energy is by far the cheapest form of producing energy – particularly in Australia where climatic conditions are ideal to produce energy from renewable sources. As an example, when solar and wind are used to produce energy there is no account for payment to be received for providing such services. Australia has an abundance of these free energy gifts from nature. Given time, and time is the key word, there is no doubt that renewable energy will, if given continued proper government support, provide Australians with the cheap energy we are so keen to have available.
It should not be forgotten that for the past nine years or so, Australia has lagged way behind the rest of the developed world in relation to developing the necessary infrastructure to enable renewable energy to be used in a truly progressive manner.
Brian Measday, Myrtle Bank, SA
Johannes Leak’s cartoon is a good one (12/10) and recalls Chris Bowen’s statement “if you don’t like our policies don’t vote for us”. Why would anyone in their right minds allow coal-fired power to be turned off before green energy was up to the task?
Paul Everingham, Hamilton, Qld
There’s a big elephant in the room in the mad rush towards renewables and net zero, with the premature closure of coal-fired power stations. According to the CSIRO, moving to net zero will all depend on “new technology”; that is, it just doesn’t exist now. It’s Field of Dreams stuff – “build it and they will come”. And don’t worry about the prediction this week by some energy CEOs that prices will rise by 35 per cent next year.
John Mikkelsen, Noosa, Qld
Just a reality check for Ron Hobba (Letters, 12/10) about his beloved nuclear power. The Olkiluoto nuclear plant in Finland took 13 years to build and had a cost blowout of €5.5bn. Nuclear remains one of the most expensive sources of producing power and the time it takes to commission a plant means it is not a practical means of solving our current energy crisis. And that’s without considering the waste issue.
Graeme Lechte, Brunswick, Vic
Word count: 645
