Wolseley's Nikki Ballinger participated in the National Youth Science Forum in January this year, thanks to a $500 sponsorship from the Bordertown Rotary Club.
She explained that participating students usually study at the Australian National University in Canberra for the two week experience.
However, because of COVID-19, the event was a mixture of in person visits and online lectures which could be accessed at any time during the two weeks.
Each day gave a choice of three different lectures to watch and ask questions. Nikki was pleased to watch many of them live, and also view many more after the two weeks had finished.
Lectures included critical thinking skills, when she learnt that a research scientist needs to challenge his or her personal opinions and try to prove the results wrong.
"We live in a world where much of our news can be misinterpreted or fake news can be spread, so as scientists we need to ensure that research will have the right influence on the people who read it," she said.
An advantage of being online was that participants could visit many places that would usually not be possible. A highlight for Nikki was a virtual tour of the CERN laboratory in Switzerland.
"A walk through the facility showed us the large hadron collider which is over 27 kilometres long. We learnt about the benefits which discovering new particles has on our world," Nikki said.
"I discovered many interesting areas of science from this talk and it sparked my interest in quantum physics."
An inspiration for Nikki is former Brisbane Lions defender, Justin Clarke, who retired from the AFL due to concussion, and was selected as a Rhodes Scholar this year.
"He now studies Aerospace engineering at Oxford University. His optimism and outlook on life made him someone to aspire to be," Nikki said.
Nikki then travelled to Adelaide and three days were spent at the University of Adelaide's Science Research Campus on North Terrace.
A tour of the Fibre Optics area revealed the university's progress in making in Fibre Optics. Two areas are for global communications and delicate medical operations.
"In the biological area, we witnessed the research happening in genetics and fertility treatments and how to achieve a greater percentage of successes in IVF treatments," Nikki said.
"Visiting the medical training facility allowed us to see the rooms for doctors to carry out operations.
"Day two took us the Technology Centre at Tinsley. There we gained an understanding of the technology used in a driverless bus that drove us around the campus."
At the Defence Science Technology Centre in Edinburgh, she was able to see underwater robots, sonar systems, self flying drones and many other systems being developed for use in the defence industry.
Nikki thanked the rotary club for the generous sponsorship in helping her to attend the forum.
CREDIT: Taylor Harvey
Word count: 476
