THERE was a different feeling in the excitement and pure joy shared among Ballarat's highest achievers in receiving their Academic Tertiary Admission Rank on Thursday morning.
There was an overwhelming sense of sheer relief after two year's studying for Victorian Education Certificates under interrupted pandemic conditions.
The hard work, focus and persistence has paid off for the Class of 2021, including a strong cohort completing their Victorian Certificate of Applied Learning in year 12 with limited and restricted chances to complete work experience.
You can see a gallery of some of Ballarat's highest VCE achievers here.
Ballarat Clarendon College's Jackson Dun was the top-scoring dux in the city with a ranking of 99.95 but Ballarat's highest achievers say this year has been about far more than just studying - it has been about striking the a good balance.
BALLARAT CHRISTIAN COLLEGE Matthew Van Den Hoek (highest ATAR student)
ATAR: Not disclosed
SUBJECTS: English, mathematical methods, physics, business management, certificate III in Christian studies
Matthew hopes to eventually become an engineer involved with mechanical design, computational engineering and AI learning.
His extra-curricular activity was the piano and he has just sat his grade five piano exam.
Ballarat Christain College did not award a dux in 2021.
BALLARAT CLARENDON COLLEGE Jackson Dun
ATAR: 99.95
SUBJECTS INCLUDE: Further Mathematics, English Language, Chemistry and Extension Mathematics (via University of Melbourne)
BORN in South Australia, Jackson Dun followed his family to live on a station in the Kimberley region of Western Australia then North-East Arnhem Land.
In Ballarat, Jackson said he found a greater sense of calm in the classroom with a greater chance to study.
He arrived in Ballarat for year seven and joined his brother, who was already a student at Ballarat Clarendon College.
Jackson felt College offered him the best chance to learn and feel prepared for exams.
Even so, Jackson was surprised by his ATAR and final study scores.
"I looked at them, but definitely wasn't expecting a 50 in English - I had to re-read my results," Jackson said. "I got my results first thing this morning but sat there for a few minutes by myself, just to take it all in.
"...I never felt like I was studying too hard. I think I kept up consistency in my studies, tried my hardest on my SACs and by the time of exams, I was pretty ready."
RELATED COVERAGE
Ballarat's VCE Class of 2021 learn final ATAR rank and scores Year 12 students: your rank will not define your life. Take this from experience Jackson achieved a perfect study score of 50 in further mathematics last year and built on that with perfect scores in English Language and Chemistry this year.
Taking a university level mathematics subject allowed Jackson to both extend his studies and offer him a taste of what might tertiary studies might feel like.
Eleven College students achieved an ATAR above 99 and 15 per cent scored 98 or higher. The Class of 2021 had a median study score of 37 and ATAR of 91.
Students' post-school plans are diverse - from aviation and aerospace engineering to agronomy and the armed services, marine biology, optometry, teaching and veterinary medicine.
A keen chess player - starved of tournaments during the pandemic - Jackson kept active and relaxed away from his studies by playing squash, cycling and running.
Jackson plans to study a Bachelor of Science, likely at University of Melbourne, to better decide which brand of science he might want to pursue further for a potential career.
Home schooling suited Jackson. He believed it might have even played to his advantage with less distractions to study and more time to balance relaxation but he looked forward to getting back into a classroom for formal learning once more.
BALLARAT GRAMMAR James O'Sullivan
ATAR: 99.55
SUBJECTS: Specialist mathematics, chemistry, physics, physical education, English language, mathematical methods (2020)
Another year of the coronavirus pandemic worked in James O'Sullivan's favour.
The Buninyong teenager said the restrictions Ballarat was placed under in 2020, causing most sports and venues to close, gave him more time to study.
"I missed out on all of the fun things of year 12 but I had more time to spend on my work rather than socialising," James said.
The school captain said his teachers were very supportive during remote learning.
"I ask a lot of questions. When learning remotely, I would ask questions on Microsoft Teams and they would always reply to me. I was very fortunate to have very good teachers this year," James said.
A talented tennis player who was playing tournaments in Melbourne before coronavirus, said he turned to the court to release his tension.
"I love playing sport so any chance to get out is always good."
James said he had an older brother, Matt, who studied similar VCE subjects to him, and gave him some valuable feedback.
He said his sister Emma, who has an intellectual disability, always brought him down to earth while his parents always put his year 12 studies first.
James has not decided what his university path looks like or what his career will be just yet, but he is interested in mathematics and science.
He is certain of one thing though, that he wants to go to Melbourne University and live at the residential Queens College.
James started at Ballarat Grammar in grade one after he and his family moved to Ballarat from Horsham.
He thanked his family, teachers and friends for their support during 2021.
BALLARAT HIGH SCHOOL James Sharp
ATAR: 92.90
SUBJECTS: Biology, Chemistry, Psychology, Mathematical Methods, Further Mathematics, English.
A STRONGER focus on health and well-being was a key factor in James Sharp stepping up his studies for year 12.
James cut back his video gaming to focus more on himself and finding more balance in his schooling - and the results showed.
"I spent time working on myself: meditating, yoga and working out," James said. "I wanted to feel really healthy and playing games all the time I didn't always feel my best. I found other ways to try and keep busy in lockdowns."
James said studying year 12 further maths last year allowed him a taste of what he might expect in his final year of school, and the work ethic required to do well.
His girlfriend helped him in taking up yoga and meditation, which he said made a big difference.
James celebrated his year 12 results from the moment they dropped while in a video call with a group of friends from different schools.
A proud Ballarat High student - his mum is also an alumna - James said he enjoyed the diversity of his classmates and the different perspectives they offered both in classes and the school yard.
"I've just liked meeting everyone through the years here," James said.
While uncertain exactly what path he wanted to take next, James is planning to defer for a year and regroup after such an interrupted finish to his schooling in the pandemic.
"I've got the ATAR I need, so I want to spend the year working and making some money and then I'll look at biomed," James said.
"I've got a whole year to decide before I reapply to university."
DAMASCUS COLLEGE Mia Lepair
ATAR: 98.2
SUBJECTS: Chemistry, English Language, French, Mathematical Methods, Biology, Further Mathematics.
DISTANCE runner Mia Lepair found extended periods of home learning allowed her more flexibility to build exercise about her study routine in year 12.
The bulk of the cross-country season was sidelined under pandemic restrictions but Mia said she kept up training as a bit of an outlet from her studies.
Mia, who lives in Buninyong, said good connections with teachers and supportive fellow students had also played a key role in her academic achievements at Damascus College.
Mia topped her Damascus cohort with an ATAR of 98.2 with plans to study a Bachelor of Science at University of Melbourne next year.
"It's kind of a relief it's all finally done and over with," Mia said. "It has been a difficult two years with COVID-19 and remote learning, so I was especially excited when I received my results this morning.
"I was hoping my score reflected my efforts.
"I have loved my time at Damascus and hanging out with my friends. As I look back, it has been the camp and co-curricular experiences that I have really enjoyed alongside my classroom learning."
Mia's workload was predominantly in maths and science but she chose to study French both as something a little different and because she had dreams as a little girl of visiting France one day.
Once she started learning French, Mia wanted to continue studying the language through to year 12.
During her time at Damascus, Mia excelled in her studies and earned a school academic excellence award in all six years.
Damascus had 122 students complete their VCE this year and 27 students completed year 12 VCAL.
Seven Damascus students earned an ATAR in the high-90s.
LORETO COLLEGE Mia Mulheron
ATAR: 99.55
SUBJECTS: Biology, Mathematical Methods, Chemistry, Specialist Mathematics, English and French.
THERE is something special about being a Loreto girl for Mia Mulheron.
The Loreto College dux said support from the school community, her peers and teachers - whether they directly teach you or not - was what Mia loved most about her time at Loreto.
Mia said it had been hard to gauge how she might perform in her studies after what had been an interrupted two years' facing home learning stints amid the pandemic.
"It's just a relief it's over," Mia said. "I got a call this morning from [Loreto principal] Mrs Brodrick telling me I was dux, but I didn't think I would do that well.
"It's good to be here at school with a lot of the girls to celebrate."
Mia, who lives in Smythes Creek, said it was tough to keep up extra-curricular activities in the pandemic. She likes to play "different sports" such as croquet and badminton. While there was not a lot of chance to play sports this year, Mia said academic showdowns such as maths competitions and Tournament of Minds gave her a slightly changed focus to her studies.
Studying French in year 12 also offered Mia a "good break" from a strong load of science and mathematics.
Now Mia will take a chance to "chill" a little for the summer and to firm up what she might like to study next.
Mia is keenly looking to a science degree, possibly engineering or medical research. Her ATAR gives her more options.
Almost 15 per cent of Loreto year 12 students achieved an ATAR of 90 or higher.
Loreto College principal Michelle Brodrick said this was a great chance to recognise the efforts of every student who completed their VCE or VCAL, the latter of which had work placements heavily impacted by pandemic conditions.
"Just to see the look on the girls' faces today, how happy they are and how super proud, is wonderful," Ms Brodrick said.
MOUNT CLEAR COLLEGE Yuri Hoashi
ATAR: 98.15
SUBJECTS: English, mathematical methods, specialist mathematics, chemistry, physics (2020), Japanese second language (2020)
A desire to get a good ATAR result and go to university motivated Yuri Hoashi during another year of coronavirus lockdowns.
Yuri said it was difficult to not let distractions get in the way of his year 12 studies.
"When you have computers in front of you, you can game any time you want or use social media. I managed to stay focused and get away from all of the distractions," Yuri said.
"My motivation was just my own desire to go to university, get a good score and get scholarships. A lot of people struggled during lockdown. Knowing that motivated me to do even more work because everyone else would slack off. That made me think to study more."
Yuri did not expect his score to be high but his score allows him to be considered into an accelerated program at Monash University where he wants to study engineering.
He hopes to gain his masters in engineering at the same time as a bachelor of engineering.
"I found the course from my friend because I didn't have anything in particular I wanted to do," Yuri said.
"I haven't decided the exact major but I want to do something with engineering and go from there."
Yuri said he played competitive soccer in 2020 but it was cancelled halfway through the season. He decided not to play in 2021 in case the competition was cancelled again.
But he said he still played soccer with his friends and watched a lot of professional soccer matches to get himself away from his school work.
Yuri, who lives with his parents in Mount Helen, said his parents were very supportive.
MOUNT ROWAN SECONDARY COLLEGE Amy Cook
ATAR: Not disclosed
SUBJECTS: Biology, chemistry, health and human development, English, further mathematics
Amy Cook had almost gone a full day before she told her parents she had been awarded dux of Mount Rowan Secondary College.
The 18-year-old said she had found out her high achievement after her parents had left to go to work and she wanted to wait for them to return home to surprise them.
"My parents are very excited and very happy (with my ATAR) but they don't know I am the college dux," Amy said on Thursday afternoon.
Amy said she found year 12 difficult due to the coronavirus pandemic which forced students to learn at home.
"It was a struggle to do my work at home. Finding motivation was hard but I gave myself set times like, I would work for 60 minutes, have a 10 minute break or watch a video," she said.
Amy said her teachers were supportive and remembers how nice it was to see her teachers and friends after everyone was allowed back in the classroom.
To balance her study throughout the year, Amy made sure she took part in extra-curricular activities, including dance, casual work at KFC Wendouree and reading books.
She is in her ninth year with Jayde Calisthenic Club.
Amy said she had not yet decided on what to study at university in 2022 but she was interested in science or secondary school education.
"I'm looking forward to a new journey. University will be different to school but I'm looking forward to more independence and making new friends," she said.
Until she starts university, Amy will continue working at KFC Wendouree where she has just been promoted to chef supervisor and manager.
PHOENIX P-12 COMMUNITY COLLEGE Isolde Kieni-Judd
ATAR: 94.1
SUBJECTS: Media, drama, art, studio art, English literature
Isolde Kieni-Judd hopes her dream to become a script writer or script supervisor comes true.
The 18-year-old has already settled herself in Melbourne where she will study a bachelor of film and television at JMC Academy in 2022.
Isolde said she did not expect the ATAR result she achieved because the subjects she studied were scaled down.
"I was doing two folio subjects so I didn't know I was going to do well in both," Isolde said.
She said at the start of year 11 in 2020, she traveled to the Netherlands on an exchange program for one year, but due to the coronavirus pandemic, she had to return home within six months.
However, Isolde said this turned out to be a good thing because it helped her to better prepare for year 12.
She said 2021 had its challenges with remote learning at her family's Ballarat East home and preparing live drama performances online, which she did not know would be performed in front of an audience or not.
Art was another difficult subject to carry out at home because it is mostly practical but Isolde said her teachers were very good in organising the day's work.
Isolde was the college's band captain and house captain.
"It was nice to be involved in the planning of things, especially in a world where we didn't know what was going ahead," she said.
Isolde recalls why she chose to do her schooling at Phoenix P-12 Community College: She saw the college's music teacher playing a trumpet on a visit to her primary school.
While studying VCE, Isolde was proud to continue her work on the youth board of the Science Gallery in Melbourne, which explores the collision of art and science.
She joined the board in year eight after Phoenix P-12 Community College gave her an application and hopes to continue her involvement over the coming years.
Isolde made the move to Bundoora on the day of her last exam in October. She works as a food and beverage attendant at Crown Conservatory.
She said she was on the tram on her way to work when she found out her ATAR result.
ST PATRICK'S COLLEGE Jack Sheehan
ATAR: 99.85
SUBJECTS: Literature, Specialist Mathematics, Mathematical Methods, Physics, Further Mathematics and Software Development.
THREE St Patrick's College students achieved ATAR rankings above 99 for their VCE results and Jack Sheehan had the edge with a 99.85.
The college vice-captain was also one of two St Pat's students to earn a perfect study score of 50 - he chalked up the feat in literature.
"My sister did [literature] and really enjoyed it. I was always geared towards maths and sciences but I also always enjoyed creative story-telling and it off-set the rigours of my other subjects. I could read books, analyse and discuss them," Jack said.
Classmates Connor Gaffney (99.8) and Hugh Ollerenshaw (99.35) joined Jack with ATARs above 99 and were among 11 St Pat's students to earn ATAR rankings of 90 or above.
Jack planned to study a science degree and major in computer software, following success in software development as a year 12 subject last year.
A chance to be on student council really opened Jack's eyes to the workings of the wider school community, particularly in a year hampered by pandemic restrictions.
"This was the first leadership role I'd had at St Pat's. Working closely with student council you get to know the background working of the school," Jack said.
"You're also in the public eye and representing the school more, so need to set an example.
"It was interesting to see the school differently in my final year, especially compared to junior years when you tend to be in your own bubble."
St Pat's year 12s had a modified valedictory dinner. Boat Race had no crowds and no spit crews. There was no formal.
Year 12 was tough and different to what Jack had expected and hoped. Jack found home learning suited him better than others, in terms of motivation to study, but he said the chance to finish school on-site for term four was vital.
"In term three we didn't have a full week of school once," Jack said. "All the not-knowing...I think I was one week off burning out in lockdown."
Year 11 student Matthew Jones joined Jack with a perfect study score for a year 12 subject at St Pat's. Matthew's feat was in further mathematics.
St Patrick's College principal Steven O'Connor said staff were pleased with all efforts of VCE students in what had been a challenging two years.
"It has been a tough road for all students across the state and in this sense, I am really proud of the achievements of the students from St Pat's," Mr O'Connor said. "Our college dux Jack Sheehan recorded an ATAR of 99.95, which is remarkable adn reflects the hard work and dedication that Jack - and so many others - displayed, despite the impact of the pandemic.
"...Many boys achieved personal best results and we are proud of these as well."
Woodmans Hill Secondary College Veronica McCarthy
ATAR: 94.9
SUBJECTS: English, food studies, biology, history revolutions, mathematical methods, chemistry (2020)
Veronica McCarthy is going to take a gap year in 2022 but to keep herself occupied with things other than work, she is going to learn the art of Patisserie.
The 17-year-old hopes to complete a certificate three in patisserie at the William Angliss Institute in Melbourne.
Veronica's mother suggested the William Angliss Institute and Veronica loved the idea.
"I always knew I was going to take a gap year. I thought I would take some baking classes and then Mum encouraged me to do a qualification, get a certificate so I can get a good job while at university," Veronica said.
In 2023 after her gap year, Veronica will apply to study wildlife and conservation biology at Deakin University.
"I have always liked animals and being around them. In about year eight was when I started thinking about environmental science seriously," she said.
"I found this course just this year and it sounded like what I wanted to do."
Veronica said she had not expected to receive the ATAR result she achieved. She said she concentrated on completing her work and believed she would "get what I get out of it".
She said studying through remote learning due to the coronavirus pandemic was a struggle at times but she got through it.
"It started off ok but there was a lull in between. It was a little bit of a struggle but I got through it," she said.
Veronica said she worked one day a week and often played volleyball with her friends at lunch time which was "good fun".
Veronica learned how to crochet, making two vests, which she said had made her feel relaxed.
Veronica was born in Melbourne, moved to Perth when four and moved to Gordon in 2012.
If you are seeing this message you are a loyal digital subscriber to The Courier, as we made this story available only to subscribers. Thank you very much for your support and allowing us to continue telling Ballarat's story. We appreciate your support of journalism in our great city.
CREDIT: Melanie Whelan and Erin Williams
Word count: 3655
