More than 70 companies, institutions, government departments and associations are involved in the space industry in South Australia. These include: GLOBAL COMPANIES Airbus Defence and Space – pioneer in aerospace and earth observation satellites.
BAE Systems – leader in space, defence, aerospace, IT and security. Boeing – the world’s largest manufacturer of commercial aircraft, defence, satellite, space and security systems.
Cobham Aviation – largest contract aviation service provider in Australia, owned by Cobham Plc, technology and services innovator to the global space industry.
Lockheed Martin – global security and aerospace provider.
Northrop Grumman – developer of autonomous systems, intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance.
SpeedCast – global satellite communications provider.
SA-BASED COMPANIES Aerometrex – mapping service using imagery from satellite and aerial sources. Atrad – radar researcher and manufacturer.
Axiom Precision Manufacturing – component maker for space and aerospace. Elementrex and Nodesat – data aggregator and interpreter.
Fleet Space Technologies – Internet of Things communication service provider. Fullarton Space Biotech – research into micro-organisms in space. Geoplex – geospatial data analysis.
Greenhouse Gas Monitor Australia – development of space and terrestrial technology to detect trace gases.
Inovor – nanosatellite-based system to detect objects in space to assist avoidance of debris and assets. Separate business stream designs and builds satellites.
Irriscan Australia – Earth observation data analysis for agricultural enterprises.
Launchbox Australia – educational materials on space for students. Mirage Photonics – laser development and consultants.
Myriota – Internet of Things communication service provider. Neumann Space – developing plasma propulsion systems.
Nova Systems – aerospace engineering and management consultant. Shoal Engineering – expertise includes modelling of launch and re-entry vehicles.
Silentium Defence – radar technology developer.
Small World Communications – error control on communications. Southern Launch — developing launch facility near Port Lincoln.Toolcraft – manufacturer of rocket components.
Word count: 296
