FIFTY years ago today, Australia was on the cusp of playing a key role in one of the most significant moments in world history.
At 12.26pm on July 21, 1969, about 600 million people watched as Neil Armstrong walked on the moon.
The CSIRO’s Parkes radio telescope, along with NASA’s antenna at Honeysuckle Creek, near Canberra, played a key role in televising the momentous event.
Even with the passage of time, the lunar landing stands out as an epic achievement, a triumph of co-operation and goodwill in a time of Cold War and conflict.
It happened fewer than 12 years after the Soviet Union launched the first artificial Earth satellite in 1957, called Sputnik 1.
It was little more than eight years after the Soviet Union’s Yuri Gagarin became the first human to journey into outer space, in 1961.
The space race galvanised the US, which poured billions of dollars into the research and development necessary to craft a lunar program. In today’s terms, the budget is simply astronomical.
The technological advances generated by the space program go far beyond the landmark achievement of taking human beings to the moon for the first time. The developments in fields including aerospace, engineering, electronics, are simply too numerous to list.
Today, Adelaide is spearheading a fresh Australian effort to develop a national space program.
South Australia was an early leader, even before the Apollo program, because of the Woomera rocket range.
But that leadership role was overtaken and, sadly, neglected for some time. In recent times, the world has rediscovered the excitement of space. It is a field that has a capacity to inspire, like few others.
This shows the opportunity for Australia’s program. We can and must harness this public excitement and passion, in the state and national interest.
The achievements of the past can inspire us all to a greater future.Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Matt Deighton, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 329
