SOUND DESIGNER 1 Sound designers work across a range of media, such as theatre, television, installation art and video games. They typically generate and manipulate music and sounds as well as design the physical sound system and train its board operators. They need creativity and imagination and often have a background in music. Vocational qualifications are available, such as the Certificate III in Music Industry (Electronic Music Production) or Diploma of Audio Engineering and Sound Production. University options are available, too, such as the Bachelor of Creative Technology (Audio Engineering and Sound Production) or the Master of Creative Industries. PayScale Australia reveals the median salary is $55,000 but can range from $48,000 to $79,000. Many work as freelancers, earning a median rate of $45 an hour.
WEDDING CELEBRANT 2 Pulling on heart strings and striking a chord is a standard workday for wedding celebrants as they present the story of loved-up couples to friends and family.
But performing ceremonies is just a small part of the role. There is also preparatory work such as writing speeches, paperwork, rehearsals, and legal responsibilities.
The Attorney-General’s Department says Commonwealth-registered marriage celebrants – of which there are more than 9000 – must complete five hours of professional development every year. Typically, a Certificate IV in Celebrancy is also required.
Easy Weddings’ 2020 Australian Wedding Industry Report reveals the average celebrant earns $794 per wedding.
AEROSPACE ENGINEER3 This involves the design and maintenance of aircraft, spacecraft, satellites and missiles, and the development of new technologies for use in aviation, defence and exploration. Most have at least an undergraduate degree, such as a Bachelor of Engineering (Aerospace Engineering) (Honours), which requires four years’ full-time study and covers topics from measuring the chord of wing to building drones to solving sustainability issues in aviation. JobOutlook figures reveal about 1200 Australians are employed as aeronautical engineers, which are a type of aerospace engineer. Most work full time (93 per cent), are male (92 per cent) and are aged 25 to 34 (36 per cent). More than a quarter (28 per cent) hold a postgraduate qualification. PayScale Australia reveals the average salary of an aerospace engineer is $78,600.
Word count: 360
