ONE of the Sri Lankan terror suicide bombers brought his wife and child to Australia on a “student” visa while he studied for a postgraduate degree in engineering.
Having obtained a degree in aerospace engineering at the Kingston University in England, Abdul Jameel Mohamed was given “student and graduate skilled visa” status.
Part of the visa conditions was that his spouse and child were also allowed to live in Victoria while Mohamed did his postgraduate degree.
The family left in 2013 and never returned.
The high academic achiever was part of an Islamic State death squad responsible for one of the worst acts of terror since the September 11, 2001, attacks in the US.
At least 359 people died in the Easter Sunday attacks on luxury hotels and churches in Sri Lanka and more than 500 others were injured.
Mohamed’s prime target was the five-star Taj Samudra hotel but the attack was foiled by a faulty suicide vest.
According to intelligence sources, he then retreated back to a safe house, where the bombs were assembled and he managed to repair it.
He then struck at a guesthouse close to Colombo zoo, killing himself and another person. Authorities are also investigating if he was forced to take the bag away from the Taj Samudra – between the Shangri-La and the Cinnamon Grand hotels, which were both attacked in simultaneous bomb blasts – when a staff member saw it and gave it to him.
Mohamed had checked into the Taj Samudra hotel the day before the multiple atrocities happened. Intelligence agencies are probing his links to the UK and in Australia to see if he had been radicalised in either country and the dates when he made contact with IS jihadists.
Mohamed was part of the bomber group described as “well-educated”, “upper middle class men” who were “financially quite independent”.
The Melbourne-educated bomber was also involved in Islamic student bodies and charities in the Middle East.
Meanwhile, Sri Lankan authorities set off more controlled detonations of suspicious items as soldiers stop-ped and searched vehicles.
Investigators continued to comb through a mansion with nine front balconies where investigators said suspects detonated a ninth bomb on Sunday that killed three police officers who were pursuing them.
Sri Lanka’s former navy chief says a father of two Easter suicide bombers was arrested on suspicion of aiding his sons. It takes the number of terror suspects arrested since the bombings to 62.PAGE 53: MORE WORLD NEWS
CREDIT: ALEKS DEVIC
Word count: 414
