RIGHT now, we’re on the brink of a new era in transportation. Autonomous vehicles, shared mobility services, electric vehicle technologies – even the development of unmanned aerial vehicles – all promise to revolutionise how we travel.
It’s an exciting time: not since Henry Ford invented the Model T in 1908 has the transport sector seen this much disruption. And, while many of these technologies are still in their infancy, when they’re market-ready, the implications are likely to be profound.
Already, shared mobility has had a significant impact on transport systems. In New York, for example, ride-share services such as Uber, have become more popular than the city’s ubiquitous yellow taxis.
It’s a scenario also mirrored in Sydney, where the average value of a taxi licence has declined from $400,000 to $80,0000 since the advent of Uber.
The rise of collaborative consumption reflects the broader transition from an ownership-based economy to an access-based economy.
Indeed, the turn of the 21st century has seen suggestions of “peak car”, with stagnant or declining levels of private car use across much of the developed world, including Australia.
For example, between 2001 and 2016, per capita vehicle kilometres travelled decreased by 6 per cent nationally, and the rate at which people under 25 get driver’s licences dropped by more than 10 per cent in Victoria and New South Wales.
Autonomous vehicle technology could even accelerate “peak car”, helping households downsize from two cars to one, or potentially, none at all.
Such technology will enable a new form of micro public tr­an­sport where on-demand, door-to-door transport services will deliver cheaper, faster and more convenient transport options.
And of course, this is achieved without the drawbacks of mass public transport services that require large catchment areas to be feasible, or private transport, where high parking costs and frequent congestion can limit access and use.
Parallel with these developments, electric cars are also becoming more commercially feasible. And, despite current challenges (high costs, low driving ranges, long charging times and limited public charging infrastructure) most experts agree that the electrification of our transport system is not a question of if, but when.
Interestingly, companies like Google and Uber have also been testing pilotless planes, the next-gen taxis – with Uber announcing plans to trial these in Melbourne next year.
Together, shared electric autonomous (and potentially flying) vehicles promise to be cheaper, safer and more energy efficient than any other existing mode of transport.
Fifty years from now, most urban regions across the world will likely not allow humans to drive. And, in 100 years, we’ll look back at this period and ask ourselves how we ever allowed humans to drive in the first place.
Like the horse-drawn carriage that came before, the human-operated car will likely be nothing more than a quaint object from a distant past.AKSHAY VIJ IS SENIOR RESEARCH FELLOW AT THE UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA’S INSTITUTE FOR CHOICE
CREDIT: AKSHAY VIJ
Word count: 487
