AUSTRALIANS are unwilling to relinquish their grip on their car’s steering wheel anytime soon with more than half saying they will never feel safe in a driverless vehicle.
The development of autonomous vehicles, which could pave the way for fleets of low-cost shared vehicles, is also not considered a priority for improving transport in increasingly crowded cities.
The findings are part of a national survey gauging the views of more than 1500 Australians on the future of transport. It was funded by mining giant Rio Tinto.
The public’s unenthusiastic embrace of driverless vehicles comes as tech giants including Google, Amazon, Uber and Tesla invest heavily in the space.
Rio has rolled out driverless trucks and trains at its mines and is moving to tap new deposits of lithium to cash in on an expected rise in electric vehicles.
The survey found 51 per cent of Australians said driverless cars would never address their safety concerns.
More than 30 per cent said the use of such vehicles should be restricted to delivering goods.
A swag of Silicon Valley tech giants are betting households will give up their car with the future of transport to be driverless and shared.
Australians are yet to be convinced with 40 per cent say the development of autonomous vehicle technology is “not a priority at all” when it comes to addressing transport needs.
Rio Tinto growth and innovation group executive Steve McIntosh said demonstrating the success of driverless vehicles in the mining sector could help overturn widespread unease about their safety.
Rio rolled out its first driverless truck in the Pilbara a decade ago while it completed its autonomous train project, world’s first fully autonomous heavy haul rail system, late last year. “We’ve learnt some really important lessons about autonomous vehicles,” Mr McIntosh said.
“We’ve dealt with speeds, collision avoidance, obstruction, level crossings, complexities of weather and terrain. This lays a solid foundation for their use in everyday life.” Mr McIntosh said the roll out of driverless vehicles had created safer mine sites and would create safer roads.
“Safety improvements we are seeing from autonomous trucks, trains and drill rigs could put us (Rio) on a path to eliminate fatalities at work in my lifetime,” he said.
The nation is more enthusiastic about electric vehicles with two-thirds of Australians predicting most cars will be electric in 20 years.
Cost, however, is the key barrier preventing people from buying one. Bloomberg predicts electric vehicles will increase from 1.1 million worldwide in 2017 to 30 million in 2030 as they become cheaper to make than petrol and diesel cars.In aviation, one-third of Aussies expect air to be able to book air travel on demand is the same way they would call up a taxi in the next 10 years.
CREDIT: JOHN DAGGE
Word count: 464
