Technology has gone mainstream and smart homes, once the domain of the tech savvy and the very wealthy only, are swiftly becoming the norm.
In case you’re not familiar with the concept, a smart home is simply one where ordinary objects and products (think light switches or stereo systems) are interconnected thanks to digital networks.
A smart home means you can see who is at the front door via digitally connected security cameras that speak to your phone, for example, or digital home screen via an app. Or it may be a light you can dim by voice command. The same technology allows you to ask your digital assistant (which you set to recognise your voice or in some cases your face) to screen the news highlights on the TV or play your favourite podcast all without lifting a finger. Legrand Australia ambassador Tim Ross believes smart home automation systems are becoming increasingly popular in Australia and he’s not surprised either. “Having the ability to control your lights, appliances, heating and home security, all remotely, from your smartphone is impressive,” he says. Tim, though, is a self-declared tech nerd so it makes sense he would embrace tech.  What about the average Aussie family however? Are we embracing this trend at the same rate? The Good Guys says yes. “Smart tech has made its way into pretty much every room of most homes, from smart TVs, voice-controlled speakers to ovens that can follow recipes and fridges that can order your food shop,” says George Panagiotidis, TGG’s GM of consumer electronics. Read on to learn more and discover our pick of the bunch.
ENTERTAIN WITH EASE Impress your guests by replacing existing switches and power points with voice-activated digital versions.
Excel Life Smart is a series of smart switches and power points which allow you to turn on the lights, power up the fan or turn up the tunes instantly.
Tim Ross, tech guru and ambassador for Legrand, says these innovative technologies can help completely transform and elevate the home entertaining experience.
“I love having people over for dinner or drinks, but I don’t like worrying whether or not my guests are having a good time,” says Tim.
“Having the ability to control my lights, appliances and cooling all from my smartphone, has been an absolute gamechanger when it comes to entertaining.” For more information about Excel Life Smart, visit Legrand.com.au
KNOW YOUR WEATHER Has the weather ever ruined your plans? If so you’ve got a couple of options. You can hop on to a website and do a little research before you organise an event next time, or scroll through to your favourite weather app. These, it has to be said, are generally pretty reliable. But if you want truly localised weather reports you can’t go past the Netatmo Smart Home Weather Station.
This clever clogs device has an indoor and outdoor module, which you place inside your home or yard for seven-day weather predictions based on your exact location. They also provide information about your indoor temperature, humidity, air quality and even noise levels. And, they look good too.
Learn more at Thegoodguys.com.au
PLAY IT SAFE If you’re concerned about home safety and like the idea of a security camera, check out the eufy Floodlight Cam 2 Pro. This is the first smart floodlight camera to feature 360-degree pan and tilt capability for a complete view with no blind spots, unlike most outdoor security cameras, which have a limited field of view.
The camera also features motion detection and A.I. human detection that will automatically lock-on, record and track any subject while it’s in motion.
Works with Google Voice Assistant and Alexa, the Floodlight is fitted with three LED light panels, effectively deterring any unwanted visitors. Smart lighting turns on and off at sunset and sunrise too.
More at Thegoodguys.com.au
ORGANISE EVERYTHING If you’re new to the whole smart home situ the Echo Show 15 home screen is a great place to start. This 15-inch screen is wifi-connected and, thanks to Alexa, has the capacity to both sort your life and become the true digital heart of your home. Once set up to recognise your voice (or even your face) you can ask it to do pretty much anything and hey presto it does. Alexa can take care of your calendar events, reminders and jot down notes for you. You can ask Alexa to play party tunes (the sound quality is excellent), set a timer for jumping jacks, provide recipes, update you on the news and much more. The program’s widgets continually refresh so you have the latest information on your screen too.
Visit Amazon.com.au for more
LIGHT IT UP If you’re looking to save energy and reduce your power bill, lights with adjustable brightness and timer capabilities are worth a look. The HPM Smart Downlight is a terrific option; all you need do is connect your downlights to your smart device and you have control from anywhere at home including dimmable, colour and temperature control all via an app. We also like Tapo SmartWi-Fi Light Bulbs which work with both Amazon Alexa and Google Assistant. This means instead of fumbling in the dark of an evening, you can ask that the lights be switched on automatically. Tapo Smart Wi-Fi Light Bulbs are available at Thegoodguys.com.au
CREDIT: Words; Kelly Baker
Word count: 890
