Last year the Waterfall Gully to Mount Lofty walking track was given a $5 million upgrade, and it’s worth every cent to the hundreds of thousands of people who use it each year. There’s now more than 3km of pebbly concrete path and a few hundred metres of non-slip boardwalks over the boggy areas.
I used to head up there occasionally but I’ve been turned into a regular tracker by a friend. He turns 50 in June this year and last November he set himself two interconnected goals. The first, to walk to the summit in less than 45 minutes, and the other is to lose 15kg, and both have to be achieved by his birthday.
The two of us trek up and back at least once a week and more often than not twice a week. I’ve dropped my time from just under 50 minutes to around 44 in the past three months and he’s gone from 52 minutes to 47. My friend is also seeing the kilos drop away and I’m sure he’ll achieve his goal.
But now we’re regular walkers we’re interested in another goal. Ridding the park of the rubbish people drop. The paper tissues are always there. They’re unsightly but the plastic is unforgivable. And it’s not just the plastic lolly and chewing gum wrappers. On the last walk we picked up six plastic drink bottles, a takeaway cup with plastic lid and a soft drink can. That’s one drink container about every 500m. The can would’ve rusted away if it wasn’t picked up but the plastic won’t. It will break down and likely be washed to the sea.
So let’s have a $1000 fine for the litterers and the rattan for repeat offenders. The birds of Lord Howe Island, whose stomachs are full of bits of plastic, would be grateful and it would stop them killing their young when they feed them. All plastic that flows down from the hills and plains through the creeks and drains to the sea is carried on currents and breaks down in sunlight to polluting particles killing and poisoning seabirds and marine life globally.
By pure coincidence I was walking along the track last weekend listening to a podcast by Dr Andrew “Twiggy” Forrest. He’s the second richest person in Australia with a collective wealth of more than $23 billion. The mining magnate completed a PhD in marine science just over a year ago, and he and his wife are spending a sizeable part of their fortune fighting plastic pollution.
I knew plastic was a problem for our oceans but Dr Forrest stunned me by describing the scale of the problem and how concern over microplastics has now turned to nano plastics. He said these are particles so small they are able to pass through the blood-brain barrier.
There’s an old saying we reap what we sow. And another you are what you eat. So by using our rivers and oceans as rubbish dumps for decades we have now poisoned the waters that feed us. By creating a predominantly plastic world we are also ingesting plastic in the air through the microfibres in our synthetic clothes, children’s toys, floor coverings, upholstery and furniture.
It’s everywhere. It’s in our food and drink. A World Health Organisation review in 2019 found it was in bottled and tap water. Another report said Australians were consuming about 2000 tiny plastic particles a week or about 21g a month. That’s about a credit card’s worth – but at what price?
The latest research into different types of micro and nano plastics suggests it has the potential to cause stress and inflammation in cells of the nervous system and damage DNA. Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s and a range of other neurodegenerative diseases are being looked at to see the role played by exposure to plastics at the cellular level. It adds a whole new meaning to the term neuroplasticity.
The CSIRO published a report last October showing plastic pollution is far worse than we thought. It’s in sea ice around Antarctica, in the sea floor sediment in the Great Australian Bight and even in the deepest waters of the Mariana Trench. Millions of tonnes of plastic ends up in the sea every year and three-quarters of the rubbish found along the Australian coastline is plastic.
So what’s the answer? We need to eliminate as much plastic as possible from our lives and wear and buy natural fibre products. Choose linen, cotton, wool, hemp and even bamboo. I wish Dr Forrest and his wife Nicola, and their Minderoo Foundation, every success with their war on plastic pollution. You can find out more and see and hear Dr Forrest’s ideas at noplasticwaste.org
CREDIT: Ian Henschke
Word count: 788
