ITALIAN automation company Nice will relocate to the Tonsley Innovation District early next year following development of a new state-of-the-art facility.
With 24 branches across the world servicing more than 100 countries, the Nice Group specialises in smart home automation systems, including intelligent gates, garage doors, awnings, shutters, alarms and lighting that can be managed remotely via smartphones and tablets.
The company also develops technology to manage high-security ­access to industrial, commercial, government and military sites, such as anti-terrorism boom gates.
The company’s new regional headquarters at Tonsley will service the Asia-Pacific region and will include a state-of-the-art workshop, showroom and office spaces across two levels. It will join other automation groups at Tonsley including Sage Automation, Zeiss, Azzo and Phoenix Contact.
Nice Group Australia and New Zealand managing director Roberto Giacometti said the move formed part of an ambitious expansion plan for the company and a desire to collaborate with other automation players.
“The Nice Group has an ambitious growth agenda that will see us target a new type of customer in the near ­future and that will require us to operate in a new type of technical environment,” he said. “The move to Tonsley will allow us to customise the work space we need for this future growth and affirm our presence in key markets in the private and public sectors.
“It will also give us access to shared infrastructure, maintain proximity to ... suppliers and put us in touch with other future thinkers in high-value manufacturing and automation.” Local property developer Leyton Property will deliver the new premises on 3000sq m of land on Tonsley’s main promenade near the entrance to the Main Assembly Building.
Woolcock Group, which has been engaged to construct the building, has begun early site works, with the new facility expected to open by February next year.
Leyton Property development manager Lukas Weeks said the project aligned with the developer’s strategy to “partner with blue-chip tenants to deliver high-quality, purpose-built property developments”.
“We are delighted that this new build will be 10 times more thermally efficient than other builds of a similar scale and purpose, and that in this way it will uphold and strengthen the sustainability credentials of the wider Tonsley precinct,” he said.
Renewal SA general manager of project delivery and property Todd Perry said Nice’s arrival was another step towards realising Tonsley’s masterplan.
“With the arrival of Nice Australia to Tonsley we see the business multiplier effect in action, where new ­businesses are attracted to the district by the collective presence of other ­related businesses, and together these businesses grow in impact and reach, and support each other’s success,” he said. Nice Australia has recently had its smart blind products installed at the Ritz Carlton Hotel in Perth, while its automated gates have been installed at the Moorebank precinct in Sydney, to help improve the way containerised freight moves through Port ­Botany.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 486
