It’s time to smarten up your home power-wise. From lighting upgrades and home automation to installation of ceiling fans, security lights, safety switches and fire alarms, you will need an expert electrical installation service.
Electrical contracting firm Adelaide Urban Electrical offers the expertise to deliver everything from full rewiring through to system upgrades.
Owner and experienced electrician Ben Colic says his firm can also provide expert advice about making homes or offices more energy efficient, reducing power usage and money.
“Ceiling fans are particularly great as they complement airconditioners, assisting them run more efficiently,” he says. “They are safer than freestanding models, particularly for children and pets and also save on space."
Ben says new ceiling fans are more efficient with improvements in motors, controls, blade design and reduced weight, and they can make your home cooler for as little as 2c per hour.
“They can be installed in alfresco dining areas, which not only cool your dinner guests but deter pesky bugs,” he says.
“During peak summer, a ceiling fan working with an airconditioner reduces your running costs by up to 40 per cent.” And in winter, a ceiling fan with reverse mode circulates warm air downwards, which can help lower heating costs by up to 10 per cent.
Adelaide Urban Electrical can provide LED installations and lighting upgrades, including tailored solutions to light up your outdoors.
“By mixing downlights with statement spotlights and by choosing ambient and feature lights, we can create an effortless lighting experience (outdoors),” Ben says.
Home automation systems are also fast becoming an affordable luxury, Ben says. “You can control the lighting, temperature, locks, curtains and appliances all from your smartphone,” he says. Smart thermostats and smart light bulbs save energy and curb utility costs.
“Some of our systems actually monitor water usage too, which in turn, prevents exorbitant water bills, some of which offer rebates,” he says.
Free quotes on work are available.Adelaide Urban Electrical, 0488 488 988, adelaideurbanelectrical.com.au
Word count: 327
