WHEN her dreams of becoming a ballet dancer were crushed by a devastating scoliosis diagnosis at age 16, Justyce Manton decided to instead reach for the stars.
The 21-year-old is now chasing a new dream to become NASA’s first Indigenous astronaut.
“My passion is space exploration and NASA, anything to do with space,” said the proud Eora-Wiradjuri woman, who was born in Sydney but moved to SA and grew up living on Kaurna land.
“My reality sort of dream is to be in the defence or aerospace sector, but if I were to push that dream into the clouds, I would love to be the first Indigenous astronaut.” Ms Manton is taking the first steps towards achieving that history-making goal. She is in her second year of a bachelor of mechanical engineering majoring in aerospace at the University of Adelaide.
And she has already been offered an internship with international aerospace and security company BAE Systems.
As part of that role, she will be observing and engaging in manufacturing projects, including the E-7A Wedgetail and P-8A Poseidon aircraft.
“I love the ethics and their principles for the company and what they stand for, and how international and well-known they are,” Ms Manton said.
Her path to BAE Systems saw her take part in a STEM Academy with the University of Adelaide in year 12.
After that, she completed a two-year internship with Defence SA. Ms Manton said maths and science had given her a new drive after she was forced to give up dance at the age of 16.
“My diagnosis crushed my dreams of sport and dancing, and then I found my love through mathematics and science,” she said.
“I fell in love with mathematics because the motion we display with our bodies can present equations and graphs, so, yeah, it doesn’t end there,” she said.
“I guess I was smart with mathematics and science, but I didn’t perform the best that I could.
“I thought a pass was fine but once I took the time to actually sit down, study it, review it, the passion came in.” That passion and determination embody the state government’s New State of Mind campaign, which is shining a light on game-changers who choose to call South Australia home.
As part of a partnership with NewsCorp SA, 25 such women will feature in this weekend’s Sunday Mail and online on advertiser.com.au on Sunday morning.
Ms Manton said she was hopeful for her future, even though some days of study were harder than others.
“I’m loving it, there’s so much flexibility with what I’ve chosen to be,” she said. “I got this experience from Defence SA where one day you could be sitting in the office and the next couple of days are travelling out in the field doing something … I’m absolutely loving it.”
CREDIT: KITTY BARR
Word count: 474
