The two University of Adelaide students work part-time at the Australian Space Discovery Centre as “Space Communicators”; helping inspire the next generation of astronauts.
The Lot Fourteen role perfectly complements their university studies, with the pair enthusiastic about finding their own place in space from their South Australian launch pad.
Having completed a Bachelor of Science in space science and astrophysics, McCulloch is completing her honours in science innovation, in the hope of learning more about how SA space start-ups can be supported.
The 22-year-old former St Michael’s College student is also undertaking a space internship with Stone and Chalk and is currently president of two university clubs – the Adelaide University Space Society and Adelaide University Physics Institute.
She says she loves her role as a space communicator; a job she points out comes with “the coolest job title”.
“I heard about this role through a friend and when I saw the description, I’ve never been more excited to apply for a job in my life,” McCulloch says. “As space communicators, our role is to encourage people of all ages to think about entering the space sector and raise awareness of the past, present and future developments in space research and exploration. We also focus on why we study space and how it improves our daily lives.
“Should someone be inspired to join our space sector, we hope to give them a head start. With space becoming increasingly popular, in coming to the Australian Space Discovery Centre you’ll be able to explore space opportunities, programs, study paths, knowledge and more.”
And there is also much to appreciate about her own involvement at the centre.
“I get to talk to everyone about one of my favourite things,” she says. “Watching everyone share the same level of enthusiasm for space is something so rewarding. I personally love when I have the opportunity to talk to young students who are just as eager as me about working in space. Through my role, I’m able to encourage everyone to stay curious, ask questions and be keen for what is to come.”
Amber Pegoli, who is in her second year of a mechanical engineering (aerospace) and mathematical and computer science degree, also enjoys the public interaction at the space centre.
“I love connecting with people,” the 19-year-old Endeavour College graduate says. “Whether that’s over a conversation about someone’s future or learning some cool space facts together, talking to the public is by far the best part of my role here.”
Having always had a passion for space, Pegoli describes her position as a “dream come true”.
“I saw the ad for a job at the Australian Space Discovery Centre on the Australian Space Agency Facebook page and was just so excited about the prospect of joining the space industry here in South Australia.
“I really love the work I do at the Discovery Centre – most of my day is spent encouraging and inspiring people to chase what they enjoy doing, particularly if that means
working is a space-related field. The space industry here is so diverse, from astronauts and computer scientists to project managers and space lawyers, so whatever your background, there is a place for you in space.”
The centre’s Lot Fourteen base is also a major plus, she says.
“The location is just a hub for innovation and creativity,” Pegoli says. “It doesn’t get much better than being surrounded by some of Australia’s brightest minds. I’ve learnt so much about the workings of our space industry here in Australia, and it has reignited my passion to work in a space-related field.
“It is so comforting to know that working in this field won’t force me to move far away, and that I can find work here in South Australia.”
Word count: 611
