With the global space economy growing to a peak of $US469bn ($686m) in 2021, up 9 per cent from 2020, we’re seeing incredible confidence and renewed interest in space exploration and its capabilities in positively affecting future generations.
But the disconnect between attitudes towards space technology advancements and what the industry is looking to achieve is halting Australia’s contribution to a critical and rapidly growing sector.
Space technology will only increase in significance, especially as an enabler to address some of the world’s most pressing challenges including carbon storage and climate change. Contributing just 1 per cent – $4bn a year – towards the global space sector, Australia is at risk of falling behind in the global space race as it speeds ahead if the industry is not adequately supported by governing bodies.
There have been misconceptions pointing to burning through money and resources that are better designated to issues facing planet Earth. Yet, this fails to acknowledge space technology is Earth technology. Really we’re investing in both at the same time. All the technology and science put towards outer space have provided innumerable material benefits to society.
For example, space infrastructure such as positioning, navigation, and timing is the most central element in one of our most-used technologies, GPS. In an era when scientists were able to track a satellite with shifts in its radio signals, modern use allows for navigation of aircraft, ships, submarines, trains and space shuttles, to people driving cars.
Unbeknown to many, there has been a connection between human spaceflight and dental care, with NASA technology making its way into the field of dentistry. What was originally technology used solely to track heat-seeking missiles, has been developed into invisible dental braces. Made from material stronger than steel with light-absorbing qualities that give it a translucent look, and with its smooth, round properties that resist breakage, it’s no wonder we’ve used this technology to improve our quality of life (and achieve our perfect smiles).
Untapped potential There have been criticisms as to why we spend so much money – more than $90bn across the globe each year – on outer space when we have an abundance of issues on planet Earth.
Why don’t we focus on tackling the climate crisis and the economy? Opportunities in the space sector are so great for the economy that the Australian Space Agency reports goals of tripling the sector’s contribution to national GDP to $12bn and creating 20,000 jobs by 2030.
It’s paramount to understand that scientific and technological applications are not confined to the initial purpose it was created and used for.
The sooner this is realised, the more we can support and grow companies that are already leveraging space technology to tackle areas such as the climate.
It’s one of the reasons we’ve focused on growing Stone & Chalk in South Australia. Adelaide is already a haven for technology and home to the Australian Space Agency, making a name for itself as the national space centre.
One of our residents, Perennial, is using satellite remote-sensing technology for soil-based carbon offset. This technology, fused with machine learning and ground observations can map historical, present and future soil carbon and land-based emissions to build a more sustainable and transparent agricultural supply chain. This can help food, fibre, and fuel companies reduce land-based emissions and brand climate-smart commodities.
Satellite technology, paired with solar power, is also being leveraged by Ping to determine the health of windmills. Known as a “stethoscope for windmills”, it detects cracks, splits, holes, pitting and lightning damage. This can potentially cut maintenance and repair costs in the wind-power sector by as much as $500m a year.
Australia continues to birth innovative individuals with an entrepreneurial drive to transform our future. But it’s ingrained into our culture to not boast about our achievements.
Historically, Australia has always been a key player in the global space economy, dating back to the Apollo missions. Our country played a key part in helping to send TV images of humankind’s first steps on the moon, inspiring a generation of science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) careers.
Australia has so much to offer towards building a stronger space economy that the world remains none the wiser about.
That’s the whole reason for us existing – to build a community and create a pathway for passionate minds to accelerate and collaborate to propel Australia towards a sustainable tech-driven economy.
We need to start collaborating and working in synergy across universities, the government and the industry to build the future of the space industry. We’re already equipped with the technical foundations to innovate towards improving our quality of life – we just need the perception to shift towards understanding space technology is not exclusive to space. Michael Bromley is chief executive of Stone & Chalk Group
CREDIT: Michael Bromley
Word count: 804
