BLADE Runner and Chariots of Fire composer Vangelis, the Oscar-winning electronic music pioneer whose distinctive style defined a generation of film soundtracks, died aged 79.
He died of Covid-19.
“Vangelis Papathanassiou is no longer with us,” Greek Prime Minister Kyriakos Mitsotakis tweeted.
His Chariots of Fire theme in 1982 won an Academy Award for best original score, beating John Williams’ music for the first Indiana Jones film. It reached the top of the US billboard chart and was an enduring hit in Britain, where it was used during the London 2012 Olympics medal presentation ceremonies.
The reclusive, mostly self-taught keyboard wizard was a lifelong experimenter, switching from psychedelic rock and synth to ethnic music and jazz.
In a career spanning more than five decades, he drew on space exploration, wildlife, futuristic architecture, the New Testament and the 1968 French riots for inspiration.
Vangelis’s work on more than a dozen soundtracks included Roman Polanski’s Bitter Moon and the Oliver Stone epic Alexander. He also wrote music for theatre and ballet, as well as the anthem of the 2002 FIFA World Cup.
Born Evangelos Odysseas Papathanassiou, Vangelis was a child prodigy who performed his first piano concert at six, despite having no lessons.
“I’ve never studied music,” he said in 1988.
After studying painting at the Athens School of Fine Arts, Vangelis joined popular Greek rock group The Forminx. But success was cut short in 1967 by a military clamp down.
He fled to Paris and joined fellow Greek expatriates Demis Roussos and Lucas Sideras in successful group Aphrodite’s Child. It sold millions of records before disbanding.
Relocating to London in 1974, Vangelis created Nemo Studios. But he valued his independence over record sales.
“Success is sweet and treacherous,” he said in 2012. “Instead of being able to move forward freely and do what you really wish, you find yourself stuck and obliged to repeat yourself.” VANGELIS PAPATHANASSIOU Composer Born: March 29, 1943, Agria, Greece Died: May 17, 2022, Paris, France
Word count: 329
