Guest speakers on board add huge value to a cruise If the idea of taking a journey and learning something along the way from the best in the business appeals, head to the high seas. Special guest speakers on cruise ships give cruisers the opportunity to glean expertise in various fields, and the choice and quality of the speakers is phenomenal. On a recent cruise with Avalon Waterways with guest speaker Cheryl Strayed, author of Wild, media personality Melissa Doyle was a guest on board. Doyle noted the abundance of opportunities to interact. “We all had a chance to ask her a thousand questions… I did, however, hesitate when she suggested a hike,” Mel wrote on Instagram.
Strayed was on board as part of Avalon Waterways’ Storyteller Series. The line has had Sex and the City author Candace Bushnell sail in July, and in September Gone Girl author Gillian Flynn will join for a voyage along the Danube. Flynn will host a book signing and a Q&A session, plus cruisers can share experiences both on board and in port with the author between Budapest and Deggendorf.
Cunard recently announced an impressive line-up of guest speakers from politicians to former Olympians (sometimes both) on upcoming Australian voyages, with commercial director Katrina McAlpine saying the guest speaker program was a vital aspect of Cunard’s on-board experience. “We know our guests are passionate about learning and expanding their views, so in choosing our speakers for this upcoming season, we wanted to ensure that they both inspire and entertain our guests while sailing with us,” Katrina says.
It’s easy to see why these voyages are appealing. Already sold out are Cunard voyages where cruisers can mingle with the likes of Nova Peris and Dawn Fraser. Another voyage that’s bound to be popular is Cunard’s Queen Mary 2 departing Hong Kong for Sydney on February 23, 2023, with legendary Nine Network sports presenter Ken Sutcliffe. The affable media personality will delight guests with anecdotes of his impressive 50-year television career. On the Queen Mary 2 Fremantle-to-Sydney journey departing in April 2023 Comedy Company creator and producer Ian McFadyen will be joining guests on board to impart stories about his fascinating career as an acclaimed Australian television writer, actor, director and producer.
Speaking of television personalities, dynamic duo Andrew Denton and Jennifer Byrne will join Chimu Adventures’ 11-day Antarctica Unveiled voyage on January 11, 2023, to share their deep knowledge, passion, and experiences of the frozen continent. Both have travelled south numerous times and can offer entertaining insights during the sailing across the Drake Passage, via the South Shetland Islands, to the Antarctic Peninsula. The Ocean Endeavour is ideally suited for expedition cruising to the polar regions, and with just 199 guests, cruisers will get to share more time with the two personalities.
Aurora Expeditions will feature media personality and author Dr Karl Kruszelnicki on its South Georgia & Antarctic Odyssey departing March 10, 2023. Dr Karl will conduct a series of talks on topics such as climate change, space exploration and travel. And former ABC presenter and author Richard Morecroft will be on board Aurora’s Antarctic Explorer departing February 19, 2023, delivering talks on landscape, wildlife and art, as well as interactive and participative talks involving members of Aurora’s Expedition Team. As part of the special guests program, these speakers help enrich any expedition with their unique perspectives, insights and experiences.
auroraexpeditions.com.au; avalonwaterways.com.au; chimuadventures.com; cunard.com Travel writer Andrea Black’s dream special guest speaker on a cruise would be Curb Your Enthusiasm’s Larry David, though she suspects he wouldn’t be amenable to the “stop and chat”.
CREDIT: Andrea Black
Word count: 603
