It takes imagination to build a nation, but dreams don’t always come true My first reaction on hearing of Saudi Arabia’s crazy-brave plan to woo tourists by building a ski resort in the Arabian Desert (take a moment if you need to – I know I did) was stunned disbelief. Saudi Arabia is, famously, a scorching sandpit where temperatures can reach more than 50C. True, it has some high mountains that catch snow for a few months, but would anyone seriously forgo the French Alps, Niseko or Aspen in favour of a barren wasteland with an extremely dodgy human rights record? Certainly no journalist, woman or gay person with a zest for life would be found dead in the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia. Or perhaps they would. Maybe I should rephrase that.
We’ll know soon enough whether this Arabian folly amounts to anything more than a petroleum-fuelled fantasy. Trojena, as the snow park’s called, is due to debut in 2026.
It’s part of a far larger, $US500 billion mirage called Neom which, if the government hype’s to be believed, will comprise a 170km-long city – 500m tall and 200m wide – designed for nine million people to live in, sheltered from the elements, within its mirrored walls.
I’m not mocking this Big-Idea mentality. It worked for Dubai, which 50 years ago was a simple pearl-fishing village on the Arabian Peninsula. Now it’s the world’s busiest hub for international air travel.
But there’s a fine line between capturing human imagination and boggling the mind. I’m old enough to remember an entire parade of pie-in-the-sky plans that vanished, inevitably, into thin air.
Leaving aside our own very-fast-train fantasies here in Australia (first mooted 40 years ago and not a sleeper’s been laid since), there was the Russian-designed Ark, circa 2011, a nautilus-shaped, climate-change-hardy hotel that could float in the event of, say, the polar ice caps melting. There was a flurry of interest on its unveiling in 2011. Since then it appears to have sunk without trace.
China is never a country to think small. In 2014 it proposed building a 13,000km bullet train line from Beijing to Alaska, Canada and mainland USA via the icy extremities of Siberia and a submarine tunnel in the Bering Strait.
Imagine that. It would make The Ghan look like a suburban commute. But of course it never left the station.
Personally, I loved the idea of Boris Island, the Thames Estuary airport championed by then London mayor Boris Johnson. But the Â£100 billion price-tag, combined with concerns around environment and merit, grounded the project before it even took off.
By far the greatest concentration of outlandish ideas seems to come from the Middle East, proving the old adage that (oil) money can’t buy taste.
I remember first visiting Dubai around 2007 and being gobsmacked by the sheer ambition of this place The Guardian dubbed a “Middle Eastern helldorado”. I wrote a story chronicling the futuristic plans for its sandy badlands. Among them was the Falcon City of Wonders, a collection of sham global landmarks including an Eiffel Tower, three pyramids, a Taj Mahal and a “town of Venice… with retail outlets and residences of an Italian theme”. Last I checked it was still going to be built, but it’s been almost 20 years since it first surfaced so I’m not holding my breath.
Dubai’s vaulting ambitions have often come unstuck. Who can forget The World, the emirate’s modest plan to recreate Earth’s landmass on a series of man-made islands in the Persian Gulf? Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie were reported to have bought Ethiopia but, like their marriage, that dream didn’t last.
The entire development was due to be completed in time for the Dubai Expo in 2020, but as far as I can confirm there’s only one island opened to tourism to date. That would be “Lebanon”, memorably described by one English architecture critic as “a scene of post-apocalyptic desolation”.
Elsewhere in the glitzy emirate there’s still no sign of the Dynamic Tower, an 80-storey rotating skyscraper revealed in 2008. This is possibly because the architect, David Fisher, has never built a skyscraper before. At the time of writing there’s still no date for its completion. Or its commencement.
Dubai has also announced plans to construct a Martian compound which, given the lifeless, sun-blasted landscape, seems a case of the city finally playing to its strengths.
The Mars Science City, a 3D-printed colony covering 17.5ha of desert, is intended to be a training centre for Mars-bound astronauts. Some reports suggest members of the public will also be able to visit an on-site museum “to bring space exploration closer to wider audiences”.
Which all sounds totally out of this world. And probably is.
Look out for ...
Big ideas that worked There have been notable instances when humankind’s grand travel designs have actually come true. The Chunnel’s a great example – this undersea tunnel linking England to France and the continent was first suggested in the 19th century and finally realised in 1994. And for all its flops, Dubai has had some breathtaking successes. Like the garish Burj Al Arab hotel anchored on a man-made island, and the pointless but impressively pointy Burj Khalifa, the world’s tallest tower.
Read more of Kendall Hill’s travel insights at escape.com.au/kendall-hill or follow him on Instagram: @misterkendallhill
CREDIT: KENDALL HILL
Word count: 891
