The Prime Minister acknowledged the “great capability” of the South Australian workforce, which has been desperately seeking assurances their jobs won’t be shifted to Western Australia, during a visit to Adelaide on Wednesday.
But Mr Morrison said a decision about where future Collins Class submarine maintenance would take place was yet to be made.
“That matter is not one that needs to be addressed at this point,” he said.
“There are still many years before we are in that position, and there are a series of other issues we are dealing with across the procurements, where I am focusing my attention right now.”
The government’s top secret national security committee was expected to announce where full cycle docking for the ageing Collins Class submarine fleet would be based in December 2019.
Shipbuilder ASC had even drafted press releases about the decision, which was instead put on ice.
SA federal politicians and Defence industry experts this week revealed hopes that Peter Dutton’s appointment to the Defence portfolio would speed up the decision.
Although many believe the longer the wait, the better the chance SA will retain the lucrative contract supporting 700 jobs.
Despite the ongoing uncertainty, Mr Morrison had a message for the workers at Osborne: “Keep working.”
“They are doing a great job,” he said.
“What has been achieved here with the Collins Class full cycle docking has been extraordinary.
“They have demonstrated a great capability. It is one that I take very seriously and acknowledge.”
Experts speculated the delay was due to the political toxicity of the decision, with both SA and WA lobbying the government to secure the work.
In February 2020, Mr Morrison said he wouldn’t “rush” the important decision, adding it would be made in the national interest.
Insiders have criticised former defence minister and WA senator Linda Reynolds for being “too close” to the Defence department and unable to push them on capability issues.
Premier Steven Marshall, state Opposition Leader Peter Malinauskas and unions have been calling for the maintenance work to remain in SA.
Australian Manufacturing Workers Union state secretary Peter Bauer said on Wednesday night it was “cruel” to leave the 700 workers employed by the ASC uncertain about their future employment.
“We have been waiting for a decision for almost two years,” he said. “We have workers who do not know if they can enter into long-term financial obligations. It is time a decision was made.”
Mr Bauer said it “doesn’t make sense” to move the full maintenance of the submarines from Adelaide to Fremantle.
“We have a world-class facility with the skills and capability which make it a viable and productive operation known worldwide.
“Why spend one billion dollars to move it thousands of kilometres when we are in the midst of an economic crisis?”
Mr Marshall said South Australia was “unequivocally the best home for the Collins Class full-cycle docking”.
“We’ve got the very best capabilities, we’ve got the skilled workforce and we’ve been doing the work since day one,” he said.

Mr Marshall said his government was “leaving no stone unturned in delivering the skilled workforce required to ensure the ongoing success of the defence industry in our state for decades to come”.
“We are fully committed to working hand in glove with industry to make sure we meet the needs of the defence sector, and take full advantage of this once-in-a-lifetime opportunity for SA.”
Mr Marshall said the $90 billion investment in defence from the Federal Government was “already creating an unprecedented pipeline of jobs and business opportunities right here in South Australia for decades to come”.
“We are the defence state. There is no doubt about it,” he said.
Mr Malinauskas said the uncertainty about jobs at ASC “has been going on for years and years”.
“It’s not fair on the workers and it is not fair on South Australia,” he said.
“How many times is Steven Marshall going to meet with the Prime Minister and fail to advocate for South Australian jobs?”
“When SA has the worst unemployment rate in Australia, we must have a Premier who is fighting for every single job he can.”
Word count: 659
