The inaugural Australian Rover Challenge is opening students’ minds to a career in the space sector
In 1996, Andy Thomas became the first Australian to fly in space. A quarter of a century later, engineering students from across the country became the first Australians to participate in the inaugural Australian Rover Challenge in Adelaide, tasked with designing, building and operating rovers on a simulated lunar landscape. Already an established event in the US, Canada, Europe and India, organisers of the Australian Rover Challenge chose to do things differently. “In the US they go into the desert and one team at a time participates: it’s very secretive,” says John Culton, director of the Andy Thomas Centre for Space Resources (ATCSR) and Associate Professor off-Earth resources at The University of Adelaide, who played a key role in bringing the event to South Australia. “We wanted to make it a bit different: we constructed a simulated lunar terrain here on campus, in the middle of the CBD, we had jumbotron and stadium seating for spectators.
“We turned it into a spectator sport and have ended up with the best rover challenge in the world, if we can so modestly say.” Three teams competed in the event – Monash, RMIT and The University of Adelaide. Each team faced four challenges across navigation, resource utilisation and construction. While mechanical engineering students were at the core of the teams, students of physics, electrical and civil engineering, geology and astrophysics also played a significant part.
“Even though most of the students who participated aren’t involved in space applications, this was an opportunity to explore the possibility of applying their learning to this sector that I think is about to take everyone by surprise,” Associate Professor Culton says.
“The commercial space exploration sector, SpaceX Mars and the Artemis program are coming faster than most people think. This is the generation that will be able to have a space career from start to finish, doing what they want to do in support of space exploration.” With sponsorship from commercial firms including Fleet Space Technologies in Adelaide and international lunar robotic exploration company iSpace, the event also provided invaluable industry exposure.
“Flavia and Matt from Fleet spent a lot of time discussing career possibilities with the students, and representatives from iSpace and the Australian Space Agency also interacted with the participants,” Associate Professor Culton says.
“A lot of the students said this opened their eyes to the demand for their skillsets and talents, and the possibilities in space. To have CEOs saying, ‘We love what you’re doing and we’ll hire you’ is exactly what we are looking for.”
SPACE & CREATIVE INDUSTRIES SPECIAL REPORT FUTURE INDUSTRIES JOBS OF TODAY
Word count: 450
