JEFF Bezos, the richest man on Earth, has set his sights on a new frontier. With a fortune worth an estimated $270bn, Bezos was last night expected to enter space on a reusable rocket built by his aerospace firm Blue Origin.
The mission, which Blue Origin has dubbed the First Human Flight, will be the 16th flight of the New Shepard rocket, but the first with astronauts on board along with Bezos and three other civilians.
The rocket was set to launch from the company’s Launch Site One near Van Horn, Texas late last night in a milestone mission for the space tourism company. The launch came two weeks after Bezos, 57, stepped aside as chief executive of e-commerce colossus Amazon, and just nine days after rival billionaire Richard Branson went into space aboard Virgin Galactic’s first fully crewed spaceflight.
Though Branson beat Bezos in a landmark moment for the fledgling space tourism industry, Blue Origin has claimed its spaceflight experience is superior.
Blue Origin’s rocket breaks the internationally recognised boundary of space at an altitude of 100km, while Virgin Galactic breached the 80km border recognised by the US.
Blue Origin also claims to be more environmentally friendly. Its ambitions also extend beyond Virgin Galactic’s space tourism plans, with Bezos angling to become a major contractor for NASA missions.
Currently, NASA’s leading private sector partner is Elon Musk’s SpaceX, which began taking astronauts to the International Space Station in 2020 and is developing a deep space rocket for future missions to Mars.
Bezos has said he has been fascinated by space since watching the July 20, 1969, Apollo moon landing as a child. He chose the date of this launch to coincide with the first moonwalk.
He believes space will play a role in the future of the human species and in taking ­environmental pressure off Earth.
He has spoken about the possibility of humans living in space colonies, drawing ideas from science fiction writers as well as scientists.
“We humans have to go to space if we are going to continue to have a thriving civilisation,” Bezos told a 2019 CBS News interview.
“We have become big as a population, as a species, and this planet is relatively small. We see it in things like climate change and pollution and heavy industry. “We are in the process of destroying this planet … we have to preserve this planet.”
CREDIT: MERRYN JOHNS
Word count: 403
