Astronauts will head home to Earth in special ‘undergarments’ after the toilet on their SpaceX Crew Dragon capsule sprung a leak, writes Kamahl Cogdon
KIDS NEWS kidsnews.com.au – it's news for kids
A faulty toilet will leave a crew of astronauts relying on space nappies when they return to Earth from the International Space Station.
The toilet on board the SpaceX Crew Dragon Endeavour capsule has sprung a leak and will be out of operation for the journey, NASA has confirmed.
“Our intent is to not use the system at all for the return leg home,” said NASA’s commercial crew program manager Steve Stich.
“We have other means to allow the crew to perform the functions they need.” Mr Stich said the four astronauts – Americans Shane Kimbrough and Megan McArthur, French astronaut Thomas Pesquet and Akihiko Hoshide from Japan – would instead wear a special “undergarment*”.
Such gear has long been used by astronauts, allowing them to relieve themselves in their spacesuits before space toilets were available and also for launches, landings and spacewalks.
“Anytime the crew is suited they use an undergarment in that suit, and it’s a short mission coming home,” Mr Stich said.
“So, it’s pretty typical to have an undergarment on and they can use that on the way home.” SpaceX first discovered the issue with its spacecraft’s toilet last month. It found that a tube used to funnel urine into a storage tank had become unglued and was causing a leaky mess beneath the capsule’s floor.
There are concerns the urine could damage important hardware*. While the problem was fixed in the capsules that are on the ground, the repairs to the Endeavour capsule’s toilet will have to wait until it returns from the ISS. So the toilet will be out of action for the journey.
Exactly how long that journey will take – and how long the astronauts will have to hold on or use their space nappies – is not clear.
The crew docked at the ISS on the SpaceX Crew Dragon Endeavour in April and have been conducting scientific tests and maintenance.
They will be replaced by another crew of four astronauts, Raja Chari, Tom Marshburn, Kayla Barron and Matthias Maurer, who are scheduled to arrive on SpaceX Crew Dragon Endurance.
GLOSSARY undergarment: items of clothing worn underneath the outer layers of clothing hardware: machinery and equipment
CREDIT: Kamahl Cogdon
Word count: 400
