TESLA chief executive Elon Musk has raced past Amazon founder Jeff Bezos to become the world’s richest person.
Mr Musk is now worth an estimated $251bn, with his wealth fuelled by his electric car company’s meteoric rise over the past year.
He owns about 20 per cent of Tesla, with shares in the company skyrocketing eight-fold last year.
They hit a new high yesterday, climbing 7.9 per cent on Wall Street and another 2 per cent in after-hours trading, briefly overtaking Facebook and giving Tesla a valuation of $989bn.
The surge makes Mr Musk the world’s richest person, worth about eight times the entire annual GDP of Iceland.
He is now worth $12.8bn more than Mr Bezos, who he is taking on in a high-stakes space race.
Mr Bezos had been the world’s richest person since 2017, but gave a quarter of his family’s Amazon stake to ex-wife MacKenzie Scott in divorce proceedings in 2019.
The Tesla executive’s rise in wealth leaves Microsoft co-founder Bill Gates in a distant third place, with a net worth of about $172bn, according to the Bloomberg Top 150 Billionaires Index. At the bottom of the list were Australian software company Atlassian co-founders Scott Farquhar and Mike Cannon-Brookes, coming in as the world’s 149th and 150th richest people.
Mr Musk, who founded SpaceX, infrastructure and tunnel construction company The Boring Company, and Neuralink – which is making brain implants to treat neurological issues – tweeted “How strange” about his latest title, before adding “Well, back to work”.
The South Africa-born executive, who moved to Texas last year, said on his Twitter page that his wealth was “intended to help problems on Earth & half to help establish a self-sustaining city on Mars to ensure continuation of life”.
SpaceX is due to test its latest Starship prototype as early as this weekend. It is designed to take people and payloads to the moon.
Meanwhile, Tesla, now the world’s most-valuable car maker, last week reported that it fell just shy of Mr Musk’s goal of delivering 500,000 vehicles in 2020, shipping 499,500.
That was still more than double what the next-highest sellers of electric vehicles delivered for the year, including companies such as Volkswagen. Some models feature a “ludicrous mode” that allows jaw-dropping acceleration. PAGES 70-71: BUSINESS DAILY
CREDIT: DAVID SWAN
Word count: 385
