JEFF Bezos, the richest man on Earth, has set his sights on a new frontier. With a fortune worth an estimated $270bn, Bezos last night entered space on a reusable rocket built by his aerospace firm Blue Origin.
The mission, which Blue Origin has dubbed the First Human Flight, was the 16th flight of the New Shepard rocket, but the first with astronauts on board along with Bezos and three other civilians.
The rocket launched from the company’s Launch Site One near Van Horn, Texas, just after 10:40 last night in a milestone mission for the space tourism company. The capsule then separated from its booster and crossed the Karman line, the internationally-recognised boundary between Earth and space at an altitude of 100km.
It touched down about 10 minutes later, floating down on three giant parachutes before firing a retro thruster, sending up a cloud of sand as it gently landed and the crew stepped back again on the ground.
“Best day ever,” Bezos exclaimed once the capsule had settled in the dust near the launch site. “A very happy group of people in this capsule.” The launch came two weeks after Bezos, 57, stepped aside as chief executive of e-commerce colossus Amazon, and just nine days after rival billionaire Richard Branson went into space aboard Virgin Galactic’s first fully crewed spaceflight.
Though Branson beat Bezos in a landmark moment for the fledgling space tourism industry, Blue Origin has claimed its spaceflight experience is superior. Blue Origin’s rocket broke the Karman line, while Virgin Galactic breached the 80km border recognised by the US. Blue Origin also claims to be more environmentally friendly.
Its ambitions also extend beyond Virgin Galactic’s space tourism plans, with Bezos angling to become a major contractor for NASA missions.
Currently, NASA’s leading private sector partner is Elon Musk’s SpaceX, which began taking astronauts to the International Space Station in 2020 and is developing a deep space rocket for future missions to Mars. Bezos has said he has been fascinated by space since watching the July 20, 1969, Apollo moon landing as a child. He chose the date of this launch to coincide with the first moonwalk. He believes space will play a role in the future of the human species and in taking ­environmental pressure off Earth. He has spoken about the possibility of humans living in space colonies, drawing ideas from science fiction writers as well as scientists.
CREDIT: MERRYN JOHNS
Word count: 407
