IN just one month, Elon Musk’s net worth has jumped by $125bn – more than the combined fortune of Australia’s four richest people.
The Tesla and SpaceX founder is now worth $US283bn ($381bn), according to Forbes, and there’s plenty we can learn from him to shape our own money mindset.
Musk’s wealth surge is due to a deal to supply 100,000 Tesla cars to Hertz, plus some handy stock option activity.
Some say he’s going to become the world’s first trillionaire. His wealth dwarfs Australia’s richest. Forbes says Aussie software giant Atlassian’s co-founders Mike Cannon-Brookes and Scott Farquhar are now worth about $34bn each, followed by mining magnates Gina Rinehart ($31bn) and Andrew Forrest ($18bn).
Musk’s businesses focus on some of the world’s biggest growth areas: ELECTRIC vehicles, with Tesla a leader as countries start phasing out petrol-powered vehicles; RENEWABLE energy systems and storage for homes and industry, including giant battery projects in Australia, and; SPACE travel including taxiing astronauts for NASA, space tourism, and preparing to visit the moon and Mars.
Many stockmarket analysts say Tesla shares – up in price 20 times in just over two years – are overvalued. They say the current price is based on projected 2030 profits.
Investors obviously see an X-factor that takes Tesla beyond normal valuations, and an X-factor in Musk.
Aussie investors can buy Tesla shares through online platforms and stockbrokers, but can also learn some valuable lessons from Musk’s approach to business.
PASSION, HARD WORK Musk has both in spades, reportedly camping out at his factories and sleeping under his desk to achieve his business goals. You won’t need to emulate those antics, but a little passion and researching some financial strategies for yourself will go a long way.
THINKING BIG Like, really big. Like sending humans to live on another planet big. A saying I heard when younger was “shoot for the moon – you may not reach it but you won’t come up with a handful of mud, either”.  Well, Musk is shooting for Mars, possibly by the end of the decade. Don’t let naysayers deter you from your financial goals. Set stretch targets, then work out what you need to do to reach them.
MISTAKES People who have followed SpaceX – which is now sending astronauts to the International Space Station and space tourists on laps of Earth – would remember the early embarrassing videos of its test rockets crashing and exploding on landing platforms.
These were learning experiences on the way to SpaceX becoming a $100bn global leader.
Treat every money mistake as a chance to improve yourself and you’ll have fewer regrets.
TAKE RISKS Whether it’s travelling to Mars, the moon, or expanding a real estate portfolio from one to two properties by taking on a big chunk of bank debt, always remember that rewards come to those who accept risk. Understand the risks, manage them and be prepared to lose sometimes, but don’t bet everything on one risky decision.
CREDIT: Anthony Keane
Word count: 499
