The Orange Regional Museum's brand new exhibition, Out of This World: Australia in the space age, has landed and we've been exploring the many fascinating stories of Australia's involvement in early space exploration and the impacts on culture and society.
Out of This World is a National Archives of Australia touring exhibition. It opened in Canberra late last year and Orange is the first stop on its national tour. The exhibition covers all aspects of the space era from the 1950s to the 1970s, from life at South Australia's remote Woomera Rocket Range to the relay of images from the Apollo 11 moon landing.
Visitors may be surprised to learn just what a vital contribution Australia has made to space exploration. On display is a model of Australia's fist satellite, WRESAT, which was launched in 1967 using and American Redstone rocket. It was designed, built and launched in just 11 months and began orbiting the Earth almost exactly ten years after the world's first artificial satellite, the Soviet Union's Sputnik 1.
Another space-age story is that of OSACR 5. This satellite was designed and built by students at the University of Melbourne, who were inspired by the rapidly developing new technologies. Lacking any government funding, the project incorporated some surprising improvised features, like the satellite's four antennas, which were adapted from off-the-shelf measuring tapes.
The enterprising students arguably beat the WRESAT scientists, completing their satellite in 1965. But they had to wait until they could 'piggyback' onto another NASA rocket mission, and OSCAR 5 wasn't launched until 1970. It still orbits the earth, though it ran out of batteries many decades ago.
It was not only serious scientists who were influenced by the space age. Fashion, children's toys, architecture and even the humble Frisbee took their cues from rockets, flying saucers and futuristic fantasies.
Visitors to the exhibition can see an excerpt from Australia's first science fiction television show, The Stranger. Produced by the ABC, the program first aired in April 1964, well before Dr Who made it to our shores. And the episode on display features a central west link - a chase sequence across the dish of the Parkes radio telescope!
We're working on some great space themed activities for the next school holidays as well as some interesting events for adults and children alike. Stay tuned to the Museum's Facebook page or check orangemuseum.eventbrite.com.au to see what's coming up.
Orange Regional Museum is open from 9am to 4pm daily. Entry is free.
CREDIT: Mary-Elizabeth Andrews
Word count: 418
