Prime ministers Fumio Kishida and Anthony Albanese inked the accord in the Western Australian city of Perth, revamping a dusty 15-year-old statement drafted when terrorism and weapons proliferation were the overriding concerns.
The text declares the two democracies “natural partners” who face growing risks to their shared interests, and vows greater cooperation on “intelligence, surveillance and reconnaissance”.
“This landmark declaration sends a strong signal to the region of our strategic alignment”, Mr Albanese said.
Mr Kishida said the agreement was a response to an “increasingly harsh strategic environment”, without citing China or North Korea by name.
Neither Australia nor Japan has the ranks of overseas intelligence operatives and foreign informants needed to play in the major leagues of global espionage.
Japan does not have a foreign spy agency equivalent to America’s CIA, Britain’s MI6 or Russia’s FSB. Australia’s ASIS is a fraction of the size of those organisations.
But according to expert Bryce Wakefield, Australia and Japan have formidable signals and geospatial capabilities – electronic eavesdropping tools and high-tech satellites that provide invaluable intelligence on adversaries.
Mr Wakefield, director of the Australian Institute of International Affairs, said the agreement was another signal that Japan was becoming more active in the security arena.
“It is a significant agreement in that Japan hasn’t overtly worked with partners outside the United States on security,” he said.
“It may actually end up being a template for cooperation with other countries, for example, the United Kingdom.”
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and his Japanese counterpart Fumio Kishida have signed a renewed joint declaration on security cooperation.
Some even see the accord as another step toward Japan joining the powerful Five Eyes intelligence-sharing alliance between Australia, Britain, Canada, New Zealand and the United States.
As part of the deal, Japan’s defence forces will train and exercise in northern Australia with the ADF.
“Our relationship is built on mutual trust, mutual respect and mutual interest. It is an economic relationship based upon the fact that Australia remains a reliable and secure partner when it comes to the export of energy to Japan that has been so important for Japan’s post-war development.
“But the relationship is much deeper than an economic one. Because its foundation is on our values of democracy, of human rights and a free and open Indo-Pacific. And that is reflected in the work that we have done through the Quad, which I will be very proud to host in Australia next year.”
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has announced “Japan self-defence forces will train and exercise” in Northern Australia with the Australian Defence Force, following the renewed Australia-Japan Joint Declaration on Security Cooperation. Mr Albanese met with Japanese counterpart Fumio Kishida in Perth to discuss bilateral strategies in Perth. “As part of our increased security partnership, we welcome today that Japan self-defence forces will train and exercise in Northern Australia with the Australian Defence Force,” said Mr Albanese at a press conference in Perth on Saturday afternoon.
Australia, Japan partner on net zero
During Mr Kishida’s visit, Mr Albanese also described a critical minerals deal with Japan as a sign of a changing economic relationship that will help Australia reach net zero.
During a lunch at Perth’s Westin Hotel, attended by Mr Kishida and corporate leaders, including representatives from Japanese LNG giant INPEX, Mr Albanese said Australia and Japan were already co-operating to achieve a shared commitment to reach net zero by 2050.
Mr Albanese and Mr Kishida later visited a refinery in the industrial port of Kwinana, south of Perth, that makes nickel sulfate for electric car batteries including for Toyota.
“We know that, historically, we’ve been important providers of LNG, coal and other resources. We remain a secure partner,” Mr Albanese said.
“Australia can be relied upon to always honour contracts and honour agreements. We believe that this is just the way that we do business.
“And we’re also open to investment. And I know INPEX is here. And other businesses have been such in important investors here in Australia for common and mutual interest.
“But of course, we are moving forward in a changing global economy. And what that means is how do we put into practice our shared commitment to move to net zero by 2050?”
Mr Albanese said engaging in new industries such as hydrogen would be important. After signing an agreement for the supply of critical minerals to Japan, Mr Albanese said Australia had every ingredient required to build an electric vehicle battery.
“We need to make sure that the vision that our government has, you’ll see reflected in the Budget next Tuesday night, is one of a country that continues to export and be a reliable partner, is one that invests appropriately in our defence and security issues, is one that takes the challenge of climate change seriously, but sees it as an opportunity,” he said.
“An opportunity to build more things here, to take advantage of becoming a renewable energy superpower for the world.”
Japan’s Mars mission to end in Australia
Mr Albanese also confirmed that a Japanese spacecraft would land at Woomera in South Australia after a mission to one of the moons of Mars.
“JAXA, Japan’s space agency, is planning to touch down on Phobos, one of the moons of Mars, and collect samples that might tell us more than we’ve ever known about the birth of our solar system.
“The request from Japan is for the spacecraft, nicknamed MMX, to land in Woomera in South Australia with its precious samples when it returns to Earth in 2029.
“To me it’s an extraordinary example of how far Australia and Japan have come, and how far we can go.”
Word count: 911
