Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Jessica Leo-Kelton, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, 5000
AN Australian-first mission to the moon is an enterprising and exciting prospect.
Even more so is that South Australian rocket scientists are at the heart of the project, which intends to send our first nanosatellites to orbit around the moon in 2024.
It is a bold but necessary plan that SA needs to embrace to future-proof our space industry.
The mission is designed to inspire the nation, according to Deloitte Asia Pacific chief transformation officer Rob Hillard, who hopes it will encourage Australians to be bold in pursuing lofty goals.
It was 51 years ago on July 20, 1969, when Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Michael Collins became the first crew to successfully land on the moon aboard Apollo 11.
It was a momentous occasion that redefined space exploration and captured the hearts and minds of the world.
And while this planned mission does not go as far as sending humans to the moon it is hopefully the start of SA’s involvement in deep-space missions, which will help the industry grow and create jobs across the country.
Premier Steven Marshall described the establishment of The Australian Space Agency at Lot Fourteen as coming at a pivot point in the history of space. The agency set a target of 20,000 new jobs and billions of dollars in economic growth in just a decade.
Only last month, it announced launching satellites and growing food on Mars would be among its key priorities. Right now it seems a long way away – in more than one sense – especially as the coronavirus pandemic dominates almost every aspect of our lives. But, at some point hopefully in the not too distant future, the pandemic will come to an end, and the nation will aim to bounce back.
Accessing a vaccine and eradicating the virus has to be our top current priority.
But South Australia can lead the way and provide a legacy for future generations by showcasing our refreshing, entrepreneurial spirit.
Curiosity lies at the very heart of the human condition.
It is natural to want to know what lies beyond.
It may have been hunger that drove us out of the cave but it was curiosity that took us out of the valley, over the mountain and, ultimately, across the seas to find new lands beyond.
It is this very impulse that first took us into space itself. That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for the South Australian space industry.
Word count: 428
