AN executive from Richard Branson’s space flight company, Virgin Galactic, is the new head of the Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency.
Galactic’s chief operating officer, Enrico Palermo, pictured, takes over in January from Dr Megan Clark, who is to become chairwoman of the space agency’s advisory board.
Scott Morrison announced Mr Palermo’s appointment yesterday, saying his leadership would “rocket Australia toward our goal of becoming a major player in the international space industry”.
“By 2030, we want to triple the size of our space sector, adding $12bn to our economy and creating up to 20,000 new, high-skilled jobs,” the Prime Minister said.
Mr Palermo will return to Australia after 14 years with Virgin Galactic, which aims to make space tourism a reality with commercial flights.
The Perth native will move to Adelaide from California with his wife, Nadia, and their two sons.
He said he was “excited and honoured” to be joining the Australian Space Agency and continuing its mission of developing and transforming the country’s space industry.
At Virgin Galactic, Mr Palermo led a team of more than 700 engineers, technicians and professionals building and testing a fleet of high-speed Mach 3 commercial aircraft that can go into space.
He was the first person hired by Mr Branson’s Spaceship Company, which manufactures the fleet, and has worked extensively in the space industry in Britain and the US.
Before working in the space sector, Mr Palermo was a mechanical engineer with Woodside Energy in Perth.
Industry Minister Karen Andrews applauded the appointment and thanked Dr Clark for steering the agency through its “lift-off” in Adelaide since 2018.
“Mr Palermo’s skill set reflects the reality of the space sector, which is about so much more than just research or launch,” Ms Andrews said.
“It improves life on Earth and creates opportunities in a range of areas including manufacturing.” Ms Andrews said Australia’s space sector would continue to “expand at the speed of light … the economic benefits of space exploration are vast”.
CREDIT: CLAIRE BICKERS
Word count: 334
