NEL Taylor insists she’s not a NIMBY – she’s just not particularly keen on the idea of living next to a rocket-launching facility.
Mrs Taylor and her husband, Ian, live at Fishery Bay, south of Port Lincoln, in an off-grid house on 30ha of bush overlooking the sea.
From their porch they can watch the surfers ride waves at Left Point. It’s an idyllic lifestyle but one Mrs Taylor believes is threatened by Southern Launch’s plan to use the neighbouring Whalers Way region as a stepping-off point into the space race.
Mrs Taylor plans to put up a fight, though, spearheading a campaign of petitions and meetings that she hopes might see the project if not abandoned or relocated, then at least done the best way possible.
“It’s our own personal nightmare at the moment to be honest,” she said. “Our children, who have grown up here, they’re all devastated to think that all of the hard work we’ve put into living this way can be trampled on by a start-up company.” For Southern Launch chief executive Lloyd Damp, however, Whalers Way is a unique opportunity – a south-facing patch of privately owned land that would give the company the ability to launch satellites into a polar orbit, as opposed to the more common equatorial orbit.
Mr Damp said this would make Southern Launch a particularly attractive option for companies or organisations looking to expand the capabilities of their satellites.
He said the company had ticked every environmental box and took its ecological obligations seriously, and that it would be a boon for the regional city.
Mrs Taylor remains unconvinced.
“It’s clear that this is simply the wrong spot to put this,” she said. Port Lincoln-based native fauna expert Merrick Savage agrees, saying that the Whalers Way region is an important patch of remnant scrub.
“This is an experimental rocket-launch facility in the middle of at least 20,000ha of impenetrable mallee woodland,” Mr Savage said.
“It’s a pretty strange thing to do, I would have thought. That woodland is pristine, untouched” It’s a sentiment shared by Nature Conservation Society of SA president Patrick O’Connor, who is particularly concerned about the fate of the southern emu-wren.
“This project is proposed for the wrong place,” Mr O’Connor said. “Put simply, building a rocket-launching pad in a recognised conservation area, right on top of a hotspot for threatened birds, is unacceptable.” Mrs Taylor said her concerns included the potential for bushfires and accidents, the increase in traffic – including trucks – on the area’s unsealed roads, the project’s ecological footprint and the impact on residents who frequent Fishery Bay.
The facility has been the topic of much debate in the Port Lincoln community, with some insisting it’s in the wrong spot while others maintain it will bring money and jobs into the regional city. “I don’t want to be ‘that protester’, there are plenty of things I would rather be doing,” Mrs Taylor said.
“I’m not anti-technology – technology helps us live the way we do – and I’m not against the space industry.
“I understand how important it is, and I understand that young people, in particular, are excited by this. I just think that people need to understand that this isn’t about space exploration, this is about launching satellites.” Mr Damp said Whalers Way was the ideal site for Southern Launch and ticked a number of boxes.
“Any rocket-launch site in Australia must satisfy the Australian Space Agency’s flight safety code, and that’s a very mathematical document that defines what a safe rocket launch looks like,” he said.
“We used that document and looked at the southern coastline of South Australia and Whalers Way was the optimal location to do rocket launches.” Mr Damp said there was an emerging market in launching small satellites – between 2kg and 200kg – into polar orbits. “You can use groups of these small space satellites to get global coverage, and they’re driving things like early fire detection systems and helping farmers grow crops or tracking lost packages in the mail,” he said.
Mr Damp said that while government approval had been given for test launches, the company still needed approval from the Australian Space Agency before becoming a commercial operation.
“They are the final pieces of the jigsaw that need to fall into place, but we are aiming to do three test launches this year,” he said.
“Next year we’d be very excited if we were able to do four launches, and grow from there.“ Mr Damp said there were no plans to evacuate people from homes or restrict access to Fishery Bay during launches, and that public access to Whalers Way would likely remain unchanged outside of launch times.
“We have no intention of closing or restricting tourism activities unless we’re doing something that we deem as hazardous,” he said. Mr Damp said Southern Launch had been working closely with various fishing industry associations to ensure no commercial boats were in unsafe areas during launches, but admitted that recreational fishers would be barred from some areas for short amounts of time.
“If the regulator would like things to be more conservative then that’s their decision, but our goal is to try to minimise the effects on other users,” he said.
Mr Damp said Southern Launch was open to launching military satellites from the Whalers Way site.
“We would be very honoured to serve Australians currently serving overseas protecting Australian interests,” he said.
“Ultimately, it comes down to if the Department of Defence is going to use a civilian service. Space is dual use, so to speak.” Two community information meetings will be held with Southern Launch at the Port Lincoln Hotel on Tuesday. Written submissions on Southern Launch’s environmental impact study can be lodged through the PlanSA website.
CREDIT: NATHAN DAVIES
Word count: 969
