Popular activities from times past – such as marbles – are being dusted off and given new life in schools today, writes reader Rob Skewes
DID you own a pogo stick? Or play marbles at school? Maybe you flew kites or had the fastest go-kart in your street? Perhaps growing silk worms was your passion?
Other interests came pre-packaged in kits such as children’s chemistry sets and boxes of Lego building bricks, while Boomer learning in the great outdoors included a visit to SA’s very climbable dormant volcano, Mount Schank, and exploring the hidden wonders of the Naracoorte Caves.
Now it seems these and other Boomer youthful interests are making a comeback in schools across Australia.
Remember the cornerhaberdasher store?
For children, it was an Aladdin’s Cave of childhood treasures that included marbles, plastic knucklebones, cap guns and yoyos.
Better still, many parent purchases could be recycled and reimagined by Boomer youngsters in cunning and novel ways.
Wooden cotton reels could be repurposed for tomboy stitch. When teaching, I used tomboy as both a student craft activity and the finished tomboy stitch as a fun measuring tool for classroom objects.
But the wooden cotton reel has a multitude of other learning possibilities. For example, as some Boomers might recall, with the aid of a match stick and a rubber band, it can be engineered into a miniature mobilecontraption.
Known as a wooden cotton reel tractor, a quick internet search reveals how it is made.
Ready to roll While you’re reminiscing, don’t forget those once much-loved marbles, classified by size from pee-wees and cat’s eyes to tom bowlers, mashers, thumpers and toe-breakers.
Marble games – once common in school yards – have been redesigned for modern student STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) education.
Continued next page Old-school fun holds the key as learning goes back to the future From previous page One activity, called a marble challenge run, utilises everyday recycled household items (including cardboard tubes and cereal boxes) to make a sloping pinball-like track.
One task is to measure and maximise the speed of a marble down along the laid-out course.
Did you ever build or race a go-kart? It was a popular activity for many boys in my childhood neighbourhood. Go-carts can be a fun outdoor family project requiring planning, teamwork and basic engineering skills.
However, John Watson and other local lads used our streets in more practical ways.
They connected old hand-cranked wooden-cased telephones to their homes by running wires through drains in Woodville South.
Both great examples of Boomer engineering, design and technology. And if you think you might have an old phone in a back shed, while you are there why not dust off a pogo stick if you have one?
They provided a mix of great fun and great teaching lessons about forces – an example of real-life physics.
In the 1960s, a boyhood mate of mine, Don Williams, realised a dream when slot car designer Bob Crawford began testing a new track near Don’s family-run Black Kat Deli on Findon Rd.
Not far from the Holden factory and in earshot of the Holden whistle, this was the perfect setting for slot car and track innovations.
Do you recall collecting shells and those squishy sacs nicknamed jellyfish? While along our rocky shores, tiny crabs, sea sponges, stuck-like-glue mussels, spiny sea urchins and starfish were just waiting to be discovered – though not before a word of warning from adults about the dangers of the dreaded blue-ringed octopus.
During the 1960s and ’70s, many coastal beaches served as outdoor classrooms.
Right direction “Never Eat Soggy Weetbix” is not Boomer breakfast advice.
Rather it’s a phrase (called a mnemonic) to help students remember the compass directions in the clockwise order of North, East, South and West.
But what about compass directions at night?
This was a question Adelaide High School teacher Craig Griffen would pose to his science students in the early 1970s.
The solution was written in the stars.
From using the Southern Pole Star, it was possible to locate south and mark out one’s bearings; practical science that still holds true today.
When it came to reading, the “How and Why” series was perfect off-the-shelf books for knowledge-hungry students.
Topics included rocks and minerals, butterflies and moths, space exploration, flight, dinosaurs, mathematics and the human body, to name but a few.
Another shared passion with many boyhood friends was building rockets and objects that could fly.
Believe it or not, our local butcher shop sold rocket fuel – in the guise of a preservative for sausages.
If that failed, Selby Chemicals in Adelaide sold the necessary chemicals on a promise to use them wisely.
Hornby train sets could be used to guide homemade rockets along a track. Reckless and dangerous, yes. But in those post-war years, many Boomer youngsters were sheltered inside a world of naivety.
For modern young rocket enthusiasts, compressed air plastic bottle rockets offer a safer option.
Homegrown fun While designing paper planes, simple straw gliders and kites are all great ways to introduce the topic of flight.
Many fun science activities utilise items found in most kitchen pantries. With adult supervision, growing onions in jars, turning food dyes and baking soda into fizzy paints and – with the addition of vinegar – making models of fizzing, foaming volcanoes are great fun learning tasks.
And while you’re at it, don’t forget the laundry.
Those wooden pegs are useful construction materials and that much-loved Lego in a back cupboard has fun learning applications, from science to mathematics.
So, while Boomer classroom learning technologies might seem old-school – limited to the classroom PA, dancing lessons thanks to old crackling 78 RPM records, and watching black and white educational films in darkened rooms – it seems we really were an inventive lot.
And according to many educational websites, our skills and knowledge as a teaching and learning resource are still much in demand.
Children’s literature, the performing arts and student social/emotional wellbeing were at the heart of Rob Skewes’ involvement in primary school teaching for more than 40 years. He is currently involved in local history and aspiring writing projects.
CREDIT: Rob Skewes
Word count: 1030
