After a career break – having kids, caring for a loved one or because they are immigrants with no local references – many highly trained engineers find they can’t get even a job interview when they try to return to the workforce.
Believing a combination of bias – unconscious or otherwise – and a broken recruitment system was to blame, engineering recruitment specialist Natalie Desty founded STEM Returners in 2017 in Britain.
In 2020, they began the groundwork in Australia with director Marcail Roe at the helm, connecting qualified and experienced jobseekers with employers. Returners join a company on a fixed-term contract for a 10 or 12-week program, during which time they’re paid at the same rate as their permanent colleagues.
In the past 12 months, STEM Returners Australia has taken flight.
“This year we’ve already returned 25 STEM professionals to the workforce and we’re on track to more than double that in the next 12 months,” says Roe, who also has a recruitment background. “Everyone who went through the program was offered a permanent position.”
Electrical engineer Maryam Memar had five years of experience in her field when she immigrated to Australia from Iran four years ago. With no local references, she had endured three years of getting nowhere when Roe contacted her via LinkedIn and asked her if she’d share her resume to pass on to a company.
“At first I thought it might be too good to be true,” Memar says. “But I sent the resume and I was interviewed by a manager at Bechtel Mining and Metals, and they offered for me to join their 10-week STEM Returner program.”
Roe scours Seek and LinkedIn and also taps into community groups and referrals to find her Returners, focusing on women and ethnic minority groups.
“I search on skill sets, degrees, location,” she says. “Sourcing is the most time-consuming part of my role, but as we get better known it will get easier.”
Memar says the Bechtel program was like an internship.
“There were lots of meetings to get to know people, settle down into the new job, and get to know the company very well,” she says. “We also met the leaders of the company and after 10 weeks there was a presentation to give our feedback, and then we started our jobs officially. I’m now in a job that completely matches my skills. It’s my dream job – Bechtel is an international company with very interesting projects, so I’m very happy with the tasks I’m receiving.”
Engineers Australia has partnered with STEM Returners and arranges professional mentors for Returners.
“When I speak with senior executives from engineering organisations, they cite that one of the things keeping them awake at night is the engineering skill shortage,” EA’s chief engineer Jane MacMaster says. “This is so alarming. We haven’t trained enough engineers in Australia for a very long time; 58 per cent of our engineering workforce were born overseas. That’s a statistic that surprises many. It surprised me when I first heard it.”
The pandemic border closure exacerbated the problem, but it goes way beyond that.
“We need to tackle this problem on many fronts, including supporting people who may have left the engineering workforce – with a particular focus on women – to re-enter it,” MacMaster says. “STEM Returners is a really critical program given how important engineering is to most facets of everyday life, from infrastructure to defence to the nuclear sub capability that we’ve undertaken, to the renewable energy transition. This program is on the ground and making a real difference, engineer by engineer.”
Roe says paying Returners based on their experience is a vital part of the program. “It’s not about getting people on the cheap,” she says. “It’s about giving them a pathway back to their career. Many lack confidence and have been disheartened with recruitment processes. We’re supporting them to build that belief in themselves again.”
Bechtel Mining and Metals Asia-Pacific general manager Leigh Carter says the program has led the company to review its recruitment process. “It’s made us stop and think, ‘How do we screen candidates?’ ” Carter says. “STEM Returners made us take a breath and change our approach. We can welcome some senior females back into the engineering workforce and benefit everyone.”
He says there has been a noticeable positive flow-on effect. “We’ve had 10 Returners in Brisbane and two in Western Australia,” Carter says. “Now we have 10 women coming into the office here in Brisbane. It’s really reinvigorated our training program and it’s not only helped us with diversity, it has led to a general uplift in the vibe in the office, supporting them in their integration back into the workforce.”
Software engineer Singithi De Silva had worked for four years in her native Sri Lanka when she moved to South Australia in 2012. She did some freelance work, completed a PhD in telecommunication engineering at the University of South Australia and had a baby. With her daughter now in school, she started job hunting. “Even though I have my PhD, I didn’t want an academic career,” De Silva says.
Roe contacted her via LinkedIn and put her in touch with BAE Systems, where she joined the STEM Returners program this January. “Most companies want recent experience, and I had nearly an eight-year gap, but BAE Systems didn’t care about my career gap,” she says. She was offered a job as a software designer with the company’s technology hub, Red Ochre LABS. “This opportunity has changed my career completely,” De Silva says. “I am back again doing what I love doing.”
BAE Systems chief people officer Danielle Mesa says the STEM Returners program is “real­ly critical” for the company.
“We know there are many STEM professionals, mostly women and of diverse backgrounds, who have left the sector for a range of reasons,” Mesa says. “We know that there’s a shortage of engineers and STEM professionals, so the business case for us is obvious. It’s also important that we increase our flexibility and benefits – including paid parental leave, carer’s leave, career breaks – so that we make BAE a far more attractive organisation to join and stay. We have a huge amount of work to deliver and BAE works on programs for generations, so we’re probably one of the last organisations that can guarantee a career for life.”
Both BAE Systems and Bechtel have signed on for another program with STEM Returners, and Roe says she has six companies on board in total, with others contacting her to learn more.
“An average Returner has a career break of four years and feels they have no pathway back,” Roe says.
“However, an average Returner also has seven years’ work experience, 100 per cent of them are degree qualified and more than one-third are postgraduate PhD level. It really is a talent pool that can’t be ignored any longer.”
Word count: 1127
