Wild and urban worlds unite on the Bondi to Manly Walk with incredible results Perhaps the idea of hiking 80km between two of Sydney’s best-known beaches doesn’t immediately appeal, but hear me out. The Bondi to Manly Walk is barely a year old, but already ranks as one of the world’s great city hikes. It’s a meandering adventure of native bushland and seductive beaches, wildlife and watery landscapes, and intimate insights into Sydney’s colonial and Indigenous histories.
Unlike most other urban trails, the Bondi to Manly unites natural and built worlds, plunging walkers deep into native bushland without ever leaving the city. Human settlement tends to tame nature to its will or smother it altogether, but here the wildness not only endures, it flourishes.
Case in point: hiking towards Bradleys Head through a twisted tunnel of angophoras, water dragons everywhere, pythons and bandicoots lurking somewhere unseen, and yet the skyline of this five million-strong metropolis shimmers just a few Ks away across the harbour.
The views en route are often incredible. Hiking the clifftops of the eastern headlands, the high, jagged shore and crashing surf bring to mind Cape Town or Capri – heart-stopping scenery we’d fly across the world to see. Given that’s not possible at the moment, now’s a really good time to appreciate the beauty in our own backyard.
The Bondi to Manly Walk, a collaboration between various municipal councils, Aboriginal land councils and state and federal government departments, opened at the end of 2019. It links six existing coastal trails into a sinuous path with something of interest for everyone. There’s art, from Joel Adler’s Viewfinder sculpture at Vaucluse, a periscope disguised as a rusting sewage outlet whose angled mirrors capture the Tasman Sea surging against the rocks far below, to the abandoned artists’ colony of Curlew Camp at Little Sirius Cove, where Australian Impressionists including Tom Roberts and Arthur Streeton came to paint from the late 19th century. A coral tree, planted by Streeton in the 1890s to mark the camp, still shades the cove.
There’s ancient art, too, in the Indigenous rock engravings along the track. Most remarkably at Ben Buckler Headland where, at the clifftop edge of a golf course above Bondi Beach, a sandstone slab is carved with marine creatures and a giant lizard-man. There are more engravings at Grotto Point and Reef Beach on the north side and, opposite busy Balmoral Beach, a rock shelter housing the 3200-year-old remains of a First Nations kitchen midden. (To better understand the Eora Nations’ ancestral connection to Sydney, book a tour with Dreamtime Southern X.) And there’s science, in the form of “one of the most important radio astronomy sites in the world”. There’s just one antenna left anchored to the Dover Heights cliffs today, but in the 1950s this site picked up galactic radio signals, bounced off the ocean below, from the Milky Way and beyond. In the process it “revolutionised space exploration and heralded a new era in astronomy,” according to the CSIRO.
Around 35km of the 80km expanse weaves through Sydney Harbour National Park, parts of which seem untouched since colonisation. The walk’s diverse habitats range from rainforest gullies and arid headlands of grass trees and banksias to the manicured perfection of public parks and private gardens.
Fans of architecture or real estate are constantly rewarded by up-close encounters with magnificent waterfront mansions (including public museums such as Vaucluse and Greycliffe House), historic fortifications (for tours, see harbourtrust.gov.au), as well as passing right by – and over – the opera house and harbour bridge.
Tempting beaches are around every sandstone outcrop. Some are well-known, like Camp Cove and Balmoral. Others are prized local treasures, like the pint-sized Lady Martins Beach fronting Point Piper’s Royal Prince Edward Yacht Club, and the Whitsundays vibes of Castle Rock Beach at Clontarf on the north shore. At least three beaches beside the route are clothing optional – handy if you forget your bathers.
The Bondi to Manly app lists all the major attractions, but misses plenty of hidden secrets. That’s why it’s wise to take your time. Allow at least four to five days, ideally, to explore every cul-de-sac, swim in the most irresistible sandy coves, and indulge at the beach kiosks of Nielsen Park and Parsley Bay and the stilted water cafes at Kirribilli’s Sydney Flying Squadron and Mosman Rowers.
The priceless moments for me are the vignettes of daily life along the way. The truckie bathing in the morning shallows opposite Woolloomooloo wharf’s million-dollar apartments. The lone trumpeter hidden in the forest at Chowder Bay. The kind folk who interrupt their gardening to offer me directions and advice.
My friend Jacqui, who lives right beside the trail, nails its appeal when she says, “They’re all neighbourhoods. It’s just everyone doing their thing, everywhere you go. They’re not tourists. It’s all these glimpses into people’s lives everywhere. And it’s unique that it’s so accessible.” bonditomanly.com Kendall Hill travelled to Sydney courtesy of Destination NSW. visitnsw.com
Look out for ...
WHERE TO STAY Accommodation-wise, there are three options. Book hotels along the line (as I did, though this means organising luggage transfers). Stay in the city: great idea – use Sydney’s ferry system to get to and from each day’s walk points. Or, with forward planning, you could stay at the National Parks and Wildlife Service’s beautifully renovated cottages at Nielsen Park (above), Middle Head and the old quarantine station at North Head – all super-handy for hikers. nationalparks.nsw.gov.au Read more of Kendall Hill’s travel insights at escape.com.au/kendall-hill or follow him on Instagram: @misterkendallhill
CREDIT: KENDALL HILL
Word count: 933
