A GOLD Coast space exploration company has teamed up with another trailblazer – South Australia’s Fleet Space Technologies – to launch six satellites into orbit.
Helensvale-based Gilmour Space Technologies’ CEO Adam Gilmour said the contract to launch six Fleet Space Centauri nanosatellites on its Eris rockets in 2023 was a “great example of how Australian space companies are scaling and partnering to compete in the global space market”.
Gilmour Space and Fleet Space were the first two Australian space start-ups to raise venture capital funding in Australia. Formed before the Australian Space Agency, the companies were seeded by Sydney-based venture capital firm Blackbird Ventures.
Fleet Space CEO Flavia Tata Nardini said the launch would involve an Australian-built payload in an Australian-built satellite on an Australian-built rocket.
The announcement followed the release of the federal government’s Modern Manufacturing Strategy and Space National Manufacturing Priority Roadmap. It seeks to ­develop sovereign capabilities in space manufacturing, ­including satellites and launch vehicles.
“The announcement is the beginning of an ongoing launch service relationship as we work towards our planned constellation of 140 satellites,” she said.
“We are building a strong portfolio of launch service partners, and we are very excited to have Gilmour Space as one of them.
“As a country, we are highly reliant on space technologies from other nations and it’s time to realise that we can have critical sovereign capabilities in satellite development and launch here in Australia.” Mr Gilmour said the COVID-19 pandemic had shown the importance of a country having access to and control over its own technology.
Last year Gilmour announced it had signed a memorandum of understanding with global aerospace giant Northrop Grumman Corporation to develop Australia’s space capabilities. Northrop will join Gilmour Space as an industry partner on its cooperative research centre project to develop composite rocket tanks for low-cost space transport.
Word count: 307
