SAMPLES from a 4.5-billion-year-old asteroid that were collected by a Japanese spacecraft in two extraordinary touchdown manoeuvres are about to land in South Australia’s outback.
The Hayabusa2 spacecraft took fragments from the asteroid Ryugu in February and July last year, and will eject the fragments as it flies past early today. The capsule is expected to land near Woomera about 4am, with the Hayabusa2 having travelled 5.25 billion kilometres since it launched.
The fragments date back to the earliest stages of the formation of the solar system and, once analysed, are expected to provide valuable insights about its origin and evolution.
It will be the first ever sub-surface asteroid sample to return to Earth and may help scientists understand how oceans and life formed here.
The Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency said scientists had many examples of meteorites, whose origins are thought to be the same as asteroids, that had fallen to Earth but the material that was left over after re-entry through the atmosphere and their structure, along with volatile substances, had been lost.
“They will also be contaminated with substances from the Earth,” JAXA says. “On the other hand, samples from the asteroids are brought back to Earth in the same condition as they were in space, with the ‘re-entry capsule’ protecting the sample through the atmosphere and landing.” Anke Kaysser-Pyzalla, chair of the German Aerospace Centre DLR, which will assist with sample analysis, said it was a historic moment for space exploration. After releasing the landing capsule, the Hayabusa2 spacecraft will continue its scientific journey, steering itself towards another near-Earth asteroid that it is expected to reach in 2031. Woomera was declared a prohibited area in 1947 after the establishment of a long-range weapons testing facility and﻿ became a global focal point for space activity from 1957 when the first research rocket Skylark was launched by the British.
CREDIT: REBECCA LE MAY
Word count: 315
