SOMETIME in the next couple of decades, some breathtakingly fortunate person may be the first to set foot on Mars.
While it’s not a nailed-on certainty, key stakeholders worldwide share an almost unanimous belief that the pre-eminent dream of sci-fi fantasists now floats close to realisation, reawakening the public’s lust for space exploration.
As remarkable as a Mars landing may be, however, in many ways the journey to get there could be more exciting than the actual destination. Mars is no El Dorado, no exotic paradise of untold riches – it remains a largely unknown quantity, and an inhospitable one at that. But the final push to transform humankind into a genuinely space-faring race may already be generating the most disruptive, lucrative industry we have ever known – space is now open for business, and business, it appears, could be very good.
Take a closer look at the global space industry and you’ll see it’s growing at a rate of 9.5 per cent per year, almost four times faster than the world economy. Indeed, while space-related activity is worth around $350 billion today, the Bank of America Merrill Lynch has tipped that the industry will generate at least $2.7 trillion within 30 years, representing an eight-fold increase.
Fuelled by an explosion of start-ups, the global space industry is evolving from exploration to innovation, but as it does, it’s demanding innovation, creative thought, and distinct support structures to enable disruptive ideas.
Internationally, NASA and the European Space Agency have flung open the door to collaboration with entrepreneurs from SpaceX to Adelaide based, UniSA-spin-out, Myriota. And while many details of Australia’s own forthcoming space agency are still to be confirmed, key bodies such as the CSIRO and the Defence Science and Technology Group have indicated firmly that their future lies in partnership with the best and brightest new space enterprises.
Add to this the new $19.5 million Space Infrastructure Fund released in this week’s federal budget and the recent announcement of Adelaide to be the home of the Australia’s new space agency, space seems just that one step closer.
And while there has been plenty of excitement about the potential presented by a new Australian space agency, the savviest expectations must be appropriately supported. This is where UniSA’s Venture Catalyst Space incubator program comes in.
Designed to help South Australia’s progressive researchers and entrepreneurs enter the great space race, Venture Catalyst Space provides essential seed funding, development, business skills and strategy to help start-ups successfully create and commercialise viable innovations.
The underlying premise of the space incubator program is to answer one of the biggest challenges facing most start-ups: how to turn a great idea into a successful global business. Applications for our next intake are now open. To find out more, visit: icc.unisa.edu.au/venturecatalystspace/JASMINE VREUGDENBURG IS MANAGER OF THE INNOVATION & COLLABORATION CENTRE AT UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
CREDIT: JASMINE VREUGDENBURG OPINION
Word count: 481
