Is he off the planet? US President Donald Trump reportedly wants humans on Mars next year – a decade ahead of planned missions. TORY SHEPHERD reports
‘WHAT if I gave you all the money you could ever need to do it?” Donald Trump reportedly asked acting NASA administrator Robert Lightfoot.
“What if we sent NASA’s budget through the roof… could it work then?” According to yet another behind-the-scenes look at the (ahem) excitement of the Trump administration released yesterday, in 2017 the President wanted to bring the planned manned mission to Mars forward to 2020.
Mars Society of Australia president Jon Clarke said it was an impossible request.
“It’s like saying ‘if I give you an infinite number of women, can you give me a baby in a month?’ Some things take time,” he says. Time to decide on hardware, software and operational specifics. Time to test the systems, train the people. Not something to launch into on the whim of a President.
Because thousands of the world’s best minds have been working on missions to Mars for some time and they’re across the complexities of hurtling humans into space for extended periods of time and making sure they can survive and thrive on alien soil. And Australia is part of the project.
When Prime Minister Scott Morrison announced the infant Australian Space Agency would be based in Adelaide, headed by the formidable Megan Clark, a journalist said “obviously” they weren’t talking about sending humans into space. The look on Dr Clark’s face said: “Don’t be too hasty”.
MISSIONS TO MARS UNLESS Mr Trump uses an executive order to send off a mission before it’s ready, NASA is aiming for a manned mission to an asteroid by 2025 and to Mars by the 2030s.
They’ve had robots there for decades, gathering data while they work on a way to keep vulnerable human sacks of bones and blood alive for the journey and at the destination.
NASA says the exploration could find evidence of life – already hinted at by the discovery of water on Mars – answering one of the “fundamental mysteries of the cosmos: Does life exist beyond Earth?” Erratic entrepreneur Elon Musk is also planning a trip. In fact, he has said he plans to move there. His company SpaceX is aiming for a cargo mission in 2022 to get things started, with a manned mission in 2024.
People will travel on the vessel formerly known as the Big Falcon Rocket – it’s now just called the Starship.
Meanwhile, there are other companies throwing the idea around, and there’s a chance everyone will be gazumped by the secretive Chinese Government or an aggressive Russian move.
The NASA option is the most steady-as-she-goes plan, while the SpaceX hare could cross the line first.
And Australia is set to be part of it The space missions of the future will be collaborations between countries, unlike the Cold War space race.
Australia is already part of the plans; the Parkes Observatory in NSW – home to “The Dish” – helps track spacecraft including NASA’s Curiosity rover, and is sure to be a part of manned missions.
But there are plenty of ways Australia could or will be involved. We’re good at working in extreme environments such as the desert or Antarctica.
Necessity has made us good at preserving and recycling water, and highly efficient solar panels will be needed on Mars to power the new colony.
Dr Gordon Cable is an Adelaide doctor who says Australia is so used to uninhabitable environments that we’re perfectly placed to train healthcare workers to help astronauts deal with spaceflight and life on Mars.
“One of the things Australia is really good at is remote, rural and environmental medicine,” he says. “We’ve had the Antarctic division … we’ve had the delivery of rural and remote health care to communities.
“If Australia can contribute to those sorts of missions, it would be in support and training for physicians to work in Earth-independent, totally autonomous, austere environ-ments.” Dr Clark says the Mars Society is looking for funding to build a simulated Mars base at Arkaroola, in the Flinders Ranges, to start building skills.
But he says Australia has much more to offer. Places such as the Pilbara and the area around Coober Pedy have produced similar minerals to the surface of Mars. Millions of years of weathering mean they are good places to learn from.
And we have large areas of isolated terrain where we can test habitats, as well as the technology needed for long-range exploration. Australians are also culturally suited, Dr Clark says, because they work together in remote environments.
“Australia has a lot of experience in the Antarctic, on small stations, in small expeditions, psychologically and sociologically,” he says. “And culturally, we have something to offer. America is hierarchical and militaristic, while Australia focuses on team efforts.” Dr Clark says the space agency is a “big step in the right direction” for Australia to get involved, because now we have a body to represent the country.
And it’s worth it. It will be the unexpected benefits and spinoffs of the technology that will bring back a return on the space investment, he says, as well as getting young people interested in science.
WHAT WILL LIFE BE LIKE ON MARS?
IF you make it through the flight – up to 300 days stuffed into a tincan with other people and complicated toilet rituals – you’re probably pretty tough.
But then you would have to deal with the gravity field, the harsh terrain, the possibility of catastrophic weather events, and maybe even alien lifeforms of some sort. You would have to live in a contained habitat and start farming food as well as creating water and oxygen supplies.
Sounds like hell on Earth. One of the difficulties of the mission will be getting the right mix of people up there – you don’t want a gene pool that consists entirely of Star Trek nerds.
That could be where South Australia really shines. Clare Valley winemaker Muster Wine Company has been talking to space enthusiasts about the possibilities of making wine on Mars. That’s not just an educational agricultural endeavour – it could increase the Martian human gene pool.Rock-star physicist Brian Cox has said that if the conditions are not right to grow wine grapes on Mars, he “might not want to go there”.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD
Word count: 1071
