Prepare for the launch of the space sector here in Adelaide and explore the brave, unique new world of jobs it will bring, writes Business Editor CAMERON ENGLAND
YOU’RE halfway to Mars in a spaceship kitted out with everything humankind will need to start building colonies and finally taking over the red planet.
You’ve just finished your morning coffee and are about to clock on to your day job as … what?
Humanity’s second great push into space – following the space race of the 1960s – is going to be profoundly different to the time when fighter pilots with “the right stuff” were elevated to global heroes as the first astronauts to walk in space and touch foot on the moon.
This time around, bolstered by renewed interest from governments across the globe, including ours – with the first Australian Space Agency now based in Adelaide – the vision is to go further, and stay longer, with long-term missions and even colonies on the moon and Mars a possibility.
Adelaide, as home to the new space agency, will be front and centre of Australia’s push to become a global player in the space field.
With that will come jobs – an estimated 20,000 over time, according to the agency itself – and with that, an immense need for highly trained workers to build and operate the spacecraft of the future, but also to solve myriad issues which we don’t have to deal with on earth.
In a bid to help address this looming need for skills, The Advertiser has teamed up with the University of Adelaide to co-host the Future Proof: Space Jobs Forum on February 6, when high-school students, parents and educators are encouraged to attend and hear from Adelaide’s own astronaut, Andy Thomas, as well as experts in the field of off-earth resources, space mining and nanosatellites.
The event will be held at the university, with students able to ask questions and get insights into the careers available in the space sector and how to get into the field.
There will also be a post-event mini-expo, where companies in the sector will be on hand to answer questions.
John Culton – a retired US air force colonel with decades of experience in defence and space who is now an associate professor of off-earth resources at the university as well as the head of the new Centre for Sustainable Planetary and Space Resources – will be part of the panel discussion at the event.
Mr Culton said the diversity of jobs that would need to filled in this next big push for the stars ranged from pilots and engineers to those needing agricultural expertise, civil engineers, psychologists and food technologists.
He said there was a “huge amount of momentum for the upcoming set of space missions’’.
“The difference between what’s coming and what has occurred, we could say ‘Artemis versus Apollo’, is long-term human presence,’’ he said.
“So the centre is focused on supporting the long-term human aspect of these missions.’’ The Artemis program is NASA’s plan to put astronauts back on the moon by 2024 and then develop it for use as a jumping-off platform to get to Mars.
This was intimately aligned with the Centre for Sustainable Planetary and Space Resources’s work covering areas such as energy, food, oxygen, water and fuel for spacecraft.
“Long-term human presence is underpinned by the ability to use resources that we find along the way in space,’’ Mr Culton said.
Some of the work being done at the university includes research into how to formulate medicines which are not susceptible to cosmic rays.
It has also acquired a “random positioning machine” which spins randomly, leading plants being grown on it to “forget” gravitational forces. This can be used to simulate the effects of zero-gravity.
Mr Culton said there was a lot of excitement at the university’s Waite Institute around research on how to provide food for humans in space over the long term.
He said there was also a new sense of excitement in the space sector globally, with new players such as SpaceX coming into the sphere, lowering the cost to get into space and opening it up to new ideas and applications.There was a record $US5.8 billion invested in the space sector last year, he said, and Australian companies had a great opportunity to be involved.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 732
