Profoundly-gifted Kane Valente, who went to university at the age of 14 years, has brought fame to the small district of Telowie near Port Pirie.
Kane, now 22, the grandson of Telowie farmers, has just graduated from the University of Adelaide with his second degree, much to the joy of his parents Paul and Leanne Valente.
His father Paul Valente grew up on his parents' farm and attended Port Pirie High School where he was a good student.
But his son was identified at the age of six years old as being profoundly gifted - a genius - and had an accelerated education resulting in him graduating from Year 12 at Underdale HIgh School in Adelaide at the age of 13.
Kane then attended university where he took an honours degree in maths and computer science followed by honours in mechatronic engineering.
He now works as a digital developer with Data Action in Adelaide.
Asked whether he must be good at maths, Kane modestly replied: "I guess so."
He graduated recently and Paul and Leanne were there to celebrate with him.
"I wanted to work in something involving software development. I am still unsure what exactly I want to do," Kane said.
"I am working at a company that makes software for Mutual Banks including People's Choice and Beyond Bank."
He said one of his heroes might be entrepreneur Elon Musk who developed the Tesla electric car, Paypal and SpaceX.
"He is a good businessman. He developed two multi-billion dollar businesses," Kane said.
Asked about his being an especially knowledgeable individual, he said: "Ever since I was young, I was always a bit like that. I think I dealt with it fairly well. Study took up a lot of my attention.
"Both my parents have been a big help along the way."
Described by his father as being a budding businessman, Kane said he would like to "move up in terms of more knowledge, moving into a more senior position".
"There are different paths you can go down. You can move into management or a more technical side or be an entrepreneur or consultant," he said.
"I am not really sure which of those I want."
Paul Valente said his son had been tested at six years old and was found to have an IQ of 139 to 145.
He said Kane's hobby had been helping people with their personal computers.
"He didn't have any work experience and spent eight years at university. He finished his study last year. He applied for a couple of jobs, got both of them and has accepted a position," he said.
"He wants to start his own business."
Paul, who lives in Adelaide, is the son of the late Alf and Iolanda Valente who had a farm at Telowie.
Leanne Valente said Kane had been the youngest person to begin study at the University of Adelaide.
She said he had finished his first degree in maths and computer science in two-and-half-years instead of three years.
"He is only 22 and still has a good career ahead of him," she said.
CREDIT: Greg Mayfield
Word count: 519
