South Australia has longembraced the space industry – putting it in a prime position to thrive from new opportunities While other states have had their eyes on the ground, South Australia has been reaching for the stars – which is why our state is in a prime position to embrace the new space age, an internationally recognised leader in the emerging field of space archaeology says.
Flinders University space archaeologist Dr Alice Gorman, a director on the Board of the Space Industry Association of Australia whose research on space exploration has been published in National Geographic, Monocle and Archaeology magazines, wants the university to use its strengths in technical areas such as robotics to capitalise on opportunities.
“South Australia has long had space in its blood,” says Dr Gorman, also known as “Dr Space Junk” because of her many writings. “For South Australians, this isn’t some weird thing that happens somewhere else. It happens right here: SA was where it all began for Australia in space.” Dr Gorman is referencing the establishment of the Woomera Rocket Range in the state’s Far North in 1947, built in partnership with the UK Government as a rocket-testing site. Since then, SA has been a key player in the building of three satellites, strengthening relationships with the US, UK and Japan.
South Australian universities’ links with the space industry were strong even back then. The University of Adelaide’s physics department, led by Professor John Carver, designed and built Australia’s first satellite, WRESAT 1, which was launched on November 29, 1967, from Woomera aboard a modified US Redstone rocket.
The satellite placed Australia firmly in the history books, making it just the third country in the world, after the US and the USSR, to launch its own satellite into orbit from its own territory.
The second satellite, Australis OSCAR 5 was built by ham radio enthusiasts with support from Melbourne University. It was launched in California in 1970 and is still in orbit.
And Adelaide scientists played crucial roles in Australia’s third satellite, FedSat, a national collaboration launched by Japan as a gift in 2002. The Institute for Telecommunications Research at the University of SA designed components and provided the ground station for telemetry, tracking and control from Mawson Lakes.
Japan has had significant involvement in Woomera, including using it in 2010 to land samples scooped from an asteroid by a robotic spacecraft. SA has also been a major centre for the Defence Science and Technology arm of the Federal Government, which has run many research projects related to space.
Dr Gorman says the existence of the DST Group and its predecessors was one of the reasons the Federal Government didn’t see the need for a national body for space, “but we’ve now entered into a new phase where civil space activities are coming alive,” she says.
Private companies have got ahead of government, and Dr Gorman is excited to see that finally “Australia is prepared toback its own technology”.
CREDIT: Words Jennifer Hullick; Lynn Cameron
Word count: 502
