Ripples hit home IT was through tears that I read the stories about the loss of children from taking drugs (“The ripple effect”, Sunday Mail, 24/11/19).
There can be few things more chilling than the ringing of the phone in the night when a son or daughter is out enjoying themselves.
Unfortunately, alcohol, combined with illicit drugs, seem essential to enjoy a night out or music festival.
It’s sobering to realise just how many young people do not die from these dangerous drugs. This, of course, is why they keep doing it. It seems the thinking is “Well, it didn’t happen to me or my friends, so why worry?”.
We see news reports of huge drug busts, which must be a small amount of what is constantly being moved into, and around, the country. Perhaps much more time and effort should be used on stopping this instead of the millions being spent keeping a relative handful of refugees prisoner on Manus Island, Christmas Island and various detention centres around the country.
MAUREEN GOLDIE Blackwood
Protecting Bight EQUINOR’S country manager for Australia, Jone Stangeland, regards the risk of an oil spill from drilling in the Great Australian Bight as highly unlikely (“Surfers protest over Bight drilling”, Sunday Mail, 24/11/19).
These odds are not good enough. An oil spill must be impossible. The only way to ensure this is to shelve the plans and forget all about drilling in this beautiful region. An apology and a hefty fine in no way compensates for the devastation caused by an oil spill.
R.E. KERREthelton
Oil industry safe THE protest against the proposed drilling in the Bight would have been more convincing if the protesters hadn’t driven there on sealed roads, using tyres and cars, played with surfboards in wet suits and made calls on smartphones.
All of these are made wholly or partially from petroleum.
Oil and gas has been extracted from Bass Strait for more than 50 years – where there are also heaps of whales and other ocean life – without adverse effect.
This is helping to maintain our ability to produce and distribute food, heat our homes, cloth our children and even make surfboards.
BRUCE FARQUHARHyde Park
Busting the unions WITH wages stagnant and unscrupulous bosses paying incorrect wages and failing to pay workers’ superannuation, where do we find the Federal Government?
Hellbent on busting unions in Parliament. Wake up, Australian workers. PHIL HARVEYPort Pirie
Go easy on pensioners IF Josh Frydenberg wants to find savings, get off the aged pensioners’ backs. A total of $50 billion wasted on the dud NBN, $4.3 billion burnt on foreign aid and millions wasted on space exploration every year. Not to mention to the super-generous pension for pollies. Josh, leave us aged pensioners alone and look elsewhere.
KYM BRAYPort Victoria
Growth not working MATT Abraham knows that more people means more roads, cars and congestion (“We’re spending billions but are still on the road to ruin”, Sunday Mail, 24/11/19).
During the Rann era, big plans were made for urban expansion and infill. We would become a mini Los Angeles, they said. Well, the population has grown, the suburbs now extend from Maslins to Freeling, and the State Government still wants more people to come to South Australia.
The roads are now packed with traffic for much of the day. What has SA gained by two decades of population growth? A state debt of $19 billion, the world’s highest energy prices, high housing costs and longer commuting times for everybody.
We should have been happy with what we had.
PETER BLYTH Williamstown
Monarto success I CONGRATULATE the chief executive, board, staff and volunteers of Zoos SA, and the State Government on the ongoing success and exciting developments at Monarto Zoological Park (now to be known as Monarto Safari Park).
This zoo has come a long way since 1991 when it was regarded as an agistment area for excess animals from Adelaide Zoo and boasted hardly any staff for the whole 1500ha.
(Dr) ED McALISTER AOParkside
Think twice on pets WITH Christmas just around the corner I urge people, no matter how well-intentioned, to think long and hard about giving pets as presents.
They are a real responsibility, needing a lifetime of love, care, and expense. With hundreds of animals abandoned every year, the RSPCA is working at capacity.
I know that adorable puppy, or kitten, is irresistible. But how quick they mature.
Make sure the person receiving the pet is ready for such a commitment. Also, consider the effect it may have on your neighbours.
J.M. GRANT Hove
Distribute the hay WE often drive along South Rd and notice many hay bales sitting in paddocks near major roads have been sitting there for weeks.
Surely farmers north of Adelaide could use these for their starving stock. CHICK HANSON Hackham
Mums, dads investing UNLIKE Peter Goers, I know many so-called mum-and-dad investors (“Rich Pickings in a topsy-turvy world”, Sunday Mail, 24/11/19).
In the main, these people are far from rich, but merely working Australians who have risked and sacrificed in order to self-sustain in their retirement.
As property owners they have paid, and still pay, a plethora of local, state and federal taxes.
Most have not been recipients of the generous taxpayer-funded salaries and super schemes.
And, unlike Mr Goers’s self-proclaimed ambition to collect the age pension, they will not be a financial burden to society in their advanced years.
TONY TAGNI Belair
Sex laws PETER Goers rightly wants to decriminalise prostitution, as prostitutes should be treated as an exploited minority, not punished for selling sex.
I support the socially just Sex Buyer Law (Nordic model), where the sale of sex is decriminalised but the purchase of sex is criminalised.
Pimping and brothels are banned and prostitutes are helped to leave this exploitative industry.
Full decriminalisation of the New Zealand sex trade occurred in 2003, which resulted in a growth in prostitution and associated sex-trafficking (as economic theory predicted). This gave more power to the pimps, brothel owners and sex traffickers who exploit vulnerable women.
RICHARD LUTZ Payneham
Beware dieting I READ with much interest the column by Nick Ryan titled “Abstinence makes the fat fade faster – who knew?” (Sunday Mail, 24/11/19).
I enjoyed his analysis of himself involving his abstinence from food for long periods of time with the objective to lose weight.
My medical practitioner advised me some time ago, at one of my annual health check-ups, that I should lose a couple of kilos to ensure better health.
But they said don’t go on a diet as it is like holding your breath – sooner rather than later you have to take a breath. This means people who abstain from eating food to lose weight inevitably eat more food to make up for it. So, instead of them losing weight, they actually put it on.
It made sense, prompting me to never go on a diet, but to reduce the quantity of food that I eat and step up my exercise program. I can report this process works.
DES KEMP St Agnes
Driving tests for over-70s make a lot of sense I TOTALLY agree with Michael Barber that over-70s should have a driving test every five years or so (“More licence tests”, Sunday Mail, 24/11/19).
There are many drivers under 70 who should also have a regular test. I have been driving since I was 10 years old and I will be 84 in December. I have no problem with it.
I now do volunteer community driving and had to pass a test for that. I also support calls for anyone who tows a caravan or trailer grossing over 1500kg to have a special licence.
I drove road trains for 20 years and my greatest fear was passing caravans on narrow, sealed roads. I was also a driving instructor for 10 years and still instruct people how to drive vehicles on unsealed roads.MALCOLM BUTLER Port Broughton
Word count: 1325
