SPACE exploration, says JLL research director Rick Warner, may be grabbing the headlines in South Australia recently but we have, remarkably, been there before.
“According to renowned space historian Kerrie Dougherty, Adelaide was where Australia’s first ever rocketeer, Frederick Hustler developed the nation’s pioneer rocket in the 1870s,” Mr Warner said.
SA is also the reputed location of Australia’s first ever rocket range, in Woomera in the state’s north, which was the site for long range missile testing in the 1940s he said.
“So when the Australian Federal Government announced in December 2018 that Adelaide was to be the location of the newly established Australian Space Agency (ASA), it could be considered a natural continuation of a long established association between location and industry.” Providing the framework for the success of the ASA is SA’s reputation as the defence technology capital of Australia, Mr Warner said, with the majority of global defence technology firms already present in SA having significant links to the space industry.
Using the 2018 PwC Aerospace and Defence Review list of the top 100 global companies (by revenue) as a proxy for the global aerospace industry, it shows that, as an aerospace and defence cluster, Adelaide punches well above its weight, he said.
Of the top 15 largest companies in the report, nine are already in Adelaide. The American aerospace “big three” of Boeing, Lockheed Martin and Northrop Grumman have all expanded footprints and research activities in Adelaide over the last two year while Europe’s largest aerospace firm, Airbus, was the first company to sign a statement of intent with ASA to commit to the capability and competitiveness of Australia’s space sector.
The big question is whether the sector growth will translate into a tangible positive for the commercial property market in the Adelaide CBD.
Since 2016, 7700sq m of aerospace occupier gross take-up has been recorded in the CBD Mr Warner said.
“Non CBD office precincts such as the Adelaide Fringe (where Raytheon expanded by 1100sq m), and designated technology precincts like Mawson Lakes (where Lockheed Martin expanded to 5400sq m and SAAB developed a new research and development R & D facility) also still attract occupiers.
“However, with the growing concentration of aerospace technology R & D and knowledge centred on Lot Fourteen proximity to government decision-makers and access to highly-skilled human capital courtesy of two city based universities, the Adelaide CBD will be the most attractive location for the SA aerospace industry in the future.
The Australian Federal Government has committed $41 million to ASA through 2022 with the goal of tripling Australia’s space economy to $12 billion and doubling the sector workforce to 20,000 by 2030.
“The potential for SA to capture the majority of this growth is very strong, underpinned by the interconnection with the longstanding defence technology cluster in the state.As the fledgling agency grows and the related value chains get bigger, the SA aerospace cluster will become increasingly internationalised. It won’t be long until more firms from the global Top 100 list join the party.
CREDIT: RICHARD EVANS
Word count: 510
