ADELAIDE’S executive rental market is set to soar as the benefits of growths in both the medical and space research sectors flow into the state.
According to realestate.com.au, there were 30 properties for lease in metropolitan Adelaide asking for $1000 or more a week, with one fully furnished Hackney home asking a commanding $3500 a week and a bond of $21,000.
Real Estate Institute of South Australia president Brett Roenfeldt said it was encouraging to see a strong supply of top-end properties, and said the market should thrive in coming years as the state’s medical and film sectors continue to grow, and the space exploration industry takes off.
“I don’t think we’ve fully grasped how significant these advancements are for the state,” he said, adding he was surprised at the number of high-priced rentals.
“We have obviously got some huge infrastructure projects happening both in the city and in the Iron Triangle (Port Pirie, Whyalla, Port Augusta) as well, and with those massive projects comes very expensive expertise that’s got to come into Adelaide from overseas.
“With new companies establishing here, there will be, I would have thought, strong demand in that top-end rental market because they may not want to buy a property if they are only going to be here for a short period of time.
“What you see with a lot of these top-end rentals is that they are rented out by CEOs and company executives where their company is picking up the tab and they want to make sure they are looking after their people. It might be they are on a contract for a period of 12 or 18 months and at the end of the day they want to make sure their employee is happy so they will pay the premium price to get them into good accommodation but on the basis that they are only there maybe a few years at a maximum.” Some of Adelaide’s high-end listings include a three-bedroom Norwood house at $1500 a week, a four-bedroom Hazelwood Park house at $1450, a four-bedroom North Adelaide house at $1295 and a five-bedroom St Peters property at $1250.
Until just this week, the penthouse of the Rowlands Apartments off Grote St in the city was advertised for $2500 a week.
The apartment has since sold but the sub-penthouse was for lease at $1500 a week, fully furnished. Owner and building developer David Lee said life in the penthouse was incredible.
“I love my apartment, and as far as city living goes, this is as luxurious and comfortable as it gets,” he said.
“The Rowlands is 100 per cent occupied except for this sub-penthouse, and the majority of our rentals are executives allocated to South Australia working across industries as diverse as health and medical research, oil, defence, energy, mining and banking.
“We’re seeing rental prices going up and the market is really strong and everybody should be cheerful about that.”
PRICEY RENTAL OPTIONS $1200 a week 1/252 Piney Ridge Rd, Brukunga 5 bedrooms, 3 bathrooms, 5 parking spaces $1000 a week 57 Delamere Ave, Springfield 5 bedrooms, 2 bathrooms, 2 parking spaces $1295 a week 70 MacKinnon Pde, North Adelaide 4 bedrooms, 3 bathrooms, 2 parking spaces $1200 or $1500 a week furnished 1802/18 Rowlands Place, Adelaide 2 bedrooms, 2 bathrooms, 1 parking space $1200 a week 118 Esplanade, Brighton4 bedrooms, 4 bathrooms, 3 parking spaces
CREDIT: TOM BOWDEN REAL ESTATE EDITOR
Word count: 571
