ADELAIDE Airport could have space tourists blasting off within five years, newly reappointed Space Minister Karen Andrews says.
She has revealed there are plans afoot for space tourism and the Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency is in talks with American company Virgin Galactic about how to make it happen.
CONTINUED PAGE 6 Space agency’s plan for Adelaide tourism blast-off FROM PAGE 1 She said the plan would be for a spacecraft to use a commercial runway – any runway that can accommodate an A380 plane will work. Tourists would then have three minutes of zero gravity before watching Uluru, the Great Barrier Reef, or Lake Eyre from a cabin 100km above the Earth, which is known as Near Earth Orbit.
After peaking, the craft descends slowly to Earth. Seven or 10-day packages could see tourists enjoy wine in McLaren Vale, a meal in the city, and a regional tour before takeoff.
It comes as NASA announces its first non-government launch will be next year – and it will be in Australia. Equatorial Launch Australia will work with NASA to launch rockets from the Arnhem Space Centre.
Virgin Galactic’s Richard Branson is hoping to do a US space tour by the end of the year; however, a fatal crash five years ago has dented confidence in the company.
In 2014 a spacecraft broke apart during a test flight, killing a co-pilot. Sir Richard is confident that his winged passenger jet venture, SpaceShipTwo, will eventually be successful. Two weeks ago, he announced a move to a remote area of New Mexico for final testing.
Crew member Beth Moses described her experience in a test run as something she would remember “forever”.
“Everything is silent and still and you can unstrap and float about the cabin,” she said.
“Release is like free fall at an amusement park, except it keeps going.” Elon Musk is also testing a tourist spaceship, as is Jeff Bezos. However, Virgin Galactic is expected to pip both SpaceX and Blue Origin respectively. Virgin’s US flights cost about $250,000 a pop, but that price is set to come down.
“I’m very keen to develop space tourism here in Australia. We’ve already got some keen players in the northern hemisphere, the United States, in particular, they are looking at taking people up on space flights. We’re ideally located in the southern hemisphere,” Ms Andrews, pictured, said.
“What’s being planned is three minutes of weightlessness. We know that there’s a market. Clearly the cost of space travel will come down over time.
“I would like Australia to be part of that. There’s a lot of work to do. We’re probably looking at a five-year time frame.” There are regulative and legislative hurdles to overcome.
Ms Andrews said Australia could target China and South East Asia. “It wouldn’t just be the space trip. They’d come to stay,” she said.
Mr Branson has previously name-checked Woomera for a potential space launch pad. Doubts have been cast in the past on Virgin’s ability and Adelaide’s own astronaut, Andy Thomas, is sceptical. He sees Virgin Galactic’s plan as overly ambitious. He has described the Near Earth Orbit flights as just a very high-altitude aeroplane ride.
Australian company Mobile Travel Agents are licensed to sell tickets once they’re available. MTA is one of eight accredited agencies.
Premier Steven Marshall said SA was getting international interest from entrepreneurs and space companies interested in the space sector.“This is just an indication of the worldwide interest we are receiving, and the tip of the iceberg. Our state now has an enormous competitive advantage by having the national space agency located in Adelaide,” he said. NASA physicians are studying any effects on the human body from going into orbit; some with health conditions such as heart disease could be at risk.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD SPACE REPORTER
Word count: 635
