RURAL and remote families are urging the government to work with eccentric tech billionaire Elon Musk, to improve their internet access.
Patchy internet service has plagued the lives of many regional Aussies, but the Isolated Children's Parents' Association thinks cheap high-speed satellite internet project Starlink is a permanent solution.
Starlink is being developed by Mr Musk's company SpaceX and is anticipated to provide a 480 megabyte per second connection - 10 times faster than the new Sky Muster Plus service.
The ICPA passed a motion at its recent national conference to lobby politicians to work with companies who want to bring universal broadband to Australia, including alternative satellite-based internet services such as Starlink.
"SpaceX's Starlink system is the most advanced and promising universal broadband internet system," the motion states.
"Additionally, Starlink could be used for 4G and 5G small cell backhaul, allowing cheaper expansion and upgrade of mobile phone networks into remote areas."
But ICPA warned "red tape and political point scoring" could stop the high-speed internet dream from becoming a reality, with SpaceX facing resistance on several fronts.
"Foxtel, a service which is fast becoming obsolete, has voiced concerns to the Australian Communications and Media Authority over radio spectrum allocations," the motion stated.
Astronomers are also worried about the brightness of the satellites, while SpaceX is concerned ACMA will unnecessarily limit Starlink to remote areas, reducing potential market share.
The ICPA said all of the issues could be addressed "if they do not become political battlegrounds".
ICPA Qld's Jeff Little said there were a few companies looking to put up satellite-based internet systems.
"This is definitely worth looking at and we should encourage the government to look at them further," he said.
Mr Musk has shown a willingness to work with Australian governments in the past. In 2017, he built the world's biggest lithium-ion battery for an SA wind farm to help solve the state's power crisis. He promised to have the system delivered in "100 days or it's free", with it up and running in 63 days.
CREDIT: Jamieson Murphy
Word count: 342
