THE 50th anniversary of the moon landing has sparked new interest in space exploration, Aussie astronaut Andy Thomas says.
Another mission to the Moon or Mars and the search for life on other planets is the next frontier in space adventures.
Adelaide-born Dr Thomas is one of Australia’s most passionate advocates of space research.
He spent a total of six months in space, on four missions over 12 years. These days he splits his time between Adelaide and his adopted hometown of Houston, Texas.
Dr Thomas said finding signs of extraterrestrial life would be a “stunning pinnacle” of human achievement and a way of different nations working together on a visionary project.
“To me there has to be a fundamentally good reason to go out and do it — and that’s to acquire the knowledge of the unknown and seek new life, to discover whether life has formed on another planet,” he said.
“If there is life on Mars, for example … that would be a profoundly significant moment and achievement.” Last week NASA’s Mars Curiosity Rover detected high levels of methane, which could indicate some form of life. Evidence shows the Red Planet may have been habitable billions of years ago and astrobiologists believe there could be underground aquifers that may sustain life.
Dr Thomas said that while the original Moon mission was a decidedly US journey, future missions should be global collaborations.
“Everyone on the planet got behind the Moon landing and cheered Neil (Armstrong) and Buzz (Aldrin) on. If we did this again as an international collaboration … what a positive thing for human society.” Human space flight is once again being seriously considered, and private companies including Blue Origin and Virgin Galactic are making their own plans to send tourists into space.
Dr Thomas said space exploration was also a perfect opportunity to inspire children to study science, technology, engineering and maths subjects.
A range of school programs and government grants have already begun to encourage students, postgraduates and women into STEM-based space study. The International Space Station, long a hub of scientific research, is now letting students conduct experiments in orbit, and is now even selling space to anyone who wants to study space’s effects.
tory.shepherd@news.com.au
SOUVENIR MAGAZINEReaders can celebrate the 50th anniversary of the Moon landing with our souvenir glossy magazine One Giant Leap, available for $4.95 at participating newsagents with the token inside your Herald Sun this Saturday.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD
Word count: 409
