A $20 BILLION solar farm project planned for the Barkly would generate 1000 jobs in Darwin and another 1000 in Adelaide during the construction phase and a further 300 on-site solar farm jobs in the Northern Territory.
The 15,000ha project, which has attracted the interest of Australian billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes’s private ­investment arm Grok ­Ventures, would be the largest solar farm in the world.
Singapore-based proponents Sun Cable have set a time frame to start construction in 2023 with commercial operations starting off in 2027.
Chief Minister Michael Gunner has voiced strong ­support for the proposed solar farm and met with Sun Cable and Grok Ventures in Darwin this week.
The NT News understands traditional owners in Central Australia and the Federal Government have already been in negotiations about the project.
Sun Cable managing director David Griffin said the farm would use 5B manufactured Maverick solar power technology and produce about one-third of Singapore’s electricity through solar power, sourced from the desert near Tennant Creek and transmitted via a 3800km High Voltage Direct Current (HVDC) cable.
He said Australia’s strong relationship with Singapore, its stable economy, political and legal framework, would ensure security of supply for Singapore. The 5B Maverick solar power technology is successfully in use in the cyclone-prone Top End township of Borroloola.
“The Maverick technology combines modular design, ­prefabrication and rapid­ ­deployment,” Mr Griffin said.
“We would look to ­manufacture those Mavericks in Darwin and Adelaide, and transport them to site. That will involve a lot of factory jobs … about a thousand jobs in each assembly facility.
“On-site construction will take just under three years and the workforce would peak at about 300 people on site.
“We are designing this ­project on the back of solar technology that exists now. We know it works from a technical and engineering perspective, and our firm view is that this will work on a commercial basis. It will have a 10gW ­generation capacity “We are working as fast as we can to put the myriad of project components together and get to the 2023 target date.” Mr Gunner said: “There is no better place in the world to lead the renewable revolution than the Northern Territory. “We have the guaranteed cloud-free days, the land, and a government with the vision, plan and will,” he said.
“I met with Sun Cable this week to talk about the work we’ve been doing together and our next steps together.
“There are more bright days ahead of us than cloudy; literally, that’s why we are the natural place for leadership on solar.”
PROJECT FACT FILE 10GW of energy 3800km of HVDC cable 15,000 hectares of solar arrays One-third of Singapore’s electricity supply
MAIN PLAYERS DAVID GRIFFIN - MANAGING DIRECTOR - SUN CABLE David has been active in developing utility-scale solar and wind farms in Australia since 2000 and South Africa since 2010, through his own development companies and during his time as General Manager of Infigen Energy.
MAC THOMPSON - DIRECTOR PROJECT MANAGEMENT - SUN CABLE Mac is an experienced technology project manager, business founder and CEO. He built DigiGuard, an Australian and New Zealand based IT business continuity firm and sold it to Iron Mountain (NYSE:IRM). He then built and sold CloudRecover, a Sydney based online storage and back up business to J2Global
POSSIBLE FINANCIAL INVESTOR?
Mike Cannon-Brookes Estimated net worth: $8.5 billion Mike Cannon-Brookes is cofounder of collaboration software firm Atlassian, based in Sydney.
He and co-CEO Scott Farquhar started the company soon after graduating from college, funding it with credit cards.
Atlassian, which has no sales team, boasts NASA, Tesla and SpaceX as customers. In 2017 Cannon-Brookes started working with Elon Musk to bring Musk’s battery technology to southern Australia, which was suffering a power crisis.Cannon-Brookes has been a vocal advocate for reducing Australia’s reliance on fossil fuels, in favour of renewable energy sources.
CREDIT: EXCLUSIVE GARY SHIPWAY
Word count: 649
