TRAVEL
ADELAIDE Airport could have space tourists blasting off within five years, Space Minister Karen Andrews says.
She has revealed there are plans for space tourism and the Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency is in talks with Virgin Galactic about how to make it happen.
She said the plan would be for a spacecraft to use a commercial runway – any runway that can accommodate an A380 plane will work.
Tourists would then have three minutes of zero gravity before watching Uluru, the Great Barrier Reef, or Lake Eyre from a cabin 100km above the Earth.
Seven or 10-day packages could have tourists enjoying wine in McLaren Vale, a meal in the city, and a regional tour before takeoff.
It comes as NASA announces its first non-government launch will be next year – and it will be in Australia.
Equatorial Launch Australia will work with NASA to launch rockets from the Arnhem Space Centre.
Virgin Galactic’s Richard Branson is hoping to do a US space tour by the end of the year; but a fatal crash five years ago has dented confidence in the company.
Sir Richard is confident that his winged passenger jet venture, SpaceShipTwo, will eventually be successful.
Elon Musk is also testing a tourist spaceship, as is Jeff Bezos. However, Virgin Galactic is expected to pip both SpaceX and Blue Origin respectively. Virgin’s US flights cost about $250,000 but that price will come down.
“I’m very keen to develop space tourism here in Australia. We’ve already got some keen players ... the United States, in particular, they are looking at taking people up on space flights. We’re ideally located,” Ms Andrews said.
“What’s being planned is three minutes of weightlessness. We know that there’s a market. Clearly the cost of space travel will come down over time.
“I would like Australia to be part of that. There’s a lot of work to do. We’re probably looking at a five-year time frame.” There are regulative and legislative hurdles to overcome.
Mr Branson has previously name-checked Woomera for a potential space launch pad. Premier Steven Marshall said SA was getting international interest from entrepreneurs and space companies interested in the space sector.“This is just an indication of the worldwide interest we are receiving, and the tip of the iceberg. Our state now has a competitive advantage by having the national space agency (here),” he said.
CREDIT: Tory Shepherd
Word count: 399
