Late mail on postie HAS anyone noticed a British postman on a bicycle in their neighbourhood? The reason I ask is a couple of weeks ago we received a Christmas card from the United Kingdom posted on December 10, 2018.
And now a neighbour has received a Christmas card this week. TONY TOVEY Payneham
Pay attention WITH regard to the inattentive driving blitz, we know all about people on phones. But what about people who are drinking coffee, smoking, having breakfast or putting on make-up behind the wheel?
You see people do all sorts of things in cars, and I wonder whether we should ensure that people aren’t engaging in other dangerous behaviours while driving.
MARIA QUAINI Lockleys
Privatise transport WHEN it comes to privatising our transport network, how could it be anything but good?
The unions love to oppose anything while we have a Liberal Government – good old pot-stirring, methinks.
If trams were privatised, the owners would be in it to make money, not lose millions to fare evasion and vandalism.
I would think that they may follow China’s example and place conductors or security on every trip, as they do on fast trains. No fare evasion, no vandalism, and total comfort in a clean, safe train. Different companies would compete for a customer base and prices would go down.
Governments have proven they can’t run these systems economically or efficiently. If trains were safe, I guarantee patronage would probably double. How can that be bad?
TONY TAGLIAFERRO Ardrossan
Coal means jobs INTERESTING comments by reader R. Fisher (“Money the priority”, Sunday Mail, 4/8/19) in his lambasting of Australia’s “rich” mining companies and his criticism in general of the exporting of coal by our country.
With the many thousands of jobs it generates both directly and indirectly, and the many billions of dollars in taxes it raises, I wonder which areas of their own taxation they would be prepared to nominate and additionally pay if this vital Australian industry did not exist.
BRUCE BURFORD Adelaide
Care for mothers WITH regard to the looming “chronic shortage of childcare workers” (Sunday Mail, 4/8/19).
If we put half as much effort and half as much money into helping families care for their own children and mothers who want to look after their own young as we do in pushing mothers into the workforce and institutionalising our children from birth, it would make a huge difference.
Plus, it would help with many of the other social problems we seem to be creating. In fact, it would be a win-win for everyone.
B. SCHROEDER Warradale
Time for new judges WHAT show has Lainie Anderson been watching (“Opinion”, Sunday Mail, 4/8/19)? Certainly not the same one as me. I am delighted that those overpaid judges have left MasterChef.
How much do you need to be paid to shout “45 seconds to go”, or to reduce the contestants to tears as the judges are about to sample their efforts? Or to walk past a contestant who is engrossed in cooking and make a snide remark about what is being prepared?
It’s not pleasant viewing to watch the judges shovelling food into their mouths and giving each other a nod and a wink, but in the overall series we watched hours of this.
I have been fed up with this trio’s antics over the years. So perhaps we can now have a show that focuses on the competition and not the judges.
BRONTE SCHUBERT Moana
Seeking intelligent life THE letter by J.M. Grant (“Forget space, try Earth”, Sunday Mail, 4/8/19) once again brings up a hoary old belief/superstition, that there is “nothing out there worth pursuing”.
Well, there are a number of planets in our own solar system, plus thousands of planetary systems in the Milky Way galaxy, any one of which may have developed intelligent life long before Earth came into existence.
So, just who says that there is nothing out there?
The ultimate aim of space exploration is to make friendly contact with a highly advanced technological civilisation, which could advance our science and technology by a hundred years overnight. An extremely worthwhile pursuit.
It has been said we are not alone in the universe. I do agree that if we had our priorities in order, we could transform our planet and still have enough for space exploration.
P. O’DWYER Mount Barker
Eat first, travel later WOULDN’T space travel and exploration be exciting if no one back here on Earth was hungry.
MEREDITH THACKRAY Stonyfell
Moon flight overpriced YES, Peter Goers, I totally agree with you (“Opinion”, Sunday Mail, 28/7/19). When I first read the cost of the moon landing I was utterly appalled, horrified and furious.
With all the poverty in the world, and the millions of people who have no decent shelter, food or water, how dare the US Government have the gall to spend those millions.
The moon is lovely to gaze upon throughout it’s different phases but who wants to go there?
It reeks of egoism, greed, power, and one-upmanship. Just imagine a world where all are equal, adequately fed and housed. Look at the bleakness of refugee camps and the plight of people fleeing their country.
I’m afraid I have no time for materialism, huge sums of money spent needlessly (and in our own country) and corrupt politicians.
Keep up the good work Peter. I agree with you on most things (especially the “aitch” pronounced as “haitch!”).
BEVERLEY KOCH, Seacliff Park
We need animals WHY is it Australia and the rest of the world are prepared to witness the removal of flora and fauna from the planet if it gets in the way of our human wants?
The pollution of our seas and rivers, and land deforestation and degradation, show a complete disregard and lack of respect for nature. They are seen as acceptable by-products for the advancement of people throughout the world.
Plants and animals are the very reason we as a human species can exist on the planet. Like our general attitude to climate change we need to start considering the wider consequences of our actions.
Maybe in Australia we can listen and learn from our First Australians by respecting and living with the country and not continuously exploiting areas but live in.
Is it also too much to ask many religious believers to not excuse their non-actions in the belief that it all up to the “Almighty”?
GLEN CHENOWETH Goolwa North
Political arrogance I LOVE it when the arrogance of politics is laid bare.
The press has been having a field day with the fiasco over Labor MP Jon Gee playing solitaire during a parliamentary hearing (Tory Shepherd, Valdman, Christopher Pyne). But there is none better than Matthew Abraham (“Opinion”, Sunday Mail, 4/8/19) – with solitaire being the only game in town. The more you try to sweep it under the carpet, the more it comes back to bite you.
JENNY ESOTS Willunga
Sell pollies, seriously LOVED the comments by Peter Goers (“Opinion”, Sunday Mail, 4/8/19) but, laughs aside, there would be a lot of merit in privatising both state and federal governments.
This could greatly reduce the number of taxpayer-funded politicians on the gravy train.
We would only need to vote for enough to form an administrative body and use public service to carry out the tasks of governance. Who knows, apart from getting closer to a real “of the people for the people” government, the saving might go a long way towards reducing the budget deficit.
BRYAN LOCKIron Knob
Word count: 1256
