WELCOME back, Starman.
On August 19, Elon Musk’s Starman and his Tesla Roadster completed their first orbit around the sun. The deep space duo have come full circle. The spacesuit-clad mannequin, who sits behind the wheel of SpaceX founder and chief executive Elon Musk’s red Tesla Roadster were launched on February 6, 2018, on the inaugural flight of the huge Falcon Heavy rocket.
The duo wrapped up their first solar orbit just over 10 days ago. Starman and the Tesla have an orbital period of about 557 Earth days. In this time, they have travelled more than 1.2 billion kilometres. The car’s warranty has well and truly run out!
Car and driver will probably make many more laps around our star. An orbit-modelling study carried out last year calculated that the Roadster will eventually slam into either Venus or Earth, most likely within the next few tens of millions of years.
Winter is the best time of year to seek out the Milky Way, the hazy band of light that outlines the disc of our home galaxy. If you can find an especially dark sky-watching site, you’ll see it arcing from the Southern Cross in the south, through teapot-shaped Sagittarius high in the west, and on to Cygnus, the swan, low in the north.
If you’d been around a few billion years ago, though, the view wouldn’t have been nearly as impressive. The galaxy’s disc might have contained only half as many stars as it does today.
Researchers looked at observations from the European Space Agency’s Gaia, a spacecraft that’s been measuring a billion stars. The observations show how different types of stars are spread through the galaxy. That tells astronomers when and where the stars were born.
From that, the researchers concluded that the galaxy began giving birth to many stars about five billion years ago. By a couple of billion years later, the Milky Way might have been producing 10 times as many stars as it does now. In fact, that outburst could have produced half of the stars we see today.
The outburst might have been triggered by a merger with another galaxy. The merger would have brought in a lot of gas, the raw material for making stars. It also would have squeezed already existing big clouds of gas, causing them to form stars. One of those stars was our Sun.
Today, the Milky Way gives birth to the equivalent of one sun-sized star per year.
The sun will cross a special point in the sky on September 23, known as the “equinox”. The crossing officially marks the beginning of autumn in the northern hemisphere and spring in the southern hemisphere. The lengths of day and night are equal.
Astronomically, the equinox is one of two points where the sun’s path intersects the celestial equator – the projection of Earth’s equator on the sky. The other is in March.
The definition of a “year” is the interval between the sun’s passages across the equinox point. On average, that’s 365 days, 5 hours, 48 minutes, and 46 seconds. Those extra hours and minutes are why we have leap years – to keep the calendar in synchronisation with the seasons.
There are two features in the solar system that just about anyone will recognise. One is the rings of Saturn. The other is the destructive “eye” of Jupiter: the Great Red Spot.
Recent work suggests that both are temporary. Saturn’s rings could disappear in as little as a hundred million years. And the Great Red Spot could be gone in decades.
Astronomers have kept an eye on the Great Red Spot, the solar system’s largest storm, for a couple of centuries.
At its peak, it was more than twice as wide as Earth. In the past few decades, though, it’s been shrinking. Today, it’s only about half its earlier diameter. And in the past couple of years, it’s started to show some odd behaviour.
Friction with a band of clouds below the spot has started pulling out blade-shaped streamers of clouds. The streamers wrap around the spot, and they can stretch for thousands of kilometres.
It’s possible that it’s just part of a normal cycle. But it’s also possible the streamers could drain away this giant storm, marking the beginning of the end for one of the solar system’s best-known features.
You can find Jupiter for yourself in the evening sky. Being the third brightest object in the night sky, after the moon and Venus, it’s impossible to miss. It will be even easier for you to find, for on the evening of September 6, it will be very close to the first quarter moon.
Research has shown that our moon formed as a result of an explosive encounter between the Earth and a Mars-sized body, 4.5 billion years ago, very soon after the Earth had formed from the solar nebula.
It must have been chaotic, with planet-sized bodies roaming the solar system, not unlike dodgem cars.
Data obtained by the Juno spacecraft, in orbit around Jupiter, now suggests that a planet 10 times more massive than the Earth hit Jupiter in a colossal head-on collision that stirred up Jupiter’s dense core at about the same time.
Billions of years later, that material is still settling.The moon is at first quarter on September 6, full on September 14, at last quarter on September 22, and new on September 29
CREDIT: STARWATCH JOE GRIDA
Word count: 906
