AS chief historian for America’s space agency and a lifelong scholar and former fighter pilot, Bill Barry can easily point to plenty of evidence proving the Apollo 11 mission, 50 years ago this month, actually did occur.
There’s only one issue when he’s called to answer conspiracy theorists positing crazy questions about the authenticity of the historic mission.
“The problem with conspiracy theories is that often, if you have a killer answer to them, that’s part of the conspiracy,” he says.
Dr Barry says he generally takes a policy not to argue with people about it. But with the world now turning its attention back to marvel at the achievements led by Neil Armstrong, Buzz Aldrin and Mike Collins in July 1969, and looking forward to a new era of space exploration, NASA’s chief historian admits he’s getting the questions more and more.
“But there are all those rocks, 800 pounds of rocks, how do you explain where those came from, you know?,” he says of samples brought back by the Apollo astronauts.
“They’re clearly not from planet Earth. Four hundred thousand people in America worked in the program, how could you possibly have kept a secret like that for this long? I could go on and on.” The biggest persuader for Dr Barry is how very tight the space race was between Cold War enemies Russia and America.
“The Soviets were very serious about beating the US to the moon. They had three completely separate efforts that they made, all of which failed, and then they covered them up until the Soviet Union collapsed,” says Dr Barry, who was completing his doctoral dissertation in the late 1980s and was able to access evidence of the Russian-led endeavours.
“(Russian President Leonid) Brezhnev was in charge of the Soviet Union at the time and he was very tightly associated with the people who were in charge of the space program, and so part of his political legitimacy was based on beating the US into space very early,” Dr Barry explains.
“And internationally, it was really important to them to prove to all the developing countries in the world that the Soviet system was better than the US system.
“The space program was really the only way, the only evidence they had. “So they were heavily invested in beating us to the moon. And the moon race actually ended on July 20, 1969, when their attempt to send a robot to the moon to bring a sample back crashed on the moon, while Neil and Buzz were on the surface.
“It was that close. If that (Russian) probe had succeeded, they would have got their soil sample back from the moon about the same time the Apollo and this crew landed, and they could have said, ‘Hey, it was a tie’.
“So, to me, the killer answer on this is: If we tried to fake landing on the moon, they (the Russians) would have busted us so bad. They would have loved that, if they could’ve proved it. And they were carefully following us.” Dr Barry has consulted on several recent NASA-focused movies, including last year’s First Man about the private life of Neil Armstrong.
Such films are part of the renaissance underway for America’s aerospace industry, which has seen record applicants pouring in for the astronaut program, new US Government funding to put man back on the moon for good by 2024 and a slew of private companies launching their own space exploration efforts.
Meanwhile, the NASA symbol has risen to the sort of cult status enjoyed by the likes of superhero franchises Marvel and DC Comics.
“We’re getting to that point now where we have enough industry and technology (to make space travel viable for more people),” Dr Barry says.
“Getting to space is still rocket science, it’s still hard and dangerous, but we’ve been doing it for 60 years now, so it’s well known.
“We kind of know the parameters and you can do it reasonably safely, which is why the United States is now going to be buying rides to space from American companies rather than flying people up to the space station on our own spacecraft like the space shuttle, because varied companies know how to do this stuff now.
“That allows NASA to spend what part of the budget we have on going further out into space. So I think there’s a lot of stuff in play at the moment.“It’s close enough that people can see that it actually is a potential reality that in a few years there will be hotels in space.”
CREDIT: SARAH BLAKE IN ORLANDO
Word count: 774
