ASTRONAUTS joke that being in a spacecraft is like being “spam in a can”, but missions have gradually become a bit more comfortable.
On early, short trips astronauts were almost in the foetal position, while on the Apollo missions they could start to move around a bit. On longer missions such as on the International Space Station they can move around fairly freely, and even stretch their legs in a space walk. And then there were the ablutions.
Fifty years ago, the Apollo 11 astronauts had to strap on something a bit like a condom with tubes attached under their spacesuits. Buzz Aldrin admitted that when he followed Neil Armstrong down to the lunar surface, he had a nervous wee in his suit.
They famously left some of their waste on the moon in tiny bags. Glen Nagle, who liaises between NASA and the CSIRO at the tracking station in Canberra, says some astronauts hated the full toilet experience so much they decided not to go – for days. That took Imodium.
Space toilets use a suction system, which collects waste in those individual bags that ended up as litter on the moon. Early on, the food was effectively army rations. Freeze-dried stuff that you added water to, making a gluggy paste, Mr Nagle said.
Mr Aldrin, writing about the 1969 trip to the Moon, complained about a mechanism to rehydrate food that was supposed to put hydrogen into the air – but instead it went into the food, pictured.
“It caused flatulence and, in our cramped quarters, considerable fragrance,” he wrote in his memoir. That’s a big change from earlier flights. First the astronauts ate from squeeze tubes. Later there were bite-sized cubes coated with gelatine, according to NASA. “With improved packaging came improved food quality and menus,” NASA says. “Gemini astronauts had such food choices as shrimp cocktail, chicken and vegetables, butterscotch pudding, and apple sauce, and were able to select meal combinations themselves.” On the space shuttles, astronauts can choose from a standard menu, or even design their own. A meal tray can be attached to an astronaut’s lap or a wall.
Life on the ISS today is far better than it was on the Apollo missions. Mr Nagle says the ISS has separate little cabins for astronauts; “somewhere they can call their own”. And they get regular supplies of food delivered.
“A lot of effort went into designing new ways to make food for astronauts to retain nutrients and flavours,” he said. “For the ISS, food supplies are sent up on a regular basis. It’s important psychologically that they can get fresh food, have a social gathering over a meal, talk about the day.” Australia’s first astronaut Andy Thomas said the ISS was “certainly a confined space”, but so much exciting stuff was happening. He was working on experiments, hanging out with Russian cosmonauts – and there was a pretty good view. Mr Nagle said the new spacecraft – those made by Elon Musk’s SpaceX, for example, are sleek and ergonomic.
The spacecraft of the future will be … well, futuristic. SpaceX, Blue Origin, and Virgin Galactic are already working on them, but even SpaceX’s Dragon, which docked with the ISS earlier this year, looked like “the sports car of spacecraft”, Mr Nagle says.
And for the tourist ships, picture big panoramic windows, and some of the technology developed for plane flights.
When space tourism (ahem) takes off, passengers will pay a premium to experience weightlessness on their way to Near Earth Orbit. They’ll cruise over the Earth, even see its edge. Blue Origin, by Amazon’s Jeff Bezos, has posted pictures of the inside of their New Shepard space tourism vehicle. No doubt the companies will start competing to offer better experiences that match the $250,000 price tags.It’s not yet clear how they’ll deliver their clients the champagne they’ll likely expect – or whether the toilets will be a less awkward experience.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD
Word count: 660
