HILARY SWANK GETS THE CHANCE TO LIVE OUT A DREAM IN NETFLIX SERIES AWAY, WRITES MICHELE MANELIS BEFORE Hilary Swank set out to chase her Hollywood dream, she looked to the heavens and aspired to join the ranks at NASA, exploring the ultimate in fi nal frontiers.
In her new Netflix drama series Away she finally gets that chance – playing astronaut Emma Green, who commands a three-year space mission to Mars and becomes the first person to land on the mysterious red planet.
“I’ve always wanted to be an astronaut, even before I wanted to be an actor” the 46-year-old, two-time Oscar-winning actress tells The BINGE Guide.
“I love the whole idea of space exploration, of something bigger than us. Just the idea of looking back at Earth, and how beautiful it is,” she ponders, “and that feeling we’re all connected without borders, without boundaries.” Evidently, her first career choice wasn’t in the stars for Swank. “I just didn’t have the brain for it,” she admits, turning to the next best thing.
“A teacher in school had the class write and perform a skit. As soon as I did it I realised that I came alive inside. Performing was so exciting for me, and I went home and told my mum. She really encouraged me to continue and one thing led to another and here I am – an actor playing an astronaut.” Away was created by Andrew Hinderaker and the cast includes The Good Wife’s Josh Charles, as Swank’s devoted husband; Love, Simon’s Talitha Bateman as her teenage daughter; as well as a multi ethnic four-man crew.
While there’s no mistaking the soap opera element essential to the plot, much of the drama stems from Emma’s choice to leave her husband and teenager daughter behind on Earth, 50 million miles away; while the crew grapple with myriad problems.
Swank says one of the biggest challenges was acting as though she were moving in zero gravity which required the actors to be suspended in the air for hours on end.
“I will say that was more challenging than I thought it was going be. To make zero gravity look effortless, took a lot of effort,” she chuckles. “We were suspended by the lower part of our hips. If we wanted to tilt forward, we’d squeeze our glutes and if we needed to go back, we had to squeeze our abs really hard. It was a workout, for sure.” Presumably, with her love of space exploration, she’s put her name on the waiting list to go to Mars, alongside such celebrities as Richard Branson, Kris Jenner and President Donald Trump? She shakes her head: “Not if it would take three years, but the moon? One hundred per cent!” And besides, she has her own devoted husband who’d be left behind on Earth, entrepreneur Philip Schneider, who was equally thrilled about the role.
“My husband is super happy with anything that I embark on that I am excited about,” she says.
Happily married for two years, Swank offers, “He’s such a support and such a champion of me, which I greatly appreciate, especially because I do some ambitious stuff.” Ambition has always been the driving force behind Swank’s success. Born in Nebraska, she grew up in a low socio-economic environment with her brother, eight years her senior. Her mother was a secretary and dancer, and her father, a travelling salesman.
Her parents separated when Swank was 15, and she relocated to Los Angeles with her mother so she could pursue her acting career. They lived out of a car until their mother could afford to move then into an apartment.
“It was an adventure,” she says, with a smile, looking back on her early days of struggle.
With a reported net worth of US$40 million, those days of living hand-to-mouth are well behind her.
To what or whom does she attribute her classic rags to riches success? “My mother gave me the best gift – the gift of believing in myself which is hands down the most valuable gift I’ve ever received.” Her mother worked tirelessly, both to feed her family and advance her daughter’s career. Armed with a roll of coins, she made cold calls to managers and agents from a public phone booth, until she eventually secured representation for her daughter.
Swank landed her fi rst role in Buffy the Vampire Slayer, back in 1992, before her breakout film followed two years later in The Next Karate Kid.
She earned her first Oscar for Best actor for Boys Don’t Cry in 1999, following it up for a second win in 2004 for boxing drama Million Dollar Baby.
While her career took off, Swank remained close to her family, even putting her job aside to care for her ailing father, who was suffering from a lung condition. The break turned into three years and while many actors would be afraid to take time away from the spotlight, she says, “I probably should have been worried about it but I wasn’t. I didn’t think about it. I just thought about the task at hand and what was important, and that was the need to give my dad the best chance at living. That was all that mattered,” she insists.
“It also gave me a gift, the opportunity to explore more of me and to realise that I’m not just defined by being an actor.” AWAY STREAMING ON NETFLIX
CREDIT: MICHELE MANELIS
Word count: 911
