THOUSANDS of tiny satellites could deliver fast and cheap broadband to Australia and lure away customers from the $50 billion NBN.
Three companies are planning to deliver mobile broadband to Australia by sending the satellites into orbit.
Canada’s Kepler Communications and United States company Swarm Technologies, along with SpaceX, founded by Elon Musk, pictured, have applied to the Australian Communications and Media Authority for “space apparatuses” licences.
ACMA will consult with the industry about adding the companies to its foreign space objects list.
The move could be a hit to the controversial national broadband network – which is running several years behind schedule and has blown out from about $30 billion.
Customers have also been disappointed with the speeds the network offers. Under its Starlink project, SpaceX plans to create constellations of satellites that can connect people anywhere in the world to the internet.
It is confident it can compete with other internet providers with fast connections at a low price.
Telecommunications experts say the competition will ultimately benefit consumers by driving down prices and offering faster connections, while warning about the effects on the government-owned NBN network.
Alex Grant, chief executive of Adelaide-based Internet of Things start-up Myriota, said the satellites would give global coverage. He said their lower orbit would mean lower “latency” or delays because signals would not have to travel so far.
He said there was a “new wave” of broadband technology disrupting the current model and that existing companies had to react and adapt or they would “fall by the wayside”. “If they have a competitive product, priced appropriately with technical features that customers want then people will buy it. It will be a great alternative,” he said.
Associate Professor Mark Gregory, from RMIT University, estimated that NBN Co. would lose $500 million a year if just 10 per cent of broadband customers shifted to mobile networks.
Telecommunications expert and academic Professor Reg Coutts said the technology would be a boon for users in regional and remote Australia.However, he said it wouldn’t be able to fully penetrate the denser areas in the city so people should be wary about waiting for it instead of getting the NBN.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD STATE EDITOR
Word count: 368
