A MISSION to Mars or finding new life on a distant planet could be the catalyst that unifies Earth, according to a former astronaut from Australia.
Adelaide-born NASA astronaut Dr Andy Thomas believes a major space exploration project, such as putting a person on Mars or finding extraterrestrial life, could be the glue that finally bonds Earthlings together.
“Everyone on the planet got behind the moon landing and cheered Neil (Armstrong) and Buzz (Aldrin) on,” the former astronaut said.
“If we did this again as an international collaboration … what a positive thing for human society.” Dr Thomas, who over 12 years went on four missions and spent a total of six months in zero gravity, says finding indications of extraterrestrial life would be a “stunning pinnacle” in human achievement.
“To me there has to be a fundamentally good reason to go out and do it (explore space and look for new life) – and that’s to acquire the knowledge of the unknown and seek new life, to discover whether life has formed on another planet,” he said.
“If there is life on Mars, for example … that would be a profoundly significant moment and achievement.” The former astronaut, who spends half the year in Australia and the remainder in his adopted hometown of Houston, Texas, expects that any future space projects will be in the form of global collaborations rather than just one nation’s interstellar pursuits.
NASA says space exploration is about pushing scientific boundaries and discovering new worlds, but also addressing fundamental questions about the universe and the history of our solar system.
Its stated aim is: “Through addressing the challenges related to human space exploration we expand technology, create new industries, and help to foster a peaceful connection with other nations.” Last week NASA’s Mars Curiosity Rover detected high levels of methane, which could indicate some form of life exists on the Red Planet.On Friday the US space agency announced its latest mission in searching for extraterrestrial life – sending a nuclear-powered drone called Dragonfly to Titan, Saturn’s biggest moon.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD
Word count: 347
