Imagine strapping yourself into a seat inside a hovering metal pod in Melbourne, before being fired at nearly the speed of sound down an airless, 900-kilometre metal pipe to arrive in Sydney in a little more than an hour.
That's the pipe dream that proponents of Elon Musk's hyperloop will spruik to politicians at an inquiry in Sydney today.
A hyperloop is several times faster than high-speed rail. It costs half as much. It runs off renewable energy. It is, its proponents say, the future.
Sceptical transport experts say the hyperloop faces a major hurdle: there is only so much speed a human body can endure.
None of that fazes HyperloopTT's co-founder and chairman Bibop Gresta, who said yesterday it was the solution to all the world's transport problems and - if built - would represent one of humanity's great advances.
"It's completely noiseless. And, I say this because I am Italian, it looks beautiful."
HyperloopTT is one of several companies around the world racing to build a functional hyperloop after Mr Musk - of Tesla and SpaceX fame - developed the idea and then dumped it on the internet for anyone willing to have a go.
Today Mr Gresta will front a senate inquiry into automated mass transit, to spruik the company's bold plans for a network that would link Adelaide, Melbourne, Canberra, Sydney and Brisbane. He has already met Minister for Urban Infrastructure Alan Tudge, who professes himself excited by the concept, although proponents "don't yet have an operable model".
Hyperloop's 38-person pods run inside a huge vacuum tube, the air sucked out by pumps at either end.
The carriages magnetically levitate above the track. With no friction or air resistance, very high speeds are possible. The tubes sit on pylons elevated high above the ground.
HyperloopTT's proposal suggests the entire system could be run off renewable energy, perhaps by covering the tube in solar panels.
The company recently completed work on its first section, 320 metres of test track in France.
It has feasibility studies in several countries and hopes to make Australia next.
But University of Sydney transport expert David Levinson said: "They've never moved a single person a single metre on a hyperloop."
He compared HyperloopTT's plans to the Wright brothers trying to convince governments across the world to build airports - before they had invented a plane.
CREDIT: Liam Mannix
Word count: 396
