LUNAR LANDING 50 YEARS ON To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the moon landing, The Australian asked our readers for their reflections on the historic moment. Here are some responses to our question: Where were you when the landing took place?
The man, in person I was 18 years old in 1969 and five months into my first full-time job. I vividly remember joining a large crowd in the bar of a hotel near Australia Square in Sydney where I was working at the time to view the landing. Amazing time! I have had a fortunate life since with a career in accounting, and a wonderful family. But that early experience stayed with me.
Then, many years later in 2011, I got to meet Neil Armstrong in person in Sydney with colleagues over a long lunch, not far from where I witnessed the landing in a crowded bar all those years ago. He told me he had travelled to Australia many times. Even at age 81, he had arrived for this visit via the Middle East where he met serving troops. He talked of his regard for Australians; he met many Australian pilots in the Korean War. He talked of his regard for accountants; his father was one. He talked of the possibility of manned flight to Mars, and of the enormous technical difficulties such a mission would involve. And of course he talked of the moon landing. He talked. We listened. A truly great and humble man.
Peter Dowling, Brisbane
What are the odds?
The moon landing reminds me of the town of Kyneton in the Macedon Ranges of Victoria. I recall a group of children, at a Melbourne primary school, sitting on the floor around a radio listening to the landing on the moon. “One small step for (a) man, one giant leap for mankind.” At that moment, an interruption on the radio. In a nasal voice: “There we must leave the man on the moon. They’re racing at ­Kyneton.” William McDonald, Sydney
Among the comrades I was 21 and travelling through Russia with three other Australians in an old Jeep. Arriving at the Leningrad (St Petersburg) camping ground on the moon landing day, we and other campers were given a room in which to watch the event. In the middle of the Cold War and the first time a US event was shown in Russia, it was an unforgettable experience. There were many nationalities present but almost all were ecstatic that the West had won the race.
I wish there was more detail but from memory we all had quite a heady time on Russian vodka.
Helen Fox, Brisbane
A bit of British reserve With my wife, 11-year-old son and nine-year-old daughter I was on an RAAF exchange posting at the Royal Air Force Station at Upwood in the heart of rural England, and so a long way from home. We watched the moon landing on the BBC and even though we had colour TV we watched the grainy vision in black and white scarcely believing that it was real. When I told my RAF colleagues that I was going home to watch this historic event they were not the slightest bit interested. I suspected that because it was an “American” event and, unlike Australia, Britain was not directly involved, it was not a big deal, a strange attitude for people steeped in history.
Six months later on a visit to the Science Museum in London it became a reality, not a TV image, when we saw a specimen of rock brought back from the moon, bought a souvenir postcard and my son bought a plastic model of the lunar module. Fifty years later I remember it as the most memorable “where were you when?” event of my 95 years, surpassing the memory 30 years earlier of the outbreak of World War II.
Les Sullivan, Burwood, Vic
My girl, Josephine The day man set foot on the moon leaves me with a mixture of wonder and sorrow. My memory of those moments is as vivid as if it was yesterday. I see my young daughter Josephine sitting at my feet in front of our loungeroom television, caught up in the unfolding event we were witnessing. Her teacher had released her pupils early from their classes, deeming their seeing this special time in the history of space exploration as being far more important than any lesson she could give that day.
We owned a TV set, and my plan was to watch the landing and I was thrilled when one of my four children unexpectedly joined me. Josephine and I would talk about this for years to come and that she would have the pleasure of telling this story to her own children one day. Our younger school-age son had not been so fortunate to be let out of his class and my husband had to work. Two infant brothers, one asleep in his cot, the other in kindergarten, would never experience this momentous day.
I remember the excitement, how we held our breath, as Josephine and I waited for the space module to open and for the moment Neil Armstrong stepped out on to that alien land. We marvelled at man’s ingenuity and the bravery of astronauts.
Unfortun­ately, there would be no storytelling to Josephine’s children. Josephine didn’t even make it out of her teens, she died in an accident. Even as I continue to marvel over the moon landing, I still see my daughter sitting at my feet in front of the television that day, and feel again her head against my knees.
Susan Hunter, Point Cook
A journey starts at two I recall all the adults gathering around the small black-and-white television in suburban Adelaide to watch the event and debate its authenticity. It was the heady mix of incredulousness and wonderment that helped sear that memory in my very young mind. I was about to turn two and the adults were my parents and one set of grandparents, all of them new immigrants from Italy making a new life in Australia.
The first man on the moon is my most profound earliest memory. Since then I have always been fascinated with science, technology and NASA. I completed a science degree, and blitzed astronomy as an elective. I never did follow that path, completed a second degree in business, and ended up in management roles. Not to worry; I have been fortunate enough to witness the launch of the Discovery space shuttle in August 2009, from Florida’s beautiful Vero Beach; spent many hours at the Smithsonian National Air and Space Museum during a visit to Washington, DC; hauled the family to the Kennedy Space Centre, Cape Canaveral and the Hayden Planetarium at the New York Museum of Natural History and just recently have taken my two teenage daughters to see astrophysicist professor Brian Cox on his world tour. Perhaps one of my daughters will find her future path in this ­exciting sector.
Judith Damiani, Mildura
Kellogg’s keepsakes The clear crinkly packet fell out of the Kellogg’s cereal box into my breakfast bowl. I quickly tore it open and deftly snapped together the orange plastic bits to make my moon buggy. My collection of space age toys was growing — I ­already had the red space station and a matching tiny red astronaut.
They were fragile models with thin protruding antennas and other detailed parts so I handled them with extra care. I tucked into my cornflakes. The sooner this cereal box was empty, the sooner mum would buy another one. I just had to have the entire set, especially the rocket transporter.
It was the late 1960s and the space age had well and truly begun over a decade earlier with the world’s first satellite, Sputnik 1, launched by the Soviet Union. Then in 1961 cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin became the first human in space. But now it was the American Apollo 11 mission, the moon landing, that was making headlines as the day drew closer.
At school the excitement grew in my grade three classroom as we talked about the moon and wrote far-fetched stories about little green men and a lunar surface made of cheese. At night I used my dad’s binoculars to look at the moon. What were those dark shadows? Was that a face I could see? Did I just see a rocket whiz by?
We all remember the day. A rare day off from school, my family huddled around the television set that afternoon. We watched in awe at a grainy black-and-white picture of Neil Armstrong as he bounced around the dust-like lunar surface and uttered the now legendary words, “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.” It was July 20, 1969, and the whole world stood still.
What did it mean for our future? Surely if we could land a person on the moon then why not Mars? Why not flying cars? Our imaginations soared to new heights fuelled by science fiction TV shows of the time like My Favourite Martian and Star Trek. Only later did we learn the significant role Australia’s CSIRO Parkes radio telescope and Honeysuckle Creek Station near Canberra played in the video transmission. It was indeed a momentous day in Australia’s history, a day etched in the minds of so many. It ignited huge interest in space exploration and research. Suddenly we all wanted to be astronauts. My space age toy collection became far more than something to play with. It meant dreams could come true.
Mary Serenc, Cairns
Thank you, Mr Smith In Darwin in 1969, the city did not have TV. At school we listened to the landing via radio in class. Our teacher had found some charts of the moon and even a photo of the surface — pretty resourceful considering it hadn’t been landed on yet, and our limited resources in what was a very isolated part of Australia. There was also a cardboard model of the lunar lander.
The touchdown was on in school hours, and we had to use our imaginations, aided by the provided resources, to fill in the gaps as we listened to the radio. Afterwards we went out on to the oval, and with some examples of “this object represents the width of the Earth” and so on, we could think about the distances involved.
I remember thinking afterwards that explaining things to people and “turning on the lights” of understanding was a pretty good thing to do, so maybe that’s why years later I became an educator. Our classroom teacher was a Mr Smith; I don’t remember his first name. So, down the years, “Thanks, Mr Smith, for the moon landing; you made us understand how great it was.” Tom Lewis, Darwin
Live from Parkes As a 21-year-old teacher in western NSW with a girlfriend in Sydney, I with three other teacher mates was returning by very aged Holden to school very late on Sunday, July 20, 1969. Weekend rendezvous: great. Drives down and back: not so much. Listening to the Apollo flight live on ABC radio, we drove past the Parkes telescope. Early morning hours, frost everywhere, tired from the drive, freezing cold (no heater), we stopped and gazed into the blackest spaces between the stars, imagining we could see Apollo 11. The memory still grabs me. BTW, the trips were worth every hour in the crappy Holden — we’re celebrating 49 years this year.
Max Harris, Hobart
Delayed transmission Aged 22, I watched the moon landing with fellow university students in our flat in Christchurch. At the time, although New Zealand had a national TV network connected via microwave signals, it did not have a satellite receiving station and hence a tape of the landing was flown urgently from Australia by an RNZAF Canberra bomber. The aircraft left Sydney about 16.45 AEST and landed about 2.25 hours later, given air traffic control priority. With a traffic cop escort to the TV station, the landing was screened on the 7.30pm news bulletin. As we watched, I remember thinking how much had been achieved in the 12 years since, as an 11-year-old, I had stood with my father on the roof of our family garage to watch the orbit of Sputnik. Roger Estall, Sydney
Word count: 2054
