Improving doctors A PERNICIOUS culture overly based on money and status has developed in the world of medical education, aspirations and careers to produce the GP crisis in rural South Australia and elsewhere and its corollary, the obsession with becoming a specialist (“Rural GP shortage revealed”, Sunday Mail, 28/7/19).
It’s the difference between a salary package in the millions or merely the hundred thousands. It will not be fixed, even by the current grotesquely expensive throwing of money to provide Band-Aid solutions.
The obsession with becoming a specialist, for most, starts around the family dinner table and in the schools. By the time of entry to medical school it is set in concrete for the majority of students.
The only way to fix it and deal with such a deeply ingrained culture is to make a minimum of five years GP experience a requirement for entry to further specialist training.
This, along with other changes to entry requirements and education, would develop better GPs and specialists and better heath care and outcomes for the community.
STEWART SWEENEY North Adelaide
Vegan stereotyping IN reply to Alan Moskwa, regarding faux flesh-eating vegetarians and vegans (“Bleeding for vegans”, Sunday Mail, 28/7/129).
Firstly, there is more to being a vegan than diet.
Secondly, many vegans and vegetarians eat meals that do not resemble meat, fish or any animal flesh at all. Please stop stereotyping those who have chosen compassion over slaughter.
MOIRA FERRES Gulfview Heights
Important memories I WOULD like to congratulate Rebecca Digirolamo on her superb article about Headstone SA and its operations, and in particular her sensitive and interesting lead-in story (“We won’t forget”, Sunday Mail, 28/7/19). As someone who has delivered more than 20 Remembrance Day and Anzac Day addresses over the years, I was most impressed.
KEN MADIGAN Port Pirie
Pride in Bentley WHAT a sad reflection on the Australian psyche that David Warner was advised to hide his Bentley for fear it would damage his image (“The reinvention of David Warner”, Sunday Mail, 28/7/19).
Unfortunately, this mentality is indicative of the tall-poppy syndrome for which we which we Aussies are renowned. The rise of a working-class boy to sporting super-stardom and its associated riches should be an inspiration to us all. Good on you, David. Drive your Bentley with pride. Some of us are happy for you!
TONY TAGNI Belair
GST changes fallout I READ with some concern the article “Fairytales, land taxes and a really ugly dog” (Sunday Mail, 28/7/19).
Thoroughly agree with the analogy Matthew Abraham makes in respect to the manner in which Premier Steve Marshall and Treasurer Rob Lucas are endeavouring to sell to the voters the proposed $40 million tax revenue, which will eventuate from the changes to the current land-tax policy.
One is not that naive to see that, with the other taxes already introduced by Marshall’s Government to raise more than $500,000 (which includes increased taxes on hospital parking, public transport fees, car registration and licence renewals), this is about the amount of revenue SA lost through the Liberal Federal Government reducing our GST revenue.
Marshall needs to show some intestinal fortitude against his federal colleagues or we will all be broke.
DES KEMP St Agnes
Sea woes DURING the past few years, dominion or ownership over the South China Sea has become an upward-spiralling argument.
While no real headway has been experienced, China has continually maintained the whole area is under their control.
And on that premise, it has proceeded with converting coral reef islands into functioning land masses upon which they have built large military facilities populated by thousands of personnel, scores of jet fighters and bombers and, just recently, batteries of anti-ship cruise missiles.
In addition, the Chinese have created deep-sea ports to cater for large military vessels.
It is almost an exact repeat of the German military build-up before World War I, especially their navy.
A point I made more than two years ago, which was ignored, is that the defunct South-East Asia Treaty Organisation should be resurrected, and must comprise forces from the US, Indonesia, South Korea, Japan, Australia, New Zealand and Vietnam.
The message to the Chinese Government and, to a lesser degree, the Russian Government, would be succinct and clear.
PETER NYGAARD Sheidow Park
Money the priority ALL we hear about is climate change and how worried we all are, or should, be. But this country still exports coal. I guess that money is the main priority in this form of income for the rich mine owners. Who cares so long as they make money and have a great time while the planet is still liveable?
R. FISHER Port Noarlunga South
Forget space, try Earth PETER Goers, your column on the moon-landing race was spot on (“Way over the lunarcy of moon landing anniversary”, Sunday Mail, 28/7/19).
What an obscene waste of money just to beat the Russians, simply for bragging rights. Who cares?
Man will always have inquiring minds and space exploration is commendable. But to what end?
Yes, man may colonise the moon or Mars one day, but at what cost and why? There is nothing out there worth pursuing.
How about we put all our energy and space funding in fixing up the only world we have. Leave the rest to God. Or have I got stars in my eyes?
J.M. GRANT Hove
Carols too religious OF course the Carols by Candlelight event is too religious.
Jingle bells, Rudolph the red-nosed reindeer and Santa Claus is coming to town are old hat. No one believes in them anymore.
These are the first ones that came to mind. I’m sure people can think of more. (MRS) H.A. JOHNSON Christie Downs
Kind man AMONG all of the sad news we read every day, I send a letter of loving thanks to the kindest young man I have ever met.
I am very old and I slid in the rain, falling onto the pavement. I was unable to move.
A young man passing in his car saw my accident and stopped.
He picked me up and took me to help, which I would not have received without him.
As I do not know his name, I hope he reads the paper. He will have a loving place in my heart for all my life for offering help when I was disabled.
WENDY McGUFFOG Leabrook
Dogs are heroes THANKS for the lovely dog stories published in the Sunday Mail on July 14 and July 21.
The “Canine carers” dogs are very clever with what they do with their owners. To help the elderly and the young people to accomplish daily tasks is a credit to the dogs.
The “Hero hounds” who risk their lives searching in dangerous situations, helping the various emergencvy organisations, are wonder dogs.
When I saw the picture of Tiber (hero hound), the dog looks exactly like my dog, Bella, a curly-coated retriever. With all the gloom and doom in the world it was great reading feel-good stories.
KATHRYN RUSACK Queenstown
Only one Bond WHAT a to-do there is as to who should play the role of James Bond in a yet-to-be-made movie.
After the portrayal by Roger Moore as Bond all those years ago, it’s pointless for anyone, be they man, woman, black, white or brindle, to even bother – Daniel Craig included!
MARY DENHOLMRiverton
Word count: 1224
