THE state’s rich history of rockets and satellites puts South Australians in a better position to embrace the new space age, a leading expert in space archaeology believes.
While people in other states and Canberra have suffered from a cringe factor that Australia isn’t powerful enough to play in space and it’s all a bit silly, SA has got on with it and backed space activities.
“For South Australians, this isn’t some weird thing that happens somewhere else. It happens right here: SA was where it all began for Australia in space,” Flinders University archaeologist Alice Gorman says, referring back to 1947 when the UK needed somewhere to test rockets for weapons and partnered with the Australian Government to establish the Woomera Rocket Range.
Woomera became a hive of activity with young people, especially locals from SA, flocking to the Outback town. At its height, it had the highest birthrate in the nation and launch pads were constantly busy.
“Connections to this space heritage are deeply entangled in the South Australian community. SA has long had space in its blood,” Dr Gorman says.
Known as “Dr Space Junk” because of her writings, Dr Gorman teaches students and gives public lectures on space heritage.
SA’s involvement has not been limited to providing the huge tract of land that is Woomera.
The University of Adelaide was closely involved in the technical side from early days in Woomera.
The university’s physics department, led by Professor John Carver, designed and built Australia’s first satellite.
WRESAT 1 (Weapons Research Establishment Satellite) was launched on November 29, 1967, from Woomera aboard a modified US Redstone rocket.
The satellite made Australia the third country in the world, after the US and the USSR, to launch its own satellite into orbit from its own territory.
Adelaide scientists also played crucial roles in Australia’s third satellite, FedSat, launched in 2002.
The second satellite, Australis OSCAR 5, which is painted in the black-and-white stripes of a Collingwood footy jumper, was built by ham radio enthusiasts with support from Melbourne University. It was launched in California in 1970 and is still in orbit.
FedSat was a national collaboration and launched by Japan as a gift. The Institute for Telecommunications Research at the University of SA designed components and provided the ground station for telemetry, tracking and control from Mawson Lakes in Adelaide’s north.
Japan has had significant involvement in Woomera, including using it in 2010 to land samples scooped from an asteroid by a robotic spacecraft. SA has also been a major centre for the Defence Science and Technology arm of the Federal Government, which has run many research projects related to space.
Dr Gorman says existence of the DST Group and its predecessors was one of the reasons the Federal Government didn’t see the need for a national body for space.
“There is still a close relationship between defence and space, but we’ve now entered into a new phase where civil space activities are coming alive,” Dr Gorman says.
Private companies have got ahead of government, and Dr Gorman is excited to see that finally “Australia is prepared to back its own technology”.
She wants Flinders University to use its strengths in technical areas, such as robotics, as the space industry grows.
She also sees great scope in the humanities because there should be more research and debate about ethics in space exploration.
FUTURE ADELAIDE LAUNCHING TODAY IN PRINT AND ONLINE 32-PAGE GLOSS MAGAZINE, INSIDE THE WEEKEND AUSTRALIAN + DIGITAL MAGAZINEfutureADL.com.au
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 585
