WITHOUT gravity, surface tension of water causes the liquid to wrap around and envelop a plant, smothering it to death.
“Water becomes sticky and creepy in space,” Professor Matt Gilliham of the University of Adelaide says. “It’ll creep up the stem and suffocate it. The same happens with the roots.” Plants did not evolve for life in space and this phenomenon is just one of the many obstacles astronauts face if they are to grow food and survive. Engineering and biological solutions are needed to overcome issues such as a lack of convection, protection from gamma rays, provision of nutrition and purifying toxic gases emitted by plants.
Prof Gilliham is a crop molecular physiologist and newly appointed director of the Waite Research Institute. The university has opened up pathways to NASA to work on solving the problems, with an urgency spurred by renewed interest in space exploration.
“There’s real momentum – what we thought was science fiction is becoming a reality,” Prof Gilliham says. “But there are challenges. If you get things wrong in space, you’re dead.” Plans to build a permanent settlement on the Moon and launch a mission to Mars by the early 2030s means there is much to be done.
“With these long missions, there are impracticalities of taking all your food with you,” Prof Gilliham says.
“It’s not going to happen. You will have to grow and replenish supply.” His research specialises in how crops can tolerate inhospitable conditions “and, in Australia, we have an abundance of those”.
He was drawn to SA after studying in Cambridge because work at Waite delivers real positive outcomes, driving innovations for agriculture.
“But we’re also moving into black-sky research, the innovations which are going to help these developments in space.” He says SA’s harsh environment and “inhospitable soils” provide the perfect locations for such research.
Astronauts have already been experimenting with growing food in space. NASA astronaut Scott Kelly grew a zinnia flower in 2016, using sacks of a claylike substrate around the roots to restrict water movement.
Prof Gilliham says work done in space is benefiting life on Earth. For example, astronauts needed an air purifier to remove toxic gases, such as ethylene, emitted by plants. This purifier technology is now in hospitals.
“You have to peel away one thing at a time. You do the basic biology and then you put the parts together in short-term experiments in space,” Prof Gilliham says.
“The great thing about space research is that it is very collaborative.“International space agencies partner with researchers all around the planet to run trials in space.”
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 435
