Adelaide’s Andy Lee tells Bob Byrne about his father Ken Lee’s Apollo 11 role IT was just a grainy black-and-white image on our TV screens on that day 50 years ago but it was a history-defining moment for humankind.
NASA reports suggest that more 500 million people around the world tuned in and watched in awe as Neil Armstrong stepped off the ladder of the lunar module on to the surface of the moon and uttered his famous one-liner: “That’s one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.” For most watching the story unfold, there was little thought about how those fuzzy pictures were getting to our screens and we were completely unaware of the crucial role being played by the Australian tracking station at Honeysuckle Creek, just outside Canberra. Former Advertiser employee, Andy Lee, of Panorama, recalls that his father, Ken, was at the computer controls that day, in the main operations room at Honeysuckle Creek and was one of the first people on Earth to witness Armstrong step on to the moon’s surface.
His father also took photographs of the video screens in the control room as Armstrong ventured on to the moon.
Continued Page 24 G'DAY, THIS IS   PLANET EARTH From Page 21 “Dad was operations supervisor at the tracking station,” Andy says. “He and another supervisor, John Saxon, did 12-hour shifts, communicating with and monitoring the actions of the flight from take-off, right through to the module landing back on Earth.
“Keep in mind that the technology in those days was pretty basic and although the computer was about the size of the average living room, all tubes and valves, the power was about equivalent to a Commodore 64, which came out in the 1980s.
“In fact, looking back now, it all seems rather primitive compared to today’s very professional approach to space exploration.” Andy has a copy of his father’s log of the Apollo 11 mission, written in pencil. “It may seem strange but Apollo tracking stations were not required to keep a formal log,” he says.
“Usually, particular times were reported to Houston Control as they happened. “At Honeysuckle, however, both John and my father kept an overall log of mission events as they observed them.
“The log pages I have were maintained for the entire Apollo 11 mission, 24 hours a day by the two of them as they worked alternating 12-hour shifts.” Page 13 of the pencil written log records “Lunar touchdown”, while page 15 notes “Armstrong on surface”.
In his book Honeysuckle Creek: the story of Tom Reid, a little dish and Neil Armstrong’s first step, Andrew Tink writes that Honeysuckle Creek is officially recorded “as the station which received and relayed to the world, the first televised footage of astronaut Neil Armstrong setting foot on the Moon on the 21st of July 1969”.
Both Honeysuckle and Tidbinbilla, the other deep-space communications complex, could not only receive information from the spacecraft and communicate with head office in Houston, but they also could send commands to the astronauts and the computers on board.
In the film The Dish, which was made in 2000, Parkes Observatory is portrayed as playing the leading role in relaying live TV pictures of man’s first steps on the moon but, in reality, Parkes received only the landing footage.
It was a further six hours before Armstrong stepped on to the moon and by that time the angle of the Parkes antenna was no longer in line with the moon to receive signals; and so the first seven minutes of the moon walk was transmitted from Honeysuckle Creek.
The signals and pictures were then sent direct to OTC Sydney where NASA selected the audio visual feeds for worldwide broadcasts.
I asked Andy for his own recollections of that day and if he had any idea of the significant role his father was playing in such an historic event.
“I remember the day, sitting in the auditorium with all the other kids from school watching it on TV,” he says.
“Most knew what my father did and that he worked at Honeysuckle Creek but, at the age of 16, I was pretty much unaware of the magnitude of his role. All I really knew was he was one of the main guys and I was pretty proud of that.
“I know that he was pretty excited about it, as anyone would be, sitting at the console with a direct link to what was happening on the moon. He actually took some photos of the monitor as a memento of the whole experience.
“They were relying on the Honeysuckle Creek crew to keep them connected with Houston on Earth.” Ken Lee had arrived in Australia from Canada in 1960 to work for NASA at the Muchea tracking station just north of Perth.
He was manning the computer controls there when John Glenn was sent into space aboard the Mercury capsule, Friendship 7, and became the first American to orbit Earth.
Ken later received a special award from NASA, a commemorative medallion especially struck and minted from metal parts taken from the lunar and command modules, as recognition for his contribution to the overall success of the mission.
After Apollo 11, he left NASA in 1970 and returned to Canada. When the Apollo missions ended in 1972, Honeysuckle Creek became part of the Skylab program and closed in December 1981.
The 26m antenna was relocated nearby to the Canberra Deep Space Communications Complex at Tidbinbilla, and was decommissioned in late 2009.
In May, 2010, the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics declared the antenna an Historical Aerospace Site.
The antenna remains in perpetuity as an historical site at Tidbinbilla. Today, at Honeysuckle Creek, the concrete foundation is the only thing that remains of the tracking station. An outdoor display was added in 2001 for tourism purposes.BOB BYRNE IS THE AUTHOR OF ADELAIDE REMEMBER WHEN AND POSTS MEMORIES OF ADELAIDE EVERY DAY ON FACEBOOK.COM/ADELAIDEREMEMBERWHEN/
CREDIT: Bob Byrne
Word count: 998
