THE Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency has signed a deal with its European counterpart to join forces on future missions, opening up a whole new world for South Australian companies.
The Federal Government is also in discussions with Japan about landing a spacecraft at Woomera. The deals are a boost for the gr­owing num­ber of space companies in SA.
CONTINUED PAGE 4 SA space industry sets new course FROM PAGE 1 The Australian and European space agencies have signed a joint statement of intent to collaborate on missions.
They could include manned missions, space exploration, work on the International Space Station, and satellite projects.
The details of the deal will be formally hammered out later in the year. The European agency has already sent rovers to Mars and has hopes of a manned mission to the planet.
Federal Space Minister Karen Andrews, pictured, said it was a big step forward for the Australian Space Agency.
“It shows just how much momentum and excitement has been developed since the Coalition Government established the ASA last year,” she said.
“Having the ASA to pursue these opportunities will play a big part in us reaching our goal of tripling the size of our space sector to $12 billion and up to an extra 20,000 jobs by 2020.” The agreement will mean space start-ups can pitch their technology to the Australian Space Agency, which will co-ordinate with the Europeans.
Australia’s special skills that translate to space include robot mining technology that could be used on asteroids or other planets.
Because of our dry climate, Australians are also very good at conserving water, which is critical on space missions.
Australia already works closely with Europe through the CSIRO and the New Norcia deep space tracking station in WA.
Meanwhile, the Government is talking to Japan about a landing site in the SA Outback for the Hayabusa 2 spacecraft.
Hayabusa 2 was launched in 2014 to collect samples from an asteroid called Ryugu and will need somewhere to land in 2020.
The original Hayabusa 1 was launched in 2003, made a billion kilometre journey to the Itokawa asteroid, and then landed at Woomera in 2011.
That was the first time a spacecraft made contact with an asteroid and returned to Earth.
The Australian Space Agency will co-ordinate the manoeuvre with the Japanese space agency, JAXA.
Australian Space Agency head Megan Clark said Australia could offer “world-leading expertise in remote operations that can be applied in space”.
“We are delighted to start working with the ESA to open up opportunities for our industry and researchers to participate in joint missions,” she said.
Dr Clark said the Hayabusa landing was an example of the agency’s role co-ordinating international space activities.
“We look forward to working with JAXA and encouraging entrepreneurship, while ensuring our activities are safe – in space, and on Earth,” she said.SA Space Industry Centre head Richard Price said the SmartSat Cooperative Research Centre being set up on North Tce would be a critical part of future missions.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD STATE EDITOR
Word count: 507
