THREE astronauts have blasted off into space on the 50th anniversary of the moon landing as Americans attended events across the country to commemorate the milestone in modern history.
American Andrew Morgan, Russian Alexander Skvortsov and Italian Luca Parmitano, below, lifted off in the Soyuz spacecraft at 1.58am, SA time, from the Baikonur Cosmodrome in Kazakhstan on the same date that NASA’s Neil Armstrong and Buzz Aldrin landed on the moon in 1969.
Morgan said it was a fitting tribute to the Apollo 11 crew to be heading off to the International Space Station on the 50th anniversary on the moon landings. Russian Alexey Ovchinin and Americans Nick Hague and Christina Koch have been aboard the ISS since March.“It is a huge honour for both my Soyuz crew as well as the entire crew of expedition 60 that we will be joining,” he said. “It’s a beautiful way to commemorate the moon landing.” Morgan said he hoped he could both “carry the torch forward” for NASA and also inspire a new generation to dream of space exploration.
Flanked by Apollo 11 astronaut, Buzz Aldrin, Vice President Mike Pence, chairman of the National Space Council, announced at the Kennedy Space Centre that the Orion capsule that will take American astronauts back to the moon in 2024 is ready. “On this historic occasion, I am told that we have achieved a critical milestone in our effort to go to the moon and beyond,” he said. “The Orion crew vehicle for the Artemis mission is complete and ready to begin preparations for its historic first flight. In the coming years, American astronauts will return to the moon aboard the Orion.” Mr Pence earlier tweeted photos with Aldrin and Neil Armstrong’s son, Rick, at the Apollo 11 launch pad. Aldrin had a humble message to Americans, saying “today belongs to you”. “Looking back, landing on the moon wasn’t just our job, it was a historic opportunity to prove to the world America’s can-do spirit. I’m proud to serve the country that gave me this historic opportunity,” he said. In Armstrong’s hometown of Wapakoneta, Ohio, nearly 2000 runners competed in “Run to the moon” races.
“We’re celebrating the 50th anniversary of perhaps the most historic event in my lifetime, maybe in anybody’s lifetime, the landing on the moon,” 10K runner Robert Rocco, 54, said. Huge crowds were drawn to the Museum of Flight in Seattle, where the spacecraft was on display.
NASA chief Jim Bridenstine said the main reason the day was special for millions of Americans was because Armstrong, Aldrin and Collins showed the world that anything was possible.“The enduring legacy of the moon landing were the countless young Americans they inspired to join science, technology, engineering and maths fields of study,” he said. “If you were alive, you will never forget where you were at that moment in history because it is when many realised dreams could become reality.”
CREDIT: MATHEW MURPHY NEW YORK
Word count: 492
