Twelve Americans walked on the moon between 1969 and 1972. Another 12 visited the moon, orbiting at low altitude, but never set foot on the surface. SARAH BLAKE reports
Apollo 11 July 16-24, 1969 CREW: Commander Neil Armstrong, Lunar Module pilot Edwin Eugene “Buzz” Aldrin and Command Module pilot Michael Collins.
Armstrong flew 78 combat missions in the Korean War and later joined NASA as a test pilot.
Armstrong flew aircraft reaching speeds of more than 6000km/h. Fifty years ago this Sunday, Armstrong stepped off the lunar landing module, Eagle, and became the first human to walk on the surface of the moon.
Armstrong was heard by more than a billion people when he said: “That's one small step for man, one giant leap for mankind.” Armstrong, who died age 82 on August 25, 2012, was active in the Boy Scouts and one of the personal belongings he took to the moon was the World Scout Badge.
Aldrin will always be known as the second man on the moon.
Space fans love that his mother Marion’s maiden name was Moon. Buzz became his legal name in 1988 in recognition of his sister calling him “buzzer” rather than “brother” when they were kids. He was the only man to hold a religious ceremony on the moon when, as a Presbyterian elder, Aldrin took communion on the moon.
After three divorces and a facelift he blamed on the impact of g-forces in space, Aldrin, 89, lives in Florida.
Collins never walked on the moon, but he orbited it 30 times. He designed the famous Apollo 11 mission patch featuring an eagle carrying an olive branch landing on the moon.
A father of three, Collins, 88, is still married to his wife of more than 60 years, Patricia.
Apollo 12 November 14-24, 1969 Crew: Commander Charles “Pete” Conrad, Lunar Module pilot Alan Bean and Command Module pilot Richard Gordon.
Bean deserves special mention for a series of camera-related misadventures. After Conrad and Bean descended to the moon with a colour TV camera, transmission was lost when Bean destroyed the camera by pointing it at the sun. He had also smuggled a camera timer on board so he could take a selfie with Conrad on the moon, but he couldn't find the timer when they got there.
And finally, when the command module landed back on Earth, Bean was knocked unconscious by a camera falling on his head.
Conrad, meanwhile, had a $500 bet with a reporter that he could say whatever he liked when he stepped on to the moon, after denying that Armstrong's first words on the moon were scripted by NASA.
“Whoopee! Man, that may have been a small one for Neil, but that was a long one for me!” Conrad cried. He apparently never got the $500.
Gordon was a genuine fly boy who won the Bendix Trophy race, a transcontinental, point-to-point race from Los Angeles to New York in May 1961. He established a new speed record of 869.74 miles per hour (1400km/h) and a transcontinental speed record of 2 hours and 47 minutes.
Apollo 13 April 11-17, 1970 Crew:Commander James Lovell, Command Module Pilot John “Jack” Swigert and Lunar Module Pilot Fred Haise.
Unlucky 13 lived up to its reputation when the lunar landing had to be called off two days after launch (on April 13) when an oxygen tank explosion left the command module severely compromised. The crew overcame limited power, loss of cabin heat, water shortage and carbon dioxide build-up to return safely to Earth, using the landing module as a lifeboat which eventually landed safely in the ocean near Samoa.
Lovell was also a member of Apollo 8, the first manned flight around the moon, and was the only man to have flown to the moon twice, but to have never walked on it.
Swigert was the astronaut who made the dramatic announcement, “Houston, we’ve had a problem here”. He was called in late to replace Ken Mattingly, who was incorrectly diagnosed with measles. Swigert’s precise approach to life – he used to line up cans of soda alphabetically in the fridge – is credited in large part for the successful return to Earth of the Apollo 13 crew.
His life after the dramatic Apollo 13 mission was marked by mixed blessings. He was implicated in the so-called Apollo 15 postal envelopes scandal — which involved hundreds of unauthorised commemorative envelopes being carried to the moon and then sold at very high prices by German stamp dealer Herman Sieger. Today, the so-called “Sieger covers” (envelopes) sell for more than $50,000 each.
In 1973, Haise crashed a World War II training plane and suffered second degree burns over 65 per cent of his body.
But by 1977 he had recovered to pilot the first test flight of the Space Shuttle Enterprise.
Apollo 14 January 31-February 9, 1971 CREW: Commander Alan Shepard, Command Module Pilot Stuart Roosa and Lunar Module Pilot Edgar Mitchell.
In 1961, Shepherd became the first American to travel into space, but he was later grounded for four years with Meniere’s disease – a severe form of vertigo. Desperate to get to the moon, he successfully underwent an experimental surgical procedure and was cleared for take off.
When he did finally reach the moon’s surface, he celebrated by hitting two golf balls with a makeshift club.
Mitchell grew up in Roswell, Texas – which later became famous for reported UFO sightings. Mitchell spent five days in a lunar module simulator during the Apollo 13 crisis, testing out emergency procedures and radioing them into space. During the Apollo 14 mission, Mitchell conducted ESP experiments, trying to send his thoughts back to collaborators on earth.
Roosa conducted experiments with tree seeds to see what impact microgravity would have on their growth on earth. The seeds were later planted successfully around the world, with no difference to normal seeds.
Apollo 15 July 26-August 7, 1971 CREW: Commander David Scott, Lunar Module Pilot James Irwin and Command Module Pilot Alfred Worden.
The men from Apollo 15 returned with the four-billion-year-old Genesis Rock, which is still important to science today as a remnant of the history of the universe. Apollo 15 saw the first use of the Lunar Roving Vehicle.
Scott, the seventh man to walk on the moon, is the only living commander of an Apollo mission who landed on the moon, and one of four surviving moon walkers.
Scott left a memorial plaque on the moon bearing the names of the astronauts and cosmonauts who had died to advance space exploration.
Irwin was the eighth man to walk on the moon. He became a devout born-again Christian after returning from space and, after retiring from NASA, he founded the High Flight Foundation and became a Goodwill Ambassador for the “Prince of Peace”, saying “Jesus walking on Earth is more important than man walking on the moon”. He led expeditions to Turkey to search for the remains of Noah’s ark.
Worden said in 2017 that all human beings are actually aliens who arrived on Earth from outer space.
He ran for Congress in 1982 but lost the Republican primary. Apollo 16 April 16-27, 1972 Crew: Commander John Young, Lunar Module Pilot Charles Duke and Command Module Pilot Ken Mattingly.
Young, the ninth man to walk on the moon, had the longest career of any astronaut and flew six space assignments during a 42-year career with NASA. Young was very critical of NASA management after the Challenger shuttle disaster in 1986 killed seven people.
Duke was the 10th and youngest person to walk on the moon at the tender age of 36.
He left a family photo on the surface of the moon and is a committed born again Christian who has been married to wife, Dorothy, since 1963. He is 83.
Ken Mattingly spent three days, nine hours and 28 minutes by himself in the command module, the longest solo US space flight.
Apollo 17 December 7-19, 1972 Crew: Commander Eugene Cernan, Lunar Module Pilot Harrison Schmitt, and Command Module Pilot Ronald Evans.
Cernan was the 11th person to walk on the moon. He got back into the lunar module after Schmitt, which means he is the last man to walk on the moon so far. He went to college at Purdue University in Indiana, as did Neil Armstrong, making it the college of the first and last men to walk on the moon.
Schmitt was the first professional geologist to make the big moon trip and he collected the rock sample designated Troctolite 76535, which has been regarded as one of the most important samples returned from the moon.Evans orbited the moon a record 75 times. When the Apollo 17 crew landed in the Pacific Ocean, they were met by USS Ticonderoga, which was the ship Evans had served on in the Vietnam War.
CREDIT: SARAH BLAKE
Word count: 1481
