Among the hundreds of old-timers that turned out to celebrate 50 years since the first moon landing at Honeysuckle Creek tracking station on Saturday, a handful of young people sat keenly interested.
The student group, from McNamara-Saunders Astronomical Teaching Telescope, reveled in the event; surrounded by a wealth of experience and some former trackers.
For most, their passion started early. Joining a tight-knit, nostalgic community pushed them even more to lead the charge for the next generation's space exploration.
"In future, if I get to go into space, then I would like to inspire people like these people have inspired me," 17-year-old Tala Olds said.
"When my friends find out what I do, they say, 'That's awesome. How do I do that?' They're interested."
The McNamara-Saunders program sees students work on a year or two year-long project in or out of school hours.
Honeysuckle Creek's significance was brought to the forefront of their minds with a series of speakers at the former station. Minister assisting the Chief Minister on Advanced Technology and Space Industries, Mick Gentleman, reflected on its role in transmitting the first images of Neil Armstrong setting foot on the moon.
"Today we commemorate and acknowledge the 50th anniversary of the first moon landing, and in particular, the men and women from Canberra who worked at these tracking stations," Mr Gentleman said.
"The success of these missions would not have been possible without the remarkable precision and coordination among the engineers and specialists."
READ MORE:
When astronauts on the moon asked for Aussie beer, John Saxon replied Canberra's Camelot: the lost tracking station in the bush How The Canberra Times covered the moon landing 50 years ago A new artwork revealed at the Honeysuckle site echoed Armstrong's famous words: "One small step for man, one giant leap for mankind".
Master of ceremonies Andrew Tink described the day as an opportunity for "belated recognition" of the trackers' work, while astronaut Dr Andrew Thomas said the dedication and artwork would help carry regard for Apollo 11 forward.
"There are more people alive today who did not witness Apollo than those who did," he said.
"That's pretty amazing when you think about it and yet Apollo ... and the anniversary [have] generated profound interest and profound excitement."
Dr Thomas said as a "kid growing up in Adelaide", he thought he might never have a chance to become an astronaut. He realised he could when he got into the aerospace industry.
"It's not impossible," he said.
"No matter what your career is - it might be to become an astronaut, it might be to do something else - [but] no matter what, follow your dreams and aim high because as my career shows, the sky is not the limit."
United States ambassador to Australia Arthur Culvahouse said the significance of Australia's contribution to the space program could not be "adequately described".
CREDIT: Cassandra Morgan
Word count: 482
