Southern Launch has announced it will be launching Australia's first space-capable rocket to the edge of space from its Koonibba test site next month.
The test launch is set for Tuesday, September 15 at the Koonibba Test Range in uninhabited national park land north of the town.
The rocket will carry a small payload into the thermosphere, where it will be released from the rocket to gently fall back to earth under a parachute to be recovered and examined.
The rocket weighs 34 kilograms, has one engine, will burn out of fuel six seconds after lift-off and will travel at about 1.5 kilometres per second.
The front section, which contains artwork developed by the Koonibba community, will detach from the rocket and continue into the thermosphere as the larger rocket motor falls back to earth.
Southern Launch chief executive officer Lloyd Damp said the event would push Australian space exploration to a new level.
"This event is more than just Australia's first launch, but a testament to Australian companies coming together with our international partners to push the boundaries of the conceivable and inspire future generations to be space farers," he said.
Mr Damp said the possibilities to come from exploration would help local communities, including farming through the use of small satellites.
"There's so much misinformation about modern space launch and when people think space they think Saturn V rockets, but what we do is about tiny rockets," he said.
"It's about efficiencies in operations touching communities we are proposing to operate from, so there are benefits to industry, including agricultural practices.
"If we can make agriculture more profitable and efficient it can help farmers better manage their land."
Southern Launch recently engaged with more than a dozen members of the Koonibba community, who have completed training to become traffic monitors for the test launch periods.
Mr Damp said cooperation with the Ceduna District Council, Koonibba Community Aboriginal Corporation and local communities had been "fantastic".
"We recently organised the training and the 14 community members have certificates and will be involved when we launch to start roadblocks, undertake operations with Southern Launch and educate the local community about what is taking place," he said.
Koonibba Community Aboriginal Corporation chief executive officer Corey McLennan said they had been actively engaged with Southern Launch throughout the process and were excited the venture had come to fruition.
"Our people continue to have a strong connection with the land, the sea and the sky, so with Southern Launch developing a rocket test range on our lands we are excited to develop a partnership role in developing Australia's space future," he said.
Premier Steven Marshall said he was excited for the upcoming launch.
"South Australia is already home to the Australian Space Agency, SmartSat CRC, Mission Control and the Space Discovery Centre," he said.
"This launch will further cement our state's reputation as the 'space capital' of the nation - and is a prime example of what the collaboration between local companies can achieve across this high-growth sector."
Mr Damp said safety to people and the environment at launch time was "front and foremost in everything we do", with the company happy to talk with any community members who expressed concerns about aspects of the project.
CREDIT: Luca Cetta
Word count: 545
