No matter which party is in charge, MPs and advisers are living large in Canberra As the great federal budget surplus of 2020 approaches, it’s easy to get caught up in the excitement and forget how we got here, and whether it even matters.
Rhetoric has galloped ahead of reality. “The budget is back in the black … and for the first time in 12 years, our nation is again paying its own way,” Josh Frydenberg said, to roars of applause from Coalition MPs behind him last week.
Yet it’s not, and if it does eventuate it will be thanks to squeezing unprecedented levels of tax from middle to high-income workers, not the “real progress” in Canberra the Treasurer speaks of.
The last page of the federal budget shows taxation per person, adjusted for inflation, is the highest level ever. Page 312 shows tax as a share of gross domestic product — 23.3 per cent — is at the highest level since 2007, having grown by two percentage points under the ­Coalition.
“Let me be clear: the answer to these challenges is not higher taxes,” Frydenberg said in his speech. “Taxes will always be lower under the Coalition,” he added, proceeding to mention cutting taxes more than 15 times.
Recall that Gough Whitlam, for some a socialist bogeyman, raised taxes equivalent to 19.9 per cent in 1975. Under the Rudd-Gillard government, for all its waste and turmoil, the tax share fell by 0.4 percentage points to 21.3 per cent.
Hoopla about the ­Coalition’s “tax cuts” overlooks how the tax share will continue to increase for two years, implying the vaunted “cuts” aren’t large enough even to draw bracket creep to a standstill let alone reverse it.
Page 65 states the “headline cash balance”, a more comprehensive measure that includes spending on the National Broadband Network, is in deficit until 2022.
So the budget is still remarkably in the red despite a record tax haul, which could have been even higher. Page 66 talks about the unlegislated “repair” measures stuck in the Senate. “This comprises around $5 billion of receipt increases and around $0.7bn of payment saves (sic),” the papers states.
When it comes to “‘saves”, lifting taxes is the preferred method. The Treasurer also stressed the government’s “budget discipline”. Only a political class with an immense capacity for self-indulgence could deem the budget disciplined. Last week’s effort brought $87 million for “athlete support and wellbeing” and a new sport integrity commission.
There was $3m to “drive ­national leadership for agricultural innovation”, and $31m to “support live music”.
Almost $8m will go towards “dedicated men’s social support workers”. Based on the well-established principle you can never have enough centres and hubs, there’ll be $23m for a centre for population, $1.8m for an integrated youth services hub, $30m for an international centre for food studies and a further $20m for a “collaborative research engagement hub” in Adelaide.
The $19.5m earmarked for a space infrastructure fund might have been worth it if had been named Australian Research and Space Exploration (ARSE), which actually has enthusiastic private backers.
Even outside the budget process, the federal government, whoever is in charge, is extraordinarily spendthrift — and by global standards. Since 2013, backbench MPs’ salaries have increased more than $12,000 to about $260,000. While private sector wage growth has stagnated, the government’s 452 ministerial advisers — already the world’s highest paid — have enjoyed a further 11 per cent increase since 2014.
And remember that 96 of the 104 Coalition members of the federal parliament are ministers, former ministers, committee chairs or deputy chairs or holders of some parliamentary office that bumps up their salary. The 20-odd departmental heads in Canberra have all enjoyed pay rises of $100,000 a year since 2013 to about $800,000.
Discipline isn’t a word that really springs to mind. Canberra house prices buck the national trend for a reason.
Budget time is a reminder how politicians, insulated from daily reali­ty, use words in ways that insult their ordinary meaning.
Of course, the opposition is just as bad. That’s why it doesn’t highlight the chasm between rhetoric and reality. It wants its fingers on that giant money hydrant that’s expected to spurt out almost $500bn next year, rising to $567bn in 2022.
Bill Shorten in his budget reply repeated the nonsense about Coali­tion “cuts” to hospitals and schools, when spending is clearly at record levels and rising. In government, Labor too would waffle on about being tough and disciplined.
The Opposition Leader also said Labor would oversee even bigger surpluses than the Coali­tion — “a strong surplus to protect us from international shocks”.
That’s nonsense. Thanks to a decade of bracket creep, debt is ­already falling as a share of the economy. Economic and population growth naturally erode the public debt burden.
A surplus means the government is collecting more tax than it needs. It’s preferable for taxpayers, better positioned than government to know what they want, to keep their own money.
With the lowest debt burden in the G20, the government could easily borrow if it needed to in a downturn. Indeed, yields on its 10- year bonds have fallen to record lows of about 1.8 per cent. If the government insists on raking in surpluses, it would be better off giving the proceeds to the Future Fund, which returned 5.8 per cent last year.
Failure to legislate annual indexation of the income tax thresholds and curbing stealth taxation is a major disappointment. The high rates of inflation that thwarted Malcolm Fraser’s attempt in the 1970s have disappeared. Small annual tax cuts for all taxpayers would have been popular and would have made life harder for future spendthrift governments.
Maybe it’s not such a bad thing politicians’ rhetoric bears so little resemblance to reality.Some of Labor’s recently announced energy policies, such as increasing electric car sales to 50 per cent by 2030, defy science, let alone economics.
CREDIT: ADAM CREIGHTON; ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
Word count: 992
