Consider the 2020s and beyond from China’s point of view.
Here is a nation comprising one-fifth of humanity that will outrank the US in GDP (in US dollars) by the middle of the decade. Here is a nuclear state, a state capable of space exploration, a state with an urban middle class of 400 million, a state that contains 111 of the 500 largest enterprises on earth (by revenue) as measured by Fortune, up from 20 a decade ago, a state with a standing army of at least two million that can deliver a military budget three times that of Russia.
Given this context, why would China accept “containment’’ in a way that doesn’t apply to its peer, the US, or indeed to smaller economies like the UK or France?
China will expand into and claim (or reclaim) offshore islands to assure its seaborn approaches and supply lines. The same logic is driving China to develop land-based connections with India, western Russia and Europe via the One Belt One Road project.
China’s population is now 1.42 billion, rising at a rate of 4 million a year, down from more than 20 million a year in the late 1960s and early 1970s. By 2030, China’s population will be in decline.
However, the working-age population is already in decline. The one-child policy that took ­effect during the 1980s delivers progressively fewer people to the working-age cohort from 2015 onwards. A contracting workforce shifts the balance of power, enabling workers to demand higher wages. This “demand for labour’’ will accelerate the process of rural-to-urban migration.
I estimate around half a million people are moving to Beijing every year from rural China. China’s ­imminent worker shortage will accelerate this flow. This will trigger the kind of mechanisation and farm aggregation that has already worked its way through the Australian farmlands.
As China’s countryside empties, there will be greater demand for the kind of urban resources and middle-class commodities Australia can provide. China cannot deliver a developed-world standard of living to its current, let alone its aspirational middle class, without trade. There simply aren’t sufficient resources within its land mass. China must set up multiple and interchangeable supply lines with resource states like Australia but also Russia, Kazakhstan, Namibia, Brazil and Canada.
China must develop leading-edge port facilities. The Port of Shanghai is the world’s busiest as measured by tonnage and container throughput, having overtaken Singapore a decade ago. And China must develop a naval force capable of protecting and assuring its supply lines and seaborn approaches. Militarisation of the South China Sea islands is a logical part of this strategy.
The One Belt One Road project is also part of this “supply line logic” since it would provide China with a land-based connection into western Russia, India and Europe. But there are other ­issues China must navigate during the 2020s and 2030s, including the ageing of the population. Life expectancy (at birth) in China has lifted 20 years in the past 50 and it now sits at 76, compared with 83 for Australia. Retirement age in Australia is 65. In China it is 60 for men and 55 for women. China’s 65-plus population will double by 2037, forcing the government in the interim to raise taxes, limit benefits, encourage a culture of thrift and push out the age of ­retirement, especially for women. This will trigger discontent among the aged, who are likely to regard this as a betrayal of the social contract where it was believed taxes paid over a lifetime would deliver an agreed retirement date, benefits and income.
In some respects, the last 30 years of China’s development have been easier than the next 30 are likely to be. The liberalisation of the economy has lifted living standards for most people from abject poverty to comfortable middle class. There’s more prosperity to fund public health, education, housing and infrastructure and more private money to buy consumer goods.
In order to continue this trajectory, average income levels must rise, which in turn will drive demand for food and resources. China in the 21st century must dominate world trade; it must develop workable relationships with a range of supplier nations; it must excel at diplomacy; and it must develop a naval fleet capable of projecting power. And if that weren’t enough, China must also manage internal dissent based around ethnicity, ageing and social division.
America projects soft power through movies, pop culture and consumer goods and is supported in this regard by corporate expansion via entities like IBM, Coca-Cola and Google. China cannot project soft power through language-based mediums but it can help globalise corporations such as State Grid, ICBC and Alibaba.
Then there’s China’s unique soft-power strengths, namely students and immigrants. China has a negative net migration of 1.6 million a year; this figure for Australia is a positive 200,000. Some 43 per cent of Vancouver’s 2.3 million residents has Asian heritage. This figure for Sydney is closer to 20 per cent. China’s diaspora injects a kind of cultural alignment into the demographic heartland.
China projects its culture by visitors, students, immigrants, trade and corporate expansion. While the rise of China has transformed the quality of life of its citizenry, there are limits to its trajectory.
America struggles to deliver a first-world lifestyle to 327 million residents with access to the resources of much of the North American continent, and with a global system of trade and military alliances. If China is to achieve even half the per-capita wealth of America it would need twice the resources and double the trade and military alliances built by the US over a century.
The first 30 years of China’s transformation have delivered immeasurable benefit at the individual level. The average 50-year-old in China today would not question the wisdom of economic liberalisation. In the next decade China will test the boundaries of containment; it will shore up supply lines and build military cap­acity; it will continue its people-based and corporate expansion; its agriculture will mechanise; its countryside will lose workers; and its cities will expand further through internal migration.
But it is the period between 2030 and 2050 when the limits to growth might reshape China and the region. Japan had 40 years of growth from 1950 to 1990 before being reined in by underlying demographic forces (not enough workers, lots of retirees).
The average 50-year-old in China in 2035 won’t remember a pre-liberalisation lifestyle and will demand parity with their middle-class counterparts in the US.
However, with resource utilisation and trade alliances at full cap­acity, this expectation will be hard to meet from existing trade relationships, prompting external conflict and/or internal dissent.
In the short term, Australia stands to benefit from China’s heightened demand for resources, commodities and education services. China’s strengthening of its naval capacity in particular is likely to prompt greater investment in defence and in defence support, benefiting cities like Darwin, Adelaide, Perth and Townsville.
The skill set Australia needs in the 2020s and beyond is the ability to navigate safe passage between superpowers. Perhaps a centre for superpower studies could be established at a university. Such a ­facility might research learnings from history. For example, how did well-to-do Denmark steer a neutral course between the behemoths of Great Britain and France during the Napoleonic Wars?
The answer is instructive: initially well, later, disastrously. Perhaps there’s a lesson or a warning in this for Australia.
Bernard Salt is managing director of The Demographics Group; research by Simon Kuestenmacher.bernard@tdgp.com.au
CREDIT: Bernard Salt; Demographer
Word count: 1253
