From drones to medical devices and seaweed farming, scientific advances make a brand new world just a quantum leap away The world keeps changing. Progress moves ever forwards.
In this era of ever-shifting technology, it is sometimes difficult to envisage what future employment opportunities may look like.
How many of our current jobs will be usurped by robots, artificial intelligence, blockchain and digital automation?
Will we all need to re-skill and steer our children away from traditional areas of study?
A World Economic Forum The Future of Jobs 2018 report forecasts that by 2025, machines will perform more current work tasks than humans. This compares to 71 per cent of tasks performed by humans and 29 per cent by machines or algorithms in 2018.
The report, which examines expected trends in 20 world economies and 12 industry sectors, finds the evolution of machines and algorithms in the workplace will displace 75 million jobs but will create 133 million new ones. “Wholly new specialist roles’’, the report says, will include AI (artificial intelligence) and machine learning specialists, big data specialists (dealing with data sets that are too large or complex for traditional software), process automation experts, information security analysts, user-experience and human-machine interaction designers, robotics engineers and blockchain specialists.
Established roles that are set to experience increasing demand include data analysts and scientists, software and applications developers, e-commerce and social media specialists.
Jobs with “distinctively human’’ skills – such as customer service workers, sales and marketing professionals, training and development, people and culture, organisational development specialists and innovation managers – are also expected to grow.
A report this year by consulting firm Ernst and Young, Australia, on workplace disruption and the way technology is reshaping work, states globalisation, ageing across the working-age population, and an uncertain political and economic outlook must also be considered.
These factors, along with technology, are “reshaping both labour supply and demand, and the content, structure and location of work’’.
The report, titled Stop Talking About the Future of Work, finds learning and development programs have work to do and “still focus on the roles of today and yesterday – not tomorrow’’.
It estimates about one third of the annual $12 billion learning and development spend by organisations in Australia is “misplaced” or not used effectively.
“The current approach to skilling people is not meeting rapidly changing current needs and is certainly not future fit,’’ the report says.
It recommends education institutions work together to offer “agile, adaptable” courses.
Queensland University of Technology Vice-Chancellor Professor Margaret Sheil, a director of the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation and a member of the CSIRO Science Industry Endowment Fund, says today’s students will need technological skills, an entrepreneurial attitude and cultural competencies to have the best outcomes post-university.
“We are constantly looking at our courses and, based on student demand and employment trends, we design new programs, we delete courses but we also add a lot to our existing degrees,’’ she says.
“Universities are responsible for ensuring that the courses and programs they offer are directly reflective of student demand and employment and business trends throughout the world.’’ University of Queensland Vice-Chancellor Professor Peter Hoj says it is likely graduates will need to be prepared for “multiple career incarnations’’. He says the role of university is to prepare graduates to find a job but also to instil the “knowledge, skills and innovative mindset to anticipate job opportunities that don’t yet exist’’.
“The university is acutely aware that we must have the programs in place to develop graduates who can ably navigate and manage working environments being revolutionised by technological progress,’’ Hoj says.
NEW DISCOVERIES, NEW JOBS Deep in the laboratories of our best universities, that incredible, futuristic progress is under way. Our smartest minds are pushing the boundaries of what is possible, quietly working to realise a brighter, easier, safer, improved future.
And with new discoveries, new industries will be created, along with a raft of futuristic jobs.
Research by Queensland quantum physicists shows the vast potential of nanofabrication and its applications in many different industries.
Professor Warwick Bowen, who works in a rabbit warren of small laboratories in the basement of The University of Queensland’s Physics Annex, leads the university’s Quantum Optics Laboratory and is a program manager of the Australian Centre for Engineered Quantum Systems. In his small laboratory bays, Bowen, 42, works in nanometres or a measurement that is a mind-boggling one millionth of a millimetre.
It is, as Bowen so eloquently says, “exquisite precision’’. But for something so infinitesimally tiny, the implications are vast. Nanofabrication – the design and manufacture of devices that are measured in nanometres – is a big deal.
A quantum technologies industry is expected to be established in Australia with potential applications that will revolutionise biosciences, navigation, computation and communications.
In the shorter term, nanotechnology could contribute to the development of a range of jobs in the technologies sector, including hi-tech start-ups building medical diagnostic devices and next-generation sensors for drones.
Bowen’s team is developing quantum sensors that fit on a silicon chip. These sensors allow measurements of magnetic fields, such as those emitted from the human body and measured in an MRI machine or brain scan; of sound waves, such as those measured in ultrasound and used to image the seabed; and of acceleration, ­potentially allowing autonomous vehicles to navigate better.
Bowen and his team are working with US space agency NASA, developing magnetic field sensors for deep space communication over longer distances.
The Australian Defence Force funds his team’s development of ultraprecise navigation sensors that don’t rely on GPS (global positioning system) satellites. (GPS satellites are crucial for navigation, financial transactions, electric power grids and digital televisions and radio transmission, and are vulnerable to being knocked out by space weather such as solar flares or deliberate attack.) With aerospace company Lockheed Martin, Bowen’s team are also working on an “entirely new way to do computation’’ based on mechanical vibrations. Bowen says computers are currently built from semiconductors that makes them “inherently sensitive to radiation’’.
Computers based on mechanical vibrations could have implications for space exploration, allowing travel through regions currently inaccessible due to harsh radiation.
In the resources industry, Boeing is funding development of very precise, lightweight sensors that could be put on a “swarm of drones’’ to autonomously search for mineral deposits, replacing current methods that require bulky cryogenic systems in a vehicle or plane that require refrigeration to far below freezing.
In a medical setting, the incredible accuracy of the ultrasound technology could actually “change how scientists understand biology’’, allowing them to “listen to the sound emitted by living bacteria and cells’’.
Scientists could hear the differences in how healthy and cancerous cells vibrate that, in turn, could have a “revolutionary effect’’ on understanding how cancer spreads and potentially offer new treatments.
“These sensors, smaller than a millimetre in size, could allow us to listen to the pulse of life in a living cell and to miniaturise an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) machine onto a silicon chip,’’ Bowen says. “We will learn about how cells behave and that may have huge ramifications on our understanding of medicine.’’
ROBOTS EVERYWHERE Parents and students often ask robotics professor Jonathan Roberts which industries will be most affected by robots in terms of looking at jobs of the future.
His answer? All of them.
“Pretty much every industry in the future will incorporate robotics,’’ he says. “We see robots as the next personal computer. Just as the personal computer has changed nearly every job, robotics has the potential to do the same thing.’’ Roberts works at Queensland University of Technology’s school of Electrical Engineering and Computer science and is also the Australian Centre for Robotic Vision’s chief investigator. This is a four-university research centre (with Monash University, University of Adelaide and Australian National University) based at QUT.
Roberts is currently supervising a world-first development of a 3D-printed custom-made and disposable robotic surgical tool for arthroscopes, used in the examination and surgical repair of a joint such as the knee, shoulder, elbow, wrist, hip or ankle. He says the semi-autonomous surgical system has the potential to revolutionise keyhole surgery “in ways not before imagined’’.
The brainchild of PhD researcher Andrew Razjigaev, the “SnakeBot’’ prototype is designed for surgery inside joints where curved spaces and straight tools make these procedures “technically quite challenging’’.
“There is a fundamental difficulty in surgeons getting where they want to get … your joints have to be manipulated to make space for the tools and a camera. So the whole thing is relatively complicated,’’ Roberts says.
“What’s new about this work is that a scan of the patient’s joint is put into a computer and a snake robot 3D-printed part is specifically designed for that patient. It is matched to the patient and that component that is very cheaply printed is then thrown away after the operation.
“We are always looking for ways to make the surgeon’s job less complicated because that’s better for the patient as well.’’ The snake robots are 4mm across and about 5cm long, “like a thin finger’’. They are 3D printed using a computer that works out the best design from patient scans in just a few minutes. A “leg manipulation robot’’ has also been developed to bend and hold a patient’s leg in place during surgery. The technology also has wider implications for many other types of surgery where “surgeons need to go around corners” such as in the brain, face or neck.
“It is likely new surgery will be developed and will open up a new type of procedure that is just not possible now,’’ Roberts says. “The idea that you can have your surgical tools custom made for the patient is a revolutionary thing.’’ Roberts says robotics will be key to the future of industries such as agriculture, mining and manufacturing. Future farming will involve robotic weeding of crops, robotic harvesting systems and robots that harvest fruit more efficiently than humans (there is already a robot developed to pick capsicums).
In mining, robotics now being used could be developed to remove miners from hazardous jobs such as driving underground haul trucks and loaders, he says. Instead, human “drivers” can stay above ground to supervise trucks below.
In July, the Queensland Government announced a $7.71 million investment over four years for the nation’s first robotics manufacturing hub, with an extra $10 million from QUT.
“New, collaborative robots are now safe to be around, so humans can be next to them and work safely with them,’’ Roberts says. “We can start to use them for low-level production.
“Robots are a huge part of our future.’’
SEAWEED SAVES THE WORLD To Associate Professor Nicholas Paul, the humble seaweed, in all its 10,000 forms, is his life’s work, his passion and great hope for the future.
A fledging global seaweed industry has the potential to employ vast numbers of people worldwide as the crop is developed for a multitude of uses. Seaweed, a macroalgae broadly broken into red, brown and green types, is perhaps the most versatile plant life on the planet.
There is already a $7 billion global industry producing food products such as nori and wakame, as well as gelling, thickening and emulsifying food additives carrageenan, agar and alginate. It is also widely used as a fertiliser.
But humans are only starting to realise seaweed’s vast potential. Seaweed may offer answers in terms of reversing climate change, stopping nutrient run-off into coastal waters, even as a source of bioplastics and biofuel.
Paul, 42, of Buderim, works at the University of the Sunshine Coast, moving to the area in 2017 to live in the “epicentre’’ of his favourite species of seaweed, the pink asparagopsis, which is in abundance on the Sunshine Coast.
“There are 10,000 species of seaweed out there, there are so many different potential applications,’’ Paul says. “We are just scraping the surface in terms of the science, let alone industry uses. In Indonesia, there are 200,000 seaweed farmers working in shallow coastal environments and seaweed has the potential to be an enormous industry in Australia.’’ Paul has found asparagopsis seaweed can reduce methane emissions from livestock if added to the diet of cattle and sheep and “significantly reduce’’ greenhouse gas emission from Australia’s $17 billion livestock sector, responsible for about 10 per cent of Australia’s overall emissions. Seaweed can also boost the immune response of animals and therefore reduce antibiotic use.
In terms of reversing climate change, seaweed may have a big role. There are hopes that giant kelp forests could pull large amounts of carbon out of the oceans. In ideal conditions, giant kelp can grow up to 60cm a day to about 50m long.
“As seaweed grows, it photosynthesises, which means it pulls out carbon dioxide out of the water,’’ Paul says. “Carbon dioxide in the ocean is bad in terms of ocean acidification. Each tonne of dry weight of seaweed that you pull out of the ocean, you are actually probably pulling out 300-400kg of carbon.’’ This carbon-laden seaweed could then be “locked away’’ by turning it into biochar – a biological charcoal created by burning without oxygen to trap carbon and minerals inside. This could be used in agriculture to boost soil.
Paul believes the seaweed industry will first be “scaled up’’ over the next 20 years before it is used to combat climate change seriously.
More immediately, off-coast seaweed farms will be used to mop up phosphorous and nitrogen nutrient run-off in coastal waters. This nutrient run-off creates unwanted algal blooms that strip oxygen from the water and kill marine life.
There is already a tiger prawn farm near Ayr on the central Queensland coast, part of Australian aquaculture company Pacific Bio, that uses seaweed to strip wastewater of pollutants.
This year, growing seaweed off oyster lease platforms is to be trialled in Moreton Bay. Paul says up to 15,000ha in new aquaculture leases identified for the Great Sandy Marine Park (including Hervey Bay and Fraser Island) could be used for seaweed in the future.
“There’s a lot of community interest … short term, it’s about seaweed as food, nutrition, animal feed and crop agriculture soil conditioning.
“There is the potential in the future for it to reverse climate change impacts.’’
ADVANCING UNLIMITED POTENTIAL SEAWEED ● Seaweed is the largest aquaculture crop in the world but isn’t grown commercially in Australia yet. A trial to grow seaweed in Moreton Bay is planned to start this year.
● As a food source, seaweed is high in dietary fibre and omega-3 fatty acids. Used for fertiliser, it is touted as a climate change hero with its ability to produce oxygen, absorb nutrients and reduce carbon dioxide in water.
NANOTECHNOLOGY ● A nanometre is a measurement of one millionth of a millimetre. Nanofabrication is the design and manufacture of devices measured in nanometers.
● The incredible accuracy of the technology allows scientists build sensors smaller than a millimetre in size. Ultrasound, for example, will be transformed by miniaturising a MRI machine on to a silicon chip.
● There are also applications in navigation, computation and communications.
ROBOTS ● Over the next decade, robotics is predicted to boost Queensland’s economy by $77.2 billion and create 725, 810 new jobs(QUT’s 2018 The Robotics and Automation Advantage for Queensland report).
● The future workforce will include robots on the job with people. ● In medicine, 3D-printed, custom-made surgical tools, created from individual patient scans, have potential to revolutionise surgery.Robotics and bespoke 3D-printed tools and body parts will be standard in hospitals.
CREDIT: ELISSA LAWRENCE
Word count: 2594
