A University of Adelaide research centre dedicated to solving the challenges of long-term space exploration has been renamed after astronaut Andy Thomas.
Astronauts of the future will need to generate and store energy and fuels, grow their own food and maintain safe operations on other worlds, the first Australian to fly in space says.
Andy Thomas says long-term planetary exploration brings particular challenges.
“For life to prosper on new worlds, space resources will need to be made into new essential products," Dr Thomas said.
“Sustainable use of resources in space is critical to the future of space travel.”
His comments came as the University on Adelaide on Wednesday named its centre established to tackle these issues, the Andy Thomas Centre for Space Resources.
Dr Thomas said he was honoured to be associated with the globally unique education and research facility working to address the challenges faced by long-term planetary exploration while ensuring the near-term application of solutions on Earth.
“Journeys into deep space will only be viable if we find ways to identify, assess and model resources on planets and near-earth objects and extract these resources and process them in a responsible, efficient and sustainable way," he said.
The Adelaide centre connects local specialist capabilities in artificial intelligence, autonomous systems, mining engineering, and advanced materials and manufacturing to global efforts in off-world exploration and habitation.
Director John Culton said successful long-term space exploration required a fundamental rethinking of the technologies, processes and infrastructure required to ensure continued and sustainable access to the energy, fuels and resources.
“Addressing the challenges for sustainable planetary resource exploration also provides opportunities for developing new technologies that can underpin long-term, sustainable, resource exploration and processing in remote locations here on earth," Professor Culton said.
CREDIT: Tim Dornin
Word count: 292
