G'day, g'day.
It's Friday, February 11, & you're reading The Loop, a quick wrap-up of today's news.
One thing you should know — Omicron is 'well & truly here' in WA
A man with COVID-19 has died in hospital as Western Australia recorded 51 new local cases of the virus in the community, its highest daily number to date.
* It is the second death WA has recorded linked to community transmission of the virus throughout the entire pandemic
* A total of 99 new cases have been reported in WA, with another 48 returned overseas & interstate travellers also testing positive
* There are currently 482 active cases in WA
"Omicron is well & truly here in Western Australia," WA Premier Mark McGowan said.
While you're here
Australia's Scotty James has won silver in the snowboard half-pipe at the Beijing Winter Olympics, narrowly missing out on gold in a thrilling finish.
*
Fellow Australian Valentino Guseli impressed in his maiden Olympics & finished sixth with a best score of 79.75
*
American superstar Shaun White, widely considered the greatest snowboarder of all time & competing at his final Olympics, finished outside the medals in fourth place with a best score of 85.00.
News alerts you might have missed
*
Gladys Berejiklian has been appointed to a new executive role at telecommunications giant Optus four months after stepping down as NSW premier
*
An Adelaide woman & her lover will spend more than 20 years behind bars for the murder of her husband, Steven Hinrichsen.
Not signed up for ABC News alerts & want updates like these in real-time? Head to the ABC News app homepage ➡️ Settings ➡️ Notifications & tailor your alerts to what you want to know.
What Australia has been searching for online
* Cressida Dick: The Metropolitan Police Commissioner is leaving her role after a series of damaging controversies. Dame Cressida said she had been left with "no choice" after London Mayor Sadiq Khan made it clear to her he had no confidence in her leadership
* NASA v SpaceX: NASA has raised concerns about SpaceX’s plan to deploy about 30,000 satellites for its Starlink array, which the agency fears could flood Earth’s orbit with objects, making flights & observations more difficult
* Deer Omicron: The discovery of the Omicron variant in white-tailed deer in New York has raised concerns that the species could become hosts of a new coronavirus strain, a lead researcher says.
One more thing …
A Russian gallery says one of its security guards has vandalised an avant-garde painting on loan from the country’s top art repository — by drawing eyes on the picture’s deliberately featureless faces.
The painting, dating from the 1930s, shows three torsos & heads with hair but no facial features. The vandal drew eyes on two of them with a ballpoint pen.
The Yeltsin Centre said the painting has been sent for restoration to the State Tretyakov Gallery in Moscow, which owns it.
Sometimes life really does imitate art …
You're up to date!
Have a good weekend, we'll be back on Monday.
Word count: 516
