Stargazing just got a little easier in Australia as a series of regional towns were officially named the home of the nation's darkest night sky on Thursday.
A section of South Australia's Swan Reach Conservation Park is a core zone within the 3,000 square kilometre River Murray International Dark Sky Reserve, the nation's first section of sky to receive the prestigious title.
It is also the world's 15th location to receive the dark sky reserve status.
Project leaders have been pushing for the recognition for many years & are hoping to make the area a new home for space exploration & education.
What is a dark sky reserve?
The official title references a dedicated space that has policy controls in place to ensure light pollution is kept to a minimum, including local residents using alternative types of outdoor lighting.
Night sky darkness is measured at levels ranging between the lightest at 0 to the darkest at 22.
The River Murray International Dark Sky Reserve producing readings of 21.97 — making it one of the darkest places in the world.
Australia is already home to two other dark sky spaces, but reserve status is only awarded when the zoning area includes public & private residential land.
Mid Murray Landcare chair Chris Tugwell has been championing the project for more than three years.
He said when embarking on the journey to dark sky reserve status he did not realise it would be such an arduous task.
"I'd heard that there were these dark sky places around the world & we've got a property on the river & we always think 'the stars are amazing' & I thought 'why not give it a go'," he said.
"I didn't realise it was going to take three & half years years & I didn't realise how much was involved. But it's been a fantastic journey.
"One of the advantages is that in the Southern Hemisphere you get to see the centre of the Milky Way, that's our own galaxy, & that's a really special thing because it can't be seen from the Northern Hemisphere."
Mr Tugwell said now the area has received the esteemed title he is hopeful that as many people will enjoy it as possible.
"The reason we wanted it [the reserve] to be so big is to incorporate so many small communities so they can take advantage of it," he said.
What does it mean for the region more generally?
Regional Australia is increasingly facing more challenges as the implications of drought & the rising costs of living are impacting the survival of small regional towns.
Tourism operators in the area are already talking about running dedicated tours & hope to be able to showcase some of the reserve's most notable natural sites, including the Big Bend Cliffs.
Tourism development manager Julie Bates said she expected the official status would become a drawcard for international tourists.
"The accreditation, in terms of the tourism industry, is a major asset to us," she said.
"We're looking forward to welcoming many, many thousands of visitors a year, & we certainly will be targeting some of the international markets.
"The US has a very popular night sky [audience] as their stars are not very easily seen."
Ms Bates said while she expects new businesses would be created in response to the dark sky recognition, there are existing tourism operators that would also benefit.
"We've got some cruises on the river, which is an amazing way to experience the dark sky, " she said.
"Also for us being on the river … people that are hiring house boats, & having amazing house boat holidays, can literally go on the back deck & turn the lights out & have a wonderful view of our dark sky."
New home for space education
The River Murray International Dark Sky Reserve has been flagged as a potential education hub for stargazing.
A key goal for astronomers is to set up a stargazing education camp, at a nearby town, if funding can be secured.
Astronomical Society of South Australia light pollution officer Martin Lewicki said he was hopeful that young people will be targeted through the education element as there was a lot to be learned from the skies above.
"It will be a great idea if they could put aside their screens & look up into the sky," he said.
"When we get people coming to an area like this they go back to the city saying 'you won't believe how bright the stars are'.
"Some people have lived in light-polluted cities all their lives."
Mr Tugwell said he hoped it would help inspire more people toward a science-based career.
"We've had telescopes donated to us for this reserve & that means that young school kids can actually get their hands on equipment they'd never, ever get a chance to use otherwise," he said."That means that they can see science as a possible future for them & perhaps in the future become involved in the wonderful space research that is going to be going on in Adelaide with the new space agency."
Word count: 851
