Phone reception concerns producers
Blackspots of telecommunication connectivity are still frustrating rural communities with the federal government pledging spending to address mobile blackspots in Labor-held and marginal seats, none of which are in SA, according to federal infrastructure and transport assistant opposition spokesperson Tony Pasin.
He was warning of millions in budget cuts to regional communications initiatives under the federal Labor government.
"Federal treasurer Jim Chalmers is warning that his forthcoming budget will contain what he calls difficult decisions," he said.
"I'm very concerned that this will include cuts to regional communications initiatives, which ultimately means less capacity to address mobile black spots in our regions, including here in Barker."
The Coalition installed more than 1270 new mobile base stations across Australia, including 30 in Barker.
Following the federal election in May, Mr Pasin wrote to the new Communications Minister Michelle Rowland, reiterating the importance of addressing mobile blackspots and encouraging the minister to ensure communities remained at the centre of identifying locations for government funding.
Mr Pasin said he did not receive a response to his letter sent in June.
"What hope do we have in continuing to address mobile phone blackspots under Labor if the minister can't even be bothered replying to a letter about the issue," he said.
"So far all I've seen from the Labor government to address mobile blackspots is pledges for spending in Labor-held and marginal seats, none of which are in SA.
"The Coalition's $811.8 million Connecting Regional Australia initiative is under threat, and I fear the small amount of funding it will be replaced with will not be spent in electorates like Barker.
"A functional mobile phone service is no longer a luxury - it is a necessary business tool and in the case of regional communities, it is also a key piece of safety equipment."
Taplan farmer Clinton Scholz said signal in his Mallee area was a bit poor.
"During harvest, we generally tend to communicate via SMS," he said.
"In the header, at some point in time I will be on a higher area and a SMS will go out easier than I can sometimes obtain phone calls. So that is how we have gotten around it over the years."
He said he did not have agtech that relied on cellular data.
"But without signal it makes day to day working life harder," he said.
"I am out there doing a bit of work on my own a vast majority of the time so to have signal would improve safety, certainly around the workshop and especially in the paddock.
"It gives you the opportunity to be able to call for help if something does go wrong.
"It's just painful."
Mr Scholz said despite some blackspots, there was definitely improvements in the Paruna and Meribah areas.
"We have been looked after, we're just not quite there yet," he said.
"It would be really good to fill a couple of extra holes around the place and life would be easier for everyone."
Grain classifier Cropify co-founder Anna Falkiner said blackspots were a hinderance to the uptake of agtech adoption on farms.
"Because we're aware of the issues with connectivity in the bush, we have purposely made our products so it can work without internet connection," she said.
"But of course, if they want to be able to share their results, say with their broker or a potential buyer, then they'll want to have connection."
She said the sample their device required was the same as when the farmer delivers their their load to a bulk handler, like Viterra or an end user.
"There is a grain trade Australian standard, which will be analysed by our machine, and then it uses our model to derive the results," she said.
"And those results can be housed locally, but if the primary producer wants to share those results, that's when connectivity would be important. But they can get the results locally without being cloud connected."
Primary Industries Minister Clare Scriven said to-date the SA Mobile Phone Black Spot Fund had contributed to addressing 45 mobile phone black spot locations in regional SA.
"As part of this investment, the state government partnered directly with telecommunication providers to address five mobile black spot issues across the state," she said.
"This investment in new mobile infrastructure improves existing coverage, speed, connectivity, and helps to strengthen triple zero mobile connectivity.
"The state government is well aware that good mobile connectivity is essential in regional areas, not only vital for keeping in touch with family and friends, but is also a key ingredient for regional growth and development, ensuring businesses can run to their full capacity and guarantee people living in and visiting our regional and remote areas are able to access services and relevant emergency management information.
"Glenburnie in the Limestone Coast was, earlier this month, the latest location to be switched on, in association with Telstra."
She said of those projects still to be completed, two are in the Adelaide Hills and Fleurieu, two in the Far North, three on Eyre Peninsula and one in the Clare Valley region.
"In addition to co-funding new mobile phone towers, the state government has committed $1m from the Mobile Phone Black Spot Fund towards the Wudinna Switch Up Project, leveraging funding from the Commonwealth government's Regional Connectivity Program to upgrade broadband connection to the community," she said.
Ms Scriven said the Adelaide Hills area was receiving a mobile network extension from Telstra.
"To date, 55 devices have been installed," she said.
The federal Communications Minister was contacted for comment but did not respond by deadline.
CREDIT: Kiara Stacey
Word count: 937
