Livestock producers were given a valuable insight into the agtech installed on the Struan and Kybybolite best practice demonstration farms.
PIRSA senior agtech extension officer Robyn Terry said 18 ag tech suppliers had signed up their latest innovations from remote cattle weighing system to water monitoring technology to in line dosing of mineral supplements.
There have also been eight different weather stations, some including soil moisture probes, installed across the two sites.
"Some of tech has been here since early 2020, we were hampered a bit with COVID getting some in and some of it is very new like the diesel tank monitors from Goanna Ag which are due to go in soon," she said.
Dr Terry said expressions of interest for suppliers wanting to be involved would remain open for at least the next year with the project running until November 2024.
She said the aim was to assist producers in their decision making as to which tech was right for their farm by assessing productivity gains and where possible calculating a return on investment.
"The AgTech field is a minefield at the moment, if you are a producer it is like OK I want to do this, firstly is there a technology solution that fixes that or if there are multiple tech solutions which one is best for me," she said.
"We are trying to solve those issues for them and with physical farm tours available producers can come here and kick the tyres and see anything that they want to."
RELATED READING:
Simple tech adoption helps Keyneton farming family Technology goes on show at Kapunda Modelling shows increased use of agtech on South Australian farms could return as much as $2.6 billion each year to the state's economy.
Primary Industries Minister Clare Scriven said the day provided farmers considering implementing agtech the chance to see what options were available to them.
"The AgTech field day enables producers to assess the practical benefits of implementing the latest technology, on their properties," she said.
"We know producers are most engaged when they see the practical real time demonstrations of the technology."
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: Catherine Miller
Word count: 375
