The head of agtech at Australia's largest horticultural company has shared his thoughts on some of the limitations holding up adoption of these innovative products.
Costa Group agtech and innovation commercial manager Jesse Reader said horticulture was craving solutions to its labour-related challenges.
"We're always really focused on those headwinds and managing the cost of production and a lot of that is going to be linked to technology solutions for us," he said.
"That ability to find and stimulate and retain skilled workers is not insignificant."
Mr Reader has been closely watching the development of autonomous tractors, autonomous tractor kits and special-purpose machinery.
He divulged some of the products he is keeping an eye on at the Tractor and Machinery Association of Australia conference in Melbourne last month.
On the autonomous tractor front, he said AgXeed was going really well and offered an interesting platform of OEM quality.
He's closely watching Monarch's electric tractor, which was well designed and balanced in terms of its battery placement.
Autonomous tractor kits also piqued Mr Reader's interest about two years ago.
"I think we've got a lot of underutilised assets on farm that don't do as much as they should do," he said.
But it is special-purpose machinery where he has spent most of his time looking at what's on offer.
GUSS' autonomous sprayer and Ripe Robotics' fruit pickers are of interest, as well as the Revo Puma fruit harvester.
Mr Reader recently trialled the Revo Puma in a citrus orchard with a team of eight new pickers.
He said these people had never picked before and traditionally it would have taken them about 45 minutes to pick a bin.
They picked their first bin using the machine in 14 minutes.
"I just sat there and crunched the numbers; on one of our farms it would be a couple of million dollars of savings coming at us and an eight-month return on our capital," he said.
So what's the hold up?
Some of the barriers include difficulties getting finance for special purpose machinery and not being able to register the gear.
The technology is also "really expensive", he said, as companies were still manufacturing in low volumes.
Mr Reader said autonomy still required supervision.
Another barrier is that the technology is not fit for purpose.
"Often companies haven't considered the user experience of the piece of technology and how we're going to apply it," Mr Reader said.
"A lot of things only do niche jobs and they sound really good but they just aren't particularly impactful.
"They might own a space and they might do it really well but... they just aren't hitting the mark."
Mr Reader said horticulture, and agriculture, needed to meet technology halfway.
He said businesses were continuing to expect technology to solve their problems but refused in most cases to change the systems in which they grow.
CREDIT: Melody Labinsky
Word count: 481
