At a night deemed "the largest networking event in Australia" between ag-related students and potential employers in Adelaide last week, new technologies became a prominent topic of discussion.
Speaking at the Adelaide University Agricultural Students Association 'Growing the Future' event, Primary Industries Minister Clare Scriven said estimates showed an investment in the adoption of agtech on SA farms could bring as much as an extra $2.66 billion in revenue each year.
A panel of experts also touched on the potential benefits, but Elders agtech development officer Andrew Phelan says it is important to remember there is a long history of agtech on farms, whether farmers were conscious of it or not.
Field farmer and agtech startup founder Penny Schulz said it was important the right technologies were being embraced.
"We've got to start with the problem first, then get the tech to solve it," she said.
"But don't grab tech for tech sake. When a piece of tech solves a problem, it changes your world and if it doesn't change your world and make life easier, it's the wrong tech."
With labour shortages identified as one of the biggest issues facing the sector, agtech, specifically artificial intelligence and automation, were identified as two solutions.
Jordan Kitschke, FLUX, said there was opportunity through AI to reduce the cost of many key jobs.
"But there are some jobs where humans will always be necessary," he said.
He stressed to those considering an agriculture career that it was not only about making sure they had the right skills, but also having the right attitude.
Michael Macolino, BDO Australia, said the rise of automation in the next 15 years would not involve less workers.
"We'll need more people, but we'll need different people," he said.
"Computers are very good at collecting data, but we need that human instinct.
"Autonomy is for jobs that we have difficulty filling, that are too dangerous or that people don't want to do.
"Autonomy is going to be there to lower the cost of production and allow farmers and people involved in ag to turn their attention to other high-value decisions."
Primary Producers SA chief executive officer Caroline Rhodes said as well as creating change, agtech could also measure improvements.
"We have an obligation to consider how we're impacting on the environment, but also ways to increase value of production by demonstrating credentials," she said.
Ms Rhodes said it was important the right policies were in place, and don't inhibit new technologies.
RELATED READING:
Students pitch solutions to resolve ag issues Industry looks to grow ag future In questions from the floor, the topic of climate change was also raised.
Dr Schulz said there were a growing number of jobs in mitigation.
"Livestock was once seen as a climate problem that needed to be fixed, but now we see it as part of the solution," she said.
However there was a gap in the workforce of people who could guide the path towards solutions, she said.
Biosecurity was another hot topic.
Mr Macolino said there was technology already available that would allow people to check into farms, providing fast information in the case of an incursion.
Ms Rhodes said this kind of technology would be fundamental if a biosecurity threat arose, as retaining market access would be reliant on high levels of traceability and integrity of data.
CREDIT: Elizabeth Anderson
Word count: 561
