I'm not sure my counterparts could truly understand my excitement when I walked into the agricultural showcase tent at the Sydney Royal Easter Show a few years back.
There laid out in front of me were a selection of robot prototypes, specifically designed for the agricultural industry, produced by The Australian Centre for Field Robotics. This included the 'Digital Farmhand' - a mobile robot capable of plant crop intelligence, automated weeding and sampling, and crop manipulation.
Also memorable was the SwagBot - essentially a larger version of Digital Farmhand designed to herd and monitor cattle.
The true excitement factor was that these were the exact field robots that I had shown my Agricultural Studies students via a ABC TV episode, as part of a unit based on precision agriculture. And there it all was in front me, the real deal! What Google can provide just isn't comparable with the uptake you get from students when you can say 'I've been there, I've seen that, I've done that!'.
Fast forward a few years and I find myself on a two-day bus trip to the South East, entirely focused on agtech. The SA Agricultural Shows Next Generation Group have been fortunate enough to gain a project grant through the AgriFutures Australia's Producer Technology Uptake Program, in collaboration with the SA Agritech Meetup community. The aim of the project is to assist in connecting Primary Producers with SA AgTech developers.
The road-trip was conceived to get AgTech developers out to the regional areas to share what they're working on, and to actively engage with producers to gain insight around where achievements are being made and challenges hinder progress.
Site visits and speakers ranged from broadacre cropping and pasture production, to free-range hens and lamb production.
There was also a brainstorming evening between the developers and the landholders, as an opportunity to try and break down some of the challenges presented by the producers and to begin formulating some possible solutions. From automated electronic data collection, to mobile applications (apps), to spider goat silk.
With an ever-growing need to increase productivity and efficiency, the possibilities for technology-based solutions within agriculture seem to be endless. For an industry that not all that long ago, in the grand scheme of things, was operated by horse and cart.
CREDIT: SARAH HAZEL
Word count: 384
