Wine industry representatives from throughout SA, Australia and the world are raising a glass to the sector as they gather in Adelaide this week for the 18th Australian Wine Industry Technical Conference.
Held at the Adelaide Convention centre, the conference will tackle the technical and business issues, as well as the opportunities facing the grape and wine sector.
More than 1000 official delegates are expected to attend the whole conference, with a further 1500 wine industry experts involved across the three days to Wednesday.
At WineTech 2022, the expo component of the event, Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister Clare Scriven will address and welcome participants to South Australia.
The SA government's AgTech demonstration sites will be on show throughout the conference and participants will be able to take a virtual tour of the viticulture-focussed Nuriootpa site and register their interest to visit and experience the AgTech on show in-person.
Ms Scriven said SA was indisputably Australia's wine state, producing half of our bottled wine and more than three quarters of our premium wine.
RELATED READING:
Limestone Coast wine showcased to world Casella offers major stake in vineyards "It's also home to the National Wine Centre and all national industry representative and research bodies, including the Australian Wine Research Institute," she said.
"It's very fitting that Adelaide is hosting Australia's premier wine industry technical event again in 2022, after hosting 10 of the past 17 conferences.
"Along with the South Australian wine industry, I welcome the delegates and event participants to Adelaide and have no doubt they will enjoy all our great state has to offer, as well as gleaning invaluable insights into issues and opportunities facing the grape and wine sector today.
"The expert speakers as well as emerging voices in the grape and wine sector from around the world will offer fresh perspectives on key issues such as sustainability, wine quality, technology, vineyard health, market trends and more."
The event also coincided with the Australian Grape & Wine Outlook Conference.
Today, the conference is focusing on global economic trends affecting the Australian wine industry, the wine sector's license to operate, focusing on sustainability and our legitimate role in a civilised society and consumer trends of alcoholic beverages across the globe.
CREDIT:
Word count: 373
