GRAIN Producers SA are seeking growers to participate in a blackspot connectivity project and trial Agtech company Zetifi's long-range connectivity technology.
The connectivity pilot project is being funded through AgriFutures Australia's Producer Technology Uptake Program and is asking three grain producers who farm in mobile and internet blackspots to trial Zetifi's technology.
GPSA chief executive officer Brad Perry said the biggest barrier to the adoption of technology on-farm was lack of connectivity.
"Without reliable connectivity it is challenging to undertake precision agriculture, remote monitoring, use autonomous machinery and advanced data analytics to name a few," he said.
"We are excited about the opportunity to team up with AgTech business Zetifi to install its Cell and Rover technology on three SA grain producers' properties to extend phone and internet coverage as a solution for black spots and on-farm connectivity.
"This will be the first of its kind project in SA that will pilot last-mile connectivity for vehicles and machinery on farms".
RELATED READING: Signal upgrades critical to save lives
Zetifi chief executive officer Dan Winson said he was looking forward to applying the businesses' connectivity solutions to SA grain farms.
"We're really grateful to Brad and the team at GPSA for the initiative they've shown in creating this opportunity for SA farmers," he said.
"Our unique approach to on-farm connectivity was developed with regular input from grain growers around our base in Wagga Wagga, NSW, so we know this setting is well suited to our products and we're excited to be able to showcase the benefits they provide as part of this project."
AgriFutures Australia innovation manager Ulicia Raufers said the third round of the Producer Technology Uptake Program had enabled a further 28 producer groups and networks to design bespoke projects to increase AgTech adoption on-farm and on-boat.
Expressions of interest to participate in the pilot program are sought from SA grain producers by emailing office@grainproducers.com.au
CREDIT:
Word count: 317
