World vino conference in city
THE “challenge of change” facing the wine industry will be a key theme dissected by professionals from across the world at a pre-eminent event in Adelaide.
WineTech, a trade exhibition at the Australian Wine Industry Technical Conference, will examine the changing expectations of consumers and opportunities presented by a new marketplace.
It aims to help the industry to continue at the cutting edge of production practices by showcasing the latest technologies, services and equipment.
More than 1000 official delegates are expected to attend the conference, which kicked off at the Adelaide Convention Centre on Sunday and will run until this Wednesday.
Another 1500 industry experts are expected to have some involvement across the four days.
The state government’s AgTech demonstration sites will be on display throughout the conference, and attendees will be able to take a virtual tour of the viticulture-focused Nuriootpa site, which focuses on production systems in the surrounding Barossa, Clare and Eden Valleys. There will also be workshops, a social program and networking events, a student forum and wine tasting.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister Clare Scriven said it was fitting that Adelaide host the conference in 2022, after hosting 10 of the past 17 events including the 17th, in 2019.
“South Australia is indisputably Australia’s wine state, producing half of our bottled wine and more than three- quarters of our premium wine,” she said.
“It’s also home to the National Wine Centre and all national industry representatives and research bodies, including the Australian Wine Research Institute.” Ms Scriven who will address WineTech, welcomed the delegates and said they would glean “invaluable insights into issues and opportunities facing the grape and wine sector today”. “The expert speakers as well as emerging voices in the grape and wine sector from around the world will offer fresh perspectives on key issues,” she said.
CREDIT: KATHRYN BERMINGHAM
Word count: 313
