The livestock sector has plenty of demand for agricultural graduates.
That was the message received by second-year agricultural science student and Ag Institute Australia mentee Deanna Blesing.
While exploring the career pathways and employment opportunities available, the University of Adelaide study said she was "very excited about the opportunities shared".
Part of this inspiration came through attending the Barossa Improved Grazing Groups water planning workshop and the Fleurieu Beef Groups agtech demonstration farm field day recently.
"I've gained new cutting edge information and technology in these two action packed half days that will be really valuable in my studies, and help guide me in my selection of subjects in final years," she said.
"Such things as comparing water supply, capture, storage, distribution and monitoring options, determining livestock water requirements, electronic pasture monitoring options, genetic selection and AI technology for commercial herds versus the traditional use of bulls, in paddock livestock weighing that works and new crush, weigh crates and data collection processes."
Ms Blesing is upbeat about the career and employment opportunities gained, from both the recently-released 2022 AIA Student Compendium, and from the industry professionals who freely gave their time at the two events to share their experiences and suggest career pathways.
"I'm blown away by the openness and excitement of future employers of the grazing industries," she said.
"Having done a summer vacation of shed-handing, I'm currently relief milking, and with the Compendium, this work experience and the mentor program, I now have the confidence to start a conversation with professionals that is opening other doors and widening my horizons of what my agriculture degree will afford me in the future."
Ms Blesing grew up on a small farm on the Fleurieu Peninsula, before working overseas for a couple of years.
"Deanna has found a passion for the dairy, beef and sheep grazing industries a little later in life than some other students, but it brings maturity, a worldly outlook and strong desire, which are key attributes for any employer," AIA mentor Bruce Hancock said.
RELATED READING:
Numbers prove ag remains popular SA future leaders named among scholarship recipients Ms Blesing said there were a wide range of career options that she had not considered.
"Genetics looks exciting, coupled with the likes of AI technician, sales and advisory service, livestock management and handling and associated infrastructure, the current agtech in electronic animal identification and what the utilisation of that information can do for on farm productivity and efficiency," she said.
"And from the on-farm advisory and consultant perspective, farm planning and water security systems, natural resource management, pasture utilisation, biosecurity and the people are all important.
"Mark Higgins on the Fleurieu Beef Day shared their business focus, the 3 Ls - Land, Livestock and Labour, and that really resonated with me and I look forward to playing my part in the grazing industries it in the years to come."
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 502
