You've heard of tools and diesel being stolen from farms but the latest crime spree sweeping rural communities is the theft of bee hives.
A Victorian agtech start-up was recognised on Monday for its role in stopping these thefts in their tracks thanks to an innovative GPS tracking device.
Hive Guardian is a tiny, light-weight and ultra-rugged battery-powered GPS bee hive tracker that can help beekeepers track and recover stolen hives and monitor queen bee health during transit.
Apiarists can view the movements of their hive 24/7, set alerts if there is suspicious activity, and obtain a precise GPS location if the hive goes missing.
The technology was developed by Victorian firefighter, beekeeper, and CEO/founder of HiveKeepers, Simon Mildren.
HiveKeepers was one of three winners, alongside LB AgTech and CRC for Honey Bee Products, in the inaugural Beef Tech Challenge.
The pitch-style competition is run by the AgriFutures Honey Bee and Pollination program in partnership with the Australian Honey Bee Industry Council.
AgriFutures Honey Bee and Pollination program manager Annelies McGaw said it was really exiting to see how remote-sensing technologies could be adapted to strengthen the honey bee industries in a variety of ways.
"Each year pollinators contribute more than $100 million to the Australian economy and play a crucial role in the productivity of our agricultural sectors," Ms McGaw said.
"The Bee Tech Challenge is part of our ongoing commitment to foster a thriving agtech ecosystem to further support and increase the capacity of our primary industries."
The competition criteria looked at ready-for-market Australian products designed to meet the needs of the honey bee and pollination industry in the key areas of hive health, biosecurity, hive safety, bushfire protection and preparedness.
Winners receive two tickets to EvokeAg 2023 in Adelaide on February 21 and 22, where they will meet with potential investors, researchers and agribusinesses from the Asia Pacific region.
CREDIT: Melody Labinsky
Word count: 315
