Construction will begin on five new technical colleges across SA later this year, including in Port Augusta and Mount Gambier.
Premier Peter Malinauskas said it was important to ensure people had access to educational opportunities, with the sites selected to ensure they meet the greatest demand.
"These technical colleges are all about ensuring young people can choose to pursue the career they want, while also ensuring businesses are getting access to the skills they need," he said.
"Every young person has a right to expect they will complete school and will be ready to become self-sufficient adults, equipped with skills for further study and employment.
"We can bring the practical outcomes of trade schools together with the new technologies that are now part of every workplace, and make sure that young people graduate from school, so they have the power to make choices for their future."
The first of the five will be built at Findon High School, with that site expected to be operational by 2024.
All five sites, which also include the Heights School in north-east Adelaide and the Tonsley tafe site, are expected to be in place and open by 2026.
Mr Malinauskas said the $208 million investment would include brand new buildings with the latest equipment and state of the art technology.
He said they would be run in conjunction with the nearby high schools to make sure that their students complete their SACE as well as getting vocational qualifications.
RELATED READING:
Big jump in national farm cash incomes for grain and livestock Thinclab start-up wins agtech award Education, Training and Skills Minister Blair Boyer said SA had relatively high youth unemployment and was experiencing a skills shortage.
"The only answer to this challenge is to invest in education and training and I am proud the Malinauskas Labor considers this a priority for our state," he said.
"Labor's technical colleges are a big part of the answer for many students who are interested in pursuing opportunities in vocational work and I'm excited to see this incredible investment come to fruition."
BAE Systems' head of resourcing and early careers Georgette Elston said technical Colleges provided a great foundation for industry to engage with students, provided early hands on exposure to new industrial technologies and supported career connections.
"Building a strong vocational pipeline into BAE Systems Australia is a key priority as we prepare to build the nation's most complex warships and service other manufacturing and electronics projects from South Australia."
CREDIT:
Word count: 414
