Housing may need some "tender loving care" to deal with the country accommodation crisis, according to Opposition leader David Speirs.
Mr Speirs was speaking in a special, wide-ranging interview with South Australian Editor Greg Mayfield, of Australian Community Media, publisher of this newspaper.
In asserting that the Liberals were a better party for country South Australia, he said the Opposition would push for more public housing in the regions.
"Wherever possible we need to make sure public housing is not sitting idle ... it may need a little 'tender loving care' to bring it into operation," he said.
"There is a need for more public housing in the regions and we will push for that.
"People tell me the lack of accommodation for both renting and buying is at historic lows and it creates a lot of pressure on regional SA."
He said that in another blow to country people $12 million had been cut from the budget for the Primary Industries Department affecting farmers and regional residents.
"It will see programs go by the wayside," he said.
"We know the AgTech area is definitely going to see reduction in funding. There will be reductions for the forestry division for nature-based activities such as trails and camping.
"A significant number of jobs will be lost in the department. We are concerned.
"The cuts will see fewer services and resources and less experience about what country SA needs at the height of government and that is a real worry."
He said that in the 100 or so days since losing the state election, the Liberals had "jumped right back up with a pretty enthusiastic team"
He said his Shadow Cabinet included seven politicians aged under 30 years, nine with school-aged children, six women and seven from the country.
He said the regional MPs were Port Lincoln-based Sam Telfer, Penny Pratt, Ashton Hurn, Murray Bridge-based Adrian Pederick, Josh Teague, Nicola Centofanti and Tim Whetstone.
"This compares to the Labor Party which has one country MP, Clare Scriven, or two, if you count Independent Stuart MP Geoff Brock," he said.
"I created a Shadow Minister for Regional Population Growth and Regional Planning, a position held by Port Lincoln-based Flinders MP Sam Telfer.
"We will bring up these matters regularly in both parliament and with political solutions."
Examples of what Mr Speirs says is his commitment to the country are his repeated trips to regional areas.
He has visited the South East three times and called at other centres including the Fleurieu Peninsula, Mid North, Adelaide Hills and Yorke Peninsula.
He reckons it averages out to a country trip every second week or so.
Asked whether there was a temptation to take country voters for granted, he replied that the Opposition would "talk and listen" to them and "be there for them".
"The regions can rest assured they have a loud and insightful voice when it comes to the Liberal Party of SA," he said.
He said a big part of Mr Telfer's portfolio would be to deal with the country's shortage of skills and labour.
"There are lots of job vacancies and they need people with skills to fill those roles," Mr Speirs said.
The Opposition leader is mindful that the next role above him - that of the Premier - is unavailable for four more years at least so he is doing the best he can in his job, with an eye on the bush.
CREDIT: Greg Mayfield
Word count: 576
