Kooyong and Goldstein in Melbourne look like they may fall to teal independents, while in Sydney blue-ribbon Liberal seats of North Sydney, Wentworth and Mackellar are also likely to fall.
Adding in sitting independent MP Zali Steggall brings the total teal camp to six, with the ballot count only just starting in the West Australian seat of Curtin, which could add another independent, Kate Chaney.
Former Liberal MP Christopher Pyne told Channel 7 the “Coalition forming government is not going to happen unless there is a very big change with postals and pre-polls, and it would need to be a very big change”.
Asked if the climate wars were over, given the Coalition was about to lose government, Nationals Deputy Leader David Littleproud said no, “they are about to start”.
INDEPENDENTS’ IMPACT ON REGIONAL AUSTRALIA
The prospect of these independents gaining the balance of power has major consequences for farmers, fishers, tourism operators and the mining industry.
The teals want a 60 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2030, which they want to achieve by redirecting $10.3 billion of what they call government “fossil fuel subsidies” into renewables and other carbon-cutting schemes.
However, almost $8 billion of those “subsidies” are the fuel tax credits regional businesses claim on their diesel and other fuel purchases each year, to deliver food, fibre, mineral and energy exports to our cities and the world.
National Farmers’ Federation president Fiona Simson has warned scrapping or restricting the FTC would impose a levy on industries, such as agriculture, reliant on diesel fuel to generate power and operate vehicles and other off-road machinery.
Independents to watch tonight are standing in the following seats:
THE BATTLEGROUND SEATS TEAL INDEPENDENTS ARE CONTESTING
Kooyong: Currently held by Treasurer Josh Frydenberg on a margin of 6.4 per cent, who is up against paediatric neurologist Monique Ryan
Kooyong, Vic: Election Results and Polling
Goldstein: Incumbent Liberal MP Tim Wilson, on a margin of 7.8 per cent, is up against independent and former ABC journalist Zoe Daniel.
Goldstein, Vic: Election Results and Polling
In NSW
Wentworth: Held by Liberal Dave Sharma on a 9.8 per cent margin, up against teal independent and businesswoman Allegra Spender
Seat card: Wentworth, NSW
North Sydney: Held by Liberal Trent Zimmerman on a 9.3 per cent margin, up against teal independent Kylea Tink who is the CEO of various charities and fundraisers. Previously held by former treasurer Joe Hockey and “father of independents” Ted Mack.
Seat card, North Sydney, NSW
Mackellar: Held by Liberal Jason Falinski on a margin of 13.2 per cent, up against teal independent Sophie Scamps.
NED-6242-Election-Seat-Card-Mackellar
Warringah: Held by independent Zali Steggall on a margin of 7.2 per cent, up against Liberal candidate Katherine Deves.
In Western Australia
Curtin: Held by Liberal Celia Hammond on a 13.9 per cent margin, who is up against independent businesswoman Kate Chaney.
NED-6242-Election-Seat-Card-Curtin
In South Australia
Boothby: Held by the Liberals on a margin of just 1.4 per cent, with 10 candidates in the race including Labor and independent Jo Dyer.
Boothby, SA: Election Results and Polling
OTHER INDEPENDENTS (NON-TEAL BRANDED):
Indi (Victoria): Helen Haines succeeded Cathy McGowan as the choice of the Voices for Indi movement and is aiming for a second term.
NED-6226-Election-Seat-Card-Indi
Hinkler (Qld): Bundaberg mayor Jack Dempsey is challenging Federal Resources Minister Keith Pitt in a seat he holds by more than 14 per cent.
NED-6226-Election-Seat-Card-Hinkler
Mayo (SA): Held by Centre Alliance’s Rebekha Sharkie on a 5.1 per cent margin
Grey (SA): Held by the Liberal MP Rowan Ramsey on a 13.3 per cent margin up against independent Liz Habermann, who came close to winning.
Grey, SA: Election Results
Word count: 572
