GRAIN Producers SA continues to be in a "strong financial position", according to audit committee chair James Heaslip at its AGM at Hahndorf on Monday.
GPSA had a total income of $1.605 million, including $1.52m in operating grants and $59,415 in project income, while expenses, including more than $800,000 in employee costs and $87,113 in rent, came to about $1.553m, leaving a profit for the year of $51,837, while its total equity balance stood at just over $1.26m.
GPSA chief executive officer Brad Perry also outlined plans for a "very busy" next 12 months, with engagement a "key focus".
"We have already increased our social media presence and provided several opportunities for growers to give feedback," he said.
"This week's sell-out Growing SA conference has also been a great example of industry collaboration working effectively."
GPSA will also be teaming up with agtech company Trust Provenance and iconic SA brand Coopers for a state government-funded traceability project with local malt barley growers.
"We are currently seeking 10 graingrowers to be involved," he said.
"GPSA will also be the first in Australia to try a new tool for measuring on-farm greenhouse gas emissions, also using state government funding. We will open expressions of interest soon for 10 growers for the pilot."
Mr Perry also launched the annual grower survey, which shapes GPSA's direction for the year.
"We're also seeking views on grain sustainability, taking an in depth dive into the thought of growers on this important issue," he said.
SA Grain Industry Trust chairman Max Young also gave a presentation on the some of the projects being supported this year, including developing a new high value noodle wheat market for SA growers; appointing lead agriculture teacher Sue Pratt, who will help train the next generation of ag teachers; investigating conical snail biocontrols; and on or near-row sowing.
Dion Woolford, Kimba, and David Malpas, Lucindale, also retired from the GPSA Board, while Dylon Kay, Lock, and Chelly Lister, Minlaton, were elected to replace them.
CREDIT: Alisha Fogden
Word count: 335
