Upper South East livestock consultant Penny Schulz has been recognised for her industry advocacy and ability to help SA farmers gain new skills.
She was presented with the Jim McColl Ag Institute of Australia Young Consultant of the Year award at the Growing SA conference dinner last week in Hahndorf.
"I am really proud to win it, I think really highly of the award and who has won it in the past but I am also very humbled because to win that award you need to be nominated by your peers," Ms Schulz said.
She has just notched up a first decade delivering industry workshops, facilitating farmer learning groups and one-on-one mentoring and coaching, which she has undertaken alongside running Schulz Livestock, a beef and first cross ewe lamb operation, with her husband Jason at Field.
Until recently they also ran the Raven Limousin and Limflex stud.
Ag Institute SA division chair Craig Davis said "the combination and balance of Penny's technical expertise, practical on-farm experience, and effective engagement and communication skills underpin her success as an industry consultant."
After gaining her ag degree from the University of Adelaide in 2002, Ms Schulz spent a decade working in several jobs, including extension in the dairy industry which she says began her "ag consulting journey".
To juggle having a young family and farming she started her consulting business in 2012.
"Running your own business is not easy but it does have its perks of being able to be flexible and it complemented our farm business being in the same sector," she said.
"It changes from year to year what I am involved in, at the moment I have a lot of advisory roles both for industry and government at a state and federal level.
"I still feel that fits in ag consulting space but just to a different audience."
Ms Schulz says private and independent consultants and even those attached to commercial agribusiness companies are critical in upskilling farmers, with free extension services once provided by government either completely gone or significantly reduced.
Her particular interests include ag tech adoption, livestock genetics and farm business management.
"Farmers' businesses are so complex, they always have been but it seems to be growing in complexity and it is impossible to be an expert in everything," she said.
"If I can share that information that I have a passion for with others to help make a difference in their business that is what it is all about."
Ms Schulz says it is an "exciting but also challenging" time to be involved in agriculture.
"I have been involved formally in our farm business for about 15 years and I have seen two of the worst droughts on record, I have seen the highest prices on record, a global financial crisis and global pandemic," she said.
"Who knows what the next 15 years is going to look like but we are in it for the long haul."
Since 2019, Ms Schulz has also been teaching the next generation of agricultural consultants at the University of New England.
Earlier this year she submitted her PhD thesis, supported by the Sheep CRC, on the adoption of app technology by livestock farmers and the role that apps can play in farmer extension.
"I need to thank my family for their support, I couldn't do it without Jason and the parents and grandparents on both sides of our family filling the gaps," she said.
Fellow consultant Elke Hocking - who nominated Ms Schulz for the award- said she was a "highly active, extra curricular contributor to the ag industry" with her industry and advisory leadership roles including chair of the Limestone Coast Landscape Board, the SA Cattle Industry Fund, a member of the Premier's Climate Change Council and member of the Minister for Primary Industries & Regions Agtech Advisory Group.
She also noted that Ms Schulz, who was the 2014 SA Rural Woman of the Year, had been actively engaged in supporting other women seeking agricultural leadership roles, and getting behind the next generation of leaders.
"Penny is highly respected for her professionalism, engaging nature, her immense capability to influence the activity of a wide array of industry groups, and her ability to 'get the job done'," Ms Hocking said.
"She is an innovative thinker, an effective leader, and enjoys the challenge of solving problems."
CREDIT: Catherine Miller
Word count: 728
