It started with a meeting about succession planning.
Justin Webb was sitting at the table and asked the family's advisors, "if we make a decision to spend on an improvement, what's our expected yield?"
To which he was told, "farming doesn't work that way, you can't predict it", which raised the question, what if it could?
Mr Webb, along with fellow AgriWebb co-founders Kevin Baum and John Fargher, set out to try and digitise the data farmers had previously stored in notebooks or in their heads.
Eight years on from the launch of AgriWebb and the 13,000 farmers using the business management software are proof that not only can this data be captured, it can be used to generate actionable insights.
"The point was to create an interface that empowered and enabled data capture, super simply and intuitively," Mr Webb said.
"But then we got into the idea of 'let's not be a data graveyard', because ultimately just to gather this data and then look back and go, 'look at all this data I've gathered', is not that great.
"It becomes an idea of what action can I derive from the information I've captured."
AgriWebb allows sheep and cattle grazing operations to track a range of information, including livestock movements, feed on offer, weight gain and paddock treatment records. This information can be viewed on a farm map, removing the need for spreadsheets and drop-down menus.
Mr Webb said agtech companies had a responsibility to build products that were sympathetic to the infrastructure as it existed.
That's why AgriWebb operates online and offline. Data can be added while out of service and it will be updated in the cloud once the user is back in range.
Mr Webb said AgriWebb always had an aspiration to deliver its product internationally and to help red meat producers on a global scale.
Investment from groups based in the United Kingdom, United States and Canada accelerated this journey.
More than 200 farms are signing up every month and there are 18 million head of livestock being tracked across 54 million hectares.
Mr Webb said surveys had found users had been getting a 7.5 to 8 per cent year-on-year uplift in productivity.
"That's really exciting because we see users getting so much value out of it, fundamentally meaning they don't have to sell the farm and increasing profitability to the point it reengages the next generation," he said.
In some cases AgriWebb's data is being used overseas to provide farmers with cheaper loans and deliver a premium per kilogram to producers.
Capturing data was creating opportunities throughout the supply chain and could be used to arm consumers with proactive information about red meat.
"Fundamentally, what AgriWebb is and what AgriWebb does, is it provides a tool to primary producers to increase the productivity, profitability and the sustainability of their on-farm operations," Mr Webb said.
"And I think the supply chain becomes empowered to actually have a conversation with their consumer about sustainability, animal welfare and environmental welfare."
Mr Webb has also been using the software at home on Eddington Station in western Vic, with the family nearly tripling the dry sheep equivalent run.
Lambing and marking rates in the Coopworth/Poll Dorset-cross flock have consistently gone from 90pc up to 140pc.
Calving rates in the Angus herd are up to 95pc and the cattle are hitting their target weights for sale.
Investment in pasture improvements and using smaller pastures to do higher rates of rotational grazing has also paid dividends.
CREDIT: Melody Labinsky
Word count: 587
