A summit held late last week at Murray Bridge has put biosecurity in the spotlight to ensure the state's $2.1 billion livestock industry continues to flourish.
Producers, agents, livestock transporters, processors, peak industry groups, Livestock SA and PIRSA-Biosecurity came together to discuss biosecurity priorities for managing endemic diseases, such as lice and footrot and preparedness, for exotic disease outbreaks.
From this, the state's first Livestock Biosecurity Blueprint for the sheep, cattle and goat industries will be developed with a draft likely to be made publicly available within the next couple of months.
Livestock SA president Joe Keynes says the industry has set some lofty targets in the Sheep and Cattle Blueprints, which could only be achieved with good biosecurity.
"The majority of producers have a good understanding of endemic disease risk but we can always do better," he said. "They also understand with Lumpy Skin Disease right on our doorstep we need to be aware of reinforcing the whole landscape."
Mr Keynes says three main themes of the summit were using agtech and science-based approaches to biosecurity efforts, education and awareness across the whole supply chain and biosecurity as a shared responsibility.
"We know that there is government funding for biosecurity and you could always argue that it is not enough but part of the reason for having the blueprint is ensuring that we have the best programs in place with the dollars we have available," he said.
SA Cattle Industry Fund board chair Penny Schulz said the fund had provided small amounts of money for various short-term biosecurity projects but had been wanting a long-term funding strategy for some time.
"Even if it is not perfect, we currently don't have anything, we have the state government trying to provide funding, industry funding stuff and even the federal government giving money around traceability but no plan around what good biosecurity looks like for the state," she said.
Ms Schulz believes part of the problem is that biosecurity is not viewed by producers as a" sexy" topic, despite it being as important as animal welfare and environmental stewardship.
"Often biosecurity is something that is snuck into other workshops rather than being a workshop of its own," she said. "It is like parents sneaking vegetables into their children's dinner when it (biosecurity) should be the cheese on the top that everyone wants.
"Biosecurity underpins our market access and opens up some markets that other countries don't have access to."
Ms Schulz says it is a great chance to discuss more equitable cost sharing between industry, state and federal governments, as well as along the supply chain.
"A lot gets landed with producers but lots of people benefit from biosecurity, particularly at the farm level and not all beneficiaries pay," she said.
Sheep Producers Australia chief executive officer Bonnie Skinner said SA should be commended for bringing the state government and industry groups together to discuss biosecurity.
She said biosecurity needed a "stronger sell" and should be seen as an insurance policy protecting Australia's high value export markets.
"The sheep meat industry is in one of the strongest eras in history with record high prices, increased production and the growth of flocks across the country all underpinned by global demand, but this all hinges on our ability to export," she said.
Ms Skinner said she would take on board the summit's feedback that peak industry bodies including SPA, needed to work harder at connecting national programs back to the state and grassroots producers.
Another major area of discussion was livestock traceability programs, particularly in the sheep industry.
"We agree at the national level that individual electronic identification is the most viable opportunity to strengthen traceability for the sheep industry. For that system to be successfully implemented it will require sustainable investment, monitoring and compliance in the field and education and extension for producers," Ms Skinner said.
"State and federal governments are looking to industry to provide strong leadership on traceability reform. Industry has the opportunity to be in the driver's seat and partner with government to design an implementation strategy that is fit-for-purpose for producers."
PIRSA Biosecurity executive director Nathan Rhodes said ensuring SA retains its high animal health status was a priority for PIRSA, enabling the industry to provide key assurances in accessing premium domestic and international markets.
"While the state prides itself on its robust biosecurity systems, emerging and ongoing disease risks mean that vigilance is key in protecting this important industry," he said.
"Expert opinions suggest there is a significant risk of an exotic animal disease outbreak in Australia in the next five years and with recent detections of African swine fever and Lumpy Skin Disease present on Australia's doorstep, ongoing preparedness and continual improvement of livestock biosecurity systems is important to protect our livestock industries. It is one of the reasons why PIRSA congratulates Livestock SA for its initiative in organising the summit."
Mr Rhodes said the feedback during the summit indicated current initiatives such as the sheep lice control program, the Department's animal health officer network and government/industry relationships were all highly regarded, with ongoing emergency animal disease preparedness identified as a priority for continual improvement.
"The Department will continue to work with both Livestock SA and the livestock industry not only in the development of the blueprint but in improving traceability systems, ensuring measures are in place to deal with the changing risk profile of animal health diseases," he said.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: Catherine Miller
Word count: 926
