That’s despite reports other industrialised nations are backing off their own targets in the face of rising fuel prices and global instability, with a new poll showing Australians want to hit the brakes on Net Zero.
“We’ll enshrine a nationally determined contribution of 43 per cent emissions reduction by 2030 and Net Zero by 2050,” Mr Bowen told the National Press Club Wednesday.
Asked whether 43 per cent was an aspiration or a minimum target, Mr Bowen added “We’re not going to treat it as a ceiling.”
Mr Bowen acknowledged problems still existed with storing renewable energy with potential “renewables droughts” on the horizon for states like Victoria, but insisted that despite the challenges “renewables are the cheapest form of energy.”
The energy Minister also said that despite countries like Japan asking their citizens to consume less power during an ongoing heatwave, he did not anticipate such problems here as Australia has much greater rooftop solar uptake.
The speech comes amid rising concern across the globe about energy, with some nations starting to walk back their climate change commitments in the face of economic and strategic pressures.
Closer to home, a poll of 1,001 Australians conducted in June for the Institute of Public Affairs found that 61 per cent of respondents wanted to pause its 2050 Net Zero commitment “until we have enough energy supplies to avoid blackouts.”
Just 17 per cent said thy disagreed, with a majority of respondents in every state, age, and income group saying they supported the pause.
“Real Australians are growing increasingly uneasy with net zero as our energy crisis deepens and their power bills continue to skyrocket.
“That is why there needs to be a proper debate about how net zero is going to impact real Australians and their cost of living,” said Gideon Rozner, the IPA’s research director.
Nationals senator Matt Canavan accused the government of being “out of touch”, saying Mr Bowen was “pushing ahead with net zero policies written in Paris while people in Penrith can’t afford their electricity bills.”
“We need to develop our own energy resources for Australian energy needs first,” he said.
Word count: 343
