Hon. David Basham MP, S.A. Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development, Media Release, 23 June 2021
The State Budget 2021-22 is building what matters, backing business and creating jobs in regional South Australia. 
Through more than $875 million in new measures supporting South Australia’s regions, the Marshall Liberal Government will build key infrastructure, drive economic growth and recovery to ensure our regional communities thrive. This includes: 
Regional transport improvements – $786.4 million for major upgrades to regional roads and highways to support regional communities, tourism and productivity, including in partnership with the Commonwealth 
Fruit fly response - $33.3 million additional investment over two years from 2020-21 to assist in eradication efforts in both metropolitan Adelaide and the Riverland 
Mobilisation of a seasonal and regional workforce - $8.3 million to address labour shortages facing regional employers in primary industries, hospitality and tourism 
School and preschool capital works - $5.5 million to accelerate maintenance in key education facilities, including replacement of existing learning areas at Eastern Fleurieu R-12 School at Langhorne Creek campus and relocation of the Elliston Kindergarten to the Elliston Area School.
Our Regions Matter – contributing around $29 billion per year to the South Australian economy across a range of industries and supporting more than 180,000 jobs. 
That is why, the government has committed to investing in regional infrastructure, including hospitals, schools and roads, with expenditure on projects underway or commencing in 2021-22 totalling over $4.1 billion. 
The Budget includes $46.7 million in improvement works in our country hospitals and health services, close to $100 million in environment and water conservation projects in our regions, and $115.7 million in capital upgrades to regional schools and kindergartens.
These investments support the recently released South Australian-first Regional Development Strategy, which aims to shape the way government engages with our regions in fostering economic development and growth. 
The State Budget also supports $56 million for a range of initiatives in agriculture to drive economic recovery and growth. This includes: 
Primary Producers SA support - $1 million over two years to assist the peak agriculture body provide advice to the State Government on primary industries and regional matters.
AgTech adoption projects - $1.3 million per year to increase uptake of new agricultural technology by primary producers to improve productivity and profitability  
Rural Financial Counselling Service – additional $2.2 million over three years to support farmers in hardship and extend the Family and Business Support (FaBS) mentors program
Drought support – in partnership with the Commonwealth we are extending the On-Farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme and establishing the Drought Resilience Adoption and Innovation Hub
Lens Snail pest proof of freedom program - $1.7 million over five years to contain, treat and prove freedom from this potentially devasting pest to the grains sector, which will be repaid by the grains industry via Grain Industry Fund contributions over two years. 
Plant-based Food Incubator - $2 million to establish a dedicated laboratory at Waite to research plant-based ingredient development and attract investment to South Australia
Seaweed aquaculture development - $1.5 million over two years to support the establishment of a commercial seaweed industry in South Australia to provide stock feed supplements to boost ruminant productivity growth and emission reductions. 
South Australia’s wine industry will also benefit from $5.38 million over four years for an industry export recovery and expansion program to assist the industry secure new markets, to help deal with recent challenges from bushfires, the global pandemic and trade market disruptions. 
This Budget also provides $1 million over four years to support the South Australian Wine Industry Association deliver industry development services to the wine sector. 
These investments are in addition to existing investments that will continue to be supported in this budget, including the Regional Growth Fund, Mobile Phone Black Spot Fund and Regional Roads and Infrastructure Fund. 
We are building a stronger South Australia, securing our growing global reputation as one of the safest and most attractive places in the world to live, work and raise a family. 
Read the SA Budget 2021-22. 
Word count: 668
