As part of the Marshall Liberal Governments AgTech Program test beds will be established on state government farms across South Australia.
The Struan Demonstration Farm will be included in this roll out.
Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development, David Basham said test beds will allow replicable testing of new technologies as part of the development process.
"Commonly test beds are used in the development of technology, varying in nature from hands-on prototype development to intellectual property refinement in such fields as computer software development," he said.
"In relation to approved trials, the Department of Primary Industries and Regions will contribute time and expertise of technical and research staff; access to farm fields, paddocks and crops; and access to co-working space.
"Many farmers want to adopt new and emerging technology but the investment is a huge risk without being tested in South Australian conditions.
"Likewise, AgTech providers want to test their new technology in South Australian conditions and show farmers how easily adoptable it is.
"The AgTech test beds are designed to take that risk away from farmers and developers and are the next logical step at our demonstration farms.
"We are keen to see ideas come to light, be supported in development, get to market and be put into practical use by our farmers growing more food, and increasing their own profitability."
Expressions of interest are now open to trial new products, using the test beds in a working farm setting.
For more information on test beds and to express interest visits: https://pir.sa.gov.au/primary_industry/agtech/testbeds
An AgTech Growth Fund of $3.35 million has been developed and is now open for applications.
The fund was designed to find solutions to agricultural problems by fast-tracking the development of new technology.
$800,000 of the funds will be available in grants this year, with $850,000 available in each of the following three years.
Mr Basham said he hoped these grants would support the growth of the South Australian agricultural business, and this AgTech grant was the first of its kind in Australia.
"Our farmers are some of the most innovative in the world but the adoption of AgTech has not happened as widely as needed if we are to see dramatic growth in productivity and profitability," he said.
"Farmers face many challenges such as tough seasons and global market disruptions but these challenges can motivate industry to innovate and the AgTech Growth Fund will invest up to $3.35 million to develop technology to do things better on farm and through the agriculture supply chain.
"AgTech has an important role to play in progressing the Government's Growth State initiative to boost industry and jobs in regional South Australia."
To be eligible for the AgTech Growth Fund grants, up to $100,000, applicants must be based in SA and propose outcomes that deliver results to the states agricultural sector.
For more infomration and to apply for a grant visit: https://pir.sa.gov.au/primary_industry/agtech/agtech_growth_fund
CREDIT: Sophie Conlon
Word count: 485
