ANDREW COPPIN Australian Agritech Association founding director VIEWPOINT
AS OPPORTUNITIES for producers to invest in agtech have continued to expand, so too has the industry itself.
Producers are faced with a burgeoning field of providers offering an array of solutions to choose from and many compelling use cases.
To find the solution that's right for your needs, approach buying agtech in the same way as buying any piece of equipment or infrastructure and undertake due diligence.
When choosing an agtech provider, ask to talk to a customer who is already using the technology you're considering.
Also ask how many devices they have deployed, and whether they have any operating in your region.
When considering the actual agtech, check with the provider to see if it is a complete solution, or just a piece of hardware that will require other elements to actually work and fulfil its purpose.
Can the device work with a computer as soon as it's connected - known in the tech industry as 'plug and play' - or is a technician required to visit on-farm to install the agtech? If a technician is required, this can involve additional hidden set-up costs.
Is there a set-up fee involved, and will there be ongoing costs and maintenance?
Is after-sales support available if needed and where is it located?
Further to these questions, check if the agtech is fit for purpose. For example, is a device robust enough to withstand being installed out in the elements in a paddock with livestock? Or if you're wanting to capture data in real-time, does the technology have the ability to fulfil this requirement?
This leads to another critical consideration - the reliability of connectivity. As many producers are acutely aware, connectivity can be a challenge in rural areas where it is unreliable, slow or unavailable.
If you want a device to constantly be collecting data, then a reliable connection is obviously vital. Ask the provider whether satellite options are available. If the product has been produced with rural connectivity restraints in mind, they will offer a satellite option that works across Australia.
By asking key questions, your investment in agtech will enable your business to innovate and become more productive, sustainable and, ultimately, profitable.
LETTERS A well-used saying that states the "squeaky wheel always gets the oil" is used to convey the idea that the most noticeable or loudest problems get the most attention, despite their low level of occurrence.
This is true when you consider the ongoing reporting and never-ending debate about the supposedly poor standards and conditions of our health system.
While any system or service can and should improve, the positive outcomes delivered by our professional, dedicated and hardworking health professionals are being ignored, but would far outnumber those unsatisfactory incidents that occur at times for a range of logical and justifiable reasons.
Constant public denigration of our health system and those who work within it does nothing to maintain morale and places further unwarranted pressure on an already demanding government service.
Rather than believing our health system is in crisis, it would seem that focusing on the many positive aspects of health services in SA would have more beneficial effects for all concerned.
Ian Macgowan, Ceduna.
CREDIT:
Word count: 538
