LOXTON High School students will soon have a better understanding of technology in agriculture thanks to a partnership between the CMV Group and its Foundations, and Schools Plus - a not-for-profit organisation that connects schools with communities and donors.
Agriculture is one of the major employers in the Riverland and Malee region and there is currently growth within the industry, especially in the fields of emerging technologies.
The school, through the new grant, plans to establish a greenhouse, integrate a range of technology, including robotics and sensors, to monitor plant growth in a sustainable manner.
Students will be encouraged to develop their own sensors for use in the agricultural industry and gain skills to support both their own career opportunities, and expertise for employers within the local vicinity.
Loxton High School principal David Garrett anticipated benefits to both the students and local community.
"Loxton High School already has strong agriculture and business and innovation programs, but this grant and partnership with a significant Riverland business and employer will provide our students with hands on learning opportunities using significant emerging technologies.
"We will be able to introduce robotics and sensor technology with a strong industry focus into our agriculture programs. This will help our students to understand where Ag Tech industries are heading, develop relevant practical and problem solving skills, and to prepare them for employment in regional industries."
RELATED READING: Demo farm with latest tech launched
RELATED READING: FoodBytes! helps AgTech startups gain global audience
CMV Farms managing director David Crawford said the company's long-standing relationship with the Riverland dated back to 1980, when CMV first established an almond orchard at Lindsay Point, followed by the development of its Riverland Almonds processing facility at Loxton and more recently the Fielke's almond orchard development also at Loxton.
CMV Farms is a key employer in the Riverland area and pride themselves on their commitment to upskilling their workforce and engaging modern technology and practices to safeguard the future of local agricultural businesses.
"I'm excited by the prospect that local employers, just like us, will benefit from initiatives such as this one being implemented at Loxton High School because it means the students, who are the workforce of the future, will come better equipped with the knowledge and technical skills that will see them immediately contribute to the growth of the local agricultural industry," he said.
A launch and tour of the Loxton High School ag block was held on Friday, with representatives from CMV, Riverland Almonds, Nut Producers Australia and Schools Plus in attendance.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 443
