IT IS not just the marketing of agricultural products that has been forced to pivot enormously due to COVID with the logistics of actually keeping the people on farms and in plants safe creating a whole new world of business management.
Compliance with measures put in place by governments to contain the virus have called for massive investments and, with Australia starting to open up for business again, the double-vaccination requirements in some areas will lead to an entire new wave of on-site planning and interventions.
The meat processing sector alone estimates abattoir owners are putting $20,000 a week into COVID management. Workplace compliance experts say the return on investment in emerging COVID management technologies can be as much as 10-to-one in the agribusiness space.
With the revitalised push to prioritise essential primary workers on Australia to keep food supply chains moving, they believe there is an argument for an agtech-type government grant to get online COVID compliance solutions rolled out faster.
Compliance solution company Sentrient has been working with agricultural businesses across the country to put in place its solution, which features an online record keeping tool for vaccination status of staff, a reporting tool for testing and ready-made reports for COVID-19 compliance and audit purposes.
Director Gavin Altus said it paid for itself quickly in terms of reduced administration costs but it could also mean, in the event of a positive test, a business could be back up and running within 24 hours by demonstrating it was COVID safe, avoiding the two-week shutdowns that have been common.
Sentrient is a five-year-old company that has handled workplace compliance in areas such as safety, privacy and bullying but when COVID emerged it added features for helping small to medium-sized businesses manage the situation.
"What we've seen with the compounding effect of COVID is the cementing of the fact the number one requirement a business has is the safety of its people - that is the only non-negotiable in business," Mr Altus said.
"However, reputation comes second. No one wants to be on the front page of the paper for not adhering to COVID reporting.
"COVID has crippled businesses with the changed conditions necessary. Overwhelmingly, the majority have had to shift focus from driving operational profit to just keeping afloat.
"The fear of everything associated with COVID has meant businesses have spent hundreds of thousands doing things like having more than one lunchroom, operating at reduced capacity, putting in cameras and heat monitoring and extra human resources and record keeping. Those costs are going to increase as it becomes necessary to monitor who has been doubled vaccinated."
About 10 per cent of Sentient's customers are in primary production, including abattoirs, dairy factories, farms and food packaging businesses.
CREDIT: Shan Goodwin
Word count: 459
