An international leader in agricultural technology will be the keynote speaker at the 2021 AdvanceAg conference at the Adelaide Convention Centre on July 23.
Founding executive director of Agritech New Zealand and head of Global Alliances, Peter Wren-Hilton, will be the keynote speaker, followed by Ros Harvey, entrepreneur and founder and managing director of multi-award winning Australian AgTech company The Yield.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister David Basham said AdvanceAg promised to be one of the biggest AgTech events in Australia for the year.
"The AdvanceAg conference is part of the AgTech Strategic Plan priorities to increase collaboration and networking amongst farmers and the AgTech community," he said.
"It is exciting to have the calibre of Peter Wren-Hilton coming from across the ditch to give insights as to why New Zealand is a world leader on AgTech adoption.
"Mr Wren-Hilton has been at the forefront of AgTech adoption in New Zealand and building the country's AgTech ecosystem over a long period of time."
Mr Basham said it would also be great to hear from Ms Harvey about machine learning, data science and scaleable digital technology to power technology to solve real challenges at farm level and throughout the food chain.
"The focus of AdvanceAg is to provide insight into the practical application and on-farm benefits from AgTech to increase uptake in SA," he said.
"The conference will feature AgTech providers presenting with farmers about the application of technology on their farm.
"We want to be able to demonstrate to producers a range of technology that can be implemented now to create efficiencies on farm."
RELATED: Conference brings together next gen of tech-changers
AgTech discussed at inaugural conference
Mr Wren-Hilton said he was looking forward to seeing first-hand the AgTech landscape of SA.
"There are a lot of similarities between New Zealand and Australia and benefits to be derived from sharing experiences, particularly from what we have learnt on our path to adoption," he said.
"I've been following some of the recent AgTech ecosystem developments in SA and am grateful for the opportunity to be a part of AdvanceAg."
The conference will be held at the Adelaide Convention Centre and will feature more than 50 speakers and exhibitors, including panel and pitch sessions.
As AdvanceAg's platinum sponsor, Elders managing director and chief executive officer Mark Allison said the company was proud to be supporting the conference for the second year running.
"Increasing the adoption of AgTech is so important in creating efficiencies for producers and benefiting the industry at large," he said.
"We see the real value in bringing together an audience of producers and technology providers and everyone in between to make this happen - so we are excited to be returning to AdvanceAg as Platinum and Keynote sponsor for 2021."
AdvanceAg is part of the SA government's commitment to accelerating the use of AgTech by the state's primary producers to increase productivity and profitability as part of the target to reach food, wine and agribusiness revenue of $23 billion by 2030.
Tickets are available with an early bird discount on offer until today (May 28) at advanceagsa.com.au
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 540
