GRAINGROWERS, researchers and entrepreneurs are being called on to participate in Australia's first grain agtech challenge, launched by Australian deep tech incubator Cicada Innovations in conjunction with the GRDC.
The GrowLab Grains Challenge is designed to uncover innovative deep tech solutions that will drive sustainability and create enduring profitability for Australia's $13.77 billion grain growing industry.
Successful applicants will be invited to participate in a six-month coaching program, which includes a dedicated workspace at the Cicada Innovations incubator, and get membership to Cicada's deep tech community.
Participants will access to state-of-the-art rapid prototyping facilities, shared labs, curated events and resources, and introductions to Cicada's and the GRDC's network of mentors, leading industry experts, investors and successful entrepreneurs.
MORE READING: Rural communities 'positive but cautious' as border restrictions set to lift
Program participants will be given guidance on how to refine their value proposition, navigate the agtech and grains industry, build their business model and pricing, identify the right customers and partners, become investment ready, and build a winning team.
Cicada Innovations chief executive officer Sally-Ann Williams said the grain growing industry was a huge contributor to the Australian economy and it was critical to find new ways to support its sustainability and long-term profitability.
"Sourcing new deep technology solutions and supporting their pathway to market will benefit the grains sector and regional communities," she said.
"We are excited to launch Australia's first grain agtech challenge, and we are optimistic about the prospect of uncovering innovative, groundbreaking solutions to novel problems that often arise at the intersection of multiple disciplines and industries through deep technologies.
"Through this challenge we are seeking out innovators working across all manner of fields and technologies, from task automation and sensors to renewable technologies and genetic tools.
"We're looking for solutions that will help growers to develop new, novel, and high-value products and by-products for health and nutrition, animal feed, and industrial uses or biofuels."
MORE READING: Ex-politician aims for peak advocacy board urging dairy to 'be stronger'
GRDC Business Development and Commercialisation - North manager Chris Murphy said the challenge was designed to support innovators with ideas that could potentially transform the industry.
"GRDC is committed to investigating and exploring innovative concepts and new technologies from grain growers and other non-traditional sources from Australia and across the globe," he said.
"With the support of incubators like Cicada Innovations we want to position successful participants so they are well-placed to attract further equity investment and take their products or services to the next level.
"This innovation investment might seem different to the way in which GRDC has traditionally provided support, such as through universities, state agriculture departments or the CSIRO.
"However, the intent and outcomes are still aligned with our strategic plan. That is, we want to create enduring profitability for Australian grain growers."
Applicants with solutions from a diverse range of research and industries beyond just agtech are encouraged to apply. This could include application in automation being used in mining, biotech (nanotech, synthetic biology, antimicrobial resistance), data science, circular economy, and sustainability.
Applications are open until December 17 and interested parties can apply here.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 541
