Five innovative agricultural technology developers from across Australia have won an opportunity to pitch directly to an estimated 500 strong audience at SA's premier agtech conference AdvanceAg next week to win $10,000.
The inaugural Macro Meats AgTech 'Pitch to Farmers' competition finalists are Winely and Bio Optics Australia from SA, Onside and Farmbot Monitoring Solutions from NSW, and Bitwise Agronomy from Tas.
The projects will cover worker safety and training, real-time micron testing, plant analysing artificial intelligence, real-time fermentation analysis and on-farm monitoring through cameras.
Primary Industries Minister David Basham said many people were looking forward to attending AdvanceAg on 17 and 18 October after the rescheduling of the event due to COVID-19 restrictions.
"With more than 500 people expected to attend AdvanceAg, Australia's biggest agtech conference in 2021, there will be an excited buzz around the Adelaide Convention Centre," he said.
"It's exciting to have five finalists for our 'Pitch to Farmers' event and for attendees at the conference being able to vote for the winner on the day.
"The five agtech businesses have been chosen from a field of almost 30 applications from all over Australia. Each business will have a five-minute pitch opportunity to farmers and delegates to outline the benefits of adopting their technology."
RELATED:
Conference brings together next generation of game changers Agtech adoption grant helps boost genetic capability on-farm Govts must take the lead on agtech adoption With more than 500 people expected to attend, those wanting to head to AdvanceAg are being urged to purchase their ticket as soon as possible.
"With COVID-19, there has been limited opportunities for farmers and agtech community members to get together and share ideas and network," Mr Basham said.
"The inaugural AdvanceAg had around 330 people in attendance and is growing each year.
"This year we have focused on having technology providers present with a farmer who uses their technology as a way to encourage greater adoption of tech on-farm in SA."
Mr Basham said the government was focusing on agtech as a way to boost farm profitability.
Details: advanceagsa.com.au Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 364
