THE state government is establishing a number of new AgTech demonstration sites in the state and is calling for submissions of suitable products to showcase.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister David Basham said opening up the Minnipa Agricultural Centre as one of the sites would help show the value of technology to farmers and producers in the region.
"The Minnipa Research Centre has been one of Australia's leading dryland research sites for many years and the addition of AgTech on-farm will be important as the facility continues to move forward," he said.
"We're inviting suppliers of innovative agricultural technologies, known as AgTech, to tell us about their products, and let us know what difference they can make for SA producers.
"The state government sees encouraging the uptake of AgTech by primary producers as a key to unlocking the potential of SA's agricultural sector and that's why we launched the state's first AgTech Strategic Plan.
"Adoption of the right AgTech on-farm could save our farmers money, increase their profitability, productivity and improve their sustainability.
"However, we know that primary producers need to see and experience the benefits of AgTech for themselves. That's why we've established AgTech demonstration sites around the state, including Struan, Kybybolite and Loxton."
Mr Basham also announced this week that the government would be opening up the Nuriootpa and Turretfield research farms as AgTech demonstration sites.
"These research farms provide outstanding opportunities to showcase technology in viticulture, cropping and livestock," he said.
"For Nuriootpa, we're looking for AgTech that will support management decisions and activities relevant to the viticulture production systems of the Barossa and surrounding areas, including the Clare and Eden valleys.
"At Turretfield, which is a research centre focused on broadacre cropping and livestock, we're seeking AgTech solutions that target the typical production systems of the surrounding 'Lower North' cereal and livestock zone."
Mr Basham encouraged anyone with a relevant commercially-available AgTech product to make contact with the government.
"It could end up being demonstrated to our primary producers, helping to de-risk their investment in relevant technologies by showcasing how it can improve efficiencies and increase their outputs," he said.
"Farmers and growers will be able to attend the AgTech demonstration sites around the state to experience AgTech solutions on a working farm, once it is safe to do so within COVID-19 regulations."
Details: pir.sa.gov.au
CREDIT:
Word count: 391
