UP to $10,000 in prize money is available for AgTech businesses to help meet the needs of Australian farms.
AgTech businesses from across Australia will be able to take part in the Macro Meats 'Pitch for Farmers' session as part of the 2021 AdvanceAg conference.
Both startups and newly-established AgTech providers will put forward their case as to why SA farmers should adopt their products.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister David Basham said the Macro Meats 'Pitch to Farmers' concept linked in well with AdvanceAg.
"We are calling on AgTech businesses who think they have the best piece of technology to encourage greater on-farm adoption for South Australian farmers to apply and get involved," he said.
"A judging panel made up of members of the AgTech Advisory Group will assess applications and narrow the list to invite finalists to pitch at AdvanceAg."
Mr Basham said the applications were short and easy to fill out.
The final pitch of the Marco Meats 'Pitch to Farmers' will be held at AdvanceAg with five businesses given the opportunity to put forward their case on why their technology should be adopted on-farm to the audience who will vote for their favourite pitch in real time via the conference app.
"This is an exciting opportunity for five innovative AgTech businesses to get their product in front of an interested and engaged audience of hundreds of people," Mr Basham said.
He said the winning pitch would get $10,000 in prize money while the runners-up will be hosted at the government's AgTech demonstration farms.
RELATED: AgTech ideas sought to fix on-farm issues
Tech helps to tick boxes for on-farm productivity
"The Marshall Liberal government is focused on helping to drive adoption of AgTech on farms in SA and that's why we recently launched the AgTech Strategic Plan," Mr Basham said.
Macro Group Australia managing director Ray Borda said the company was excited to be a part of this year's AdvanceAg conference.
"Macro Meats prides itself on leading the way in industry innovation and excellence, which aligns with the objectives of AdvanceAg," he said.
"We see real value in the uptake of AgTech by farmers - the impacts and benefits of which flow through the supply chain to the benefit of the greater industry.
"We can't wait to see what's presented as part of the Macro Meats Pitch to Farmers session."
Details: Visit www.advanceagsa.com.au Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 418
