Rain gauges have been used for centuries to aid in farm planning, with some records indicating that they first emerged during the 1400s.
Today, the entire agricultural sector bases its decisions on data that's generated by these invaluable water measurement devices, which are located across farms worldwide.
The integration of Internet of Things (IoT) technology into rain gauges is able to provide regular, automated updates on water volume and quality in close to real-time.
These sensors then connect to nanosatellites that are small, cheap, and easy to launch, and provide large scale, low-cost connectivity for monitoring in some of the most remote locations in the world.
With rainfall playing such a critical role in determining agricultural production, the use of IoT connected rain gauges across farms of all sizes is creating a more cohesive ecosystem.
These rain gauges are taking the guesswork out of farm planning, with producers now able to leverage real-world data detailing current and historical weather conditions.
This data is then used in decision making on a daily and seasonal basis to drive profitability. It's like being able to listen to the heartbeat of the farm in order to assess what it needs each day, and with rain gauges more accessible and affordable than ever before, this increased connectivity and data is enabling growers to optimise their water management in a revolutionary way.
This shift comes at a crucial tipping point, as the damaging impact of climate change, weather events like La Nia and many years of drought are being felt by Australia's farming community, who are doing their best to make every single drop of water count.
Data collected by rain gauges is supporting the agricultural sector to have greater confidence in their decision making processes. Additionally, the nanosatellites that rain gauges communicate with are also helping to solve the issues of rural and regional connectivity, which impacts many parts of Australia.
The use of low-cost, ubiquitous technology to automate once manual processes is not only helping farmers in forward planning, but is also providing a long term view of farm specific variability without the need to regularly drive to and physically inspect equipment. Real-time data also helps identify issues early so that timely decisions can be made to remedy problems. This way an issue can be addressed long before it becomes more serious - something that is critical for the frequently drought-stricken Australian market, whether that be a remote cattle station or an intensive cotton growing operation.
Take for example South Australia's Anna Creek station. As the largest cattle station in the world, it is slightly larger than the entire country of Israel. Understanding rainwater levels and patterns for a property this size would have once proved incredibly challenging, but the automated insights generated by today's innovative rainwater gauges can now provide stations like these with a clear understanding of current rainwater levels.
In one project carried out by our partner and nanosatellite operator Myriota, water level sensors connected to satellite transmitters were installed in tanks located in Western Australia, South Australia and New South Wales. One of the sites experienced a pump failure soon after deployment. Such a failure rapidly leads to distressed stock, and is especially problematic during calving periods, but because the sensors alerted farmers to the issue, the failure was resolved within hours.
Reliable, cost-effective monitoring is critical to the health of Australia's farms. Given increasingly volatile weather events, understanding what is happening across a farming operation is a significant opportunity for Australian agriculture.
The benefits to farming businesses begins with saving time and making more informed day to day operations. Even greater value will come from emerging applications of this data in commodity marketing, risk management and financial solutions through to deep agronomic and whole farm management decisions. The industry is beginning to take advantage of IoT connected devices, and we are now, thanks to solving the issue of affordable, 'everywhere' connectivity entering the next exciting stage of this evolution.
By ALICIA GARDEN, CEO at Australian AgTech company Goanna Ag. Alicia has extensive experience in product development and commercialisation, business development and stakeholder engagement. She has previously held roles at Graingrowers Limited, and AgTech startup Agrecon.
CREDIT:
Word count: 697
