A Canadian-made Bale Baron baler is reportedly put to work on one of the Crown’s estates when hay needs to be harvested, producing small bales perfect for the royal family’s stables.
Manufactured in Ontario, Canada, the Bale Baron is distributed exclusively locally by G&J East (Strathalbyn) in South Australia.
Marcrest agents since 2011, G&J East (Strathalbyn) has recently extended its reach to now handle sales throughout the country.
Bale Barons were first seen in Australia in 2009 and in subsequent years more models were introduced to the range, culminating in the arrival in late 2019 of the new 50 Series.
Key features of the latest models include higher compression for tighter bundles, a wider front stance for greater stability, faster tie system, stronger rams, swing-out twine boxes, greaseless pins, gas shock mounted access panels and shields and ISOBUS connectivity.
G&J East (Strathalbyn) sales manager Matthew Keast said Marcrest started out with its 10 Series in 2007, moving through subsequent models before peaking at the 6240 self-propelled machine and, now, the 50 Series.
“It’s a trailing machine, which comes in two variants – the pick-up and trail-behind – with about 14 units sold around Australia so far,” he said.
“Others available here are the 6240SP, 4250P and 4250T.
“Marcrest is always improving its machinery and the main impetus for this advance was to enable them to have an ISOBUS-compatible model on the market.
“The 5250 produces 21-bale bundles of 36 x 46cm (14 x 18-inch) bales which can be handled by a front loader or telehandler to avoid manual labour.
“The bundles are all tied together, so a buyer could put 21 bales into a trailer, then, once back home, simply cut four big strings to release the load.
“We’ve found most of the demand for the Bale Baron has come from market segments such as horse owners, fodder producers and garden suppliers.”
While the 50 Series comes equipped with full ISOBUS connectivity, the Bale Baron will also work without ISOBUS using standard in-cab control.
Tow-behind units can operate with any tractor above 120hp (88kW), powered by either the tractor’s remote hydraulics or an optional power unit.
Able to keep up with two to three balers, the pick-up model now features lowered pick-up and rollers to increase both production and grip on the bales, giving a capacity of 1000 bales an hour.
Storage for 16 balls of twine means owners can bundle more than 5000 small square bales before needing to refill cabinets, while the company’s Smart-Solve system constantly monitors operations.
Fitted with lights for the Australian market, the 50 Series machines are priced from $140,000, excluding GST.
To find out more: Marcrest (external site).
MAGGROW UNIT MAGNET FOR SAVINGS
THE quest to cut spray drift and farm chemical wastage has been given a boost with the arrival of a pioneering new technology from Europe.
Irish agtech firm MagGrow has developed a system that uses magnetic fields to significantly improve crop spray coverage to reduce spray drift, run-off, wasted water and chemicals, and potential damage to the environment.
MagGrow estimates that up to 70 per cent of crop protection products do not reach the intended target.
The MagGrow system delivers a more consistent spray profile, resulting in higher levels of pesticide coverage within the plant canopy, according to MagGrow business development manager Australasia Jack Kavanagh. Mr Kavanagh said this allowed growers to achieve higher coverage while using their current application rate, or the same coverage using a lower application rate, boosting profitability, efficiency and environmental compliance. The costs savings are so significant that a MagGrow unit could pay for itself in one year, he said.
The patented, proprietary technology is a “plug and play” system comprising two simple components that can be fitted to any existing spray equipment in one day.
It passes pesticides through magnetic fields and changes the physical properties of the fluid to achieve optimum droplet profile and thereby superior spray drift control and crop coverage. The cost of fitting MagGrow units starts from about $35,000. They are available through Australian distributor Trimble Dealers. Details: Maggrow.
Word count: 654
