While the state is predicted to have its second highest grain crop in past five years, Kangaroo Island farmers have battled adverse growing conditions.
KI growers like their state counterparts were hit with a late start but unlike the rest of SA, the Island was seen sometimes intense rains and a lack of sunshine that has impacted on not only crops but also pasture.
Across SA, late rains to kick off the 2021-22 grain season and 70 per cent of the crop dry sown has culminated in an early estimate of 7.6 million tonnes, according to a state government report released last week.
The latest PIRSA Crop and Pasture Report estimates almost 4 million hectares of crop had been sown, similar to 2020-21 but production about 1.5 million tonnes down on last season.
Head of cropping at Bellevista farms, Travis Bell said KI growers however battled not only the late start that forced late seeding and delayed crop growth, but also excessive winter rains.
Standing water was impacting on crops, with certain parts of the Island more affected than others, and canola particularly impacted on by having its roots wet, he said.
There had been a loss of growth potential due to both the late start and then the wet, overcast winter, which impacted on the Island more so than elsewhere in SA.
"It's nice to finally see some sunshine and we are hoping to get a good, late spring that will allow the crops to finish off nicely," he said.
Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development, David Basham said the lack of soil moisture to start the season meant many farmers dry sowed and hoped for rain which thankfully arrived in late June.
"There is no doubt farmers are going to need more rain to improve on the 7.6 million grain crop estimate and it is noted the current Bureau of Meteorology outlook for the August to October period shows increased probability of a wetter than normal winter and early spring," he said.
Mr Bassham noted almost 10 per cent of South Australia's canola crop had been planted with genetically modified canola after his government lifted a 16-year ban.
The Island however will continue to be GM free, allowing Kangaroo Island Pure Grain to achieve premium prices for not only its canola, but all grain.
Having this clean, green image thereby helped KI growers to offset the increased costs of producing and transporting a bulk product off the Island.
The Crop and Pasture Report states the dry start has resulted in a larger than expected area of barley sown in place of longer season crops such as pulses and canola, while the area for wheat is near average.
The report further highlights the decline in export hay demand has contributed to the area sown for export hay being significantly reduced this season.
While the COVID-19 pandemic continues to disrupt markets, dry conditions and poorer harvests than expected in many northern hemisphere cropping areas have led to increased prices for most commodities, particularly for canola and some pulses.
To read the latest Crop and Pasture Report, visit www.pir.sa.gov.au/cropreport
AgTech survey Understanding the drivers and barriers to the adoption of agricultural technology on South Australian farms is a key factor in the state government's annual AgTech survey.
The state government wants to hear from as many farmers as possible through this survey, as well as businesses involved in the AgTech supply chain. It says full adoption of AgTech across the industry could return up to $2.6 billion per annum to the state's economy.
The survey closes September 23, visit www.pir.sa.gov.au/agtech
CREDIT: Stan Gorton
Word count: 603
