Agriculture and the grains sector were big winners from Steven Marshall's State Budget for 2021-22.
A range of initiatives worth about $18.7 million were flagged by the South Australian Premier to help support economic recovery, grow the industry and create rural and regional jobs.
A new $5.2 million AgTech Adoption Program was announced to increase primary producer uptake of technology and improve on-farm efficiencies.
Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development David Basham said SA's grain producers were some of the most innovative in the world but, like those in other sectors, continued to lag behind in the uptake of AgTech.
He said the AgTech Adoption Program would drive the development and adoption of technology, which would contribute to higher on-farm productivity and profitability.
Mr Basham said the program would be rolled-out at a cost of $1.3 million each year for five years and aligned with the National Farmers' Federation target for farmgate output value to hit $100 billion by 2030.
He said the state's grains sector would also receive $1.7 million across the next five years for initiatives to help contain, treat and prove freedom from the potentially devastating exotic pest lens snail.
Mr Basham said these and other new budget initiatives would build on existing programs to help grow SA's grains sector and wider agriculture industry.
"SA's rural and regional areas are crucial for the future prosperity of our state," he said.
"The agriculture industry contributes about $29 billion to SA's economy and supports more than 180,000 jobs.
"Many farmers across the state have had a challenging few years due to drought, bushfires and then the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
"Our farmers are a critical part of our state economy and the importance of agriculture across the country has been further highlighted during the pandemic."
Growers needing drought support were buoyed by the provision of $5.2 million for round two of the On-Farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme.
CREDIT:
Word count: 322
