Agtech startup MEQ Probe has become the first to gain commercial accreditation for a device used to measure intramuscular fat in lamb.
The MEQ Probe, used in abattoirs on hot carcases at line speed, had its accreditation application approved last week by the Australian Meat Industry Language and Standards committee.
The accreditation represents a key advance in sheep meat grading and comes off the back of the introduction of the lamb intramuscular fat percentage trait into AUS-MEAT language.
The hand-held probe has three imaging needles and uses spectral analysis to predict IMF on a carcase by carcase basis, providing real-time information back to the meat processor.
The probe has been accredited by AUS-MEAT for accurate measurement between the 2-6 per cent IMF range for lamb, but the agtech startup plans to extend this range with a top-up accreditation soon.
MEQ Probe chief executive officer Remo Carbone said it was fitting that Australia, as the world's second-largest producer of lamb, was leading the way in this space.
"A certifiable measurement provides opportunities across the entire lamb supply chain, from growers and producers to retailers - enabling them to deliver on their brand promises," he said.
"But most importantly it will give assurance to consumers about the quality of the lamb they eat.
"The accreditation of MEQ Probe as the first grading technology to accurately measure lamb's eating quality is a major milestone not just for us, but for Australia's entire agtech sector."
The MEQ Probe is already in use at NSW-based Gundagai Meat Processors but Mr Carbone said the decision opens the way to work with even more processors.
"I've had some really good conversations and like anything you have early adopters and late adopters," he said.
"This is all really new for the industry ... but I think now that they see the technology has been approved and can be used commercially, I think that will accelerate the conversations that I'm already having."
Meat & Livestock Australia objective measurement program manager Richard Apps said MLA had invested with industry partners in the research and development of the probe because of its potential to be transformational for the red meat industry.
"The commercial reality of the MEQ Probe will ensure Australia maintains its status as a global leader in red meat innovation and production - no other country is using this technology," he said.
"There is also a huge benefit for the lamb supply chain with the technology allowing instant feedback to producers, so they are able to ascertain the IMF within their flock and plan how to improve or maintain IMF by using tools such as Australian Sheep Breeding Values and more targeted nutrition."
The accreditation helps open the way for the implementation of the new Meat Standards Australia sheep meat cuts-based model. MEQ Probe also plans to pursue accreditation for the marbling measurement for beef in the coming months.
CREDIT: Victoria Nugent
Word count: 483
