INNOVATION was a key theme at the first-ever Hort SA conference.
Held on Tuesday at the SA Produce Markets, the inaugural event brought together speakers from throughout the supply chain to discuss the value of game-changers in the sector.
Session convenor, Croplife chief executive Matthew Cossey, said innovation was at the core of all agriculture.
"Never before in human history have so many people relied on so few to feed them," he said.
"For those of us not producing our entire food requirements, we don't need to, because of farmers - it's a very new and modern part of human history."
Mr Cossey said there had been a number of "revolutions" in food production, with the next expected in the next decade.
"We will be producing as much as we are now, with fewer resources and on a smaller footprint," he said.
"But it's important to tell the story in our engagement with the the end consumer."
Keynote speaker, Australian and New Zealand business development director for Netherlands-based seed company Enza Zaden, Ton van der Velden, said there had been some big changes in his nearly 40 years in the business, particularly in how quickly new products could get to market.
But he said there were some core messages he had picked up in that time.
"Always be ahead of of your competition, keep researching and try to do a better job all the time, and always be honest with customers," he said.
Mr van der Velden said there were several key areas to their research, including resistance to potentially damaging fruit and vegetable diseases, such as the Tomato Brown Rugose Fruit Virus.
"It's not in Australia yet, but we want to prevent it even becoming an issue in Australia," he said.
There was also a focus on improving the shelf-life of vegetables, to reduce the need for plastic.
But a core focus was in attracting consumers, particularly enticing children to increase their vegetable consumption.
"We've got to get the kids on board," he said.
Mr van der Velden said it was important to consider the end result.
"Innovation has to be translated into a better product - it's not just innovation for the sake of innovation," he said. "It has to be profitable for growers or else we're wasting our time."
SA AgTech committee member and viticulturalist Oli Madgett, McLaren Vale, said new technology was quickly reaching a tipping point where it could potentially revolutionise the way things are done on-farm.
He said for many producers, they may have had difficulties with agtech in the past, with different segments "in silos".
But he said there was a change coming as more and more people entered the space, with more players able to "pull multiple bits of software together".
He said labour shortages throughout the world meant there was increased focus on labour-saving efficiencies in agtech, but many of these technologies could have larger impacts.
"They're not just taking labour out of the equation, but the ability to automate labour can change the whole farm system," he said.
He said "swarmbot" technology could mean apple orchards don't need to do a blanket spray to remove flowers, but could have a system that could count the blossom on a tree and perform individual spray treatments at the optimal time.
The desire to reduce waste had also led to big innovations in the field of packaging as well.
Perfect Automations' John Whitfield said plastic still had a place in packaging, but there was an increasing range of options, including parceling products into cardboard containers and sleeves, or compostable plastic alternatives.
RELATED: Compliance conundrum surrounds fruit fly control measures
Demo farm in full swing at Struan
At the SA Produce Markets, they have also embraced new options, including the soft launch of a new virtual market for their usual buyers this week.
SA Produce Markets chief executive Angelo Demasi said this would be expanded.
It follows on after the site was the world's first to embrace a microgrid, which reduced their energy usage by 30 per cent and at full capacity, produces enough energy to power 1200 households each year.
He said this was a great message to share with customers, while it also helped with revenue.
AusVeg SA chief executive officer Jordan Brook-Barnett said the conference was a chance to fill a gap in the horticulture sector.
"We, as individuals, probably didn't come together as often as we could," he said.
"And it's great to have it here, at SA's home of fresh produce."
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: Elizabeth Anderson
Word count: 775
