A COLUMN by Matthew Abraham made me think about one of the main things holding back our great state In the Sunday Mail on October 18, Matt lamented the lost jobs at the West End Brewery – and, of course, all those people, and their families, have our sympathies and best wishes for the future.
However, in the course of doing so, he compared Lot Fourteen (the old RAH site) to the US Defence facility Area 51 in the Nevada Desert, saying the language about what goes on at Lot Fourteen is “impenetrable PR wah-wah”.
Well, Matt, why don’t you come and see for yourself?
There is a bunch of us helping to build businesses at Lot Fourteen who are looking to the future, not to the past. Perhaps some South Australians would like a return to Adelaide of the 1960s – but I’m here to tell you that it’s not going to happen.
Like it or not, we’ve arrived in the 21st century – the future is digital and this means a change to the way we work. Lot Fourteen, Tonsley, Mawson Lakes and lots of other precincts are trying to move SA forward so that we’re not stuck with an economy based on horseshoe manufacturing.
I’m reminded of the joke that the only people who whinge about SA are those who’ve never left and those who’ve never been.
Many of those working in our digital, defence, space, medtech, agtech and creative industries have lived and travelled the world.
And guess what? They’ve chosen to come home to live and work in SA, creating jobs and investment that will help keep the state one of the best places to be in the world. Another thing I don’t understand is the criticism of Premier Steven Marshall’s “boundless enthusiasm”. What do we want? A premier as morose and down on the state as all the naysayers?
I want to be led by an optimist, not by Chicken Little. Sure, we have our challenges, but look at the rest of the world right now.
We have handled COV­ID-19 better than anyone. And as someone who has lived and worked throughout Europe and North America, I can tell you there is no place I’d rather be – and that was even before COVID hit.
Lot Fourteen has become a focal point for entrepreneurship and innovation, something SA was founded on. If you talk to industry counterparts interstate and overseas, the regular refrain is that what’s happening in SA is absolutely fantastic.
Just last week I was talking to a couple of SA expats who had recently returned from five years in the US, where they had started a successful tech company in San Francisco. They were back in Adelaide, moving into Lot Four­teen and bringing their entre­preneurial spirit with them.
Fobbing off Lot Fourteen as “PR wah-wah” is ignoring the fact that world economies are going through massive change as a result of technology, and that we need to be a part of it.
It’s also denigrating those people who are working hard to make it a success. Claiming it’s about “corporate handouts” is also a lot of rubbish and takes a swipe at the many start-ups and people who have put houses, careers, relationships and reputations on the line to create jobs and new businesses.
All of these people should be celebrated for taking risks and helping create wealth and jobs in industries of the future.
In the two years since Lot Fourteen was established, it’s created and attracted some great organisations and capabilities, including the Australian Cyber Collaboration Centre (A3C), the Australian Institute for Machine Learning (University of Adelaide), the Australian Space Agency, the Smart SatCRC and the MIT bigdata Living Lab.
It’s also home to more than 60 companies in creative industries, software development, artificial intelligence, space technologies and satellite manufacture, medical technology, defence and cyber security.
Almost 900 people work on the site, and the number is growing daily. So, what’s wrong with SA, entrepreneurship and Lot Fourteen? Absolutely nothing – it’s just a little more complicated than making beer. Jim Whalley is South Australia’s chief entrepreneur
CREDIT: Jim Whalley
Word count: 692
