After a jump of 32 students listing the Bachelor of Agricultural Sciences as a first preference in their SATAC selections last year, the courses popularity has been maintained this year with a massive 91 students eager to begin.
University of Adelaide's Department of Agricultural Science head Jason Able said uptake in the Bachelor of Agricultural Sciences degree had been "pretty good" for 2022.
"First preferences were on a par with last year, with 91 first preferences this year compared to 90 last year," he said.
"Our actual enrolments are slightly lower than our first year enrolments last year but that is always to be expected before the Census date approaching at the end of March.
"I envisage that number will probably pick up and be close to on a par with on last year, which has been a year-on-year increase."
Professor Able said he believes the interest in the degree stems from a drive in sustainability.
"Particularly with the urban students, there is a want to use every bit of available land to us, be it vertical agriculture and urban agriculture in producing agricultural goods that will feed our growing society.
"The support that we have from our research expertise goes hand in hand with the teaching and the research.
"We've got a very strong research presence and part of the university strategy is linked to an agri-food industry engagement priority, students want to be engaged in this space."
Prof Able said despite being head of school, he was looking forward to getting in front of the students after two years of virtual teaching.
"I am pleased to say we are doing face to face teaching which is wonderful," he said.
"It's the first time we have been able to do that for a couple of years - it was really pleasing.
He said there has also been a shift in some of the teaching focus, with a new appointment in "decision" agriculture keeping up with the focus on agtech.
"It is the interface of mathematical and engineering problems that can actually help inform agricultural solutions," Prof Able said.
"We have a lot of agtech out there in the industry and some growers don't know what to do with all that data so it is people like (Matthew Knowling) who will be instructing our students in this innovative area, who will then inform growers how they can best use those results."
CREDIT: Kiara Stacey
Word count: 404
