MALLEE farming town Pinnaroo has claimed the title of South Australia's 2020 Ag Town of the Year.
Pinnaroo finished ahead of four other finalists - Kimba, Parndana, Kapunda and Woodside - to be crowned the state's top agriculture town.during the Regional Showcase event at O'Leary Walker Wines in Clare.
The Ag Town of the Year award is designed to recognise towns that demonstrate excellence in agriculture and consequently encouraging growth in the primary industries sector.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister David Basham congratulated the small farming town on being named Ag Town of the Year for 2020.
"Well done to the farming sector, the community and all involved in making Pinnaroo such a diverse and innovative town," Mr Basham said..
"The extensive process to crown Pinnaroo as SA's Ag Town involved 70 town nominations, more than 5000 public votes and visits to the five finalist towns by our independent judging panel.
"As a farmer said during the judges' visit, 'Pinnaroo has got your back' and I think that really captures the spirit of this small town and the importance of agriculture to its economy.
"I know the judging panel had a difficult time making this decision, with each of the finalist towns being more than just worthy contenders.
"All the towns are excelling in agricultural practices, displaying incredible community spirit and resilience, and are committed to developing their region."
Member for Hammond Adrian Pederick congratulated the whole Pinnaroo community on winning the Ag Town of the Year Award, saying the win highlighted the "legendary resilience" of the Mallee.
"Agriculture can be a testing industry especially with some of the recent poor seasons," he said.
"It's good to have had a handy cropping season last year, stock prices up and a huge horticulture industry in the Pinnaroo region adding to the mix.
"Pinnaroo certainly deserves this award especially in relation to operating with the challenges of a cross-border community in dealing with COVID-19."
There were also six other awards presented to a range of regional organisations, businesses and initiatives as part of the 2020 Regional Showcase.
The winners were:
Regional Resilience Award: Imagine Uraidla
Community Empowerment Award: Phil Marshall
Meaningful Connections Award: Macclesfield's Young at Heart Club
AgTech Award: Trust Provenance
Lifelong Learning Award: EP Analysis
People's Choice Award: Merv Lehmann of Robertstown General Store
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 406
