From fintech to space technology and surveillance, this co-working hub keeps an eye on the future The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that Australia must develop its own capacity in various areas rather than relying on imported technology or services, ­according to tech leader Alex Scandurra.
“It has highlighted the need to grow our own sovereign industrial capabilities around key areas in the economy,” says the chief executive of the tech hub Stone & Chalk.
“We need to have a critical mass in space technology and we need to be able to provide for our own intelligence and surveillance needs.
“Increasingly we need to be able to develop companies in Australia as opposed to buying from overseas suppliers and vendors.” As part of that shift, Stone & Chalk, which was launched as a fintech hub in Sydney seven years ago but now has hubs in Adelaide and Melbourne, is merging with a group dedicated to building the cyber security sector here.
The not-for-profit will take over the Canberra-based Australian Cyber Security Growth Network (AustCyber), set up in 2017 as part of the federal government’s Industry Growth Centres initiative. AustCyber encourages research, innovation and product development in the cyber sector.
It’s a natural extension for Stone & Chalk which began by specialising in the emerging fintech technology, encouraging the commercial development of starts-ups and scale-ups. Over time it set up hubs in Melbourne and Adelaide and expanded into other sectors including property tech, health tech, ­insurance tech, agtech and medtech.
The merger with AustCyber will boost commercial development of cyber security by drawing on Stone & Chalk’s expertise, as well as helping tech start-ups incorporate cyber security into their operations from the start. The new entity will work more with federal government agencies, including the Department of Defence, on projects of national need.
Scandurra says the merger will make it easier for Stone & Chalk to oversee a start-up culture where cyber security is built into products even before the first line of code is written.
He tells The Deal: “We have always had a very strong focus on cyber security within financial services. It is a catastrophic failure if there is a data breach of people’s bank accounts and financial details.
“If your company has a major data breach, your permission to exist can almost evaporate overnight. Cyber needs to play a very important role as fintech companies are evolving. IT security is a growing sector. For us (the merger) has been a natural next step.” Stone & Chalk has about 850 entrepreneurs working in its three co-working hubs and more people connecting to its resources remotely. Those entrepreneurs are working on more than 200 different companies.
Scandurra stresses the organisation is not just a co-working space but also offers support in terms of access to customers, capital, expertise, specialist mentoring and connections to help companies ­succeed.
The organisation has helped secure more than $520m in funding for the starts-up and scale-ups which have gone through its doors and helped create more than 2500 jobs through its residents and alumni. More than 50 of the companies being developed within the hubs sell to international customers. Stone & Chalk and AustCyber will retain their brand names but the merger will see a combined staff of 50 people with a footprint around the country.
AustCyber is run by Canberra-based Michelle Price, and its board is co-chaired by former IBM executive Doug Elix and the founding chief executive of the CSIRO’s data arm, Data 61, Adrian Turner. Turner now works with miner Andrew Forrest’s Perth-based Minderoo Foundation overseeing its development of resilience capability for bushfires and floods. Other board members are company director and the former chair of Australian Super, Heather Ridout, and tech entrepreneur Eddie Sheehy, the founder of software company Nuix.
AustCyber does not have resident hubs, but its “nodes” of small groups of people work together in all capital cities as well as regional cities such as Townsville and Toowoomba.
Stone & Chalk has come a long way in seven years.
“When we first started there were about 100 fintechs across Australia,” Scandurra says. “Fintech was something people in Australia were just starting to learn about.” A recent KPMG study notes there are more than 800 fintechs in Australia. Reflecting that growth, Stone & Chalk early last year began expanding into all areas of emerging technology.
In South Australia, for example, it is involved in space technology, defence and renewable energy as well as artificial intelligence – sectors which the state government is keen to develop.
Scandurra says COVID-19 has cut the numbers physically working in the Stone & Chalk hubs and he foresees a hybrid model with some people continuing to connect remotely, even though most start-up entrepreneurs want their staff working together as much as possible.
“I speak to a lot of founders who are becoming increasingly frustrated,” he says. “They want to see their team together more often, collaborating. They see the creative benefit of doing so and the efficiency that comes from very rapid problem solving. They say there is increasingly a potential risk when you have people working in insolation that their work isn’t necessarily aligned and may need reworking. They see working together as a way to quickly move forward.”
CREDIT: Story by Glenda Korporaal
Word count: 881
