NEW industry body Cattle Australia is set to officially launch at the start of the new financial year, with producers invited to help shape the future of the grass-fed industry ahead of the transition.
Designed to address system-wide changes in the industry over recent decades and the threat of future challenges, Cattle Australia aims to represent the interests of all Australian cattle producers and provide them with a unified, visible, and influential voice.
Restructure Steering Committee chair Andrew Macaulay said the consultation period was critical in ensuring Cattle Australia could realise its vision of supporting industry growth and empowering producers.
"Cattle Australia will unite levy payers and engage with cattle producers and industry stakeholders, so that it can advocate on important matters to the industry, lead and direct policy development and its implementation, and protect the profitability, competitiveness and future of the cattle industry," he said.
"However, to achieve this we need to hear from producers on what areas of work Cattle Australia should focus on and where it should direct investment to support growth. I encourage cattle producers and other invested stakeholders to share their thoughts so Cattle Australia can effectively represent the interests of producers and strengthen the grass-fed sector and broader beef cattle industry."
RELATED:
Record global beef prices temper talk of cattle price drop
Getting the best value on cattle stations from agtech
Three free-to-attend webinars will occur in the coming weeks and are open to all producers and interested parties, with events scheduled on March 30, April 4 and April 8.
Input received during this public consultation will help guide the next steps of Cattle Australia's development.
It is planned the peak body will launch on July 1, with the Cattle Council of Australia's responsibilities transitioning to Cattle Australia.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 315
