Regenerative graziers Stephanie Trethewey and Stephanie Schmidt are teaming up to speak up about perinatal mental health on live online talk series, Walk with Me, this month.
Walk with Me is hosted by Aussie-founded AgTech company, MaiaGrazing.
Ms Trethewey, co-founder of Tasmanian Agricultural Company, launched the Motherland Australia podcast in December 2019 after struggling with her own mental health and feeling incredibly isolated as a new rural mum.
"Mums are the backbone of our rural communities and are often the glue that holds everything together," she said.
"Unfortunately many rural women face crippling isolation and struggle with their own mental health due to their location, or a lack of local services and support.
"It's my hope that by breaking the stigma surrounding motherhood and mental health on the land, we can start to uncover what is really required to create meaningful change for rural mums across Australia and give them the support they desperately need."
Ms Schmidt is an award-winning SA clinical psychologist and grazier, who won the 2020 SA AgriFutures Rural Women's Award for her program designed to create resilience among the farming community.
She runs a large sheep and cropping operation with her husband and three young sons.
"Being in a farming family has given me a unique perspective on perinatal mental health, as I've experienced postnatal depression twice after the birth of my first and third sons," she said.
"This lived insight has helped me in my practice.
"I now have a deeper understanding and appreciation of the challenges that rural mums and dads encounter that may exacerbate and prolong depression.
"I hope that by coming on Walk with Me, I can help rural parents recognise and address the signs of anxiety and depression so they can get the help they need."
The free 45-minute Walk with Me: On the Shoulders of Mothers session will be held online on September 8 at 7.30pm SA time.
Details: Register at maiagrazing.com/walk-with-me-mothers-shoulders
CREDIT:
Word count: 323
