Carbon Count, AgTech's newest start-up, launches the world's first commercially available online soil carbon project management software that facilitates the trade of soil carbon for agricultural consultancies, project managers and carbon trading companies in Australia.
Offering regulatory approved sampling design and measurement of soil carbon and farm emissions, the Carbon Count Platform is a complete intelligent solution with the potential to dramatically simplify, streamline and fast-track soil carbon projects and maximise the value of derived carbon credits, a spokesman said.
The young company, spearheaded by soil scientist Philip Mulvey leading a team of world class agronomists and programmers, assures that its platform takes care of all the complex mathematical equations and regulator-compliant documentation required to measure, value and certify soil carbon.
What's so promising about this new online software is that it's built on the Australian government's legislative framework for the Emissions Reduction Fund.
This means users simply have to follow the steps in the program to meet all regulatory requirements and reporting obligations necessary to register and operate their projects and enter the Australian carbon trading market.
At the heart of this program is the patented Fast Adaptive Algorithm for Soil Testing (FAAST) that delivers a quick and easy way to measure and certify the carbon in a project area. Developed by Sydney University's Professor Alex McBratney and Carbon Count chief executive Philip Mulvey, the powerful tool determines the most cost-effective sampling plan for any farm in any region.
To celebrate its launch the organisation offers the first 30 new customers a complementary pH variability map for soil health management. Platform access is now available to agricultural consultants, project managers and carbon traders through licences, and farmers can find a licensee via the website.
Visit www.carboncount.com or call 03 83305625.
CREDIT:
Word count: 292
