Education, entertainment and exposing the audience to on-trend, new or futuristic concepts for the beef industry will be the objective of the Tech Yard Talks at Beef Australia 2021.
Presented by NBN, a scheduled series of technical and innovation-focused talks will take place on the Rabobank Stage which is situated in the Ken Coombe Tech Yards - the AgTech and Innovation Hub.
This new precinct is a world-first site, featuring a curated display of market-ready and emerging technology and innovations used in the beef supply chain.
The Tech Yards will include trade fair booth spaces, demonstration spaces, producer-led panel discussions and Pitch in the Paddock - a high profile platform for startups to launch and showcase their ideas to the industry and investors.
Beef Australia chief executive officer Ian Mill said they are proud of being the premier beef industry trade show event in the world.
"It is renowned by the industry as the 'must attend' event to witness new innovations, learn about consumer and production trends, see the best stud cattle and forge new business relationships," he said.
"Mr Coombe was visionary in his leadership and an early adopter of technology.
"The establishment of the Ken Coombe Tech Yards, will ensure people continue to say, 'I saw it at Beef' for many more years to come."
While the Tech Yards have a focus on market-ready technology and innovative products, it also highlights emerging technology.
"The Tech Yards will showcase existing and emerging technologies that impact the beef industry supply chain from conception through to consumption, and will include trade fair booths dedicated to market-ready tech and innovations, and a shared demonstration area," Mr Mill said.
"By showcasing a blend of what's available now and what will be available in the future, producers and members of the entire beef supply chain will be able to visit the Tech Yards and invest in a product that will benefit their business.
"They'll also be able to get a first-look at the technological advances that are in development, which will allow them to make long-term planning decisions."
Exhibitors in the Tech Yards are encouraged to provide attendees with interactive and hands-on demonstrations, in both the indoor booth spaces and the allocated demonstration areas.
The Ken Coombe Tech Yards will be located at the Rockhampton State High School during Beef 2021 and will be connected to the Rockhampton Showgrounds via the Tech Alley.
CREDIT: Helen Walker
Word count: 402
