The importance of farmers and agricultural industry members "controlling the narrative" surrounding primary production was a key discussion point at the fifth annual Growing The Future event held at Adelaide Oval on Thursday last week.
Speaking as part of a panel discussion at the event - which is hosted by the Adelaide University Agricultural Students Association - AgTech Advisory Group member and Platfarm founder Oli Madgett said too many negative views about agriculture were being circulated by those with power, but not necessarily agricultural knowledge.
"It's so easy for social media technology companies to make up any narrative they want about food," he said.
"They are good at it, and the food industry is at the moment not very good at creating the viral narrative we want on food.
"We need to use the tactics straight against the people who would have ulterior motives against all types of ag."
Melissa Rebbeck, SA Livestock Consultants, said tunnel vision views about animal methane production needed to change.
"People see livestock as a negative in the fight against climate change, without knowing or realising the important role animals play and will continue to play in the future, particularly surrounding carbon farming," she said.
"Animals graze pastures, the pastures grow up, and photosynthesise more, and that stores carbon - that vital process is the kind of narrative we need to be getting across."
Loxton farmer John Gladigau, Bulla Burra, said along with changing negative connotations, ag industry members needed to embrace changes and opportunities, with those opportunities then highlighted to the public.
"For example, plant-based foods are portrayed across social media and the ag sector as being anti-farming, when really it's a fantastic opportunity for ag, we haven't grasped that opportunity and talked up the narrative, and shown that it's well and truly an opportunity that can exist successfully alongside of meat," he said.
"By 2050, Australia's population will be 35 million, and of the extra 10m (on the present population), a chunk of them will be wanting meat and a chunk will want plant-based foods, so there are definitely side by side opportunities there."
GRDC's Craig Ruchs said recognising shared values would help sell the correct narrative.
"Whether we're a producer or consumer, we all want to produce and eat food that's safe, made in a sustainable way, and is profitable, and recognising that we want the same thing no matter what our role is, is a key message we need to be across."
Event photos P22-23
CREDIT: Claire Harris
Word count: 417
