AUSTRALIAN native foods will be the focus of a Nuffield scholarship, awarded to Native Co director and farm manager Marlon Motlop.
Announced at the annual Nuffield Conference, held virtually this week, Mr Motlop is one of 12 scholarship recipients who will travel in Australia and overseas to research innovative concepts, techniques and systems that will make a positive impact on their businesses and the broader agricultural industry.
"The native food industry is a developing one, which provides an exciting challenge for me as a First Nations grower to be able to educate the public and customers on what they are eating, and the beautiful cultural storyline of our first foods," he said.
Native Co grows native herbs, greens and fruits in greenhouses north-west of Adelaide and on farmland in the Barossa Valley.
The Nuffield Scholarship will allow Mr Motlop to travel to various Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Countries throughout Australia, as well as to New Zealand, Africa and Fiji.
"The desired outcome is to create a body of information which shows the importance of Australia's first foods, and the nutritional benefits which give many of our native products the 'superfood status' today," he said.
His scholarship has been supported by Woolworths.
Nuffield recipients receive a $30,000 bursary to travel in and learn from international agribusinesses and research institutions.
Nuffield Australia chief executive officer Jodie Redcliffe says the Nuffield Scholarship program will give the producers and agribusiness professionals global perspectives that will help them learn, remain competitive and grow.
"Among the cohort, there's a strong focus on finding and sharing innovations that can make Australian agriculture and its associated value chains more resilient to changes in the environment, regulations, markets and consumer expectations," she said.
Other research topics include carbon storage, drought tolerance, agtech, seaweed, hemp machinery, finishing lambs and supply chains.
CREDIT:
Word count: 303
