CAROLINE RHODES Primary Producers SA chief executive officer AS South Australians head to the polls later this month, Primary Producers SA stands ready to work with all sides of politics to ensure agriculture and regional development are at the heart of government decision making.
With every election comes the prospect of a change in government and a reset of political representation in the upper house.
Across the country, regional development is rapidly taking on renewed significance in all three tiers of government, as they look for initiatives to support economic recovery from COVID and respond to population growth outside of our capital cities. At PPSA, we strongly believe our state can no longer afford to overlook the interdependency of agriculture to regional development.
The SA food, wine and agribusiness sector has set an ambitious growth target of $23 billion by 2030, underpinned by industry plans that establish sector-wide priorities and projects. To realise this target - and ensure our state's primary producers remain profitable and sustainable - we need government policy, programs and funding that respond to the needs of industry and support the regional communities that sustain our agricultural workforce.
Our regions contribute about $29 billion a year to the state's economy and are home to about 27 per cent of the state's population. PPSA and our six commodity members will be making strong representation to the next government to ensure key legislative reforms governing pastoral and biosecurity laws are progressed in the next Parliament. In addition, new initiatives to support carbon farming, farm forestry, agtech, plant-based protein, wild dog management, agricultural research and development, cutting stamp duty and lowering the cost of inputs remain high on the wish list.
While our sector's election wish lists are long and often complex, we need to ensure those vying for the primary industries portfolio understand why these issues are so important. We also need to ensure those candidates commit to working with PPSA and its six commodity group members.
We acknowledge key legislative reforms and service delivery may reside outside of portfolio responsibilities. A whole of government approach needs to be taken to reforms, such as mining on agricultural land, water security, technical skills training in schools, heavy vehicle transport and natural resource management and planning laws. This approach requires leadership from the Minister responsible for primary production.
For agriculture to address the sector's chronic workforce shortages, we need strong and vibrant regional communities that support housing, healthcare and social services for farmers and their workforce.
Primary producers contribute to the social fabric of regional communities and provide an abundance of food, fibre, and fine wine for domestic and export markets. As those who live and work in this sector, we know it is worthy of respect and considered government policies.
Agriculture will remain the economic powerhouse of the SA economy and must be positioned as a growth opportunity now and into the future. At this time of global conflict and geopolitical instability, it is timely to reflect on how important the very act of casting our vote at the ballot box really is.
So, when you head out for your democracy sausage on Saturday 19 March, think about who will best work to promote agriculture and regional development - essential to securing economic prosperity for all SA.
Viewpoint
CREDIT:
Word count: 549
