GILLIAN FENNELL SA pastoralist LAST week I had the opportunity to attend what is, without a doubt, the premier beef cattle event in Australia.
Viewpoint
Beef Australia 2021 was a week full of the best of what the cattle industry has to offer, and attracted people from across Australia to Rockhampton, Qld.
I have never seen an event of such a scale that was so well organised - and devoted solely to the beef industry of Australia, from paddock to plate.
And while it might take some time to crunch the numbers for the 2021 event, many of the exhibitors and attendees said that it was the best year ever.
Good livestock prices and recent rains across some parts of the country have helped to boost the confidence of the industry.
Producers are quietly hopeful that the improved season and cattle values might hang about for a little bit longer.
While I could go on talking about the diversity of exhibitors, the incredible showcase of "agtech" and scientific innovations, the amazing events and the sheer size of Beef Australia 2021, what I really found most amazing was the fact that if it wasn't for the humble beef producer, none of this could exist.
In reality, Beef Australia is a tiny representation of the impact and value of the national beef industry.
This is an industry that, according to Meat & Livestock Australia in its 2020 State of the Industry Report, contributes almost a quarter of total farm value across Australia, directly employs more than 189,000 people, is worth $20.2 billion and - together with our sheep counterparts - manages half of Australia's land mass.
In fact, Beef Australia was the ideal place to see the impact that beef production has on the broader economy.
In among the traditional exhibits of cattle feed, handling equipment and the iconic stud animals, there were also the associated trades and industries that you might not immediately associate with beef production - and these represent big money.
Banks, insurance companies, agricultural investment companies, genetic testing services, satellite mapping technology and agricultural machinery - I'm talking "big stuff" in terms of balers, silage wrappers and spray booms.
All-in-all, the beef industry is responsible for the employment of an additional 245,000 people that provide associated goods and services - 90 per cent of whom live in regional and remote areas.
This "beef week" was a snapshot of our industry, and a public demonstration of the economic powerhouse that we - as producers - are responsible for.
It is us - our farms, our families and our cattle - that have made all of this possible. And we should take that responsibility seriously. Because without us, without this cohesive, united, powerful, progressive and passionate industry, we put all of those jobs and value at-risk.
Not just our own individual businesses, but the entire industry as a whole - this industry that we love so much and does so much good, not just here, but throughout the world.
As producers, we need to take advantage of this interlude of good times and focus on what makes us great, and what we can do together to keep the industry heading in the right direction.
- Gillian Fennell lives with her family on a remote beef property in outback SA. You can follow Gillian on Twitter @stationmum101
CREDIT:
Word count: 557
