A recent study has outlined the potential of space technologies to add immense value to the agricultural industry in the coming years.
Titled Space-based technologies - opportunities for the rural sector, the 76-page report was commissioned by AgriFutures Australia and produced by the Australian National University.
According to the report, monetary benefits of space tech of geolocation alone could benefit Australian agriculture by $2.2 billion over a 30-year period, while satellite connectivity could add $15.6b to gross value of production across agriculture, fisheries and forestry industries each year.
The report gives an insight into what is already happening on a global scale in terms of space tech, and consolidates the technologies and applications suitable for the Australian context. It focuses on three main components that can address challenges in rural industries: remote sensing, connectivity and geolocation, as well as the barriers to adoption.
AgriFutures Australia Rural Futures senior manager Jennifer Medway said while space tech has traditionally been associated with industries such as mining and defence, there were many opportunities to unlock for the rural sector.
"It's exciting - the farmer of the future will have space technology fully integrated into their everyday production systems and decision making," she said.
"For instance, dashboards will enable farmers to remotely manage manual processes, and interoperable data systems will radically shift the way on-farm decisions are made."
"All this is made possible through space technology, which has the potential to revolutionise the working day of tomorrow's farmers."
"Agriculture's time is now. To stay competitive and continue to up the ante on increasing productivity and sustainability, we need to look to fixes 'outside the square'. Space technology is one of those fixes."
While the future of space tech is promising, some space tech adoptions are already being adopted, with many producers routinely using satellite imaging, low bandwidth sensors, GPS tracking, autosteer, paddock level imagery and weather forecasting to drive better decision making.
RELATED READING: AgTech strategic plan set to increase adoption rates
Centre for Entrepreneurial Agri-Technology industry engagement senior manager Martin Amidy said practicality and cost effectiveness would be key to adoption of space tech going forward.
"It is important to emphasise the opportunity space technology presents, but it is equally important to arm producers with practical information on how to implement it and the return on investment they can get from adopting these technologies," Mr Amidy said.
"In addition to the report, easily digestible fact sheets summarise available space technologies and their impact for livestock farming and broadacre cropping, to fishing and forestry, as well as more intensive farming systems like horticulture and dairy."
Details: agrifutures.com.au/publications-resources/publications/ Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 454
