THERE are plenty of reasons to believe the good times for Australia's cattle game will continue for some years yet, but more importantly is the opportunity that exists right now to build on the good fortune.
For many producers, the aim is not just rebuilding herds to pre-drought levels, but making them even stronger to capitalise on boom times ahead for beef.
This was the message from ANZ's agribusiness insights team at a Beef Australia 2021 forum in Rockhampton, Qld, last week.
ANZ agribusiness head Mark Bennett said solid underpinning demand, better weather conditions, record low cost of finance and high cattle prices had placed producers in a very strong position.
"Those who've had cattle for a while probably wouldn't have seen things better in their lifetime," he said.
"And there are a lot of reasons to think these times might last for a while - the underpinning demand is going to support good times for beef for quite a while."
But Mr Bennett also spoke about cycles and long-term thinking.
"Most spends on land are a much longer, generational investments, so knowing your own business fundamentals and where you have room to move is still critical," he said.
"Prices will eventually come down and the weather will leave us and interest rates will go up at some time. When that happens, we don't want people in untenable positions."
While this shouldn't dampen confidence, it had to be factored in, he said.
The reinvigorated family cattle farm sector and its role in Australia's booming cattle industry was also discussed.
ANZ agribusiness insights director Michael Whitehead said 10 years ago, there was some pessimism about the family farm - the future was thought to be in big capital.
"There were fears that family farms could find it difficult to compete on scale, efficiency, or consolidation opportunities," he said.
"Fast forward to today and increasingly many family farms have not only risen to the challenge, but pursued a range of innovations to grow in strength."
The average family operation has evolved - in scale and generationally, he said.
Mr Whitehead said more and more the younger generation was returning home from a tertiary education, not just with the training in agriculture, but new skills and knowledge, a passion for agtech and financial skills.
Capital was still flowing in, and while the position of the family farm on the agri-investment landscape was now far stronger, it was not an easy game, Mr Whitehead said.
The ANZ team said there were key things investors were looking for, including good management skills and data.
But they say one key "insist" for the future was sustainability credentials.
CREDIT: Shan Goodwin
Word count: 444
