While farming's appeal as a safe investment option has gained momentum of late, in reality the capital invested in Australian agriculture is barely keeping up with the industry's asset depreciation.
On present investment trends there is no way Australia can lift annual farm productivity figures to hit its $100 billion goal by 2030.
In fact, it may not get to $100b within 30 years, according to a sobering analysis of agriculture's capital investment requirements and the mood among producers and leading investors.
The study found for every $1b rise in gross value of production, Australia's primary production sector needed an increase in productive capital of between $1.8b and $5.3b a year.
Achieving the National Farmers' Federation's 2030 farm productivity target would require about $8.7b in fresh capital annually for the next nine years - well above the average $1.2b a year invested in the past 30 years in the agriculture, fisheries and forestry sectors.
Despite Australia's rapidly growing share in many key export markets, offshore and domestic sales and prices would also need to leap further to help meet NFF's productivity goals before 2054.
The report, commissioned by AgriFutures Australia, tipped present investment trends would restrain farmgate value growth to just $84b by 2030 - roughly $20b more than today.
"From purchasing machinery, to expanding production, to adopting new farming practices and innovating, access to capital is critical," AgriFutures managing director John Harvey said.
While Australia was well-regarded in agtech research and innovation, he said farming needed better access to capital to deploy technology at a paddock level.
The study found the total value of agriculture's capital stock of land assets, machinery, buildings and raw materials actually grew significantly after the 1980s to be worth more than $500b today.
But, in the past decade investment had not kept pace with asset consumption (depreciation), possibly because prolonged drought had constrained spending.
Investors said they valued ag assets because they provided portfolio diversity that did not correlate with financial markets; enhanced wealth preservation; provided hedges against inflation and currency movements, and offered a pathway to environmental, social and sustainability investing.
Poignantly, the study also reiterated a frequent farm sector concern about Australian institutional investing's meek appetite because local capital managers were legally required to have almost instant access to liquidity in funds they invested.
That regulatory challenge conflicted with the reality that it may take a year or two for an asset manager to exit an agricultural stake, where assets were on a three- to 10-year transformation timeline.
AgriFutures' report also identified investment sector frustration with a lack of timely and relevant data to benchmark farm performance which could help potential investors.
Requirements for foreign investors were often poorly understood, too, and there was a need for new investing models for big scale land ownership enterprises.
NFF chief executive officer Tony Mahar agreed more robust and timely farm performance monitoring was badly needed.
"Data compiled by ABARES does not meet the standard required by institutional investors," he said.
"We are poised for continual growth, but to supercharge this growth Australian agriculture needs to attract investment from sources other than debt and equity finance."
CREDIT: Andrew Marshall
Word count: 524
