THE installation and continued availability of a new weather doppler radar on the Eyre Peninsula would have significant benefits for the region's farming, fisheries and emergency services sectors, according to figures behind a renewed effort to secure funding support from federal and state governments.
Forecasts for the Eyre Peninsula are made using information from Ceduna and Adelaide-based radars, combined with the forecasting prowess of Bureau of Meteorology meteorologists.
Providing accurate local forecasts becomes a more difficult task more than 200 kilometres from the radars due to the curvature of the earth, leaving a "significant gap" over much of the EP, according to Port Lincoln mayor Brad Flaherty.
Mr Flaherty has previously written a business case on the matter and has lobbied state and federal governments, and the BoM, to no avail.
"We've got more than three million hectares of broadacre grain on the EP, we've got the largest fishing fleet in the Southern Hemisphere and we've got a considerable population," he said.
"There's a significant gap in forecasting capacity and it's probably the only gap on mainland Australia where there is a significant population base and industry base."
Mr Flaherty said a new doppler radar, which he estimated would cost $8 million to install, would have major benefits to agriculture, fisheries, emergency management operations and personnel, as well as a burgeoning space company operating on the EP.
The installation of doppler radars are typically funded by the federal government, with state governments and local industry occasionally contributing.
Recent examples of doppler radar funding include the WA government contributing $28m to support the BoM in building three radars and upgrading two in south-west WA in 2017 and 2020, $28m in federal funding for four new radars to cover large gaps between Mount Isa and Townsville in Qld in 2019, and $24.5m from the NSW government to build three doppler radars from July 2020, to remove a blackspot covering Western NSW.
Lower EP farmer and Liberal candidate for Flinders Sam Telfer said he had seen favourable benefit-to-cost ratio figures from the WA wheat industry relating to the installation of their doppler radars and said it strengthened the EP's case.
"I suggest that the efficiency figures for the EP would be equal to, or greater, because of the high input farming regime comparatively on the EP," he said.
"There is a variety of industry and opportunities which could be strengthened with an investment in this technology to bring us up to the same standard as most of the rest of the state and country."
Mr Telfer said the ability to access localised, accurate and timely weather forecasting would help EP farmers improve the efficiency of chemical and fertiliser applications and minimise any wastage.
"Having this weather information would have a high degree of impact on planning and operations," he said.
"With the ever-improving agtech within the industry, farmers need to utilise every potential dataset available.
"Weather has an impact on all farming operations and reliable, short-term forecasting would provide greater certainty to these operations."
Mr Flaherty said the formation of an industry cluster, to lobby governments and discuss industry contribution, had been discussed.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister David Basham said he would be willing to assess any proposals put forward and meet with the businesses and communities invested in such a proposal.
"A new doppler radar on the Eyre Peninsula could certainly provide both economic and environmental benefits," he said.
"Traditionally, funding for the installation and ongoing maintenance of BoM facilities falls under the federal government's responsibility, but I would be happy to look at any proposal put forward by the industry."
The Department of Agriculture, Water and Environment insisted doppler radar funding queries were best answered by the BoM.
The Bureau said radar funding was a complicated matter and were unable to provide further information before Stock Journal went to print.
More: stockjournal.com.au
CREDIT: Quinton McCallum
Word count: 646
