SE MLC retains regional portfolio
FARM labour and biosecurity are at the top of agenda for the newly-appointed Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister, with Clare Scriven sworn into the role following Labor's landslide state election win.
The new-look SA Cabinet was announced last Thursday, fronted by Premier Peter Malinauskas and backed by 14 MPs and MLCs.
South East-based MLC Ms Scriven retained the Primary Industries and Regional Development portfolio she held for the past year in opposition, as well as Forest Industries, while Independent Geoff Brock and Deputy Premier Susan Close were also announced as part of the cabinet.
Less than a week into the job, Ms Scriven said it was a privilege to be the face of the crucial portfolios.
"I'm really excited and I feel very honoured to be in this role as minister for regional development and primary industries and forest industries," she said.
"We need to have someone based in the regional area because they understand the day to day things that affect us, which you don't always have line of sight over if you're living in the metropolitan area.
"I'm really pleased I managed to keep these portfolios - they were the three that I had when we were in opposition and I was very keen to keep them now we're in government."
First on the agenda for Ms Scriven was to tackle labour shortages and biosecurity in the regions, but she said these would not be an easy fix.
"These are really complex problems, so they have to be a priority in terms of looking at how we create long-term solutions to the issues that have perhaps been there for some time, but were certainly highlighted during COVID-19," she said.
"It seems that under the previous government, it (biosecurity) kind of came to a bit of a standstill, or at least was moving very, very slowly.
"It's very good all of the metropolitan (fruit fly) outbreaks have been contained, but we do still have outbreaks in the Riverland.
"We need to be looking at both what is happening nationally in terms of biosecurity, as well as how that then links in with what we're doing and what to do on a state basis."
Ms Scriven said she hoped to work with all levels of government to address the labour issue.
"It's an industry challenge and it's also a challenge for regional communities," she said. "People who are affected include businesses who are looking for workers, but also regional development associations and local councils in regional areas.
"The way to address housing shortages in a regional area is perhaps a little bit more complex than it is in a metropolitan capital city.
"It's really got to be about utilising all of the different resources available, not just government, but industry, local government, perhaps non-profits and so on.
"I think that's the way to look at a sustainable long-term solution and it's something that obviously is not going to be easy to solve."
Ms Scriven was hesitant to pin down a timeline to address any specific issue, stating it was more important to get them right rather than set an arbitrary date to have them completed by.
"It can be tempting to say we'll have this, this and this done in the first 12 months, but these are longer term issues that cannot be solved immediately," she said.
"The workforce issue is one that won't necessarily be solved in 12 months, but it's got to be addressed immediately because without workforce of course, none of the other things that we're talking about can be achieved.
"Legislatively, we really need to look at how much consultation has been done, for example, around a particular new Biosecurity Act.
"In opposition, you don't always have line of sight over that, so I want to make sure if we have a new Biosecurity Act we get it right."
Issues like the contentious Pastoral Land Management and Conservation Act 1989 will not be covered under Ms Scriven's portfolio, instead falling into the hands of Climate, Environment and Water Minister Susan Close.
Despite this, she said she was committed to discussions with stakeholders surrounding the issue.
The Labor government already committed to invest an extra $1 million to get pastoral lease land condition assessments up to date.
Prior to the election, former Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister David Basham said SA Labor "confirmed" it would slash funding to government departments including PIRSA to help pay for the party's $3 billion of "reckless" spending.
Ms Scriven squashed Mr Basham's claims, stating it was just speculation on the Liberal party's behalf.
"I don't think that was based on anything tangible whatsoever," she said.
"All governments go through the normal budget process to look at programs and things they've committed to during the election period."
With projects such as demonstration farms part of the former Liberal government's commitment to agtech, Ms Scriven said she was keen to ensure industry innovation was a priority in her four-year term.
Also in cabinet are Mr Brock, with Regional Roads, Local Government and Veterans Affairs; Ms Close who also has Industry, Innovation and Science; Defence and Space Industries; and Stephen Mullighan as Treasurer.
Nat Cook takes on Human Services, Joe Szakacs heads Police, Emergency Services and Correctional Services and Tom Koutsantonis has the portfolios of Infrastructure and Transport; Energy and Mining; as well as being Leader of Government Business in the lower house.
Tourism and Multicultural Affairs went to Zoe Bettison, while Chris Picton is Health and Wellbeing Minister, and Blair Boyer is Education, Training and Skills Minister.
Nick Champion leads Trade and Investment in addition to Housing and Urban Development and Andrea Michaels has Business Affairs, Arts and Small and Family Business.
Emily Bourke will be Assistant Minister to the Premier and Rhiannon Pearce is Assistant Minister to the Deputy Premier.
CREDIT: Katie Jackson
Word count: 978
