Tough year no match for Eight Point Plan
DESPITE ongoing drought and bushfires in the first half of the financial year, and without claiming any COVID-19 support measures from the government, Elders has reported underlying earnings of $120.6 million, before tax and interest - a 64 per cent increase on last year - and a return on capital of 18.7pc at its online annual general meeting last week.
At the close-out of its second Eight Point Plan, the company reported an underlying after-tax profit of $107.7m - an increase of 69pc on 2019.
Shareholders also received a final, fully-franked dividend of 13 cents a share on Friday, totalling 22c/share for the full year - a 4c increase on the 2019 financial year.
Elders chief executive officer Mark Allison said the company's EPP ensured a "strong financial performance" and helped the company continue to make "good money in bad seasons and great money in good seasons".
"The results highlight the resilience of our business model and represents outperformance against the second EPP goal of 5-10pc earnings before interest and tax growth through the agricultural cycles," he said.
Mr Allison wasn't surprised though, given the essential and important nature of agriculture.
"We have been through floods, drought, bushfires, so COVID-19 was just another challenge to overcome," he said.
"Elders clients responded in a very resilient and stoic way in order to make the best of the good season.
"They're used to being at the whim of external factors, while our staff were kept busy supporting the winter crop and restocking properties after the drought-breaking rainfall."
Mr Allison highlighted the performance of the company's rural products division.
"The acquisition and integration of the AIRR wholesale business provided an EBIT contribution of $21.9m, and has exceeded business case expectations after only 10.5 months of ownership," he said.
"Elders' return on capital of 18.7pc was 0.5 percentage points up on FY19.
"If the effect of the AIRR acquisition is excluded, our return on capital of 20.2pc is in line with the 20pc return on capital hurdle we set ourselves at the start of the second EPP period."
Mr Allison said following the coronavirus outbreak in March, the company acted "early and decisively", forming a dedicated COVID-19 response committee.
"The committee oversaw several measures including establishing new ways of working, as well as contactless service arrangements in our branches and on-farm," he said.
"From an operational perspective, COVID-19 created supply chain disruption and border crossing challenges for our business and local communities to navigate.
"I commend our people for the resilience and adaptability they have demonstrated in maintaining our commitment to our clients through the COVID-19 period and delivering an essential service to Australia's agriculture sector."
Elders chair Ian Wilton also commended the company's 2100 staff that "went above and beyond for our clients and our company".
"This was evident during the summer of bushfires, where Elders people fought fires, mended fences, fed livestock and provided a shoulder to lean on for so many," he said.
Mr Wilton said the next period for Elders would be guided by its third EPP, taking the company through to 2023.
"It will outline how we will achieve our ambition of delivering consistent and compelling shareholder returns through the agricultural cycles," he said.
In developing the third plan, Mr Allison said the company worked with investors and key stakeholders to set appropriate objectives.
"Our ambition is to achieve 5-10pc growth in EBIT and EPS (earnings per share) through the cycles at a minimum of 15pc return on capital," he said.
"The five strategic priorities for the next three years include winning market share, capturing more gross margin, strengthening and expanding our service offerings, optimising our feed and processing businesses, and further developing our sustainability program.
"Our three enablers for the third EPP include our systems modernisation program, developing the best people in a safe and inclusive environment, and maintaining our unflinching financial discipline."
Mr Allison said the systems modernisation was in the design phase and included the company's financial systems, online platforms and agtech.
"We had been wanting to do this for a while, but not too long ago we weren't quite in the financial position to do so," he said.
"We feel now the time is right to make these enhancements and improvements, given that Elders is in a very positive growth phase."
CREDIT: Alisha Fogden
Word count: 727
