Farmers urged to consider manufacturing
Wimmera farmers have long been supplying restaurants and food manufacturers with the produce they need to make a living, and now they are being encouraged to do this manufacturing themselves.
The Wimmera Development Association is partnering with AgTech firm Beanstalk to deliver the Wimmera Food Innovation Program.
This will provide training to people with ideas for food businesses - and those that have existing businesses.
WDA project manager Vernetta Taylor said the aim was to create new revenue streams and opportunities for the entrants. "We want to grow food entrepreneurship in our region," she said.
"I think if farmers have the desire to go into food distribution they should consider it."
Ms Taylor said the two-hour workshops would include insights on the opportunities COVID-19 had created. Up to 10 participants in these workshops will then undertake a 12-week crash course in foundational innovation skills. Following this, the program will develop the three strongest ideas across a further 12 weeks.
Ms Taylor said: "Over time, we expect that a critical mass of participants will allow for an alumni network to co-mentor one another beyond the program."
Beanstalk founder Will Taing said his organisation had previously rolled out this strategy to Darwin and parts of New South Wales, with positive results.
"We get some businesses that come with an idea and we help them move to establishing a business with early stages of revenue," he said.
"For existing operations, (the program) is about helping them diversify and de-risk their core business: A farmer in Mildura who took part was producing almonds and had a sheep operation.
"While the sheep operation wasn't their focus, one of the sons in the business was taking an interesting approach to training Kelpie dogs to manage a sheep flock. As a result, they were working with Adelaide University on understanding the welfare and stress implications for sheep of doing this.
"They are now looking to move into welfare lamb products into high-end butchers. We worked with that group to help them test it and work with a number of chefs in Melbourne and Adelaide to validate the taste of the new product."
Ms Taylor said the project would be delivered in conjunction with Food Innovation Australia Limited, and had been in the works for several years.
The three Innovation Inspiration Workshops will take place on Monday October 26 at 7pm, Wednesday October 28 at 10am and Thursday November 5 at 2pm.
Registrations can be made via Beanstalk's website.
CREDIT: Alexander Darling
Word count: 419
