WHETHER we live in the metropolitan area or in the regions, South Australians are fortunate to have access to the best food, wine and fibre in the world on our doorstep.
However, Australian farmers – and SA farmers in particular – don’t do what they do for accolades or acknowledgment. They do it out of an ingrained passion for caring for land and livestock in order to produce for domestic and export markets.
What should be acknowledged by governments is the role of agriculture as the powerhouse of the SA economy.
As such, it is in the interests of all that primary industries be positioned as a growth opportunity now and into the future. Across the country, regional development is taking on renewed significance as we look for initiatives to support economic recovery from Covid-19 and respond to population growth outside of capital cities.
In SA, the food, wine and agribusiness sector has set an ambitious target to generate $23bn by 2030. To realise this – and to ensure primary producers stay profitable and sustainable – we need policy and programs that respond to industry needs. And that support the regional communities which sustain our workforce.
Primary Producers SA stands ready to work with all sides of politics to ensure agriculture and sustainable regional development are at the heart of decision making. While differences in policies may arise, PPSA will work hard to establish trust and respect and be solutions-oriented in all our dealings.
Along with group members representing grains, dairy, livestock, horticulture, wine grapes and forestry sectors, PPSA will be advocating for the next government to ensure legislative reforms governing pastoral and biosecurity laws are progressed in the next parliament. We would also like to see support of carbon farming, farm forestry, AgTech, plant-based protein, wild-dog management, agricultural research and development, cutting stamp duty, and lowering the cost of getting food from paddock to plate.
To some, agriculture’s state election wish lists may seem long and complex. But it is critical those vying for the primary industries portfolio understand why these issues are so important. We can no longer afford to overlook the interdependency of agriculture to regional development.
A whole-of-government approach needs to be taken to reforms such as mining on agricultural land, water security, vocational education and training in schools, heavy-vehicle transport, natural-resource management and planning laws. This requires strong leadership from the minister.
No matter which side forms government after March 19, it is important they deliver opportunities that benefit farmers, rural communities, and the economic performance of SA. PROFESSOR SIMON MADDOCKS IS PRIMARY PRODUCERS SA CHAIR
CREDIT: SIMON MADDOCKS
Word count: 435
