Australia attracts a lot of attention in the global climate change debate for a country with around 0.33 per cent of the world's 7.9 billion people.
Australia emits 1.2 per cent of the world's greenhouse gas emissions which, let's be honest, indicates we Aussies do need to reduce our carbon footprint.
But does Australia deserve to be singled out by world leaders like the UK's Boris Johnson and America's Joe Biden for failing to set more "ambitious" greenhouse gas reduction targets?
Many world leaders have recently been falling over themselves making pledges that their countries will achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050.
Even China, the world's biggest carbon polluter, has set 2060 as its target year to become carbon neutral.
However, few details have been provided on just how these targets will be achieved and don't hold your breath waiting for them.
Unfortunately "ambitious targets" and vague "roadmaps", while generating a lot of media hot air, won't produce significant reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.
The world is expected to have a population of almost 10 billion by 2050 with much of that growth occurring in developing countries like India, Nigeria, Pakistan, the Congo, Ethiopia, Tanzania, Indonesia and Egypt.
Will these new arrivals happily live on the breadline like most of their parents and grandparents as their contribution to stopping the steady rise in the world's thermometer, or will they aspire to modern pleasures like cars, travel and big houses?
The latter is the more likely.
If you listen to the noisy critics you'd be forgiven for thinking Australia is the main obstacle to a cooler earth.
And while many of these critics have political and other agendas, the present federal government has allowed itself to become an easy target for them by pandering far too much to climate-change deniers.
While the world is unlikely to ever achieve carbon neutral status - particularly if the human population continues to rise - the current worldwide switch to renewable energy offers a tremendous opportunity for Australians.
We have a talent for developing clever technology - you just need to look at what's happening with agtech - which gives us the chance to build new and profitable industries around things like cheap, green energy, solar power technology and electric vehicles.
It's time we stopped being lectured on the world stage by phonies pretending to be climate-change saviours and grabbed an amazing opportunity to rebuild our manufacturing sector.
We have the natural resources and the human capital just waiting to be invested. Australia can be a major contributor to reducing carbon emissions through innovative technology.
Just about every day one of the world's leading car makers announces a new all-electric or hybrid model vehicle.
The tipping point has arrived in the switch to electric vehicles (EVs).
We have all the resources to make EVs right here.
An Australian-built electric ute, the ACE Yewt, is on schedule to roll out of an Adelaide factory early next year with a price tag of just under $26,000 for the basic model.
Will other local manufacturers follow suit? We will probably let the likes of Tesla, the world's leading maker of EVs, cut our lunch.
Tesla chair Robyn Denholm said the company plans to spend upwards of $1 billion on Australia's minerals supply to meet growing worldwide EV demand.
She told the Minerals Council of Australia that each EV has around $5000 of minerals, with Australia able to supply most of it.
"Australia is the only country in the world with resources in all three of the critical battery metals as well as other minerals required for the clean energy transition."
"By 2030, the value of the global lithium-ion battery market is forecast to be $400 billion. That's eight-times the revenue generated by Australia's coal exports in 2020."
She said Australia should be refining its lithium to save costs and reduce emissions.
Tesla estimated Australia last year supplied about 49 per cent of the world's lithium ore, but zero per cent of the refined product suitable for battery cells.
That lithium sold for about $US100 million, but if it was processed on shore in Australia the value would have been more like $1.7 billion.
It's time Australia got smart and left our critics in our dust.
By VERNON GRAHAM, ACM national machinery writer.
CREDIT: Vernon Graham
Word count: 718
