Through its Growth Awards, Syngenta puts the spotlight on growers and farm advisers from different regions across Australia and New Zealand (ANZ), showcasing their contribution in one of the following categories: Productivity, Sustainability, Community & People, and new for 2020, Innovator.
Nominations for the Growth Awards are invite-only and 26 regional winners have been chosen from the pool of nominees. The Australian and New Zealand winners are chosen by an independent panel comprised of industry representatives and stakeholders. They will be announced at the Growth Awards dinner in 2021. Meet the regional winners:
Uncovering innovators Innovation is about more than big ideas. Innovation is about transformation. The Innovator category of the Growth Awards is new in 2020, and it couldn't have come at a more appropriate time, as the entire agri industry rethinks how it operates from the paddock all the way up the value chain.
This year has turned everything we know about work, product, access, supply chains and climate on its head. Innovators are those leaders at every level who don't just come up with ideas, they champion them, bring people along on the journey and in the end, change the industry for the better.
The new Innovator category of the Growth Awards recognises trailblazing growers, advisers and industry influencers who contribute to innovation in agriculture or apply game-changing technologies.
The Innovator regional winners are:
Heath McWhirter from Summit Ag in NSW, who is connecting farmers and others in the ag sector through an ag focused communication platform he developed called Yacker. Sarah Nolet from AgThentic, an agtech strategy and advisory firm, and Tenacious Ventures, Australia's first dedicated agrifood tech venture capital firm. Tanya and Rob Kitto from WA who have developed a new commodity by taking lupins from the paddock to the plate as pulse flours and are about to launch on the export scene. Productivity - the key to driving profitability Productivity always has and always will be a key driver of profitability in agriculture, and nowhere more than in Australia and New Zealand, where labour costs are high and market access is competitive.
Unlocking new ways to maintain and improve productivity will also help us play our part in feeding and clothing a growing global population.
From the very first Growth Awards in 2014, Productivity has been a keystone category, recognising and celebrating growers and advisers who use best-practice in achieving consistent productivity gains.
The Productivity regional winners are:
Productivity Growers
Brad Johnston, Grower, Quandialla, NSW David Haak, Grower, Tent Hill, QLD Simon Doolin, Grower, North Star, NSW Productivity Advisers:
Dale Abbott, Adviser, Bowen, QLD Graeme Jones , Adviser, South Island, NZ Karen Smith, Adviser, Perth, WA Paul McIntosh , Adviser, Dubbo to Burdekin, NSW and QLD Roger Blyth , Adviser, Canterbury, NZ Tim Walker , Adviser, Devonport, TAS An eye on the future Sustainability is always one of the most contested categories in the Syngenta Growth Awards, because the industry is so acutely aware of the link between creating sustainable practice and being able to continue to farm into the future. Sustainable practice requires an exceptional understanding of regional conditions, the crop and the soil, to build the best approach to planting, protecting, growing and harvesting.
The Growth Awards Sustainability category recognises growers and advisers who are committed to addressing industry issues to create a sustainable and profitable future.
The Sustainability regional winners are:
Sustainability Growers:
Adam Schreurs , Grower, Clyde, VIC Murray Hall , Grower, Brookton, WA Sustainability Advisers:
Chris Monsour, Adviser, Bowen, QLD Chris Toohey , Adviser, Albury, NSW Denis Persley, Adviser, Toowoomba, QLD Linda Peacock , Adviser, Tauranga, NZ Nigel Meyers , Adviser, Lower Eyre Peninsula, SA Stuart Grigg , Adviser, Ballan, VIC Connections matter Some say it's market forces that drive agriculture forward. Some say it's science. Others still think it's climate, or land prices or technology. But what really drives agriculture forward is people. Practice change happens in agriculture because growers are interested in learning from each other, sharing what they know, and collaborating in the best interests of the industry.
The Community and People category of the Growth Awards recognises those growers and advisers who make a leading contribution to their community, workers and fellow growers by creating networks, building connections and igniting conversations.
The Community and People regional winners are:
Community and People Growers:
Anthony De Ieso, Grower, Adelaide, SA Brett South, Grower, Esperance, WA Sue Middleton , Grower, Wongan Hills, WA Community and People Advisers:
Alex Thomas, Adviser, Torrens Park, SA Grace Brennan, Adviser, Dubbo, NSW Josh McGregor, Adviser, Qld and NSW
CREDIT:
Word count: 757
