This is branded content for Farmers Business Network.
Farmers Business Network (FBN), the farmer-driven agtech and e-commerce platform disrupting the industry and the way farmers purchase crop protection inputs, is on a recruitment drive for regional community members to provide a local presence.
FBN was launched into the Australian market over 12 months ago and is working to build a network of local Community Builders to offer on-the-ground support to its growing network of farmer members by engaging and empowering local rural and regional communities.
FBN's Community Builder program has seen tremendous growth in the past six months with independent representatives now located across many broadacre farming regions around the country.
Their role is to help communicate to farmers in their area how FBN membership can deliver transparency around pricing, reduce their crop protection input costs as well as plug them into analytical tools and farmer-driven data sharing intelligence to make more informed on farm decisions.
In Western Australia, fifth generation wheat grower Durwin Melbin decided to take on the Community Builder role in January.
As well as running his property, Mr Melbin has owned and operated hardware and rural supplies business Main Street Hardware in the town of Coorow since 2015.
"This is really going to disrupt the old standard style of buying for farmers that has been around forever.
"It's really exciting," he said.
"The transparency of pricing is wonderful.
"The prices are there for everyone to look at and it's the same prices whether you're big or small - there's not one price for someone and a different price for someone else.
"Members can use the platform to compare and price inputs and get the best deal."
On the other side of the country, Drew Liddicoat from Tumby Bay in South Australia works full time in logistics while managing a portfolio of broadacre growers in his off time.
"As a Community Builder it allows me to be in the community selling products to farmers and making relationships," Drew said.
"It also gives me the flexibility to hold a full time job."
Over on the east coast of Australia, with the bumper harvest and finishing off rains, which are being driven by La Nina, we have seen high demand for crop protection in New South Wales.
One of FBNs Community Builders shared his thoughts on the benefits of FBN to his network of growers.
"Within an ever changing marketplace, the need to focus on costs and reliability of supply has never been more important," the Community Builder said.
"FBN provides solutions for grower inputs at competitive prices with flexible inventory management and scheduled deliveries.
"The online platform for ordering inputs provides agri-business with the necessary tools to ensure an efficient program for paddock preparation and crop management throughout the seasons."
Want to build something big as an FBN Community Builder? Head to the fbn.com/locals or email Sarah Woolford swoolford@farmersbusinessnetwork.com
Copyright (c) 2021 Farmsave Holdings Pty Ltd, t/a Farmers Business Network Australia. All rights Reserved. "FBN" and "FBN Direct" are registered trademarks or trademarks of Farmer's Business Network, Inc.
CREDIT:
Word count: 511
