Letters to the Editor
RE: Victoria Liberals/Nationals Policy document response Dear Editor,
Victoria's agriculture sector is a vibrant and thriving industry, resilient to the challenges that are thrown at it, whether that be fire, floods, storms or the impacts of a global pandemic.
Agriculture is worth $17.8 billion to the Victorian economy and almost one third of Australia's total agricultural value. It is more than numbers on a spreadsheet - the more we produce and sell, the more jobs are created in local communities.
The Andrews Labor Government is proud to support our hard-working farmers and agribusinesses with almost $30 billion of investment in rural and regional Victoria since 2015 - four times more than the former Liberal National Government.
Our $115 million Agriculture Strategy identifies key projects to help the agriculture sector remain strong, innovative and sustainable now and into the future.
This includes our Agriculture Energy Investment Plan supporting farmers to improve energy efficiency and reduce costs.
We are also promoting Ag tech with $15 million to establish an AgTech innovation network, using our smart farms to translate cutting edge research into useful methods on farm.
We are investing in agriculture colleges to support upgrades of teaching spaces and accommodation offerings so they have state-of-the-art facilities to upskill the next generation of agriculture workers.
It's been a difficult few years for the sector - and it's extremely disappointing that the National Party has no plan to stand up for farmers.
It's very similar to Peter Walsh's legacy as Minister for Agriculture which was one of inaction, cuts and neglect.
Sadly, the latest Liberal National policy document shows nothing has changed and the Nationals are beholden to the Liberal's agenda of cuts and privatisation.
While the Opposition has produced a 40 page glossy pamphlet which fails to mention agriculture even once, we have been delivering new projects, more investment and creating opportunities for farmers to grow their businesses and expand into new markets.
This year, rural and regional Victorians have a choice between a National Party that continues to neglect their interests at the expense of the Liberals' agenda, or the Andrews Labor Government, which is working side by side with regional Victorians to ensure our state remains the agricultural powerhouse of the nation.
Mary-Anne Thomas, Minister for Agriculture and Regional Development Scrap GPs in the Bush Dear Editor,
'Scrap GPs in the Bush', is the latest federal government controversial idea, as recently reported in the Daily Telegraph.
This extraordinary proposal from the Morrison government to rip GP's services out of regional Australia shows the government does not care about the lives of regional Australians.
Anne Webster MP and Emma Kealy MP, why are you not outraged?
Your slogans 'getting it done', 'putting you first' and 'I'm listening' are hollow and lacking.
At a time when we are losing more and more medical services from our regions, it's time to stop blaming the states, when it is the federal government who believe regional Australians don't deserve access to basic healthcare.
Aged care, Medicare, no RATS over Christmas and health services depleted, while funding is spent on sports stadiums.
Our Mallee electorate deserves an explanation as to how this idea has ever seen the light of day.
We have more and more people that have relocated to the regions.
We need more GP's and medical services, not cutbacks.
I have always said I will fight for medical services for the Mallee.
Kealy has been a hospital CEO and Webster said she welcomed 'every tool in the toolbox' to increase the health workforce in regional centres last December.
Mildura is losing GP's and Horsham does not even have a surgeon. It seems our National party elected representatives have run out of tools in their toolbox.
I urge the communities of Mallee to write letters of protest about this to Webster and Kealy, your local papers and make your voices heard that this is unacceptable.
I have friends who are in the medical professions and along with my community, they all tell me how urgently our medical services need to be increased, not taken away.
Time for a new toolbox. Time to scrap the LNP in the Bush, not GPs.
Vote 1 Claudia Haenel, Independent for Mallee.
Claudia Haenel, Independent for the federal seat of Mallee. Federal budget questions Dear Editor,
Media reports indicate that in next week's Federal budget funding for gas-related projects will be of considerable magnitude.
It is now widely recognised that renewables are significantly undercutting fossil fuels as the world's cheapest source of energy.
The price of solar power has dropped by over 80% since 2010.
Using fossil fuels to produce energy is also a prime cause of climate change.
Therefore the question needs to be asked: why are the federal Coalition Government still promoting using fossil fuels - coal and gas - to produce energy, and why are they pouring huge sums of money into fossil fuels?
In my opinion the answer can perhaps be found by looking at the partnership structure that exists between the Liberals and the Nationals.
It is common knowledge that the Nationals have strong reasons to favour the fossil fuel industry-Barnaby Joyce has publicly made this well known many times.
Surely the Federal Coalition Government should be considering the well being and financial health of all Australians before continuing to promote the use of expensive and climate damaging fossil fuels for energy production, and also attempting to put aside internal political aspirations that may exist within their partnership structure concerning fossil fuel use to produce energy.
A federal Government election is due to be held in May.
Brian Measday, Myrtle Bank, South Australia
CREDIT: Ben Fraser
Word count: 944
