The Marshall Liberal Government has released a survey as the initial step in creating South Australia's first AgTech strategy to grow productivity and profitability for primary producers.
The aim of the survey is to better understand the current state of play when it comes to adoption of technology on farm and the barriers preventing greater uptake and development of AgTech.
Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development Tim Whetstone said the AgTech strategy will provide a path for greater uptake of technology on-farm.
"Through the Marshall Liberal Government's AgTech Advisory Group, we are establishing the first AgTech strategy for South Australia which we envisage will be a game changer for our primary industries sector," Minister Whetstone said.
"The first step is a survey to gain a greater understanding from farmers and those involved in the AgTech sector about the barriers to on-farm adoption of technology."
Minister Whetstone also said that he sees AgTech as a key to greatly enhancing the productivity, profitability and sustainability of the agricultural sectors in the state.
"This survey asks primary producers, agricultural advisers, and AgTech researchers, developers and suppliers to let us know what's preventing the agricultural community in SA from developing, investing in, and using AgTech," Minister Whetstone said.
"We have already held our first AdvanceAg showcase at the Adelaide Showgrounds as well as established two AgTech demonstration farms at Struan and Kybybolite.
"It's our goal to show the agricultural community the value in AgTech, support its development, and assist the adoption of solutions on-farm for beneficial outcomes."
AgTech Advisory Group independent chair Dr Leanna Read said the group has been established to provide strategic advice to the government on the practical application and adoption of AgTech.
"AgTech is constantly evolving but there is a huge opportunity for South Australia to be a leader in this field," said Dr Read.
"Creating an AgTech strategy in South Australia will help to grow the agricultural sector and encourage on-farm technology adoption.
"We want as much input into the survey as possible, and we particularly want to hear from farmers about their future intentions for on-farm technology adoption."
To undertake the AgTech strategy survey, visit: https://www.surveymonkey.com/r/BLTJYS2
CREDIT: Taylor Harvey
Word count: 362
