The Kohlberg Kravis Roberts-owned infrastructure investor John Laing has hired advisory firm Azure Capital as part of its quest to buy an interest in Enel Energy’s Australia-based green energy business.
Enel, an Italian manufacturer and distributor of electricity and gas, has been keen to sell its Enel Green Power renewable energy assets in Australia for some time, say sources, and now it has investment bank – Credit Suisse –running an official sale process, with first-round bids due this month.
On offer is a major stake in the Australian portfolio, which is understood to have a valuation in the hundreds of millions of dollars. The proceeds will be used to fund its development pipeline.
KKR purchased British infrastructure investor John Laing last year in a Â£2bn buyout.
Most recently, John Laing has been busy on the deal front Down Under, looking at the portfolio of New Zealand telecom towers, that was sold by Vodafone New Zealand to Northleaf Capital and InfraRed Partners for $NZ1.7bn in recent weeks.
John Laing ran a process of its own to sell renewable energy assets, with First Sentier (now known as Igneo Infrastructure Partners) buying its wind farm assets in 2021 for $285m.
But while its Finley and Sunraysia solar farms in NSW were originally part of the portfolio on offer, they were later withdrawn from the process and retained by John Laing.
John Laing operates in Britain, Europe, North America and Latin America as well as Australia, investing in more than 150 projects across transport, social infrastructure, energy transition, accommodation and digital infrastructure.
Enel operates in the renewable energy sector in Australia and has the Bungala 1 & 2 solar plants in South Australia that were developed in conjunction with the Dutch Infrastructure Fund.
They have offtake agreements in place with Origin Energy.
In total, the Enel assets produce 309 megawatts, with the Bungala 1 & 2 solar projects producing 137.7MW and 137.5MW respectively and its Cohun solar farm in Victoria operating with 34MW capacity.
Globally, Enel manages more than 1200 power plants on five continents with assets in operation or under construction in about 21 countries.
It has over 54GW of installed renewable capacity from a mix of renewable resources, including wind, solar, hydro-electric and geothermal.
It will be interesting to see what other groups are lining up for a stake in the Australia portfolio, as renewable energy assets remain in high demand from groups hoping to capitalise on the energy transaction towards cleaner fuels. Other buyers in the space have recently amassed their own platforms.
Infrastructure Capital bought Engie’s Willogoleche Wind Farm in South Australia and secured other development opportunities from Engie for $400m in 2020. Igneo also purchased Elliott Green Power in Australia this year. Palisade Investment Partners bought the Tilt Renewables Snowtown 2 wind farm for $1.1bn in 2019.
CREDIT: EDITED BY BRIDGET CARTER
Word count: 473
