The state government and the University of Adelaide have joined forces to enhance opportunities for agricultural research in SA.
Through the signed agreement, PIRSA and the University will utilise each other's strengths in research, development, extension and innovation and also provide a strong platform to attract more federal government funding.
Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development Tim Whetstone said key areas of the agreement's focus would include crop and food sciences.
"By leveraging PIRSA's strengths in applied research and extension and optimising the University's strengths in discovery and basic research, there are big research and development wins to be gained for the benefit of South Australia's primary industries sector, particularly in focus areas such as AgTech.
"The state government already has a close working relationship with the University of Adelaide but this new partnership creates greater opportunities to grow the state's reputation as a world leader in agricultural research."
The University of Adelaide's vice-chancellor Peter Rathjen says the partnership with PIRSA will provide ongoing benefits for SA.
"Throughout its history, through research and our graduates, the University of Adelaide has made a profound impact on Australia's multi-billion-dollar agriculture, food and wine sectors. This new partnership will help us to grow our research capability in these fields for the benefit of South Australia," Prof Rathjen said.
"SARDI researchers and facilities have been co-located at our Waite and Roseworthy campuses for decades. While there has been much interaction between us during that time, this new partnership deepens our relationship and creates more opportunity for world-leading research based right here in SA.
"By combining our expertise and research efforts, we aim to confront the big issues faced by our primary producers. The results of this work will be felt from the laboratory to the paddock, to the supply chain, and into people's daily lives through the food they eat."
Word count: 307
