PLANS to create a state-wide AgTech strategy are kicking off with the government releasing a survey for primary producers.
The survey aims to better understand thestate of play when it comes to adoption of technology on farm and the barriers preventing greater uptake and development of AgTech.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister Tim Whetstone said the AgTech strategy would provide a path for greater uptake of technology on-farm.
"Through the government's AgTech Advisory Group, we are establishing the first AgTech strategy for SA, which we envisage will be a game changer for our primary industries sector," he said.
"The first step is a survey to gain a greater understanding from farmers and those involved in the AgTech sector about the barriers to on-farm adoption of technology.
"We see AgTech as a key to greatly enhancing the productivity, profitability and sustainability of the agricultural sectors in our state.
"This survey asks primary producers, agricultural advisers, and AgTech researchers, developers and suppliers to let us know what's preventing the agricultural community in SA from developing, investing in, and using AgTech."
RELATED READING: Call out for innovative ag to populate demonstration farms
SE govt farms to showcase tech
Mr Whetstone said several steps had already been taken, with the first AdvanceAg showcase at the Adelaide Showgrounds, as well as the establishment of two AgTech demonstration farms at Struan and Kybybolite in the South East.
"It's our goal to show the agricultural community the value in AgTech, support its development, and assist the adoption of solutions on-farm for beneficial outcomes," he said.
AgTech Advisory Group independent chair Dr Leanna Read said the group had been established to provide strategic advice to government on the practical application and adoption of AgTech.
"AgTech is constantly evolving but there is a huge opportunity for South Australia to be a leader in this field," she said.
"Creating an AgTech strategy in SA will help to grow the agricultural sector and encourage on-farm technology adoption.
"We want as much input into the survey as possible, and we particularly want to hear from farmers about their future intentions for on-farm technology adoption."
Details: Take the AgTech strategy survey at surveymonkey.com/r/BLTJYS2
Word count: 361
