WITH more than half the state's primary producers saying they do not use any form of AgTech on their operations, and nearly one-in-five having no plans to, the chair of the AgTech Advisory Group Leanna Read says the next step is to remove the barriers holding producers back.
A recent survey from the state government asking producers, advisers, researchers and suppliers also showed the biggest reasons for the reluctance to invest was concern about the return on investment and confusion about how to use the technology.
Dr Read said while the results were somewhat expected, and consistent across the different sectors, it was useful feedback into the development of the AgTech Strategic draft plan, which has been released publicly in the past week.
The draft strategy includes seven pillars to help fast-track adoption of AgTech, including networking and collaboration, demonstration, entrepreneurial capability, skills and education, improved regional connectivity, compatibility of products and government leadership.
Dr Read said cost and a lack of a good case study were often holding back farmers from investing, and one way they wanted to tackle this was through demonstration.
This includes the demonstration farms at Struan, Kybybolite and Loxton - with calls going out for expressions of interest in supplying technology to the Loxton site this week - but also through "intermediaries" and "ambassadors".
"People want to see a demonstration on a real farm, so we need proper operations to be most convincing to people," she said.
She defined an intermediary as someone with broad knowledge of the products available but acting independently of different companies.
Dr Read said she considered the biggest focus to be on networking, with AgTech hubs - not necessarily physical - to bring people together and build trust.
She said the draft was a high level strategy at this stage and they pushed for "traction" with stakeholders but they were hoping for industry feedback and government funding to get the plan into reality.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister Tim Whetstone said the government would work with the agricultural community to see the value in AgTech, support its development, and assist the adoption of solutions on-farm for beneficial outcomes.
Details: View the draft strategy at pir.sa.gov.au/primary_industry/agtech
CREDIT: Elizabeth Anderson
Word count: 369
