South Australian sheep and cattle producers will receive $10,000 State Government grants to embrace AgTech on farm enabling use of data-based livestock management to help grow their business profitability.
The Livestock AgTech Adoption Rebate is part of the $7.5 million Red Meat and Wool Growth Program and is designed to encourage livestock producers to invest in new technology and obtain the necessary training and support to implement it successfully.
Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development and Member for Finniss David Basham said the rebate scheme was about increasing livestock sector productivity and profitability.
"The funds will support adoption of electronic identification equipment such as walk-over weighing systems, panel readers and auto drafters or remote monitoring sensors for water points and soil," Mr Basham said.
"On-farm AgTech is a key component for the future growth of our red meat and wool sectors particularly as the South Australian Beef Industry Blueprint indicates only one in five beef producers currently achieve greater than five per cent return on assets.
"The rebate will support producers to implement priorities identified in their Farm AgTech Adoption Plans developed through the Livestock Enterprise Planning sessions.
"Following feedback received during recent drought forums, a rebate for pregnancy scanning services for sheep is also included in the scheme.
"Current research shows 74 per cent of South Australia's sheep producers do not currently undertake pregnancy scanning, one of the lowest rates in the country.
"As pregnancy scanning significantly assists with increasing lambing percentages, leading to improved productivity along with the obvious welfare benefits; it is important that we encourage uptake of this technology to assist with the rebuild of the state's flock.
"The red meat and wool sector generates $2.65 billion a year in production and processing revenue, $1.1 billion in exports and supports 30,000 jobs.
"The Red Meat and Wool Growth program provides a strong pathway for the industry to be even more resilient and forward looking with its focus on technology adoption, strategic skill development and enhancing biosecurity."
Applications for the Livestock AgTech Adoption Rebate will close at 5pm on March 31, 2022 or whenever the funding allocation is exhausted, whichever occurs first.
For further information visit www.pir.sa.gov.au/redmeatandwool
CREDIT: Michael Simmons
Word count: 364
