THE South Australia Research and Development Institute has joined forces with Adelaide University to increase agricultural research capability.
The State Government has signed a significant agreement with the University of Adelaide to deliver benefits in research, development and extension for primary industries in the state.
Through the agreement, Primary Industries and Regions SA (PIRSA) and the University will utilise each other's strengths in research, development, extension and innovation to achieve outcomes for the agricultural sector to attract greater external research and funding.
Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development Tim Whetstone said key areas of focus under the agreement include crop and food sciences.
"The Marshall Liberal Government is focused on growing the state's capabilities in agricultural research, development and extension and this agreement provides a strong platform," he said.
"By leveraging PIRSA's strengths in applied research and extension and optimising the University's strengths in discovery and basic research, there are big research and development wins to be gained for the benefit of South Australia's primary industries sector, particularly in focus areas such as AgTech.
The State Government already has a close working relationship with the University of Adelaide but this new partnership creates greater opportunities to grow the state's reputation as a world leader in agricultural research.
The University of Adelaide's vice-chancellor, Professor Peter Rathjen, said the partnership with PIRSA would provide ongoing benefits for South Australia.
"Throughout its history, through research and our graduates, the University of Adelaide has made a profound impact on Australia's multi-billion-dollar agriculture, food and wine sectors," he said.
Professor Rathjen said this new partnership would help the university to grow its research capability in the agriculture and food science fields for the benefit of South Australia.
"SARDI researchers and facilities have been co-located at our Waite and Roseworthy campuses for decades," he said.
"While there has been much interaction between us during that time, this new partnership deepens our relationship and creates more opportunity for world-leading research based right here in South Australia."
He said by combining expertise and research efforts, they would be able to confront the big issues faced by our primary producers.
"The results of this work will be felt from the laboratory to the paddock, to the supply chain, and into people's daily lives through the food they eat," he said.
Word count: 382
