One of Australia's most successful business innovators is coming to the region as part of his new role with the University of South Australia.
Founder of four highly successful startup companies, including the green energy company ZEN Energy and 2010 Australian Entrepreneur of the Year - Richard Turner - has joined UniSA as Industry Professor of Practice and Entrepreneur in Residence of the regional and metro Innovation & Collaboration Centre.
Prof Turner will be in the region from Tuesday, December 17 to Friday, December 20 to speak to community leaders and businesses about the support that UniSA is able to provide to the many businesses in the region, whether that be at idea stage, startup, scaleup or more advanced.
"There are so many emerging sectors that will be incredibly important to the state's future prosperity that will be centered around the Eyre Peninsula including renewable energy, space, manufacturing and agtech," he said.
"I will be heavily involved with the regional Innovation & Collaboration Centre based at the Whyalla campus and together with the brilliant resources and workspace available at the ICC, we can support and foster collaboration.
"I want to see startups, scaleups and spin out businesses all working together to create a buzz and a thriving new industrial heartland. Regional Australia has fielded some of the nation's greatest innovators and we want to make sure we are supporting enterprising business creators in regional South Australia."
The Innovation & Collaboration Centre gives entrepreneurs and those with early-stage ideas, a place to grow and receive support and the tools they need to build a successful startup. The ICC is a community of likeminded people whose shared experience of successes and failures benefits everyone. The ICC offers free workspace, events, workshops and support programs like Venture Catalyst.
As UniSA's Entrepreneur in Residence Prof Turner will contribute to programs like Venture Catalyst, which is a six-month program of support for those with an idea who think it might work as a business.
"We will pick the ideas that we think have the best chance of success and we will help develop it right through to making a pitch to investors," he said.
The program is offered at both the regional and metro Innovation & Collaboration Centres and provides tailored workshops, one-on-one mentoring, workspace, a network of expert advisors as well as the knowledge, experience and support of the University of South Australia. Two local companies are already participating in the program with availability for more to join. For more details, contact ICC Community Lead Denni Russel on 0431 233 679 or denni.russell@unisa.edu.au.
Word count: 429
