Australia’s nascent space industry has been boosted by a new research commercialisation project led by the University of Southern Queensland, which will help create a space manufacturing precinct in the state.
The university has been awarded a $50m federal government Trailblazer grant, to be matched by private investment, to develop infrastructure and equipment for rocket manufacturing, rocket launching, and hardware for satellites and space communication and sensors.
The grant is one of six awarded to universities by the Morrison government under the Trailblazer program to stimulate research commercialisation, which was announced in November last year and then expanded in this year’s budget.
But the Coalition held back the announcement of the six projects until the election campaign with the last two – the USQ space project and the University of Queensland’s food and beverage project – revealed only this week.
Federal Regionalisation Minister Bridget McKenzie said the USQ grant for space commercialisation “will turbocharge our growing space industry, helping us to achieve our goal of having 20,000 space sector jobs by 2030”.
The grant builds on USQ’s expertise in advanced materials and hypersonic propulsion.
“It will attract new rocket manufacturing companies to Australia and provide critical infrastructure such as testing facilities and spaceports able to service high volume launch capacity,” said Peter Schubel, executive director of USQ’s Institute for Advanced Engineering and Space Sciences.
USQ will partner with the Australian National University and the University of South Australia in the hub, dubbed iLaunch. USQ will also creat a space engineering degree to train students in the skills needed to develop the Australian space industry.
A second $50m Trailblazer grant announced this week went to the University of Queensland to commercialise food and beverage technology.
“By 2030, this project aims to contribute to doubling the value of Australia’s food and beverage manufacturing sector through a focus on smart production and new ingredients, creating innovative foods and beverages,” said Matthew Morell, director of UQ’s Queensland Alliance for Agriculture and Food Innovation.
UQ is partnering with the Queensland University of Technology, USQ, the Queensland government, the CSIRO and numerous industry partners. Between them, another they are investing another $110m.
Professor Morell said the project would be a game-changer, giving food and beverage manufacturers access to pilot facilities and state of the art equipment.
“This investment will allow innovative smaller businesses to accelerate their capacity for developing and manufacturing products that meet changing consumer needs, such as the desire for premium products,” he said.
Deakin University won another $50m Trailblazer grant for REACH – its Recycling and Renewable Energy Commercialisation Hub – which will boost innovation and job creation in Geelong and western Victoria.
Deakin and its partners – which include Federation University, RMIT, Swinburne University, USQ, CSIRO and a number of Victorian TAFE colleges – will invest over $300m on top of the Commonwealth’s $50m, and back several projects including: • An Australian supply chain for high technology batteries.
• Development of hydrogen storage and usage.
• Conversion of organic and inorganic waste into other products, including recycling soft plastic in a closed loop system.
Deakin research innovations executive director Ross Mahon said the REACH program was estimated to generate $1.4bn of revenue in ten years and create 2500 jobs directly and 7000 eventually.
Other Trailblazer grants went to the University of Adelaide (defence), UNSW (recycling and clean energy) and Curtin University (resources technology and minerals).
Originally only four were announced but two more – earmarked for regional areas – were included in the 2022-23 budget.
In the end only one Trailblazer project is being led by a regional university, USQ, but others, such as those run by Deakin and Curtin, have a regional component.
Regional University Network chair Nick Klomp said his group was pleased to see one project go to “a truly regional university”.
“This investment recognises the immense value that Australia’s regional universities can provide to the Australian economy,” Professor Klomp said.
TRAILBLAZING RESEARCH Universities awarded $50m Trailblazer grants * UNIVERSITY OF QUEENSLAND: Food and beverages Partnering with Queensland University of Technology, University of Southern Queensland, CSIRO, Queensland government * DEAKIN UNIVERSITY: Recycling and clean energy Partnering with Federation University, RMIT University, Swinburne University, University of Southern Queensland, TAFE * UNSW: Recycling and clean energy Partnering with University of Newcastle * UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE: Defence Partnering with UNSW, CSIRO * UNIVERSITY OF SOUTHERN QUEENSLAND: Space manufacturing Partnering with Australian National University, University of South Australia * CURTIN UNIVERSITY: Resources technology and critical minerals Partnering with University of Queensland, James Cook University
CREDIT: Tim Dodd
Word count: 754
