Well-known private equity executive Tony Schultz has joined the board of agtech start-up Availer as chairman and taken a 20 per cent stake in the firm.
Mr Schultz left global private equity firm KKR in April last year after four years when he specialised in infrastructure, utilities and natural resources.
Availer is a start-up group made up of four agtech companies that was created at the University of Adelaide, where Mr Schultz studied for his MBA.
One of its companies, MEQ Probe (MEQ stands for Meat Eating Quality) is now in a trial process, testing some of its laser technology before taking the next step of commercialisation.
The technology is being touted as a major advance in assessing meat. It is tested when the animal is freshly killed rather than cold to determine quality, taste and texture using laser technology.
A trial is under way involving data collected from 2400 lamb and beef carcasses. The project is being carried out with the Meat and Livestock Association (MLA) and is due to be finalised by the end of May.
Under the current meat processing system, each carcass is assessed by an inspector who then gives it a grade based on different cuts.
In comparison, MEQ uses laser technology to test the marbling and meat tenderness.
The company was given a $500,000 funding grant from Availer, MLA, Teys Australia, the meat processing firm and Midfield Group.
Another of the Availer companies is Spectral Change, which shoots laser beams into wine to measure a range of characteristics. This then helps winemakers determine the quality of the wine within the barrel.
Mr Schultz has taken on the chairmanship of Availer and holds a 20 per cent stake in the business.
The company is trying to raise cash at the moment from venture capital investors both in Australia and overseas.It is expected Availer would look at a public market debut within the next five years or be on the radar of a larger international technology company.
CREDIT: EDITED BY BRIDGET CARTER ; SCOTT MURDOCH
Word count: 340
