SOUTH Australia’s agricultural waste could be used to create new post-farmgate industries worth more than $100 million a year.
This is the aim of a new $11 million research consortium led by the University of Adelaide.
Some of these high-value products could include sunscreen from mushroom waste, skincare products from apples and berries and hi-tech materials from brussels sprout stalks.
Research consortium director Professor Vincent Bulone said up to 40 per cent of SA’s primary production could end up as waste, sometimes left to rot in the field or turned into low-value products such as compost or animal feed.
“But all of this food waste contains compounds that have high-value potential applications,” he said.
“Some can act as prebiotics or antioxidants; some have anti-inflammatory or antimicrobial properties; others, in particular carbohydrates, provide mechanical strength and texturising properties in food, lubricants, cosmetics and structural materials.
“Our research will cover the entire value chain from our local growers to manufacturers of food products and beverages, skincare products, and green materials.” State Innovation and Skills Minister David Pisoni, pictured, launched the research consortium at the university’s Waite campus yesterday.
Mr Pisoni said the consortium had been supported with a $4 million grant through the Research Consortia Program.
“Science and research are of enormous value to our economy, our society and critical to SA’s prosperity,” he said.
“Industries like agtech are driving economic growth and creating new, knowledge-intensive jobs.” The Research Consortium brings together some of the best scientists from many fields across the University of Adelaide, with a total of 18 partners – including nine SA-based agriculture and food sector companies, and another nine national and international academic institutions and industry partners.
Projects already under way include isolating and identifying anthocyanins from apples and berries for use in skincare formulations and other health-promoting products and trialling cellulose molecules from waste brussels sprout stalks and other biomass as replacements for glass fibres in filtration systems and plastic materials.Another project is extracting vitamin D, beta-glucans and chitosan from mushroom waste for use in nutraceuticals and sunscreen materials.
CREDIT: PAULA THOMPSON REGIONAL EDITOR
Word count: 348
