"WE HAVE no choice - we need to do more with less."
This was the constant message I received during my visit to Israel last week as part of a SA delegation looking at agtech opportunities and business investment.
For a country with 60 per cent of its landscape being desert, the 'more with less' tagline certainly rings true. But, that hasn't stopped Israel from pushing the boundaries. Using technology and a culture built on determination and 'chutzpah', Israel is growing food in the desert on nothing more than sand.
From winegrapes to date palms to cherry tomatoes, olives and vegetables, this arid area is thriving. In fact, 80pc of Israel's milk and food production is in the desert.
In many ways, SA's dry climate and challenges to water availability are very similar to Israel.
Despite numerous limitations such as having a small population and a challenging geopolitical climate, Israel has overcome adversity to become a world leader in agtech. More than 300 multinationals have Israel-based operations and the country's vision is focused on exporting its knowledge to global markets. Israel has more start-ups per capita than any other nation.
During my visit I met with a number of agtech start-ups, many of whom are working on technologies related to irrigated horticulture. While technologies such as automation, yield mapping and sensors were cutting-edge some years ago, these are the norm today.
A start-up I met with in Tel Aviv has its Growth Based Irrigation technology installed in SA, showing water saving results on apple and winegrapes of 20pc on average.
Utilising a number of data sets, the product monitors trunk diameter and fruit growth and uses this to respond to soil moisture status and vine growth.
As a citrus and winegrape grower for 30 years in the Riverland, I was an early adopter of Israeli technology that gave SA a competitive advantage.
But, we can't rest on our laurels and we need to continue to be progressive in adopting agricultural technologies.
Additionally, the way in which Israeli businesses collaborate, particularly in an incubator setting, is something that I found extremely insightful.
At agriculture research organisation the Volcani Centre, and Ben Gurion University of the Negev, the delegation heard about impressive research and development and commercialisation of technologies and techniques to grow more food in arid conditions with less water.
There is also a focus in Israel on pest management and defence against these threats. I met with a business that has developed a substance to attract and eradicate Qld fruit fly and has had commercial results in India.
These types of technologies could value-add to the work SA is undertaking against fruit fly.
As the state government embarks on an agtech focus with the appointment of a collaborative advisory board, I will use my learnings from recent study trips to the United States and Israel to change the way in which SA has previously approached agtech. Instead of playing catch-up on agtech investment on a global stage, we want SA to be a leader in this space.
While we aren't aiming to be the next Silicon Valley, SA has the opportunity to have a focused approach on agtech to grow the state's agriculture industries on par with the National Farmers' Federation vision for agriculture to be a $100-billion industry by 2030.
CREDIT: TIM WHETSTONE
Word count: 554
