The State Government has partnered with Vinehealth Australia to fund nine new biosecurity signs at key border locations, as part of a new project which will see South Australian vineyard biosecurity launched into a new digital era.
Bordertown residents will see one of the new biosecurity signs when they travel on the Dukes Highway, towards the South Australia-Victoria border.
The new signs will highlight the strict quarantine requirements associated with the entry of phylloxera risk items into the state, such as vineyard machinery, equipment, soil and grapes.
The new Digital Biosecurity Platform will provide real-time data on South Australian vineyards to enhance responses to devastating diseases and pests.
The Marshall Liberal Government has shown their support, providing $75,000 towards the "nation-leading" project.
Announcing the funding today at Penola, Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development Tim Whetstone said the adoption of an AgTech approach to biosecurity through this platform will provide the wine and grape sector with advanced technology to meet serious biosecurity threats.
"The Marshall Liberal Government sees this project as a key opportunity for the wine industry to adopt rapidly evolving technology in the fight against incursion threats," said Minister Whetstone.
"The new platform will establish South Australian grape growers as global leaders in biosecurity and propel our wine and grape industries into next generation technology in this area."
Vinehealth Australia CEO Inca Pearce said the development of the new platform will replace the existing Vineyard Register, providing greater ability to protect South Australia's vineyards from pests and diseases.
"By enhancing the Vineyard Register with contemporary technology, we can better support all parts of biosecurity management, including preparedness, prevention, response, surveillance and recovery," said Ms Pearce.
Local Member for MacKillop Nick McBride said that the newly erected biosecurity signs sent an important message to those travelling through the region.
"I welcome the increased signage, particularly in the electorate of MacKillop, as it sends a strong message, said Mr McBride
"Phylloxera presents a huge risk to our local wine industry and it's crucial that we remain vigilant in implementing the highest quarantine measures at the border and in our vineyards."
People who break the rules when crossing the border or entering the state's wine regions face fines of up to $100,000.
CREDIT: Taylor Harvey
Word count: 375
