More than 50 per cent of South Australian primary producers are not investing in on-farm technology, the SA government AgTech Advisory group reveal.
The recent figure was pulled from their first survey, which received more than 600 responses from primary producers, agricultural advisors, researchers, and AgTech suppliers.
However, the group highlight "important progress" with the establishment of AgTech demonstration sites in Struan and Kybybolite in the South East and in the Riverland.
For now the results will play an important role in the final AgTech Strategic Plan which also works to support the Eyre Peninsula.
The advisory board said how feedback demonstrated the need for a collaborative and cohesive approach to encouraging greater adoption of technology on-farm in SA.
More concerningly, the survey found 18 per cent of primary producers are not planning on investing in technology into the future.
Also, 50 per cent are not currently investing in technology on-farm and which the group hopes to change for the better.
The most significant barriers were divided into three main categories:
Primary producers highlight that the value proposition isn't always clear Difficulty in understanding the usefulness of new technologies on-farm. New technology products can be difficult to deploy The survey further showed the biggest barriers to farmers adopting more AgTech, are the return on investment was not always clear (47 per cent).
Also, more needs to be known about product reliability and longevity (33 per cent).
The state government meanwhile, view AgTech as a key to greatly enhancing the productivity, profitability and sustainability of the agricultural sectors in the state.
The government will work with the agricultural community to see the value in AgTech support its development, and assist the adoption of solutions on-farm for beneficial outcomes.
The results of the survey will be used to formulate South Australia's AgTech Strategic Plan, which is intended for release this year.
Word count: 309
