An AgTech pilot program aimed at supporting long-term business growth is being rolled out in the Riverland to assist primary producers improve their profitability.
The state government is launching the $180,000 Business Growth Productivity Program to continue support for food producers who have been impacted by last year's hailstorm, the challenging environment of drought and the impacts of coronavirus.
Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister Tim Whetstone, who is also the Member for Chaffey, said the program was designed to help Riverland businesses grow.
"We provided support in the immediate response to the hailstorm and now we're providing opportunities for primary producers in the Riverland to access a program that will help improve their farm business planning and profitability," he said.
"We'll be hosting three different one-day workshops, each building on the previous workshop to deliver financial literacy training, seasonal and medium-term planning, all with the end goal of helping growers to improve their forward planning and productivity.
RELATED READING: World-leading AgTech centre lands in Loxton
"As part of the workshops, we'll also offer participants 12 months access to a farm business management software program called 'P2PAgri', developed by a home-grown SA-owned AgTech company, which allows farmers to develop key performance trends and benchmarks for their farm business, and improve decision making.
"We want to assist primary producers to identify and embrace AgTech options which will help them work smarter, not harder, grow more product and to put more money in the bank at the end of every day."
Mr Whetstone said the state government was focusing on supporting regional businesses plan ahead to prepare for challenging seasons and the wide range of agricultural risks.
"Riverland producers affected by last year's hailstorm are encouraged to register for the program and work with P2PAgri to look at how they can capitalise on opportunities to grow their business into the future," he said.
The first group training session will commence on July 6.
Details: pir.sa.gov.au
Word count: 323
