KI support: Livestock SA is continuing to coordinate donations and requests for hay for those on Kangaroo Island affected by the recent fires. More than 1000 tonnes have already been provided with the state government paying the cost of transporting donated fodder on the ferry from the drop-off point at Cape Jervis. The donated hay has been greatly appreciated, particularly given the number of donations already made because of the drought and the general need for hay and fodder.
Details: Joe Keynes 0428 648 235. Harvesting risk: Grain Producers SA has welcomed the revised Fire and Emergency Services (Miscellaneous) Amendment Bill which incorporates key recommendations made by a Parliamentary Select Committee last year. This includes giving SA Police officers the power to prevent recalcitrant farmers from harvesting or conducting other operations where that activity might cause a fire. The bill explicitly recognised the success of industry self-regulation, as any direction to stop harvesting must be supported by the SA Grain Harvesting Code of Practice. GPSA is pleased the state government has listened to the concerns of farmers.
Details: Caroline Rhodes 1300 734 884. AgTech showcase: Primary Producers SA is pleased to be able to support PIRSA, which is presenting an opportunity for producers to hear and share ideas on cutting-edge technologies that could translate to real-world application. AdvanceAg, SA's agtech adoption showcase event, is set to take place on February 22 at the Adelaide Showground. This event is targeted at primary producers and will help to drive innovation and the application of agtech in SA.
Details: Register at pir.sa.gov.au/advance-ag SADA AGM: At the annual general meeting of the SA Dairyfarmers' Association held late last year, John Hunt was re-elected as president with Nick Brokenshire as vice-president and Rick Gladigau as treasurer. Sharon Joppich continues as one of the South East representatives with Ben McHugh for Central Region. This leaves a vacancy for the South East area. If any member is interested in filling the vacancy, they would be most welcomed.
Details: Andrew Curtis 0419 037 569.
Word count: 336
