Catch and Indulge at the Star F S S M T W T F S S $650 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 7.30am Star of Greece Craving the fresh sea breeze and flavours of the ocean? Head south with a brief stop to collect morning tea and then on to Wirrina Cove where you will be welcomed aboard a fishing boat with Star of Greece chef and a local fisherman to snag the catch of the day - squid, whiting, snapper. After you have caught your lunch, stop at the Victory Hotel for a behind-the-scenes tour of the cellar and tasting of Rudderless wines by acclaimed publican Doug Govan. Then it’s on to South Australian icon - the Star of Greece at Port Willunga for your four-course lunch paired with local wines.
Everything But The Pizza F S S M T W T F S S $150 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 12.00pm Pizzateca Think you know Pizzateca? Think again. Join the Mitolo family and chefs for a five-course lunch that showcases their Abruzzese heritage and the fresh, delicious food that is hand-made with love, in line with tradition – and no pizza in sight.
Focusing on seasonal produce, each course will be inspired by the central Italian region of Abruzzo. Located in McLaren Vale, the Mitolos have established a strong reputation for their authentic and high-quality pizza, featuring the family’s home-made sugo that’s full of Australian tomatoes and requires hours of cooking, draining and crushing. That same passion goes into every dish that is prepared at Pizzateca, served with the equally delicious V Mitolo & Son wines produced by director Anthony Mitolo and his father Vito.
d’Arenberg Cube Surrealist Ball F S S M T W T F S S $290 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 7.00pm d’Arenberg Cube Join d’Arenberg for a night of extravagant decadence, a gala event reminiscent of the Rothschild Surrealist Ball, where distinguished guests such as Salvador Dali and Audrey Hepburn explored the boundaries of their imagination. Take inspiration from their 1972 attire and clothe yourself in an exotic blend of fashion and fantasy, combining traditional black tie with the weird and wonderful. Savour the stunning views of McLaren Vale’s rolling vineyards and watch the building come to life as digital projections illuminate the glass exterior. Enjoy d’Arenberg wine and creative canapes prepared by head chefs Brendan Wessels and Lindsay Durr. Sorry, no dietary requirements.
Dinner Noir F S S M T W T F S S $165 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 6.30pm Beresford Estate Established in 1985 in the heart of McLaren Vale, Beresford wines is family-owned and passionately South Australian.
The winemakers apply their extraordinary knowledge and expertise to handcraft wines of celebrated distinction, heroing the individuality and diversity of the McLaren Vale region. Beresford Estate is a 70-acre working vineyard producing award-winning wines of nuanced excellence.
Indulge in exclusive evening access to the Tasting Pavilion, where your four-course degustation menu awaits. Each dish is prepared by local chefs and suitably matched to the award- winning wines to be enjoyed by the open fireplace.
Discover Wirra Wirra F S S M T W T F S S $225 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 11.00am Wirra Wirra Discover Wirra Wirra via full immersion – from the vineyards to winemaking and even the old cellars. Learn the secrets behind Wirra Wirra’s biodynamic vineyards with a hosted tour of the Scrubby Rise and Chook Block vineyards, taste biodynamic wines on the Wirra Wirra jetty, learn barrel ageing via a tour of the original ironstone cellars, and taste five of Wirra Wirra’s best wines complemented with a local handmade chocolate. Finish with a regional two-course lunch and matched wine from Harry’s Deli on site.
Family Dinner at Salopian with Karena Armstrong and Emma McCaskill F S S M T W T F S S $45 56789 10 11 12 13 14 6.00pm Salopian Inn Join two of Adelaide’s most talented and generous chefs - Emma McCaskill and Karena Armstrong - for family dinner. This feast is for every foodie, no matter what age or background, to come and share delicious fare around their table, as they do with their own families. McCaskill and Armstrong bring a modern twist to the mid-week meal, with a focus on great produce and cooking with passion. The Salopian Inn’s Alex Marchetti invites Gemtree wines along to share the fun with the “bigger” kids, and his former colleague and industry champion Sharon Romeo (FINO at Seppeltsfield) will join the party.
Glamping at Serafino F S S M T W T F S S fr. $700 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 2.00pm Serafino McLaren Vale Your Serafino “Glampsite” will be set up under magical festoon lighting, nestled amongst hundred-year-old gum trees on their lakeside lawns. Enjoy a relaxed evening toasting marshmallows over a fire pit and get back to nature - in style. Relish in a fine dining experience with your fellow Glampers at Serafino’s restaurant, where their Executive Chef will prepare a three-course dinner accompanied by a selection of award-winning wines.
Enjoy an outdoor cinema by the lake after dinner, followed by a cooked breakfast on Sunday morning to set you on your way for a day exploring the beautiful region.
Go From Bumbler to Big League F S S M T W T F S S $70 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 1.00pm Hugh Hamilton Wines Ever felt like the dunce at a dinner party when people start talking about the wine? Fear not, “Bumbler to Big League” has you covered! Hugh and Mary Hamilton are part of the oldest wine family in Australia, so they’ve learned a thing or two over the last 180 years. Now they’re opening their doors to share some of the secrets of the wine industry with you. From bottling your own wine to a masterclass on oak, you’ll walk away with a deeper appreciation for your wine. Join Hugh, Mary and winemaker Nic Bourke for an engaging afternoon.
Imagining the Future of Food F S S M T W T F S S $20 56789 10 11 12 13 14 6.30pm Cove Civic Centre Join an expert panel of speakers to discuss what we can expect our food to look like in the future. From ugly vegetables to AgTech, bee pollination to native foods, Professor Andrew Lowe lays out the challenges of an industry going through unprecedented change whilst trying to ensure productive and sustainable practices.
Dr Caitlin Byrt will explore the menus of our ancestors and great grandchildren, and discuss the impact of synthetic biology technologies that will allow societies to create designer crops and easily develop new crop varieties. Kristen Messenger of Bugs n Slugs talks about eating insects (entomophagy) as an alternative source of protein in the future. You may even like to try a sample! Visit “Curiosity Lane” to sample native bush tucker products and meet people working in future food innovation. Cost includes supper and tea and coffee.
BYO wine, beer and bubbles. Doors open at 6pm.
Lime Cave Experience F S S M T W T F S S $250 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 7.00pm Maxwell Wines Nestled amongst the vines at Maxwell Wines is a hidden treasure, the Maxwell Lime Cave. This stunning and unique venue will be your dining room for the evening, offering guests a food and wine experience to remember. Head Chef Fabian Lehmann and team will design a feast for the senses; six courses showcasing the best of South Australian produce, all paired with Maxwell’s premium wines by Mark Maxwell. Organic estate garden produce will be featured throughout the entire menu, including a showcase dish of mushrooms grown in the cave, metres from the dining table.
Masters o f Their Craft F S S M T W T F S S $195 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 6.30pm Beresford Estate Meet the brewer, the distiller and the head winemaker as they take you through a luxurious six-course meal.
Beresford Wines, Vale Brewing and Twenty Third Street Distilleries join forces to share insights with guests about the processes and inspiration behind these outstanding local products. Beresford House is a luxury retreat nestled within the idyllic 70-acre vineyards of Beresford Estate, located in the world-class wine region of McLaren Vale. Built with modern architectural precision, Beresford House has a unique charm and an atmosphere of unparalleled luxury.
Meet the Grower, Taste the Region - Eat the Street F S S M T W T F S S $169 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 9.00am Willunga Farmers Market Enjoy a guided tour and tastings of the iconic Willunga Farmers Market. Held every Saturday in the Willunga Town Square, more than 80 farmers and artisan food producers come together at the market to sell their fresh, local and seasonal produce. You will be collected from the Adelaide CBD at 9am by award winning Chook’s Little Winery tours, and then enjoy a guided tour and tastings at the market. Following this, meander into historic High Street to uncover some hidden gems of the town, including a private tasting with the Head Brewer of Shifty Lizard Taphouse and a chocolate demonstration and tasting at Four Winds Chocolate with founder Wendy Ashwin. Finish the day with a glass of wine from Kitchen Door @ Penny’s Hill Winery, before Chef Tom Boden serves a delicious three-course lunch overlooking the vineyards.
Meet Your Maker F S S M T W T F S S $30 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 12.00pm Beresford Estate Sit back and enjoy as Beresford Wines’ chief winemaker, Chris Dix, takes guests through a flight of six wines that hero the Estate and limited release red wines. Each of the wines - Angelique Premium Cuvee, Estate Grenache, Estate Cabernet Sauvignon, Estate Shiraz, Limited Release Shiraz and sparkling Shiraz - will be paired with a tasting plate of regional flavours. Established in 1985 in the heart of McLaren Vale, Beresford Wines is familyowned and passionately South Australian. The winemakers apply their extraordinary knowledge and expertise to handcraft wines of celebrated distinction that showcase the individuality and diversity of the McLaren Vale region.
Moonlight Garden Cinema F S S M T W T F S S $25 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 7.00pm St Francis Winery Enjoy film, food and drink under the stars at St Francis Winery resort – the first grape vine plantings known in South Australia. This family-friendly event features stalls showcasing local wines and produce from the region for you to peruse and graze throughout the evening and a viewing of The Lion King film. Unwind and unfurl with loved ones young and old and settle in for the evening at St Francis Winery.
Of the Land and Sea F S S M T W T F S S $130 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 12.00pm Mitolo, Bocca di Lupo Join Mitolo Wines’ award-winning cellar door Restaurant, Bocca di Lupo chef Tom Jack in collaboration with Executive Chef, Asher Blackford from Southern Ocean Lodge, Kangaroo Island. Tom and Asher come together to create an exemplary five-course lunch in the Southern Vales that is true to their own unique styles and combined passion for foraging from the land and sea. Each course will be matched with a curated selection of Mitolo’s wines, including mature vintages of their flagship single vineyard wines, locally produced in McLaren Vale. Matching wines incur additional cost.
Our Garden, Their Grapes F S S M T W T F S S $165 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 12.30pm The Currant Shed Traipse through the history of one of McLaren Vale’s leading eateries, The Currant Shed. Established in the early 1900s as an undercover shed for drying currants for export to the UK, the shed where the restaurant is now housed is reputedly the largest in the district. The surrounding vineyards, owned and operated by Shottesbrooke Wines, provide an opportunity for the two regional champions to collaborate on this unique Tasting Australia event. Shottesbrooke will be providing the grapes - by way of wine - while the chefs at The Currant Shed including head chef Wayne Leeson will utilise fruit, herbs and vegetables from the restaurant garden.
Peninsula Olive Festival F S S M T W T F S S FREE 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 10.00am Peninsula Providore Meet one of the Australian olive oil industry’s newest teams, Mel Hollick and Brook Wyett, who combine their wine and agricultural industry experience to maintain their picturesque 9,000-tree property in Currency Creek.
They will be joined by local chefs and producers who will provide tastings and sales of regional fare on the day, while local produce hampers will also be available to stay and graze or take away. Local musicians will add to the atmosphere while local wineries including Kimbolton Wines from Langhorne Creek and local craft brewers and distillers will keep guests hydrated. Enjoy educational, hands-on activities including how to taste EVOO, how to pickle olives, pruning and harvest demonstrations.
Producer Waiters Gather at Coriole F S S M T W T F S S $135 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 7.00pm Coriole Vineyards Gather at Coriole, situated at Coriole Vineyards Estate in McLaren Vale, will host a six-course beverage matched dinner created by Chef Tom Tilbury using locally sourced, ethically harvested and sustainable products from the region’s producers. This night will pay tribute to the producers - wait staff for the evening - allowing guests to ask about the processes and philosophies that underpin their brands.
Salopian Kitchen Garden Lunch F S S M T W T F S S $150 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 12.00pm Salopian Kitchen Garden Help pick your lunch with the gardener or sit back, relax and have a drink. Either way, you get to see the best of what the Salopian Kitchen Garden team does. Let Karena Armstrong cook you a shared lunch at her home in the Salopian Kitchen Garden , matched with wine and gin. Sit in the garden and eat a meal that has been inspired by all the seasons of the garden, everything from tomatoes preserved from the summer to fermented root vegetables from winter. Help pick your lunch with the gardener Maddie or enjoy drinks by co-owner Alex Marchetti.
Taste the Alphabet F S S M T W T F S S $89 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 7.00pm Alpha Box & Dice This is your only chance to try every letter of AB&D’s World Famous Alphabet of Wine side-by-side, including rare bottles from the Museum and vintage comparisons. Local chef Jessie Spiby will be on board again to create a grazing menu of locally-focused, Australian-with-a-twist street foods. And you’ll even leave with a treat! The winemakers and producers will speak to guests about the small batch, minimal intervention, vegan-friendly winemaking that the brand is known for, explaining the evolution of the wines.
The Charcutier and The Winemaker – A Masterclass F S S M T W T F S S $95 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 3.00pm Kay Brothers Amery Wines This is an opportunity to taste Kay Brothers’ premium wines expertly paired with some of South Australia’s best charcuterie, freshly sliced in the surrounds of their heritage listed cask room. The Winemaker, Kay Brothers, is the oldest winery in McLaren Vale that is still owned by the original family and all wines are still traditionally basket pressed. Nestled in the heart of the Adelaide foothills, The Charcutier, Parma Handcrafted Cured Meats, is founded on the philosophy of providing high-quality, locally sourced, meats, produce and artisan smallgoods, fresh from the farm to your table. An unparalleled experience of high-quality Adelaide tastes and flavours.
The Fleurieu Experience F S S M T W T F S S $89 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 6.45pm The Beach Hotel The Fleurieu Experience offers guests a great opportunity to try some of the Fleurieu Peninsula’s great local produce alongside beer and wine from close-by suppliers. Meet head chef Daniel Serafin and spend the evening in great company and conversation about the spoils of the surrounding region.
Vintage Dinner at S.C. Pannell F S S M T W T F S S $55 56789 10 11 12 13 14 6.00pm S.C. Pannell Join the locals at Stephen Pannell and Fiona Lindquist’s McLaren Vale home for their weekly vintage dinner. The kitchen team feeds the hungry, thirsty, wine-stained vintage workers with a weekly feast from locally sourced - if not estate grown – produce, matched with wines from local and imported producers. The theme for this extra special vintage dinner is Southern Italian. Aglianico, Nero d’Avola, Fiano and Montepulciano from local producers will be served alongside imported benchmarks matched with a feast of roasted proteins fresh from the smoker and garden fresh garnish. A chance to rub shoulders with local winemakersand vintage workers following a day of hard graft.
Word count: 2905
