Growing SA: Registrations are closing for the two-day Growing SA conference on August 26 and 27 at the Adelaide Hills Convention Centre, Hahndorf. There is a top line-up of speakers on agtech, farm business management, innovation, global trade and competitiveness and biosecurity. During the dinner on August 26, both National Farmers' Federation president Fiona Simson and Primary Producers SA chair Rob Kerin will speak.
Details: growingsa.com.au. Livestock AGM: For those members who are not attending the whole of the Growing SA conference, it is possible to attend just the Livestock SA annual general meeting. This is being held at 3pm on August 26 on the upper level of the Adelaide Hills Convention Centre. This is free to Livestock SA members. In addition to the annual report and results of the election for the board, there will be several other reports including from the SA sheep and cattle advisory groups. There will as also be an open forum for discussion and resolutions on issues of concern to members.
Details: Joe Keynes 0428 648 235. Grains meeting: Grain Producers SA members are also reminded of the 2019 AGM. This will be an opportunity to look back on the past year and celebrate a range of successes for the industry despite tough seasonal conditions. The meeting will be held at the Adelaide Hills Convention Centre's Lakeview Room on August 26 at 3pm.
Details: RSVP for catering purposes on 1300 734 884. Red meat industry: Livestock SA is working with Meat & Livestock Australia to get an understanding of the producer perspective on what a sustainable red meat industry could look like. As part of this process, a workshop is being held before the AGM in the Three Gums Bistro in the Adelaide Hills Convention Centre stating at 12pm on August 26. This is the first of a series of workshops that will be held with producers across the country and as such the more Livestock SA members who can participate the better the representation of the SA lamb and beef sector will be to this important national research. Lunch will be provided.
Details: Register with Livestock SA on 08 8297 2299.
Word count: 358
