Growing SA: Registrations have opened for the two-day Growing SA Conference on August 26-27 at the Adelaide Hills Convention Centre, Hahndorf. The program has been finalised with a top line-up of speakers on agtech, farm business management, innovation, global trade and competitiveness and biosecurity.
Details: growingsa.com.au Grains AGM: Grain Producers SA members and Grain Industry Fund contributors are invited to attend GPSA's 2019 annual general meeting. This will be an opportunity to look back on the past year and celebrate a range of successes for the industry despite tough seasonal conditions. A notice of meeting has been provided to members and posted on GPSA's website. The meeting will be held at the Lakeview Room, Adelaide Hills Convention Centre on August 26 from 2pm.
Details: RSVP to GPSA on 1300 734 884. Remember to vote: Livestock SA members are reminded to vote so their ballot papers are received before the closing date of August 20. There were seven nominations for six vacancies, and ballot papers have been distributed to all members. The results will be announced at the Livestock SA AGM at Hahndorf on August 26.
Details: Deane Crabb 08 8297 2299. Hi-tech scarecrow: Grapegrowers sick of grape-gorging birds have been experimenting with a new-generation scarecrow proving highly effective in NSW trials. The device uses a dead, stuffed crow slung underneath a pilotless drone broadcasting bird distress calls to make pests think it has been captured. The Wine Grape Council of SA has indicated while some may find the device distasteful, crows were a major problem particularly in the Padthaway region when grapes became ripe.
Details: John Summers 0412 515 068. Managing heat: Livestock SA is encouraging cattle producers with feedlots to attend a workshop on managing summer heat. Organised by the Australian Lot Feeders Association, the workshop will be held at Hahndorf on August 16. It will enable producers to be able to formulate their own heat management plan, conduct a risk assessment, and develop their own daily monitoring program with defined triggers and status levels.
Details: ALFA 02 9290 3700.
Word count: 341
