IT is fair to say it has not been the easiest of years for the agriculture sector, with the ongoing drought, high-profile farm invasions, the worldwide condemnation of the cropping sector's most important herbicide in glyphosate and activists questioning livestock producers' social licence and right to farm.
But National Farmers' Federation president Fiona Simson says adversity only makes ag stronger as she contemplates the year that was on National Ag Day being held today (Thursday).
As Australians across the country are urged to don green for the day and reflect on the efforts of farmers producing clean and safe food and fibre, Ms Simson said support that had come in for the nation's primary producers had been overwhelming.
"There have been some positives out of the events of this year," she said.
"We've received wonderful support from a lot of quarters and we've also seen members of our own industry, in particular young people, step up and become fantastic advocates.
"Getting our message out to the broader community is just going to become more and more important as we consider issues such as social licence and the right to farm. It is why we at NFF are involved in the Telling Our Story campaign and ensuring people are connected to their country's farmers."
Many National Ag Day events were held in SA yesterday, including an AgTech stream at the southstart conference, held in Adelaide, and meetings at the Wallaroo and Roseworthy Viterra sites.
"With National Ag Day there are lots of good things happening and we urge people in agriculture to get involved however they can," Ms Simson said.
"It is a really busy time of year for many farmers, but maybe shoot a quick photo or video for social media or even do something as simple as ring a mate in the city and ask them to raise a glass to our farmers, it all raises the profile of agriculture and the good things we are doing."
Stock Journal is a proud media partner for National Ag Day.
CREDIT: Gregor Heard
Word count: 342
