ONLINE bidding at store sales has kicked into gear in a big way with a cutting-edge system put in place by two prominent agtech companies trialled in Vic last week seeing close to 30 per cent of lots bought remotely.
Saleyards across the country are in discussion with Outcross and AuctionsPlus about running out the new way of operating as quickly as possible.
Agents have described it as a watershed moment that will see livestock selling enter a new era - one that was already in the pipeline but has been ramped up as a solution to social distancing restrictions.
Outcross provides software to 95pc of yards across the country, plus contract staff to the larger selling centres in Qld, NSW and Vic.
It joined forces with AuctionsPlus to share data and create a fully-functioning online store sale.
Online bidding has been happening in store sales in small pockets particularly since the lockdowns started, typically via Facebook. They generally see less than 5pc of stock sold to remote purchasers and are not nearly as comprehensive in the supply of pre-sale information.
Of the 248 lots penned at Mortlake, Vic, last week, 72 went to online buyers and 60pc attracted online bids.
NSW restockers and feedlots took a good helping and there was also good competition from SA.
Outcross managing director Tom Newsome explained each agent's nominated accredited AuctionsPlus assessor collected details on all pens, in addition to information usually displayed on saleyard placards.
This information, as well as photos, videos and the usual data uploaded via the Outcross software, was used to generate an online catalogue.
This was distributed to the AuctionsPlus network, and those who chose not to attend the saleyards - whether to comply with social distancing, due to personal health concerns or due to distance - were able to secure cattle form the sale via the AuctionsPlus online bidding platform.
Mr Newsome said the challenge in saleyards had been putting together an online catalogue on the morning of the sale.
"Because we have guys on the ground that understand the process we've been able to populate catalogues in a short space of time," he said.
"Then one of our contract team acts as an interface during the sale."
Every bid was uploaded through the platform in real time so the bidding on AuctionsPlus followed the live bidding. Those involved remotely could watch the process and see whether bids were held on the floor.
Yass, NSW, will run the online system at its sale on Friday and saleyards in WA have also expressed interest in setting it up.
CREDIT: Shan Goodwin
Word count: 433
