IN THE past 12 months, you might have heard the phrase "standing with our farmers" quite often.
This is not a throw-away line, this is the foundation on which I base policy development. The farmers are the engine room of SA's economy and the majority of these producers are based in regional areas.
In the face of adversity we have backed our farmers. We are delivering a $21-million drought support package, we have stood side-by-side with graingrowers on lifting the genetically-modified crop ban and we are rolling out a $7.5m red meat and wool program.
Add to this the mammoth $25m task of rebuilding the Dog Fence, the implementation of zero tolerance on fruit fly and the extensive review of the pastoral act for the first time since it was established 30 years ago.
We are prepared to make tough calls but the right decisions that have the long-term interests of our primary industries sector in mind.
The government has set a 3 per cent economic growth target for the state and despite the challenges with drought, I have full faith in our industry's ability to achieve this target. The federal government wants to grow the Australian agriculture industry to be worth $100 billion by 2030 and we believe SA can play a large part in this.
Looking forward, we identified agtech as key to transforming our agricultural industries through increased adoption of on-farm technology. My study tour to Israel has provided strong connections and partnerships and we are already starting to see that bear fruit.
It has been a difficult year for many of our primary producers facing drought and we will continue to support those doing it tough.
I have travelled all over SA meeting with drought-affected farmers and met regularly with the Dry Conditions Working Group, which is made up of key industry representatives, to make sure support is being delivered where it is needed most.
Our Drought Support Program provides immediate assistance through a council rate rebate and pastoral lease rent relief for those most in hardship, expanding the Rural Financial Counselling Service and increasing the Family and Business mentor program, while also supporting long-term resilience by doubling the On-Farm Emergency Water Infrastructure Rebate Scheme.
In March we will get to work to deliver the once-in-a-generation project to rebuild 1600 kilometres of the Dog Fence, which will provide greater protection to our pastoralists from the severe impacts of wild dogs and reopen country to sheep.
As we look back on the achievements of the past 20 months, I look forward to what we can achieve for agriculture in this state.
Please take the time during the festive period to enjoy the company of family and friends, give consideration to those who are experiencing tough conditions and from my family to yours, a Merry Christmas and prosperous 2020 to you all!
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Click here to sign up to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: TIM WHETSTONE, Primary Industries and Regional Development Minister
Word count: 505
