JOHN MAHER Agribusiness Australia director and Indigenous Land and Sea Corporation chief executive officer ISRAEL is an unlikely place to farm - it's a nation defined by dry conditions.
Half of the country's 22,000 square kilometres are desert, while most of the rest receives an average rainfall ranging up to just 100 millimetres - in just three or four months each year.
Geopolitically, Israel is surrounded by less than friendly neighbours and the number of farmers has been dwindling year on year.
So it was remarkable for me, on an Australia-Israel Chamber of Commerce study tour to Israel earlier this month, to see exactly why Israel is leading the world in agribusiness innovation.
It turns out Israel's challenges actually drive its success. Its agricultural industry knows how to do more with less.
Israel's limited land mass (it's a third of the size of Tas) and limited water have forced it to pool its resources and find innovative ways to produce more food, while the hostile neighbourhood has forced it to become self-reliant and united.
The country has a population of just 8.7 million, so, with such a small domestic market, its farmers must think globally and focus simultaneously on domestic markets and exports to be profitable.
It has a world-leading water system nationalised to remove competition and ensure agriculture has ample access to water.
Israel leads the world in citrus exports, while vegetables, cotton and grains are all major crops.
The Minister of Strategic Affairs says the country recycles 90 per cent of its wastewater, channelling most of this into agriculture through world-leading technology.
It has one unified government agriculture department led by a chief scientist, but it does appear to be a country uninhibited by agripolitics and division among the commodities.
The government spends about $200 million a year on agricultural research and development, mostly partnering with commercial enterprises.
For every $1 the office of the chief scientist spends on agriculture R&D, it is believed Israel receives $4 to $5 return.
By contrast, the Australian government spends $300m a year on ag R&D, but this is diluted across 14 commodities, severely limiting its ability to tackle bigger issues.
Each year, Israel spends more than $6 per capita on R&D in agriculture. That's more than the $5.80 the US spends, and it dwarfs the 12 cents a head spent here in Australia.
Venture capitalists spend $6 billion on start-ups in Israel and produce 1000 new start-ups a year, and are strongly supported by government and Israel's universities.
In Australia we are lucky to see $1 billion spent annually on start-ups.
Interestingly, the agtech we saw being developed was not overly complex. But it was practical. The incubator programs we saw in action were dedicated to solving immediate problems.
Perhaps the most telling factor in Israel's attitude to agribusiness is its acceptance of risk and failure as necessary to increasing productivity and profitability.
Failure is not something to be ashamed of.
The government says that for every failed start-up, another four or five spring up, providing employment and value to the state.
In Australian agribusiness we must learn to embrace risk and failure, and establish a more unified approach to R&D and innovation to take advantage of the opportunities ahead.
Viewpoint
CREDIT: John Maher
Word count: 543
