PASTORALIST James Morgan, managing director of large-scale North East landholding Mutooroo Pastoral Company, has backed most of the amendments suggested for the pastoral act, in particular the extension of lease tenures to 100 years for more financial security and better management of land resumption.
"The lending ability of the NSW Western Division from growers to banks has always been a little bit stronger than what it is in SA, as banks did not consider the 42-year tenure that attractive," he said.
"That was one of the major points we made in our submission to the government and it looks like they've listened."
Mr Morgan also liked that if land was resumed by the Pastoral Board, then compensation would be based on market value.
"There has been some really severe injustices on properties where land has been resumed for military purposes and the compensation has not been sufficient for people handing over land that had been in their family for generations," he said.
"Resumption is a very difficult topic and it doesn't happen very often, but it should be dealt with more fairly and at a commercial rate."
Mr Morgan's family have been farming the area since the late 1800s. Mutooroo Pastoral Company comprises five stations covering nearly 2 million hectares from Yunta to Broken Hill, NSW, plus Mr Morgan has his own station which is not part of the portfolio.
He said the change to 10-year condition assessments was "fine", but the process did need to be more streamlined, possibly reverting back to "dashboard assessments".
"When I first started in pastoralism, inspectors were coming out every year to drive around with us and have a chat about what they though were should be doing," he said.
"Then they went to a 14-year assessment, which became an extremely detailed process and it has been a struggle for the pastoral unit to get them done on time.
"They need to adjust that detailed process and if that means incorporating new technology, that's great, but I object to inspectors passing judgements from satellites, as there is always extreme circumstances, particularly weather patterns, that require further inspection."
Mr Morgan also supported the approval of alternative land uses, such as the possibility of farming goats, but felt the Pastoral Board should retain final say on whether the grower has the appropriate control facilities.
One aspect Mr Morgan did not agree on was any change to maximum stocking rates.
"I know a lot of people want more flexibility in open stocking rates, because growers should be trusted to make that judgement, but changing to open slather could be a mistake," he said.
"Not only do financial institutions prefer a DSE rating over loose numbers, but a maximum also stops people from buying up properties, abusing that land and then leaving.
"We think the maximums are mostly reasonable and a sensible way of drawing a line in the sand on what stock number a property could cope with and a definite figure for the banking institutions as to what value might be attached to a property.
"The bill may allow a bit more flexibility for growers to increase numbers when the season is good, but it should remain a consideration for the Pastoral Board on a case-by-case basis, possibly in a more speedy fashion."
Fellow pastoralist Gillian Fennell, Lambina Station via Marla, agreed that for a "piece of legislation drafted by the government, it was not too bad".
But some elements needed "closer attention", such as the responsibility of public access route maintenance and how the Landscape SA Act 2019, updated mining act and water allocation plans would intersect with the new pastoral act.
"Hopefully we can get some more information on this at the public consultations coming up," she said.
She agreed new technology could help the "onerous" property inspection process.
"There is always going to be a need for people on the ground to perform some sort of function and for pastoralists to maintain that relationship with the pastoral unit, but I believe it can be done more efficiently with enhanced technology," she said.
"I'd also like the department to commit to reviewing the legislation more frequently, as more agtech becomes available and as management systems change, because what's suitable for the next 10 years, might not be suitable for the next 60 years.
"You want to make sure you can always manage your property to best of your ability and give the best outcomes to the landscape as well."
CREDIT: Alisha Fogden
Word count: 748
