AGED care trainees would be given more supervision while gardeners would get less under reforms to the apprentice and trainee sector.
Bosses would have greater flexibility in determining how many junior or inexperienced staff supervisors have to monitor under proposed new rules by the South Australian Training and Skills Commission.
The Commission’s chairman has told The Advertiser an overhaul of supervision rates, which have not been reviewed since 2010, are intended to ensure a “contemporary approach to best practice, risk-based” regulation of training.
The move is expected to raise concerns from unions and parents of children killed in workplace accidents.
Skills Minister David Pisoni, pictured, said the proposed guidelines directly reflected feedback provided from industry that indicated a “one size fits all” approach to training supervision no longer met the needs of apprentices, trainees, employers and training providers.
“Updating training supervision guidelines is occurring in line with strong feedback from stakeholders,” Mr Pisoni said.
“It is an important component of (the) work to support the skilled workforce required in a transitioning economy, including in new and growing industries such as cyber, space, defence, agtech, social care and construction.” The Commission has provisionally allocated a draft training supervision level rating to about 550 occupations and is seeking feedback on each one. Examples provided to The Advertiser show that some occupations including aged care, third and fourth year hairdresser apprentices, lab technicians and plumbers would see an increase in supervision.
Trainees and apprentices including retail workers, electronic trades assistants and horticulturalists could have less supervision. Commission chairman Michael Boyce said the guidelines do not displace, override or change an employer’s obligations under the WHS Act, which is administered by SafeWork SA.
“However, although the Act – together with the Work Health and Safety Regulations 2012 (SA) – sets out health and safety duties to provide protection from hazards and risks in the workplace, it remains critical that the training environment is regulated to ensure quality outcomes for those undertaking apprenticeships and traineeships,” he said.In January two mothers who lost their sons in workplace accidents urged the Government to not water down supervision requirements for apprentices and trainees. Mr Pisoni has asked members from the group, Voice of Industrial Death, to contribute to consultation.
CREDIT: MATT SMITH POLITICAL EDITOR
Word count: 377
