The month has been busy, with our president Carl Walker attending Agritechnica 2019, in Europe, the world’s leading trade fair for agricultural technology, where all the leading companies in the industry present their innovations.
The AUSVEG trip, funded through Horticulture Innovation, started in Hanover, at AgTech, and will end in Amsterdam, looking at indoor cropping.
Carl has also been pursuing avenues with agencies in the areas of agriculture equipment, technology and workforce.
He has thanked the BGGA staff and exec for their work while he is away. November was also an exciting month, with the commencement of three new staff including Andrea McLeod, as administration officer, Adelaide Belyea, as projects officer, and our new industry development officer, Eilis Walker.
Eilis hit the ground running by attending TropAg2019, in Brisbane, and visiting the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, the Health and Food Sciences Precinct, and the Brisbane Markets.
Eilis graduated from the University of Queensland with a Bachelor’s Degree in Environmental Management, with a minor in natural resource management.
Since then her journey has led her to Townsville, and now to Bowen with BGGA. She has a passion for supporting the primary industries sectors growth and development, in the face of emerging challenges.
Her first week was an introduction to the horticulture industry at TropAg with Eilis saying, “attending TropAg was the ultimate crash course in learning about horticulture, it is really interesting to see how the scientific community has approached some of the challenges in the sector, from manipulating plant genetics to manipulating the growing environment.” If you would like to contact Eilis her number is 0427 701 225 and she is more than happy to have a chat or a cup of coffee.
For myself, meanwhile, I have been busy with the mango season and running Marto’s Mangoes. The season got off to a good start, however, the domestic market is under a lot of pressure at the moment with the sheer volume of fruit going through it.
Hopefully, in the next few weeks, it might improve.
This is another example of why we need better market access protocols for fruit and vegetable growers in Australia, so we can export more product.This should, in turn, increase profitability for growers due to the extra demand for fruit and veg.
CREDIT: COMMENT Ben Martin; Bowen Gumlu Growers Association vice-president
Word count: 389
