FROM Adelaide game designers to Sydney micro algae experts, innovative minds around the country are on the job to reduce the carbon footprint of Australia's red meat industry.
Producers, too, are doing their fair share of the heavy lifting on working out ways to reduce methane emissions from livestock and new methods of measuring carbon in soil.
Technology business 'incubator' Cicada Innovations and the beef industry's research and development body Meat and Livestock Australia joined forces to set up a 'hackathon' to come up with solutions to those two key challenges.
MLA is driving the red meat industry's ambitious goal to be carbon neutral by 2030 through a combination of new investment in research, development and adoption, and via policy settings.
The hackathon offered a $10,000 cash prize and involved months of work on the challenges.
A precision feeder to manage the delivery of carbon-limiting supplement to livestock, the brainchild of a group of producers who run a small breeder operation in South East Queensland, took out the emissions reduction challenge.
Peter Heywood, co-founder of the NextGen Supplement Feeder, said the team - Robert Aisthorpe, Craig Fraser-Grant, Ross McNichol and himself - were in the early stages of developing the combined hardware/software solution.
"Given the feed-additives research currently underway, we anticipate in the coming years there will be a whole range of things that can be added to livestock feed to reduce greenhouse emissions," Mr Heywood said.
"From this we saw a potential opportunity for developing a solution as to how this is managed in the field.
"We had promising results from our initial field testing and to further develop our solution, we entered the hackathon."
There, they were able to access Cicada's high-tech facilities and collaborate with other members of the deep tech and agtech community and are now looking forward to ongoing support and guidance from MLA and Cicada Innovations to take the idea from proof of concept to the next stage.
"We support the beef industry's goal of being carbon neutral by 2030 and want to make a contribution towards achieving this," Mr Heywood said.
CREDIT: Shan Goodwin
Word count: 351
