Cootamundra-Gundagai mayor, Councillor Abb McAlister, has suggested local groups combine to bid for a new agricultural innovation hub to be situated within our local government area, and Cootamundra Development Corporation (CDC) has backed him up.
Cr McAlister said the Cootamundra-Gundagai region is the ideal location for a new hub of the kind announced by the minister for agriculture, David Littleproud, this week.
Mr Littleproud said the federal government would provide $86 million for eight "adoption and innovation hubs" across Australia, and one of those hubs would be allocated to southern NSW.
Gwen Norman, CDC project officer, said it was an exciting initiative for agricultural operators and emerging young students of agricultural innovation, and the CDC looked forward to collaborating on the project.
The agriculture minister said the aim of the hubs was to bring together organisations that provide and use research.
"They are expected to be consortiums that include, but are not limited to, research organisations, industry, agricultural businesses, community groups, farmers and the private sector," Mr Littleproud said.
"This will allow them to support research, development, adoption and innovation that responds to regional needs and priorities."
The government announcement said allocation of sites would be through a competitive grant process, which would open next month.
Cr McAlister said the establishment of a hub would be a welcome boost to the region.
"We're in the middle of a great livestock industry and we have extensive broadscale cropping in the plains country," Cr McAlister said.
"We've also got all sorts of viticulture and fruits such as cherries and almonds, we're close to forestry, we have water, and we're well connected by road and rail - we've got a lot going for us."
Ms Norman echoed these comments, saying the Cootamundra-Gundagai region is home to some of the most productive agricultural country and innovative primary producers in Australia.
"The prospect of creating enduring partnerships between research organisations, agricultural sector businesses and our community will provide opportunities and collaboration," she said.
According to the government's announcement a major aim of the hubs will be to harness research, development and innovation to build drought resilience
Mr Littleproud said the government would also develop a Digital Foundations for Agriculture Strategy to support farmers, fishers and foresters better harness technology
"The hubs will provide a physical location where researchers and the community can come together to develop ideas that build drought resilience," he said.
"The end result will see a range of enduring institutions that cement partnerships among key organisations.
"I have been working with the Rural Research and Development Corporations (RDCs) to support improved collaboration, increased flow of investment and transformative innovation by establishing a special purpose joint investment company.
"These hubs will provide a direct link for research providers such as the RDCs to the farmers, by providing a way for farmers to co-design innovative solutions that deliver real impact on-farm and along the supply chain.
"The hubs will be located in regional areas that reflect the key agricultural and climatic zones across the country."
The regions targeted are southern NSW, southern QLD/northern NSW, south-west WA, Victoria, top end NT/WA, tropical north Queensland, South Australia and Tasmania.
"Through the program there will also be $11 million in funding for Drought Resilience Innovation Grants to support drought resilience initiatives for farmers, community groups, industry, and researchers," Mr Littleproud said.
"In addition to drought innovation hubs, I am also announcing the development of a Digital Foundations for Agriculture Strategy that will set the foundations for widespread uptake of digital technologies across our agriculture, forestry and fisheries industries.
"We know that digital technologies and agtech will drive the next wave of growth for the sector.
"In fact, the Australian Farm Institute estimates full adoption of digital tools by the agriculture sector could boost productivity by around $20.3 billion each year.
"Over the coming months, we will also develop a national agricultural innovation policy statement to position the sector to reap the benefits of innovation, delivering for the Australian economy and our regional communities."
The statement will set out ambitious mission-oriented investment priorities to address significant cross-sectoral challenges, focusing effort and investment across the agricultural innovation system to achieve a step-change in productivity at the farm gate and along the supply chain.
For more information about the Future Drought Fund and other drought resilience building programs visit: www.agriculture.gov.au/fdf
To read more about the National Agricultural Innovation Agenda visit: www.agriculture.gov.au/ag-farm-food/innovation/national-ag-innovation-agenda
CREDIT: Tom Gosling
Word count: 734
