Technology and tradition are joining forces to protect one of South Australia’s most prestigious industries South Australia has established a global reputation for producing some of the world’s most respected fine wines. It’s a reputation the state’s premium winegrowers are deservedly proud of – but it is under threat. Counterfeit wine is big business. In China alone, it is estimated that more than 40 per cent of all wine sold is fake, with fraudsters swapping out labels for those of premium producers. Experts estimate that, by 2022, this scam will cost the global wine industry more than $4 trillion.
It’s also happening here in Australia. Late last year, 600 tonnes of Langhorne Creek shiraz was taken to the Barossa Valley on a series of trucks and passed off as Barossa shiraz, netting the fraudsters a $600,000 profit; while shiraz from the Riverland was also passed off as Barossa shiraz.
These practices have a lasting impact. “It affects the reputation of local winemakers and Australian winemakers, and the Barossa Valley as a brand,” says Entrust co-founder David Travers. “If you’re having a special event and are buying a really nice bottle and it’s not that wine, then everyone gets ripped off and the consumer loses trust in the product.” As a fifth-generation farmer in the Clare Valley, Travers understands the importance of protecting South Australia’s reputation. His family owns a number of vineyards in Clare and has been selling grapes to wine companies including Kilikanoon, Treasury, Penfolds, Hardys and Sevenhill Cellars for 160 years.
Together with Jeff Grosset, owner and founder of Grosset Wines in the Clare Valley, Travers in 2019 launched a three-month trial of an innovative technological solution to wine fraud. Backed by $50,000 in prize money as winners of the Premier’s Blockchain Innovation Challenge in Adelaide in March last year, the trial involved embedding supply chain information in the wine bottle’s screw cap which tracks the product from vine to bottle to confirm its authenticity.
“We ran the trial from February to April this year and had about 15 companies participating,” Travers says. “We built a small app which allowed wineries to use a smartphone and online platform to follow their produce. We collected about 250,000 litres of wine in various parts of the data set so it gave us the chance to do some analysis.” The trial proved a success: since then, the technology has developed apace. “We started out trying to stop fraud and that is still very much part of our focus – but the engine room is about empowering farmers to take control,” Travers says.
That engine room is a new system called Entrust, which the Premier launched in September. The beta technology, which is currently out for testing in the market, features a hashgraph embedded in the lid which timestamps location – helping eliminate not just fraud but also the endless paperwork involved in farming. “Most farmers keep their records in a notepad in the ute glovebox, written on the whiteboard or at the back of the filing cabinet – it’s just a mess,” Travers says. “We‘re working with a hashgraph which is immutable. So if I’m in the vineyard and sending my fruit to Kilikanoon, it records the location I’m in and the time I send it and stores all the information I need in the Cloud.” It’s game-changing technology which can revolutionise the wine industry in South Australia – the only challenge is convincing the old guard to change their ways. “My 83-year-old dad has an old Elders’ notepad which is infamous in the farming community,” Travers says.
“If you explain this is just like that notepad – you just put it all in there and it’s there for you – you can help them to overcome the fear of something they don’t understand. Once they see how simple it is … ” While the wine industry mulls it over, the dairy and meat industries have jumped on board. “We’re hoping to do an alpha trial with 15 South Australian dairy producers, who are keen to be the first in Australia to do it,” Travers says.
The versatility of the technology makes it a significant timesaver for busy farmers. “The idea is that eventually we’ll create a universal agriculture supply chain software trust, so as a farmer I can sell my products to the market and record everything in my smartphone,” Travers says. Travers and Grossett’s standing in the wine industry adds value to the technology. “We understand it intuitively, whereas firms from outside the industry don’t have that knowledge and experience,” Travers says.
CREDIT: Words lynn cameron
Word count: 768
