Blockchain to tackle information costs
The word blockchain may make many uncomfortable given its connection to the world of cryptocurrencies where fortunes have been made and lost with the click of a mouse.
But ag businesses are now seriously looking at what it can offer to improve transparency and trust and produce premiums in markets at home and overseas.
But, just what is blockchain?
Economist with the Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology's Blockchain Innovation Hub Dr Darcy Allen said the technology provided a way of re-organising how we record facts that are dealt with on an everyday basis.
"Bitcoin is really a proof of concept for blockchain," said Dr Allen.
Dr Allen explained that blockchain allowed all players in a particular supply chain to update, approve and track the path of a product, providing proof along the way of what is being sold.
"It is a managed and maintained decentralised ledger of information about that good," he said.
"The producers, distributors and suppliers all the way to the retailer, are all uploading information to a ledger that everyone can see. Each block of information chained to the next and the one before it."
Dr Allen said blockchain could be a solution for rising "information costs" in agriculture.
"Throughout the 20th-century we solved a lot of the transportation costs in a supply chain," he said.
"Things like the shipping containers and airfreight...which brought down transportation costs.
"But now we are looking for ways to bring down the information costs of proving this good is what it says it is.
"As cattle move from production to consumer what we do is pass information.
"And that's costly, there's errors along the way and there's a potential for fraud."
Industry costs Speaking at the recent Australian Ag Immersive Technology conference in Melbourne, the Head of Agri-Food Tech with KPMG Ben van Delden provided some sobering numbers on the cost of that fraud.
"Food and beverage fraud globally is a $10-$15 billion problem," he told delegates.
Industry and corporate affairs manager with Teys, John Langbridge, also spoke about the cost of inspection and the lack of transparency in his sector.
"The current cost of inspection to the industry is about $113 million per year," said Mr Langbridge.
"We also have third party certification....so you could probably take that figure and multiply it by four.
"Even importing countries come out and verify. In 2010 when I was with the department (of agriculture), 17 different countries came out to verify the supply chain. They all look essentially at the same thing, but again they don't share anything."
CREDIT: Campbell Cooney
Word count: 433
