This is a commercial partnership with iseekplant
Excavators are used for a range of project types across the construction industry but knowing exactly what you're looking for can be difficult at times. There are a few considerations to be made when you're in the process of selecting an excavator hire company. It isn't just the reputation of a company but the specifications of the machine you wish to hire you need to consider. Seeing reviews for a machine or company is all well and good, but if you end up with a machine that isn't capable of completing the job, you're in trouble.
The top six features to look for when hiring an excavator: Excavator size and diameter
This one seems pretty obvious, but plenty of contractors can often under or overestimate how an excavator may fit onto the site. The size of the excavator can really throw out your project and timeline significantly. If the excavator is too large, it may not be able to access areas of the site that need work completed, and alternatively if its too small it may not be capable of completing larger excavation elements and can cost you money and time.
Common excavation jobs
Almost every construction project will need excavation completed like grading, clearing, or site cutting and filling. When considering an excavator for your project you need to take into consideration the specific jobs it will complete. Selecting an excavator for site preparation is very different to when you need it for site preparation and ensuring you're prepared can make a great deal of difference.
Excavator depth and strength
Excavators of different sizes have different excavation depth capacity and strength. Before hiring an excavator try to calculate the earths depth and the depth that needs to be excavated to. Once you've done this you can select an excavator that fits the exact parameters of excavation. Some materials or soil types may need a stronger excavator or additional attachments to ease the process.
Excavator attachments and bucket type
Depending on the scope of you project and the tasks that need to be completed, attachments may need to be hired in addition to the excavator. It may be an auger, rock grabber, post hole digger, spreader bars, and more that you may need to make sure you cover all your bases on site.
You need to also consider the bucket size required for different tasks. Larger buckets may need to be used for ease of moving earth, whereas smaller buckets may be needed for smaller technical tasks.
Dump location and height
The height of the excavator can significantly impact the way you complete tasks on site. If the arm of the excavator is too short, you may not be able to reach particular areas, so checking the height is essential, or you may need to hire a long reach excavator.
Dump location is also important to consider so you're not trying to maneuver around too small a space creating hazardous conditions. Whether it is dumped immediately into a truck or another location, make sure you have enough space on site.
Smart technologies
As excavators continue to evolve, new technology is being added to streamline the use of this type of machine. If you're completing a technical excavation, you may need extra technology that can help you locate utilities, help you measure the depth more precisely, and so on. Take into consideration the exact parameters of your project and if any extra technology may need to be hired in accordance.
Finding the right excavator hire companies
Now that you know what you're looking for in an excavator and the considerations you need to take, it may be time to hire. Here are a couple of excavation and excavator hire companies to help get you started:
TPC Earthmoving is one of the top excavation and excavator hire companies in Brisbane. Able to complete earthmoving jobs of all kinds, they're a great choice for your next project.
Fast Track Contracting are the earthmoving specialists across Adelaide. Providing excavation services across the residential and commercial sectors, they're a top choice for any earthmoving needed.
Choose the best excavator for your project
Understanding what to consider before hiring an excavator is the first step to completing a successful project. Once you know what you need hiring an excavator will be a breeze and make the entire hire process faster and more efficient. So keep an eye out for excavators that meet your exact needs on site and get digging.
CREDIT:
Word count: 752
