REAL-TIME monitoring of traffic congestion, carparks, rubbish bin capacity, tennis court and swimming pool use is being adapted by councils in a bid to make Adelaide the “smartest” city in the nation.
In an Australian first, the Local Government Association has launched a Smart Cities framework project aimed at ensuring councils always use cutting-edge technology in planning.
Some smart ideas already on the table include carparking and traffic technologies that identify vacant parks and road congestion points, interactive maps and audio guides, rubbish bins that know when they need to be emptied, and apps that allow the public to report potholes and footpath damage and view in real time the schedule for repair. Leading councils including Burnside in Adelaide’s east are being used as mentors to help other councils embrace new technologies.
Gawler Mayor Karen Redman, who is also chair of an association committee over-seeing the rollout of the Smart Cities project, said technology and data presented myriad opportunities for councils to improve effectiveness and efficiency, and the services they provided to their communities. “The needs and expectations of our communities are constantly changing, and smart technologies can help councils identify and implement new solutions and improved services,” she said.
“The Smart Cities framework provides a platform for councils to work together on a range of technology and data projects that will benefit all South Australians.” Burnside Mayor Anne Monceaux said her council was introducing 29 smart sensors to measure live use of facilities, including tennis courts, a wading pool, playgrounds, barbecues and carparks.
“Data obtained will assist in providing an evidence base and inform future upgrades of the park, allow for improved maintenance response times and provide an accurate real-time source of information for our community,” Ms Monceaux said.
One hundred sensors have been installed across six metro councils with the help of federal government funding and technical help from the University of Adelaide.
The sensors feature heavily in rubbish collection, with Port Adelaide Enfield Council using the technology so that a driver, using a tablet device stops only at bins that need emptying.
Prospect Council is using the sensors to not only alert it when bins are full but also when public barbecues and sports ground are being used – all in real time.
Campbelltown Council is using sensors to evaluate the impact of the Magill Rd upgrade by using the sensors to count people on the busy road.
Councils hope the Smart Cities project will increase the efficiency and effectiveness of their area, improve local amenity and community wellbeing and drive downward pressure on rates.Adelaide’s status as a Smart City has been established as part of a City Deal signed by the state and federal governments. It is aimed at complementing work at Lot Fourteen – the redevelopment of the old Royal Adelaide Hospital site that will house businesses specialising in artificial intelligence, cyber security, smart sensor networks, robotics, big data, defence and space technologies.
CREDIT: EXCLUSIVE MATT SMITH
Word count: 493
