Watch out for flying toasters. That’s the catchcry with red-hot interest in small low-orbiting satellites. They’re the size of toasters and will soon encircle Earth in tens of thousands, working together in “constellations” to provide communications.
Big companies are investing. SpaceX’s Starlink, Facebook and Amazon want to launch them and offer internet.
UK-based OneWeb launched its first six toasters in February and will fire 30 per month into space by the end of the year. It aims to have a constellation of 650 next year, with global commercial coverage from 2021. That includes internet services in Australia.
These low-orbit satellites have lots of advantages. Communications from Earth to just above 500km is much faster than to a regular satellite in a geostationary orbit at 36,000km. Network delay or latency is less.
Cameras can take better shots of Earth at 500km than at 36,000km, they’re relatively inexpensive, you can keep constellation technology up to date by routinely replacing ageing satellites, and it costs less for satellite services, and presumably customers, to monitor internet-of-things devices.
Laser communication with base stations on Earth means gigabit internet speeds faster than NBN’s Sky Muster. Signals sent up to lower-orbit satellites don’t have to be as strong as those required for more distant satellites.
The big disadvantage is an additional tens of thousands of objects encircling Earth that could quickly become space junk. They could become catastrophic hazards that turn transiting astronauts to toast. To deal with this, it seems space will be regulated like aviation airspace.
From humble beginnings in 2015, Adelaide-based Fleet has bookings for monitoring four million devices using low-orbit nanosatellites. Fleet launched four satellites late last year.
Co-founder Flavia Tata Nardini says building and launching three satellites cost it about $500,000. She says the four tiny satellites capture data as they sweep over groups of low-powered sensors once or twice a day. Fleet plans to operate 100 satellites — with a size of 30cm by 10cm — at an altitude of 580km.
The satellite systems offer an alternative to 5G, which also aims to mass collect sensor data. The latest development is this week’s announcement of Australia’s Co-operative Research Centre for Smart Satellite Technologies and Analytics, or SmartSat, led by the University of South Australia with $190 million in investments and $55m from federal funds.
A total of 84 organisations are joining forces to help Australia become a leader in implementing smart technologies.
SmartSat chief executive Andy Koronios (pictured above) says research satellites will use laser communications that develop AI systems for satellite cameras in the sky.
“Rather than sending all the data on the ground for someone to say, ‘Hey, that’s a ship and, by the way, that’s an illegal boat, the satellite technology … tells you what it is rather than send you all the information all day,” he says.
“Something like a border protection or illegal trafficking of drugs may have a real-time need for (fast analysis), so rather than do the analysis on the ground, you do it on the satellite itself.
“You track where your livestock is in a huge space — whether they are hungry. “You can have Fitbits for the livestock, so if there is a problem and they fall down or are sick, they can send a signal to the satellite and the farmer can receive that information as an SMS.” Sam Reisenfeld from the school of engineering at Macquarie University says robots could roam in remote areas, conducting soil tests for minerals. They could return and download data to a base station that uses AI to determine significant findings. These findings would be reported to a satellite.
Koronios says 5G will make the digital divide bigger, not smaller, “because it requires many, many more mobile towers”.“How are you going to do that in Birdsville or out in the desert? By using satellite towers, you can do that.”
CREDIT: CHRIS GRIFFITH; TECH TALK
Word count: 650
