DATA-hungry South Australians will soon be able to access National Broadband Network speeds in their homes up to 20 times faster than currently available on the market.
As the 5G mobile phone network, which also promises super-quick internet, rolls out across the country, pressure is on the NBN to deliver for the modern Australian household.
CONTINUED PAGE 4 NBN to boost speeds in battle against 5G FROM PAGE 1 NBN corporate affairs boss Tim Saul said fixed-line internet was still the answer for SA homes, where data consumption had grown by about 25 per cent a year.
“Homes are embracing video-streaming and subscription services and connected devices like never before, while businesses continue to embrace smart technologies like video conferencing and connected equipment,” Mr Saul said.
From May, NBN will offer retailers plans that can deliver speeds of 1000Mbps – about 20 times faster than download speeds on the most popular 50Mbps plans.
The plans initially will be available to about 88,000 homes and businesses that have NBN fibre-to-the-premises technology. It will then roll out to an estimated 200,000 additional homes and businesses with fibre-to-the-kerb connections.
Across metropolitan Adelaide, about 93 per cent of homes and businesses can now connect to the NBN network. Households and businesses in remaining suburbs, focused mainly in parts of eastern and southwestern Adelaide, will be asked to switch from the traditional copper network to NBN by the middle of this year.
As the rollout nears its end, the NBN is also boosting household speeds to keep pace with consumer demand.
But there is pressure on the company to deliver as the mobile 5G rollout, facilitated by major telcos such as Telstra and Optus, also continues across the country. The 4G mobile network has not been widely used to connect to the internet at home. But the 5G network is now promising to deliver wireless internet coverage competitive with the NBN in terms of price, speeds and data allowances.
Mr Saul said there was no doubt 5G was a great development but there remained a misconception that it was in competition with the NBN.
“We believe that 5G is quite complementary to the NBN,” he said. “About 90 per cent of all downloads are on a fixed-line network and about 10 per cent are on a mobile network. That is because a fixed-line network is designed to carry those large data volumes.” He said the average NBN user in SA was using 240GB of data per month, compared with 65GB in 2016. Federal Adelaide MP Steve Georganas said the NBN rollout had been dogged by cost blowouts and delays.
“Every day while we’re transitioning to the NBN, continuously people are telling us they’re getting misinformation and buck-passing,” Mr Georganas said.
“It’s not NBN’s fault, it’s the telco’s fault. It’s not the telco’s fault, it’s NBN’s fault.” Mr Georganas has held four NBN forums with the company’s SA manager Jill Bottrall to address the concerns raised with his office. “Elderly people are trying to deal with it who are not up to date with IT,” he said.“(Ms Bottrall) tried to answer as many questions as she could and she did take up cases individually.”
CREDIT: EXCLUSIVE MATT SMITH
Word count: 533
