WATER bills will be slashed by $26 a year for households, with a bigger cut possible if the State Government decides to help consumers instead of its Treasury Department.
SA Water has lodged a plan to cut prices, while continuing to invest in upgrades in the four years from July next year.
The plan, now open for public comment, aims to cut water prices by 1.8 per cent and sewerage by 3.2 per cent – delivering a $26 cut to this financial year’s average annual bill of $1258 for a city household.
CONTINUED PAGE 8 Households set for water-bill cut FROM PAGE 1 SA water manager of customer delivery Kerry Rowlands said a focus on smart technologies, maximising productivity of assets and containing capitals works costs had made the utility more efficient.
“We’re now in a position to deliver a real price decrease, while still covering all of the fundamentals that protect public health and the environment, as well as pursuing initiatives that will deliver sustainable experience improvements for our customers,” Ms Rowlands, pictured, said.
The plan has been lodged with the Essential Services Commission of SA, which will receive public submissions until December 20 ahead of making a draft decision in February and a final decision in May on how much consumers will pay.
The proposal also would cut average prices for primary producers by $299 and city businesses by $138.
SA Water says of the 13 largest utilities in Australia, it has the fifth lowest operating costs for each customer for water and the lowest for sewerage. A bigger cut depends on Treasurer Rob Lucas deciding on how much SA Water is worth. Its revenue is linked to what is called the regulated asset base – that is how much all its assets are worth and it is entitled to make a reasonable return on these assets.
In July, Mr Lucas released a report he commissioned by former chair of SA Water Lew Owens into the asset base.
Mr Owens recommended SA Water’s asset base be devalued by at least $520 million, which would reduce its annual income by $31 million.Mr Lucas is considering the report and recommendations.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 364
