TWENTY-EIGHT remote communities across SA will receive cheaper electricity after the state government reduced tariffs for 2020-21 under the Remote Area Energy Supply scheme.
Minister for Energy and Mining Dan van Holst Pellekaan said the reduction in annual electricity costs would benefit about 3400 customers across 13 townships and 15 Aboriginal communities under the RAES scheme.
The remote communities to receive cheaper electricity are Blinman, Cockburn, Glendambo, Kingoonya, Manna Hill, Marla, Marree, Nundroo, Oodnadatta, Parachilna, Andamooka, Coober Pedy and Yunta.
The Aboriginal communities are Amata, Iwantja (Indulkana), Kaltjiti (Fregon), Mimili, Pukatja (Ernabella), Umuwa, Murputja, Kanpi, Nyapari, Pipalyatjara, Kalka, Oak Valley and Yalata.
"Electricity tariffs under the RAES scheme are reviewed and set annually by the state government, and residential and business tariffs are aligned with the average of offers provided by retailers to South Australians connected to the national grid," he said.
"As a result of this year's tariff review, RAES scheme tariffs will be adjusted downward to reflect recent reductions in prices for all other consumers.
"This will deliver an average reduction of $118 a year for residential and $286 a year for business customers."
Mr van Holst Pellekaan said a recent $9 million investment in solar and battery technology at the Central Power House in Umuwa would also provide cheaper, cleaner and more reliable power to communities in the APY Lands in the state's Far North.
"When completed, the upgraded Central Powerhouse will comprise 3 megawatts of solar photovoltaic panels and 1 megawatt of battery storage capacity, and will deliver 4.4 gigawatt hours of clean energy and reduce the amount of diesel used by 1 million litres per annum," he said.
Homelands connected to the Central Power House grid include Yunyarinyi and Watinuma.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 306
