Communities across the Far North will receive cheaper electricity under state government reduced tariffs.
Blinman, Marla, Marree, Oodnadatta, Parachilna, Andamooka and Coober Pedy are among the 28 regional townships to benefit from the Remote Area Energy Scheme (RAES) into 2021.
Minister for Energy and Mining Dan van Holst Pellekaan said the reduction in annual electricity costs will benefit around 3400 customers.
"Electricity tariffs under the RAES scheme are reviewed and set annually by the State Government, and residential and business tariffs are aligned with the average of offers provided by retailers to South Australians connected to the national grid," he said.
"As a result of this year's tariff review, RAES scheme tariffs will be adjusted downward to reflect recent reductions in prices for all other consumers. This will deliver an average reduction of $118 a year for residential and $286 a year for business customers."
The Minister for Energy and Mining said this modest, but important reduction in electricity costs demonstrates the State Government's commitment to reduce power prices for all South Australians and reflects the lower electricity prices now available in the rest of South Australia.
"The State Government has committed $5 million for the RAES Future Sustainability Program over the next four years, to introduce a range of measures to improve supply and integrate renewable energy into the RAES scheme," he said,
"This includes upgrading electricity meters with new smart meters that will help to improve energy efficiency and service delivery across the network.
"We have also recently announced a $9 million investment in solar and battery technology at the Central Power House in Umuwa which will provide cheaper, cleaner, more reliable power to communities in the APY Lands in our state's Far North.
"When completed, the upgraded Central Powerhouse will comprise 3 megawatts of solar photovoltaic panels and 1 megawatt of battery storage capacity, and will deliver 4.4 gigawatt hours of clean energy and reduce the amount of diesel used by 1 million litres per annum, continuing our commitment to lowering energy costs for all South Australians."
CREDIT: Amy Green
Word count: 343
