Stop handing out free money and spend it instead on making sure our aged are well fed As a self-funded, taxpaying retiree, I’m appalled at the government’s largesse in this election year (“Elderly still not being fed properly”, 29/3) Instead of tax cuts and payouts to people who don’t need them, the government should spend money to guarantee aged-care homes serve their residents high-quality meals. My late father, who was cooking himself nourishing meals until he had to go into a high-care nursing bed in his 90s, found the food terrible and his and others’ complaints to the management were ignored. Please use our money for more compassionate purposes, Treasurer Frydenberg, and have regular unannounced inspections of government and privately run nursing homes.
Jan Kendall, Mt Martha, Vic
Where was Jada?
Chris Rock’s comment “I love you, Jada” before saying “GI Jane 2, can’t wait to see it” could indicate he liked the way she looked and may well have been said without knowing her condition (“Hits and Mrs: It’s an Oscars like no other”, 29/3). While it may have been in poor taste, the daily insults directed at our political leaders (of all persuasions) and their spouses are much nastier and a sad indictment of society.
To me, the concerning part of the whole incident is that it sends a message that women can’t stand up for themselves. Jada Pinkett Smith could have rebuked Rock with a simple “You’ve gone too far” or even a gesture. Instead, like a damsel in distress, she sent her husband to slap Rock in what looked like a farcical medieval duel.
Jacqueline Poetzscher, Brookfield, Qld
Fleeing in kayaks Greg Sheridan reports that a Compass Polling survey suggested in the event of an invasion, Greens voters would be more likely to flee the country than to stay and fight (“In perilous times, would we flee or fight”, 29/3). While I would find it richly amusing to see Australian Greens as boatpeople taking to their kayaks in a mass exodus, only to be turned back by the Royal New Zealand Navy in the Tasman Sea, such a scenario seems unlikely.
First, I have great confidence in all Australians, as they have always done in the past, to step up and be counted when push comes to shove, even the Greens. After all, it was the rich, not the pacifists, who fled Britain in 1940.
Second, invading Australia is a non-trivial task – even the Imperial Japanese Navy found it beyond its resources in 1942.
Finally, New Zealand’s navy has been starved of funds for so long, and is now so small and powerless, that it would need to borrow a Manly ferry to run Sovereign Borders-type patrols.
Glenn Simpson, Elanora, Qld
Tit for tat The threat of China’s negotiations with Solomon Islands, and possibly with Papua New Guinea, seeking the establishment of Chinese military bases there, is of grave concern to Australia and New Zealand and doubtless to the US. It seems to me that a potent way of countering this would be for ANZUS countries to immediately commence negotiations with Taiwan, with a view to the establishment of an ANZUS military base there. This, I feel, would not only be welcomed by Taiwan but would give serious pause to Xi Jinping and his cronies with their intimidatory strategies. It would also be a much-needed projection of strength and determination in the face of recent totalitarian aggression.
Alan Franklin, St Ives, NSW
Strategic error Gerard DeGroot’s review of The Greatest Raid by Giles Whittell (Bookshelf, 29/3) is a travesty. He misses the whole point of Operation Chariot, which was to damage the Normandie Dock at Saint-Nazaire so much that it could not be used by German navy battleships for the remainder of World War II. The operation succeeded, despite the heavy cost in manpower. Counted in strategic terms the loss of so many navy and army commando personnel was justified because it kept German capital ships out of the North Atlantic and away from the vital convoys supporting the Allied build-up in Britain.
This was either a very bad review or a very bad book.
Greg Ferguson, Church Point, NSW
Powering up The 520MW coal-fired power station at Port Augusta closed in 2016 because Alinta Energy could not persuade the SA Labor government to subsidise an upgrade of $25m. It was replaced by the 275MW Bungala Solar Power station costing $295m. More than 1.2 million solar photovoltaic panels (made in China) provide daylight electricity. Since then my electricity bills have increased by 60 per cent and recently another two more blackouts occurred. Adding the $172m battery and wind farm at Hornsdale (150MW). I wonder whether renewable energy is as cheap, reliable and dispatchable as proclaimed. Alan Watchman, Adelaide, SA
Word count: 794
