Sustainability can work as part of the art economy Contemporary art superstar Olafur Eliasson has made his name by bringing the experience of the natural world into the realm of art. He almost could be described as a landscape artist, because while his exquisitely executed installations have little resemblance to the painting tradition of, say, Turner, Canaletto or von Guerard, he shares with those artists a similar affinity with the sublime.
Perhaps his most famous work is The Weather Project, in which Eliasson contrived to have an artificial sun rise in the vast space of Tate Modern’s Turbine Hall in London, filling it with golden light.
In New York, he erected four waterfalls that emptied themselves into the East River. Last year, he shipped boulder-size chunks of ancient glacier from Greenland to London so that visitors could taste and breathe the ancient air trapped in their frozen bubbles.
Eliasson was at the Gallery of Modern Art in Brisbane last week to oversee the installation of his 2014 environmental sculpture, Riverbed. Inspired by a lifetime of bushwalks that Eliasson has taken in Iceland, Riverbed comprises a roomful of smooth stones with a small trickle of water running through it. This tiny stream could be a primordial river at the beginning of time or the precious remains of a once-great torrent in a parched, apocalyptic future.
Eliasson is careful not to disturb the experience of visitors who view and climb on his artwork. He is determinedly not didactic. But in conversation he explains that his purpose in bringing a simulation of nature into the art gallery is an attempt to “reframe” his viewers’ relationship with the outdoors. Global warming and the extinction of plant and animal species, he says, are some of the big questions confronting the planet.
“I don’t mean to tell people what to see, and certainly not tell them how to behave,” he says.
“I am interested in the degree to which we understand complex things such as the environment, but I am trying to step away from suggesting that the way I see things should be seen as the truth.” If Eliasson’s work is an open question, various arts and cultural organisations are attempting to provide some answers. Several are embracing sustainability to lighten their load on the environment. Others, such as the Adelaide Festival, are trying to erase their carbon footprint expressly to take action on climate change.
One of the earliest modern buildings in Sydney to embrace sustainability was the Sydney Opera House. With a similar display of ingenuity that has given the city one of the world’s great buildings, architect Joern Utzon had the Opera House fitted with a cooling system that uses seawater from Sydney Harbour.
More recently, the Opera House has decreased water consumption by 35 per cent, reduced energy consumption by 16 per cent, stopped using plastic bags and straws, and will aim to source 85 per cent of its annual electricity consumption — it used 16 gigawatt hours last year, equivalent to 2500 households — from wind and solar generators, according to its annual report. Last year the building achieved carbon-neutral status, with 17,471 tonnes of emissions offset by carbon credits.
Sydney Theatre Company, when under the leadership of Cate Blanchett and Andrew Upton, em­barked on its Greening the Wharf project, fitting out its heritage Wharf Theatre with solar panels and rainwater tanks. (Blanchett was criticised in some quarters for using her celebrity to promote climate action in a TV commercial.) The Wharf is undergoing a $60m revamp as part of the state government’s Walsh Bay Arts Pre­cinct development. Its solar and rain-capture units will be a feature of the building.
Across Darling Harbour, the Australian National Maritime Museum has installed lightweight solar panels on the roof of its Wharf 7 heritage centre, expected to contribute 25 per cent of the building’s energy needs.
Sydney’s newest cultural building, the $344m extension of the Art Gallery of NSW called Sydney Modern, which began construction last month, claims to be the first major gallery in Australia to earn six green stars for its design.
Art galleries and museums typically are big users of electricity: they are open to the public almost every day and their valuable, perishable collections require consistent air temperature and humidity. International lenders of artworks also demand rigorous climate controls.
Sydney Modern has achieved its six-star green rating, the highest awarded by the Green Building Council, because of its environmentally sensitive design, its adaptive reuse of World War II-era oil tanks — which will be transformed into a contemporary art space and back-of-house facilities — and the inclusion of sustainability features such as photovoltaic panels that will provide 250 kilowatts or 10 per cent of the building’s electricity, and tanks with 636 kilolitre capacity to capture rainwater for irrigation and other uses.
Sally Webster, head of the Sydney Modern project, says the gallery included sustainability crit­eria in its brief for the architectural competition in 2014.
“Being a museum of the 21st century, we really have to think about how we create a more sustainable operation,” she says.
“(Winning firm) SANAA designed a building that offers us different ways to think about how we manage conditions in the gallery.” Japanese architects SANAA, led by principals Kazuyo Sejima and Ryue Nishizawa, have designed Sydney Modern as a series of pavilions that step down an embankment from Art Gallery Road to Woolloomooloo. Webster describes the arrangement of climate-critical spaces within the pavilions as being like an onion. The inner areas of the building where art is displayed — and which necessarily consume power — can be closed off, while outer areas do not require the same constant level of airconditioning.
Webster says it is unrealistic for the AGNSW and Sydney Modern to be entirely emissions-free; its custodianship of the $1.3bn state art collection means that it is obliged to use electricity. But other arts organisations, especially seasonal events such as festivals, are moving towards greater sustainability and some have declared themselves carbon-neutral.
The Adelaide Festival takes place mostly in March. Often it is very hot, and demand for airconditioning and refrigerated drinks is high. An international festival with real cultural credentials, it attracts artists and visitors from interstate and overseas, many of whom fly to Adelaide for the event. All of these things add to the carbon load, but the festival next year will be carbon-neutral, brought about by waste minimisation and the purchase of carbon credits.
“Our responsibility is to show corporate and cultural leadership,” Adelaide Festival co-director Rachel Healy says. “Climate change affects us all.” The festival used Adelaide consultant Matthew Shorten of Trellis Technologies to calculate its likely carbon emissions and work out how to reduce them. Next year it will cut down on printed programs and day-bills, eliminate single-use plastic and provide water stations to reduce demand for bottled water. It has embraced videoconferencing as an alternative to interstate travel and is encouraging visitors to use public transport or to ride a bike.
Emissions that cannot be avoided have been offset with carbon credits. Shorten estimates that the festival will produce 9000 tonnes of carbon — equivalent to 3000 cars on the road — and has cancelled that liability by purchasing 9000 credits, at $2 each, from a wind farm in Gujarat, India. When the festival concludes in March, Shorten will compare actual emissions against the estimate and make adjustments if necessary.
The festival estimates it will spend $65,000 on going carbon-neutral, financed with corporate and philanthropic support and its own resources (total turnover was $19m this year).
Critics of carbon credits say they are essentially greenwashing, conveniently paying off an environmental debt. Indeed, Indian credits of $2 apiece are much cheaper than some Australian credits which may cost $8 to $15, Shorten says, for abatement projects such as reforestation. But Adelaide Festival executive director Rob Brookman says the festival chose to help reduce emissions in a huge emerging economy such as India to emphasise that climate change is a global challenge.“We feel there is potent symbolism in supporting the development of clean energy sources in India at a time when Australia will be profiting by shipping coal to that country from the Adani mine,” he says.
CREDIT: Matthew Westwood
Word count: 1372
