Four Fleurieu Peninsula students have been awarded a prestigious a Playford Trust scholarship to assist them in their university studies.
Rory Bowls, Joshua Grist, Mckale O'Flaherty, and Cameron Tugwell were presented with their scholarships along with over 40 South Australian students in a ceremony in Adelaide on Thursday April 21.
Rory, from Mount Compass, received a Regional Science and Engineering Scholarship to support his studies in civil engineering at Flinders University.
He was one of six students to be awarded the scholarship of $4000.
In year 12 at Tatachilla Lutheran College, he won the Top of Subject awards for all five of his SACE stage 2 subjects.
Joshua, who grew up on the Fleurieu, received the Coopers Brewery / Playford Trust Honours Scholarship, worth $7000, to support his continuing studies at the University of Adelaide in genetics and ecology.
Through his university studies Joshua has received the faculty's Outstanding Academic Achievement Award twice and has travelled to Cambodia and Laos with the help of a New Colombo Plan grant to see first-hand the ecological and agricultural challenges those countries face.
Joshua's Honours degree will shed light on genetic mechanisms controlling the timing of crucial phases in the growth and development of barley crops, and how these mechanisms interact with environmental conditions
McKale, from Goolwa, received a Nyrstar/Playford Trust Scholarship for his studies of chemical engineering at the University of Adelaide, majoring in renewable energy.
During his schooling at Investigator College, Makale developed an interest in chemistry and mathematics.
Mckale believes in a future of renewable energy and through his studies he wants to contribute to our states transition towards carbon neutral, sustainable energy consumption.
With help from his scholarship Mckale recently gained practical experience at the Port Pirie led smelter.
Cameron, from McLaren Vale and who is in his third year of an electrical engineering degree at Flinders University was also awarded a Nyrstar/Playford Trust Scholarship.
For his academic success at university Cameron received a Vice Chancellor's Letter of Commendation in 2021.
Cameron also recently gained some experience at the Port Pirie led smelter, during his time there he was stationed in the electrical engineering and engineering projects departments.
Mckale and Cameron were two of four students who were awarded the two-year Nyrstar/Playford Trust scholarships valued at $20,000 each.
CREDIT: Sophie Conlon
Word count: 382
