People of all abilities are coming together to sing as one in an inclusive choir for people who want their voice heard beyond the walls of their shower cubicle The noise coming from Kingston House on this summer evening is joyful and melodious, so much so that people passing through the surrounding parklands stop to listen and applaud.
What is not evident is that the With One Voice Kingston Park choir began singing together just nine months ago.
Most of their members had never before sung in public – and many thought they never would.
This is an inclusive choir made up of local residents of all ages and abilities – a group to which allcomers have access and where everybody gets a voice.
The brainchild of Creativity Australia, the With One Voice choir concept is in its 10th year, with 22 inclusive choirs dotted around the country.
Creativity Australia program co-ordinator Lydia Griffiths says the vision was to provide the impetus and seed funding to set up choirs that were accessible to everyone to come together and bond around music and singing.
To date, choirs nationally have welcomed people from all faiths, cultures, ages, abilities, backgrounds and socioeconomic situations, including those with disabilities, such as autism, visual impairment and cerebral palsy. Griffiths says about 25 per cent of people in the choirs identify as having a disability At Kingston Park, the sole With One Voice choir in South Australia to date, coordinator David Kelly says access to the group is facilitated in different ways.
“We had our first rehearsal in May 2018,” he says, “This is a choir where there are no auditions – everybody is welcome and, if you can’t afford the membership fees, it doesn’t matter; we’ll make it work. We advertised through the local community, through the residents’ association, local councils and word of mouth. We had about 35 people to our first session. That was a great success and we’ve continued since that time.” Creativity Australia is also an approved NDIS provider, which means people living with a disability can claim NDIS funding to cover their choir membership contribution.
What the group has in common, regardless of background, is they are locals who enjoy singing and are happy to work together so everyone can find their voice and form new social connections. “We have a shared meal together with the choir,” Kelly says.
“It’s a very social event. We want to build connections in our local community and food is a really traditional way of getting people together.” Co-conductors Michelle Byrne and Heather Frahn have worked on musical projects for years and were more than happy to back the choir when first Frahn and then Byrne were recruited.
“Here we don’t use any sheet music so for starters there’s nothing to intimidate people,” Byrne says. “We teach a lot by call and response, so I will sing the parts and people will sing it back to us.” Frahn says song choice is important: “Our songs have a meaning to them that is positive and uplifting.
“It’s getting people singing, clapping, stamping their feet, having a laugh and connecting through music.” For those who feel they cannot sing, for whatever reason, the choir gives them the opportunity to test their talents in a safe place. “We set an intention with ourselves and everyone here, which is we believe everyone can sing and believe everyone has a voice and this is a space where everyone can express their voice,” Byrne says.
“We’ve found that people come along and say, ‘I can’t sing’ but, after the first session, you see them joining in, their faces are lit up and, after a few weeks, they’ve gained confidence and they realise they actually can sing.” Singing in a choir has the potential not only to bring people together but also give them better health outcomes.
“I’ve been involved in singing and choirs since I was a kid,” Kelly says. “I’ve spent four years working at the SA Health and Medical Research Institute at the Wellbeing and Resilience Centre.
“We have done some research into singing and there’s no doubt that the science of neuroplasticity – the capacity of our brain to create new neural pathways – is enhanced by creative activities like singing.
“And we know that hormones, like endorphins, are released when we sing collectively in a group and these just make us feel good. It’s not just the social part of it that makes us feel good, it’s also a chemical process in our brain.” Choir member Karen Zaskolny says the With One Voice experience has been a revelation after she learned about it from a flyer in her letterbox.
“I have previously joined two choirs but they didn’t suit me,” she says. “One was too casual and people didn’t respect the process. The other one was extremely formal and they sang really old World War II songs – Vera Lynn.” Fortunately, Zaskolny’s desire to sing overcame any reservations she had and she plucked up the courage to call. “I’m one of the people who rang up Dave and said, ‘I can’t sing, is it still OK to join?’,” says the freelance copywriter who works from home.
“I just loved it from the moment I came here. The singing was a big deal but I was actually looking for community. In May last year, I had no regular work at all.
There’s an old saying – a happy life needs three things: someone to love, something to do and something to look forward to.
“I had none of those things in my life at the time, so I’d very much isolated myself. So this choir was my something to look forward to and gives me some structure. I love the community supper afterwards: you chat with people and I meet new people every time and catch up with people for coffee.
“A lot of people are local so you see them on the street and say ‘hi’.” Considering starting your own choir?Contact Creativity Australia at creativityaustralia.org.au/
CREDIT: WORDS JENNIFER HULLICK
Word count: 1013
