Anthony Albanese has promised to establish a $500m fund to help roll out more electric vehicle charging stations across the country and asked Australians to imagine a future without petrol bills.
The Opposition Leader used the ALP campaign launch in Perth to announce that a Labor government would set up a $500m “driving the nation fund” so the Commonwealth could co-invest in additional EV chargers, as well as hydrogen refuelling infrastructure for heavy vehicles.
Labor has set out a goal to develop a national charging network with stations at an average interval of 150km on major roads. It is willing to put forward an investment of $39.3m towards this objective and says investment would be matched by the NRMA.
Under the plan, Labor says the owners of electric vehicles should be free to drive from Adelaide to Perth, across the Nullarbor; ­Darwin to Broome and on to Perth; Broken Hill to Adelaide; Port Augusta to Darwin and from Brisbane to Mt Isa and on to ­Tennant Creek.
An $80m investment would also be made towards what Mr ­Albanese calls ‘hydrogen highways” – a refuelling network that would see up to 16 stations on ­Australia’s busiest freight routes.
Mr Albanese said heavy vehicles were moving towards cleaner energy, with hydrogen-powered freight vehicles in development.
“To prepare for them, we’ll partner with the states to create hydrogen-ready highways, matching the investments state governments make,” he said.
“Labor will build more electric ­vehicle charging stations across Australia so we can close the gaps in the network. Together with Labor’s already announced Electric Vehicle Discount, we’ll make it easier and cheaper for your next car to be electric.” “Imagine a future where you don’t have to worry about petrol bills. We can get there, but we need government to build the foundation for it.” Under Labor’s electric car discount, many electric vehicles will be exempted from fringe benefits tax and import tariffs.
Climate change and energy spokesman Chris Bowen said the driving the nation fund would be delivered through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency.
He said a Labor government would co-ordinate public investment to ensure it did not duplicate or crowd out private sector investment.
Electric Vehicle Council chief executive Behyad Jafari said that “range anxiety” was a major impediment to Australians purchasing electric vehicles.
“Although much of this anxiety is misplaced, building a modern network of charging infrastructure would send a strong signal that there’s nothing to fear,” he said. “For regional drivers, hesitancy is stronger, but that’s why it’s excellent to see the NRMA committing to partnering with the ­federal government to roll out ­regional charging infrastructure and make EVs an option for all Australians.” The government has established a $250m Future Fuels Fund to support electric and hydrogen heavy vehicles, through the Australian Renewable Energy Agency. The Coalition on Sunday also argued that Labor and the Greens had teamed up in June 2021 against regulations in the Senate providing ARENA with $192m in funding, including $74.5m allocated for the Future Fuels Fund and funding to trial electric and hydrogen heavy vehicles. But Labor has attacked Mr Morrison for arguing at the last election that the ALP’s electric vehicle policy would “end the weekend” and that an EV would not be able to “tow your boat” to a camping site.
CREDIT: JOE KELLY
Word count: 551
