H2EX is an explorer and aspiring miner of natural hydrogen that sits under the ground and has secured four permit applications in South Australia across 32,000sq km where the company says there is a potential annual revenue opportunity of up to $500m.
Coleman took Woodside into hydrogen research in 2017 as part of an alternative energy strategy. He now chases hydrogen as one of four or five different investment themes.
“What I’m doing here with H2EX is very complimentary to the other opportunity I’m pursuing with Infinite Blue Energy. That’s more a conventional hydrogen play,” he says.
Conventional hydrogen processes include blue hydrogen from steaming methane or green hydrogen from electrolysis or photolytics using solar energy.
The idea of mining natural hydrogen is gaining traction as hundreds of millions of dollars pours into an effort to commercially scale hydrogen production as a clean energy solution.
Natural hydrogen is formed underground not from hydrocarbons, but from the oxidation of water and iron sediments. Oil and gas fields have little free hydrogen and one reason acreage is up for grabs is it was ignored by explorers.
The two founder directors of H2EX are chief executive Mark Hanna and chief financial officer Greschen Brecker. Both worked under Coleman at Woodside.
Coleman says the hunt for natural hydrogen, also called white or gold hydrogen kicked off after from Geoscience Australia paper at APPEA last year. “That paper won best paper in the conference. After that the SA government opened up a number of areas for permits,” he says.
Coleman says the H2EX tenements are in good situ on the edge of the Gawler Craton – most famous for BHP’s Olympic Dam mine.
The team was beaten out in one area but secured blocks next door, one of which will go to license soon. “They are adjacent to areas where hydrogen has been discovered in oil wells that had been drilled in the early part of the last century” he says.
Natural hydrogen threatens to disrupt renewable energy.
If successful mining could deliver hydrogen in quantity at a far lower cost than promised by existing players in a Wacky Races to be the first hydrogen producer at scale. H2EX follows Brisbane based start-up Gold Hydrogen which is exploring tenements in South Australia’s Yorke Peninsula and Kangaroo Island.
In November, Gold Hydrogen’s Neil McDonald told The Australian early modelling showed SA could produce enough hydrogen to power a million homes for 40 years.
Both companies cite proof of concept in Mali, Africa, where an old water bore accidentally intersected a hydrogen stream of 97 per cent purity. In 2018 a hydrogen pilot well provided electricity for a small village. There is early exploration activity in Arizona, Spain, Brazil and Russia.
The question remains however, whether there are commercial quantities of hydrogen lying under the ground in SA. Coleman understands the scepticism but says it is early days. “Go back and think about Colonel Drake when they first drilled their first oil wells in the US, there was scepticism then,” he says.
Seed funding for H2EX is almost in place but Coleman says the first round is modest. “We have covered our work program commitments on the blocks plus a little bit. We want to see what the prospectivity is first, because otherwise you can start diluting your shares quickly with money that you don’t really need.”
Word count: 545
