Don McMillan, Paddington, Brisbane
Energy poverty is an issue that should concern us all. This week I spoke to my 78-year-old sister in England. Her power bill is now £200 ($344) a month. This is a threefold increase in the past year. The UK energy policy is shambolic and I worry that we may well follow down the same path and end up with extremely high power bills for manufacturing, domestic use and general living. Why do our politicians not read and learn from the situations in other countries?
William Knight, Wherrol Flat, NSW
We are in a period of rapid transition as the worsening climate emergency necessitates movement away from many traditional industries. Angelica Snowden (“Plan needed to transition from coal”, 30/9) raises excellent points regarding the need for planned transition. It’s crucial that workers aren’t seen as expendable as we move to renewables. To date there have been examples of poorly planned transitions that have led to significant disadvantage and disruption. This is completely unfair to those who have worked in industries that have provided benefit to us all. Given the scale of change required, the federal government must immediately establish a national transition authority so that there is oversight in this area to ensure workers are protected but change happens at the required rapid pace. There are great opportunities ahead for workers to move to more sustainable employment in less destructive areas, but careful management is required.
Peter Cook, Essendon, Vic
Hearing about the 2035 closure of Loy Yang A (“Power plant to pull plug”, 29/9), those words “It’s not a race” came back to me. Recall that the Coalition failed to set targets for vaccination, then failed to meet the targets it set. Now we are faced with an even more dire problem: energy security. If the Coalition had seen the light a decade ago, our transmission infrastructure and investment in renewables would be much more advanced, and our transition that much more orderly.
Fiona Colin, Malvern East, Vic
Speaking frankly
Many self-funded retirees face difficult times with the prospect of falling share prices and dividends in the current economic environment. Not for them any government support such as the indexation relief provided to pensioners. That is why they view Labor’s proposed legislation on franking credits with apprehension. While some claim the legislation is only a minor change, many will see this as the thin edge of the wedge aimed at dismantling the franking credit regime over time. The Prime Minister and the Treasurer should have learnt by now that fiddling with franking credits is kryptonite.
Martin Newington, Aspendale, Vic
Mining on target
Thank you for your balanced reporting (“Revealed: Netball’s multimillion-dollar saviour”, 28/9). What this investment has done, aside from deliver much needed support directly to players, is allow Netball Australia to maintain ownership of one of its most valuable assets: the Suncorp Super Netball League.
At its most fundamental, this will ensure that this league continues to support outcomes for netball in Australia, from grassroots all the way to the Diamonds, not the profits of private equity investors. Gina Rinehart, through Hancock Prospecting, has a history of investing into sport. An often conveniently neglected truth when climate activists talk about mining is that most, if not all, of the primary products required for the generation, distribution and delivery of renewable energy depends on resources that need to be mined. Put simply, no mining, no renewables.
Katherine Savage, South Fremantle, WA
Barbaric memory
Hanging is barbaric (“Politics swings for the crime: how states came to the end of the rope”, 17/9) and, along with other forms of execution, should be stopped by those countries that still practise it. I was a young cadet journalist with the ABC in Adelaide when I was assigned, along with a senior journalist, to go to the Adelaide Jail and report on any demonstration against the execution of Glen Sabre Valance, the last man hanged in South Australia in November 1964. Before then I had never really thought much about the death penalty, but after hearing a siren sound at 8am and realising that a man had just been hanged in the guard tower near us, I became vehemently opposed to state-sanctioned killing.
Peter Baker, Encounter Bay, SA
Word count: 698
