The advantages are immense. They come pre-assembled and do not need refuelling for 30 years, so are safe. Their costs, and building time at three years, are much less than conventional nuclear plants. They can be sited at decommissioned fossil-fuelled power stations, where power lines are already in existence. They can be built to various power outputs and do not need water for cooling, so can also be constructed away from the coast, ideal for siting in inland Australian towns for their power security.
Should we believe CO2 is killing the planet, then nuclear is the only proven medium-term solution, as is now being recognised in Japan, Germany, Britain, the EU, (even Greens-run Finland wants a plant), as plants are reopened or planned. Australia also has a lot of uranium.
It’s another wake-up call for Chris Bowen – cut the ideology and keep the lights on.
Graham Pinn, Maroochydore, Qld
The US NuScale company says it could build a small modular reactor power station to generate 924MWe in Australia for $US3.3bn. That is about $5000 per kWe and is in line with information from national and international authorities including the International Energy Agency, which says: “Nuclear (is) the dispatchable low-carbon technology with the lowest expected costs in 2025.”
However, the CSIRO’s GenCost Report has persisted for several years in stating that the capital cost of nuclear power plants in Australia would be $16,773 per kWe, although the basis for this figure has always been tenuous. There is only one way to find out who has it right.
Don Higson, Paddington, NSW
Nuclear power is a valid route to assisting the world to achieve carbon net zero. It is relatively safe as evidenced by Hinkley Point B, Britain’s most productive power plant, which, coincidentally, came to the end of its reliable life early this month and was closed down after 46 years of operation.
The small-scale reactor has been touted for some time as the alternative to the eye-watering expense of a large-scale reactor. It is encouraging that the first design has been approved in the US and that there are agreements in place for construction in 12 countries. Australia should follow these nations into nuclear power as soon as the reactors become closer to “off the shelf”.
The path to nuclear power for Australia is a long one so it would be better to start the debate sooner rather than later. Any discussion should also include the potential for South Australia to become a repository for the world’s nuclear waste, not just our nation’s small amount. We have stable geology and the rest of the world would pay billions for a place to store waste.
John Kempler, Rose Bay, NSW
Adam Creighton quotes NuScale’s chief executive, who suggests we put his small modular reactors near mines in “remote locations”, where we don’t even need to make them connect to the power grid. “Clean” energy to dig up fossil fuels – hooray.
Creighton also promotes the idea the Albanese government is coming under more pressure to reconsider the moratorium on nuclear energy. In fact, Chris Bowen has made it crystal clear: nuclear energy is the slowest and most expensive form of alternative energy and “its adoption in Australia would push power prices up and crowd out cheaper and cleaner technologies”.
Nuclear energy produces deadly waste that has a half-life of thousands of years. It also poses the kind of risks we have seen over decades and are now seeing in Ukraine. Those who promote nuclear energy are businesses, first and foremost. Let’s not be taken in by the hype.
Fiona Colin, Malvern East, Vic
Word count: 590
