But perhaps the most optimistic claim is a life expectancy of 60 years for small modular reactors — unproven technology. The construction of the world’s first commercial SMR started in July 2021 with the Chinese power plant Linglong One. The operation of this prototype is due to start by the end of 2026.
Ray Peck, Hawthorn, Vic
Peter Sjoquist (“Nuclear power the key to a prosperous future Australia’’, Letters 7/7) is right, but what “group of intelligent politicians’’ is prepared (or courageous enough) to try to reverse the ban on nuclear power when anyone with a reasonable suggestion risks being cancelled?
Roseanne Schneider, Toowoomba, Qld
Your correspondents seek small modular nuclear reactor technology (Letters, 7/7). Perhaps it is a viable option in some contexts, but do these SMRs even currently exist in the format that our energy system would require?
Aside from the fact that nuclear power is currently banned in all states and territories in Australia, nuclear power is considered to be prohibitively costly, attracts significant safety and security challenges, requires waste management, and is renowned for delays in implementation.
As another ‘‘rain bomb’’ descends on NSW, it seems time to stop “fission’' for alternatives and push on with cheaper and safer renewable energy as per the AEMO’s Integrated System Plan.
Amy Hiller, Kew, Vic
Following on from the Tony Grey article and subsequent letters in support of nuclear power, it is worth noting that a recommended course of action for Australia is already being taken up overseas.
Romania, which already derives 20 per cent of its electricity from nuclear power, has signed an MOU with NuScale of the US for the deployment of its small nuclear reactor, the first of which to be located on an old coal power plant site, allowing ready connection to the grid without the need for expensive new transmission.
This is a template Australia should seriously consider and save $20 billion of new transmission lines for remote renewables facilities.
Peter Dutton must start pressuring PM Albanese now for an overturn of the absurd ban on civilian nuclear power and bring Australia into the 21st century.
Ron Hobba, Camberwell, Vic
There have been a great number of negative comments lately in the media indicating that reaching net zero greenhouse emissions by 2050 will not be possible because battery energy storage technology is not yet at a required standard or cost to enable the desired zero emissions date to be achieved. But 2050 is almost 28 years away, have faith. Humans will most certainly overcome the storage battery problem a long time before the year 2050.
Brian Measday, Myrtle Bank, SA
It has been reported that more and more Australians are beginning to realise that nuclear power generation is the most sensible and expedient way to reduce emissions yet sustain the necessary power to keep Australian industry functioning and domestic requirements, whatever the weather. The article by Tony Grey clearly explains exactly how this can be achieved.
Good government can assist markedly in reducing bad weather purportedly caused by man-assisted climate change by repealing the idiotic 1999 legislation which denies Australia the benefits of nuclear-power generation.
Bob Hawke once suggested Australia has the ability not only to secure its own nuclear waste but also that of other nations.
Nick Bailey, Ngunnawal, ACT
In reply to Rita Zammit (“Who would want the job of PM?’’, Last Post, 7/7), I would. Just for six months. Enough time to set up a the foundations of our new nuclear industry, hand out the forms to applicants wanting to build coal or gas-fired power stations, cancel all wind turbines and solar panel orders purchased from overseas (helping local industry), sign off on a few new dams and set up a Covid royal commission.
David Astin, Taperoo, SA
Word count: 609
