It is self-inflicted and a direct result of successive governments pursuing improbable outcomes with impossible timelines.
We could argue the minutiae of the whys and wherefores but the simple reality is governments have interfered with energy markets at their peril. It has been subtle, a creeping death by a thousand cuts for the fossil-fuel power generators, most of whom paid state governments handsomely in desperate capital-raising asset sell-offs, with the undertaking of future free-market competition.
As a result of renewable power subsidies, in the tens of billions, fossil-fuel power generators became uncompetitive – and even more so now, when major equipment upgrades are required to ageing assets. Their business model has effectively been destroyed.
Similar government mismanagement is evident in LNG gas, whereby east coast users are exposed to global pricing, the difference being we own the resource and are now a major world supplier of LNG. One could be forgiven for deducing that if this were so, we should be enjoying the cost benefits of this homegrown resource. What’s urgently required is enlightened lateral-thinking government, working co-operatively with industry to resolve what has become a dreadful situation. To have available reliable energy is a basic issue; to have otherwise is a threat to our wellbeing and national security.
Kevin Drum, Drysdale, Vic
I applaud Mark McGowan and the West Australian government for taking the politically bold step in closing their remaining state-owned coal generators by 2030 (“McGowan sets timetable to shut coal-fired power stations”, 15/6). Investing in renewable energy, storage and infrastructure is a sensible plan, given the growing cost of maintaining their ageing coal plants and the availability of cheap excess solar generated during the day. More admirable is the WA government’s plan to support workers and the wider community in Collie in the transition to other industries. This is what leadership looks like – foresight and future planning. This is what Australia needs more of.
Ching Ang, Magill, SA
The 25-year quest to reinvent the electricity wheel has resulted in something resembling a pentagon; it can still roll with a lot of ­effort but the ride is very bumpy. The next iteration will be a square one.
Those who play the blame game need to remember who closed Port Augusta and Hazelwood power stations and recognise that the past failures apply to all governments.
They are attempting the impossible against all common sense and despite many warnings. The fervent adherence to the simpleton “science” of climate change has addled their brains and they have lost the capacity to think rationally, if they ever had it.
The pity of it is that all of this is for absolutely no gain – we will not stop climate change, no matter how much some think it needs stopping.
We are not facing an energy crisis; we have had a 25-year wisdom crisis.
David Bidstrup, Plympton Park, SA
Surely it is more sensible to burn our good-quality coal in clean coal-fired power stations here than send it to China to burn in their dirty ones. Either way, it will be burnt and doing it here would supply us with the energy we need and overall reduce global carbon emissions.
Another possibility is to burn our rubbish (or even that of other nations). Budapest has a power station burning waste in the centre of the city. It is highly efficient, does not smell, and deals with the waste disposal problem.
Marian Hinwood, Elsternwick, Vic
Local TV here in Queensland is keeping us up to speed on how to save on rising power and fuel costs. Last week, we were told if we had a surfboard on the roof racks of our car to take it off to improve mileage. As for power, we were told to only open the fridge when absolutely necessary. With help like this, what could possibly go wrong?
Barry Simpson, Noosaville, Qld
Word count: 629
