Rob Davies, Drysdale, Vic
In his eagerness to please NATO leaders, Anthony Albanese will tell them that under his government Australia is committed to tackling climate change head-on (“We’re part of global solutions”, 25-26/6). He won’t admit that when it comes to carbon emissions we are a bit player and that what we do won’t make an iota of difference to the climate.
He won’t tell them that we are hurting from an energy crisis quelled for now, but threatening to smite us again and again unless his government reforms its climate and energy policies so as to benefit the nation, not punish it. He won’t commend Germany, Austria and Britain for reopening coal-fired generators to ensure their citizens get the reliable power they need, and stress that energy security must take precedence over futile climate gestures. No, the Prime Minister won’t say any of that. Instead, he will shirk his duty of care to the nation by prostrating himself before world leaders in a bid to win their praise.
Dale Ellis, Innisfail, Qld
In terms of time it is not long ago that Australians would have been adamant that telephones would never be possible, aeroplanes would never fly, landings on the moon and Mars? Don’t be silly. Radio and television? Get real. I could fill 10-plus pages with today’s norms that were considered impossible not that many years ago.
The numbers are declining at a fast pace but there are still Australians who think reaching net-zero greenhouse emissions by 2050, using renewables, will not be possible. I say to the doubters, be optimistic, just like it would have been with flying to the moon, aeroplanes and television; success will finally come. Investment dollars will now, of course, be many more than in the past. Presently we have available, and still coming, billions and billions of dollars of investment flooding into saving the world from climate change. This is coming from highly respected and large numbers of worldwide organisations – the money will not be wasted. The advance of climate change will be halted, in my opinion, well before 2050.
Brian Measday, Myrtle Bank, SA
I can tolerate most letters that I disagree with, but Douglas Mackenzie’s letter on the weekend was a bridge too far. He writes that it would take at least 10 years to build a conventional nuclear power station.
In 1957, near where I lived in Scotland, construction of the Hunterston nuclear power station began on a greenfield site. Six years later, in 1963, it started delivering power. It beggars belief that it would take longer than that to build a nuclear power station in 2022. Mackenzie writes that it takes decades to decommission such plants. Decommissioning is under way at Hunterston now and it will not take anything like decades.
Hopefully, Douglas is not a fellow Scot. I’d be embarrassed.
Ewan McLean, Beecroft, NSW
Our use of coal and gas and oil for so many years has been selfish and has caused pollution. Now we have the option of using clean and renewable energy.
It may be costly or inconvenient to convert to renewables but we must do it.
At some future time, even long into the future, our descendants may have to face a nuclear winter or changes in Earth’s conditions. At that point they may have no option but to use whatever oil, coal and gas we have left, simply to survive.
Armida Poli, Glenside, SA
Word count: 560
