Soaring coal prices are driving up power costs in NSW and Queensland as Victoria and South Australia reap the benefits of relying on brown coal and renewables rather than black coal, undercutting scare campaigns about "wrecking ball" economic losses from clean energy.
The states that burn the most black coal and use the least renewable energy, NSW and Queensland, have the highest wholesale power prices and the worst future outlook while Victoria and South Australia have been shielded from the spikes.
In the first quarter of the year, NSW's wholesale price was $87 a megawatt hour, up 129 per cent from $38 a megawatt hour this time last year. In Queensland, the wholesale price hit $150, up 248 per cent from $43, exacerbated by an outage at the Callide coal plant.
Black coal prices have spiked because Russia's invasion of Ukraine has created a global energy crunch and increased demand for coal.
The wholesale price for the first quarter in Victoria was just $57 a megawatt hour. The state relies on brown coal, which unlike black coal is not influenced by the global market because it's not exported.
South Australia, which does not burn any coal and has the greatest proportion of renewable power in its energy mix, had a wholesale price of $71 in the first quarter.
Green Energy Markets director Tristan Edis said the "hysteria" at the last election over South Australia's high levels of wind and solar "now looks pretty stupid" given where wholesale power prices are.
"It's no longer a simple narrative that addressing climate change will hurt the hip pocket and drive up power prices," he said.
"But at the same time it's also not as a simple as more renewables will deliver us cheap electricity because batteries still need to fall a lot more in price."
Experts including Grattan Institute energy program director Tony Wood and Schneider Electric's Lisa Zembrodt have said the wholesale price hikes will flow on to retail bills.
During the 2019 election campaign the Coalition attacked then Labor leader Bill Shorten when he pledged to cut Australia's emissions by 45 per cent by 2030 and increase the share of renewable energy to 50 per cent of the grid.
At that time, Energy and Emissions Reduction Minister Angus Taylor seized on modelling of Labor's policies by BAEconomics managing director Dr Brian Fisher, which he said showed Labor's policies would swing a "wrecking ball through the economy".
In the current election campaign, Taylor has warned power prices will rise up to $560 because bill payers will bear the cost of Labor's grid upgrades.
Labor has promised to invest $20 billion into electricity transmission lines, which would attract $58 billion in private investment.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison said yesterday that global forces had "pushed up the prices of energy" which was "outside of our control". He harked back to the 2019 election when he warned Labor was "doing it again by having a policy that gold-plates the transmission network that only pushes prices up".
Labor has rejected the Coalition's claims and said its plan would increase the share of renewables to 83 per cent of the energy mix by 2030, bringing cheaper power and lower electricity bills.
"Labor is the only party with an investment in transmission through our Rewiring the Nation policy, bringing more renewables, bringing more stability and lower power prices," Labor's energy and climate change spokesman Chris Bowen said yesterday.
The Coalition has set a slightly lower renewables target of 69 per cent.
  CREDIT: Mike Foley | Climate and energy correspondent
Word count: 591
