Being a Labor devotee of the climate change religion, it will be impossible for him to be seen to imply that gas and coal are essential for the rectification of the current self-inflicted power crisis. His only solution is motherhood statements about turning off appliances and the age-old government recourse to any drastic issue; talk and more talk. He and his Labor peers need to realise that a Third World power grid, based on renewable hopes and miracles, will have them back in opposition in short order.
The Prime Minister has to address the issue and restore cheap power to the nation now. Australia floats on gas, has one of the largest deposits of uranium on the planet and has more solar energy availability than most other countries, yet we are forced to endure unreliable electric power. And this is at a time when more of our needs are switching to electrical power sources.
It’s time to stop listening to the flower people and start addressing the basic requirements of our growing nation or it will soon be a case of the lights are out and everybody is at home.
Tom Moylan, Melbourne, Vic
You report that “about 1800MW of coal-fired power (was) not operating in Queensland” and this was partly responsible for the power crisis in NSW. There was also an unplanned outage in AGL’s Loy Yang A coal-fired power plant in Victoria’s Latrobe Valley that was forecast to last several months.
Meanwhile, here in the ACT, the lights have stayed on. Canberra’s electricity supply comes from 100 per cent renewable energy – while on Wednesday, a few kilometres across the NSW border, there was a blackout in Queanbeyan. So much for coal being a reliable source of baseload power.
Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT
It is misleading to assert that regulators have temporarily seized control of the entire electricity market; regulators have been running the show since Labor formulated the national grid in the 1990s. Electricity supply has not been a free market since government forced providers to receive excess power from rooftop solar panels.
Mandating alternative technologies such as wind power – with additional government incentives and subsidies – further undermined synchronicity and reliability. Ultimately, a crooked “market” bid and tender process whereby providers need only commit to a few minutes of energy – because renewable technology cannot guarantee longer durations – purposefully destroyed the viability of legacy generators.
Exploiting what economists call beggar-thy-neighbour Labor governments in Victoria and South Australia bulldozed essential coal-fired plants – a cascading failure of electricity transmission, as each state expected other states to provide fossil-fuel infrastructure to cover peak overloads. Labor built this problem and now owns it.
Greg Jones, Kogarah, NSW
According to Cameron England (“The whys and wherefores of electricity system in turmoil”, 16/6), “load shedding is a process of lightening demand by switching parts of the grid off”. Lightening demand? It’s the product delivery that gets lightened, not the demand. Yet another case of blaming the victim?
Mike McCormick, Upper Beaconsfield, Vic
Cameron England writes: “The longer-term solution ­involves projects such as the Snowy 2.0 hydro­power scheme and the new interconnector which is being built between SA and NSW, as well as the Integrated Systems Plan designed to chart a path to net zero for the network.”
If 32 countries have large nuclear energy power plants and several countries are building small modular reactors, why are the energy brains of Australia turning their backs on trialling SMR technology?
Putting Australia’s future energy eggs into wind, solar, pumped hydro and unproven battery storage solutions while eschewing SMR technology may well prove disastrous for the economy through ongoing turmoil.
Shouldn’t SMR technology at least be trialled as an alternative source of stable electricity supply?
Peter Sjoquist, Wahroonga, NSW
Word count: 612
