I’m someone who has consulted and worked widely with Aboriginal people for over 20 years, first as a lawyer in Alice Springs (where I had numerous Aboriginal clients including the Papunya Tula artists) and second as the NT minister for Aboriginal matters, and you would think that when the various governors-general visited a community such a “welcome to country” ceremony would take place.
Can’t say I ever saw one.
I’m told that there is no anthropological evidence of such a custom. The violence that we almost daily witness among the clans unwillingly brought together at Wadeye would seem to support that.
Paul Everingham, Hamilton, Qld
Chris Curtis (Letters, 29/7) correctly asserts that the classroom teacher provides the emphasis in the curriculum but is sadly astray to the realities of curriculums which are tested by public exams. Here the teacher is hamstrung by what is laid down by the designers of that curriculum.
Furthermore, the chief examiner hands out a marking guide for the curriculum-driven exam. Like it or not, in the best interests of the students’ exam results, the affected classroom teacher is forced to comply.
Never underestimate the power and impact of those given free rein (“School history ‘teaching national shame to our children’ ”, 28/7) to design school curriculums.
Bob Miller, Wembley, WA
Re Douglas Mackenzie’s gloomy assertions about glaciers and snow cover (Letters, 29/7), glaciers have always come and gone in the history of Earth’s geology since the last great ice ages 20,000 years ago.
Both the Antarctic and Arctic ice caps are maintaining their cover despite forecasts to the contrary, and alarmist predictions about an ice-free Arctic by 2015 have not come to pass.
With regard to Australian snow cover, the high and early snowfalls of 2021 and 2022 have been helped by a persistent La Nina, while in New Zealand massive snowstorms have dumped metres of snow on the ski resorts, so much so that the Mt Lyford Alpine Resort near Christchurch announced that it would not be opening due to too much snow on the road, visibility not improving and lifts with a “good amount “ of rime ice on them.
The New Zealand ski season has been one for the record books, but so have the temperatures in early morning sunny Brisbane, where it is freezing.
Helen Derrick, Sherwood, Qld
Perry Williams’s article (“Energy prices smash records as coal generation slumps”, 29/7) confirms my deep fear that the electricity system is in the hands of fools.
Those who insist they can provide cheap renewable energy if we just spend a few billion more on electric unicorns are devoid of any ability to look facts in the eye and see their folly.
Sir Roger Scruton described ideologies thus: “The facts no longer make contact with the theory which rises above them on clouds of nonsense. The point is not to believe the theory but to repeat it ritualistically and in such a way that truth becomes irrelevant.”
We have massive coal reserves that we sell to others but will not use to our advantage.
We do not need solar, wind, pumped hydro, hydrogen or any other cockamamie idea; we just need to use coal.
David Bidstrup, Plympton Park, SA
So, here we all are, two months in from a national election, up the Murray-Darling in a barbed-wire canoe without a paddle, and already an enormous challenge to rectify the problems facing our food bowl, according to Environment and Water Minister Tanya Plibersek (“Basin promise walk-back signalled”, 29/7).
One could be forgiven for thinking that the Coalition looked where we were heading and said, “No thanks, we’ll take a raincheck.”
What sort of future does the region have when irrigators manage to empty the Menindee Lakes within three years of the 2012 drought coming to an end?
Professional management is the one phrase missing in the political arena as undertow pulls any attempt to rectify the situation closer to the too-hard basket – again. “Challenges” are what government is all about; they didn’t do the Morrison government any harm, they just got on with it.
John Bain, South Bunbury, WA
What gives the Department of Health (“No pride in groupthink that tears us apart”, 28/7) the right to mangle the English language, consulting in secret with the Diversity Council of Australia and Pride in Diversity in preference to openly and honestly consulting scientific fact with the Australian people?
Joe Dowse, Mosman, NSW
Word count: 712
