Mr Carr also espouses the benefits of cheap renewable energy but he fails to mention that very few operators would be able to stand on their own feet without massive government subsidies.
Greg Charlesworth, Wollstonecraft, NSW
Bob Carr reckons renewables backed by storage are thrashing nuclear on price. Germany’s energy predicament, in particular, begs the obvious question: what storage? After 20 years attempting to transition to renewables, Germany’s electricity network is still firmed by fossil fuels. California’s 2015 decision to close its last nuclear reactors assumed renewables and storage could cover the energy gap. If that assumption were correct, why is California’s decision being revisited?
If nuclear is so expensive, why have international customers been buying Australian uranium? Barely two weeks ago, the UK approved the construction of a new reactor called Sizewell C. Why? After all, presumably the alternative was renewables plus storage.
Egypt, a developing nation, started construction of its first reactor in July. Again, why did Egypt not elect to use renewables plus storage?
Why did Bob Hawke spend the last 20 years of his life telling Australia to go nuclear? Why are two of history’s most successful businessman – Bill Gates and Warren Buffett – financing a new generation reactor in Wyoming?
There’s a simple test for Carr and his fellow travellers: if they believe nuclear is so expensive, they’ll agree to overturn the ban on nuclear energy because, according to their logic, no nuclear plant would ever get built.
W. McColl, Roseville, NSW
What a difference a somewhat sensible government makes. Soon after reports of the emissions reductions target of 43 per cent as on track to being legislated comes the news that Clive Palmer’s proposal for a new coalmine has been rejected (“Minister cites health of reef in axing Palmer coal project”, 5/8).
This rejection is poignant as the old-school bruiser had tried to buy himself some political power by spending extraordinary amounts of money campaigning in the previous election – and failed. It restores one’s belief in democracy and the limits of corporate influence in our politics.
Milos Karapandzic, Torrens Park, SA
Mr Carr, new large nuclear reactors may well be expensive getting through the regulatory period and long construction period but there are now several small modular reactors that show it is much cheaper and more reliable than renewable energy.
NuScale has approval to build a 60MWe reactor, 4.5m diameter and 23m long, with an estimated cost of $448m. Mr Carr should know that wind turbines work only at a capacity of 30 per cent, as against 70-plus per cent for nuclear reactors. Unlike intermittent sources, there is no need for battery backup, new transmission lines or switching gear.
Graeme Weber, Malvern, Vic
We can’t achieve a 43 per cent reduction in greenhouse emissions in seven years even if we close all coal and gas electricity generation. As the easy reductions we have already made largely come from land use changes and forestry, the proposed commitment requires electrifying most of our industrial heating and much of land transport. That will increase demand for electricity even further, and solar and wind can’t provide reliable baseload power without backup storage.
Renewables won’t do this without thousands of mega batteries that each cost nearly a billion dollars (and we won’t be able to obtain these because it will take hundreds of years to mine enough critical minerals at current production rates) or hundreds of pumped-hydro schemes (and this is not feasible in this dry continent and take years to construct).
Ian Wilson, Chapel Hill, Qld
Word count: 577
