David Bidstrup, Plympton Park, SA
The AFL likes to present itself as a modern, moral organisation. Nobody believes that any more.
Kevin Rugg, Sandringham, Vic
One of Labor’s promises when elected was transparency and now we read of the Assistant Treasurer forming a secret advisory committee of some maybe not so suitable members to review the previous government’s superannuation policy (“Advisory committee not so super”, 21/9). Is Mr Albanese on board here?
Penni Seignior, Mudgeeraba, Qld
It’s make or break for Charles III. He will need all his skills to navigate the monarchy post the reign of his mother, Elizabeth. Like his namesake Charles I, he either will lose his crown or set it on the path to a new and dynamic era.
George Fishman, Vaucluse, NSW
Given the Prime Minister’s encouragement to King Charles III to speak out on climate change issues, what would be his attitude should the King speak out on nuclear energy? British corporate entity Rolls-Royce is rapidly developing small modular reactor technology that will be used in the UK.
Geoff Bushby, Milsons Point, NSW
I don’t understand those who want Australia to become a republic. If you look at the countries that are a republic all you see is chaos and graft. I, for one, do not want to be under the thumb of a tin-pot despot whose main aim is to raid the coffers to make sure they retire a billionaire.
Roger Marks, Drouin, Vic
There is of course a very easy and effective remedy to the cheating crisis at our universities. One that would not be welcomed by the deans and lecturers as I dare say it would involve more work for them. Simply insist on old-fashioned exams to be sat in halls.
Dr Sukhbir S. Patheja, Surfers Paradise, Qld
Some media captions, in describing the attire of female attendees at the Queen’s funeral, said they “opted for black”. There was a choice?
Roseanne Schneider, Toowoomba, Qld
So Chris Bowen says we will be a “renewable energy superpower”. I think that’s actually a contradiction in terminology.
Simon Gamble, Noosa Heads, Qld
Word count: 340
