If renewables had to supply on demand, they would have to form alliances with gas generators or build storage such as battery banks. The renewables industry would have to invest in and develop technologies to become a reliable source. This would make the renewables sustainable, drive innovation, and determine their true carbon footprint and the actual cost of electricity.
Don McMillan, Brisbane, Qld
In regard to nuclear power, a correspondent (Letters, 10/6) asked, “Who’s putting their hand up for a reactor in their vicinity?” Good question. You also could ask those near suitable nuclear plant sites: Who wants thousands of construction jobs? Who wants hundreds of ongoing jobs after construction? Who wants reliable power supplies? And this would be the clincher: Who, within 50km of the plant, wants free power for 10 years? Stand back!
Huw Morgan, Adelaide, SA
Zali Steggall and the teals (“Teals ignite gas war”, 10/6) appear to believe the current shortage of gas in the market is the fault of the fossil fuel industry. It should not be blamed. Gas fields, in particular, are hugely expensive to develop, so the enterprises involved need to lock in long-term contracts for their product before committing to development. Overseas customers were prepared to step up while local customers were not.
Bob Reid, Fig Tree Pocket, Qld
As we celebrate the Platinum Jubilee of a remarkable monarch, Queen Elizabeth II, perhaps we also should celebrate the tercentennial of an even more successful reign, that of Old King Coal.
Coal saved the forests of England when they were being cut down to make wooden ships in the 16th century. Deforestation accelerated when wood was needed to make charcoal to make iron (a better shipbuilding material). Coking coal replaced charcoal and Sherwood Forest was saved.
King Coal has served us well and will continue to do so despite attacks from ignorant and ungrateful multitudes who have benefited from coal power for the past 300 years. A celebration of our rich history would shed light on the path to an enlightened future. May I suggest January 1 as Old King Coal Day to remind us why we enjoy the hidden benefits of hydrocarbon energy?
John McRobert, Indooroopilly, Qld
If my head’s in the oven and my feet are in ice, I can justifiably say I feel fine, on average. That’s the quality of analysis we get from proponents of renewable energy. On average, wind and solar might generate an acceptable amount of energy.
However, an energy system designed around averages is useless because such an approach defies the most basic design principle: the need to account for extremes. Why is it necessary to account for the possibility that renewable energy won’t deliver the energy required at different times? Because it won’t.
The UK has roughly 24 gigawatts of so-called installed wind power. During the wind drought last year, there were weeks – not days or hours – when output was as little as 2GW. Had there been demand for even 10GW during that time, redundant capacity would’ve been required.
Renewable energy enthusiasts have had decades to prove so-called energy storage is able to provide such redundancy at the scale required, for the duration required and economically. They’ve been unable to do so.
And even if it existed, would investors finance such capacity on the off-chance they can generate some revenue? Perhaps, but they’d also charge a fortune to cover periods when their electricity couldn’t be sold, thereby blowing a hole in the argument that renewable energy is cheap.
The energy crisis gripping Western nations demonstrates the innate risk with over-reliance on renewable energy and Australia’s policy stupidity by ignoring the obvious benefits of nuclear power.
W. McColl, Roseville, NSW
Word count: 600
