Aussies energised THIS global energy crisis has brought home some truths about where the world is at in combating climate change.
The UN and EU have been complaining about Australia’s lack of action. This is mainly because of our reliance on fossil fuels.
However, the EU and many countries in the northern hemisphere are showing they are still dependent on fossil fuels.
And this is in the northern summer months, when renewables should have been able to carry more of the load.
We in Australia also have an energy crisis, but it’s no worse than many other places. And it’s winter.
Therefore, I believe our renewables have been as good as anywhere else in helping to carry the load. Perhaps we need to see Aussie detractors practise what they preach and leave us alone.
DAVID BISHOP, South Plympton
Powering on HERE’S hoping that reliable, affordable and flexible baseload technology and construction keep up with the new ambitious emission targets.
BRUCE FARQUHAR, Hyde Park
Solar injection OUR federal governments’ constant bickering over the use of coal and gas compared to renewable energy has brought us close to a crisis where blackouts could become the norm.
Hard decisions should have been taken years ago, making every new house install solar power with a transition period to older homes.
This won’t provide all energy needs, but will be a big help. DES KEMP, St Agnes
Reliable system CHING Ang is applauding the closure in 2030 of the remaining state-owned coal power generator in Western Australia (“Closing coal”, The Advertiser, Friday) What will replace the base-load power there? Certainly not wind or solar, in my view.
Few people from the climate change cult have even uttered the N word – nuclear. If you are serious about reliable baseload power with zero emissions then embrace it. Anything else would result in Australia becoming an energy basket case.
Perhaps a few blackouts in Magill would bring home the reality that coal still has a future in Australia. I believe green ideology won’t change that.
ROMAN RAUTENBERG, Murray Bridge
Renewed interest CHEAP, abundant renewables are our way out of costly reliance on fuels with downsides like extreme price volatility.
Certainly it requires time, smart investment in more storage and transmission, removal of roadblocks, and much faster reform of outdated rules to work better on a national scale.
A clue, though, is that the lowest wholesale electricity prices are in regions such as South Australia and the ACT, with more renewable energy in the power mix.
Caleb Bond, it wasn’t renewables that created the crisis in Ukraine, or hitched the domestic gas price to the international price, or disabled one-quarter of the nation’s coal-fired power stations, or brought the cold weather, or failed to plan for this present crisis (“Rush for renewables leaves us peering over an energy cliff”, The Advertiser, Friday).
Let’s hope short-term interventions by energy ministers and regulators can quickly deliver relief from exorbitant costs. And stop the uncertainty for suffering Australian households and businesses.
JIM ALLEN, Panorama
Long transition WE have to acknowledge and accept that it will take years, if ever, to move totally to renewable power such as wind and solar.
There are more cars, houses, fridges and airconditioners every day, all requiring power that simply cannot be supplied by wind and solar at this point in time. And perhaps for decades to come.
The other thing is that coal and gas supply power all year round. I get that we need to wean ourselves off fossil fuels, but it must be done patiently.
DENNIS AGOSTINI, St Morris
Exporting coal NEW Prime Minister Anthony Albanese is off to a cracking start, showing that he is a consummate politician who is not fazed by reality at all.
As long as Australia continues to sell coal to other countries that don’t care about emissions reduction, this government is being hypocritical in the extreme.
I believe Australia could reduce its emissions to zero and have negligible effect on planetary emissions. But if we just export our emissions overseas, where is the benefit to anyone?
I’d better send this email quickly, because I’m expecting our power grid to fail any minute now.
PATRICK KERIN, Woodville West
Names a bit rich PARENTS have always searched for exotic baby names linked to expensive and iconic items like Ruby, Tiffany or Mercedes.
Watch out for these three beginning to emerge on the scene: Gasse, Electra and Petrol.
MICHAEL PRATT, Torrens Park
No time for tolls I JUST returned from a caravan holiday along the east coast. If paying an average of $2.10 a litre for diesel for every 5.7km travelled wasn’t enough, we skirted around Sydney but didn’t miss three tolls.
This included a wonderful 8km tunnel, and a toll-road bill of $61.87 turning up. But it was a great holiday.
Please, let’s not introduce toll roads to South Australia. NIGEL HAWKES, Warradale
Word count: 814
