Electricity bills for hundreds of thousands of Australian households will rise by up to $227 a year as consumers feel the pinch of soaring fossil fuel prices and incoming energy minister Chris Bowen accuses predecessor Angus Taylor of delaying the bill shock for political gain.
While cost-of-living pressures are rising and inflation is sitting at a two-decade high, the Australian Energy Regulator yesterday confirmed spikes in the cost of wholesale electricity would drive double-digit jumps in household and small business bills within weeks.
So-called default market offers - price caps on what retailers can charge households and businesses that do not take up special deals or bundle utilities bills - would rise in all states across the east coast electricity grid, the regulator said.
From July 1, default offers will jump by 14 per cent, or $227, in New South Wales; 11 per cent, or $165, in Queensland; and 7 per cent, or $124, in South Australia.
In Victoria, where the Essential Services Commission determines its own default offer, the price cap for households will rise by 5 per cent, or $61, a year.
The energy regulator usually sets the default market offer on May 1. However, in April, the then Coalition government delayed that process until after the federal election, citing the need for more time for the regulator to compile data on the recent price fluctuations.
Bowen pointed the finger at the outgoing Morrison government for delaying the decision on the default market offer and for "nine years of policy chaos" that delayed the transition from coal power to cheaper renewable energy.
"Angus Taylor and Scott Morrison knew that the result of their policies was Australians paying more in their power prices," Bowen said. "They sat on this report, they approved its delay until after the election."
Taylor's office was contacted for comment.
Bowen said the Australian energy system was under-prepared for the challenges caused by international fuel price hikes, and promised to "bring on more renewable energy through our investment in the grid".
About 800,000 households in Victoria, NSW, Queensland and South Australia are on default offers, as are more than 160,000 small businesses, while more than 90 per cent of customers across the country are on market contracts.
Coal and natural gas prices have been rising sharply around the world as a global energy crunch is exacerbated by energy utilities shunning Russian supplies and scrambling for alternatives in a bid to starve Moscow of the revenue it needs to fund the war in Ukraine.
Prices for cargoes of thermal coal at the Port of Newcastle have more than tripled from $100 a tonne to $350 a tonne in the past 12 months as global demand ramps up.
Lynne Gallagher, of Energy Consumers Australia, called on energy retailers to shield customers from the full extent of the spike in the default market offer. "Most consumers are supplied by the largest three retailers, and we believe there is some room in their margins whereby they can, and should, absorb some of the pain of rising wholesale costs," Gallagher said.
The Australian Energy Regulator said default market offers were governed by laws designed not to set the cheapest price possible but rather to establish a rate of pay for customers that was as low as possible while enabling retailers to remain viable.
"In setting these new default market offer prices, we understand the significant impact they will have on some consumers who may already be struggling with cost-of-living pressures," regulator chair Clare Savage said. "We have given scrutiny to all factors affecting the default market offer calculation and have set safety-net prices that reflect the current conditions and underlying costs to retailers."
CREDIT: Mike Foley and Nick Toscano
Word count: 619
