Australian gas is produced for $1 a kilojoule. It's being sold to Australians in the eastern states for $40 a kj -and that price would be higher if a cap hadn't been imposed.
Australia is the only gas exporter in the world that doesn't save a proportion of its own resources for its own use.
We are being ripped off by a cartel of big companies making huge profits because of the war in Ukraine.
Weirdly, both sides of politics support this rip-off.
The federal government is currently making feeble noises about how there's no 'quick fix' for the problem.
This is pathetic.
It just means the government doesn't have the guts to take on the gas cartel.
Could the Addy give us a report on the views of our member Lisa Chesters on the subject?
Please don't let her regurgitate the cliches: 'no quick fix', 'perfect storm' etc.
Ask her to explain the logic that means we're paying six times more than Western Australia for our own gas.
Bernard Slattery, Castlemaine Gas regulations All kudos to the City of Greater Bendigo council for being one of the 31 Victorian local governments calling on our state government for planning laws to be amended to allow them to ban gas on new developments.
Burning gas produces 16 per cent of Victoria's total emissions and home use accounts for two-thirds of those.
In addition, bright sparks are getting off the gas in droves.
This means the rapidly rising cost of gas, and gas infrastructure, will fall to those who either choose to burn - or like renters - may have no choice.
Not good for the environment, nor equity.
As we race to a safer, decarbonised world, supporting gas use and gas infrastructure is no longer a defendable, nor ethical choice.
Karen Campbell, Geelong Gas seeps offshore Despite the gas industry's claims that we need more new gas projects to meet domestic demand, it needs to be noted that 72.7 per cent of Australia's gas is exported overseas, with only 7.4 per cent of our gas used for domestic electricity generation.
This highlights that Australia does not have a problem with gas supply; instead, it has a problem with gas exports.
With the surge in global price of coal and gas, we need to reduce our reliance on fossil fuels and its volatile market prices.
The best way to do this is to ramp-up investments in renewable energy and accelerate the electrification of households to get off expensive gas.
Coincidentally, not only is the shift from gas good for our wallets - it is great for the climate and our planet, too.
Ching Ang, Magill, South Australia Rotten views I see that Johnny Rotten of notorious '70s punk band The Sex Pistols is now a self-proclaimed "guru" and "voice of reason" on Piers Morgan's program Uncensored on Sky News.
It is hard to believe that this hard-living, rebel rocker is now as Piers Morgan puts it, "telling it like it is" and "setting the world to right" and giving advice on his program in a fortnightly appearance on how to live.
Soon it will be Sir Johnny Rotten or John Lydon (his real name) just like Sir Mick Jagger and Sir Paul McCartney.
What a joke.
These rock icons were meant to be the downfall of the British Empire with their "evil, devil music", just like Elvis was meant to be the downfall of American civilisation with his "devil music" ways.
Now they are proclaimed as saints, with those still living as world authorities on current issues and self-proclaimed "gurus".
One Australian band that got up to accept an ARIA award many years ago said, "I won't thank God because rock 'n' roll is the devil's music".
He is right.
Kids love rock 'n' roll music because it represents what it means to be young, wild and free. No one wants to be preached to.
Oh, we are so fortunate to have Saint Bob Geldof, Saint Bono and now Saint Johnny Rotten setting the world right.
Lois Morrissey, Strathdale Brakes off, go up a gear For The Australian Labor Party, the stars have all aligned and, in relation to climate change, in particular, the frustrating brakes of latter years are now off.
May I say to the Labor Party, make hay why the sun shines, don't waste a minute, and make sure that Australian children no longer have to march in great numbers asking to be provided with a future.
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has promised to make Australia a "renewable energy superpower".
The huge environmental (including climate change), economic (including employment opportunities) and health benefits etc that can come from using a very much larger quantity of greenhouse emissions free renewable energy sources, to produce energy, will be of enormous benefit to all Australians and indeed to the rest of the world.
What can one say other than - bring it on.
Brian Measday, Myrtle Bank, South Australia
CREDIT:
Word count: 828
