What if Albo’s pristine energy future turns out to be a grim existence with no reliable power?
In keeping with the ever-soaring electricity costs, the Albanese government is committed to ever-soaring increases in renewable power generation.
To meet election promises, they “must boost renewable energy to 82 per cent of supply by 2030” (“Labor already feeling heat over its emissions-reduction strategy”, 23/5). It might look a big ask, but we can easily demonstrate how successful such changes will be, using South Australia as a full-scale, real economy field test.
The SA Department of Energy and Mining proudly reports that the state has “transformed its energy system from 1 per cent to over 60 per cent renewable energy”. The rest comes either from gas locally or coal interstate. So, at 60 per cent renewable, SA is approaching the federal target of 82 per cent. If we were to cut SA’s electrical extension cord to the eastern states, and thus shut out the evils of coal-fired generation, SA would become the practical demonstration of the renewable outcome sought by Albanese.
Some might argue that cutting the electricity interconnectors would be an extreme step, allowing no latitude for routine outages, and they would be correct: there needs to be some back-up electricity transfer possible. And there are times when SA is exporting power.
So we must somehow remove the coal-fired component from any power entering SA. It would, however, be simple enough just to provide electricity to SA proportionate to that being generated by renewables only, with the contamination of coal generation thus removed pro rata.
But what if, against all expectations, the field trial failed, and SA were again to be plunged into that almost-forgotten powerless darkness of the past? Well, it’s only mendicant South Australia, and another submarine or two to build one day should sort that out.
Tim Fatchen, Mt Barker, SA
How right you are, Glenda Korporaal (“For a greener economy”, 26/5). Having clear and effective policy to reduce our own emissions, and even to encourage our trading partners to do the same, is essential to provide certainty for businesses to invest in renewables and zero-emissions technologies.
It’s good to see a clear vote on the weekend supporting much stronger targets. I agree with Albanese that our government is over the climate wars and suggest choosing the best policies available regardless of past bunfights.
I read today that the American Economic Association has studied the macroeconomic impact of Europe’s carbon taxes, and they “find no evidence for a negative impact on employment or GDP growth but rather find a zero to modest positive impact”.
If implemented as a “climate dividend”, this could achieve just the stimulus we need without hurting our pockets or our economy, while also providing an incentive (as the EU does) for trading partners like China to also raise their game.
Australia continues to be a very lucky country with our vast resources of renewable energy, mineral resources, skills and knowledge to transition profitably to an emissions-free world. Let’s hope our new government can put us on that path.
Tom Hunt, Oak Flats, NSW
Robert Gottliebsen (“There’s more to the teal drive than politics”, 26/5) refers to a change in attitudes among financially secure people. To my mind this is just the tip of the iceberg for Australia, which has had two generations free of serious challenge to the realities of existence.
For decades now, our export industries have covered the nation’s economic inadequacies. Secondary industry and downstream processing, the next levels in value-added activity, are largely uncompetitive.
Low energy costs are no longer available to underpin activity, with the populace now naively accepting the carbon myths that China and India ignore. Fuel and electricity price rises are going to hit with a vengeance. On top of that, we have First World welfare supported by this cardboard replica of an economy. Having a new federal government may be the break that we need to start the process of rebuilding our economy. It won’t be easy.
Ken Dredge, Camp Hill, Qld
To the barricades!
The High Court has made a perfect pig’s breakfast of section 44 – the man on the Bondi tram could have made a better job of ensuring that the original intent of these provisions was preserved.
If Dai Le, who has won such a famous victory in Fowler (26/5), is ever deemed ineligible to sit in the parliament of the nation that succoured her and her family, we should all be out in the streets reaching for the cobblestones.
Terry Birchley, Bundaberg, Qld
Courage calls Every time I hear of another US gun massacre, I thank John Howard for his wisdom and courage after the Port Arthur massacre.
It is time Americans woke up! Mary-Anne Higgins, Rose Park, SA
Word count: 796
