Electricity bills for hundreds of thousands of Australian households will rise by up to $227 a year as consumers feel the pinch of soaring fossil fuel prices.
In response, late yesterday afternoon NSW Treasurer Matt Kean announced an increase to the state's energy accounts payment assistance program for households experiencing short-term financial hardship. Under the program, application limits will increase from $300 to $400, up to a maximum of $1600 a year.
"This means the annual maximum limit of vouchers has increased from $1200 to $1600 per household," Kean said.
While cost-of-living pressures are rising and inflation is at a two-decade high, the Australian Energy Regulator yesterday confirmed that spikes in the cost of wholesale electricity were set to drive double-digit jumps in household and small business bills within weeks.
So-called "default market offers" - price caps on what retailers can charge households and businesses that don't take up special deals or bundle utilities bills - would rise in all states across the east-coast electricity grid, the regulator said.
From July 1, default offers will jump by 14 per cent, or $227, in NSW; 11 per cent, or $165, in Queensland; and 7 per cent, or $124, in South Australia.
Incoming Energy Minister Chris Bowen accused predecessor Angus Taylor of having delayed the bill shock for political reasons.
NSW Premier Dominic Perrottet said cost-of-living measures would be central to next month's state budget, insisting his government's energy policy had not failed.
"Different states have different initiatives and the NSW budget is on June 21 ... we will go through the budget process, as we're doing actually right at the moment," he said.
Perrottet said rising energy prices were a national and global issue in a high inflationary environment.
"We are seeing real supply constraints, particularly with thermal coal and gas, that is going to put up with prices on wholesale energy."
The Australian Energy Regulator usually sets the default market offer on May 1.
However, in April, the former Coalition government delayed that process until after the May 21 federal election, citing the need for more time for the regulator to compile data on the recent price fluctuations.
Bowen pointed the finger at the Morrison government for delaying the decision on the default market offer and for "nine years of policy chaos" that delayed the transition from more costly coal power to cheaper renewable energy.
"Angus Taylor and Scott Morrison knew that the result of their policies was Australians paying more in their power prices," he said. "They sat on this report, they approved its delay until after the election."
A spokesman for Taylor said Bowen's claim was incorrect and showed "how amateur he is".
"We did not see the final (direct market offer) prices until they were made public this morning so claims of "hiding" them are complete rubbish," the spokesman said.
Bowen said the Australian energy system was under-prepared for the challenges caused by international fuel price hikes, and promised to "bring on more renewable energy through our investment in the grid".
About 800,000 households in Victoria, NSW, Queensland and South Australia are on default offers, as are more than 160,000 small businesses, while more than 90 per cent of customers are on market contracts rather than the default offers.
The NSW and Queensland default offer price rises are being driven largely by spiking wholesale costs because of higher coal and gas prices adding to the cost of fuelling the states' biggest power stations. Coal and natural gas prices have been rising sharply around the world as a global energy crunch is being exacerbated by energy utilities shunning Russian supplies.
Lynne Gallagher of Energy Consumers Australia called on energy retailers to shield customers from the full extent of the spike in the default market offer.
CREDIT: Mike Foley and Nick Toscano
Word count: 633
