FIVE years ago, energy storage company 1414 Degrees was inviting comparisons of its technology against no less than Snowy Hydro and Tesla, while talking up its imminent $50m initial public offer.
But so far, things haven’t gone as planned. This November, shareholders will vote on a third bid in under 18 months to tear the board asunder, with former executive chairman Dr Kevin Moriarty – who wrangled his way back on to the board in a shareholder vote held just two months ago – locked in a vitriolic battle for control of the company with other board members.
One non-executive director, Sheree Ford – whose position on the board was not up for a vote at the coming meeting – resigned just this week, concurrent with the notice of meeting being released, after only joining the board in May.
Short board stints have not been a rarity in the company’s also short life. Marketing executive Penelope Bettison and former ­Envestra managing director Ian Little both joined the board in September 2019 and resigned the following July.
Non-executive director and company secretary Richard Willson joined the company in July 2020 and resigned in May 2021, with no explanation for his resignation given to the ASX.
And over the course of the company’s listed life – it hit the bourse on September 12, 2018 – it’s been through four leaders (including acting) and has failed to achieve any of the goals set out in its prospectus.
Those goals were lofty.
Dr Moriarty was talking up the ability of the company’s technology – based around the ability to store energy as heat in molten silicon for later use – to provide the solution to the country’s energy woes. The pre-IPO capital raising came not long after South Australia’s statewide blackout in 2016, and the role storage would play in fixing the nation’s energy problems was becoming increasingly apparent.
“The company has estimated that its silicon storage solutions will have the potential to provide lower costs of storage than any alternative technology, while delivering a wider range of features,’' the company’s prospectus said.
Dr Moriarty favourably compared its systems to Tesla’s lithium batteries. However, the capital raise got off to a bumpy start. It was scaled back from $50m to $30m, with a minimum subscription of just $12.5m.
Eventually, $16.3m was raised. The stock listed on a Wednesday, and tanked from the 35c issue price to close at just 22.5c.
The stock has rarely traded above the issue price since, and currently changes hands for less than 10c per share, valuing the company at less than $20m.
Nevertheless, the money raised was meant to be enough to bring the company’s Thermal Energy Storage System (TESS) technology to commercial readiness, and deals for pilot projects had been struck with large private companies and South Australia’s water utility SA Water.
However, those plans did not pan out, with the tech­nology unable to deliver on its promise. The company has not delivered any working TESS modules to clients – at least not ones which are economically viable.
The pilot project at an SA Water site – part-funded by a state government grant – was unsuccessful.
The company has now swung its efforts behind a ­different silicon-based tech­nology dubbed SiBox, and a joint venture project to develop the early-stage Aurora renewable energy project in SA’s Upper Spencer Gulf.
Meanwhile, at the management level, the company has been characterised by dysfunction, animosity, and News Corp Australia can reveal, claims of nepotism and a “dictatorial’’ management style on Dr ­Moriarty’s behalf.
Former managing director Jamie Summons was stood down from the top job in mid-2021, just four months after his appointment, pending an independent investigation “into complaints received from employees concerning workplace behaviour within the company’’.
Mr Summons was later let go, with the company telling the ASX in a one-line statement that the investigation “has been finalised and no further action will be taken in ­relation to Mr Summons’’.
What the company did not say, is that, according to a document sighted by News Corp Australia, “no adverse findings have been made ... as a result of the misconduct investigation’’.
Mr Summons says Dr ­Moriarty moved to push him out, after he raised issues, ­including the employment of Dr Moriarty’s daughter in a business development role on $180,000 per year.
Mr Summons also has doubts about the veracity of the “investigation’’ undertaken by the company.
“Not at any time was I presented with any evidence regarding any allegations,’’ Mr Summons said.
“The board saw fit and endorsed that the truth should not be made public until now.
“You’d have to ask them why they decided that this situation was a fit and proper way to deal with a managing director who was trying to get the company back on track.’’ Mr Summons said board-level correspondence indicated that directors had concerns around “nepotism” and Dr Moriarty’s management style.
CONTINUED PAGE 26 ‘Disaster’ on the horizon FROM PAGE 25 “The director elaborates further,’’ Mr Summons said, going on to quote the correspondence. “Whilst the terms ‘bullying’ and ‘harassment’ have not been specifically mentioned, words such as ‘dictatorial, aggressive, dismissive’ and ‘threats of dismissal if you don’t do what Kevin wants’ have been repeated more than once in these complaints.’’ Dr Moriarty declined to comment on Mr Summons’ claims, and the company said in a statement: “1414 Degrees complied with all obligations at the time the employment of Jamie Summons ceased.
“An investigation took place and appropriate disclosure releases were made to the ASX.’’ Former Beach Energy executive Matthew Squire was appointed chief executive in July last year following Mr Summons’ tenure, and resigned in May this year for “personal reasons’’, with Dr Jordan Parham taking over as acting chief executive.
Dr Moriarty himself resigned from the board mid-last year after launching his first bid to remove directors Peter Gan and Dana Larson from their positions.
That vote never made it to shareholders, but Dr Moriarty came back with another board tilt in June, this time seeking to oust the first two directors, and also chair Tony Sacre, and ­replace them with himself and Ian Burdon.
Mr Sacre told the ASX at the time that the board push, if successful, would be “disastrous” and “form an existential threat to the company’’.
“At a time when stability is critical, we have grave concerns that the resolutions put forward … if passed, form an existential threat to the company and will irreparably damage its prospects of success,’’ Mr Sacre said.
He said that a staff exodus was a likelihood should the vote succeed. The incumbent directors hung on, each by less than 1 per cent of the vote. Dr Moriarty succeeded, again by a tiny margin, on getting himself on to the board.
Not satisfied with that result, a group of shareholders, including Mr Burdon, last week launched yet another tilt at the board, banding their shares together to call an extraordinary general meeting to vote once more on punting Mr Gan, Mr Larson and Mr Sacre from the board.
The company, which will now have to hold both an EGM and an AGM in November, said it was disappointed to be revisiting the issue, and “particularly concerned’’ about the use of company resources pursuing what it characterised as “activism’’.
In response to questions sent to the company by News Corp Australia, 1414 said it: “is disappointed that past issues continue to distract attention from its ongoing operations”.
“We remain committed to looking after the interests of all our shareholders, employees and key partners. “The company has clear forward pathways with respect to SiBox and the Silicon Aurora Project and there are critical upcoming commercial milestones.’’
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 1285
