IN a big boost for local jobs, the federal government will provide $50m in Tuesday’s federal budget for Hobart’s zinc smelter Nyrstar, creating hundreds of new jobs.
The funding was promised by both Labor and the Coalition during this year’s federal election campaign.
Nyrstar is planning a $400m modernisation of its 100-year-old smelter, which is expected to start later this year.
Industry and Science Minister Ed Husic said Nyrstar was an important contributor to the Tasmanian economy.
“This delivers on our commitment to the people of Tasmania to support local manufacturing and local jobs in an industry vital for our transition to a renewable energy ­future,” Mr Husic said.
“This investment will help strengthen Australia’s sovereign manufacturing capability of valuable metals necessary to our transition to net zero by 2050.
“We want to build a stronger and more resilient future and that includes adding value at home, delivering secure well-paid jobs and skilling up for the technologies of the future.” Nyrstar says the modernisation will secure the long-term sustainability of 650 jobs in Hobart and a further thousand jobs at its operations at Port Pirie in South Australia.
It also believes the upgrade will support jobs for more than 5000 people in direct supply chain companies in Tasmania and regional South Australia.
Mr Husic said Nyrstar played a “vital role in the production and supply of metals such as zinc, lead, silver and copper”.
“This upgrade will create an advanced manufacturing facility, helping to secure a long-term future for zinc metal refining in Australia,” he said.
“Our investment in Nyrstar is one part of building that capability, with more to come through our $15bn National Reconstruction Fund.” Mr Husic said the government was focused on ensuring a greater share of the country’s raw materials were processed in Australia.
He said zinc was a vital input for critical supply chains, including renewable energy infrastructure, construction materials and anti-corrosion coatings on steel.
About 90 per cent of Nyrstar’s raw material zinc for processing comes from Australian sources.
Tasmanian Labor senators and two federal MPs welcomed the budget announcement. “This is a fantastic investment for southern Tasmania supporting secure, well-paid jobs,” they said.
Nyrstar’s modernisation is expected to take 28 months and be finished in 2024-25.
Both the federal and state governments will provide funding for the upgrade. The zinc smelter was hit by strike action in September when workers walked off the job saying they had not had a pay rise in five years.
The Australian Workers Union said the union had made little progress in negotiating a pay rise. susan.bailey@news.com.au
CREDIT: Sue Bailey
Word count: 432
