Labor has accused the government of abandoning a key policy which has kept energy prices down – a decision which will now add to the rising cost of living.
Wholesale electricity prices are increasing steeply interstate and retailers have warn customers substantial rises are on the way.
Tasmanian power prices were “delinked” from mainland prices from 2017-18 to 2019-20.
But that policy was reversed to allow new renewable energy projects to participate more fully in the National Electricity Market.
The Tasmanian Energy Regulator has set the prices for the past two years and will announce the a price determination for the coming year later this month.
Member for Franklin David O’Byrne said a price hike would be a blow to ordinary Tasmanians.
“All indications are that household energy bills are expected to increase significantly from July 1, which will be devastating for families right across the state who are doing it tough,” he said.
“Many will have no choice but to turn off the lights and heater this winter.
Rather than waiting for the axe to fall, the minister must intervene right now to save these businesses, prevent these job losses, and shield the state from this crisis.”
Energy and Renewables Minister Guy Barnett said people should keep in mind that electricity prices have decreased by 18 per cent for residential customers and by more than 27 per cent for small business customers over the past seven years.
“We are now in a historic period for the National Electricity Market, with the retirement of coal and the disruption of the war in Ukraine,” he said.
“In this environment, we must consider how we respond again to ensure we do not have any unintended consequences.
‘Exiting the National Energy Market would erode investor confidence in the Tasmanian energy market and potentially jeopardise billions of dollars in current and planned future investment in renewable energy projects, including in Marinus Link, new wind energy and Tasmanian green hydrogen projects.”
Mr Barnett said the state government would engage with its federal counterparts to see what they could do, and would provide additional concessions and support for those struggling to pay their bills.
Labor’s energy spokesman Dean Winter said Tasmanian households had been left exposed to the fluctuations of interstate wholesale energy markets.
“The policy was to be put in place to protect Tasmanian customers from exactly the sort of risks and shocks that are now being realised across the National Electricity Market,” he said.
“It is extraordinary that it took questions from Labor in Question Time for the government to admit they had now walked away from the policy – four years after the promise was made.
“The decision puts wind developers and project Marinus ahead of Tasmanian major employers and residential customers.
“Any shocks that fall upon Tasmanian businesses and households will now fall at the feet of the Rockliff-Ferguson government.”
TASMANIA’S GAS FUTURE
TAS Gas says it is confident “at this stage” that Tasmanian gas users will not be impacted by potential gas supply shortages in southeastern Australia.
On Wednesday the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) issued a notice warning around supply shortages in Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania.
AEMO said the supply shortfall trigger notification was due to low reserve conditions in the national electricity market (NEM), prevailing NEM supply, gas supply, pipeline capacity or market conditions and generators running on liquid fuel due to lack of gas supply.
Tas Gas CEO Phaedra Deckart said there was no imminent gas supply shortage that would have an impact on customers in Tasmania.
Tas Gas supplies gas to 14,000 homes, 1000 businesses and 70 industrial customers across Tasmania.
“Tas Gas provides its customers with firm supply through contractual arrangements with its suppliers. We are monitoring these unprecedented market conditions however are confident that at this stage Tasmania’s customers will not be impacted,” Ms Deckart said.
“We are experiencing an unprecedented energy price shock on the east coast of Australia and AEMO together with the industry is working hard to ensure there is enough capacity in the system. This in turn should put downward pressure on gas prices.”
Ms Deckart said the industry needed “more supply not more regulation”, calling for further investment in the national gas supply.
“We expect that the current challenges in the gas market may continue for some time. Coal plant outages, significantly high coal prices, increased demand for gas power generation and international geopolitical factors have all worked together to create tough market conditions and higher gas prices,” she said.
“The energy industry will need to work together with Government and regulators to ensure that as the nation seeks to decarbonise that energy supply security for both electricity and gas is the priority for customers. Tas Gas is working to secure long term gas supply for local homes and businesses to ensure that their needs continue to be met, as we also explore lower carbon alternatives.”
In February Tas Gas reached a supply agreement with Origin Energy for 5100TJ of gas from 2023, in a bid to address a shortfall predicted by AEMO.
blair.richards@news.com.au
Word count: 814
