WELLBEING WE ALL LOVE LISTENING TO TUNES, BUT DOING SO ALSO HAS BENEFITS FOR OUR HEALTH Do you use upbeat music to help you crush a workout? Or perhaps you use mellow beats to unwind at the end of a hard day, or to set the tone for a romantic dinner?
According to ARIA award-winning artist Katie Noonan music is fundamental to the human experience.
“We come into the world singing and making sounds, and it’s been an integral part of my connection with the world since my birth,” she says.
Noonan is one of a line-up of much-loved Aussie stars, including Kate Ceberano and Lee Kernaghan, who are ambassadors of Make Music Day on June 21, a free, national event designed to bring people together through the power of music. Open to everyone, it’s a DIY “music festival” where musicians of all ages, all walks of life, and of every musical persuasion can organise their own gig, or join organisations hosting events to share music with friends, neighbours, and strangers.
And you don’t have to be a professional to participate.
“Everyone is an artist, and everyone who can talk can sing,” Noonan says. “Everyone is also welcome and equal in the world of music making. Making sounds together is a key part of the human experience, and more than ever we need to be in the moment together and make sounds as one.” While it’s well known that music can boost our mood as well as being a popular activity socially, what if our response to it runs deeper?
Publishing their findings in the Plos One journal in March 2021, researchers from Canada’s Ryerson University said that personally tailored music programs can be used as therapy to help treat the symptoms of anxiety, a condition that has exploded in recent decades. But it’s not just about using your favourite tunes to soothe frayed nerves.
“Music therapy utilises music’s ability to facilitate neuroplasticity, and activate cognitive, motor, and speech centres in the brain,” says Tamara Cavenett, president of the Australian Psychological Society.
“It’s an emerging field with many potential benefits.” Neuroplasticity is the brain’s ability to reorganise itself by allowing neurons, or nerve cells, to compensate for injury and disease and to adjust what they do in response to new situations or to changes. As a result, music therapy can help with physical and mental wellbeing and enhance quality of life, from reducing stress and anxiety, to managing anger, improving memory, and even coping with cancer treatment.
Melbourne based registered music therapist, Cherry Hense, says that music connects us to emotions and memories in powerful ways. “It can be used to explore and regulate our emotions,” she says.
“Music is also highly motivating, and can incorporate a wide range of developmental tasks that can assist in learning and education.” Like participation in Make Music Day you don’t need to be musical to benefit from music therapy; it’s effective for everyone from newborns to older adults. A typical session may include listening to music played by a music therapist, playing an instrument, or singing.
“With an adult who has experienced long-term mental health issues, for example, I might work to address areas of social connection,” Hense says. “We might also discuss their musical preferences, and build their skills on a particular instrument over a series of weeks or months, so that they can eventually join a community music group.” Gavin Gleeson, 50, is having music therapy at the Tweed Heads Momentum Collective Connections Centre, a community services organisation working across NSW and southeastern Queensland.
Gleeson has schizophrenia and used to live with an overwhelming sense of sadness, but music therapy has helped him find new purpose, while increasing his happiness and contentment.
“In the last four or five years, I have really started to get into music,” he says. “I play the piano and sing.” Gleeson feels totally in his “zone” with music, and it’s become a key part of his mental health management. He says he feels the most relaxed when he is playing a keyboard or listening to his favourite songs, but it also gives him a sense of achievement.
“I listen to all types of music,” Gleeson says. “I love using my brain to remember and recite lyrics, and I enjoy learning new songs. I can play about 30 different ones now.” Make Music Day, June 21, makemusicaustralia.org.au
In the mood Cherry Hense shares her tips for using music to lift your spirits ● Make your own playlists for specific purposes as your responses to music are completely unique. Start a playlist with ‘where you are at’, and work your way gradually to where you’d like to be.
●Avoid pre-made commercial radio or commercial playlists when feeling emotionally vulnerable, as you may encounter a song that triggers an emotion when you’re not expecting it.
●Use music to connect with people in real life rather than virtually. If you play an instrument or sing, consider joining a band, an orchestra, a community choir, or a drumming circle. ● Learn to sing or play an instrument. It will connect you with parts of yourself that you may have shut down or never actualised, and open up new avenues for social connection.
CREDIT: JOANNA HALL
Word count: 874
