WITH the election looming, all sides of politics seem to be hoping that throwing money at the aged-care sector is all that is required to solve the vast problems in the sector.
My partner has endured six years of poor care and been let down by the industry regulators who supposedly are there to help her.
Only vigilance, diligence and integrity can achieve any meaningful change – and sadly this is lacking across the board in the aged-care sector.
The main concern seems to be about the service providers’ needs and not the needs of the residents who desperately require our help. Money won’t fix this.
The residents have again been forgotten. Which political party will stand behind the residents first and foremost, and make suitable policy known to all before election day?
Gordon Moore, West Brunswick
The price is right NICK Conidi is right that spending more than you make is a recipe for problems (YS, 16/5). That is precisely why we should be turning to renewable energy sources for our power.
Last year South Australia made more than two-thirds of its electricity from variable renewable generation.
That state and Tasmania (98 per cent renewable energy) had the lowest wholesale prices in the national electricity market.
Conversely, Queensland – which has long had the least renewable generation – had the highest prices. This year Queensland’s average wholesale price has been twice that of South Australia’s.
So the price is right for renewables. And we get the benefits of cleaner air, a safer climate and jobs into the future for free.
Lesley Walker, Northcote
Petrol on a bonfire SCOTT Morrison wants first-home buyers to again dip into their super by up to $50,000 (“Market to get super booster”, HS 16/5).
Before Covid, the average amount of super accrued by those aged 25-34 was less than $30,000. However, after the early-access scheme offered during Covid, that amount is now significantly lower. In May last year, the Australian Financial Review reported that $36.4bn of super had been withdrawn through the early access scheme, and that would have then been worth $41.1bn if it had remained in super.
However, if Mr Morrison’s second dip was to happen on a large scale, Industry Super Australia boss Bernie Dean said it would be “like throwing petrol on a bonfire”, driving up the median house price by more than the amount taken from super. It would also fuel inflation.
And this policy comes from the party that claims to be the best at managing the economy.
Ray Peck, Hawthorn
Marketing ploy THE Prime Minister touts his economic credentials, but really he’s a marketing man and not an economist.
The push to encourage people to use their superannuation to buy their first homes fails the most basic economic law of supply and demand. Unless there is an increase in the supply of houses, Scott Morrison’s idea will just force demand up and make housing more expensive and harder to get.
And then people would have less super for retirement and have to rely more on taxpayer-funded pensions.
Terry Kelly, Coburg
False riches SCOTT Morrison’s promises for first- home buyers and empty nesters seem to be all over the place.
Encouraging the elderly to downsize so young people can buy larger homes, and allowing the young to dig into their superannuation to purchase homes, and then replace it when they sell, does not make sense.
Getting the elderly to sell and put money into super is just a cunning way of eventually getting them off government pensions.
All this seems like a short-term political stunt to make all age groups think they have plenty of money to spend. Ian Jones, Altona
Word count: 613
