Peter Jennings writes of the risk of the newly elected Albanese government being held hostage to the whims of Greens or independent MPs in the all-important area of national defence (“Mr Albanese goes to Tokyo to face his first big security test”, 24/5). And others have warned that Labor might be tempted towards a more radical climate stance than promised, with possible devastating consequences for regional Australia. With a likely majority in the House of Representatives those obstacles may not arise. Yet the Senate looks a different matter with 12 or so Greens having potential blocking power. So how should the Coalition, with a Peter Dutton or Andrew Hastie leadership, react? I suggest a policy of constructive opposition: by which, so long as the government pursues its mandated program, the opposition ought not strive officiously to oppose. Similar to the John Howard constructive approach to the Hawke/Keating economic policies, which proved of long-term benefit to the Coalition and nation. And it would deprive the Greens and “independents” of an influence not justified by their primary vote.
John Kidd, Auchenflower, Qld
Our democratic system has delivered a government for which three in 10 Australians voted at a primary level. Powerbrokers decide preferences not on policy but on what will achieve success for their candidate. A three-year campaign of character assassination by the left, and in particular the ABC, toward the leader of the Liberal Party has succeeded. A group of independents with a huge war chest has targeted Liberal seats and prevailed. Ironically, their mantra of climate change relies on a strong economy. We have sacked the coach after winning the grand final. It is now time for Labor and others to walk the walk. I hope for our country’s sake they are capable.
A. Bovell, Swanbourne, WA
Failure to prosecute the so-called culture wars with conviction has been the hallmark of the Liberals for a decade and is the reason it has bled more than 10 per cent of support to minor parties on the right. If you don’t stand for anything, you stand for nothing.
John McLeod, Sunshine Coast, Qld
It may be time for a political party to embrace the basics that made the modern nation of Australia, long before the “isms” of fascism, communism, socialism and even capitalism. They are: Support for those who need it. Reward for effort. Accountability. The aspirations of the extreme centre.
Rob Atkinson, Adelaide, SA
Those talking of a separation of the Liberals and Nationals while in opposition may be on to something. Between the 1972 and 1974 elections the parties were in opposition and were not in coalition. Even though the 1974 election was only 18 months after Gough Whitlam came to power the Liberals and the Country Party between them reduced the Labor majority from nine to five. While separated the parties would be free to pursue their own agenda, with genuinely conservative policies. The Liberals might even realise being liberal-conservative doesn’t mean sliding left.
David Morrison, Springwood, NSW
It’s a wildcard idea but perhaps it’s time for Liberal supporters to start a movement to draft Mark Latham as leader. His thinking and position on many if not most issues is more Menzian Liberal and mainstream Australian than many of the current pusillanimous gatecrashers and LINOs (Liberals In Name Only). Latham, who knows his way around Canberra and who, as a former leader, understands Labor machine politics, is totally wasted in NSW One Nation and actually gets what middle Australia, from the ’burbs to the bush, is all about.
Jim Ball, Narrabeen, NSW
Numbers game
Author Mark Twain’s apocryphal comment was “never let the truth get in the way of a good story”. Before we drink the Kool-aid of Labor’s renewed push to further cripple our electricity generation, we need to ignore the emotion and look at the numbers.
The US has 22 per cent renewable, Europe 22 per cent, Britain 40 per cent (with 12 per cent of that from burning trees): they are all now urgently looking at renewed oil and gas exploration as the Russians have inconveniently upset their activist plans. Australia has renewable energy figures variously measured as 18-35 per cent, with increasingly unachievable reduction plans for 2030 (“Albanese must stick to middle road on climate”, 25/5).
In the US last winter solar panels were buried under snow and wind turbines froze. Europe continues to suffer a prolonged wind drought. Closer to home, our Sunshine Coast Council has built a $50m, 57,000-solar panel farm that was recently non-functioning while under water. The area also has 40,000 rooftop panels. Energy-conscious residents may have noted a conspicuous lack of sunshine over the last few weeks. It’s a pity the Greens’ environmental activism stopped us building dams. Some flood mitigation and hydro would have been handy to save the planet.
Graham Pinn, Maroochydore, Qld
Word count: 791
