GOOD OLD DAYS WEREN’T REALLY SO GOOD TRENT (CP, 6/06) is right that electricity is getting more expensive but it is not the renewable variety that is causing the problem.
Last year, South Australia made more than two-thirds of its electricity from variable renewable generation.
Along with Tasmania (98 per cent renewable energy), South Australia had the lowest wholesale prices in the National Electricity Market. Queensland, which has long had the least renewable generation, had the highest prices. This year, Queensland’s average wholesale price has been double South Australia’s.
Making renewables the scapegoat for the current energy crisis is contrary to all the evidence from other states.
The problems we are now experiencing could have been avoided if more renewable sources of energy had been installed in Queensland years ago.
Instead we are paying the price of relying on gas and ageing coal-fired power stations.
Ross Clark, Freshwater
LIVE LONG AND PROSPER WITH FOSSIL FUELS THE advent of large-scale fossil fuel use, both directly and indirectly has increased life expectancy by some 40 years.
Prior to 1900 life expectancy in Europe, North America and Australia was about 45 years while in Asia and Africa it was less than 30 years and infant mortality was rife. While internal combustion engine and mechanisation dramatically reduced the human burden, electricity and its associated grid powered modernisation and invention to eliminate much that was the cause of premature death including household small particle pollution from candles and wood-cooking fires.
Fossil fuels have and will continue to have trillions of times’ more credits for the advancement of mankind than will ever be provided by virtual signalling carbon credits.
Bill Bates, Kewarra Beach
GET THE MESSAGE RIGHT TOUCHING down in Cairns last night we were reminded of the sorrow and respect we must show to “the owners and elders of this land”.
Past, present and future. All future generations. To all, yet unborn or even conceived generations of fellow Australians. Forever. And ever.
This is pure insanity. Is it not? If not, what is it that I’m missing here? Paul Humphries, Cairns
BRING BACK THE SMACK A SIMPLE solution to discipline … it starts at home and bring back the cane. In schools this would cause less flack, rather than teaching self defence to school staff.
Imagine some teacher defending themselves only to the delight of all phone carrying reporters. Just the recipe for another copycat fad.
The teacher wins today and tomorrow a quest to be the one who can beat this teacher.
When I was at school the good old cane worked because we knew there was a consequence for our actions hence we had respect for teaching staff and this started at home.
Not mummy or daddy looking to sue or report somebody for doing the job they neglected. John Boyd, Cairns
Word count: 469
