Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT
It is encouraging for the nascent CCS industry that Resources Minister Madeleine King considers “Australia is ideally placed to become a world leader in CCS”. I agree with that sentiment as your large continent has many stable reservoirs for underground carbon dioxide storage. For far too long, CCS has been considered as mainly a process that simply enables oil and gas fields to continue production. The decades-old processes of carbon dioxide extraction from gas and injection into subsurface reservoirs combine to create a legitimate form of carbon abatement.
Mark Wilson, Denver, US
At the time of a supposed existential crisis, the Greens’ policy rejects carbon capture and storage because it is supposedly unproven and non-viable. Yet companies are starting to roll out active CCS projects. It’s more of the Greens being all talk, a lot of opposition and no action. It highlights a Green detachment from real-world solutions and a fixation on unreal climate ideology.
Lee Smith, Kenmore, Qld
Geoff Chambers’ article raises the issue of carbon capture and storage as a strategy for large carbon emitters to reduce their emissions and so continue their exploitation of oil, gas and coal. If we assume that this technology is 100 per cent foolproof that is well and good, but what about the emissions caused by the use of these fossil fuels? Clearly, the only way to zero emissions is through the phasing out of fossil fuels, and allowing companies to use this strategy is delaying the necessary and inevitable.
Graeme Lechte, Brunswick, Vic
I have recently read a number of media reports that clearly indicate many potential large-scale investors are keen to invest in decarbonising Australia and further developing renewable energy but are holding back due to the lack of clear information concerning related national strategy and government policy. Further large-scale investor funding will be essential for our federal government to be able to reach essential and proposed greenhouse emission reduction targets. It would seem to be obvious that potential investors be provided with the information they require as soon as is practicable. One important question arises out of all of the above: Is there a well-detailed government plan available indicating how the greenhouse emissions reduction target by 2030 can be achieved?
Brian Measday, Myrtle Bank, SA
The news that “South 32 abandons Illawarra coal extension plan” (23/8) reinforces the need to seriously consider the viability of our domestic steel industry. It should be declared an essential industry and treated as such. All levels of government need to put aside political pointscoring and deal with the actual reality facing our major steelmaker BlueScope Steel at Port Kembla. The Illawarra regional economy depends on steel, as do thousands of jobs, both direct and indirect. In an uncertain world it’s unimaginable that a developed economy could do without a domestic steel industry.
The Dendrobium mine is a major local source of metallurgical coal for BlueScope. Those who glibly argue that we should be producing “green steel” reveal their ignorance of blast furnace steelmaking. Of course practical measures should be taken to decarbonise, but the reality is that commercial options using hydrogen are decades away. As a former MP I am aware first hand of these significant challenges. The threatened closure of the steelworks in 2015 was largely saved by the sacrifices agreed to by the workforce and through redundancies.
The failure to institute a gas reservation policy, coupled with the early closure of coal-fired power stations, has serious consequences. Have we learnt from the energy crisis in Britain and Europe? The bells are ringing out early warnings again. We must take stock and ensure the viability of our steel industry. Reality must trump rhetoric.
Jennie George, Mollymook, NSW
Word count: 612
