In the lead-up to the Federal Election we heard much about the power which independents might be able to exert in the event of a ‘hung’ Parliament. There were grand statements about extracting services and infrastructure for their electorates, introducing reforms to parliament itself and compelling the government to take action on climate change, amongst many, many other things.
There appeared the “we are not a party, we just have generally the same policies, election peripherals and the same person paying for our campaigns” Simon Holmes a Court Teal “independents” who were on a mission to change the world.
However, when it came to it, when the ALP was clearly still in a minority, yet desperately wished to form Government and appoint themselves as Ministers of the Crown (nice cars, overseas trips, bigger offices, extra staff, higher pay, etc) the independents rolled-over like pussy cats wanting their bellies patted. Or should we say, five independents, three of them from rural seats, those selected carefully by the ALP, rolled-over.
When a similar situation occurred in 2010, the independents, including the still in Parliament Bob Katter, spent a week negotiating with the ALP and the Coalition. Not this time, no siree. Without any further ado, on Monday May 23rd, the Monday following the election held just two days earlier on Saturday May 21st, and whilst counting was still continuing, the Australian Financial Review reported :
“At his first press conference as Prime Minister, Mr Albanese revealed he had taken out insurance if Labor fell short of gaining a majority by speaking to existing crossbenchers who had retained their seats; Rebekha Sharkie, Bob Katter, Andrew Wilkie, Helen Haines and Zali Steggall.
He said they had agreed not to support any no confidence motions against the government and support passage of supply.”
So, there it was. Game and match to the ALP. Tangible benefits to be delivered to their electorates by the independents - zero. Any discernible changes to anything, apart from a change of Government – zero. Impact of the Teal independents, apart from reducing the number of members of Parliament representing the Coalition - zero. One could be excused for believing that all the claims by the Coalition that the many of the independents were no more than stooges for the ALP were correct.
The independents use the excuse that the Government needed to function. This is bunkum. The Government functioned in 2010. The Government was functioning during the election. The bureaucracy was still in place. Services were still being provided. No, this is a lame excuse from a group of people who, at their potentially most powerful, walked away. They squibbed it. The ALP machine chewed them up and spat them out as their Commonwealth cars left them in the dust, diminishing figures in their rear view mirrors. Either the independents did not understand their power, or decided not to use it. Either way, it is not a good answer – and bodes very badly for their capacity to influence anything in the future.
In order to dig a bit more deeply into this, Fiona Fox, the Managing Editor of Australian Rural & Regional News, asked the three rural independents – Rebekha Sharkie, Bob Katter and Helen Haines – for their views and, in particular, which, of all the many and varied proposals they have put forward in their media releases and on their websites, how many of their many pontifications, had been taken on board and agreed to by the ALP Government which they had been instrumental in installing just two days after Polling Day.
The lists of questions and the answers received are printed - at some length - below.
In summary – nothing tangible was obtained by the independents from the ALP. Items ranging from a Federal Integrity Commission, the problems associated with the Murray Darling Basin Plan, and Climate Change to infrastructure for their electorates, health services, aged care arrangements, and many, many others were left just where they were – in their ‘promises’ file. None reached their ‘delivered’ file.
Kookaburra counted a total of approximately 133 proposals and suggestions from these three rural independents.
Rebekha Sharkie, Member for Mayo, South Australia: 65 - including a Federal Integrity Commission and delivering zero emissions by 2035, noting that the ALP’s stated policy is to cut Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions by 45% on 2005 levels by 2030 and a long term target of net zero greenhouse gas pollution by 2050.
Helen Haines, Member for Indi, Victoria:  9 - including her key initiative of a Federal Integrity Commission and a new hospital for Albury-Wodonga. Dr. Haines did not respond directly to our questions concerning her position on the ALP’s policy of resuming water buybacks in the Murray Darling Basin apart from alluding to the limited time left for the Murray Darling Basin Plan to be fully implemented and referring to the lack of transparency by the major parties on the issue.
Bob Katter, Member for Kennedy, Queensland: 59 - including his original Twenty Point Plan from 2010, pulling apart the supermarket duopoly and overturning the Port of Darwin lease.
Not one obtained by extracting a concession from the ALP in return for providing confidence and guaranteeing supply. Probably a lower success rate than most Government backbenchers and about equal with most opposition backbenchers.
It was quite apparent to Kookaburra that the ALP had snowed the independents with the importance of having a new Government installed ahead of the Quad meeting in Tokyo. This was such a perfect cop-out from making any commitments to anything for the well-oiled political machine of the ALP to be able to use in order to mesmerize people apparently unused to the negotiating tactic of setting a deadline for an answer and making the alternative of not providing an immediate answer too terrible to contemplate.
Rebekha Sharkie, Member for Mayo, South Australia
Questions to Rebekha Sharkie regarding provision of confidence to the minority ALP Government.
The Australian Financial Review reported on May 23rd :
“At his first press conference as Prime Minister, Mr Albanese revealed he had taken out insurance if Labor fell short of gaining a majority by speaking to existing crossbenchers who had retained their seats; Rebekha Sharkie, Bob Katter, Andrew Wilkie, Helen Haines and Zali Steggall.
He said they had agreed not to support any no confidence motions against the government and support passage of supply.”
https://www.afr.com/politics/federal/albanese-woos-crossbench-as-insurance-as-he-inches-towards-majority-20220523-p5ano6
On her website and during the recent Federal election campaign, Ms. Sharkie outlined an extensive number of areas of policy in which she would like to see action taken by the Federal Government.
These issues included :
Transparency in Government - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree to support :
legislation proposed by the Member for Indi, Dr. Helen Haines, to establish a National Integrity (anti-corruption) Commission?
legislation that would require real-time disclosure of political donations (and referred to a Parliamentary Committee inquiry)
legislation that would a reduction in the donation disclosure threshold from $13,800 to $1,000 (and referred to a Parliamentary Committee inquiry)
legislation to establish a Parliamentary code of conduct
an increase the penalty for repeated breaches of Parliamentary entitlements by 200% and by 400% for repeat offenders (as opposed to a mere 25% supported by the Government and the Opposition)
granting Parliamentary committee oversight of intelligence agencies, require mandatory security background checking for all ministers, and to strengthen freedom of information laws?
Agriculture - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree to provide :
extra funding to help fight fruit fly incursions into SA
funding for a post-harvest fruit fly treatment plant for Mayo growers
federal assistance for a netting support scheme for growers
support for growers’ ‘Hailstorm Heroes’ marketing campaign for hail-damaged fruit
creating a level playing field between the banks and our farmers
protecting the reputation of our agricultural products and producers
implementation of the Billions Trees for Jobs and Growth program
an extension of financial counselling services for farm and rural small businesses affected by bushfire and storm events
workforce and technical support for Kangaroo Island landholders affected by bushfire?
Animal Welfare - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree, especially given the ALPs policy announcement that it would ban live sheep exports, to provide an orderly transition to allow farmers who rely on the live sheep export market for their livelihoods to have the time to adjust?
Education - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree to practical measures (please describe what any such measures will be) to assist with :
delivering fairer and stronger funding for education, especially for our schools
delivering sustained funding for apprenticeships
helping young people successful transition from school into workplace or tertiary education?
Environment - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree to practical steps to ensure :
getting a fair deal for the Murray River, Lower Lakes and Coorong
keeping risky big oil out of the Bight
preserving and protecting native forests
preserving prime agricultural land from too much residential development and retaining the region’s agricultural landscape
keeping plastic out of our oceans
delivering zero emissions by 2035, noting that the ALP’s stated policy is to cut Australia’s greenhouse gas emissions by 45% on 2005 levels by 2030 and a long term target of net zero greenhouse gas pollution by 2050
support for the Mount Lofty Ranges UNESCO World Heritage Bid
a national ban on lightweight single-use plastic bags in Parliament?
Health and Aged Care - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree to practical steps to ensure :
better access to hospital and after-hours healthcare
improved access and quality of aged care services, including transparency in staffing ratios
more mental health services located within the electorate
greater funding for drug rehabilitation and addiction specialist support services
better support for disabled Australians
better Pharmaceutical Benefit Scheme (PBS) coverage for critical medications?
Infrastructure and Public Transport - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree to practical steps to ensure:
reinstating Supplementary Road Funding for South Australia
expanding public transport services throughout Mayo, especially bus services to the south coast of the Fleurieu and Strathalbyn
securing funding for major improvements to Victor Harbor Road and Main South Road
obtaining lower sea freight costs (and other assistance with cost of living) for Kangaroo Island
extending the railway line from Seaford to Aldinga
continuing to upgrade the South Eastern Freeway
additional investment in community facilities and infrastructure across the electorate of Mayo?
Security in Retirement - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree to practical steps to ensure :
the creation of an independent body to set the deeming rate for age pensioners
secure a once-off support for pensioners ($75 for singles and $62.50 per member of a couple) struggling with rising energy bills
the return of the Pensioner Concession Card to pensioners who stopped being eligible for a pension payment due to changes to the assets test
the creation of an independent tribunal to determine the age pension in line with cost of living increases
support for and maintenance of critical services for seniors, including the Medicare Services Centre in Victor Harbor
 support for superannuation reforms to ensure more money goes into the pockets of retirees – does Ms. Sharkie have any suggestions as to what those reforms should be?
 organising positive ageing forums and expos with a range of guest speakers to provide relevant and timely information
 Implementing an urgent review of the stringent Centrelink income reporting obligations for pensioners?
Small Business and Employment - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree to practical steps to ensure :
addressing rising energy costs, especially for small businesses
supporting apprentices
establishing an Advanced Manufacturing Fund for SA businesses
establishing security of payment provisions for subcontractors
recovering unpaid superannuation
supporting small business tax cuts
supporting the extension of the small business $20,000 instant asset write-off
introducing the Seasonal Work Incentives Trial
supporting the Mayo region’s vibrant wineries, craft brewers and distillers
supporting access to data for independent vehicle repairers?
Telecommunications - did Ms. Sharkie obtain a commitment from the ALP to agree to practical steps to ensure :
continuation of the Mobile Black Spot Program and revise its criteria to deliver more results in Mayo
reforms to the MBSP criteria to allow more flexibility to apply for funding bespoke solutions as new technologies emerge, to increase the cap on Commonwealth contributions to incentivise investment in regional blackspots, and to encourage co-location by multiple Mobile Network Operators
greater government investment in improving the redundancy and resilience of backhaul links and telecommunications networks during power outages and natural disasters, specifically auxiliary backup power and extended backup power
a subsidy for households in marginal black spots to purchase mobile coverage extension devices for their homes or vehicles
ongoing financial support to improve NBN connectivity through the NBN Co Regional Co-investment Fund and the Regional Connectivity Program
government support for low-income households to stay digitally connected
guarantee 24 hours of standby power for mobile phone services in bushfire zones?
Written Commitment
If and when Ms. Sharkie raised these issues with the ALP, did she obtain a written or other commitment by the ALP to implement her policies in practical ways prior to providing the ALP with confidence?
Answers provided by Rebekha Sharkie
Hi Fiona,  
Please attribute the following statement to a spokesperson for the Federal Member for Mayo Rebekha Sharkie.
"The Federal Member for Mayo had a constructive conversation with Prime Minister Anthony Albanese on Sunday."
"During the call, they spoke about their shared goal of a stable and respectful Parliament with fewer gag orders and a larger focus on debating policy issues." 
“They also discussed how this Parliament must address urgent policy issues, especially in respect to climate change, a federal integrity commission, aged care reform, and affordable housing.” 
"Ms Sharkie will always consider each bill on its merits and will only vote in favour of legislation that positively impacts the Mayo community." 
Kind regards,
Paul Purcell
Policy and Media Advisor
Follow-up Question to Ms. Sharkie
Hi Paul,
Thank you, but just to confirm, is this the entire response?
Best Wishes,
Fiona
Fiona L Fox
Managing Editor
Australian Rural & Regional News Pty. Ltd.
Answer to Follow-up Question provided by Ms. Sharkie
Hi Fiona,
Yes, that’s correct.  
It was a short phone call between Ms Sharkie and the Prime Minister, as he was undoubtedly quite busy ahead of the Quad meeting in Japan. 
We would be happy to revisit those four pages of policy questions after we’ve had the opportunity to discuss them in depth with the new Government.

Kind regards,
Paul Purcell
Policy and Media Advisor
Questions to Helen Haines regarding provision of confidence to the minority ALP Government.
The Australian Financial Review reported on May 23rd :
“At his first press conference as Prime Minister, Mr Albanese revealed he had taken out insurance if Labor fell short of gaining a majority by speaking to existing crossbenchers who had retained their seats; Rebekha Sharkie, Bob Katter, Andrew Wilkie, Helen Haines and Zali Steggall.
He said they had agreed not to support any no confidence motions against the government and support passage of supply.”
https://www.afr.com/politics/federal/albanese-woos-crossbench-as-insurance-as-he-inches-towards-majority-20220523-p5ano6
Commencing with her campaign launch on 3rd April, Helen Haines M.P. for Indi, made a number of announcements regarding services and infrastructure which she would like to see come about :
A new hospital for Albury-Wodonga - April 3rd campaign launch;
Better mental health support services - April 3rd campaign launch;
Australian Federal Integrity Commission Bill, the Indi Bill - stating on April 6th “[Dr. Haines] called for the next Parliament to pass her Australian Federal Integrity Commission Bill as a first item of business, irrespective of who forms Government.” And “As an Independent, I don’t have to pick between doing the right thing or doing what party bosses tell me to do. I will push for a federal integrity commission no matter who is in the Lodge.”
‘Haines is proposing the establishment of a new $2 billion Regional Housing Infrastructure Fund that would provide direct funding to regional councils to build essential infrastructure that will enable more housing to be built in their towns.” - April 12th
A $250 million Regional Tourism Fund – April 14th
A plan to establish a network of 200 agricultural extension officers, located in regional hubs across Australia, to work with individual farms on implementing emissions reduction strategies.  The policy is fully costed by the Parliamentary Budget Office at $32 million a year– April 27th
On April 28th, Dr. Haines slammed the buck-shifting and delays between the Liberal and Labor parties on a new world class hospital on the border, calling on all sides to put aside political point-scoring and commit to addressing the desperate need for a new hospital. Dr Haines noted that federal Labor Senator Deborah O’Neill even questioned the need for a new hospital on her visit to Albury.
“..both major parties should commit the $26 million needed to build a new aged care facility in Bright” - 13th May
“Haines is fighting for a $1 billion regional health fund, which would cover desperately needed redevelopments for hospitals in towns like Mansfield, Bright and Benalla….Haines has proposed a series of measures to increase the health workforce in rural and regional Australia by increasing the number of places for medical students at La Trobe University in Wodonga, increasing scholarships for mid-career health professionals to upskill, and forgiving university debts for mental health workers who choose to live and work in regional and rural Australia.” – 19th May
Prior to providing the ALP Government with confidence, did Dr. Haines obtain a written or other form of commitment from the ALP Government to deliver these services and items of infrastructure?
In Dr. Haines’s interview with Andy Park on the ABC’s RN Drive programme on 23rd May, Dr. Haines did not indicate that she had received any firm commitment from the ALP Government in regard to implementation of her template for a Federal Integrity Commission – has she since obtained such a commitment from the ALP Government?
On 22nd April, Dr, Haines announced twelve projects totalling nearly $150,000 in investment would be made possible by the Coalition’s Stronger Communities Programme. Prior to providing the ALP government with confidence, did Dr. Haines extract a written or other form of commitment from the ALP Government that not only would these projects continue to be funded but that the Stronger Communities Programme would continue?
What is Dr. Haines’s position in regard to the ALP’s policy of resuming water buybacks in the Murray-Darling Basin?
Answers provided by Helen Haines
Hi Fiona, 
The following response can be attributed to Helen Haines MP: 
“While the full results of the election are yet to be determined, the Labor Party is extremely likely to be in a position to form majority government. This means that the Labor Party is likely to have enough seats in the House of Representatives to pass legislation on their own without relying on the votes of the crossbench. 
As you know, Scott Morrison has issued his resignation as Prime Minister to the Governor-General, and the Governor-General has sworn in Anthony Albanese as the new Prime Minister. 
The Prime Minister has indicated that if the final election results see Labor fall short of the 76 seats required to form a majority, he will be able to rely on the votes of some members of the crossbench to secure supply and confidence which are necessary to the functioning of Government. 
I have not entered into any formal agreements to provide confidence or supply with either side of politics. This is in line with the commitments I made to the people of Indi before the election. I believe in stable government and now that a new Government has been sworn in, I do not intend to support no confidence motions that would trigger a new election. And I will support supply bills, without which the Government would cease to function.
I am an Independent, and will always remain so. This means that I will always vote on legislation based on the best interests of Indi. I intend to advocate for the people of Indi, including through the services and infrastructure we need, and the policy proposals I put forward through the campaign, in the same way I did with the previous Government. I will hold meetings with ministers and bring them to Indi to see for themselves the needs we have and speak to them about funding and policy opportunities. 
I have had early conversations with Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and with Mark Dreyfus, who I expect to be soon sworn in as Attorney General, about my commitment and mandate to deliver a federal integrity commission. I will be seeking to play a central part in the process of finalising the legislation for an integrity commission, be that on a committee or by Labor adopting and introducing my bill that I put forward in the last parliament. 
The projects funded under the Stronger Communities Programme during the 46th Parliament were not election commitments, and have already been provided for in previous budgets. 
Questions about the continuation of the Stronger Communities Programme should be directed to the incoming Government. 
The Murray-Darling Basin Plan is in a precarious position with just two years until the deadline. Coming into this election, neither the Coalition nor the Labor Party were straight up about how they planned to deliver the water required under the plan by the 2024 deadline.  
The failure of both parties to be honest with regional communities about how they plan to deliver the Plan is unacceptable.
I want to see the incoming government consider extending the timeframes for efficiency projects, re-committing to the socio-economic neutrality test and focusing more investment in on-farm efficiency projects.” 
Best wishes,
Sally
Questions to Bob Katter regarding provision of confidence to the minority ALP Government.
The Australian Financial Review reported on May 23rd :
“At his first press conference as Prime Minister, Mr Albanese revealed he had taken out insurance if Labor fell short of gaining a majority by speaking to existing crossbenchers who had retained their seats; Rebekha Sharkie, Bob Katter, Andrew Wilkie, Helen Haines and Zali Steggall.
He said they had agreed not to support any no confidence motions against the government and support passage of supply.”
https://www.afr.com/politics/federal/albanese-woos-crossbench-as-insurance-as-he-inches-towards-majority-20220523-p5ano6
On his website and during the recent Federal election campaign, Mr. Katter outlined an extensive number of areas of policy in which he would like to see action taken by the Federal Government.
Media Releases (since end December 2021)
“….the Federal Government must immediately disregard the Defence Department and overturn the 99-year Port of Darwin lease” - December 30th, 2021
“At the very least, every boy should be doing cadets at school, and they should all have access to a semi-automatic rifle” – December 30th, 2021
“Katter calls for final stretch of the Hann Highway (Kennedy Development Road) to be sealed” - 12th January, 2022
“Mr Katter has said that a Liberal or Labor Federal Government should continue the ongoing support of telehealth beyond June 30 this year” - 18th January, 2022
“FEDERAL Member for Kennedy, Bob Katter MP, has written to the State and Federal Governments requesting that the sprays used to exterminate the Fall Armyworm be subsidised..” - 21st January, 2022
“Katter welcomes Aboriginal flag copyright purchase, but says authentic art must also be protected” – 25th January, 2022
“NAIF budget boost welcomed; now build some nation building projects” – 26th January, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, said the Federal Government needed to address immediate and real problems facing the Great Barrier Reef” - 28th January, 2022
“Fall Armyworm threatens future of Tablelands ag industries” – 3rd February, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, will be knocking down the door of the Federal Health Minister, Greg Hunt, pleading the case for CT scanners to be installed at the Ingham and Charters Towers” – 9th February, 2022
“AS Australia’s international border reopens, Kennedy MP, Bob Katter, says any new tourism campaigns aimed at overseas tourists must have a specific focus on attracting backpackers” – 14th February, 2022
“Govt’s inaction on fuel security leaves Australia vulnerable” – 15th February, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter is calling on the Federal Government to invest in thousands of missiles and delivery systems, as well as a fleet of patrol boats to protect Northern Australia” – 16th February, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, has requested the Federal Government get onboard with the Bridle Track Tunnel and fund the engineering plans for the new super-fast freight highway and tunnel” – 17th February, 2022
“Federal Govt. has a big mouth when it attacks China, but it has no stick” – 20th February, 2022
“Govt backs the likes of Tesla over Aussie workers” – 22nd February, 2022
“Fortress Australia: Missiles, patrol boats and a guerrilla youth force” – 28th February, 2022
“‘Don’t hang up on the regions’, Katter’s plea for more telecommunications funding in the Federal Budget” – 4th March, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, has welcomed the Prime Minister’s announcement on missiles and submarines but says these new weapons will be useless unless Australia has sovereign fuel” – 8th March, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, has renewed [1] his call for one-thousand troops to be stationed at a new army base in Mount Isa, north west Queensland” – 14th March, 2022
“KAP State and Federal MPs, Shane Knuth and Bob Katter, are demanding that both levels of government place the highest priority on building an alternate route to the Kuranda Range Road” – 14th March, 2022
“Minister considering CT Scanners for Ingham & Charters Towers” – 14th March, 2022
“Time for mandatory masks to fly away, says Katter” – 16th March, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, is supporting the Cairns Council’s Water Supply Stage 1 Project which will source water from the Mulgrave River for drinking supply to the region’s rapidly growing” – 17th March, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, is opposed to the proposal of a low-level dam at the Hells Gates site (less than 395m above sea level), with irrigation on unreliable basalt rock country” – 22nd March, 2022
“Barnaby and the Nats kotow to the Greenies on Hells Gates – Bob Katter” – 25th March, 2022
“China circling the Asia-Pacific region like pack of wild dingoes” – 28th March, 2022
“Telecoms, irrigation projects, and doctor training, top budget wins for Kennedy Electorate” – 29th March, 2022
“Farmers forgotten in cost-of-living debate” - 30th March, 2022
“Kennedy electorate road upgrades roll on, but more to be done” – 30th March, 2022
“Townsville’s Migration Agreement, a plan to undermine local workers’ pay and conditions” – 4th April, 2022
“Govt has transport operators running on fumes” – 6th April, 2022
“Doctors given Uni incentive must go bush immediately” - 7th April, 2022
“Bob Katter – “The gloves are off”” – 11th April, 2022 in which Mr. Katter made the following statements :
NORTH QUEENSLANDER, Bob Katter, says he will continue to fight the tide of destruction caused by the policy decisions of the major parties as he seeks re-election in the seat of Kennedy at the forthcoming federal election, and warned that the gloves were coming off.
Mr Katter said he was tenaciously opposed to the net-zero emissions policy of the Liberal National Party (LNP) and Labor, which he says will destroy North Queensland’s three major industries, coal, cane, and cattle.
“Till the day I’m pushing up daisies I’m coming after the ALP and LNP with ruthless brutality,” Mr Katter said.
“The Federal LNP have frittered away $1,000m in studies and reports without building a dam, or producing an engineering plan. All while the Hughenden Irrigation Scheme, Hells Gates Dam (built to 395m above sea level to facilitate the Bradfield Scheme)[1], Charters Tower’s Big Rocks Weir, the Tableland’s North Johnstone Transfer, and Ingham’s Stone River Weirs are ready to go. The old Country Party, under Sir Joh Bjelke-Petersen, was building a dam a year, yet the ALP and LNP have built none.”
“Letter to the Editor: Which of the major parties will back North Qld?” - 13th April, 2022
“Forgotten opportunity of biofuels is a national shame: KAP” – 13th April, 2022
“INFRASTRUCTURE projects that will facilitate new coal and copper mines in North Queensland must go ahead and will be key policies Kennedy MP, Bob Katter, negotiates for in a balance of power” – 19th April, 2022
“Katter calls for $200 a fortnight boost to the age pension” – 20th April, 2022
“Federal Labor plan to lock in FNQ’s economic demise with Kuranda plan” - 21st April, 2022
“Dear Editor, The absolute imperative for the Copperstring transmission line was demonstrated yet again this week. Some 3,000 people came to the Dirt N Dust festival” - 23rd April, 2022
“KAP plan for cheap renewable fuel and electricity” - 26th April, 2022
“Government Inaction and Apathy helped Destroy Queensland's Dairy Industry” – 5th May, 2022
“Flower Power: Katter backs country of origin labelling for flowers” – 8th May, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, is calling for an income splitting scheme to be established for tax purposes to return more money to families with multiple children and a single income, as well as being prorated down for less deserving situations, and to encourage Australians to have bigger families once again.” – 8th May, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, is calling on whoever forms government after the May 21 election to push for market access for Australia’s fruit and vegetables into new Asian markets” – 10th May, 2022
“Kennedy MP, Bob Katter, has fired a warning shot at Labor that he will become ‘extremely hostile’ if they win Government and attempt to close the live export industry.” – 11th May, 2022
“KENNEDY MP, Bob Katter, says every time he sees the Flinders River in flood, he gets a sick feeling in his stomach knowing that a new irrigation project has not been built in North Queensland” – 12th May, 2022
“Momentum builds behind Bridle Track Tunnel” – 12th May, 2022
“Copper boom must be sustained with access to cheap electricity” – 13th May, 2022
“The Katter’s Australian Party (KAP) MP, wants medical graduates to complete two years’ service in the regions immediately after they graduate to attract them to the regions.” – 18th May, 2022
Prior to providing the ALP Government with confidence, did Mr. Katter obtain a written or other form of commitment from the ALP Government to deliver these policies, services and items of infrastructure?
20 Key Policy Points : Document put to the major parties during negotiations for the 2010 ‘hung parliament’ Election
https://www.bobkatter.com.au/20-key-policy-points
These policy points were :
Creation of a National Energy Grid.
The removal of the tax on Australian-produced bio-fuels and the introduction of a statutory 10 per cent bio-fuel (ethanol) content in all petrol rising to 22 per cent (as in Brazil).
The two chain oligopoly – market concentration – in the Australian food retailing sector to be addressed.
No carbon tax. No emissions trading scheme.
No mining tax.
Return of recreational freedoms enabling an increased access to traditional pursuits of fishing, camping and outdoor sports and activities.
The provision of title deeds providing ownership of homes, businesses and farms – a right enjoyed by every other Australian and most people on Earth.
The enactment of legislation to ensure that the constitutional right to full compensation for the taking of property by government be extended also to the taking of any property “rights” by government.
Commitment to the use of some part of the Future Fund for the creation of a national development corporation aimed at lending/investing to major infrastructure and strategically important industries.
Assurance that employees will maintain their current rights to collective bargaining, as well as their right to arbitration.
Agreement that rural and country hospitals and dental services will be placed under the control of a restored local hospital board and that funding be delivered from Canberra directly to these hospital boards.
Agreement that where a food or plant import licence has not been approved, approval can only be granted when the country of origin can establish that is has no endemic diseases that can be imported into Australia (diseases that would threaten our native flora and fauna as well as our food production).
The utilisation of 3 per cent of northern Australia’s abundance of water to enable irrigation for small areas of agricultural land sufficient to guarantee a healthy growth in Australia’s agricultural sector and to provide food security for our people.
Agreement to the establishment of a three-department infrastructure taskforce to, within four months, prepare a Cabinet submission to secure action to provide:
Sea safety on the north-east coast of Australia through the provision of safe, all-weather anchorage roughly every 30km.
To achieve micro resource development, the utilisation of land and water.
The provision of a port to service the southern Gulf of Carpentaria.
Upgrading of the McEwen highway in North Queensland.
To help overcome the stress and financial burden placed upon pensioner aged Australians and other people on fixed government allowances, assistance in the form of, for example, government-provided solar hot water systems and/or other measures to reduce the money problems on our older generation caused by rapidly escalating costs for rates, electricity, insurances, car registration and other similar charges, which, increasingly, they are unable to meet.
A family policy that includes equal rates of government-funded parental assistance for not only working mothers, but stay-at-home mums as well.
An agreement that the Commonwealth meet with the Queensland Government and secure relaxation of restrictions on land sub-division and boundary realignment prohibitions and to establish a joint department to fast track such applications.
The government to provide assurance that it will address the unfair and artificially high value of the Australian dollar, on which upward pressure is placed by interest rates that are out of step with international benchmarks (Reserve Bank of Australia 4.5% compared to Bank of Canada 0.75%, Bank of England 0.50%, European Central Bank 1.00%, Bank of Japan 0.10%, Federal Reserve Bank of NY 0.13%. Source: F13 International Official Interest Rates – Reserve Bank of Australia).
Introduce an open, public registry of foreign ownership of farm land, housing, public and private corporations and re-examine the thresholds on foreign ownership requiring FIRB approval.
A review of zone allowances for remote areas.
Did Mr. Katter raise this document and the points in it with the ALP and a commitment by the ALP to implement these policies prior to providing the ALP with confidence?
Clean Energy Corridor
The Northern Australian Clean Energy Corridor proposal is a series of clean energy power generators to be connected by an AC transmission link from Mt Isa to Townsville – to join North West Queensland (NW Qld) to the National Grid. This will deliver clean, renewable energy to NW Qld – a region currently reliant on two small, ageing and very costly gas fired power stations, but still very valuable continuing assets.
https://www.bobkatter.com.au/clean-energy-corridor
Did Mr. Katter raise the Clean Energy Corridor with the ALP and obtain a commitment from the ALP to implement the Clean Energy Corridor prior to providing the ALP with confidence?
Ethanol
https://www.bobkatter.com.au/ethanol
Did Mr. Katter raise the issue of ethanol with the ALP and obtain a commitment from the ALP to pursue policies to encourage the use of ethanol prior to providing the ALP with confidence?
FIFO
https://www.bobkatter.com.au/fifo
Including the need for :
Taxation reform
Mandatory infrastructure investment
Mandatory local workforces
Sustainable population growth
Did Mr. Katter raise the issues associated with FIFO with the ALP and obtain a commitment to implement his recommendations in regard to FIFO prior to providing the ALP with confidence?
Food Labelling
The Bill mandates warning labels on all imported foods, which can harm health if not grown or processed under Australia’s health and hygiene standards. The Bill aims to help consumers make informed choice about the potential health risks of purchasing and consuming imported food products.
https://www.bobkatter.com.au/food-labelling
Did Mr. Katter raise the issue of Food Labelling with the ALP and a commitment from the ALP to implement his policies in regard to Food Labellingprior to providing the ALP with confidence?
Migration Legislation
It is regretful that the only commonsense solution heard in Parliament is a minority of one – a policy of turning back the boats with, of course, fuel and food. This will remove all incentives for self-smugglers to come to Australia. If the self-smugglers were genuine, one must ask why they did not flee to any of the 20 countries they passed through between Iran and Australia; where they would easily assimilate and feel at home.
https://www.bobkatter.com.au/migration-legislation
Did Mr. Katter raise the issue of Migration Legislation with the ALP and obtain a commitment from the ALP to implement his recommendations regarding Immigration Legislation prior to providing the ALP with confidence?
Supermarket Duopoly
Reducing the oligopolistic market concentration that is gobbling up Australia’s food retailing industry was the number three priority on Bob’s 20-point list of policy demands to both major political parties after the 2010 federal election produced a “hung parliament”.
https://www.bobkatter.com.au/supermarket-duopoly
Did Mr. Katter raise the issue of Migration Legislation with the ALP and obtain a commitment from the ALP to break-up the Supermarket Duopoly prior to providing the ALP with confidence?
Commitment from the Minority ALP Government Prior to Providing Confidence
In his media release of 13th April, 2022, headed ‘Letter to the Editor’, Mr. Katter stated “ If there is a balance of power situation, the KAP will put a list of demands in front of the major parties.” - did this happen and did Mr. Katter obtain a written or other commitment to implement his list of demands when Mr. Katter spoke to the ALP prior to providing the ALP with confidence? Is the list of demands available?
Answers provided by Bob Katter
A spokesperson for Mr. Katter contacted Australian Rural & Regional News on behalf of Mr. Katter. In summary, the position of Mr. Katter appeared to be:
The Coalition had conceded defeat;
Inevitably, the ALP was going to form Government;
The ALP Leader, Mr. Albanese, and his colleague, Ms. Wong, needed to be sworn in as soon as possible as Ministers in order to be able to attend the meeting of the Quad in Tokyo;
That it was not appropriate at this time to make demands upon the incoming Government;
That if Mr. Katter has not agreed to Mr. Albanese’s request for Mr. Katter to provide confidence and to guarantee supply, then Mr. Albanese would have spoke to any number of other cross-benchers;
That Mr. Katter has a good relationship with Mr. Albanese and Mr. Katter was sure that Mr. Albanese would remember that Mr. Katter had been co-operative;
That the time for talking demands would be later in the term of Government and that Mr. Albanese would be sure to remember Mr. Katter’s co-operation at that point.
The overall message seemed to be ‘you don’t understand, we have it under control and everything will be alright’.
It did not appear to have crossed anyone’s mind in Mr. Katter’s office that Mr. Albanese may have actually needed Mr. Katter’s support at that time and that he may have agreed to some requests from Mr. Katter in order to obtain that support.
In any event, we shall never know what Mr. Albanese would have done, as it appears that he was never asked. Mr. Albanese appears to have received carte blanche approval to form a minority Government with no outcomes for the seat of Kennedy and its constituents in particular whatsoever.
Word count: 6450
