Loyalties tested WITH what is going on in the world at present you would expect every member in parliament to be prepared to defend the country ahead of their own parties.
It is important they agree on what we need to defend Australia and not do political point scoring.
G. BOSCH, Morphett Vale Healthy system I AM tired of all the negative things being said about the hospital system. I had to ring for an ambulance last week for my daughter. The ambulance was about a half an hour wait, the paramedics were fantastic and she was seen to immediately at the Lyell McEwin Hospital.
I did not see ramping, the staff were fantastic and they made my daughter’s stay comfortable. They were the best. Well done to everyone.
CHRISTINE BREWSYER, Golden Grove Fix the ramping WE continue to have incidents and deaths that may have been preventable due to a lack of ambulances.
We have known for many years the problem is caused by ambulance ramping. The state government said at the last election they were going to fix the ramping problem but needed years to do so.
This is not good enough. It should be fixed in 12 months.
I believe putting on additional paramedics and building new ambulance stations does not fix the core issue of ramping, which surely has to be the priority. The government needs to create 25-bed wards attached to emergency departments of major hospitals to enable patients to be triaged by a nurse or doctor.
Doing this will enable paramedics to be back on the road within 15-30 minutes. No wonder we have a shortage of ambulances when they are tied up for too long. Why do we need additional paramedics? This may only make the core issue worse. PHIL BILSBOROW, St Morris Tragic death A 47-YEAR-OLD man died from a heart attack near the side of the road in Plympton.
He waited more than 40 minutes for an ambulance to arrive but it was too late. SA Ambulance and the state government, you should be ashamed. NOEL DOHERTY, Flagstaff Hill Dog food shock WHILE feeding my little maltese her daily ration of treats, I noticed they are made in Hungary. Almost unbelievable.
Surely we can make simple dog food in SA.
I just hope we don’t fall out with Hungary or my dog will get very hungry. COLIN GILES, Tonsley Renewable future TAKE heart and have patience, T.S. Calver (“Power demands”, 10/8/22). SA will be running on 100 per cent renewable energy in the not-too-distant future.
When Business SA chief executive Andrew Kay said SA is “one of the few places in the world able to meet our total energy demands using renewable energy” he was referring to the numerous times that our solar and/or wind farms have recorded output exceeding 100 per cent of the state’s energy demands.
With more big renewable energy and storage projects already in the pipeline, South Australians can look forward to the day all fossil-fuel use is redundant.
C. FAULKNER, Cheltenham Showdown looms THERE was a lot of pre-season hype re Port Adelaide Power, and many pre-season concerns re the Adelaide Crows’ redevelopment.
But despite this, should Adelaide win its last two games, and Port Adelaide lose both games, Adelaide will actually finish above the Power.
Who would have thought? PETER JENSEN, Highbury
Word count: 557
