GLOBAL tourism markets will be targeted in a campaign to lure visitors to South Australia in a bid to back businesses hit hard by the Covid-19 pandemic.
Speaking at an Adelaide economic forum on Wednesday, Premier Peter Malinauskas revealed $45m would be pumped into marketing the state across Australia and the world, in an announcement ahead of the June 2 budget.
This would include $15m next financial year to provide extra support to tourism businesses – over and above Labor’s election promise of $20m over two years.
Mr Malinauskas said it was time to welcome tourists back to SA and the funding was “at the expense of other areas of government expenditure”.
“Our tourism businesses have been hit hard over the past two years, with the visitor economy losing a quarter of its value,” he said.
“South Australians have picked up the slack by exploring their own backyard, but borders are now open and it’s time to get interstate and international tourists back in SA.” The SA visitor economy was worth $8.1bn in December 2019, before the pandemic struck, but two years later, in December 2021, had plunged almost 25 per cent to $6.2bn However, average room occupancy hit 79 per cent in April, which Mr Malinauskas said was the first signs of a tourism recovery because it was the best month for hotels since the pandemic hit in early 2020.
He told the Adelaide Economic Development Agency forum the funding would include working with airlines and businesses to drive bookings and leveraging digital technology to make it easier for potential visitors to plan personalised SA holidays.
Departing from a prepared speech, Mr Malinauskas told the CBD-focused forum SA’s defence and renewable energy industries were ideally placed to capitalise on the two biggest global challenges of geopolitical instability and climate change.
He said continental Europe was witnessing a full-blown, orthodox invasion of another nation for the first time in generations, in Russia’s Ukraine aggression, and “our friends to the north are watching very closely” – a veiled reference to China.
Adelaide’s naval shipbuilding, including a $45bn frigate program, was the state’s “greatest single opportunity for economic transformation” since the Playford era.
Mr Malinauskas said SA had already demonstrated capacity to transform industrially and develop renewable energy faster than almost anywhere. “When you think about that undertaking, where else in the world is in a better place to realise that opportunity than SA,” he said.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 407
