SOUTH Australia’s world-leading renewable energy mantle risks being overtaken by NSW because of a year’s delay to the $2.4bn interconnector that is designed to unlock billions in investments, according to Energy Minister Tom Koutsantonis.
The 900km high-voltage transmission line linking SA and NSW, dubbed Project EnergyConnect, is now forecast to operate at full capacity from July 2026, rather than mid-2025.
The updated forecast was detailed in the Australian Energy Market Operator’s electricity market road map released on June 30, based on latest advice from transmission network service providers.
The 800MW interconnector has been touted as delivering $100 annual reductions to typical SA residential electricity bills, exporting SA’s renewable energy and improving power security by creating another “extension cord” to complement the Victorian interconnector. When work on the interconnector started in February at Robertstown, the-then premier Steven Marshall declared that it would “drive investment and create thousands of SA jobs in the renewables sector”.
But Mr Koutsantonis on Friday warned this investment was at risk of being snared by NSW because wind and solar investors would prefer to pump money into subsidised projects close to the bigger population.
“What you’re seeing now is the NSW government working very, very quickly to close down coal-fired power stations in NSW and build and subsidise renewable energy in NSW,” he said.
“They’re subsidising $9bn worth of renewable projects in NSW. All the investment, because of this interconnector, is now going in NSW, not SA. And what we get in return is all of our gas-fired power stations shutting.
“ … In terms of power security and consumers, what it will mean is they’re paying for an interconnector that they haven’t got, because, of course, they’re paying for it in advance (with increased bills).
“Whatever benefits support the previous government’s policy won’t be coming earlier, they’ll now be coming later.” Asked whether the delay imperilled the state’s electricity grid, Mr Koutsantonis declared “power security should be OK”.
But he added: “Whenever you lose firming capacity, an ability to control your own generation, you’re at the mercy of others.
“That’s why privatising the (government-owned) back-up generators (leased in 2019) was such an error, because without that sovereign capability you become reliant on every other jurisdiction for our firming ­capacity.” Regulatory approval for the interconnector in 2021, adding $17 a year to household bills, has been forecast to be more than covered by wholesale price falls, projected to deliver a $100 annual net benefit to consumers.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 412
