There is an old saying - don't take life too seriously, because you won't get out alive.
If you live in the United States, if you do not take it seriously, there is a very good chance that staying alive is a day-to-day proposition.
The present day US is a basket case. It is like a relation that you want nothing to do with.
Donald Trump's continuing denial of the election result is a blight on democracy, decency, truth, is delusional and ignorant of reality, all while fanning the flames of dissent.
It has been claimed that Trump became detached from reality after the 2020 election. Many believe he has always been.
The Capitol building riots held after his defeat showed the rest of the world what happens when figures such as Trump do not condemn such acts, when as president he could have done so.
By not doing so only made the situation worse with the interior of the Capitol building looking like a bomb site.
How do you rescue the country from a situation that could have erupted into something much worse?
A situation more familiar with a Third World country, for instance.
The so-called leader of the free world under Trump had been acting more like an autocracy, not a democracy, more dysfunctional than ever, and is on the brink of total chaos.
Can the present government rescue its reputation in three years?
One doubts if it will ever be "the land of the free".
Ken Price, California Gully Coal closure a good move I applaud Mark McGowan and the Western Australia government for taking the politically bold step in closing their remaining state-owned coal generators by 2030.
Investing in renewable energy, storage and infrastructure is a sensible plan, given the growing cost of maintaining their ageing coal plants and the availability of cheap excess solar generated during the day.
More admirably is the Western Australia government's plan to support workers and the wider community in Collie in the transition to other industries.
This is what leadership looks like - foresight and future planning.
One hopes that similar support will be provided for our remaining 10 coal mining communities when it is their turn for transition.
Ching Ang, Magill Tassie, ACT our energy leaders It is indeed interesting to note that because the Australian Capital Territory, successfully in 2020, made the transition to 100 per cent renewable energy, electricity costs in Canberra will actually decrease in 2022-23.
The example set by the ACT will surely be watched with considerable interest across Australia where increasing energy costs are causing an energy crisis.
Tasmania is now powered entirely by renewable energy and therefore has an abundance of clean, low-cost energy available.
Because of the present energy crisis, Chris Bowen - the federal government Climate Change and Energy Minister - has recently taken the initiative to have talks with his counterpart in Tasmania regarding further developing the linking of Tasmania with the mainland with underwater and underground high voltage cables etc to enable delivery of renewable energy to the mainland.
Discussions between Mr Bowen and his Tasmanian counterpart have been reported to be of a encouraging nature.
Tasmania possibly to the rescue sounds great to me - less money for climate change causing fossil fuels and more finance available to renewable energy sources.
It is exactly what mainland Australia needs right now.
Brian Measday, Myrtle Bank, South Australia Jesus was a refugee too I am glad that the Tamil family who were kept locked up in offshore detention have finally been allowed to return and live in Australia.
Let's hope the stay is permanent.
At the election, both Labor and Liberal leaders claimed to be Christians and yet their policy on asylum seekers was to "turn back the boats".
Jesus was a refugee when he had to escape the wrath of Herod with his parents (Matt 2:13-15). If Jesus, this person of "Middle Eastern appearance", was seeking asylum today, he wouldn't be welcomed.
I've even heard Afghan refugees say that anything is better than living under Taliban rule.
All of these politicians who claim to be Christian should remember that it is written, "The Lord protects the foreigners" (Ps 146:9) and "do not cheat of hurt a foreigner" (Ex 22:21).
Angela Morrissey, Eaglehawk Have your say Do you have something you need to get off your chest? A letter to the editor is one way to have your say. Letters must be signed and carry the name, full address and telephone number(s) of the author. We will publish the writer's name and suburb/town. In rare cases, we may consent to withholding a writer's name or suburb/town. Letters may be edited for space and/or legal reasons. Send submissions to addynews@austcommunitymedia.com.au
CREDIT:
Word count: 790
