Farewell Olivia A FOND adieu to Olivia Newton-John, a beautiful, brave and talented lady. Who can forget her heart-melting screen close-up when singing I Honestly Love You?
Many felt the glow of her beauty and the sincerity of her unique voice. I recall seeing a biker in his leathers ride past with his number plate “ONJ”, such was her universal appeal.
Always smiling, Olivia did her best to help women with cancer and raised millions for research. A unique, sincere voice is recognised by those worldwide who were enchanted by Olivia, Judy Durham, Ella Fitzgerald, Vera Lynn and Edith Piaf. Olivia, to me, had it all. Rest in peace.
J.A. STEVENS, Hyde Park Games bids JUST imagine if the renewed push in 2020 to reignite Adelaide’s 2026 Commonwealth Games bid had come to fruition.
Adelaide narrowly lost a bid to Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, for the 1998 games. A further attempt to secure the games was spurned by the Rann government. Apart from injecting up to $2.5bn into the South Australian economy, it would have placed Adelaide on the tourist map with long-term, far-reaching benefits.
It would have also created a great sense of pride for SA athletes if they had been able to perform in their own city while also providing a sense of optimism for the people of this city and state.
If the Adelaide Commonwealth Games had been set against the backdrop of an arts festival (perhaps entirely separate from Mad March), as was the case when Edinburgh hosted the 1986 Commonwealth Games, this would have further added to the vibrancy.
Adelaide would have indeed been party central for an extra magic month. What a wasted opportunity.
DENNIS G. COLEMAN, Torrensville Crows camp woes AS an Adelaide Crows foundation member, I have read and listened to accounts by Josh Jenkins, Bryce Gibbs and Eddie Betts, as well as the club’s most recent response, on the infamous camp.
Time to admit the camp was wrong in all aspects, it has significantly damaged the club, and it is time to move to do more than just make hollow broad statements to individuals.
Do something.
IAN WINTON, Happy Valley Let’s move on PLEASE, for everyone concerned, can we let the Adelaide Crows football camp rest now.
People have been scarred, livelihoods lost, careers ruined and hopefully lessons learnt.
I can’t see anybody winning from more dredging up of the bad memories this has caused.
I am reasonably confident camps like this will now be well and truly off the agenda at sporting clubs, corporations and anyone else thinking of going down this path.
They say time heals. But how can this happen if it gets dragged up again? Please let it rest now.
JOHN HARRIS, Kadina Union donations HASN’T Premier Peter Malinauskas got himself into a right old pickle. The article by Paul Starick, “Why did it take so long for Malinauskas to finally wake up?”, says it all (The Advertiser, Tuesday).
Of course it begs the question of just how much influence the CFMEU had in the last election process and what it expected to gain by donating $125,000 to the state Labor Party.
I guess time will tell how the takeover of the South Australian branch by this militant Victorian union run by John Setka will affect our construction industry.
PETER JEFFERY, Kingswood Power demands BUSINESS SA’s chief executive Andrew Kay says SA can meet its total energy demands using renewable energy (“Leverage our natural assets”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
Can he please explain, then, why in winter nights we import about 25 per cent of our electricity from Victoria? Quite a significant amount.
About half of Victoria’s power comes from renewables.
So we are partly relying on their coal-fired power stations, which are soon to close.
T.S. CALVER, Novar Gardens Standing up to DV I THOROUGHLY agree with the headline “Time to shift the DV burden” (The Advertiser, Saturday).
No To Violence chief executive Jacqui Watt says, instead of focusing on the victim and saying “why doesn’t she leave?”, we should be asking why an abuser chooses to hurt them.
I also ask why a perpetrator can’t be a better man, father, husband or partner? Why does he have to be a coward and a bully?
He should just leave so as we can live our lives in peace.
LYNNE CLARKE, Marleston Northern jobs THE Paul Starick article “Bandaids can’t fix our poverty and welfare ills” made so much sense to me (The Advertiser, Saturday).
There is poverty in our northern suburbs but there are also job opportunities. So let’s build a new hospital in the Munno Para area. All the infrastructure is in place.
Allow the people of the area to become gardeners, porters, cafe staff, cleaners, etc. Add a government-run childcare centre for at least 100 kids to allow mothers to work.
This also creates jobs for people in the childcare centre.
Include welfare support in the same hub. Having a new hospital north of the cluttered Adelaide CBD would allow better access for patients from the north of the state.
It is a win/win for everyone, allowing people to get off the welfare wagon. JENICE CURRIE, Whyalla
Word count: 861
