Gupta outlines his vision for Whyalla
SANJEEV Gupta’s grand ambitions for the Whyalla steelworks and mining operations have hit some major road bumps over the past few years, but with a hydrogen revolution brewing and an increased focus on bringing manufacturing back onshore, he still has big plans for the city he has called his “spiritual home”.
Mr Gupta’s GFG Alliance swooped in to win the bidding war for the Whyalla assets in 2017, following the collapse of listed company Arrium.
Just more than a year later, at a “big reveal” in the steel town, attended by Prime Minister Scott Morrison and other dignitaries, grand plans were laid out to pump $600m into the current steelworks, and it was announced that work would start on feasibility studies for a new steelworks which would dwarf the current one.
Over the next couple of years other major announcements were made, including aspirations to build 10 gigawatts of renewable energy and storage nationally – about 20 per cent of the nation’s installed capacity at the time – a potential copper smelter for the Upper Spencer Gulf, and the notion of once again manufacturing vehicles in South Australia was also floated.
The collapse of GFG’s financier Greensill early last year turned GFG’s focus to survival, rather than expansion however, and the lion’s share of Mr Gupta’s plans for Whyalla were shelved as the company scrambled to refinance $5bn in debt globally, including more than $400m tied to its Australian operations.
In October, the company struck a deal with Credit Suisse Asset Management over its local debt obligations, and with the Whyalla operations profitable, Mr Gupta is again looking to the future, and is philosophical about the past couple of years.
“What happens, happens to you right? You’ve got to react and adapt,’’ he told the Sunday Mail this week in Adelaide.
“The last two years have been unlike any other in my lifetime. They’ve certainly been very difficult years, a lot of hard work has gone into those situations.
“There’s always something good out of something bad and there is certainly good out of this.’’ In terms of the Whyalla operations, the steelworks is profitable – something which Mr Gupta admits his team initially did not think was possible – and the company’s mining operations are also going well.
Longer term, the focus is now on looking at how the steelworks can be converted to using renewable energy and hydrogen to make steel, with a new “direct reduction iron” steelmaking process on the cards at some stage.
“The steelworks is doing OK but the real future of the business there is mining, renewables and eventually hydrogen steel,’’ Mr Gupta said.
“That will be competitive and it will be world-scale. It will be among the cheapest and most competitive in the world.’’ Building a DRI plant would take about three years from an investment decision, Mr Gupta said.
When that might come depends on factors such as how quickly the hydrogen industry develops in the region, with Mr Gupta encouraged by the state government’s plans to build a hydrogen plant at Whyalla, as well as plans for a private sector hydrogen hub in the region.
“With the commitment this government has made to hydrogen in Whyalla, that changes things for us as it means we can think about this in a much more accelerated manner, so that’s what we’re now analysing,’’ Mr Gupta said.
More broadly, Mr Gupta said the combination of geopolitical events and the pandemic, which have highlighted the importance of sovereign capability in areas such as manufacturing, were not only of benefit to the steelworks, but presented an opportunity for the nation to rebuild its manufacturing sector.
“I now think that everybody recognises that Australia and other countries need to reclaim their sovereignty on manufacturing and that’s a really welcome development for me,” he said.
“Australia has a once-in-a-multigenerational opportunity to grab industry which will come out of renewables.
“For us it’s hydrogen, there are other avenues as well.’’ Mr Gupta said the nation should have “an ambition to become a powerhouse in terms of energy intensive industries’’, but there was still a way to go on that front.
“I don’t think that ambition, that vision, exists in my humble opinion. Nobody can argue with the opportunity Australia has right now.
“It’s a question of ... will we grab the opportunity, will we do it big enough, will we do it quick enough and how will government assist in getting it done, because these sort of things don’t happen just from the private sector in my opinion.’’ Mr Gupta said rebuilding the manufacturing sector was a generational task, but there was low-hanging fruit in areas such as steelmaking and value-adding other raw materials where the nation’s abundant natural resources could be turned into the feedstocks for industry.
Complex manufacturing at scale, was much harder, he said.
“If we get going now ... then in a generation’s time Australia could again be a great manufacturing nation.’’ And Australia, having lost much of its manufacturing base, should use that opportunity to adopt the best new technologies, and use its “second mover advantage’’ to its benefit, he said.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 866
