HOW do you use your SACE Research Project to make yourself smarter for every other subject?
By doing it on how Year 12s can improve their learning.
That is what Victoria Moularadellis did, showing the kind of nous that has also made her a young entrepreneur within the Kingston Estate wine family.
“I thought learning about memory in Year 12 would be useful,” she says of the research project about neuroplasticity and learning “It’s a lot to do with eating healthily and exercising really.” And eating blueberries, doing “brain training”, and following the old adage that memory is like a muscle that grows the more you use it.
All that must be true, because the Wilderness School graduate achieved three SACE Merits, a 99.9 ATAR and a Governor of SA Commendation.
During Year 12 she was also helping run Kingston Estate’s Mo Sisters label with her twin sister Emma, 17, and older sister Lauren, 19.
It is targeted at young female drinkers and is already exported to many parts of the US.
“It’s nothing like the (Kingston Estate) brand has done before,” Victoria says. “It’s sold to major retailers over there and it will be launched in Australia next year.
“The varietals are very much towards their (young women’s) taste, and it’s as much about marketing and packaging.” The wine work occupied her for up to 10 hours a week in Year 12. Victoria will further set herself up for a business career by pursuing law and economics degrees at Adelaide University.
At school she was sports captain, responsible for organising sports day, the swimming carnival, and the “intercol” weekends of matches against rivals Seymour College.
She also did a lot of coaching and mentoring of younger students in touch football and netball.
All of that led to her winning an Australian Olympic Change Maker award from the Australian Olympic Committee.One legacy she will leave at Wilderness is its student media team, which she founded when she was in Year 7. The team films school events and makes a commemorative video for Year 12s each year.
CREDIT: Tim Williams
Word count: 350
