Review WCH plan IN the past few weeks a number of letters have advocated for the state government to reconsider the previous government’s chosen site for the new Women’s and Children’s Hospital.
This is on the basis that the site footprint was too small to meet projected growing demand.
Neil Nicholls is on the money (“Extend the RAH”, The Advertiser, Friday). The WCH Alliance is pleased Health Minister Chris Picton is reconsidering the new WCH in light of the glaring inadequacies of the proposed development as it stood.
This reconsideration is necessary and unsurprising.
The WCH Alliance believes that a revised plan is essential to ensure South Australia has a world-class hospital that has all the room, staff and equipment to meet future demand.
The previous proposal fell well short of meeting that need.
The Alliance recommends that Minister Picton does whatever is necessary to ensure the goal of a new hospital is achieved that does justice to our women and children well into the future.
Such a decision would have our full support.
PHIL PALMER, WCH Alliance convener
Stay patient AMBULANCE ramping is the symptom and external manifestation of a beleaguered and overwhelmed health system.
It is unavoidable and unfixable in the absence of major reforms in general practice and community healthcare, access to adequate numbers of hospital beds and a more efficient framework for the NDIS.
Increasing the size of emergency departments and trying to discourage their use have no impact on the basic problem.
The state government is using all the means at its disposal to meet the demand on our hospitals.
Efforts are also in train, with federal government help, to alleviate bed blockage due to the unnecessarily long-term hospitalisation of NDIS patients.
This is an incredibly difficult time for our hospital system and for long-suffering patients and the public at large.
Ill-informed criticism by politicians and other commentators is unhelpful. What is more important is to recognise and support the dedication and hard work of clinical staff across the breadth of our stressed health system.
Professor WARREN JONES, Malvern
Rofe defence I WRITE in relation to the story written by Andrew Rule entitled “How notorious mafia boss was nailed almost three decades after bombing”, which featured on Advertiser.com.au on Saturday July 9.
I confine myself to the comments made about the character of SA’s first Director of Public Prosecutions, Mr Paul Rofe, QC.
I do not doubt that Paul Rofe had flaws, but I always found him to be a man of integrity.
I have not heard the whispers to which Mr Rule refers, and have certainly never seen anything remotely resembling evidence justifying the suggestion that Paul was compromised by “the sort of people who controlled clubs and brothels and fixed horse races and, possibly, legal cases”.
If there is no evidence, it is a terrible suggestion to make about the character of a man who cannot defend himself. I count myself as fortunate to have worked in the Office of the Director of Public Prosecutions during the time of Paul’s directorship.
From him I learnt much about courage and the personal strength required to provide the people of SA with an efficient and effective, independent prosecuting office.
Directors are required to exercise their prosecutorial discretion without fear or favour, for and on behalf of the people of this state.
We are by no means infallible, and at times must make unpopular, sometimes very unpopular, decisions doing the best we can on the material presented to us.
Paul was no different, and, in my view, in his time as director, taken as a whole, served this state admirably.
MARTIN HINTON, QC, Director of Public Prosecutions
Ukraine help SOME videos can affect you a lot.
I saw one about a foreign medical group helping the Ukrainians. One medic said: “This is our war. This is everyone’s war.” BOB COWLEY, Broadview
Cheaper bills WILLIAM Hecker wants Foreign Minister Penny Wong to tell Pacific nations about our state’s impressive renewable energy production (“Proud record”, The Advertiser, Friday).
Indeed an Open National Energy Market report reveals that nearly 70 per cent of the power used in SA came from renewable energy (“Renewables power SA”, The Advertiser, Wednesday).
I look forward to the day every South Australian sees a commensurate reduction in their electricity bills as a result.
That would be worth telling all nations.
BERNIE COATES, Modbury North
Moral issues SEVERAL people have responded to my statements about morality and the Bible (“Value judgment”, The Advertiser, Wednesday).
And, like most people who claim to get their morality from religion, some don’t seem to have actually read the book too closely.
There are numerous moral atrocities in the Bible, including the condoning of slavery, genocide and human and animal sacrifice, the appalling treatment of women and outdated inhumane laws and commandments.
The fact that people pick and choose which of these moral instructions to agree or disagree with is evidence that our morality comes from outside these religious sources. BEN GRAY, O’Halloran Hill
Word count: 834
