SMALL businesses across South Australia are at risk of collapsing in the next two years as yearly power bills rise by a whopping $2500.
The massive increase will force many small traders to hike the price of their goods and services – sparking concerns cash-strapped households will shun local businesses in search of cheaper options with supermarket and retail giants.
The grim warning has been made as new figures show yearly power bills for thousands of small businesses in SA, South East Queensland and NSW will rise from $4500 to $7000 in just two years.
Small-business leaders warn widespread closures could tear the “fabric” of vibrant communities across SA, while the threat of rising electricity bills is keeping local operators “awake at night”.
Salisbury Business Association chief executive David Waylen said local traders were grappling with increasing power costs years before the “horrific” revelations in Labor’s federal budget that electricity bills would rise by 56 per cent by the end of 2024.
“Business owners are people as well – they are families, they already have mortgage costs, their regular costs at home, then they’ve got that additional overlap of high costs impacting on their business,” he said. “Energy (prices) really need to be reined in and I don’t see any state or federal strategies that are really looking to do that.” Mr Waylen warned small businesses would be forced to pass the cost on to customers in the form of higher prices, which could leave already cash-strapped shoppers with no choice but to shop at the big chains.
“Small businesses always seem to be behind the eight ball,” he said. “Costs that impact on Big W or Myer or Harris Scarfe, for example, can be spread across multiple departments as they have the buying power the smaller traders don’t have.” Business SA chief executive Andrew Kay said the predicted 56 per cent power increase was “only going to hurt more”.
“The SA business community have told us that rising costs are keeping them awake at night,” he said.
But he welcomed Labor’s $62.6m measure to provide small and medium-sized businesses with grants to help improve energy efficiency.
“There is obviously a bigger picture here and Australia needs regulatory reform in the sector to address this issue,” Mr Kay said.
Power bills for 13,630 small businesses in SA, South East Queensland and NSW will rise by $2542 in two years, based on modelling provided by the opposition that shows residential power bills for 62,000 households will increase by $1030 over the same period. The figures are based on the default market offer – the maximum price retailers can charge customers who don’t opt for a market offer.
Small Business Association of Australia director Anne Nalder labelled the estimated increase “horrific”.
“We’re not talking about a 5 or 10 per cent increase, we are talking about bills almost doubling in many cases,” she said. “When I talk about businesses going under, I’m not talking about a couple of businesses – there’s a lot.
“When a business goes under, it’s not just the owner who suffers, it can be the whole family, the community and other businesses as well.” Both Ms Nalder and Mr Waylen warned of the hidden cost of small businesses collapsing. Many family businesses help prop up local sporting clubs with sponsorships. Without these, Mr Waylen says, the “community fabric will slide away”. “We will see more crime and more anti-social behaviour. It’s surprising how that all so quickly falls in on itself,” he said.
Labor’s first federal budget in nearly a decade contained $20bn in “low-cost finance” for the upgrade and expansion of the country’s power grid with a focus on adding renewable energy sources.
During Question Time on Thursday, Prime Minister Anthony Albanese was grilled about the effect of rising electricity costs on small businesses. “There is no doubt at all many households and businesses are already doing it tough when it comes to the energy crisis,” he said. “Russia’s willingness to weaponise energy, which is what they have done (with the Ukraine invasion) has sent coal, oil and gas prices through the roof globally (and) caused the most significant shock to global energy markets since the 1970s.” Climate Change and Energy Minister Chris Bowen said the budget contained “Australia’s road map to delivering cleaner, more affordable energy to households and businesses – putting us on a track to be a renewable energy superpower”.
Australian Chamber of Commerce and Industry boss Andrew McKellar took aim at Labor’s contentious industrial relations reforms, which he argued would cause countless small businesses with more than 15 workers to become entangled in costly worker disputes. He warned the proposal to allow multi-employer bargaining deals would only add to businesses’ rising costs.
SA Unions secretary Dale Beasley said the reforms would “modernise” the bargaining system and lead to higher wages.
WHAT IS CAUSING THE POWER CRISIS Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, coal station outages and extreme weather have caused a perfect storm in Australia’s energy market.
■ Australia exports most of its fossil fuels – including coal and gas – to overseas markets, where it commands a higher price. As a result, the country is highly dependent on imported energy.
■ The global demand for Australian coal and gas has skyrocketed as most of the Western world refuses to buy Russian crude oil and gas after President Putin’s invasion of Ukraine.
■ As Russia is one of the world’s largest producers of oil, there is a global shortage, pushing up the wholesale energy prices, including in Australia’s domestic market.
■ Worsening the issue at home are frequent outages at several ageing coal-fired power stations. As many coal plants have been earmarked for closure, there is less maintenance and more frequent breakdowns.
■ Australia’s transition to renewables will take several years, meaning the country is still highly dependent on fossil fuels.
■ During winter, extreme cold weather led to severe pressure on the national electricity grid.
COST RISES FOR CAPTAIN CHICKEN & SEAFOOD HENLEY ELECTRICITY $2904 per quarter in 2021-22 Has risen 12 per cent to $3300 per quarter this financial year. If power bills go up the expected further 56 per cent, it would be $5148 per quarter COOKING OIL now $5.50L $2.30L last financial year CHIPS now $38 per 15kg box.
$28 per 15kg box last financial year FISH now $8.50kg $7.60kg last financial year
CREDIT: GABRIEL POLYCHRONIS
Word count: 1065
