POWERING UP NEW poles and wires will be built to connect renewable energy sources with the government handing out $20 billion in low-cost loans to upgrade the electricity grid.
The program will be financed through the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, which will receive $50.4m in operating costs over four years to deliver the loans.
The Rewiring the Nation policy, a signature election commitment for the Albanese government, is expected to improve the budget bottom line by $158m over four years in interest payments on the loans, according to federal budget papers delivered yesterday.
The papers state the policy will help in “driving power prices down,” while expanding the electricity grid at the “lowest cost”.
It aims to build 10,000 kilometres of new transmission lines and enable an 82 per cent renewable-based electricity grid by 2032, the budget says.
The $20b program includes $6b of already-announced programs to help build an interconnector cable between Victoria and NSW, and the Marinus link between Tasmania and the mainland.
The budget establishes a $1.9b Powering the Regions Fund, “to assist industries, regional Australia and communities with the transition to net zero emissions”.
The Albanese government will also establish a “Net Zero Economy Taskforce” to provide advice on how workers, particularly in regional Australia, can benefit from the shift to renewable energy.
“This is Australia’s road map to delivering cleaner, more affordable energy to households and businesses – putting us on track to be a renewable energy superpower and ensuring we take advantage of the job and investment opportunities that have been missed for too long,” Energy Minister Chris Bowen said.
Mr Bowen said the government is redirecting almost $64m of a Morrison government scheme designed to invest in new power generation.
He said the coalition’s Underwriting New Generation scheme “delivered not one dollar to a project, nor one kilowatt of electricity to the market”. The money will be redirected to “dispatchable storage technologies,” he said.
The Port of Newcastle and the Hunter region will also get $100m to become “hydrogen-ready”.
“This investment will help the broader Hunter region transition from thermal coal exports towards new industries based on clean energy like green hydrogen,” the budget papers state.
“The budget proudly builds on the Government’s ambitious climate and energy agenda, which has already seen Australia’s Climate Change Bill legislated, putting Australia on track for net zero by 2050,” Mr Bowen said. The budget also includes almost $225m for 400 community-scale batteries for up to 100,000 Australian households, and more than $100m for solar banks for 25,000 Australians living in flats, rentals and low-income households.
CREDIT: JAMES O’DOHERTY STATE POLITICAL EDITOR
Word count: 435
