Recommended reading MY thanks to Peter Goers for putting pen to paper (Time we honoured forgotten sacrifice, Sunday Mail, April 24) about the ongoing lack of recognition for Indigenous people.
The Uluru Statement from the Heart is a plea not only for constitutional recognition, but recognition of their love of the spirit of this land.
It is hardly beneficial to say white settlement happened a long time ago and we need to move on, without acknowledging all that has been taken.
I have been struck by two recent depictions of the Indigenous people. In the SBS program, “Every Family has a Secret”, while Indigenous descendants were tracing their ancestors they came across links with royalty in the form of Edward VIII.
Edward wrote in his letters home that he totally despised the Aboriginal people, and there was no attempt to disguise his contempt – it was horrifying.
Aboriginal Australian author, poet, and cultural activist Anna Heiss writes in her novel, Bila Yarrudhanggalangdhuray – River of Dreams, of the way the Indigenous people were expected to be servants without offer of payment.
They were totally subjugated to their perceived superiors, the white settlers. We need to hear the ugly truths however sad these stories are.
I highly recommend you put Bila Yarrudhanggalangdhuray on your reading list. JENNY ESOTS, Willunga
War crimes MAYBE Doug Seton is right, and the ball really is in the UN’s court (Sunday Mail 24/4/22).
I prefer the International Criminal Court (ICC) at The Hague. And not just with Russia’s “tyrannical President”.
As the justices at Nuremberg correctly concluded: “To initiate a war of aggression … is not only an international crime; it is the supreme international crime differing only from other war crimes in that it contains within itself the accumulated evil of the whole.” Former prime minister John Howard is on record as saying he thought the 2003 attack on Iraq was “justified at the time”.
So let’s test that justice at The Hague. Vladimir Putin is not the only one that should be up before the beak at the ICC.
There’s a conga line of candidates. After all, if they’ve done nothing wrong, they’ve got nothing to worry about.
BOB RUWOLDT Seacombe Heights
Making the change I am so thankful for living in South Australia, a jurisdiction that is leading the world in the necessary transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy (“Labor hits the red-hot button”, 24/4/22).
Kudos to the new Malinauskas government for declaring a climate emergency under the guidance of Climate, Environment and Water Minister Dr Susan Close.
And an honourable mention must also go to the former Rann/Weatherill Labor government for setting SA on the path to wind and solar power, and the former Marshall Liberal government for keeping the momentum going.
C. FAULKNER Cheltenham
Save the trees If our new Climate Environment and Water Minister Susan Close is so keen to declare a “climate emergency” in state parliament, perhaps she could do something to save the 75,000 trees that are now being cut down in Adelaide every year.
This net tree loss right across Adelaide is making us even hotter every summer. E MOORE Stepney
Taxing times How magnanimous of Scott Morrison to “promise” no new taxes (Sunday Mail 24/04/22).
He means the existing tax system will remain.
Can one believe any politician who cancels a contract (the submarines) and puts Australia an additional five billion in debt?
Who will pay for the compensation to the French for cancelling the submarine contract?
Has Australia lost its credibility among the nations of the world? MICHAEL MAROS Joslin
Play by the rules Now that Elon Musk has decided to buy Twitter and become the great supporter of free speech there may need to be some other changes to the rules of Twitter.
The following instructions are an update of the old rules.
1. I am Elon Musk; thou will only use Twitter and definitely not Trump’s equivalent “Truth Social”, whenever it works.
2. Thou may not create memes using my name or image nor will thou forward on other people’s memes.
3. The weekend shall be for family time or football and not for googling. 4. Thou shall honour your father and your mother for they are probably still paying for your internet access.
5. Thou shall not turn off the internet access nor change the password. 6. Though shall not visit the thousands, apparently, sites that show misbehaving adults as they may have been infected by viruses, both the participants and the websites.
7. Thou shall not visit PirateBay.
8. Thou shall not spread fake news nor the rantings of any ex-leader, you know who!
9. Thou shall not use the internet to stalk or harass anyone nor see what has happened to ex-lovers.
10. Thou shall not buy from online market sites unless the seller can prove it exists, works and is actually theirs.
A quick check reveals several personal failures from this list. DENNIS FITZGERALD Box Hill, Victoria
Not a fan I HAVE been a great fan of MasterChef over the years, but I will not be watching this season as it is now the Julie Goodwin show.
I don’t believe she should have won Season One and maybe wouldn’t have but for her constant tears.
There have been so many worthy winners but to laud her as the poster person is too much for me.
Thankfully there is The Voice and Lego Masters on at the same time so all is good.
HEATHER MATTHEWMAN Wynn Vale
Word count: 918
