The European parliament has just voted 73 per cent for, 19 per cent against, with 9 per cent abstention, the phased introduction of a carbon border adjust­ment mechanism that will impose a carbon tax on a range of imports from countries such as Australia.
Following a final round of negotiations, importers will have to report on imported-product emissions from January 1 next year and start paying a CBAM levy in 2026 or 2027.
The European Commission, by the way, is adamant that it is bringing in a carbon-pricing mechanism, not a tax.
The plan is to start with heavy industries – steel, aluminium, concrete and fertiliser. Electricity is also on the list. In a manner that may have the perverse effect of increasing rather than decreasing global emissions, gas has been excluded. Inclusion of all sources of energy and expansion to include all the 66 sectors involved in the EU’s emissions trading scheme are under consideration. Parliament is suggesting an expansion to include organic chemicals, plastics, hydrogen and ammonia.
Once the EU’s CBAM enters into European law, it will be hard for any other country to overturn it. The EU has seized a significant first-mover advantage. Australia’s leaders need to engage now. Precedents such as the one that the EU is in the process of establishing have a habit of sticking around. If Australia wants to influence the way the international trade fraternity decides to allow the use of such mechanisms, it needs to act quickly.
Clinical psychologist and author Dr Jordan Peterson says the European Union’s decision to classify nuclear and natural gas as clean energy was “pretty obvious”. “Anyone with any sense who wasn’t rabidly anti-capitalist out of their mind would have figured that out at least 20 years ago,” he told Sky News host Chris Kenny.“The Americans switched to fracking pretty much at the turn of the millennium and they’ve cut their carbon output by 15 per cent.”Dr Peterson said “no environmentalist predicted” the United States’ emissions would decrease due to the practice and “nobody seems to be celebrating it”. “We know (if) you want to move the planet forward, you move people from dung and wood to coal and from coal to petroleum and from petroleum to some combination of nuclear and renewables,” he said. “We know the pathway forward economically and if you care for poor people, the only thing you really care about is making energy cheap, obviously.”
Our Canadian friends will have no problems with the EU approach – they already have a carbon tax. Britain has started an inquiry into the best form of CBAM to introduce. In the US, Democrat interest in some form of carbon-pollution tax on imports is growing. Several well-developed legislative proposals are already in circulation.
As the world’s largest exporter of aluminium and potentially one of the largest exporters of green iron pellets and steel, Australia needs to think quickly and carefully. International protectionism costs Australia and many of our exports are emission-intensive. Charges on Australian exports can have a big impact on our economy – especially those that influence demand for iron ore and aluminium.
As a bare minimum and, as set out in a University of Adelaide Institute for International Trade paper, everyone will be better off if a way can be found to provide automatic CBAM payment exemptions to any exporting nation that has been reducing emissions as fast as the EU.
The EU has chosen the industries that it thinks are easiest to transform – steel, fertilisers, cement, aluminium and electricity. Australia and the world will be better off if each country is free to choose which emission industries to begin with and which industries and emission types to leave until last.
The way emissions are assessed is equally important. Australia wants to be able to allow for offsets. The EU’s CBAM proposal, however, makes no allowance for offsets.
In an ideal, World Trade Organisation-compatible world, one would also expect the EU to recognise the effectiveness of equivalent pricing mechanisms such as our renewable energy targets. In its proposed scheme, these mechanisms count for nothing. Australian-style market-based emissions permit trading systems and sharing systems also count for nought even though they incentivise innovation and provide investment security. Under the EU’s scheme, the only thing that matters is how much each carbon emitter has to pay to the government.
If Australia doesn’t want to tax emissions, now is the time to act.
Under the EU’s scheme, it is proposed that importers will have to pay the European Commission the same amount as a European producer would have to pay. This CBAM revenue will then be used to help the EU balance its budget or, possibly, to assist least developed countries. When push comes to shove, the world would be better off if all CBAM revenue were used to reduce or offset emissions.
Judo Bank Economic Advisor Warren Hogan says the “key missing piece” in the discussion about the government's safeguard mechanism is the “broader" industry policy and ambitions.“They haven’t really articulated that since the previous government’s Modern Manufacturing Strategy,” he told Sky News Australia. “So I think my key issue is making sure that whatever they do with this safeguard mechanism and their broader emissions targets and environmental policies, that it’s heavily linked into what they’re doing with their industry policy.”
While some may argue that, as the proposal applies only to iron and steel, aluminium, cement, fertiliser and electricity production, Australia need not worry – we don’t export much of these products to Europe – the reality is that the list of products will soon be expanded. Moreover, it is likely that like-minded nations will club together and use these clubs to protect their preferred emissions-reduction strategy and ensure their industries are not disadvantaged as emissions are reduced.
More broadly, Australia needs to work out whether it wants to be part of the race to reduce emissions and be perceived as a nation interested in constructively leading the debate about how to stop the leakage of jobs and investment to laggard nations or leave this to others. If European steel goes green and gets close to zero emissions while Australia keeps on producing steel as it currently does, then an expansion in Australian steel production facilitated by a reduction in Europe would have the perverse effect of increasing rather than decreasing global emissions.
The good news is the Europeans seem to be listening to Australia again. As a result, there is an opportunity for us to take a well-thought-out proposal to the Europeans and other international organisations such as the OECD. A co-ordinated response to the EU’s CBAM from a group of climate-progressive exporting nations of standing would have to be listened to and could do much to prevent a fight in the WTO.
Mike Young is an emeritus professor in energy, water and environmental policy at the University of Adelaide and was the founding executive director of its Environment Institute. He is the author of the university’s Institute for International Trade paper Improving Border Adjustment Mechanisms.
Word count: 1156
