With projects as diverse as quantum computing, digital drivers’ licences, plastic made from seaweed and insects that process waste, innovation takes many forms. But its proponents have a common goal — driving Australia forward and inspiring the rest of the nation to achieve continued success. Amid an increasingly uncertain economic, environmental and geopolitical landscape, these are the future-makers who are hiring the next generation of talent and building the foundations for what our country can — and should — become. Photographed by Josh Robenstone
AGRICULTURE AND ENVIRONMENT Anastasia Volkova - CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, REGROW AG Regrow Ag, one of the nation's fastest-growing agriculture startups, is the brainchild of Ukrainian-born aeronautical engineer Anastasia Volkova, who is expanding her company across the US and globally, helping farmers meet net-zero targets. Regrow offers an online platform to help agriculture companies achieve net-zero carbon goals across their supply chains, with Kellogg's and General Mills among its customers.
"Agriculture needs resilience not just to put food on our plates today, but to support a liveable planet for future generations," Volkova says. "At Regrow, we are excited to be the trusted partner in delivering on organisations' net-zero goals by leveraging the global opportunity of regenerative agriculture."
Michael Lebbon and Ben McNeil - CO-FOUNDERS, EMMI Emmi co-founder Michael Lebbon says he wants to create carbon data that is as ubiquitous as Uber. The former finance executive says he had spent his career seeing the "good, the bad and the unexpected" of the finance market, and decided to build a solution. Emmi offers a platform for some of Australia's biggest companies to navigate their carbon transitions and show where the risks lie as they head towards net-zero.
Olympia Yarger - FOUNDER AND CEO, GOTERRA Goterra's food-waste management systems are the first of their kind and are growing into a big business, boasting clients including Woolworths, QueanbeyanPalerang Regional Council, hospitals, hotels, schools and apartment buildings. The startup, which has raised funding from Mike and Annie Cannon-Brookes's private investment arm Grok Ventures and agrifood tech VC Tenacious Ventures, uses robotic maggot farms to turn organic waste into animal feed.
Phoebe Gardner and Alex Arnold - CO-FOUNDERS, BARDEE Innovation could be described as a dirty word for Bardee co-founders Phoebe Gardner and Alex Arnold - or at least dirty work. The pair's company processes 10 tonnes of food waste every eight hours, feeding approximately one billion black soldier fly larvae to create a protein that can be used for pet food, fertilisers and aquafeed. Demand has outstripped supply for Bardee, and the company is currently plotting a new facility that should be able to offset 500 tonnes of carbon emissions daily.
ARTS, DESIGN AND INFRASTRUCTURE Zac Duff and Numa Bertron- CO-FOUNDERS, JIGSPACE JigSpace is a 3D presentation startup that has designs on being the next Canva. It is backed by a range of investors, including high-profile entrepreneur Roger Allen, along with Australian venture capital firms Investible and Rampersand. JigSpace last year grew its customer base by 40 per cent month-on-month, while its average active user harnesses its tools to create presentations - known as jigs - more than once a day.
"Jigs can be viewed on the device in anyone's pocket, with no need to download an app," co-founder Duff says. "It's kind of like a PDF - you can access it from anywhere, and that level of coverage is our goal."
Gaurav Kawar - FOUNDER AND CEO, BOOK AN ARTIST Gaurav Kawar's ambition is to revolutionise the way art is consumed and commissioned. He founded Book An Artist in 2019 as an online platform to connect businesses and customers with local artists across the globe. The startup is now operating in the United Kingdom, Australia, New Zealand and Singapore, and recently raised $1 million from Black Sheep Capital and Airtasker co-founder Tim Fung to expand into new markets.
David Walsh - DIRECTOR, ART PROCESSORS The visionary owner and founder of MONA, Hobart, David Walsh leads Art Processors, a creative technology company that partners with museums and galleries to inspire curiosity and make the exhibition experience more immersive. It combines extended reality and digital technologies with multisensory storytelling. The opening of MONA in 2011 was the impetus behind the creation of Art Processors' mobile technology - known as The O - and it has been used by more than 3.5 million visitors to the museum.
Dan Swan and Keith Ahern- CO-FOUNDERS, REALAR Home owners often find it tricky to visualise exactly what jobs they're contracting when kicking off a renovation. And that's where RealAR comes in. The startup's technology lets residential property owners see in 3D how streetscapes and exterior views will affect their new home or alterations. "RealAR is a user-friendly and accessible way to improve knowledge and understanding of proposals during the entire development assessment process of a space," says Ahern, RealAR's co-founder and chief technology officer.
Philip Slusarski, Edward and George Hartley - BLUETHUMB Bluethumb, now Australia's largest online art gallery, was co-founded by brothers Edward and George Hartley with Philip Slusarski in 2012. This year the brothers launched Bluethumb Digital, a curated NFT marketplace offering art from big-name Australian artists. Bluethumb represents more than 17,000 emerging and established artists from Australia, and works with 25 of Australia's most remote Aboriginal-owned and operated not-for-profit Art Centres. "For years we've wanted to add digital art to Bluethumb," George Hartley says. "Some of the most interesting new art in the past few years has been in digital and video and we actually have hundreds of artists already on Bluethumb who do some digital work. The problem is we haven't been able to work out how to sell it and now NFTs have solved that for us."
Michelle Grey, Sean Tolkin and Sam Linas - CO-FOUNDERS AND MANAGING DIRECTOR, CULTURE VAULT The Sydney-based Culture Vault, which launched this year, is taking physical art from Australian cultural figures including Reko Rennie, Stephen Ormandy and Shantell Martin, among others, and turning it into NFTs for the public to purchase. Co-founder Michelle Grey is hoping to successfully bridge the gap between NFTs and traditional art. "All art is subjective," she says, "but things like the Bored Apes and Crypto Kitties mistakenly get put into the NFT 'high art' category because of the price they're selling for, They're much more of a community token."
EDUCATION & TALENT Andre Avedissian, Ethan Catzel and Dean Mikan - CO-FOUNDERS, CANOPY STUDY While artificial intelligence is now built into our phones, homes and cities, it has been overlooked in the education space. Sydney-based edtech startup Canopy Study set out to change this, and in so doing has shown the world what is possible when it enters the classroom.
The company's data-driven platform uses algorithms to convert lesson material into learning resources such as quizzes and flashcards, which can adapt to students' unique learning styles. The outcome means educators no longer have to spend hours creating learning resources, opening up their time to focus on in-person learning instead. Avedissian, Catzel, and Mikan co-founded the startup in 2020 and recently raised $1.1 million in a seed funding round led by Australian VC Folklore Ventures.
Tom Moore, Luke Rix and Sam Baynes - CO-FOUNDERS, WITHYOUWITHME One of Asia Pacific's fastest-growing tech companies is WithYouWithMe (WYWM), which is dedicated to tackling the global digital skills crisis while lowering the barriers to entry for tech veterans, military families and other underrepresented groups. WYWM was cofounded by former Australian army captain Moore, and has since placed more than 20,000 people into work.
"Our company was founded on the principle of doing the right thing for those who have served their country.
It is only right that we now protect those who protected us as they transition into new careers," Moore says.
"We firmly recognise that the skills developed in the military are invaluable for the civilian workforce - from having the aptitude for high-demand roles like data analytics and cyber security, to soft skills like strong collaboration and problem-solving abilities.
Jeanette Cheah - FOUNDER AND CEO, HEX HEX, led by former ANZ executive Jeanette Cheah, has already educated nearly 10,000 students, and has now raised funding from investors including impact venture capital fund Giant Leap as it moves to teach thousands more. Founder and CEO Cheah says HEX's program can be thought of as a "new kind of undergraduate degree", exposing students to alternative opportunities and career paths while teaching them skills for the real world such as financial literacy, ethics and coding. Cheah took the pressure she felt during high school about what she wanted to do with her career as motivation, and says that there continues to be a skills gap between what young people learn at school and what they actually need to be job-ready. HEX aims to remedy that.
Siobhan Savage - CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, REEJIG Sydney start-up Reejig has developed what it says is the world's first independently audited ethical talent AI, created in partnership with the University of Technology Sydney. The artificial intelligence-driven HR platform ensures biases are significantly reduced from the recruitment and talent-management process.
Reejig, which is chaired by former Westpac chief executive Brian Hartzer and led by CEO and cofounder Savage, gives management an overview of the skills base within a company's workforce, and can predict crucial gaps. Clients includes Woolworths, John Holland and KPMG. Reejig recently raised $21 million through a funding round led by Skip Capital's Kim Jackson and her husband, Atlassian co-CEO Scott Farquhar, with AirTree Ventures, Greta Bradman, and Culture Amp's Didier Elzinga. Airtree says Reejig is one of the fastest-growing companies in its portfolio.
Louka Parry - CEO AND FOUNDER, THE LEARNING FUTURE Louka Parry believes humans' ability to "learn, unlearn and relearn" is our greatest asset. The former South Australian schoolteacher and principal founded education consultancy The Learning Future in 2019 to help teachers, schools and organisations transform their learning experience and thrive in a world that is constantly changing. It offers strategic design, professional development and thought leadership, and is on a mission to cultivate "the right mindsets and skillsets to work well and live fully". This means embracing human-centred concepts such as curiosity and finding comfort in our ability to adapt to ensure teams and individuals face a confident future.
Annie McAuley - FOUNDER AND CEO, TALKIPLAY A traumatic brain injury at the age of 18 left Dr Annie McAuley having to learn how to speak again. In 2017, when she discovered her own daughter had delayed language development, McAuley founded edtech startup TalkiPlay with the support of the SheStarts accelerator program. TalkiPlay makes language learning fun for kids, using a gamified app that encourages them to interact with their surroundings and learn language through play. In 2019, the edtech startup secured $750,000 in a seed funding round led by Scale Investors. With one in five Australian children aged under five experiencing delayed language development - and the pandemic further affecting these statistics - there is an increasing number of children requiring the tools TalkiPlay offers. "I've felt first hand how much language is pivotal to our predictors in life outcomes," McAuley says. "I want to enable parents with a platform to empower and motivate their children to learn language." More than 1500 children have used TalkiPlay products in homes and early learning centres around the country.
Ajay Prakash - FOUNDER AND CEO, ENTRYLEVEL Helping one billion people find meaningful employment is a mission few would accept, unless they are Ajay Prakash. Prakash's EntryLevel is an edtech startup offering virtual experiences at some of the best companies across the globe to help graduates and job seekers gain the meaningful experience they need in order to get a foot in the door of the career they desire.
The goal, Prakash says, is to prevent mass unemployment by 2030. The platform offers an alternative to the lengthy and expensive courses traditionally on offer in the education sector, delivering affordable six-week programs with mentors from
ENERGY Anston Zhang - CO-FOUNDER AND CO-CEO, DISCOVER ENERGY Discover Energy has a stated goal of helping Australians reducing daily emissions by combining green energy with giving customers the power to redistribute their energy back into the grid. Zhang founded the energy retailer in a bid to help households save on electricity costs in what is a highly regulated energy retail industry, leveraging solar, AI, machine learning and big data to allow its virtual power plant customers to participate in energy trading.
Alexander Post, Dylan Cuskelly and Erich Kisi - CO-FOUNDERS, MGA THERMAL MGA Thermal's core technology is a recently invented type of thermal storage material, Miscibility Gap Alloys (MGA), which is the size of a shoebox and can store a huge amount of energy as heat. The company's co-founders spent a decade researching miscibility gap alloys technology at the University of Newcastle, and the resulting technology allows sun and wind energy to provide baseload electricity to the grid. A recent $8 million funding round led by Main Sequence ventures continues to power MGA Thermal forward.
"Erich Kisi and Alexander Post's impressive deep research backgrounds, their expert team and innovative technology are paving the way for grid-scale energy storage and boosting the capability of a renewable energy future globally," says Main Sequence partner Martin Duursma.
Warren McKenzie and Heinrich Hora - MANAGING DIRECTOR AND SCIENTIFIC DIRECTOR, HB11 ENERGY HB11 Energy recently achieved a world-first hydrogen fusion milestone using a laser and is busy developing the next generation of high-power lasers needed to create a nuclear fusion energy industry in Australia.
The company is commercialising the scientific research of Professor Heinrich Hora, and is ultimately aiming to create clean, safe and reliable energy at superior prices and quantity than all of the existing renewable energy sources combined. The team has received multiple grants, including from the University of Adelaide and the University of New South Wales, and managing director Warren McKenzie says nuclear fusion has the potential to create billions of dollars in economic value for the nation.
Jemma Green and John Bulich - CO-FOUNDERS, POWERLEDGER The Perth-based Powerledger, which is backed by early Canva investor Bill Tai, runs an energy trading platform that allows near real-time, fully accountable peer-topeer energy trading across more than 30 projects in 12 countries. Powerledger allows its customers to access cheaper, cleaner electricity, and its software works alongside the existing infrastructure of energy systems to track, trace and trade every kilowatt of energy. This empowers customers to "take control of their energy future", says co-founder Green. The company was recently awarded Global Champion at the World Summit awards for its work in promoting distributed energy in Uttar Pradesh, India. The startup has a target of a million users globally by 2025.
FINANCE Dominic Yap and Ben Pfisterer - CO-FOUNDERS, ZELLER Payments startup Zeller offers a business-banking alternative for small businesses and this year became one of Australia's rare unicorn startups, a privately held company worth more than $1 billion. The company, led by former Square local managing director Ben Pfisterer, is eyeing an international expansion and has plans to become an APRA-regulated bank. "We first started during Covid, and we thought we couldn't have timed it better in terms of being a great product for new businesses coming on," Pfisterer says. "But actually our thesis was a bit wrong. More than 80 per cent of businesses are actually switching over to us, and it shows that the products out there just aren't meeting the demand by any stretch."
Brodie and Drew Haupt - CO-FOUNDERS, WLTH It describes itself as a "non-bank", and Brisbane-based WLTH's aim is to instead work with owners of smalland medium-sized businesses to solve cash-flow issues.
WLTH's product suite includes card-linked credit facilities, invoice-secured buy now, pay later options for businesses, loyalty points, and a high-security business payments platform. Borrowers can apply through WLTH's Lending Loop platform, which uses a speedy five-step digital application process. WLTH, now busy expanding overseas, is not only helping small businesses, it's also helping to clean up Australia's coastline as part of its environmental initiatives. Its partnership with US-based organisation Parley sees 50 square metres of beach and coastline cleaned of plastic for every loan settled.
Stefan Von Imhof and Wyatt Cavalier - CO-FOUNDERS, ALTS Investors keen on owning the equivalent of a sip of ultra-rare whisky, the rights to a few seconds of a Beatles song or part of a signed Michael Jordan sneaker can do so with Alts 1 - the brainchild of the Melbourne-based Stefan Von Imhof, who says he and co-founder Wyatt Cavalier are targeting a 40 per cent return on investment. Alts began life as an online newsletter for people interested in alternative investments. "This isn't your grandpa's investment fund," says Von Imhof.
"This fund is going to put us on the map. It's incredibly unique. This is very modern. We've been doing it unofficially for a year and a half now and our returns are currently at 82 per cent."
Dan Silver and Matt Leibowitz - CO-FOUNDERS, STAKE This Sydney-based digital brokerage startup caters specifically for the next generation of Australian retail investors, many of whom remain locked out of the nation's property market. Stake, founded in 2017, was the first Australian company to offer commission-free trading in US stocks, and it now has a global customer base of more than 500,000 people and $2 billion in funds under administration. "The growth in our customer numbers and asset base continue to outpace last year and we're blown away, given it has been a much tougher macro environment," says co-founder Matt Leibowitz.
Alex Khor, Adrian Petersen and Jessy Wu - CO-FOUNDERS AND HEAD OF COMMUNITY, AFTERWORK VENTURES What began in 2017 as five men angel-investing in companies after work has become a fully fledged venture capital fund with more than 100 operators in its community, including senior staff from Canva, Linktree and Eucalyptus. AfterWork Ventures, a community-powered VC fund making early-stage investments in Australian and New Zealand-based startups, has made at least 30 investments, including Lyka, Swing Vision and Own Home. While co-founders Adrian Petersen, Alex Khor, Adam Smith and Mike Forster have been described as the new VC kids on the block, they prefer to shine the light on their community. "Our community is our edge," says Khor.
"In pooling our collective networks, talent, and knowledge, we've been able to punch above our weight in sourcing deals, selecting great opportunities, and supporting our portfolio companies post-investment."
Jono Herman, Daniel Brockwell and Marina Wu - CO-FOUNDERS, EARLYWORK The trio of Daniel Brockwell, Jono Herman and Marina Wu, all aged 24, used a digital platform and a sharehouse in Wollongong to co-found Earlywork, with the shared mission to foster meaningful future careers in tech, startups and impact. A $700,000 pre-seed funding round led by Square Peg Capital has bolstered Earlywork's efforts to help Gen Z find new job opportunities through an online hiring platform, a Slack channel and a newsletter subscription.
Jack Zhang, Max Li and Lucy Liu - CO-FOUNDERS, AIRWALLEX Airwallex was started in Melbourne by five university student friends in 2015 and went on to become the fastest Australian startup to ever reach a billion-dollar valuation. The fintech's platform revolutionises how businesses operate internationally by enabling quick cross-border transactions. CEO and co-founder Jack Zhang has set his company a milestone target of reaching $US1 billion of revenue in 2025. "We started the business by solving one issue - cross-border payments for businesses - but we want to become a onestop shop with bank accounts, cards and, potentially in the future, cash management and lending," Zhang says.
"We've really evolved to becoming a modern financial services cloud for businesses who want to grow both domestically and internationally."
Matt Allen, Jodie Imam and Aprill Allen - CO-FOUNDERS, TRACTOR VENTURES Melbourne's Tractor Ventures offers startups an alternative to traditional venture capital, helping those who either don't or don't want to attract VC funding. It is described as Victoria's first dedicated revenue-based fund, giving the businesses it invests in the choice to either run profitably, to raise a VC round, or to exit early and cement their personal wealth. "We're solving a problem that has been brewing for quite a while," says co-founder Matt Allen. "With venture capital everybody knows everybody, but there are a bunch of great tech founders who are building great companies who either can't, shouldn't or don't want to take venture capital. And that's a growing cohort, people who just aren't interested in venture capital funding." Tractor has not only provided crucial funding to tech companies, it's also building a fast-growing community of like-minded entrepreneurs.
FOOD Dany Milham - FOUNDER AND CEO, MILKRUN He co-founded the sustainable furniture disruptor Koala in 2015, stepping away from the company in 2020. Now serial entrepreneur Dany Milham has launched MILKRUN, a grocery delivery service with a social conscience. An $11 million seed round from backers included Atlassian co-founders Mike CannonBrookes and Scott Farquhar and the 2021 startup recently raised a further $75 million, with rapid expansion on Milham's mind. And although fastgrocery companies have proved themselves to be money-burners elsewhere, Milham has reported major interest from international investors and is confident that MILKRUN's locally sourced groceries, delivered by e-bikes to limit the environmental impact, will prove to be an enduring, more sustainable and attractive solution for consumers.
Elle Curran and Josh Abulafia - CO-FOUNDERS AND CEOS, CHEFPREP Sydney-based food marketplace startup ChefPrep is on its way to building the "Amazon for food". It aims to double its staff numbers by the end of the year, as restaurants look to wean off the likes of Uber Eats while maintaining stable delivery revenue streams.
Co-founders and co-CEOs Joshua Abulafia and Elle Curran started their company during the pandemic in a bid to help Sydney restaurants weather Covid and deliver frozen at-home meals amid widespread closures and lockdowns. ChefPrep has now raised $3 million in a seed funding round led by Artesian Ventures and Canva backers Global Founders Capital, off the back of the double-digit growth it has posted every month since it was launched.
Michael Fox, Jim Fuller and Chris McLoghlin - CO-FOUNDERS, FABLE Michael Fox is the co-founder and chief executive of shiitake mushroom-based meat alternative Fable, which is helping to lead the charge by startups doing their bit to help drag Australia's economy towards net-zero.
Fable most recently raised $6.5 million in a funding round led by Blackbird in a bid to launch its meat-free products in the United States. "There are some big changes being driven by startups," Fox says. "A lot of the disruption and improvements in the climate-change space have been by tech startups."
Josh Goulburn and Paul Tory - CO-FOUNDERS, FOODBOMB Hospitality wholesale ordering platform Foodbomb has racked up more than 3000 clients, helping them get back on their feet after the pandemic's devastating impact on the industry. The startup also recently unveiled a buy now, pay later solution - BombPay - which helps restaurants and cafes manage supplier payments by offering users 21 days of credit without additional cost. Foodbomb launched in 2017 and now operates across New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland, offering 19 categories of product from more than 100 suppliers.
Thomas King and Jane Sydenham-Clarke - FOUNDER AND CEO, FOOD FRONTIER At the age of 13, Thomas King was campaigning to save the orangutan. As he entered adulthood, he lost none of that impulse towards activism. In 2017, the social entrepreneur founded independent think tank Food Frontier, where he is now executive chairman.
Food Frontier is a key educator in the "future foods" space, delivering advice and research to businesses and the government. As the global market for plantbased foods and alternative proteins booms, King wants to ensure Australia, and the country's farmers, don't miss out on significant business opportunities.
And with high meat consumption linked to negative outcomes for climate, the innovation will have a positive impact on the planet along the way. "We need new options that give people their favourite foods with fewer adverse impacts," says King. "But you can't just tell people not to do things. It's about investing in and championing viable alternatives."
Ronni Kahn AO - CEO AND FOUNDER, OZHARVEST OzHarvest has grown into Australia's leading food rescue organisation, with hundreds of staff, thousands of volunteers, and international equivalents popping up all over the globe since its creation in 2004 by social entrepreneur Ronni Kahn. OzHarvest has a stated goal of halving food waste by 2030 and Kahn says that food produced but not eaten is responsible for between 8 and 10 per cent of global greenhouse gases. "Every time food goes to landfill, it's part of the climate crisis," she says. Kahn, whose journey is the subject of the documentary feature Food Fighter, has fundamentally disrupted Australia's food-waste landscape while simultaneously nourishing those in need, and is constantly on the lookout for additional solutions, partnerships and opportunities to educate. New venture Refettorio OzHarvest, opening in September, is a social impact-focused restaurant created in collaboration with chef Massimo Bottura's Food for Soul, and will offer a dignified dining experience for the vulnerable.
Kim Teo, Kerry Osborn, Adrian Osman and Andrei Miulescu - CO-FOUNDERS, MR YUM The pandemic was the era of the pivot and no company epitomises this better than Mr Yum. The hospitality startup, co-founded by Kim Teo, Kerry Osborn, Adrian Osman and Andrei Miulescu, began delivering a QR code that allowed diners to order meals from their phones at the cafe or restaurant table. When the pandemic hit and hospitality venues closed overnight, Mr Yum - which relied solely on in-venue dining - launched an online delivery and pickup service for its customers in days, scrapping the significant commission fee taken by other delivery giants. It was a move that ensured the company's survival, and when diners finally returned to venues, use of a QR code was part of everyday life. The startup has since expanded into overseas markets and raised $100 million in funding, with backers including AirTree, TEN13 and the band Rufus Du Sol. More than 17 million people have used Mr Yum in the past year. Next, CEO Kim Teo has her sights set on building the "Shopify for restaurants".
IMPACT Mike Smith - FOUNDER, ZERO CO The beauty industry is a significant contributor to Australia's plastic problem, according to Zero Co founder Mike Smith, who has launched what he says is the world's first refillable and single-use, plastic-free body and homecare products. Zero Co removed the equivalent of more than 800,000 water bottles worth of rubbish from oceans and beaches in the past year alone via its circular model, which uses "forever" bottles made from ocean, beach and landfill waste and refillable pouches of recycled plastic. The startup has raised $11 million from crowdfunding and venture capital, and now offers 14 personal care and home cleaning products across its subscription-based range.
Tim Washington, Marty Andrews and Mark Wells - CO-FOUNDERS, CHARGEFOX In 2018, Marty Andrews, Mark Wells and Tim Washington set out on a mission to help create a cleaner future. Their company, Chargefox, is now the largest electric vehicle charging network in Australia, with 1000 public chargers placed around the country. All chargers are powered by 100 per cent renewable energy and the Chargefox app allows users to locate charging stations easily. The company now has partnerships with multiple car manufacturers, including Audi, MercedesBenz and Jaguar, so that more Australians can consider switching to electric vehicles. Today, someone plugs into the Chargefox network every 90 seconds.
Natalie Kyriacou OAM - FOUNDER, MY GREEN WORLD The climate crisis is the defining issue of our children's lifetime, and since 2013 Natalie Kyriacou has been on a mission to educate this generation about how to take positive action. The entrepreneur and environmentalist founded My Green World, a social enterprise offering youth education programs that increase children's engagement with global wildlife and environmental conservation efforts. Kyriacou believes that increasing children's involvement will embolden them to effect change . "Our programs seek to empower young people and inspire curiosity, worldwide," says the founder and PwC management consultant. For her work in the environmental space, Kyriacou has received the Medal of the Order of Australia, among other awards.
Andrew Turton and Pete Ceglinski - CO-FOUNDERS, SEABIN PROJECT Seabin Project founders Andrew Turton and Pete Ceglinski were treated to first-hand experience of plastic pollution while travelling the world as surfers and boatbuilders. The pair's ultimate goal is to "have pollution-free oceans for our future generations". To get there, their company is building rubbish bins in the water - known as seabins - that collect trash, oil, fuel and detergents. Seabin Project now has 1200 seabin units in more than 50 countries, with those bins capturing more than 16 million kilograms of rubbish that would have otherwise polluted our seas and oceans.
Julia Reisser and Michael Kingsbury - CO-FOUNDERS, ULUU This Western Australian cleantech makes a plastics replacement from seaweed. The startup, co-founded by oceanographer Dr Julia Reisser and lawyer Michael Kingsbury, has developed a biodegradable polymer that sequesters carbon and can replace fossil fuels in many applications, including furniture and packaging. It received seed funding from CSIRO's Main Sequence, The Eights and Alberts Impact Ventures in its bid to bring its trial products to the market.
Veena Sahajwalla - INVENTOR; SCIENTIA PROFESSOR, UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH WALES; NSW AUSTRALIAN OF THE YEAR.
Professor Veena Sahajwalla is an expert in the field of recycling science, the founding director of the Centre for Sustainable Materials Research & Technology at UNSW (SM@RT), and an Australian Research Council Laureate Fellow. She also leads the ARC Industrial Transformation Research Hub, a national research centre for green manufacturing. As part of her work at SM@RT, Professor Sahajwalla is spearheading work on future green materials, products and resources made from waste. She was recently named NSW Australian of the Year, and her most notable invention - polymer injection technology - has diverted millions of old tyres from landfill globally.
Priyanka Ashraf - FOUNDER, THE CREATIVE CO-OPERATIVE It was the 2020 murder of George Floyd in the US that steeled the resolve of ex-lawyer Priyanka Ashraf to take active steps towards tackling systemic racism in this country. The result is the Creative Co-Operative, a creative consultancy that provides branding, marketing and digital services while simultaneously operating as a pioneering social enterprise, set up to help migrant women of colour find work opportunities in professional industries. Each time The Creative Co-Operative takes on a project, it creates new paid worl opportunities for migrant women of colour.
The agency has created nearly 50 of these professional positions since its launch last year. Ashraf's Melbourne-based startup also offers mentoring and skills training, with its mission to build the next generation of intersectional entrepreneurs.
Simon Griffiths - CO-FOUNDER, WHO GIVES A CRAP In 2012, Who Gives A Crap co-founders Simon Griffiths, Jehan Ratnatunga and Danny Alexander decided to sell recycled and forest-friendly toilet paper direct to consumers, donating 50 per cent of the company profits to helping build toilets in the developing world. The social enterprise now sells toilet paper, paper towels and tissues in more than 40 countries, and has donated more than $10 million to its charity partners along the way. The company recently secured $41.5 million in its first funding round, with investors including Atlassian founder Mike Cannon-Brookes, and Adore Beauty co-founders Kate Morris and James Height. CEO Griffiths says achieving maximum social impact has been the driver of every move made by Who Gives A Crap and the decision to take on its first external investment was made with precisely the same goal.
MANUFACTURING Cameron Ferris, Bob Groneman, Aidan O'Mahony and Julio Ribeiro - INVENTIA LIFE SCIENCE Sydney-based Inventia Life Science is a hi-tech startup that builds printers and bio-inks that together allow human cells to be printed in three-dimensional structures. The results are used to help researchers create human tissue for research and therapy purposes.
"The biomedical applications for the use of [Inventia's] Rastrum platform are very diverse," co-founder Julio Ribero says. "For example, it can be of enormous benefit to the pharmaceutical industry, by allowing new drugs to be tested in a 3D cellular environment and eliminated if necessary, long before they reach the stage of clinical trials. This can reduce by hundreds of millions of dollars the total cost of bringing a successful drug to market. Similarly, cancer researchers can now work at scale with cell models that mimic the human body almost exactly and produce research results that are more accurate and predictive than before."
Tim Vale and Thomas George - CO-FOUNDERS, TELEMATTICA Overhead wiring condition monitoring company Telemattica works with rail networks, pinpointing defects and enabling railways to operate more safely and efficiently as a result. Network data collected via sensors is collated and processed to provide accurate and real-time feedback on overhead wiring, dispensing with the need for manual inspections. Telemattica's Pantograph Collision Detection System (PCDS) is a specialised technology that allows rail operators worldwide to reduce expenditure, improve safety, provide better services and potentially avoid disruption.
Tom Hussey and Brian Conolly - CO-FOUNDERS, XEFCO This Sydney-based startup has been creating innovative textile and coating technologies for a more sustainable future since 2018. Xefco initially worked with leading global fashion and outdoor-apparel companies but successfully pivoted during the pandemic to develop antimicrobial treatments. Its most notable invention is MetalliX, described as the world's first thin-film antiviral copper treatment for textiles.
Pat Boland - CO-FOUNDER, ANCA ANCA, one of the oldest innovators on The List, was established more than 40 years ago by Pat McCluskey and Pat Boland. In 1974, the pair purchased a mini computer for $4000 and aimed to replace the hardwired controls used at the time with a standard computer, thus enabling superior flexibility and an entirely new way of operating grinding machines.
Today ANCA has more than 1000 employees and is a world-leading manufacturer of CNC grinding machines, motion controls and sheet metal solutions, exporting 99 per cent of its products from its Melbourne headquarters.
MEDICINE AND HEALTHCARE Joshua Ismin - CEO AND CO-FOUNDER, PSYLO Psylo is a Sydney-based preclinical biotech firm with ambitious plans to revolutionise the treatment of mental illness, using naturally occurring psychedelic drugs as the starting point. Following a global trend of increased investment in mental illness by biotech firms in North America and Europe, Psylo announced it had raised a $1.1 million pre-seed round in October last year. The funding was led by Chris Hitchen's global micro-VC fund Possible Ventures along with a number of prominent angel investors, including renowned tech investor and philanthropist Daniel Petre, co-founder of AirTree.
Peter Scutt and Tony Charara - CO-FOUNDERS, MABLE Mable was created to solve a very personal problem for its founder and chief executive, Peter Scutt. Scutt's parents, then aged in their 80s and 90s and struggling with dementia, wanted to stay in their own home but a rotating cast of carers made things much harder than they needed to be. Enter Mable, an online platform for connecting users in the special needs and aged-care sectors with care providers. The startup launched in 2014 and is headquartered in Sydney, now employing hundreds of people nationally who work with more than 11,000 independent support providers.
Kristy Chong - CEO AND FOUNDER, MODIBODI It was during her own uncomfortable experience while training for a marathon that former public relations executive Kristy Chong first came up with the idea for Modibodi. Perplexed as to why there weren't better leak-proof underwear options available, particularly given the advancements in technology, Chong decided to create the sustainable solution herself. In Modibodi, she has built not only a highly successful and innovative business but is helping to change the narrative around incontinence, menstruation and body leaks. The brand's market-leading hi-tech underwear has completely disrupted the disposable hygiene market, and now also offers products for men, teenagers and postpartum mothers.
Tim Doyle, Benny Kleist, Alexey Mitko and Charlie Gearside - CO-FOUNDERS, EUCALYPTUS Digital health startup Eucalyptus, flush with funding from the likes of Blackbird, AirTree, OneVentures, Athletic Ventures and Silicon Valley VC Bond Capital, is now readying itself for overseas expansion. The business, launched in 2019, helps deliver what its cofounders call "Telehealth 2.0" via its five specialist platforms - Pilot for men's health; fertility specialist Kin; the sexual health-focused Normal; teledermatology brand Software; and menopause category Juniper. The aim is to provide healthcare that is more accessible and innovative.
Nicole Liu - FOUNDER, KIN FERTILITY Helping women take control of their entire fertility journey is the motivation for Kin Fertility, whose online offerings range from contraceptive pills delivered to your door, to video consultations with local doctors, pre-conception advice and postpartum essentials. The startup was founded by former investment banker Nicole Liu, motivated by her own experience of a confusing and isolating misdiagnosis of Polycystic Ovary Syndrome. Kin recently kicked off a #WeNeedMoreLeave campaign that has seen more than 50 companies offer additional leave and support for employees who experience a miscarriage.
Silvia Pfeiffer - CEO AND CO-FOUNDER, COVIU Coviu is a spinout of CSIRO's Data61 data and digital specialist arm and offers video-consultation software to healthcare businesses. It has grown to become Australia's largest telethealh platform, experiencing its breakout period amid the pandemic, when "seeing the doctor" took on a whole new format. Coviu now hosts more than 300,000 private video consultations on its platform every month and is planning an international expansion following its recent successful capital raise.
Dean Freestone, Mark Cook and George Kenley - CO-FOUNDERS, SEER Seer has capitalised on bumper interest in medtech and bioengineering to post impressive growth numbers every year since its founding in 2017. It has shaken up the local healthcare sector through its use of AI and clinical wearables for at-home monitoring. "Seer has changed the way people with epilepsy are diagnosed around Australia, all from our home base in Melbourne," says co-founder Dean Freestone. "Empowering people to take greater control of their health and find the answers they need remains our highest priority."
Kyle Turner - CEO AND FOUNDER, PEARLII Kyle Turner's experience of growing up in Aboriginal community housing with limited access to quality dental and healthcare motivated the creation of Pearlii.
The startup's AI-powered app offers free check-ups and education through a smartphone app. Half of Pearlii's profits are donated to the Pearlii Foundation, which is building a fleet of dental trucks providing free dental care to the homeless, First Nation and refugee groups.
"I don't want any child growing up with bad teeth when it is so easily prevented," Turner says.
Adam Jahnke and Geoff Ayre - CO-FOUNDERS, UMPS HEALTH Melbourne startup Umps has built simple, nonintrusive hardware that supports older Australians to remain independent for longer. With the number of Australians aged over 65 expected to increase to more than 5.18 million people by 2027, Umps is well positioned to help provide technology-enabled solutions nationwide - and globally - with its smarthome platform that is 4G and 5G compatible, certified and cloud-connected. Its smart plugs learn a user's standard behaviour over a week, subsequently alerting relevant parties of any routine changes that could suggest an illness or accident.
QUANTUM Vikram Sharma - FOUNDER AND CEO, QUINTESSENCELABS QuintessenceLabs has had a super-charged 2022, raising a $25 million funding round from Main Sequence Ventures and Telus Ventures, along with fresh capital from Chevron Technology Ventures. The Canberra-based company is focusing on delivering advanced quantum-enhanced cybersecurity solutions to large enterprise customers globally. "Safeguarding data - our most valuable resource - has never been more critical," founder and CEO Vikram Sharma says.
Andrew Horsley and Marcus Doherty - CO-FOUNDERS, QUANTUM BRILLIANCE Quantum Brilliance is now a world leader in making quantum computing accelerators out of synthetic diamonds. The Australian-German company, founded in 2019, this year helped establish the research hub for diamond quantum materials, a joint effort with RMIT University and La Trobe University. The startup's systems allow quantum computers to operate at room temperature and on smaller hardware scales, meaning more real-world applications. The company uses impurities within the diamonds to generate qubits, the standard bits within a quantum computer.
Michael Biercuk - CEO AND FOUNDER, Q-CTRL Quantum technology promises to be one of the most transformational innovations of this century, and Q-CTRL is right at the centre of it. The Sydney-based startup provides solutions for entrepreneurs and technologists working on quantum projects by addressing the field's historic issues with noise and hardware error. It has already raised millions of dollars in funding and has helped put Australia on the quantum map globally. "Quantum control is a true enabler for quantum technology, allowing researchers and technologists to do more with their hardware," says founder and CEO Professor Michael Biercuk. "Q-CTRL provides solutions to our customers that help them take advantage of everything quantum physics has to offer."
RETAIL Andy Miller, Ben Holdstock, Peter Brennan and Jordy Smith - CO-FOUNDERS, HEAPS NORMAL Strategist Andy Miller, brewer Ben Holdstock, designer Pete Brennan and pro surfer Jordy Smith are united in their company's mission to normalise mindful drinking.
And Heaps Normal is already changing Australia's drinking culture by creating non-alcoholic beers that appeal to the masses. Since launching in 2020, the company's award-winning Quiet XPA has found favour in the booze-conscious community, and made its way into thousands of bars, restaurants, cafes and bottle shops around the country. Heaps Normal garners equal enthusiasm from investors, receiving an initial $1.3 million from angel investors in 2020, and a further $8.5 million in its Series A round in 2021. The company recently launched its second beer and has plans to open a brewery in Sydney's inner-west early next year.
Rachael Akhidenor - FOUNDER, SELF CARE ORIGINALS Self Care Originals was initially started by Akhidenor in 2018 as a way to promote the concept of self-care to her peers. It is now offering a new suite of simple but effective tools created in collaboration with psychologists to enable a deeper, more meaningful version of self-care. No juice cleanses, jade eggs or flimsy fads here: Self Care Originals' Journal, Big Talk card game and Only Human prompt cards are designed as functional tools to establish greater self-awareness, self-knowledge and self-compassion.
Mitch Taylor - CO-FOUNDER, KOALA Irreverent marketing and exceptional customer service has earned direct-to-consumer furniture retailer Koala a loyal following since its launch in 2015. Friends Mitch Taylor and Dany Milham (who has since left to found grocery disruptor MILKRUN) started the company to sell mattresses without a middleman, cutting long waiting periods and inflated costs along the way. The startup launched on a platform of 120-night trials, quick delivery and easy returns, with initial backers including Australian cricketer Steve Smith. Koala has now expanded into the broader furniture market, while maintaining its reputation as a customer-centric and environmentally conscious business. It is now estimated to be worth $500 million.
Michael Frizell - FOUNDER AND CEO, PET CIRCLE The business of pet supplies is a burgeoning market that isn't going anywhere, and PetCircle continues to capitalise. Australia's largest online pet retailer was founded by Frizell in 2011 and a decade later it has received unicorn status. What began as an online store allowing customers to seamlessly order pet supplies for doorstep delivery has grown into an integrated pet-care platform that offers online vet consultations and advice.
"We are on a mission to reinvent the experience of pet ownership, by building an integrated platform that connects our customers to 24/7 vet advice and offers the largest and highest-quality range of pet products and services in Australia," says Frizell of the company's ambitious agenda. Next stop, the US market.
Audrey Khaing-Jones - CO-FOUNDER AND COO, GLAMCORNER Audrey Khaing-Jones's GlamCorner has become Australia's most well-known clothing rental platform, revolutionising the way women consume fashion. By reducing the amount of clothing purchased for one-off events and providing designer fashion for less, GlamCorner - co-founded by Khaing-Jones with her husband Dean Jones in 2012 - has established a true circular fashion model, renting out more than 1000 tonnes of clothing since its inception.
GlamCorner's founders recently used their company's 10th birthday to share company data as a way of helping other fashion companies reduce waste and improve their sustainability practices.
Justin Truong and Sandy Li - CO-FOUNDER, PUSHAS Pushas is an online sneaker store that handles every aspect of the resale process, from authentication to distribution. The company, which now has teams in Sydney and Los Angeles, was co-founded by sneakerloving Sydney couple Justin Truong and Sandy Li as a way of earning a return on their substantial investment in the sneaker subculture. It has now expanded into selling new sneakers and last year the company launched the Pushas Sneaker Fund, the world's first managed sneaker fund. The fund, which has already risen in value by more than 50 per cent, has garnered interest from angel investors that include the founder of Twitch, Justin Kan, Airtasker founder Tim Fung and Deliveroo CEO Ed McManus, with Pushas recently raising $1.2 million.
SPACE
Adam and James Gilmour - CO-FOUNDERS, GILMOUR SPACE TECHNOLOGIES What started off nearly a decade ago as a scrappy space startup has since grown to become Australia's largest space company. Gold Coast-based Gilmour Space Technologies launched Australia's first privately developed hybrid rocket and is now aiming to launch a satellite prototype in conjunction with the Australian Department of Defence by mid-2023.
Lloyd Jacob Lopez and Ashwin Chandran - CO-FOUNDERS, HEX20 Hex20 is a space technology company aiming to provide scalable mission-critical platforms for the defence and space industries. It is one of nine global space startups to gain entry to the 2021 Venture Catalyst Space cohort supported by the South Australian government's Space Innovation Fund, and is developing new technologies for future lunar and Mars missions. Hex20 is working on machine learning-based solutions to improve performance and make space missions more accessible.
Peter Toth, Gavin Conibeer and Babett Volgyesi - CO-FOUNDERS, EXTRATERRESTRIAL POWER Extraterrestrial Power ultimately wants to see energyintensive industries such as data centres shift off the Earth and into the solar system, thereby contributing to the greening of the planet. But central to such a vision is the availability of clean and sustainable power on the Moon. Extraterrestrial Power is busy delivering on its mission of producing mass-manufacturable, radiationtolerant silicon solar cells that are 10 times cheaper than current space solar cells, manufacturing them robotically in situ. "After supporting space and lunar missions with our advanced silicon solar cells, we are aiming to produce electricity on the Moon from locally sourced ingredients," say the co-founders.
Giles Kirby - FOUNDER, FIREFLY BIOTECH Tools that are quite literally out of this world are the domain of this Adelaide startup, which develops equipment and processes that allows biologists to study microgravity on earth. Firefly Biotech, led by director Giles Kirby, was founded in response to the lack of tools for research biologists who needed access to space environments for their work. It has since grown to become a leader in space healthcare tools. It is also part of University of South Australia's Innovation and Collaboration Centre's Venture Catalyst Space cohort.
SPORT AND MOBILITY Michael Johnson and Mina Nada - CO-FOUNDERS, ZOOMO Zoomo has tripled its workforce in the past 12 months, growing from two employees to 400. The startup, backed financially by the private venture capital firms of Atlassian co-founders Mike Cannon-Brookes and Scott Farquhar, provides e-bike delivery fleets to most of the major players in the food and grocery delivery segment across three continents, and in April hired Silicon Valley executives Jules Flynn (ex Lyft), Michelle Croker and Alan Wells (ex Uber) as it ramps up its plans for global growth. The company offers its e-bikes as part of a weekly subscription to gig workers, including servicing and support, and also offers fleet management software to enterprise customers.
Jon Gregory - CEO AND FOUNDER, VITRUVIAN This algorithm-driven adaptive weight device, named after the famous Leonardo da Vinci drawing, is the brainchild of Perth-based former trader turned sportstech entrepreneur Jon Gregory. The Vitruvian Trainer+ adaptive weight board offers a gym-like range of weights, minus the bulky racks. It costs almost $4000 and uses artificial intelligence to adapt workouts to individual users. It is supported by the Vitruvian app, which connects users to trainers, programs and comprehensive workout data. The product was released in November 2021 and sold out within three months.
Markus Deutsch - CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, FUSION SPORT More than 260 organisations and teams around the world now use Fusion Sport's Smartabase, a technology-driven performance and analytics platform developed by sports scientist Markus Deutsch and mathematician Douglas Moore. The Brisbane tech company, founded in 2003, is now considered a global leader in optimising human performance, with its international headquarters in Colorado and London. Fusion Sport works with the military, Olympic committees, the Australian Ballet, and national sporting codes such as the AFL, NRL, NFL and NBA, as well global sporting giants including the LA Lakers, Dallas Cowboys and Arsenal FC. When the pandemic hit, the tech company expanded its performance-tracking technology to include coronavirus risk management, an innovation that proved pivotal in helping codes such as the NBA continue playing. Deutsch says this was a "natural extension" of the business.
Will Lopes - CEO, CATAPULT SPORTS Catapult Sports is a sportstech company providing performance-tracking technology and data analytics to almost 3000 elite sporting teams from 39 different sports globally. It began as a partnership between the Australian Institute of Sport and the Cooperative Research Centres to help Australian athletes in the lead-up to the Sydney Olympics, then evolved into Catapult in 2006. Since then, its wearable technology has helped build and improve athletes' performance while monitoring and lowering their risk of injury. In 2020, when the pandemic cancelled most competition sports, CEO Will Lopes switched the company's offering into broader data analytics software. Catapult reached a positive cash flow of $9 million the same year. Lopes, who was previously Audible's chief revenue officer, believes that Catapult has the potential to become the "Salesforce of the sports performance technology world".
TECHNOLOGY Rob Hango-Zada and William On - CO-FOUNDERS, SHIPPIT Some of the most recognisable retail brands in Australia, such as Target, Cotton On, Sephora and Big W, now use Shippit's multi-carrier shipping technology for their deliveries. Shippit handles everything from shipping and delivery to order and post-purchase experiences, using AI to pick the best and most economical carrier for the job. Shippit has been responsible for millions of deliveries across Australia and New Zealand since its founding in 2014 and is now expanding into Southeast Asia, with 10 per cent of total bookings on the platform in Malaysia and Singapore.
Alex Birch and Luke Murray - CO-FOUNDERS, XY SENSE XY Sense is a tech startup helping businesses to see precisely how people are using their offices. The platform, brainchild of computer engineers Alex Birch and Luke Murray, combines physical smart sensors with AI-powered analytics software to offer employers and property teams real-time insights into their workplaces. Examples include when meeting rooms are being used and where employees are spending their time. Data is captured as coordinates only, protecting employees' privacy. In 2020, the Melbourne-based startup raised $5 million in seed funding, with backers including Blackbird Ventures. As businesses reimagine the workplace following the pandemic, there has never been a bigger need for simplified and transformative insights on how, when and where people work best.
Paul and Sonia Stovell - FOUNDER AND CFO, OCTOPUS DEPLOY Octopus Deploy began life like so many startups, as a side project for former investment banker turned founder Paul Stovell. The goal was to help developers streamline their app testing and development workflow and this has been realised, with the company now one of Australia's largest and fastest-growing tech startups.
Customers including Disney, NASA and Microsoft use Octopus Deploy's software to release new features faster and more frequently.
Anna Wright - FOUNDER AND CEO, BINDIMAPS It was her own retinal condition and experiences with eye surgery that led former accountant and business school lecturer Anna Wright to dwell on the possibility of improved accessibility for the vision impaired.
Wright used a SheStarts grant to found technology startup BindiMaps with Mladen Jovanovic in 2017, with the platform offering navigation in indoor spaces not serviced by traditional GPS. The BindiMaps app locates users inside complicated spaces such as universities, office buildings and shopping centres, using audio to describe the surroundings and calculating the best path for reaching their destination.
Didier Elzinga, Doug English, Jon Williams and Rod Hamilton - CO-FOUNDERS, CULTURE AMP It is undeniably now one of the world's leading employee experience platforms, with more than 5000 clients who serve 25 million employees across the globe. Melbourne-based Culture Amp is led by CEO Didier Elzinga - former CEO at award-winning visual effects company Rising Sun Pictures - and its tools help measure and improve company culture. Culture Amp was most recently valued at $2 billion, raising $135 million in funding in July 2021 and experiencing record growth as attention turned to keeping employees happy, focused and engaged during the pandemic.
Rachael Greaves and Gavin McKay - CO-FOUNDERS, CASTLEPOINT SYSTEMS Castlepoint Systems' software uses AI technology to automatically discover, classify and control every document, email, chat message, database or webpage in an organisation's network. It registers every record in every system, and every file in every record, using natural language processing to extract all the meaningful topics and entities mentioned in every item, no matter the format. Founders Rachael Greaves and Gavin McKay built the software initially to help with their own consulting business. So successful was its application that they commercialised it in 2018.
"With growing data stores, increasing security risk, more diverse applications, and regulatory obligations and fines rising, organisations need a low-impact, high-coverage method of controlling data risk and value," says Greaves of Castlepoint, which is now eyeing off global expansion.
Joris Luijke and Jon Williams - CO-FOUNDERS, PYN Internal communications specialist Pyn is the creation of former Atlassian head of people Joris Luijke and Culture Amp co-founder Jon Williams, with its focus on arguably the most important stakeholder in any business - its employees. The platform uses marketing techniques such as personalisation and automated messaging to help businesses communicate more effectively with their staff. The startup has raised funding from Silicon Valley VC stalwart Andreessen Horowitz, along with Atlassian co-founder Scott Farquhar and BambooHR co-founder Ryan Sanders.
THOUGHT LEADERSHIP Tom Frazer, Joe Frazer and Will Harms - HALF DOME Melbourne-based media agency Half Dome has notched up impressive growth in the past four years and is now turning its attention to a US expansion. Half Dome's co-founding team of brothers Tom and Joe Frazer, along with Will Harms, give their staff total flexibility over when and where they work - notable amid record churn in media-agency land. Half Dome's decision to take a startup mindset to the media landscape, combined with a focus on its people - and technology - has led the agency to outpace its competitors and work with clients that include Maurice Blackburn, The Good Guys and Savers.
Jaddan Comerford - CO-FOUNDER, SIDE STAGE VENTURES Unified Music Group chief executive Jaddan Comerford was already one of the Australian music industry's most influential voices. But this year he entered the world of venture capital and tech investing through an investment syndicate, Side Stage Ventures, alongside co-founders Emily Casey, Ben Grabiner, Matt Allen, Kieran Rivett, and Alex and Anthony Zaccaria. Side Stage has already backed the likes of zero-alcohol beer brand Heaps Normal and mobile menu and ordering powerhouse Mr Yum, and has big ambitions for the year to come. "We believe that creativity is just as important as technology in creating a brighter future," Comerford says.
Yasmin Poole - YOUTH ADVOCATE Plan International's current national ambassador has spent her short but impressive career to date as an advocate for girls' rights to be recognised across the globe. Poole, a board director of OzHarvest and national feminist organisation YWCA, has also served as chair of the Victorian government's youth congress, where she represented more than one million young Australians. She was named The Martin Luther King Jr Center's 2021 Youth Influencer of the Year and has won plaudits for her authentic style of leadership.
Erin Watson - PUBLIC AFFAIRS AND POLICY EXPERT Erin Watson is an internationally renowned public policy expert who this month launches what she says will be Australia's most innovative government relations and public policy firm, Baker and York.
Watson's public profile rose when she won the Australian government's Policy Hack competition in 2016. She is now highly experienced in the areas of public affairs and research, working at all levels of government and with all parties. Watson is well placed to navigate the growing focus on big tech regulation and how companies can best navigate an increasingly complex regulatory environment.
Victor Dominello - NEW SOUTH WALES CUSTOMER SERVICE AND DIGITAL GOVERNMENT MINISTER Digital driving licences, the voucher system, venue QR codes put in place during the pandemic lockdowns.
Customer Service and Digital Government Minister Victor Dominello has done a stellar job of innovating from within the constraints of government, and Service NSW - which he oversees - has arguably made life easier for residents and businesses all over the state during the past two years in particular. Some 85 per cent of state government transactions are now available online, and a number of services launched during the pandemic, including Dine & Discover vouchers, were exclusively digital products.
TRAVEL Mihailo Bozic and Jordan Saddik - CO-FOUNDERS, ENVITED When it suddenly dawned on Perth university students Mihailo Bozic and Jordan Saddik that their friends were missing out on party invites because they weren't on Facebook, the duo set out to find a solution - founding a startup in the process. Envited is an events social media platform that allows users to create, host and share events with their friends across all social media platforms. Bozic, a Startmate fellow, describes Envited as "Facebook events without Facebook". Late last year the co-founders raised a $350,000 pre-seed round of funding while they were still at university and the platform launched earlier this year.
Pete McKeon - CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, VACAAY Just like a dating app, Vacaay lets you swipe through thousands of travel locations and itineraries across the world from Albania to Zambia. Despite launching during the pandemic, Vacaay boasted an impressive 100,000 users in its first month. Now with travel back on the menu, the platform is inspiring future travellers to plan their next holiday while collecting real-time data-backed insights into current and evolving consumer travel patterns.
Thomas Lo and Nicole Tj - CO-FOUNDERS, TRAVIS If Pinterest and Google had a baby, it would be Travis, a collaborative real-time visual planner that allows users to curate, plan and book their next holiday. The Melbourne-based travel startup was co-founded by couple Nicole Tj and Thomas Lo in 2020, after Tj saw the need for an app that consolidated the multiple Instagram screenshots, pinned maps and Google tabs she used while planning a five-week US trip years earlier. With Millennials and Gen Zs relying on socialmedia recommendations to dictate their travels, Travis serves the new mode of holiday planning. And with borders open again, the appetite for a social commerce platform that simplifies travel has never been bigger.
Jennifer Fein and Bron Thulke - CO-FOUNDERS, YOULI YouLi is a startup focused on supporting those people who create the memorable experiences we seek from travelling. The platform provides affordable software that allows group adventure businesses to streamline repetitive booking tasks and manage group travel - crucial as the beleaguered industry recovers from a stagnant two years. The seeds of YouLi were sown in 2016 when co-founder Jennifer Fein was planning her own destination wedding in Jordan and, frustrated by the complexity, recognised a need for a platform that simplified the process. YouLi's first platform was built and tested on Fein's own wedding guests, and since then the tech solution has created more than 10,000 unique itineraries and processed more than $20 million in payments. .
Chris and Cam Grant - CO-FOUNDERS, UNYOKED In a world that has become increasingly overrun by notifications, news and noise, Unyoked is providing solace and solitude to travellers across Australia. It was founded by twin brothers Cam and Chris Grant, and provides off-the-grid cabins in secluded areas that are still within manageable proximity of major centres.
The startup, whose mission is to kickstart guests' "nature habit", is now in almost 50 pristine locations across Australia's east coast and has just launched its first site in New Zealand..
COMMUNITY, WEB3 AND CRYPTO Shane and Tim Brunette - CO-FOUNDERS, CRYPTO TAX CALCULATOR Crypto Tax Calculator supports more than 300 crypto exchanges and performs calculations with a high degree of accuracy, allowing users to calculate their crypto taxes in minutes. The company was co-founded by brothers Shane and Tim Brunett, and came into being as a result of Shane struggling with his own crypto tax nightmare. The startup raised its first seed funding in March 2022, in a round led by AirTree Ventures, alongside Coinbase Ventures and 20VC. It is now planning on further US expansion.
Alex and Anthony Zaccaria and Nick Humphreys - CO-FOUNDERS, LINKTREE Linktree, a pioneer of the link-in-bio category, was created as a side hustle born out of the joint frustrations of brothers Alex and Anthony Zaccaria and their business partner Nick Humphreys. The trio was managing social-media accounts for clients of their music and entertainment digital agency, Bolster, and found themselves constantly updating bio links. The solution was Linktree, a customisable URL that can be added to any social media platform and enables users to share multiple links. Linktree is now used by more than 25 million creators, artists, influencers and brands around the world, with offices in Melbourne, Sydney and Los Angeles. This year the startup hit unicorn status, with a $150 million raise giving it a valuation of $1.85 billion.
Patricia Haueiss - METAVERSE AND BLOCKCHAIN CONSULTANT As one of Australia's leading metaverse, NFT, DAO and Web3 consultants, Haueiss has nearly a decade worth of experience across the blockchain and metaverse ecosystems, making her one of the earliest adopters of the nascent technologies. NFTs were a $US40 billion market in 2021, growing 1000 per cent quarter-on-quarter, and Sydney-based Haueiss works closely with businesses to help them better understand the fast-evolving space and capitalise on the vast array of opportunities it presents.
James and Robbie Ferguson - CO-FOUNDERS, IMMUTABLE Immutable's aim is to become the global back-end for the trade in NFTs. It was founded by Sydney brothers James and Robbie Ferguson in 2018 and is ramping up a hiring spree, intending this year to double its headcount from 170 to 400. Top-tier tech talent is flooding in to Web3 gaming this year, Robbie Ferguson says, and the company is now focused on building a gaming studio and making key engineering and partnerships hires. It most recently scored a $28.9 million Series C funding round in March this year that valued the company at $3.6 billion.
Fred Schebesta, Frank Restuccia and Jeremy Cabral - CO-FOUNDERS, FINDER More than 24 million decisions have been made using Finder since it launched in 2006. The leading comparison website was founded by Fred Schebesta and Frank Restuccia, who were later joined by cofounder Jeremy Cabral, with a desire to help Australians make important life decisions. After launching into overseas markets, the platform now sees more than 10 million visits a month and has more than 400 employees around the world. In 2020, the comparison site transformed into a fintech company as it launched the Finder App, which combines comparison with personal finance management, and Finder Earn, a crypto-based competitor to bank deposits. "We see ourselves as that bridge between the Web 2.0 and the Web 3.0 world. Bringing the everyday consumer on that journey," Schebesta says. In late 2021, the fintech company secured $30 million in funding from Future Now Capital and is now valued at $650 million.
Michael Batko and Lauren Capelin - CEO AND PRINCIPAL, STARTMATE It describes itself as the epicentre of startup ambition across Australia and New Zealand and the stats don't lie: Startup has invested in more than 170 startups with a collective portfolio value of more than $2 billion in the past decade. The company offers a series of accelerator programs for levelling up founders and startups, and it features a diverse array of experienced mentors and angel investors. Startmate is helping to propel our local innovation ecosystem forward in a very big way.
Emily Casey - FOUNDER, WHAT THE HEALTH Helping to make health innovation fun, accessible and connected is Emily Casey's M.O. The med-school dropout turned entrepreneur and investor has successfully scaled her healthtech newsletter What the Health to the point where it now has more than 2000 community members. At its core is the intention to shine a light on local health innovations whose stories would otherwise have gone untold. Casey has since become an angel investor and tech consultant in her own right and is a co-founder at Side Stage Ventures.
Jacqueline Garrett - CO-FOUNDER AND CEO, GGWP ACADEMY GGWP Academy, which describes itself as "your gaming career spawn point", is an e-learning and marketplace platform that assists countless gamers and content creators to build their careers and accompanying online presence. The platform was developed by founder Jacqueline Garrett after her nine-year-old son qualified for the World Pokemon Championships and needed help to grow his brand. It now provides online courses to assist users form communities, build their online profiles and increase engagement.
Joan Westenberg - FOUNDER, STUDIO SELF As the founder of boutique digital creative agency Studio Self, Westenberg has collaborated with venture capital firms, tech giants and small startups to help them tell their stories. Her recent work has focused on Web3, which she says will be the next generation of the internet. "No longer can algorithms make assumptions about what we want to see and share; we will decide for ourselves," Westenberg says. The creative director is also a prolific writer and now an angel investor as well.
CREDIT: WORDS; DAVID SWAN; EMILY BROOKS; EARTHA HEWETT
Word count: 10997
