MINING magnate Andrew “Twiggy’’ Forrest’s clean energy firm will be considered as the builder of the state’s $593m hydrogen power station, Premier Peter Malinauskas says.
Speaking after meeting with Dr Forrest for almost four hours in Perth on Sunday, Mr Malinauskas said the billionaire’s Fortescue Future Industries was a potential partner in the planned state-owned plant’s construction.
Mr Malinauskas toured FFI’s Perth manufacturing hub and green fleet headquarters, where a hydrogen-powered mine truck was last year developed within 130 days and hydrogen-fuelled locomotives and marine engines are being tested.
Mr Malinauskas became just the third person to drive the truck – a gigantic machine with a 240-tonne payload – after Dr Forrest and the test driver.
“Andrew Forrest, as a business person, understands this is where the future is going and is seeking to seize on first-mover advantage,” Mr Malinauskas said on Monday.
“With our state wanting to do the same, we want to work collaboratively with them.
“Andrew and Fortescue Future Industries are very aware of our policy regarding a hydrogen-production facility and power plant (planned for Whyalla).
“We see a great degree of collaboration to be had around hydrogen in South Australia and unlocking more investment in renewable technologies.” Specific FFI proposals were not discussed on Sunday but Mr Malinauskas said he had been disappointed, as opposition leader, when Queensland secured the firm’s hydrogen electrolyser manufacturing facility. Construction started in February.
Dr Forrest said Mr Malinauskas had “experienced the incredible power of zero-emission green hydrogen when he drove FFI’s huge haul truck, seeing with his own eyes, how a massive 6m-high mining truck can operate without using a polluting fuel like diesel”.
“The Premier has an impressive vision for SA,” he said.
“I am looking forward to working with him as he leads from the front to deliver on the government’s hydrogen jobs plan and turn the great state of SA into a green hydrogen superpower.” Dr Forrest argued the world’s largest future industries would be clean energy, including hydrogen, but this would not be determined by “a lottery of who has the oil, gas or coal” or “by freaks of nature”. “Key to making this happen will be policy settings that support large-scale renewable energy developments and the tens of thousands of jobs that come with them, as well as through rapid approvals to allow our projects to progress, in time, to make us successfully compete against other countries,” he said.
CREDIT: EXCLUSIVE PAUL STARICK
Word count: 408
