From residential real estate sales to major city-shaping developments, our state is on the move.
Today, The Courier-Mail reveals the top 60 operators, assessed by one key criteria: their ability to influence the decisions that matter in Queensland.
Theywere also ranked on how effectively they use this influence.
The Property Power List is one that only The Courier-Mail has the resources and courage to undertake.
POWER 100: Queensland’s most powerful people 100-51
SPORT: Queensland’s 65 most powerful sporting identities
BUSINESS:Queensland’s 60 most powerful business leaders
CELEBRITY: 65 most influential in arts and entertainment
MONDAY: The Education Power List
NEXT THURSDAY: Queensland’s Top 50 Most Powerful
Scroll to the bottom to read how we selected the list.
1. KYLIE RAMPA
Queensland Investment Corporation CEO
Kylie Rampa has only recently returned to Queensland to take up this role, but considering the impact QIC has in straddling the business, government and property sectors, it is an easy case to make that she is the most powerful person in Queensland property – even if she doesn’t realise it herself yet.
Rampa took the reins at the government-owned corporation in April, returning to Brisbane after 15 years in Sydney with Lendlease, where she was group head of investments and a member of the global leadership team and global investment committee.
Expect her influence to grow as she settles into this critical gig and consolidates her power through using the influence only QIC can deliver as the link between government and the private sector – and the property portfolio that QIC holds.
Her 25-year career includes 13 years at Macquarie, and stints at Gandel Group, AMP and Schroders. Rampa and her husband, telco Inabox Group chair David Rampa, own a waterfront home at Noosa Heads that they bought in 2017 for $5.5m.
2. SCOTT HUTCHINSON
Hutchinson Builders chairman
If there’s major construction under way in Queensland, you’ll see the Hutchinson name plastered across cranes and building sites. At the helm of this property juggernaut is Scott Hutchinson, steering the 1912-established family firm through some of the biggest growth in its history.
Now, as Australia’s largest privately owned building company, Hutchies, as it’s affectionately known, has built 7500-plus projects with a combined value of more than $35bn. A major employer, it has more than 1400 permanent staff and 10,000 subcontractors and suppliers.
Hutchinson’s network extends far and wide, not least of which is his band of brothers from his Brisbane Boys’ College days, including fellow property kingpin Don O’Rorke. Hutchinson is also a player in the live music space.
3. MAHA SINNATHAMBY
Springfield Land Corporation
In 1992, Maha Sinnathamby purchased a huge block of land in an area where he says “no other developer wanted to touch”. The sheer determination of this Malaysian immigrant to make something out of nothing saw the creation of one of the fastest growing areas in Queensland.
Springfield, near Ipswich, is home to more than 50,000 people and a vast community comprising business precincts, health facilities, schools and sporting venues – and its own railway station. Tennis champ Ash Barty is Springfield’s ambassador and is building her dream home in its golfing community of Brookwater. The Brisbane Lions is moving its training facility there, inclusive of a 10,000-seat stadium.
4. BRIAN WHITE
Ray White Group joint chairman
The patriarch of Australia’s biggest real estate group, Brian White flies under the radar but is quietly more influential than his more outspoken peers.
One phone call from White gets his entire team mobilised, and we’re talking some 3800 agents in Queensland alone.
As one industry insider said, his team “worships him”. What he says goes, and his networks extend beyond his agency.
White has deep connections right across the country, and people have made serious millions because of the business his family founded in Crows Nest near Toowoomba in 1902.
As the third generation leader of the company, he has seen the highs and lows of the property market. Showing his confidence in the current market, he decided to sell his Brisbane home of 46 years, with the Ascot mansion fetching $10m, before auction, in July.
White, the grandson of Ray White, joined the business in 1962 after completing an economics degree at the University of Queensland. He took over as managing director in 1976. His brother, Paul, also joined at that time and is now joint chairman.
5. DON O’RORKE
Consolidated Properties chairman and chief executive
The Consolidated Properties boss has been in the property and construction game for more than 40 years and has an enviable development portfolio valued at more than $2.3bn.
Don O’Rorke is behind some of Queensland’s most well-known projects, including Yeerongpilly Green, Spire Residences, Townsville’s Breakwater Quays, and Bluewater, a masterplanned community in Cairns.
He also oversees a range of office towers, social housing projects, retail investments and resorts – almost every major one being built in conjunction with the firm owned by his mate Scott Hutchinson.
A former state president of the Property Council of Australia, he also carries influence via non-executive directorships on finance advisory boards and is chair of the Brisbane Boys’ College school council.
6. MICHAEL RAVBAR
CFMEU state secretary
In a Labor-run state, being head of Queensland’s most powerful union gives Michael Ravbar enormous influence even though he has something of a love-hate relationship with the current regime.
Considered a law unto himself on construction sites, Ravbar has been slammed by a federal court judge for his Construction, Forestry, Mining and Energy Union having a “disgraceful” record of breaking industrial laws “unabashed”. Ravbar has come before the courts for breaking the Fair Work Act in regards to the Cross River Rail project and the upgrade of QPAC.
A director of super fund BUSSZ, he is an outspoken Labor national executive member. Not afraid to call a spade a shovel, he has publicly savaged Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk for failing to excise a “creeping cancer” of lobbyists from her government.
7. MICK DE BRENNI
Queensland Minister for Public Works and Procurement
Mick ‘roll up the sleeves and just get on with the job’ de Brenni is alleged to have rolled his sleeves up a little too far in his oversight of Queensland’s building watchdog the QBCC, facing allegations of ministerial interference.
As part of the state government’s economic recovery plan, de Brenni strengthened the Queensland government builder QBuild, announcing the return to trade-based apprenticeships under a program that is seeing an extra 300 trades-based staff, including 60 apprentices employed by the state building company.
A staunch member of Labor’s dominant Left faction, de Brenni is widely regarded by unionists in the building industry as the one who got away, having escaped scrutiny in Jim Varghese’s report into the QBCC.
8. DICK WILLIAMS
Queensland Building and Construction Commission chair
Being ALP Queensland state president from 2012 to 2016 and a former state secretary of the Electrical Trades Union puts Dick Williams in a strong seat of influence within the current regime.
The QBBC, the state’s third-largest employer and contributor to the economy, is the industry’s self-funded, independent regulator. But a scathing review by Jim Varghese released in June 2022 found it sorely lacking in key areas of transparency and impartial decision-making and recommended the size of the board be reduced.
Williams was hand-picked by Labor, after Premier Anna Bligh lost to the then LNP’s Campbell Newman in 2012, to lead it out of the ashes of its worst election defeat. His loyalty to the party ensures his employability and influence.
9. DAVID HARRISON
Charter Hall managing director, group CEO
Charter Hall is one of the biggest landlords in the Brisbane CBD and David Harrison is the man in charge.
Since joining in 2004, Harrison has overseen the company’s growth from $500m to $79.5bn of assets under management, the highest return of any listed real-estate company in Australia during this period.
Charter Hall is an integrated property group, specialising in accessing equity from investors and managing funds. Its investments are primarily in office, industrial, retail and social infrastructure.
One of its latest mega projects is 360 Queen Street, a premium-grade commercial tower at the centre of Brisbane’s Golden Triangle.
Developed in conjunction with Investa, it includes over 45,000sqm of office space across 33 levels and features innovative technology, wellness centre facilities and landscaped terraces.
10. DARREN STEINBERG
Dexus CEO
This ASX-listed company’s foothold in Queensland is massive, with Darren Steinberg regarded as a dynamic and forward-thinking leader.
Steinberg has more than 30 years’ experience in the property and funds management industry, and an extensive background in office, industrial and retail property investment and development.
Dexus, one of Australia’s largest office landlords, is developing the $2.5bn city-changing Waterfront Brisbane, with the reimagining of Eagle Street Pier, an iconic dining and office precinct much loved by locals. The project also includes two towers of 49 and 43 storeys, with a combined 120,000sqm of office space.
On the sale side in the past 12 months, Dexus has sold its Gold Tower and Blue Tower Complex for a combined figure of almost $680m as part of an unprecedented $1.75bn portfolio revamp.
Steinberg is a fellow of the Australian Institute of Company Directors, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors and the Australian Property Institute. He is also a life member and former national president of the Property Council of Australia.
11. SUSAN LLOYD-HURWITZ
Mirvac CEO and managing director
Susan Lloyd-Hurwitz runs one of Australia’s largest residential, commercial and retail developers, driving its performance since 2012.
Mirvac has fast-tracked the construction of the next $135m stage of Australia’s first racecourse fronting new community, Ascot Green, with work on the 14-storey Charlton House – in partnership with Eagle Farm Racecourse owner, Brisbane Racing Club – now underway. More than $70m worth of apartments have already been sold.
In the big end of town Mirvac this year delivered Suncorp’s new headquarters, the $850m Heritage Lanes at 80 Ann St in the CBD.
But it hasn’t been all smooth sailing, with the property giant coming under fire from small retailers hit by the closure of flood-ravaged Toombul Shopping Centre. Many say the rent cash payments offered are inadequate particularly considering the ASX-listed $9.5bn company’s financial strength.
Prior to joining Mirvac, Lloyd-Hurwitz held senior roles across big corporations including Macquarie Group and Lend Lease.
She is also the chair of the Green Building Council of Australia.
12. TIM FORRESTER
ARIA Property Group
Tim Forrester has made it his mission to transform South Brisbane. His re-imagining of Fish Lane – with its giant murals and street art, trendy restaurants and cafes, public town square and two train lines rumbling overhead – is just one creative solution to the challenges of a growing city.
Considered one of Australia’s best high-density developers, Forrester has the ear of government – even if he is yet to convince Deputy Premier Steven Miles to allow his iconic Urban Forest development to go ahead.
Forrester has masterminded four residential apartment towers close to Fish Lane, including Austin, Botanica, The Melbourne Residences, and The Standard. For three years in a row, Aria beat interstate rivals to win Best High Density Development in Australia at UDIA’s national awards.
He established Aria in 2003 with a group of school friends, including Michael Hurley, who remains with the company.
13. ANISSA LEVY
Queensland Building and Construction Commission CEO and commissioner
Anissa Levy has had her work cut out for her since being tasked with reforming the QBCC at the beginning of 2022.
The former chief executive of Water Infrastructure NSW was appointed at a critical time for the organisation which has faced allegations of dysfunction and poor processes. Amid worsening conditions in the sector, a growing number of construction firms are also failing, with major players such as Condev and Probuild going under in the past year.
Levy recently announced that 60 private sector projects worth almost $2bn would be covered by special trust accounts to protect subcontractors in case of further collapses.
Levy was reportedly sacked as manager of the NSW’s Environment, ­Energy and Science unit at the height of the 2019-20 bushfires over alleged frequent clashes with the environment minister.
14. BROOK MONAHAN
Mosaic Property Group
With more than $1b worth of projects being built or in the pipeline, Brook Monahan is at the forefront of the residential building boom gripping southeast Queensland.
Monahan heads the boutique residential development firm, Mosaic Property Group, which has delivered around 60 residential projects since 2014. He employs more than 125 people, working with more than 2000 consultants and subcontractors.
Hailing from the country, he is big on integrity, and as such, is well regarded and has strong relationships with key stakeholders across the state and is regularly called on to sit on panels at infrastructure or property forums.
15. BILL DELVES
South Bank Corporation CEO
Bill Delves was appointed by the Palaszczuk government in 2018, having held the title as interim leader since 2017 following the unexpected death of Jemina Dunn.
A business leader of more than 30 years, with experience in professional services organisations, and in accounting and consulting across public and private entities, Delves has the important role of overseeing the development of this major riverfront precinct.
With all eyes on Brisbane in the lead up to the 2032 Games, his vision is to make the popular parkland and cultural hub the best urban precinct in the world.
Prior to joining South Bank Corporation, Delves led large professional services teams locally and globally at both EY and KPMG.
16. MARK STOCKWELL
Stockwell managing director
Heading the family business started by his parents in 1952, Mark Stockwell is a mover and shaker with a knack for identifying opportunities in the retail and residential market.
His company also handles commercial and industrial projects and manages property funds.
With strong political connections, Stockwell is the inaugural chairman of Trade and Investment Queensland, the government’s foreign investment and export program.
A former Olympic swimmer, like his wife Tracey, he has served as president of the Queensland division of the Property Council of Australia and chairman of the Gold Coast 2018 Commonwealth Games Organising Committee.
17. PAUL MARTYN
Department of Energy and Public Works director-general
Paul Martyn took on the job in 2021 after previously leading Trade and Investment Queensland. With more than 25 years’ experience in economic policy and reform, he is leading the development of Queensland’s plan for energy transformation, led by a 50 per cent renewable energy target by 2030.
He is responsible for policy around the building and construction industry, and for improved government procurement, and oversees a department with more than 2000 staff that delivers major building projects across Queensland.
Martyn was awarded a Public Service Medal in this year’s Australia Day honours list for his leadership of the state’s Covid-19 Response and Recovery Taskforce during the pandemic.
18. CAL AND MICHAEL MALOUF
Calile Malouf Investments bosses
Few buildings have had as much of an impact on modern Brisbane as The Calile Hotel. The landmark development in Fortitude Valley has undoubtedly become one of the city’s most desirable destinations since its creation three years ago by the low-key brothers.
The hotel precinct’s trendy vibe, tropical modernist design and signature restaurant Hellenika, run by Simon Gloftis, have cemented it as a must for locals and visitors.
The reclusive Malouf family already had a significant footprint in the up-market Valley precinct, owning James Street Market and the retail shops next door to The Calile.
19. RAYNUHA SINNATHAMBY
Springfield City Group managing director
For the past 10 years Raynuha Sinnathamby has been responsible for the day-to-day operations of Australia’s largest masterplanned community, founded by her visionary father Maha Sinnathamby.
Starting her career as a property lawyer, she has become a vital player in the sector having had various roles with the Property Council including as Queensland president. While Greater Springfield has almost 50,000 residents, Sinnathamby is seeking to develop an employment hub by creating 50,000 jobs for the area.
The Brisbane Girls Grammar old girl also has big plans to build Australia’s first zero net energy city by 2038, embracing renewable energy, electric vehicles and delivering lower power bills.
Springfield will also open its $80m training facility for the Brisbane Lions AFL and AFLW side, with the site to be a permanent home for the women’s team.
20. HARRY TRIGUBOFF
Meriton founder and managing director
Dubbed “high-rise Harry”, the 89-year-old billionaire founder of Australia’s most prolific apartment developer remains actively involved in every one of the company’s projects.
Triguboff is also a powerful voice for the industry, recently pushing for government support to prop up the construction industry as it buckles under surging material costs and labour shortages.
Meriton’s next Gold Coast project will be twin super towers on a prominent beachfront site while plans for Iconica, a $600m venture on a $75 million site in Surfers Paradise, are underway. The firm is also behind the 76-storey Ocean, the largest tower on the glitter strip, taking the total number of projects Triguboff has brought to the Gold Coast to 21.
Meriton has etched its mark on the nation’s high-rise construction landscape since it was established in 1963, designing and building more than 76,000 apartments across the eastern seaboard.
21. KEVIN SEYMOUR
Seymour Group chairman
Considered one of the fathers of the apartment tower in Brisbane, Kevin Seymour was recognised with an Order of Australia medal in 2005. His reach in Brisbane since first starting out in 1976 is undeniable, so much so that he was named honorary ambassador of the city.
The veteran property developer has been scaling back his role in the family business in recent years, with the aim of spending more time to himself alongside wife, Kay.
Seymour, who is in his early eighties, recently revealed plans to build a Hawaiian-inspired residence in Noosa on a $15.5m block he purchased in one of the biggest deals of the financial year. Luxury elements such as resort-style pools, an underground garage with enough space for 10 cars and a caretaker’s cottage are all part of the initial concept.
Seymour is also behind two luxury apartment blocks in New Farm, The Oxlade and The Peninsula.
22. DAVID PRADELLA
Pradella Property Ventures managing director
Leading the Pradella family’s development empire, David Pradella has been influential in reshaping Brisbane’s inner city with projects including the five-building Parklands development at Roma Street.
The developer’s current focus is on transforming the old industrial riverfront areas of West End into a $1bn mixed-use lifestyle precinct, with projects including Montague Markets that was completed in 2021.
The Pradellas have been in the development game since 1959, winning multiple awards for their innovative projects.
23. DAVID DEVINE
Devine Development Group CEO
Veteran Queensland property developer David Devine has staked a claim on the Gold Coast luxury market in the lead-up to the 2032 Brisbane Olympics.
He has announced plans for a $370m beachfront tower called Royal Gold Coast which follows his $105m, 19-storey tower Alba in North Burleigh.
Always looking ahead, Devine believes people interested in investing in Queensland ahead of the world sporting event will start looking now for property.
24. SOHEIL ABEDIAN
Sunland
This developer founded ASX-listed Sunland Group in 1983, and went on to create two of the Gold Coast’s most well-known buildings – Palazzo Versace and the Q1 tower.
Soheil Abedian is winding down the firm, with plans to sell off all inventory not under development by the end of June 2022 – $94.8m of which was transacted in the first half of the financial year, with $199.4m worth of unconditional sales yet to settle.
After the wind-down, he plans to continue to play a part in development on the Gold Coast via a private company with son Sahba.
25. MARCO ROSSI
Built Executive chair and founder
The boss of one of Australia’s largest private construction groups is used to building big.
Marco Rossi’s firm, Built, has been engaged to design and construct the major gaming fit-out of The Star Brisbane, which will be part of the $3.6bn Queen’s Wharf development. It is also behind projects such as the refurbishment of Transport House in Brisbane’s CBD, the upgrade of the Logan Hyperdome, and a number of Queensland defence sector projects, but has bigger projects in Sydney, Melbourne, New Zealand, and in the UK.
Founded in 1998, Built started as a fit-out contractor and diversified into commercial building and became a developer, but in recent years the firm has taken major strides towards becoming an integrated top tier builder and developer. With the backing of former Leighton Holdings CEO Wal King as chairman, Rossi plans to diversify the company further.
26. MICHAEL McNAB
McNab managing director
With more than 25 years’ experience in the property, development and construction industry, Michael McNab has grown his company into one of Queensland’s leading privately owned construction outfits.
The McNab group has completed a vast array of projects, from aged care and residential to hotels, student accommodation, retail, health and education facilities. Projects completed or under way include UniLodge, the Tallebudgera Leisure Centre, Bunnings Dalby, Sunshine Coast City Hall, UQ Sports Hub, Marist College Ashgrove, Pacific Pines State High School, Tree House by Aria, Luna Apartments, Rivers Reach Hamilton and Kirra Beach Apartments.
Clients have included Aldi, Anglicare, Dexus, Frasers Property, James Cook University, the Queensland Government and Stockland.
27. DAMIEN CAVALLUCCI
Cavcorp managing director
Damien Cavallucci has been one of only a handful of developers to spearhead the wellness movement in multi-residential projects. His luxury developments in Teneriffe and Newstead are heavily focused on the concept of living well, and his vision has worked in attracting a cohort of beautiful people who call his projects home.
Cavallucci practices what he preaches, admitting he cycles in his own sauna and does laps in his magnesium pool.
28. LEANNE ENOCH
Queensland Minister for Communities and Housing
This portfolio couldn’t be more important given the current housing crisis in Queensland.
Rental vacancies are at record lows, house prices have soared, people are living in tents and caravan parks and interest rates are on the rise. And the waitlist for social housing has ballooned.
Leanne Enoch has committed to building more social and affordable homes through a $1.6bn construction program, including 392 new homes by the middle of this year. On the Gold Coast, more than 1800 bond loans and more than 1600 rental grants have been provided in the past year.
However, industry experts say none of these measures will make a significant dent in the problem as The Courier-Mail calls on the Palaszczuk government to convene a summit on the housing crisis.
29. MATT LANCASHIRE
Ray White New Farm principal
If you follow him on Instagram, you’ll have seen his property videos – including one where he jumps in a pool in an expensive suit. The bold and affable agent goes above and beyond when it comes to selling homes in the city and is behind many of the most expensive property deals.
Matt Lancashire holds the house price record for Brisbane with the $18.48m sale of 1 Leopard St, Kangaroo Point, in 2016, closely followed by 80-86 Oxlade Dr, New Farm, for $17.35m.
He also has the “under-the-hammer” auction record after selling $10.21m for 16 Leura Tce, Hawthorne, in July.
In July last year he and agent Dwight Ferguson sold the 32 Sutherland Ave, Ascot, mansion owned by Ray White joint chairman Brian White, for $10m on the nose.
Lancashire’s little black book is fat with some of the state’s most influential people.
With long-time friend Haesley Cush, he co-owns Ray White New Farm and Spring Hill, Bulimba and East Brisbane (also with Brandon Wortley and Scott Darwon), Clayfield (with Nicholas Given), Toowong (with Reuben Packer-Hill), plus the Living Here Cush Partners rental business.
30. SARAH HACKETT
Place Estate Agent managing director
She is a real estate powerhouse in Brisbane and the highest earning female agent in the state.
Hackett has been in the industry for 25 years and runs Place Estate Agents with her husband, Damian, and founding partner Paul Curtain.
She specialises in selling luxury apartments and riverfront homes, which allows her to interact with some of the city’s most influential and wealthy residents.
In the past financial year, Hackett, who is principal of Place New Farm, has sold 84 properties worth a whopping $322m.
31. LAURENCE LANCINI
Lancini Property Group executive chairman
Starting as a home builder in Townsville more than 35 years ago, Laurence Lancini has overseen the company’s expansion into all aspects of construction and property development across Queensland.
The company’s portfolio includes retail shopping centres, commercial offices, large-format retail centres and industrial properties.
Lancini is also a former chairman of the North Queensland Cowboys, having steered the ship since 2003 before stepping down in 2019, and was at the helm when the team won its first premiership in 2015.
32. PAUL NOONAN
JLL managing director
Paul Noonan is a big player in the multibillion-dollar infrastructure development set to transform Brisbane. With Cross River Rail, Brisbane Metro, Queens Wharf and more on their way, Noonan says Brisbane is now on par with Sydney and Melbourne in terms of global and national investment focus.
Noonan has been involved in the sale of more than $10 billion worth of commercial assets. His current listings include Valley Metro, Green Square South Tower, also in Fortitude Valley, and 41 George St in the CBD.
He took on the Queensland role in 2019, returning to Brisbane after almost eight years in Sydney for JLL.
33. JEN WILLIAMS
Property Council of Australia executive director Queensland
Armed with a big smile and plenty of street smarts, Jen Williams became executive director of the Property Council of Queensland last year during the dark days of the Covid-19 pandemic.
It was not an appointment out of the blue, having been the organisation’s deputy executive director for six years.
Prior to joining the Property Council, she held policy roles in Brisbane City Council and the federal government, and had a career in teaching.
She took action to activate the Brisbane CBD following the pandemic and used her policy nous on city-shaping events and projects like the 2032 Olympics, Cross River Rail and Queen’s Wharf.
She took over from Chris Mountford who is now at Independent Schools Queensland.
The Property Council is the leading advocate for the industry, which represents one ninth of Australia’s GDP (the largest of any sector), employs 1.1m Australians and generates $72bn in tax revenues to fund community services.
34. DAMIAN HACKETT
Place Estate Agents CEO and founder
During his career, Damian Hackett has negotiated in excess of one billion dollars’ worth of property sales.
The well-connected Hackett, a trained accountant, has been involved in residential real estate and business ownership for more than 30 years. He opened his first residential agency (Professionals) in Morningside in 1991 with two other business partners and it evolved into Place Estate Agents in 2002.
Now, along with his business partners including wife Sarah and Paul Curtain, Hackett oversees the operation and growth of the entire Place business in Brisbane.
35. JUDY BRINSMEAD
ADCO chair
Instrumental in the success and growth of ADCO, one of Australia’s oldest private construction companies, Judy Brinsmead is integral to its strategic management.
Previously a partner at Morris Fletcher & Cross (now MinterEllison), she has a wealth of experience in construction and property, joining ADCO as an executive director in 1989. Since 1972 ADCO has built more than 3500 projects valued in excess of $14bn. It employs 500-strong people to deliver annual revenues approaching $1bn.
Brinsmead is also a member of the board of trustees of Bond University.
36. HAESLEY CUSH
Ray White New Farm principal
Haesley Cush may as well go by “Mr Brisbane” as there are few people around town who would not know of the friendly, award-winning auctioneer who has called more than 10,000 auctions.
As well as having his finger on the property pulse, overseeing some of Brisbane’s biggest transactions, Cush also invests heavily in the community and frequently participates in fundraisers. With good mate Matt Lancashire, he co-owns a stack of other Ray White agencies in Brisbane and the Living Here Cush Partners rental business.
37. TOM OFFERMANN
Tom Offermann Real Estate principal
The Sunshine Coast was arguably Australia’s hottest market during the pandemic property boom, and Tom Offermann’s team secured some of Queensland’s top sales.
And with 36 years in the real estate game, Offermann believes demand for property in the sought-after region is unlikely to ease anytime soon. His agency sold almost $700m in property in the past 12 months.
From developers to financiers, if they’re big in the property business, chances are Offermann knows them well.
His agency has also been a major sponsor of the Noosa Heads Surf Life Saving Club and Noosa Coast Guard since the early 1990s.
38. SIMON BEIRNE
Colliers state chief executive
With more than three decades of experience in the real estate industry, Simon Beirne, as the Queensland chief executive of Colliers, oversees more than 300 staff across six offices. He also sits on the national board.
He is heavily involved in the capital markets and has been responsible for significant industrial/logistics transactions in Queensland.
Prior to joining Colliers in 1998, he was an auctioneer for Primac Elders. Some of Beirne’s biggest sales included a 25ha manufacturing site owned by Coca Cola for $157m, a commercial building in Ipswich for $145m and the sale and leaseback of land at MovieWorld for $101.5m.
39. PAUL BIDWELL
Master Builder Association CEO
With more than 9200 members, the MBA is the peak industry association representing building and construction in Queensland. Paul Bidwell joined in 2009, with 18 years’ private and public sector experience in policy planning and analysis.
He was appointed CEO in May after eight years as deputy.
Bidwell has previously worked with the Chamber of Commerce & Industry Queensland, Herron Todd White Property Valuers and AgForce Queensland. He is a qualified valuer with tertiary qualifications in urban and regional planning, and business administration.
40. NIC DE LUCA
De Luca Properties boss
In 1994, Nic De Luca left one of Australia’s biggest construction firms to strike out on his own, founding his eponymous company that has gone from strength to strength.
From that first project – a housing commission project – De Luca went on to complete various projects for the Department of Public Works and Housing, branching out into small townhouse developments. The company then moved into industrial developments, from airport precincts to hardware stores.
In 2013, De Luca Residential Developments was born, with the company rebranded as De Luca Corporation in honour of its many arms in 2015. Completed projects include schools, warehouses, the Amazon Distribution Centre, fast food retailers, shopping centres, and residential projects such as Edgewater Apartments, Parkside Bulimba, Addison Quays and more.
41. TOM DOOLEY
Tom Dooley Developments managing director
He just sold his own riverfront house for more than $10m, but Tom Dooley is better known for creating homes for other people.
The founder of Tom Dooley Developments, he has been responsible for more than $750m worth of projects, most of which have been within Brisbane’s inner-city suburbs such as Newstead, New Farm and Kangaroo Point. His projects include Gasworks Residences, Aquila and Skyring.
Dooley is also the son of Dr Tom Dooley Snr, who ran the famous Dooleys Hotel with late wife Jan for many years in Fortitude Valley.
42. BRENT THOMPSON
Siera Group managing director
Property developer Brent Thompson is the head of Brisbane-based Siera Group, on the board of UDIA Qld and influential as part of the Brisbane City Council Policy Committee.
His firm’s biggest project to date is a 113-apartment development called Tapestry on Chevron Island, having concentrated previously on creating bespoke homes and townhouses across inner Brisbane since 2015.
43. KIRSTY ROURKE
City of Brisbane Investment Corporation CEO
Managing this urban wealth fund which helps bankroll Brisbane’s future amenity needs is Kirsty Rourke.
She is responsible for driving the performance of the organisation and leading its investment activities.
From initial seed funding of $135m, CBIC has grown to $311m in net assets. It has delivered $166m in dividends to Brisbane City Council since 2008, including $55m towards public green space.
Rourke has 15 years’ experience in the property industry and was previously a senior associate at Holding Redlich specialising in property law.
44. SIMON CAULFIELD
Place Kangaroo Point director and lead agent
If there’s a luxury penthouse for sale in Brisbane’s inner east, you can bet Simon Caulfield’s name will be all over it.
Caulfield and his team – including wife Courtney Caulfield, a former lawyer – have represented more than half a billion dollars in property sales in the past 10 years. They focus on new builds, working with big players including Frasers Property, Sunland Group, GBW Group, HCap Development, ADCO Construction, JGL Properties, Ideal Property, Deloitte and Boulder Capital.
The Caulfield team has sold out six luxury developments in recent years, most notably, Walan, at 2 Scott St, Kangaroo Point, for $44,000,000 in four months and Haven Newstead for $33,000,000 in seven months.
45. ANDREW WINTER
Real estate agent and TV presenter
A real estate agent and TV presenter on Foxtel’s Selling Houses Australia and Love It Or List It, British-born Winter is a familiar face in the lounge rooms of Queenslanders.
He has also written a number of books and is often called upon to share his insights in the property market. He has more than 35,000 followers on Instagram alone.
Winter loves Australia so much, he is now practising what he has been preaching to viewers and putting down roots. He has called the Gold Coast home for some time now, and is now building a home in Mermaid Beach.
46. ANTONIA MERCORELLA
Real Estate Institute of Queensland CEO
With a laser focus to detail from her legal background, Antonia Mercorella runs the peak body representing real estate professionals across Queensland. She is also a strong advocate for all property stakeholders, from investors to renters.
REIQ membership representation includes more than 2000 agencies and 15,000 property professionals. Collectively, Queensland’s real estate sector directly employs more than 46,000 people (the state’s second largest employer), is one of the top four industries which comprises more than half of Queensland’s small business landscape, and pays the second highest amount of state tax each year, of around $20bn.
47. JASON ADCOCK
Adcock Prestige Queensland principal
Launching his premium real estate agency in 2002, Jason Adcock has clocked up some eye-watering sales. His company expanded to a team of 13 in August and opened new headquarters in Milton.
Adcock holds the Brisbane sold-before-auction record of $12m for a luxury estate in Indooroopilly, previously owned by Citimark Properties CEO Robert Pullar, which was snapped up in November 2021.
Adcock is also a member of the philanthropic Gold Coast Brisbane Club and is its charity auctioneer, helping raise funds for children’s charities.
48. STEPHEN AND JODY GOSLING
Verde Property co-founding directors
This well-connected property power couple founded Verde Property (with Jim Goldburg) in 2009, and have created, managed and owned environmentally sustainable buildings for occupation by governments or blue chip companies.
Verde has expanded its expertise to include the development of buildings designed to best deal with natural disasters.
49. ROB AND ANDREW GRAY
Graya Design and Construct founders
Their unique take on re-imagining the Queenslander home has changed the face of Brisbane’s high-end home landscape.
Graya was founded by brothers Rob and Andrew Gray over a decade ago. The pair have since built jaw-dropping homes for Brisbane’s A-list, from rappers to football players, and more recently moved into the multi-residential space.
Rob, who is the frontman of the duo, recently built his own home in Paddington. ‘Arcos’ is frequently used for photo shoots and events, and has hosted many a party attended by some of the city’s most influential personalities.
50. LIZ PIDGEON
Cornerstone Group director
Brisbane’s Pidgeon property family is behind most of the CBD’s major buildings. Last year, they netted $295m after selling 299 Adelaide St and nearby 310 Ann St. It is understood the two sales are part of a generational wealth distribution plan by the Pidgeon family, which has been developing and owning Brisbane real estate since 1927.
F.A. Pidgeon was run for decades by Sir John Pidgeon and his sister Valmai. They joined the family company, founded two decades earlier by their father Frederick, in the 1940s.
Sir John died in 2016 and the family’s property strategy is now overseen by his daughter Liz.
51. JAYSON BLIGHT
Blight Raynor Architecture director
Jayson Blight is the go-to architect of the Brisbane development scene, shaping the way Brisbane will look in the future. He was a lead designer at Cox Rayner before establishing Blight Rayner Architecture in 2016 with industry veteran Michael Rayner.
He was the dream weaver behind the One One One Eagle Street and the 400 George Street office towers in the CBD, and the Sir Samuel Griffith Building at Griffith University’s Nathan Campus – the first zero-carbon university building in Queensland.
The multi-award winner was behind the innovative Jubilee Place office tower in Fortitude Valley and the redeveloped Jubilee Hotel next door, and is now working on the New Performing Arts Venue in South Bank, adjoining the Queensland Performing Arts Centre.
52. JOHN LIVINGSTONE
JGL Properties managing director
Former Consolidated Properties partner turned local developer, John Livingstone helps put Queensland on the map with his builds.
He collaborated with local culinary and artistic creatives including Thierry Galichet and Philip Bacon on the design of the luxury inner-city apartment project, Thornton.
53. LIAM PROBERTS
Bureau^Proberts managing and creative director
At the forefront of building design for 30 years, award-winning architect Liam Proberts partnered with GBW Developments to deliver one of the most striking apartment complexes Brisbane has seen.
Walan asserts a commanding prominence on the elevated ridge of the Kangaroo Point peninsula by virtue of its sculptural form and distinctive colourway.
Proberts also works across global markets. He helped cement his international brand with a 21m tall cloud canopy that featured as part of the Australian Pavilion at Expo 2020 in Dubai (held in 2021).
54. JOE ADSETT
Joe Adsett Architects director
JOE ADSETT ARCHITECTS DIRECTOR
Regarded as one of Brisbane’s best known architects, particularly for his subtropical modernist style, Adsett is behind many of the wow-factor homes that can be found around Teneriffe, New Farm, Ascot, Paddington and other affluent Brisbane suburbs.
His own home, which he designed, called Boomerang, featured in the TV show, Grand Designs Australia.
Adsett is the go-to architect for Brisbane’s elite. Besides designing luxury homes, Adsett has more recently been involved in mixed-use towers, retail master planning and shopping centre projects.
55. ROBERT BADALOTTI
Azzura Investment CEO
The Southport developer has approval for a 108-storey tower in his $2.3bn Imperial Square project and while it is unknown when it will be built, it is one of the leading projects set to transform this growing part of the Gold Coast.
Italian-born Badalotti is also the man behind the Wyndham Surfers Paradise Hotel and he famously snapped up the Pink Poodle Motel for $2.3m in 2001 before transforming the site into Wings Resort, respectfully keeping the Pink Poodle sign.
56. SHAUN LOCKYER
Shaun Lockyer Architects owner
Lockyer and his team are behind some of Queensland’s most striking house designs, and they regularly win awards for those creations.
His works of art often require the team to find innovative ways to work with existing builds, and to breathe new life into some of the state’s heritage-protected residences.
Shaun and his team are Brisbane-based but have clients all along the east coast – most with very deep pockets and who wish to fly under the radar.
57. MICHAEL KOLLOSCHE
Kollosche principal
The name Kollosche has become synonymous with big-ticket sales along the state’s richest stretch of real estate, Hedges Ave on the Gold Coast’s Mermaid Beach.
Michael Kollosche counts the 2022 financial year among his agency’s most successful, with unconditional sales reaching almost $2bn. High-profile deals include a $21m Hedges Ave mansion in May, along with two other designer homes on the exclusive beachfront strip for $16.5m and $14.5m.
The high-flying agency director took a five-year hiatus from the industry, marking his return in 2016 with the sale of ex-Billabong executive Scott Perrin’s beachfront mansion for $25m.
Kollosche began his career in real estate 25 years ago, but only launched the Kollosche brand in 2019. The company now has more than 100 employees and Kollosche has personally achieved more than $4.2bn in settled sales over his career.
58. ANDREW CORONIS
Coronis Real Estate managing director
Property boss Andrew Coronis first joined his father Theo in the family business at the age of 18 when he had to borrow his dad’s car to get around. He took over their single-shopfront agency in 2002, and has steadily expanded since. Coronis is the only wholly owned, end-to-end property business in the country, providing the house for sale, building ­inspection, bank loan, conveyancing and other services. Through its affiliated legal team, AG Edwards, it also does estate planning, life insurance and financial planning.
59. DAVID CALVISI
Forme managing director
Cutting his teeth at Damien Cavallucci’s Cavcorp, David Calvisi struck out on his own in 2019 and is making a splash on the Gold Coast.
His luxury residential complex Norfolk, in Burleigh Heads, has captured the attention of the rich and famous. Surgeon Reza Adib, partner of Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk, owns an apartment there, as do billionaire entrepreneurs Cathie Reid and Stuart Giles, tech giant Bevan Slattery and wife Jodie, and developers Stephen and Jody Gosling.
60. JORDAN NAVYBOX
Cohen Handler state managing director
Buyers’ agents have become a force to be reckoned with in Brisbane since the start of the pandemic-fuelled property boom in 2020. Those in the know go to Jordan Navybox to find them an off-market property or to expertly negotiate a good deal, and Cohen Handler is Australia’s largest buyer’s agency.
NED-7074-QLD Powerlist banner-100-51
NED-7074-QLD Powerlist banner-sport
NED-7074-QLD Powerlist banner-Business
NED-7074-QLD Powerlist banner-Celebrity
HOW DID WE DETERMINE THE LISTS?
Firstly, The Courier-Mail senior leadership team engaged the newsroom – reporters on the ground and in the know, those whose job it is to cover these sectors every single day.
The leadership team then used its combined years of experience and extensive contacts to brainstorm more names, adding and culling – all the while consulting with external experts and trusted sources in relevant fields.
We have excluded current executives and editors of News Corp, The Courier-Mail, Foxtel and Fox Sports. That is because News Corp Australia is the publisher of The Courier-Mail, and owns 65 per cent of Foxtel.
We understand that any such list is bound to be subjective, and is by no means exhaustive – but this list is as accurate a one as possible to produce in terms of where things are right now.
It is a unique insight into who calls the shots in Queensland. And as a subscriber it is yours exclusively.
But remember that power is more often than not temporary. Who plays large in 2022 might not be so powerful in 2023. Watch this space.
Word count: 6841
