Bill pressure CAN we have confidence that our power costs will eventually be lower under Labor as we transition to renewables?
The “not a day longer or not a day shorter” mantra espoused by Energy Minister Chris Bowen looks to be under significant pressure.
After the last decade of inaction on energy production by the previous government, having cheaper electricity would seem a pie-in-the-sky hope until at least the next decade.
Of a more immediate concern to consumers is one prediction that in South Australia the price of power may double by 2030.
If this eventuates it will take significant downward pressure to return prices to similar or lower prices.
To reach Labor’s target of 82 per cent renewables, along with building our storage and transmission capacity by 2030, any chance of obtaining cheaper power prices seems to me to be many years away.
JOHN HARVIE, Murray Bridge
Money motive WHY is it that the language around petrol, oil and gas has changed? In my view it is the green left that has labelled them all as “fossil fuels”. With the demonisation of coal, it beggars belief as to what insane thinking is behind all of it.
I believe the so-called green transition is being championed by eco millionaires and woke corporates who have their money tied up in renewable energy.
It has nothing to do with making life more affordable for hardworking Australians.
As a 70-year-old fossil I still use my gas heater in the morning. I resent the notion that I have to give it up for the sake of the impending climate armageddon.
ROMAN RAUTENBERG, Murray Bridge
Solar savings SAVING the planet seemed to be a common motive for installing rooftop solar panels to reduce fossil-fuel consumption.
But from some letters to The Advertiser it would seem the motivation of some was to increase personal wealth.
I would have thought saving the planet was reward enough.
GEOFFREY ELLIS, Christie Downs
Agree on health I AGREE with David Penberthy’s summary in “Health honeymoon is over for Mali’s ministers” (The Advertiser, Friday).
It’s bad enough how hospitals are treating their patients. But doctors are also stating the health situation in SA is the worst in 20 years.
The opposition has been ridiculing the government’s crisis. Perhaps a bipartisan arrangement to fix the problems might be more helpful and politically rewarding.
DES KEMP, St Agnes
Shifting rankings PREDICTING the global rankings of cities for liveability is a bit like predicting Powerball.
Adelaide was third but is now 30th. Auckland was first but is now 34th. Apparently there were well-paid economists who came up with this rubbish. MARK O’CONNOR, Evandale
No faith in Queen IN modern times the separation of church and state has been one of the central principles of our democracy.
Yet I am concerned to note that we continue to have as our head of state a monarchy that, through inheritance, automatically becomes the head of a church and is the defender of their faith.
Our monarch Queen Elizabeth II may well have upheld these roles in an exemplary manner. But this is a disturbing contradiction at the very top of our political system.
PHIL SAUNDERS, Belair
Control people I BELIEVE about the only action vital to achieving less carbon emissions by 2050 is reducing world population by about 50 per cent.
All the other puny measures we are trying to achieve to save our planet will count to nothing unless we can curb the number of people.
Perhaps China was correct to control its population by the one-child-per-family rule.
Maybe the whole world should adopt it to save our planet. A. BOWERS, Glenelg North
Word count: 607
