IS it time to start to take a lesson from the state’s longest-serving premier, Tom Playford, and consider a renationalisation of the national electricity market?
After the debacle last week when the Australian Energy Market Operator suspended the spot market, warned of blackouts and asked people to limit power use, it’s fair to say the nation’s electricity system is a shambles. And much of the blame for that can be laid at the feet of the privatisation mania that gripped Australia in the 1990s.
South Australia flogged off ETSA as a desperate Liberal government tried to stabilise the situation after Labor’s State Bank negligence.
It opted for the lure of short-term dollars to plug a financial black hole over the long-term health and stability of the state. The promise of privatisation was that it would supply cheaper, more reliable power. The natural efficiency of the free market and the power of competition would apparently benefit all Australians.
That would, predictably enough, turn out to be nonsense. The electricity market was broken up and sold off. Along the way, the new owners would be scrambling to make as much money as they could.
Fair enough. They had put up the money to buy the state’s assets and are entitled to make a return on that investment. But at that point, the focus of the system moves away from customers to making money.
The result of selling the state’s power assets has been higher bills and lower reliability. It also created a remarkably complex system that few non-experts can fully understand.
Customers have been advised for a decade now to “shop around’’ to find the best deal, as if picking up a language of megawatt hours, megajoules, feed-in tariffs, peak usage and supply charges was as natural as drinking a glass of water.
Electricity is a natural monopoly. It is the backbone of our society, of our economy. It should not be left to the whim of the market.
Last week’s crisis was not driven by a lack of capacity across the national market. It was driven by generators who had flicked the switch to the off position because they were worried about losing money. They were trying to force the price higher and then re-enter the bidding to make some cash.
Playford saw the dangers of the state being held hostage to private electricity supply in the 1940s. Back then, it was the Adelaide Electricity Supply Co that was in charge.
Playford wanted the company to stop importing black coal from NSW and use brown coal from Leigh Creek to ensure the state was self-sufficient. It said no. He held a royal commission, created ETSA and took control. Of course, privatisation is not solely responsible for the mess we find ourselves in.
Labor squibbed the “great moral challenge of our generation’’, the Greens voted with the Liberal Party to vote down Labor’s carbon pollution reduction scheme. Then we had the right of the Liberal Party, which ensured Australia wasted a decade and allowed the national energy system to atrophy.
When former Liberal prime minister Malcolm Turnbull tried to implement his relatively modest national energy guarantee in 2017, it cost him his job.
So, here we are, left with an overly complex, unreliable, expensive system that is still ill-prepared for the inevitability that renewable energy will ultimately drive the system. Is it possible to put back together the shattered mirror that is Australia’s energy system? Possibly not, but it’s clear we have a failed model and doing more of the same isn’t going to work.
CREDIT: MICHAEL McGUIRE
Word count: 596
