A $125 million green cement project slated for Port Augusta is described as the most significant carbon-reduction innovation project ever for that industry.
Adelaide-based Hallett Group will build what it says is a "sovereign manufacturing capability" at the old power station site.
It would process and distribute three streams of Australian-generated industrial waste into low-carbon green cement products using renewable energy.
Port Pirie Mayor Leon Stephens said his council had great interest in the project, particularly with the involvement of the other two cities and byproducts that should be managed wisely. "This project encapsulates that," he said.
About 50 jobs will be created in Port Augusta and Whyalla along with new structures in Port Adelaide.
The company says the project will reduce Australian carbon dioxide emissions of 300,000 tonnes yearly, growing to about one million tonnes yearly.
This amounts to about one per cent of the entire Australian 2030 carbon-dioxide reduction target.
Hallett says it will manufacture supplementary cementitious materials (SCMs) that can replace more than one-half of traditional high carbon-dioxide-emitting clinker-based cement.
The operation will be based at Port Augusta and will extract and use historic waste flyash from the previous power station operations.
It will provide both the Liberty Whyalla Steelworks and the Nyrstar Port Pirie multi-metals smelter with the opportunity to provide valuable materials to the project to reduce their environmental footprints. The project will include:
a granulated slag offtake agreement at Nyrstar Port Pirie A flyash offtake agreement to extract and process the material from the legacy ash storage area at Port Playford with zero community dust impact. Hallett working with Liberty GFG to look at the feasibility of installing and operating a slag granulation circuit at the steelworks The combined processing facility and green cement blending and distribution hub at Port Augusta will be powered by locally produced renewable wind and solar power.
At Port Adelaide, a green cement blending and distribution hub will be combined with import and export capability. The company won a $20 million federal grant towards the project.
Nyrstar Vice-President Australian Operations, Dale Webb, said his company was excited to be partnering with Hallett to reduce emissions, create jobs and maximise the value of Australia's minerals.
CREDIT: Greg Mayfield
Word count: 368
