A few years ago, voters may have struggled to place the seat of Mayo. Not anymore. And Rebekha Sharkie won’t be taking her foot off the pedal Rebekha Sharkie believes she has lived up to her campaign slogan to “Make Mayo Matter’’.
“I think it’s fair to say there is not a member in the parliament who doesn’t know where Mayo is. I’m not sure you could say that a decade ago,’’ Sharkie says in a coffee shop not far from her electorate office in Mt Barker.
Before Sharkie entered the political fray, Mayo had been the long-term fiefdom of former foreign minister Alexander Downer.
After Downer came Jamie Briggs, whom Sharkie beat at the 2016 federal election. Mayo was the bluest of blue-chip Liberal seats, but Sharkie won after Briggs suffered a swing against him of more than 16 per cent.
Sharkie has won the seat twice more, once after resigning because the England-born MP fell foul of the dual citizenship regulations.
Both times she beat Georgina Downer, daughter of Alexander, who had moved back from Melbourne to try to reclaim the family throne.
“I think people were sick of our seat always being taken for granted,’’ she says.
“We never featured on election night, it was just a given.’’ Sharkie says that since her first victory, Mayo has received record infrastructure spending, health care has improved and sporting facilities have been upgraded.
Part of that was no doubt due to promises made by a Liberal government desperate to reclaim the seat.
Sharkie says she expects the Liberals to keep coming after her. “It just keeps you really hungry and doesn’t make you complacent,” she says. “We’ve only got 10 seats in South Australia, we need to make every one of those count.’’ Sharkie grew up in a household that was attuned to the latest movements in politics and political affairs but says it wasn’t partisanly political.
“I knew who the president of the US was, who our premier was, just because really, from age four or five, we talked about it,’’ the 49-year-old says.
When she was doing Year 12, Sharkie studied politics, then at Flinders University she took international relations and Australian politics.
It wasn’t Liberal or Labor that appealed, but the Australian Democrats, who were then still a force on the national stage.
During the 1990 federal election, Sharkie handed out how-to-vote cards for then Democrats leader Janine Haines, who was aiming to transfer from the Senate to the lower house seat of Kingston.
After uni, she worked as a paralegal before answering an ad in the local paper to work as a researcher for former Liberal MP Isobel Redmond.
Sharkie remained with Redmond as she became Liberal leader, including through her losing run at the 2010 state election.
She would also work briefly for Mayo MP Jamie Briggs before leaving politics to work in the youth sector.
It was the federal Liberal government’s 2014 budget that fired her determination to have a tilt at Canberra.
A youth program she had been working on was axed, and other supports for young people were also reduced or chopped by then treasurer Joe Hockey.
“I just knew that for some of them (young people), it would have meant homelessness and near starvation,’’ she says.
“I just thought it was clearly a decision that was not only based on bad policy, but there was a real element to it. It was vicious.’’ Sharkie tried to talk to her old boss, Briggs, about it, but failed. So she decided, “I can either complain or I can try and do something’’. Sharkie, who is married to Nathan and has three children, took a second mortgage on the house to finance that first run, which was under the banner of the Nick Xenophon Team.
Six years later, Sharkie is a warm favourite to retain her seat. In what is expected to be a close national election, there is a possibility Sharkie could be one of a group of independents that could hold the balance of power.
Sharkie has received a $200,000 donation from Climate 200, which she says will be used to fund renewable energy grants in Mayo. She says it’s a “no strings’’ attached donation.
“There’s no other requirement from me, and the major parties take mega donations from coal, gambling lobby, fossil fuels,’’ she says.
Sharkie acknowledges Mayo has traditionally been a non-Labor seat but gives no commitment to backing either party in a hung parliament – “Forgive me if I’m a little cynical about both major parties’’.
Instead she sets out the issues she says matter most to her constituents. “I think they want us to take practical action on climate,’’ she says. “They want the federal integrity commission that was promised in 2019. “They want the promise made to the River Murray delivered. And I think people want political donation reform. “They would be my basic requirements, with a very clear timeline (attached to them).’’
CREDIT: Story Michael McGuire
Word count: 831
