ENERGY NATIONAL Australia Bank boss Ross McEwan has ­declared climate transition as the single biggest economic opportunity for Australia and New Zealand.
But Mr McEwan cautioned the move to net zero “won’t be easy”, as he dismissed calls for the lender to put an end to coal funding sooner than planned.
“The single biggest opportunity we have ahead to advance our economies is through the climate transition to net zero,” Mr McEwan told a Trans-Tasman business event on Tuesday.
“Inaction will continue to be costly. We know too well that natural disasters exacerbated by climate change not only take a human toll, but a huge financial one too.” He said an orderly transition would be crucial to get to net zero by 2050, and he predicted gas would be in use for decades to come as part of the energy shift.
“We’ve said gas is a transition fuel, so we’ve capped the amount we will lend into the gas industry until 2026 and then we measure it down to 2050,” Mr McEwan said.
“By 2026, some of the transition fuels start to kick in, but gas has probably got another 40 years plus (of use). Coal, we’ve got to get rid of faster, particularly lower-quality coal.” Revealing he gets five to 10 letters a day from people calling for NAB to stop lending to the coal and gas industries, the bank chief executive dismissed such calls to abruptly cut off these industries.
“Australia is very reliant on what we pull out of the ground. We’ve got a commodity boom going on right now.
“We’ve (NAB) made the ­determination that by 2030 we won’t be funding any more coal … and every business that we’re talking to has a clear path (to net zero) … but it’s going to be difficult and gas is going to be a transition fuel.
“We can’t just turn the coal and gas off. … if we did that, we’d have price spikes on energy. You have to transition.” NAB was the largest funder of renewable energies in Australia and New Zealand, and the 12th largest renewable energy funder in the world, he said.
Mr McEwan said NAB was working with the top 100 emitters on their plans to get to carbon neutral by 2050, and he was optimistic on the outlook for the energy transition even with the challenges ahead.
The bank was about two-thirds of the way through engaging with those 100 companies, he said. “We have not found one that’s been resistant. Some will have more difficulty than others. “Look at the cement industry, coal and gas industry, all doing very interesting things to look at reducing carbon. But we do need the help. We need to get energy sources on to a more renewable energy path.”
CREDIT: Cliona O’Dowd
Word count: 467
