THE BUSINESS REACTION ANY possibility of a minority government would bring with it the opportunity for genuine leverage to get things done, or chaos and obstructionism in the worst-case scenario.
What the business community is looking for from the new government is leadership on large nation-building projects such as the renaissance of our manufacturing sector while, in the short term, doing all it can to keep a lid on inflation – a difficult ask given it is a global issue.
A balance also needs to be struck between equitable pay rises and ones that overshoot and place pressure on the private sector broadly.
Members of the crossbench have the ability to help or hinder these aspirations, or get involved in horsetrading to the benefit of their own jurisdictions.
What we do not need as a community is the elevation of narrow minority interests above the project of transforming the Australian economy – a project that will take several electoral cycles and should not be derailed in a bid to keep a few rogue politicians on side.
In the short term, cost of living has emerged as probably the most pressing concern among Australian voters, who will be looking to the government for policy leadership to ensure that we continue to prosper, rather than see our real earnings eroded by runaway inflation.
In SA, there is also a need for strong assurances about the future of the shipbuilding industry in our state – a plan that must not be toyed with if it is to fulfil its potential for the state and the nation.
Looking out to the medium and longer term, there is an opportunity to be bold, and genuinely transform the Australian economy in a generational project that is well overdue.
Hydrogen, renewable energy, and a new era of manufacturing are all huge opportunities the nation can take advantage of if the right platforms are put in place now.
Sadly we’ve been happy to watch our manufacturing sector erode over decades, riding on the back of a robust resources sector, while also pulling back from the huge opportunity that renewable energy poses.
It is not too late to right these wrongs, although the process is one that will take several electoral cycles to implement properly and therefore could be doomed. The government needs to be backed in to make the big calls in order for this transformation journey to progress and the members of the crossbench have a moral obligation to come along for the ride.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 420
