WHEN teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg opens the door to nuclear energy, it’s worth taking notice.
Ms Thunberg has inspired a global youth movement for action to tackle global warming, galvanising school strikes and addressing UN climate summits.
Asked by Germany’s public broadcaster this week if it would be better for the planet if that country kept its remaining three nuclear power plants, Ms Thunberg said: “If we have them already running, I feel that it’s a mistake to close them down in order to focus on coal.” Then, asked if the nuclear plants should shut down as soon as possible after the current energy crisis, Ms Thunberg said: “It depends. We don’t know what will happen after this.” Australia has no nuclear power stations. The nation’s only reactor, at Sydney’s Lucas Heights, uses low-enriched uranium for purposes including nuclear medicine and research.
But there is renewed debate about nuclear energy, not least because power plants supply reliable base load electricity without producing greenhouse gas emissions.
Australia is the world’s third-largest uranium producer and has the world’s largest economic demonstrated resources.
Economics and safety concerns have been the chief barriers to Australia embracing nuclear energy, despite several inquiries and repeated national debate.
Both have been diminished by the development of so-called small modular reactors with capacity of less than 300MW. (The gas-fired Pelican Point Power Station’s maximum capacity is 497MW). These small modular reactors are not yet commercially viable, according to a June report by the International Energy Agency, but “the challenge of net zero (emissions) has stimulated a burst of development”.
These have “strong political and institutional support, with substantial grants in the US …”, making it “possible to attract private investors, bringing new players and new supply chains to the nuclear industry”.
When the report was released, IEA executive director Fatih Birol said: “In today’s context of the global energy crisis, skyrocketing fossil fuel prices, energy security challenges and ambitious climate commitments … nuclear power has a unique opportunity to stage a comeback.” On Tuesday, Brookfield’s Global Transition Fund, the world’s largest focused on clean energy, made a $12.7bn bid to acquire US nuclear engineering firm Westinghouse Electric.
Former South Australian governor Kevin Scarce, who headed the SA Nuclear Fuel Cycle Royal Commission that reported in 2016, says the economics of nuclear energy must be reconsidered.
His royal commission’s final report found: “Nuclear power generation would not be commercially viable in SA under current market rules, but should be considered as a future low-carbon energy source to contribute to national emissions reduction targets.” Rear-Admiral Scarce now is urging a serious national debate about nuclear power and its economics, given surging electricity prices.
“I think the real question is having that ability to look at an energy policy in its entire system from transmission to distribution to generation, and figure out how we’re going to generate tomorrow’s power – and we haven’t done that,” he said “There’s a lot of wishful thinking about what happens when you retire coal and gas. It’s not something you can wishfully think about, you need to have definite plans. I can’t imagine why nuclear wouldn’t be part of the technology equation.” On Tuesday, Jeff Dimery, chief executive of Alinta, Australia’s fourth-largest electricity retailer, declared tariffs next year would soar by “a minimum 35 per cent”.
A JWS Research poll of 600 SA voters, commissioned by the SA Chamber of Mines and Energy and released in August, showed 63 per cent agreed nuclear power should be considered because of cost and reliability issues in the national electricity market.
Voters have backed a renewable energy future, installing Labor at state and federal levels this year. Premier Peter Malinauskas has been in Japan and South Korea this week, seeking business and investment for the $593m hydrogen power station planned for Whyalla.
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese went to the election with a renewable energy plan he vowed would reduce household power prices by $275 by 2025. “The cheapest form of new energy is renewables and it’s the cheaper, cleaner energy which will drive down energy prices,” he said on April 10. Mr Malinauskas in August said he was “open-minded” about nuclear power. He and Mr Albanese might need to be, if Australians are to enjoy affordable and reliable electricity supplies into the future.
CREDIT: ANALYSIS PAUL STARICK EDITOR-AT-LARGE
Word count: 721
