Growing up in country NSW, Nicola Forrest says RM Williams was always part of the landscape.
“My father, everyone had their RM Williams boots,” she tells The Australian. “And then I married Mr RM – Andrew has worn RMs ever since I’ve known him.” When the chance came up for the Fortescue Metals billionaires, under their Tattarang investment arm, to buy the 90-year-old company from LVMH offshoot L. Catterton in 2020, “the opportunity to bring it back into Australian hands” was too great to pass up.
“It’s the quintessential Australian brand. Obviously it had to stack up as a business, but there was no way we could walk away from such an iconic brand,” says Forrest, who also sits on the company board.
The Forrests know all too well the challenges ahead for the company, as outlined in the latest Weekend Australian Magazine.
The skills gap in Australia, with the majority of manufacturing going offshore since the 1980s, needs to be addressed to find the craftspeople of the future.
Forrest believes that companies like Adelaide-based RM Williams can work as examples to others of what Australian manufacturing can look like.
“A lot of expertise has left this country, and we are in a moment in time where there is an opportunity to start to redevelop that,” she says. “We’re all stretched to find the workforce we need in this country at the moment, so we have to be able to train that capacity and that’s where we do want to show that leadership.
“We’ve been in conversations with the state government in South Australia around tech, around vocational training, and where the government is speaking about investing more money in that area.” While demand for RM Williams continues to grow, Forrest sees huge potential in the international market, where it largely has a wholesale presence.
“(Given) the current limitations on our production, we have to be very careful that we don’t try and run before we can walk.
“We can’t say that we can supply the rest of the world when we are just meeting demand here. We have invested a lot in customer service, back of house, which is really coming online in the next few months. I think that’s going to create a lot more demand locally. So we have to really concentrate on delivering here first, but I think there is enormous potential.” There are also unique opportunities for cross-pollination between RM Williams and other companies and ventures within the Tattarang portfolio. An obvious example is its beef production company Harvest Road.
“We have the opportunity to use a lot of the leather that we have from that side of the business into the supply chain for RM Williams, then that grows capacity within Australia,” Forrest says.
“I think we have to be creative in how we do things. And at the end of the day we’ve still got to have a product people can afford to buy.” In April, Tattarang invested $26.8m in US company Natural Fiber Welding, which creates a plastic-free leather substitute. This aligns with the Forrests’ No Plastic Waste initiative through their Mindaroo Foundation.
“RM Williams is a leather-based product so that’s never going to change, but the demand for other products is growing so we just want to make sure that we’re ready and able to provide an alternative for those people that would want that. And (the material) can be utilised across a lot of other parts of our organisation, not just for RM Williams.” RM Williams sits within the lifestyle arm of the overarching Tattarang umbrella, which also includes commercial property and renewable energy in its interests.
CREDIT: Glynis Traill-Nash
Word count: 610
