French multinational Engie will invest $87m to build the first large-scale green hydrogen plant in the Pilbara.
The first phase of the Yuri project will produce up to 640 tonnes of renewable hydrogen per year as a zero-carbon feedback for an ammonia production facility in Karratha owned by Yara Australia.
Construction on the initial $87.1m Yuri project is expected to start in October and be operational in early 2024.
The project will produce green hydrogen via electrolysis from renewable energy. It will feature a 10MW electrolyser powered by 18MW solar panels and supported by an 8MW battery system.
Once commissioned it will be among the largest instances of renewable energy-powered electrolysis in the world, significantly bigger than the largest electrolyser now operating in Australia – a 1.25MW hydrogen plant in Adelaide’s Tonsley Park.
Yuri will be funded by a $47.5m grant from the federal government’s ARENA Renewable Hydrogen Deployment Fund and $2m from WA’s Renewable Hydrogen Fund.
Engie Australia and New Zealand chief executive Andrew Hyland said while the 10MW facility seemed large today, it was only a stepping stone to achieving sufficient scale to cater to domestic and international markets.
“The next stage will be between 10 and 20 times larger and ideally power a 100 to 200MW electrolyser and make up to 500 tonnes of hydrogen,” he said.
“Funding from the WA and federal governments has helped to get this project off the ground as hydrogen is still in its infancy and requires help to make it feasible until we can scale up and bring the costs down.” Competition in the green hydrogen space in Australia has intensified as the country heads towards net zero by 2050. Fortescue Future Industries earlier this year began building a hydrogen facility in Gladstone that will eventually have a 2GW per annum electrolyser and produce more than 200,000 tonnes of green hydrogen per year.
ARENA chief executive Darren Miller said the Yuri project was an important step in Australian becoming a major exporter of renewable hydrogen.
“Whether it’s for decarbonising fertiliser production, or for use as a zero emissions fuel, renewable hydrogen will be vital to reducing emissions in so-called hard-to-abate sectors,” he said.
“It is also a huge export opportunity for Australia to provide clean energy and emissions-free materials.” An agreement between Engie and Mitsui & Co has been struck in which the later will acquire a 28 per cent stake in the Yuri joint ­venture. Energy consultancy Wood Mackenzie has forecast global low-carbon hydrogen demand to grow to 211 million tonnes by 2050, 7 per cent of final energy demand. Close to $US1 trillion in production capex will be required to meet those forecasts, it predicts.
CREDIT: Matt Bell
Word count: 449
