It was a special one-on-one interview with Premier Peter Malinauskas and it was all about gas - hydrogen that is.
The Labor leader, who was in Port Pirie for a Country Cabinet, said production and sale of the gas at Whyalla and Port Pirie as a new renewable energy source would be the saviour of country South Australia.
And through the hydrogen plants planned for those cities and from spin-off activity, he said the state was on the "cusp of an economic renaissance".
Like hydrogen, the Premier was in an expansive mood when asked to outline what his government had done for rural and regional people in its first six months in office.
He said the administration had rolled out one of the biggest programs of investment in health in a generation where there were the biggest population bases with needs which had been unmet for some time.
"Here in Port Pirie we are completing a new emergency department at the hospital under a $12 million investment," he said.
"There is substantial investment in workforce in the country."
Mr Malinauskas said country kids had a plenty of chances of finding careers other than through university courses.
"You don't just need to go to university to get a good job and reasonable standard of living," he said.
Tradespeople including boilermakers, electricians, carpenters and welders would be turned out under a $200 million plan to build five new TAFE Colleges including one at Port Augusta, in the next three-and-a-half years.
"They will develop the technical skills to gain well-paid, secure jobs. Industry is crying out for it," he said.
"It is not going to fix the skills' shortage on its own, but it will make a big difference."
On the lack of doctors in the regional South Australia, Mr Malinauskas said his team was putting a lot of pressure on the federal government to help tackle the problem.
"We are investing in health and hospitals, but that only works if there are enough general practitioners in regional areas and that is where the Commonwealth has do to its job," Mr Malinauskas said.
CONTINUED PAGE 4
CREDIT: Greg Mayfield
Word count: 356
