South Australia’s first grid-scale energy project to integrate solar generation with battery storage will come online early next year after its developer secured financing for the $200m project.
Singapore’s Vena Energy, which is behind the Tailem Bend 2 project, has also struck an agreement to sell electricity generated by the solar farm to renewables company ZEN Energy.
Construction of the 87MW solar farm – the second stage of Vena’s broader Tailem Bend development – began earlier this year, and work on the 41.5MW battery energy storage system will begin this year.
The 128.5MW capacity will enable the project to supply the equivalent of about 35,000 homes, thereby reducing carbon emissions by more than 207,000 tonnes. Vena confirmed that after reaching financial close with a group of lenders including Singapore’s DBS Bank, ING and Siemens Bank, the project was on track to begin operating in the first half of next year.
“Vena Energy’s mission is to accelerate the energy transition across the Asia-Pacific region, and the Tailem Bend BESS is an example of this shift, as it will provide both generation and storage for renewable energy to the South Australian network as part of its plans to achieve net zero by 2030,” Vena Energy Australia head Owen Sela said.
Vena has a 5GW pipeline of renewable energy projects in Australia, including the $650m, Wandoan South solar project, which would become one of the country’s largest solar farms in Queensland’s Surat Basin.
The 95MW first stage of its Tailem Bend solar project started operating in 2019. ZEN will supply electricity generated from the second stage solar farm to customers including the South Australian Chamber of Mines and Energy’s joint electricity purchasing group.
The group, which brought together some of the state’s largest energy users in a bulk electricity deal, awarded ZEN an eight-year supply agreement in 2018. ZEN Energy chief executive Anthony Garnaut said the agreement had enabled the company to support development of new renewables projects. “The members of the … purchasing group engaged with ZEN on a long-term basis, allowing us in turn to secure the output of this generation asset on a long-term basis, creating revenue certainty for new capital deployment into new, long-term assets for Australia,” Mr Garnaut said.
CREDIT: Giuseppe Tauriello
Word count: 374
