Mr Hodgman, who was appointed in November 2020, will leave this post in February next year after two years and three months in the job, Foreign Minister Penny Wong announced.
Mr Hodgman is one of a number of former Liberal politicians whose diplomatic roles will end including Arthur Sinodinos, Barry O’Farrell and Mitch Fifield.
“The Albanese Government is reversing the previous government’s approach and rebalancing appointments towards qualified senior officials, consistent with position requirements and community expectations,” Senator Wong said.
“In certain circumstances there is a clear advantage for Australia to be represented by people who have had distinguished careers beyond the public service, such as businesspeople and former parliamentarians,” Senator Wong said.
Mr Hodgman confirmed the news on his official Twitter account, @AusHCSG.
“My term as Australia’s High Commissioner to Singapore will conclude in February 2023.
“It is a great honour to serve our nation in this role. I’m extremely proud of all that our team has achieved, especially over very challenging COVID times.
“We have a lot of important work ongoing - including in the #green & #digital economies, #renewable energy, food & agriculture, education & defence. So lots more to do, further strengthening Australia’s important relationship with #Singapore.”
Senator Wong announced former Labor politician Stephen Smith as Australia’s next High Commissioner to the United Kingdom.
“The eminence of Australia’s relationship with the United Kingdom has long been reflected in the appointment of a former senior Cabinet minister,” Senator Wong said.
“I thank outgoing ambassadors, high commissioners and consuls-general for their contributions to advancing Australia’s interests in these countries during their respective tenures,” Senator Wong said.
Arthur Sinodinos will finish his posting as Ambassador to the United States of America in February 2023, as will former NSW Premier Barry O’Farrell as High Commissioner to India and Mitch Fifield as Ambassador and Permanent Representative to the United Nations in June.
Mr Hodgman was back in the state earlier this month for the unveiling of his official portrait.
david.killick@news.com.au
Twitter follow David Killick
Word count: 319
