Viewpoint
LIZ RITCHIE Regional Australia Institute chief executive officer IF AUSTRALIA wants to fast track to a more productive and prosperous nation, we need to pivot attention away from Sydney and Melbourne and towards our regions.
Our urban primacy has Australia out-of-step with global population trends and on a path that will see our major cities just get bigger at the expense of liveability standards and productivity.
Today, nearly two-thirds of our population live in cities, which puts us at odds with the average OECD country, which has less than half. More than 70 per cent of our population growth happens in our cities and about 80pc of new migrants are settling in urban areas.
Our modelling of population trends has Sydney and Melbourne on track for mega-city status by 2056 - cities of more than 10 million people - with Brisbane and Perth on track to be the size Sydney and Melbourne are today.
We may be a land of sweeping plains, but it's clear we aren't living on them.
Big cities have their place, but for majority of Australians to live in just six of them here is counterintuitive to our 10 years of research. We know there is more for a country to gain when the population pendulum swings a little further to the regions. At Federation, two-thirds of our population lived in the regions.
The Regional Australia Institute has set Australia an ambition to have 11 million people living prosperously in the regions by 2032 - an extra 500,000 people above the projected 10.5m. This target rides the wave of demand and is good economically.
Interest in regional living is the highest in a decade. In the past two census periods there has been a net outflow of people to the regions and during COVID, we saw a 15pc increase in people who did. Importantly we have seen an increase in young working age Australians moving to the regions, which is critical to addressing the aging demographic in our regions.
For every additional 100,000 Australians who choose to live in small cities rather than the capital cities, we estimate about $42b dollars would be released into the economy in the next 30 years through reduced interest payments on mortgages alone.
With more people living in our regions, we would have more people working in industries of the future that are regionally based - a decarbonised economy, agriculture and food production, resources, and renewable energy.
But to achieve 11m people living in the regions, we need to focus on a number of critical areas that are holding the regions back.
Jobs, housing, childcare, access to health, education and digital services are all critical, which is why to get to our 11m target, we are launching a framework that acknowledges regionalisation relies on meeting new targets in five key areas - jobs and skills, liveability, population, productivity and innovation and sustainability and resilience.
Issues in these areas are all interlinked. We can't solve the skills deficit, without improving education standards. Healthcare can't be improved without focusing on digital connectivity.
While there is work going on in many of these areas, this framework is the first national and collective approach to regionalisation developed with input from levels of government, leading Australian companies and with more than 2000 regional community voices. Because just like the rewards will be shared, so must the challenges.
CREDIT: Liz Ritchie
Word count: 566
