The $12.5bn APA Group appears to have won the competition to buy the undersea power cable Basslink, fending off competition from private equity with a price of more than $526m.
DataRoom understands APA has been named the preferred bidder in the competition, although a deal is yet to close.
The asset has been up for sale through receiver FTI Consulting, adviser Houlihan Lokey and law firm King Wood Mallesons and final bids were due last month.
Working for APA is understood to be Macquarie, Hydro Tasmania is believed to be advised by Morgan Stanley.
It is understood APA’s offer included a deal with the state government and the state-owned Hydro Tasmania, a key customer for the power cable, in relation to contract pricing.
Gas pipeline owner APA was competing with a consortium headed by Merrick Howes, a former executive at Anchorage Capital, while Pacific Equity Partners had been running the ruler over the business.
Mr Howes’ company that was trying to buy Basslink is called Aviron Capital and is advised by Faraday Associates.
APA was always considered the front runner to buy Basslink after it bought the $526m of senior debt in the past year.
Also weighing in its favour was its strong track record of operational expertise, given it already operates the Murraylink electricity cable between Victoria and South Australia and the Directlink electricity cable between NSW and Queensland.
Vaughan Strawbridge of FTI Consulting said the process was highly competitive and after selecting APA as the preferred bidder it had received a binding offer for the restructure and recapitalisation of Basslink.
FTI is now moving to final documentation, which includes agreeing key operating agreements with stakeholders of Basslink, including a deed of company arrangement being proposed to creditors for approval.
Basslink collapsed into receivership in November.
Owner Keppel Infrastructure Trust placed the asset into voluntary administration with EY, and receiver KPMG was initially appointed before it was replaced by FTI in June.
Basslink’s overall debt is understood to be close to $626m and it is thought APA’s offer is at least the value of its $526m in senior debt.
The receivership followed claims by the Tasmanian government and Hydro Tasmania for damages worth $105.3m from an outage of the power and internet connection with the mainland in 2015.
The undersea cable provides two-way access of 500MW of power between Tasmania and the mainland.
The 370km high voltage interconnector comprises a connection between Tasmania and Victoria for power and internet services.
In addition to smoothing Tasmania’s own power grid, it plays a role in stabilising the National Energy Market when power demand fluctuates in the summer months.
According to a disclosure in October last year to the Singapore exchange, KIT’s Australian subsidiaries had a standstill agreement for its loans that expired in late October.
It is understood FTI initially received about 10 expressions of interest for Basslink before the competition narrowed.
APA has been acquisitive in the past year in efforts to diversify away from gas to appease institutional investors’ preference for companies that produce clean energy from assets such as wind or solar farms.
Its share price has gained this year on the back of the rising oil price. APA’s acquisition targets have included AusNet. It entered a bidding contest for the electricity transmission and distribution business last year with Brookfield, which bought the business with its Canadian backers for $9.6bn.
It is competing to develop the first of the renewable energy zones, Central West and Orana, in NSW and has also weighed the acquisition of other renewable energy assets. APA chief Rob Wheals left last month and a replacement is yet to be announced.
CREDIT: EDITED BY BRIDGET CARTER
Word count: 611
