A FEW days ago I saw a rugged up Energy Minister Chris Bowen in Canberra with a nose as red as a lorikeet’s beak, and his hair standing upright in a cold arctic blast, blaming “nine years of inaction” by the former government for the current energy crisis and gas shortage. What BS.
I was a freelance journalist in Gladstone when the Curtis Island LNG plants were approved, constructed, and export contracts signed, consigning the bulk of their gas output overseas at a fraction of the cost of domestic supplies.
That was under the auspices of Labor governments at both state and federal levels. Admittedly, the subsequent Coalition governments did little to rectify things by ensuring an adequate domestic supply. Only Western Australia has had the foresight to do this, setting aside 15 per cent for local use.
Residents and businesses there are reaping the benefits now, while eastern states are stumbling, fumbling and shivering, with a critical shortage of gas to back-up base load coal generators. These are having their own reliability and maintenance problems as a result of recent and foreshadowed closures to make way for more renewables.
When the sun doesn’t shine and the wind doesn’t blow, these Chinese-built wind turbines and acres of solar panels contribute zero to meeting peak demand.
Reality bites and the Russian invasion of Ukraine only makes a predictable bad situation worse.
John Mikkelsen, Noosa, Qld
Crisis is brewing THERE are three essential things society needs to function, and adequate supply of power is one.
Australia is sleep walking into a power crisis. Our politicians are slow to learn that intermittent renewable energy can’t replace the base load power of reliable and efficient coal-fired power.
Renewables can never replace coal. As for net-zero emissions so eagerly chased by our naive politicians, China produces more emissions in three weeks than Australia does in one year. As we have seen in South Australia and with Queensland and NSW recently, renewables are very vulnerable.
When AGL closes Liddell Power Station next year, which supplies 30 per cent of NSW power, the what’s-its-name is going to hit the fan.
For the same amount of money our politicians have squandered on renewable energy, Australia could have built fossil fuel power stations that provide base-load energy with more than 630 times the output of power of renewables for at least the next 60 years.
We are replacing a perfectly good, safe, and cheap reliable power system with a vastly inferior and expensive “green” one.
Alan Barron, Grovedale
Cost solution planted WITH regard to the gaming by electricity generators to the market, one solution is for them to statutorily report ongoing fixed and marginal costs for each plant.
These costs would be audited by the regulator. The increased supply cost should always be stated as a margin of the agreed variable cost — and in most cases should not be more than say about 15 per cent.
J. Groombridge, East Melbourne
Electric blues THEN: Don’t burn coal, it is dirty! Don’t use gas, it too is dirty! Sign up to “green electricity”, it is good! Use an electric heater, they are clean! Cook with electricity, it is clean!
Now: Cut back on your electric cookers, there is no wind and the sun has set so we don’t have enough electricity. Stop using electric heaters, we can’t burn enough coal to keep them going. Don’t even think of using gas, we don’t have enough.
Is anyone else as confused as me?
John Withers, Torquay
Pay rise ... it figures NO wonder the PM has been pushing for a wage rise.
Ordinary workers will get $1.05 an hour increase. Anthony Albanese’s increase will be by $15,104 a year. Just a little under the age pension.
Go figure. Patricia Loy, Bonbeach
Word count: 629
