Australia's chief energy adviser says switching the power grid from coal to clean energy is a "mind-boggling" challenge that demands urgent reforms to drive funds into energy projects such as gas, pumped hydro and big batteries to back up renewables and stop blackouts.
Energy Security Board chief Anna Collyer will brief state and federal ministers at an emergency meeting tomorrow on a plan to move to a "capacity market", which would force retailers to pay generators to invest in power projects that can quickly be called on when the wind isn't blowing and the sun isn't shining.
Wholesale power and gas prices have surged across the eastern seaboard amid a burst of cold weather, bringing a demand for heating, a series of outages at coal-fired power stations forcing gas-fired electricity to fill the gap, and spiking commodity prices because of the war in Ukraine.
Treasurer Jim Chalmers yesterday wrote to the Australian Consumer and Competition Commission to express his "deep concern" about the impact electricity and gas prices were having on households and industry and asked them to advise on regulatory changes that may be required to "ensure these markets are functioning properly".
Collyer told the Herald it was difficult to explain the scale of the transition required for a grid that was at present relying on coal for two-thirds of electricity.
"We need to build eight times as much renewable energy that we have right now," said Collyer, who also chairs the Australian Energy Market Commission.
"Just in the next 10 years, we need $14 billion of investment in the transmission network, which is two-thirds again of the system we have right now.
"It's actually mind-boggling when you stop to think about how we're actually going to do that."
Labor has pledged to dramatically expand renewable power, taking it from roughly one-third of the energy grid today to 82 per cent by 2030.
In a speech to be delivered to the Australian Energy Week Conference today, Australian Energy Market Operator chief Daniel Westerman will say the "very real challenges" of rising energy prices underline the urgent need to decouple the grid's exposure to the global forces driving up prices of fossil fuels.
By 2050, the east coast power grid will require a doubling of the amount of the total electricity it delivers, according to AEMO forecasts, and a tripling of so-called firming capacity - assets such as batteries and gas plants that can be called on to top up intermittent renewable energy.
Westerman will tell the conference one of his biggest worries is that he is not yet seeing enough investment in firming capacity, and the Energy Security Board's proposal will be vital to create the appropriate market signals to encourage necessary investment.
Sceptics of the proposed market reform fear the capacity market will be designed to favour existing fossil fuel generators, dubbing the proposal "coal keeper".
But Collyer said such criticism was misguided.
"That has always been the criticism of it, but we have in the principles that were given to us by ministers last year a clear direction for the mechanism to be consistent with emission reduction targets," she said.
"We really do see this mechanism as not about preserving the current system, but helping with that orderly transition to the new net-zero world."
Lily D'Ambrosio, Victoria's minister for energy, environment and climate change, said her government remained committed to halving emissions by 2030 and was looking forward to working with her state and federal counterparts.
Renewable power can insulate consumers from the forces of global energy markets. While coal and gas prices have surged around the world, the ACT government announced yesterday that tariffs on power bills from government-owned retailer ActewAGL would fall 1.25 per cent, or by $23 on an annual basis.
AEMO last week imposed a rarely used price limit to keep a lid on runaway wholesale gas prices and issued a warning of dangerously low reserves in Victoria, South Australia and Tasmania.
Stephen Harty, the head of gas giant Santos' GLNG liquefied gas joint venture in Queensland, said the venture had committed more than 100 terajoules to the domestic gas market in the past week and had provided pipeline transport solutions for more suppliers to unlock more gas.
comment Page 23
CREDIT: Mike Foley and Nick Toscano
Word count: 714
