LET’S take a glimpse at the carbon-free future of Australian cricket captain and climate activist Pat Cummins.
He has been criticised for driving a gas-guzzling Range Rover and flying first-class to play cricket in India, a nation which has among the worst air pollution in the world.
He’s not about to give any of this up. But he is making a sacrifice – he will not be part of advertising for Cricket Australia’s sponsorship with energy firm Alinta.
Cummins, a principled and inspiring person, should perhaps consider handing back some of his Cricket Australia contract payments if he is so committed to the cause.
If athletes are prepared to impact revenue, they should think about reducing their code’s expenditure.
This might involve a degree of personal and financial sacrifice to creature comforts.
Similarly, Netball Australia is hosing down reports of a player revolt within the national team, the Diamonds, over concerns about Hancock Prospecting’s four-year, $15m sponsorship deal for the financially embattled sport.
This related to comments about Indigenous Australians made by a long dead Lang Hancock.
His daughter, Hancock Prospecting executive chairman Gina Rinehart, has deployed vast amounts of her considerable wealth to enrich swimming, netball and other sports.
Again, if players feel so strongly, perhaps they could consider accepting reduced conditions, rather than robbing their sport of funding.
The Adelaide Extinction Rebellion protesters should consider improving living standards, not demanding the economy be wrecked with an uncontrolled and sudden transition to renewable energy.
Fossil fuels have propelled us through an industrial age and dramatically raised living standards.
We need to preserve reliable, affordable and secure energy, particularly in the transition period.
Slogans sound good but activists should think about the end result for society as a whole if their demands are implemented in full. Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Gemma Jones, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA, 5000
Word count: 314
