The tariffs these households pay are expected to surge by at least 10 per cent when the Australian Energy Regulator (AER) reveals Default Market Offers for 2022-23 on Thursday.
DMOs are the maximum that consumers can be charged and also the starting point for electricity retailers in calculating most of their rates for the new financial year.
That means if DMOs goes up, other tariffs are likely to as well.
The Daily Telegraph understands the AER is likely to increase DMOs by at least 10 per cent.
That would add around $200 a year to the bill for a NSW family of four with a pool and air-conditioning.
About 700,000 households and 100,000 businesses in NSW, south-east Queensland and South Australia are on the DMO because they have never shopped around for energy.
The likely raising of DMOs for 2022-23 follows two years of falls.
Driving the anticipated increase is a surge in wholesale electricity costs.
Futures markets indicate the wholesale price of power in NSW is set to surge from recent levels of about 8.5 cents per kilowatt hour to nearly 16c/kWh by September then settling between 11c/kWh and 14c/kWh until the end of 2025.
In the first quarter of 2021, the average price was less than 5c/kWh.
Wholesale electricity accounts for about a third of a total bill.
Skyrocketing wholesale costs have already forced some smaller retailers to raise bills by 15 per cent.
And at least five have withdrawn all their offers for new customers, according to comparison service Canstar.
That has reduced competition in the market.
The AER published a draft DMO in February, about a week before Russia invaded Ukraine.
The draft flagged small falls in the DMOs covering NSW and single-digit percentage increases in south-east Queensland and SA.
But Russia’s invasion created chaos in global energy markets, sending the price of coal and gas soaring.
Major power companies have made submissions to the AER arguing the wholesale prices used to calculate the draft DMO were far too low.
An increase in electricity tariffs will present an early test for new Prime Minister Anthony Albanese, who campaigned on promises including that Labor would “cut power bills and reduce emissions by boosting renewable energy”.
The ALP vowed its plans would reduce household electricity costs by $275 a year by 2025.
Word count: 365
