PAT Cummins has denied he pressured Cricket Australia to end its $40m sponsorship with energy company Alinta, but has confirmed he will not be seen in their ads this summer.
At a press conference announcing his appointment as Australia’s new ODI captain, Cummins was questioned about his role in Alinta and Cricket Australia mutually deciding to end their partnership after this summer.
Cummins admits he shares a good relationship with CA chief executive Nick Hockley and has discussed his personal views on the game’s partnership with Alinta, but has denied he played any part in the decision to part ways.
“No, not at all. Nick, the CEO and I have a really good relationship. We talk about lots of things. But, no, I’ve been a big supporter of all our partners over the last few years,” Cummins said.
“I think it’s probably a stretch, exactly what happened.” Cummins said he was supportive of all CA’s corporate partners but did admit he won’t be appearing in Alinta ads this summer. “Yeah, not for this season,” Cummins said. The Australian captain defended the right of players to have a say on which companies they would like to align with as individual athletes.
“I think it’s always been a balance,” Cummins said. “You’ve seen certain players make decisions based on religions or maybe certain foods they eat, they won’t partner specific partners.
“But we really thank all our partners for everything they do for Cricket Australia and for grassroots supporting the game, and we know our responsibilities. We try and do our best.” Cummins said cricket needed to think carefully about which companies it aligned with.
“And not just us players, every organisation has a responsibility to do what’s right for the sport but also what they think is the right thing for the organisation and a whole society when it moves forward,” he said.
“I think it’s a balance when you make decisions about who you are going to welcome into the cricket family.” Cummins said he had no issue with the fact the International Cricket Council had announced a controversial partnership with energy giant Aramco without consulting players.
“It’s obviously far away from the decisions us players make. It’s an ICC decision,” he said.
Alinta Energy on its website says it’s investing heavily in renewable energy, either directly or by underwriting. PAGE 22: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: BEN HORNE
Word count: 396
