Nobody in Oz to take our $250m
NICOLA and Andrew “Twiggy” Forrest have a unique problem – they want to give away $250m but can’t find enough female founders of innovative start-ups in Australia to hand it to.
So the mining billionaires have been travelling the world to find enough women they can offer the cash to.
“We have met with some really interesting people, including Australians, which I’m really proud of, in California, from female-led venture capital funds,” Ms Forrest said.
The couple’s Minderoo Foundation committed an additional $150m to their previously announced $100m for its Strategic Impact Fund to address gender inequality in investing. Since December, they’ve allocated $70m and have $180m remaining.
“At the moment, there’s a real gender bias towards female-led businesses so there’s a number of people starting organisations to change that,” Ms Forrest said.
Two are Kate Vale, formerly of Google and YouTube Australia, and Marisa Warren, previously at Microsoft and Workday.
The pair head ALIAVIA Ventures, which focuses on early-stage capital investing in the US and Australia. They are among those being considered for an investment from the fund, though it has not been finalised.
The irony of travelling to the US to meet Australians to invest in start-ups isn’t lost on Ms Forrest.
“Historically Australians that are entrepreneurs have had to come to America to get the capital to go back and do what they want to do. Andrew Forrest is the perfect example of that,” Ms Forrest said.
Her husband, the founder of Fortescue Metals Group, made his fortune digging up iron but is trying to switch to renewable energy.
They want to bring Australian talent back home and build it up. After returning RM Williams from international ownership, the company has seen “record turnover” in ­Australia.
“It’s amazing how much it’s resonated that it’s back in Australian hands, and so we’re really proud of that,” she said.
The 90-year-old manufacturer was purchased from French fashion giant LVMH Moet Hennessy Louis Vuitton in 2020, changing from one giant investment firm to another.
Ms Forrest defended such large-scale private equity investing, which has recently come under the spotlight thanks to Elon Musk.
The world’s richest man called the framework used by large investment firms to rate the social impact of companies – a “scam” that has been “weaponised by phony social justice warriors”.
Ms Forrest agreed there are some who “use excuses” to paper over bad behaviour, but that private equity can be a force for good.
She said Fortescue doesn’t use supply chains in China that come or go through provinces where there are questions over forced labour. Their daughter Grace is co-founder of Walk Free, a human-rights group dedicated to ending modern slavery.
CREDIT: EXCLUSIVE JUSTIN VALLEJO IN NEW YORK
Word count: 460
