CLIMATE-crusading teal independent MP Kylea Tink holds shares in oil and gas producers and refiners as well as in one of the world’s largest toll-road operators, according to her statement of interests filed with parliament.
However, in response to questions, Ms Tink – the member for North Sydney – claimed she only bought the shares to engage in “shareholder activism”.
According to papers filed by Ms Tink last week, her personal investment portfolio includes shares in Beach Energy Ltd, Viva Energy Group Ltd, and Transurban Group.
According to the company’s website, Beach Energy supplies “approximately 12 per cent of the gas on the East Coast of Australia, and is aiming to grow this to 16 per cent” through a variety of onshore and offshore gas projects.
Viva Energy operates the Geelong Refinery in Victoria, one of two remaining oil refineries in Australia.
Transurban is a major operator of toll roads and last year collected more than $600m in revenue from Sydney drivers, most of them operating petroleum and diesel internal combustion vehicles.
None of Ms Tink’s other holdings, which include a major real estate fund and a company that manages indoor sports facilities and golf shops, appear to be tied to renewable energy despite her campaigning on a platform of achieving net zero emissions by 2050.
In a speech to parliament in favour of amendments to the Albanese government’s climate Bill, Ms Tink said “this is the critical decade for climate action”.
“We need a clear and actionable plan to reduce national emissions, guided by experts, to achieve at least 60 per cent (reductions) by 2030,” she said She said decisions made in the few years would “fundamentally affect our children’s and their children’s future”.
Her website called for an “evidence-based pan to achieve net zero by 2040” – 10 years earlier than the 2050 target recently enshrined into law. A spokeswoman for North Sydney Independent, which backed Ms Tink’s election campaign, said the MP “purchased small shareholdings in a number of companies where she felt shareholder activism may be a way to both better understand the entities involved and potentially exert pressure from within to drive in reform”. “(Kylea) remains committed to exploring shareholder activism as a way to effect change,” she said.
CREDIT: JAMES MORROW
Word count: 377
