BUSINESS ANALYSIS PUTTING to bed fears of a broadbased wages outbreak will be the first order of business for Anthony Albanese as he sets out to win the confidence of corporate Australia, but that’s just the start.
From a South Australian perspective, some solid assurances around the future of the shipbuilding program which has been billed as a generational wealth generator for the state, are also needed. Mr Albanese’s attention to detail on economic management was naturally called into question when he flubbed questions early in the election campaign around the cash rate and the unemployment rate.
While possessing a photographic recall of every data point relevant to the Australian economy is certainly not necessary, being clueless about these two key metrics was poor form. And now, with the election in the rear view mirror, we’ll get the chance to see what sort of leader he can be.
His historic predecessors, Bob Hawke and Paul Keating, were successful both politically an economically in striking the series of historic Accord agreements with the trade union movement, at a time when inflation was at times more than triple what it is now, and pressure for wage increases even higher.
What they brought to the table was a vision of a more equitable Australia based on the implementation of social policies which benefited all, while also allowing the business sector to prosper. We’re yet to see any such visionary economic or business-focused policy emerge from the Labor camp, which largely left the previous government to self-immolate rather than getting on the front foot policy-wise.
The new government needs to be able to ensure in the short term they do all they can to limit inflation in the short to medium term – a difficult ask given it’s a global issue – and walk the fine line between equitable pay rises and ones which overshoot and place pressure on the private sector broadly. Looking out to the medium and longer term, there’s an opportunity to be bold, and genuinely transform the Australian economy in a generational project which is well overdue. Hydrogen, renewable energy and a new era of manufacturing are all huge opportunities the nation can take advantage of.
Building a world-class manufacturing sector is well aligned with Labor’s base, and SA is well positioned to play a large role in this transformation, bolstered by promised billions in defence spending. Here’s hoping they give it a fair crack.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 408
