MANUFACTURING BRICKWORKS managing director Lindsay Partridge fears jobs, lives and businesses will be “trashed” by government forcing through unrealistic net zero emissions targets.
The manufacturing giant, which posted a record net profit on Wednesday, also warned of a “second supply chain” shock from European factories shutting down due to a looming winter energy crisis.
Several bricks and roof tile makers in Italy and Spain have already shuttered their manufacturing sites as the gas shortage and rampant gas prices in Europe crunches businesses, strangling the supply of premium building materials to Australia.
“We are running off our supply line at the moment, but if they don’t get running again soon in a reasonable ­period of time that is going to be a problem,” Mr Partridge said.
Meanwhile, the nation’s largest brickmaker and a major energy user across its Australian kilns and manufacturing sites has reduced its carbon emissions by 40 per cent since, and Mr Partridge believes the company can achieve its 2030 emissions targets.
However, he said he hoped “sanity prevailed” as the federal government and policymakers set about transforming the Australian economy and energy markets to reach emission benchmarks and drive a pivot to renewable energy.
“The biggest concern all manufacturing has in Australia is number one, having reliable energy,” Mr Partridge said.
“Number two is having it reasonably priced and the third priority is going to be making it renewable.
“And there is no use going to renewables if we trash the economy and trash people’s jobs trying to get there.
“It is counter-productive to say we are going to get net zero by trashing people, occupations and destroying companies. The idea is to get there with reliable energy first, reasonably priced and then make it renewable – but get them in that priority.” Brickworks on Wednesday posted a 257 per cent leap in its full-year net profit to a record $854.39m, as its vast industrial land holdings across western Sydney and Brisbane, that form the core of its property portfolio, supercharged its profitability to eclipse earnings from its Australian and US bricks and building materials business.
Its $4.2bn joint venture property arm with Goodman – which in the 2022 fiscal year delivered Brickworks earnings of $644m, up 155 per cent – has helped Brickworks shower its shareholders with a higher dividend payout, declaring a final dividend of 41c a share, against 40c last year, payable on ­November 29. Revenue for the year to July 31 rose 28 per cent to $1.093bn as Brickworks harvested dividends from its equities portfolio, its 26.1 per cent stake in stablemate investment company Washington H. Soul Pattinson and its Goodman joint venture.
“Although we are facing an increasingly uncertain outlook, including rising interest rates and recessionary fears, we are confident that Brickworks’ diversified portfolio of assets is well-placed to meet any future challenges and continue to deliver strong performance for shareholders,” Mr Partridge said. Brickworks shares rose 8c to $21.77.
CREDIT: ELI GREENBLAT
Word count: 491
