PRIME Minister Scott Morrison has conceded the Covid-19 vaccine rollout was a race in a highly combative debate dominated by cost-of-living issues, a corruption watchdog and why each leader has failed to make significant headway with voters five weeks into the campaign.
In a departure from the statesmanship of the first leaders debate, Mr Morrison and Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese were quick to snipe and interject throughout the 1.5 hour long event on Channel 9 — devolving to an all-out shouting match after the first hour.
At the close of the debate, Channel 9 did not have a clear winner decided by its audience.
The Opposition Leader appeared rattled from the moment the Prime Minister began interjecting with claims Labor’s renewable energy plan would not actually lower power prices, with Mr Albanese stumbling at points throughout the rest of the debate.
The biggest revelations came from Mr Morrison, who conceded, during questioning by Mr Albanese, that the Covid-19 vaccine rollout “was a race” and the government “shouldn’t have described it as otherwise”. The Prime Minister also justified his decision not to go into the blue-ribbon seats in Sydney and Victoria under threat from “teal” independents amid conversations around religious discrimination and integrity that have been damaging for moderate liberal MPs in those seats.
“I’m campaigning where the contest is between Mr Albanese and myself,” he said. “I am confident in my candidates and members and all of those seats and they have strong local members facing independents.” The rapid fire debate model of 60 second answers per leader became theatrical at points and included an awkward exchange over the definition of a “woman”, before Mr Albanese was asked to explain why he refused to launch an inquiry into the treatment of the late Labor senator Kimberley Kitching.
Mr Albanese moved to defend his frontbench and said “from time to time in politics … there is conflict, more people want positions (than) are available”.
“That happens. My experience with Kimberley Kitching was she was making an outstanding contribution. I put her on the frontbench. I kept her on the frontbench,” he said.
“I think it is a tragedy that she was lost, particularly to her family and her close friends but to the Labor family as well, far too early.” On trust, Mr Morrison attempted to use the slog of the pandemic over the last three years as being “tough on governments” and there would have been “many disappointments” and people who disagreed with what action needed to be taken.
But redirected to why people closest to him, like Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce, had spoken ill of him Mr Morrison said people disagreed from “time to time”. Mr Albanese appeared rattled by the line of questioning where it was suggested he lied when he said he did know the detail of his National Disability Insurance Scheme and had not been given a chance to explain it during a fiery press conference last week.
CREDIT: MADURA MCCORMACK
Word count: 496
