Trust in Voice IT is interesting to see the usual suspects coming out against the Indigenous voice to parliament being added to the constitution.
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has made it clear this will be discussed in parliament and it should not be a political argument.
My understanding is this is not a third chamber, as former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull said, but simply an opportunity for Aboriginal people to have some input into laws that have a direct impact on their lives.
For far too long governments have decided what should be done with no real input from the people affected by their decisions.
Is that really asking too much?
Yes, there are now more Aboriginal people actually in government, but they represent the wider community who voted for them, not just their Aboriginal voters.
I would urge the wider community to wait and listen to the facts before rushing to judgment on such an important matter.
MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood Selfless act I WAS taken to the Royal Adelaide Hospital emergency department with what has result­ed in pneumonia and Covid-19.
While I was transferred from ED to the haematology ward, unfortunately my jacket and wallet did not make the journey with me.
The loss of my wallet and subsequent knowledge of the hassle ahead to have all my cards replaced and direct debits cancelled did not aid my ­recovery.
Fast forward to a few days later when my wife, home alone while I am still in hospital, went to the mailbox and found a Coles shopping bag waiting on the driveway.
Lo and behold, inside was my jacket and wallet. Some kind soul found it and returned it to the address on the driver’s licence.
If that person is reading this, I’d like to thank them wholeheartedly. I appreciate their kindness and easing a worry while in recovery. It’s nice to know there are still good people in the world.
FRANK WAFER, West Richmond Backing Taiwan EXPRESSIONS of outrage over the current Taiwan crisis lack moral gravitas if they focus solely on the allegedly reckless actions of US Speaker Nancy Pelosi and fail to acknowledge the obscenity of Beijing’s reaction.
The patriotic fervour whipped up by the Chinese Communist Party on the mainland is nothing short of deranged.
As for the militaristic harassment of a peaceful island of about 23 million, democratically governed people – and even Taiwan’s Beijing-friendly Kuomintang party – attacked the drills as “belligerent acts” that should be “condemned by the entire civilised world”.
If nothing else, Pelosi’s visit to Taiwan set in motion a series of events that should be a wake-up call to the world about a problem that isn’t going to go away.
Perhaps now Beijing’s bulldog diplomacy will be met with something approaching an adequate shift in strategic policy and thinking in the West, rather than mere words of discontent.
GLEN KLEINSCHMIDT, Morphett Vale Cheaper power WHEN Opposition Leader Peter Dutton predicts that we are being taken “down a very dangerous path where you are going to see much higher electricity prices, much higher gas prices and greater unreliability in the system”, I say thank you (“Climate laws ‘a financial disaster’”, The Advertiser, Monday).
I trust he will stand by this prediction in about three to four years’ time when there is an election.
Everything I read tells me we are on a different path. Renewable energy is a much cheaper alternative.
Investment in storage and distribution technology will improve reliability. Many other Australians believe this, too.
RICHARD BENTLEY, Mile End
Word count: 589
