Australia has faced a series of defining challenges over the past three years. Fires, floods, a pandemic, a global recession, a mouse plague, a war in Europe, economic coercion from China.
They’ve all been hard on our families, on our businesses, on our jobs, on our farmers, on our children.
But set against those difficulties Australia, and Australians, have shown what we can overcome together.
Unemployment was predicted to reach 15 per cent, but it is now just 4 per cent – the equal lowest level in 48 years.
Our economic recovery measures saved around 700,000 jobs.
Australia is one of a small number of countries to maintain a AAA credit rating – a global standard for economic management. We have achieved the biggest budget turnaround in 70 years with our plan delivering an extra $100bn to the country’s bottom line.
Our economic growth is one of the best in the developed world – faster and stronger than the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, France, Germany, Italy and Japan. On almost any measure – fatality rates, vaccine rates, economic growth, jobs growth, or debt levels – Australia’s recovery is leading the world.
But I know our country continues to face very real challenges and many families are doing it tough.
There is still a lot of uncertainty ahead.
To build a stronger future our government has laid out a clear plan. We plan on delivering more jobs and working towards unemployment below 4 per cent. Our plan will deliver more jobs and the lowest unemployment in nearly 50 years.
We’ll deliver tax relief for workers and small businesses. We’re halving the tax you pay at the petrol pump for six months. And our tax plan will put more money in the pockets of 10 million Australians in the coming weeks and months, on top of our longer-term tax relief for everyone earning up to $200,000 a year.
We’re investing in roads, rail, water infrastructure and renewable energy technology. We have a more than $120bn pipeline of infrastructure.
We’re making record investments in health and other essential services. Our plan means we have record bulk billing rates, made Telehealth permanent, and includes listing more than 2800 drugs on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
We’re investing in stronger defence, security and borders. Locking in to new partnerships like AUKUS to build the best submarines in the world, develop long range hypersonic missiles and triple the size of our cyber offensive and defensive forces. Restarting the QUAD with the US, India and Japan to bring more security, stability and peace to our region.
This election provides a clear choice, with real consequences for Australia. Our economy has a lot of moving parts and a lot of risks. But also, many opportunities.
Anthony Albanese and Labor have no economic plan. They would weaken our economy and put our recovery at risk. Labor has a record of higher taxes. Albanese has argued for higher taxes on retirees, housing and families and inheritances.
Labor makes promises, but they can’t say how they’ll pay for them. This means two things – higher deficits and higher taxes. Labor cannot manage money, that’s why they come after yours. Now is not the time to risk it.
Only the Liberals and Nationals have a plan for a strong economy and a stronger future.
ELECTION 2022 LATEST UPDATES ADVERTISER.COM.AU
CREDIT: Scott Morrrison PRIME MINISTER
Word count: 563
