Ramping silence SO ambulance ramping must have stopped. I haven’t heard or read anything since a day before the state election.
It’s a miracle.
RUSSELL DISHER, Brompton Women’s rights NATASHA Stott Despoja, who is a member of the UN committee on the elimination of discrimination against women, says she is disappointed there is not more women in federal parliament.
Meanwhile, the UN Human Rights Council includes countries such as Libya, Sudan, China, Russia, Cuba and Venezuela. In my opinion the membership of some of these countries on the UNHRC damages its credibility.
I believe Ms Stott Despoja would do more good for women by shifting her mind from quotas for privileged politicians to focusing more on human rights issues faced by women in many other countries.
B. HINTON, Torrensville Climate calls IN the same week the UN’s Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released its report on the mitigation of climate change, Roman Rautenberg calls for Australia to keep using coal and gas (“Strong country”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
He believes “activists” calling for Australia to move to renewables is “madness”.
UN secretary-general Antonio Guterres, when releasing the report, said “climate activists are sometimes depicted as dangerous radicals but the truly dangerous radicals are the countries that are increasing the production of fossil fuels.” Guterres also said, “I’m appealing directly to you. Demand that renewable energy is introduced now at speed and at scale. Demand an end to coal-fired power. Demand an end to all fossil fuel subsidies.” It’s hard to imagine a clearer message.
RAY PECK, Hawthorn, Victoria Many US guns THE US Constitution gives its citizens the right to bear arms for protection. The result is that there are believed to be more guns than people in the US. Did it never occur to the founding fathers that citizens might use these firearms against each other?
DAVID ROBERTSON, Eden Hills Russia’s war MANY world leaders and media name Russian President Vladimir Putin as the bad guy responsible for everything that has gone wrong in the war in Ukraine.
The oversimplification of a complex geopolitical event has happened many times before, as history reveals.
It is easier to imagine one bad guy and think of citizenry of that country as nice kind folk labouring under his yoke.
Yet one single person is incapable of persecuting a complicated event such as a war.
Wars are planned and executed by thousands of complicit people, and even that is not possible without the nodding complicity of the populous.
Countries start wars, not single individuals.
As philosopher Edmund Burke is alleged to have said: All that evil requires is that good people do nothing.
Dr KENNETH E. MOXHAM, Urrbrae Human dignity IN the 1930s Adolf Hitler referred to Polish people as subhumans. Perhaps he did not die in that bunker in Berlin in 1945 but went to Russia, had lots of plastic surgery and changed his name to Vladimir Putin.
He is treating Ukrainian people as subhumans.
ROBERT McCORMICK, Bridgewater Migrant moves IN the name of compassion, I would be happy for Australia to triple its annual refugee intake, as suggested by SA Premier Peter Malinauskas (”Refugee intake to help us grow”, The Advertiser, Thursday), As long as there is a commitment not to return to the unsustainable pre-Covid-19 mass migration policy of more than 240,000 per year.
Polling by the Australian Population Research Institute shows about 70 per cent of Australians want lower levels of migration.
In the 21st century, we have the means to maintain a healthy economy without relying on physical growth in numbers. Climate change is evidence that planet Earth is groaning under the footprint of human habitation.
It is high time governments worldwide reset their economic policies to focus on social wealth and wellbeing without growth. C. FAULKNER, Cheltenham
Word count: 629
