A BUNGLED answer to a simple question about Labor’s promise to lower power bills by $275 forced Treasurer Jim Chalmers into an embarrassing backtrack on the all-but dead commitment.
And it was an expensive mistake for people facing average power-price hikes rising to $1000 a year over the next two years.
The Advertiser hit the streets of Adelaide yesterday to ask how people would cope with the budget forecast of 56 per cent power bill hikes and a 40 per cent rise for gas. Their responses ranged from Anne Wilson, 55, of Salisbury, who said “people will have to choose between medicine and power” and Daisy Shirley, 30, of St Peters, who said “as a renter, it’s pretty scary.” Maddison Sales, 24, of Para Hills said simply: “I don’t know how we’re going to cope.” Ian McGuire, 51, from Glengowrie, summed up the sentiment of the dozens of people interviewed by The Advertiser, saying: “we’re living close to the edge.” Dr Chalmers only compounded the government’s problems on Wednesday with a gaffe at the National Press Club, where he was asked if Australians should expect Labor’s promised $275 power bill saving by 2025 based on pre-election electricity prices.
“Yep, it’s in the budget,” he said.
But one hour later Dr Chalmers fronted up to Question Time to backtrack. “I misheard it and I answered a different question,” he said, claiming his big ears affected his hearing.
It comes as an online poll conducted by The Advertiser revealed almost 90 per cent of respondents were angry Labor broke its promise to reduce power bills. About 86 per cent of the 1048 people who voted in the poll said they couldn’t afford a 56 per cent increase in power bills over the next two years.
On 97 occasions before the federal election, Labor promised the power bill cut to all Australian households and businesses.
Asked by The Advertiser to clarify his position, Dr Chalmers said the $275 figure was part of the modelling released last year and it “referred to the price in 2025”.
He said the government stood by its claim bringing more renewable energy into the market would create cheaper electricity, but blamed the war in Ukraine for “causing havoc with the energy market” and “pushing up prices” shorter term.
Dr Chalmers said Australia was also in a situation where for the past decade “too much capacity” has been pulled out of the market, and “not enough has been added”.
Earlier when asked about the risk people who couldn’t afford heating next winter could end up sick or even dying, Dr Chalmers said he believed there was “more work to be done” on cutting power prices.
“In terms of the type of mechanism, triggers, caps, or other kinds of regulation, I’m not prepared to pre-empt any of that or narrow down the conversation,” he said.
“If we can do that to help take some of the sting out of price rises, then obviously we’ll consider it.” Former British prime minister Liz Truss was run out of office by her own party after promising to cap energy prices and sending markets into a tailspin over the cost of the plan.
Opposition Leader Peter Dutton said there was “shock across the Australian community” in response to the forecast power price hike.
“They heard the Prime Minister on 97 occasions promise that their power prices would come down by $275,” he said.
“We now find that five months later the government is predicting that their power prices will go up by 56 per cent over the next two years, gas prices up by 40 per cent, every other cost-of-living pressure still will continue to mount,” he said.
“The Ukraine war had started before the election and the Labor Party made the commitment. I think people are right to feel disappointed.” New figures yesterday confirmed the annual inflation rate reached 7.3 per cent in the September quarter. PAGE 24: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: CLARE ARMSTRONG NATIONAL POLITICAL EDITOR
Word count: 662
