Message filter WHAT an enlightening column by Joe Hildebrand in translating what Treasurer Jim Chalmers said in his budget speech into plain speak (“What Chalmers said and what he actually meant”, The Advertiser, Wednesday).
After reading this column, I now have a full grasp of the Treasurer’s message. There’s no money to give us and there will be tough times ahead. BOB SCHNELL, Everard Park Housing fixes THE federal government is talking about building more affordable homes. How about the state and federal governments prioritise getting those many trust houses that are standing empty, and that have been vandalised, back into liveable condition.
They could soon fill them with desperate tenants.
PETER M. BLYTH, Williamstown Budget tick APART from the forecast horrendous rise in the cost of electricity and gas, this budget seems a responsible one.
At budget time it is tempting to think “what’s in it for me”, and it is obviously impossible to please everyone.
GERRY GREENWAY, Netherby Price pressure WITH the budget forecast of large increases in electricity costs in the next two years, it will be harder to go green if you’re already in the red.
PETER McCALLUM, Booleroo Centre Rent freeze THE federal budget’s forecast for dramatic increases in energy prices across the next two years has left many people wondering what we can do to ameliorate additional cost pressures.
This is especially challenging when coupled with the reality that wages may effectively remain stagnant.
One measure that is in the control of property investors is rent rates. Please consider not increasing rents for the next two years to support families to keep a roof over their heads.
I understand these cost increases are borne by all of us but please do not seek to offset cost increases to the more vulnerable members of our community when we are in a housing crisis.
Let’s look after each other and get through these tough times with strong relationships that reinforce our shared values of a fair go for all.
KATIE McCUSKER, Felixstow Power pain SO the price of power is going to increase by about 50 per cent according to Treasurer Jim Chalmers and Prime Minister Anthony Albanese.
And there’s a whole lot of things to blame for this that couldn’t be foreseen when they promised to bring down power bills by $275 by 2025.
Now, I accept natural disasters in Australia are affecting the price of power. But I fail to see (I may be stupid) how the Ukraine war affects the price of wind and sunshine here. These renewable energy sources were said to be what is going to drive down our energy prices.
If the price exporters are getting for coal and gas has increased dramatically, and they are charging our energy providers here the same export price, it’s time the federal government pulls them into line.
In Saudi Arabia, and other oil-rich countries, they keep the global crude oil price high by limiting the number of barrels released.
But they look after their own people with cheap fuel. Why can’t we do the same with our resources?
IAN MATTERS, Croydon Park Efficient homes THE household electricity bill struggle is real (“Blitz on soaring energy prices”, The Advertiser, Wednesday).
Improving energy efficiency is an underrated solution. Turns out, adding better insulation, draught-proofing, washing clothes with cold water, and other simple changes can noticeably reduce our power bills.
State and local governments should step up by providing tips, offering subsidised energy audits, and incentivising energy-efficient appliances to help Australians cut their energy use today.
The result would be more affordable energy bills, fewer emissions, and healthier, more comfortable homes.
A win-win for us all.
AMY HILLER, Kew, Victoria Hip pocket nerve IF power prices rise more than 5o per cent across the next two years, I predict that Labor will be swept from power at the next federal and state elections.
To blame the Russian war is nonsense to me, as we have all the gas and coal we need right here.
Some people are clearly making far too much profit from our resources and governments must step in now.
Most people could never afford that sort of increase.
CHAS BARTER, Lower Mitcham New UK PM RISHI Sunak is the youngest British Prime Minister for more than 200 years. Let’s hope that he can stabilise the Tory party, sort out the UK financial crisis, and be a good example for the Americans.
The US certainly also needs some younger political leaders.
BOB COWLEY, Broadview British changes THERE is now a Hindu Prime Minister in the UK.
Who would have thought that could ever happen? Brilliant.
I wish Rishi Sunak luck, even though he’s a wealthy Tory.
British sitcom character Alf Garnett would be turning in his grave. MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood
Word count: 796
