Virus peaks CHIEF medical officer Professor Paul Kelly has assured us the current wave of Covid-19 has peaked.
Nationally, hospitalisations have either stabilised or decreased, but older people should remain cautious.
Being an older person, I don’t feel safe because of the half-hearted attempt now to keep us healthy from Covid-19.
Question: Has economics taken over from health?
DES KEMP, St Agnes
Camp ethics FOLLOWING revelations from footballer Eddie Betts, it appears the procedures used on Adelaide Crows players in the training camp used unethical behaviour.
Collecting private and privileged information and revealing it to other players in public and humiliating circumstances would be a betrayal of each client. Using disreputable methods does not make the clients stronger.
Being required to keep it secret afterwards is the age-old hallmark of many types of client abuse.
Such behaviour destroys trust among all involved, from players and their families to supporters everywhere. We are all reduced by it.
ROSEMARY McGRATH, Rose Park
Voice details CALEB Bond is asking important questions about the federal government’s proposal to insert an Indigenous voice to parliament in the Constitution (“Show us more detail before any vote to change constitution”, The Advertiser, Friday).
We need many more details before we can decide whether to vote yes or no in a referendum. For starters, there are about 250 nations in Australia’s First Nations – each with their own language, culture, customs and communities.
How will the members of the voice be chosen? Election or appointment? If the latter, who will do the appointing? Will each nation be given a vote? They may disagree with each other.
LINDSAY DENT, Campbelltown
Bill with teeth WHILE I have no issues with the climate Bill that has passed through federal parliament, it appears to be more symbolic than anything else.
We know more money and effort will be spent on renewables, but details are sketchy.
What is being done, where and when? Also, the key appears to be getting most Aussies’ power bills down. When will this happen? If this government cannot give most people any power bill relief soon, the gloss will come off this Bill quickly. Labor cannot afford a repeat of the carbon tax fiasco under former prime minister Julia Gillard.
DAVID BISHOP, South Plympton
No more games THE shelves in our supermarkets are bare of essential goods, petrol may soon be unaffordable, our power prices are ridiculous and we are exporting gas to overseas markets cheaper than our domestic market.
Families are living under bridges, trees, in cars and in tents. And the games in Canberra go on: Time wasting divisional votes, heckling and name calling.
Get on with the business of looking after Australians, is the urgent message to our politicians.
GARRY TURNER, Port Pirie
Beware scooters PERHAPS shopping centres need to erect signs now reminding customers to beware of scooter riders in their centre.
It is difficult enough avoiding cyclists while walking on park tracks. Now, after encountering a young person riding a scooter fast through Arndale Shopping Centre, showing no concern for shoppers, I ask the question: where is a safe place to walk?
ILAINA NOLAN, Flinders Park
Small reaction A NUCLEAR submarine is about the equivalent of a small nuclear reactor. SNRs can power about 230,000 homes, so a nuclear submarine may be able to power about 200,000 homes with clean energy.
Perhaps we could get around the ban on nuclear power by plugging in our new nuclear subs to our seaport grids in pursuit of clean-energy targets.
Maybe a more practical idea would be to just build SNRs.
MARK THOMPSON, Newton
Cheap energy AS the federal opposition tries to stay relevant by calling for yet another review into nuclear energy, I trust savvy businesses will hasten Australia’s transition to cheap renewable energy.
Because we finally – eureka – have a federal government that accepts climate science.
C. FAULKNER, Cheltenham
Nuclear unviable MP James Stevens raises the possibility of a nuclear option. Why on earth would we ever want to create a system that will forever be a drag on state and federal budgets and our economies?
The Howard government commissioned the Switkowski report, which found a nuclear power plant would not be built and operated without large public subsidies.
What would happen to the plants once decommissioned? How much would it demand in ongoing costs?
Rather than help the nuclear case, the report damaged it, only for the same debate to be raging 20 years later.
All of this is the opposite of Liberal philosophy of leaving it to private enterprise, small government, lower taxes, no deficit budgets and small national debt.
Our federal budget is struggling to cope with the demands already placed on it. Does Mr Stevens wants to make those demands even higher? COLIN FRASER, Sheidow Park
Word count: 797
