Sand blown away I WALKED along West Beach, north of the boat ramp, after the storm earlier this week.
I was horrified to see the damage done to the thousands of tonnes of sand carted in to help rebuild the dunes after last winter’s storms.
Why weren’t sand-retaining groynes built to prevent this damage? The beach in front of West Beach Surf Life Saving Club is totally scoured, leaving nothing but the rock wall again.
CHRIS BROTHERTON, Lockleys Migrant homes ABOUT 140,000 “skilled migrants” are waiting for visas to come and work in Australia (“Visa backlog a priority”, The Advertiser, Friday).
With our current housing crisis, where are they all going to live? Will employers provide housing, or will we see tent cities such as in the US?
R. WOOD, Valley View Formal wear SCHOOLS may not be entitled to put restrictions on students’ attire when attending formals (“If teachers find female bodies uncomfortable, stop looking”, The Advertiser, Friday).
It would be difficult for teachers to stop looking at students when dressed up, as you would need a blindfold.
A couple of simple, but stupid, solutions would be that teachers who can’t guarantee they won’t look at students not be allowed to attend school formals.
Or ban formals altogether as a school function.
Unfortunately, one of the conditions imposed by function centres for school formals is that there is adequate teacher supervision.
DOMENICA CAVUOTO, Klemzig Top priorities I HOPE our new federal government will set its priorities correctly. First and foremost, it should do what has to be done to rectify the problems caused by Covid-19 and the floods, among other things.
Any constitutional reforms can come later, if at all.
For example, I hope we will not have to endure a repeat of the dreary republic debate, which was probably anathema to most Australians.
D. G. PITT, Plympton Republic mandate I’M outraged that Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has created the role of Assistant Minister for the Republic (“Albo’s bid to clear the heir”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
He has a mandate to fix health, housing and the cost of living – but I believe he has no mandate to push for a republic.
During the election campaign, I heard no mention by Labor of its intention to create this new ministerial role.
It’s deceitful and an unnecessary cost.
Federal Labor needs to focus on the core issues we are facing and not on left-wing ideology.
BOB SCHNELL, Everard Park Policy laid out I WONDER how many people got as far as page 77 of the 157- page Labor manifesto, the ALP National Platform?
Yes, tucked away there is a single sentence about their intention to work towards Australia becoming a republic.
I can, however, find no reference to this in the material sent out by Labor during the election campaign. Why?
If Labor believes this issue is so important that it needs to appoint an Assistant Minister for the Republic, then I believe it is something that should have been front and centre of the election campaign.
Much more should also have been made of Labor’s support for another contentious issue, that of the Uluru Statement from the Heart.
In both cases, we are being informed these are essential to our growth as a nation. In reality, there are arguments for and against both issues.
Given the cost of any referendum, and the subsequent economic and social costs of implementing these things if successful, there is cause for concern about these attempts to make major changes without proper consultation.
K.M. GUNN, Lower Mitcham More information CLIMATE emergency? Please explain.
DAVE GLANFIELD, Seaview Downs Gas for Aussies WE don’t have a gas supply problem, we have a gas export problem. For years, gas companies have prioritised foreign sales over supplying the domestic markets.
As a result, despite huge increases in gas production, prices have still gone up.
Now, after creating supply trouble, the same gas companies want governments to support the chase for riskier sources of gas to keep their profits rolling in.
Yet, every tonne of gas increases global heating. Continuing on this path will lead to a climate crisis.
The solution is to prioritise gas production for domestic customers and shift our economy to renewable energy and full electrification as quickly as possible.
CRAIG WILKINS, Conservation SA chief executive Pacific stability LABOR and the Coalition parties agree that the Indo-Pacific region is now more unstable than ever.
We need democratic countries to work together to counter the new Chinese assert­iveness in the area.
US influence, including soft power, is vital in this. Terrible US gun massacres don’t help.
BOB COWLEY, Broadview New race type THE logical solution to providing “an environment that’s fair for everyone” is that transgender athletes be given their own race category (“Arnie’s plea: Make it fair”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
RICK DREWER, Gawler East
Word count: 808
