WILL our politicians finally wake up? None of this crisis should be happening if our global warming alarmists are right.
We’re freezing, not cooking. Electricity costs are soaring, not falling, and green power isn’t saving us.
Worse, some poorer Australians will almost certainly die in homes they cannot afford to heat.
We don’t have a climate crisis. We have an energy crisis, caused in part by the global warming fools who destroyed the electricity system that once gave us one of the world’s cheapest and most plentiful supplies of electricity.
Our insanity is astonishing. Australia has huge reserves of coal, gas, oil and uranium. Yet we’ve decided all four energy supplies are too sinful to use, or use much longer.
We outlawed nuclear power, stopped some new coalmines, shut coal-fired power stations and banned coal-seam gas in Victoria and much of NSW and South Australia. Banks refused to fund coal projects, and now the Albanese government insists it will make 82 per cent of our electricity come from renewable energy in just eight years – an insane tripling of the solar and wind we have already.
But these preachers said don’t worry! Switching to wind and solar power was easy and would save money! The sun and wind are free! As if you could run outside and just grab a handful of sun to boil your eggs.
But where is all this wind and solar power that we’ve spent tens of billions on already in a fake attempt to stop a fake “climate crisis”?
Fact is, green power is too hit-and-miss to rely on when you most need – like in this cold snap.
South Australia boasts it’s got masses of solar and wind power, but last Thursday had to crank up diesel generators to create 11 per cent of the state’s electricity, with gas adding another 61 per cent.
Now people will die. Even last year, before this energy crisis hit hard, Wollongong University surveyed people in social housing and found “substantial underheating” of their homes, with some turning off the heat so they could afford to eat.
The study warned: Cold homes kill.
Three years ago Michelle Ananda-Rajah of the Alfred Hospital, now a new Labor MP, said two Melbourne hospitals had treated 24 people between 2009 and 2016 who died of hypothermia.
Most were pensioners from freezing homes. How many more poor Australians will die this winter, thanks to the global warming madness of our elites?
CREDIT: ANDREW BOLT
Word count: 412
