Sit back, buckle up, and let the open road take you on an adventure along Western Australia’s glorious Coral Coast Highway.
Travelling north along the Western Australia coastline, from the bright lights of Perth to the pristine Ningaloo Reef and beautiful Kalbarri National Park is a diverse experience. Perth’s delectable dining culture and bustling streets give way to a stretch of open road peppered with small towns, surprising detours and cultural experiences. Whichever route you take north – the Coral Coast Highway towards the spellbinding Ningaloo Reef, or Indian Ocean Drive to fields of flowers in Kalbarri – you’ll see some of the most spectacular scenery on the planet.
Coral Coast Highway The trip from Perth to Exmouth along the Coral Coast Highway is one of the few routes on Earth where you can visit two World Heritage-listed treasures in one self-drive adventure. Hit the road, leaving the busy streets of Perth, the wildfowers of Green Head, the pink expanse of Hutt Lagoon and the red sandstone of Kalbarri National Park in your rearview mirror until you reach the frst UNESCO protected destination: Shark Bay. With a landscape that is as vivid as it is varied, you’ll feel yourself relaxing in the crystal clear water of Shark Bay’s Shell Beach: a rare stretch of coastline formed entirely of tiny white shells. Visit Monkey Mia, famous for frolicking wild dolphins and abundant wildlife, the rusty red dunes a backdrop to pristine sand and warm water. Close by, visit the turquoise bliss of Big Lagoon in Francois Peron National Park; its rich population of marine wildlife, including manta rays, dolphins, dungeons and sharks, are sure to delight. A relatively short drive from Big Lagoon is Hamelin Pool and a boardwalk that takes you on a trip back in time to explore thousands of 3.5-billion-year-old stromatolites, known as living fossils.
Another 500kms north – past Carnarvon, a palm tree-lined oasis featuring spectacular blowholes, and some of the best swimming, surfng and snorkelling spots in WA – is the second World Heritage-listed treasure. Ningaloo Reef is the world’s largest fringing reef and it’s part of the Ningaloo Coast region. Just beyond the reef is one of the best places in the world to swim with the largest fsh in the ocean – the gentle whale shark. They’re regular visitors between March and August, and from August to November, you can watch humpback whales make their annual migration, too. But that’s not all: from November to March, nesting turtles make the beach their own. Catch a glimpse of manta rays, turtles and dolphins; they’re all swimming in the clear warm waters of Ningaloo Reef. North of Ningaloo Reef is the welcoming coastal town of Exmouth, where accommodation is plentiful. With options for all adventurers, Exmouth is the ideal place to base yourself as you explore the Ningaloo Coast. And options are about to get even better. Ningaloo Lighthouse Resort is an eco-focused development that’s currently in approval. Undergoing an $85m redevelopment, the resort will accommodate up to 550 guests across a mix of eco tents, villas, hotel rooms and caravan sites. Powered by renewable energy, the resort will use wastewater recycling and have no single-use plastics onsite.
Indian Ocean Drive Starting in Perth, and ending in Kalbarri National Park, this 570km route traverses unique landscapes and ancient wonders. Just two hours out of Perth is Nambung National Park and the famous Pinnacles, an otherworldly sight that will stay with you forever – thousands of tall limestone spires rise out of the yellow desert sands. Drive or walk through these fascinating formations or, better still, stand at the lookout and ponder the unique sculptures that formed 25-30,000 years ago. A short drive west and you’ll hit the quaint coastal town of Cervantes – stop for some delicious fresh seafood or take up one of the land and sea activities on offer. Head towards Jurien Bay and jump on a boat tour to witness the fascinating creatures who call this pristine habitat home, including dolphins, sea lions and humpback whales. If you’re travelling between September and November, see the colourful wildflower display in Lesueur National Park. Take a break from the highway in the charismatic maritime town of Geraldton, and an hour later you’ll arrive at Hutt Lagoon, one of the region’s most vibrant attractions. Depending on the season, time of day and cloud coverage, this lake changes from red to pink and even to lilac purple. The final stop is Kalbarri – a coastal town surrounded by striking limestone cliffs and ancient red rock gorges. Before you head back to Perth, explore the Kalbarri Skywalk, Nature’s Window and the mighty Murchison River at The Loop in Kalbarri National Park. Whichever scenic drive you choose along the Coral Coast Highway – past turquoise water and white sand, pausing to explore and detouring if the mood strikes – it will be worth the trip. To fnd an itinerary that suits you, visit wanderoutyonder.com.au.
Take a break, take a tour • Book a tour with New Leaf Connect (newleafconnect.com.au) for the opportunity to disconnect from the hustle and bustle, and reconnect with the midwest region. Delve into the history of the area, explore local produce and sample award-winning rum and gin. Half and full-day tours available. • Of the coast of Shark Bay is one of WA’s most unique islands, and Dirk Hartog Island Life Adventures (dirkhartogisland.com.au) will take you there. See the spectacular view – by air or by boat – on the way to the island, where you’ll enjoy relaxing beach walks, kayaking or a guided tour.
Word count: 930
