HOUSING COALITION In what the PM calls a “game-changer”, the Coalition will let first-home buyers tap into $50,000 or 40 per cent of their super to put towards a house. To increase housing supply, empty-nesters aged 55 and over will be able to downsize with the lure of pumping $300,000 of the sale into their super without penalty.
Will more than triple the number of places in the Home Guarantee Scheme, allowing first-home buyers to buy properties with deposits as low as 2 per cent, and offer additional places to single-parent families. Will also invest $2bn to build more affordable housing.
LABOR Will provide an equity contribution of up to 40 per cent for 10,000 Australians a year under its Help to Buy scheme. Labor says the policy, available for people who have home deposits as low as 2 per cent, would allow people to save up to $1500 on mortgage repayments every month. However, the party acknowledges participants must buy out the government or sell the home if their income rises beyond $90,000 for singles or $120,000 for couples.
CHILDCARE COALITION No new measures to lift the childcare subsidy, but announced in March it had lifted the subsidy rate by 30 percentage points for a second child, up to a maximum rate of 95 per cent. The government says families who earn $120,000 a year with two children in childcare will save $144 a week.
LABOR Plans to boost childcare subsidies to 90 per cent for low-income earners, which it says will save families up to $80 a week for one child. Under the policy families earning up to $530,000 will receive increases in the childcare subsidy. Labor says families with two or more children will receive a higher subsidy rate for second and subsequent children than they would under the Coalition.
WAGES COALITION Scott Morrison says he supports a “sustainable” wage rise ­– including to the minimum wage – but won’t outline how much he thinks it should be.
LABOR Leader Anthony Albanese says he will “absolutely” support Australia’s lowest-paid workers getting a 5.1 per cent pay increase, but has refused to outline if Labor would lobby for this specific pay bump with the Fair Work Commission.
HEALTHCARE COALITION Pledged to lower the cost of medicines on the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme by $10, which would cap costs at $32.50. It would amount to a $120-a-year saving on any one-on-one script per month. It will also lower the PBS Safety Net program, which it says, coupled with an eligibility expansion of the Seniors Health Card, could have millions of people saving up to $80 a year.
LABOR Will match the Coalition’s Seniors Health Card expansion and has gone further on the PBS by promising to lower cost of medicines by $12.50 – which would deliver users an annual saving of up to $150. Labor also recently announced a $970m plan – made up of a fund worth $720m and a grant scheme worth $250m – to “strengthen Medicare”.
AGED CARE COALITION Lifted funding for aged care by $18.8bn through to 2025-26 to implement royal commission reforms, has agreed to lift minimum care standards to 200 minutes a day, ensure nurses for at least 16 hours, and will “respect” any decision on higher wages for workers made by the Fair Work Commission.
LABOR Pledged to match the Coalition boost and add $2.5bn, lifting minimum care standards to 215 minutes a day, ensuring nurses 24 hours, improving food standards and advocating wage rises via the FWC and funding the outcome. Questions remain on how it will get enough nurses and how much wage rises will cost.
ELECTRICITY COALITION Has released no new plan to tackle rising energy costs, but Mr Morrison has trumpeted his record on power bills, which have fallen 8 per cent in the past two years. Says its investment in new energy generation will put downward pressure on prices.
LABOR Says modelling of its clean-energy policies show power bills would be reduced by $275 a year by 2025, but has offered no indication of how it would ease short-term cost-of-living pressures. Experts note international markets could affect its promoted savings.
TAXES COALITION A one-off $420 cost-of-living tax offset was announced in the budget. Millions of eligible taxpayers will now receive up to $1500 a person or $3000 for couples in tax relief from July 1. The PM has given an “iron-clad guarantee” his government will not raise taxes in the life of the next parliament.
LABOR Has abolished the higher tax agenda it took to the 2019 election and will support the government’s $420 offset. Refused to match the government’s pledge to cap taxation at 23.9 per cent of GDP. Only proposed new tax is one on multinationals, which includes cracking down on businesses using tax havens.
WOMEN COALITION Has a plan, announced in budget, for more flexible parental leave where working parents share up to 20 weeks of government-funded time off. Also claims that 43 of the 55 recommendations of the Respect@Work report are fully implemented or funded with $70m committed and work under way on all recommendations.
LABOR Will work to close the gender pay gap by advocating through the FWC to raise wages in “care” sectors, promises 10 days of family and domestic violence leave and 500 new community sector workers to support women in crisis. Has also committed to implementing all 55 recommendations of the Respect@Work report and will establish a new Family, Domestic and Sexual Violence Commissioner.
NDIS COALITION Has not released an election-specific NDIS policy. The NDIS will overtake spending on defence in 2024-25, and cost federal and state governments collectively $46bn annually in 2025-26.
LABOR Has announced a six-point plan to improve the NDIS, which includes fixing regional access, stopping cuts to plans, boosting efficiency, reducing wasteful administrative expenses, putting more disabled people on the board of the National Disability Insurance Agency and boosting staffing levels at the NDIA.
NATIONAL SECURITY COALITION Has lifted defence spending above 2 per cent of GDP ($48bn in 2022-23) and plans to spend another $575bn over the next decade. Promised to increase the defence workforce by 18,500 people over the next 18 years. Announced $9.9bn in funding for new cyber security and intelligence capabilities.
LABOR Committed to keeping defence spending above 2 per cent of GDP and supports the Coalition’s national security settings. Has pledged to spend money more effectively.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS COALITION “Investing” in the relationship with neighbours, particularly through the multibillion-dollar Pacific Step Up program.
LABOR Has responded to the crisis to pitch its own Pacific strategy with heavy focus on “soft power” such as reinstating broadcast media into the region if elected, aerial surveillance of Pacific Island countries’ exclusive economic zones, and an extra $525m spend over four years in the region.
JOBS & TRAINING COALITION Promises to create “another 1.3 million jobs” over five years, spending $3.7bn on skills training to create 800,000 extra spots, $7.1bn to fund “transformative infrastructure projects” and “$2bn to drive growth and productivity” through the Regional Accelerator Program.
LABOR Has not set a whole-of-government jobs creation number, but has nominated figures across a few policy areas. Believes its emissions reduction and renewable energy plan can create 604,000 jobs, and has a goal of creating 1.2m tech-related jobs by 2030. Also wants to create 465,000 fee-free TAFE place for students studying in industries with skills shortages.
FUEL COALITION Ruled out an extension of the fuel excise tax cut beyond September. The Prime Minister says the tax cut introduced in the budget has put downward pressure on the cost of transportation of critical goods such as groceries.
LABOR Will also not extend the measure, which will cost the government almost $3bn in lost revenue.
ENVIRONMENT COALITION Its target is to hit net-zero emissions by 2050 through “technology not taxes”, with a 2030 target of 26-28 per cent emissions reductions. Extra $1bn set aside for the Great Barrier Reef. LABOR Also targets net zero by 2050, with a 2030 goal of 43 per cent reduction. Has also announced it will back the government’s $1bn reef investment and add another $194.5m for related programs.
Word count: 1354
