IN looking at the Victorian National Party’s new energy plan, I can’t believe how misinformed they have become, in particular allocating $1 billion to hydrogen, with a further emphasis on solar panels and batteries.
Hydrogen has been in an experimental stage for years and is nowhere near being a practical reality, with concerns regarding the cost of production, and safety issues regarding storage and handling.
Being on the land, they should know that in winter there is about nine hours of sunshine a day, which means there is solar fuel for only nine hours a day if the sun is shining. (Recently in Wangaratta, I have recorded 27 days out of 30 when the sun was barely seen).
The result is solar panels on houses and solar farms are impractical and uneconomic.
But the Nationals do have an excellent policy in the development of onshore conventional natural gas as an affordable, reliable source of energy. The existing LNG gas network and appliances is in place waiting to be used.
If the Nationals were to replace their policy regarding hydrogen, solar panels and batteries with keeping all the Yallourn power stations going as long as possible, it would boost Victoria’s economy immensely. And make voting for them a whole lot easier.
John Moore, Wangaratta
SA soaks up all the benefits I READ with interest that a business case has been completed for the Hughenden Irrigation Project, in the Flinders region of northwest Queensland. It suggests the proposed scheme would generate $776.6 million in benefits and more than 1900 agricultural jobs and will “transform Hughenden and the Flinders Shire communities into a diverse, future-proofed and resilient agricultural and economic powerhouse”.
A warning to all those who think this may be an agricultural and economic panacea for that region: more than seven decades ago, there were likewise grand plans for agricultural and economic prosperity across southwestern NSW with the construction of the Snowy Hydro project, Hume Dam and a magnificent irrigation scheme that would droughtproof and revitalise this land for national benefit.
Then, we had the Millennium Drought, which presented our South Australian neighbours with a unique opportunity to seek increased volumes of this stored water, primarily for their domestic and recreational use. Knowing that would not pass the “pub test”, they instead promoted the need for “environmental flows’’.
The politicians saw a potential vote-winner, the scientific community saw a unique opportunity to get billions in funding, and before you could say “let’s hang our irrigators out to dry”, the media was conned and the scene was set.
Now, instead of using water to grow the food and fibre that we all need, we provide water in abundance to keep South Australia’s Lower Lakes at a prime level for recreation activities, we make it available for South Australia’s expanding canal-frontage housing, we keep their lawns in lovely green condition and we pour what’s left out to sea.
The communities that have relied on agricultural prosperity since the irrigation scheme was established become the collateral damage, but who cares? Not the politicians, because they have a vote winner. Not the scientists, because they have their slice of $13 billion. Not the Croweaters, because they have water in abundance.
Alan Thwaites,
Finley NSW Leading the way on renewables IT IS good news that farmers are “seriously considering renewable options” and saving on their costs (“Renewables lead a new era,” WT Jul 28). Facilitating factors include leadership from organisations such as Renewables Consulting. Funding from the NSW Department of Primary industries is also crucial. And the experiences of individual farmers are likely to be convincing and inspiring to other farmers.
Renewable energy will also contribute in lowering our carbon emissions and eventually restore a less challenging climate.
Barbara Fraser, Burwood
The long view on climate change MAYBE Margaret’s tongue was in her cheek when she said climate change is simply “periods of dry followed by periods of wet” (Letters, WT July 27).
The key difference between weather and climate change is time scale. When we talk about climate change, we talk about changes in long-term averages of daily weather. It’s the trends in these long-term averages that have us worried, not a cold snap here or a wet day there.
Ray Peck, Hawthorn
Word count: 707
