ADZ Carter is correct the Delany Hotel has been around for a long time. So it should close at 6pm, as it did for a long time.
Bill Storer, Charlestown RAY Cross (Short Takes 15/10) thinks that the national flag at the Australian government's media centre is incorrectly displayed. The rule for a place such as the media centre is that it should be displayed to the speaker's right while any other flags should be to his left. As viewed from the audience the national flag should therefore be at the extreme left exactly as Mr Cross has observed it to be.
Ian Roach, New Lambton ANDREW Hirst may be a little confused in his questions about renewables v nuclear (Letters, 17/10). First he says renewables are "indisputably" the cheapest form of energy but goes on to ask whether nuclear is cheaper? Answer: No. Then he asks a set of loaded questions that read like a push-poll for nuclear. Firstly Andrew, please take Adam Bandt's advice and "Google it, mate" before putting fingertips to keyboard. Secondly, two other letters conveniently answered some of those questions, saving me the trouble. Thanks to Fiona Colin and Brian Measday, who it appears are capable of doing online searches that filter out the fossil propaganda.
Michael Gormly, Islington ANDREW Hirst (Letters 17/10) is advised to Google "levelized cost of electricity". He will find that is calculation of energy costs the cost of installation of solar panels and wind turbines is indeed taken into account. The cost of remediation after a renewable facility passes its use by date should also be taken into account as it should with a coal mine after it closes. Included in coal mine remediation costs should be to return the land to its original state for re-use in agriculture. Subsidies received by renewable companies are primarily designed to encourage new renewable capacity so that renewable energy targets are met. I might add subsidies are also received by fossil fuel energy generators.
Lloyd Davies, Stockton JOHN Cooper (Letters 19/10), you are correct the initial Robodebt scheme was a Labor idea. The scheme the LNP implemented was weaponised to something totally different to the original.
Richard Dempsey, New Lambton CRICKETER Pat Cummins is another hypocritical woke super goose. How's this bloke going to have the energy to bowl after rowing his dugout canoe back to Australia, let alone walking to test matches in Sydney, Adelaide, Perth, Brisbane and Melbourne. Quite the athlete, me thinks.
Steve Barnett, Fingal Bay SHARE YOUR OPINION WITH NEWCASTLE HERALD READERS Email letters@newcastleherald.com.au or send a text message to 0427 154 176 (include name and suburb). Letters should be fewer than 200 words. Short Takes should be fewer than 50 words. Correspondence may be edited in any form.
CREDIT:
Word count: 461
