A new political party running “independents” in two states has received large donations from climate activists, green-backing business people and leftwing unions, but denies it is a “Greens front”.
The Local Party, running Senate and lower house candidates in Tasmania and Senate candidates in South Australia, launched its federal election campaign on Wednesday.
Founder and Tasmanian Senate candidate Leanne Minshull said it aimed to elect independents bound only by commitments to action on climate change, the Uluru Statement from the Heart and citizen juries.
However, the party has received major donations from the green movement, including $20,000 from former Greens donor and entrepreneur Graeme Wood and $50,000 from Climate 200, a political group backing independents.
The party has also received backing from leftwing unions, including $10,000 from the Maritime Union of Australia and support from the Communications, Electrical and Plumbing Union. MONA founder and professional gambler David Walsh has donated $5000.
As well, the fledgling party recently received $50,000 from a NSW-based entity called Keep Them Honest. A private company of that name is owned by Sydney investment managers Fred Woollard and Therese Cochrane, who also recently donated $20,000 to the Tasmanian Greens, and apparently support Wentworth independent Allegra Spender.
Tasmanian Liberal senator Wendy Askew said The Local Party’s donations showed it was a “front for the Greens” and “taking voters for fools”.
Ms Minshull, former chief of staff to Tasmanian Greens leader Cassy O’Connor and Australia Institute state boss, said Local Party candidates were genuine independents using a party structure as “a vehicle”. The party website focuses on climate change, reducing jail incarceration rates, poker machines and opposing plans to make Tasmania “the Battery of the Nation” by building a second interconnector to Victoria and exporting renewable energy.
CREDIT: MATTHEW DENHOLM TASMANIA CORRESPONDENT
Word count: 294
