This reflected our endless ­frustration in seeking to expose wrongdoing, which we knew ­existed but could not prove.
We were delighted when eventually such a commission was established.
That said, experience in Western Australia and elsewhere, as explained in the article by the King’s Counsels at the South Australian bar (“Lessons for nation as it shapes up on integrity bill”, 26/9), points to the need to heed what they say.
Overreach in South Australia, Western Australia and NSW, to identify but three states, underlines a basic and frightening truth elucidated in the article: “Terrorism suspects are given more rights when criminal charges are brought against them than a public servant who is brought before an anti-corruption commission.”
Australian experience has taught us two things: that anti-corruption commissions are necessary to deal with governments corrupted by power, and that the commissions are also able to be corrupted by power.
A federal anti-corruption commission, yes. But one with adequate and proper safeguards for all those the subject of the exercise of its extraordinary powers.
Bill Hassell, Nedlands, WA
Praise for Tomago
How encouraging to read that Tomago Aluminium is planning for a green future. (“Top power user flicks the switch”, Business Review, 26/9) As noted by its chairman, it is a bold and costly move, and it puts pressure on its current supplier, AGL.
Necessity is the mother of invention, as they say, and the demise of coal and gas as energy sources must be faced now. ­Storage for renewable energy is a worldwide problem and is inspiring companies to develop innovative solutions beyond lithium-ion batteries. Gravity storage, water storage and molten salt storage are three of these. Some will work in some situations; some won’t be worth pursuing. Older people will know that the internet is almost unrecognisable now from its 1996 form. Change happens fast when people see opportunity.
Tomago can be a leader in driving entrepreneurs in the race to green energy storage and will also secure its own future.
Elaine Hopper, Blackburn, Vic
Shipping charade
I am currently completing a detailed maritime history of Australia so your article (“Taskforce to study merchant ship plan”, 26/9) both intrigued and alarmed me.
Obviously, our federal government is girding its loins to repeat the financial disasters of two of its predecessors in falling for the pleading of the maritime unions and other potential beneficiaries who seek the establishment of yet another “sheltered workshop” for their benefit in the form of a new national shipping line. The very expensive fates of two disastrous precedents in the Commonwealth Line of Steamers of the 1920s and the more recent Australian National Line should be ringing very loud alarm bells among taxpayers. Both were established for very similar reasons and against similar backgrounds to the present proposal.
Of course, we’ll be told that “this time it’s different”. Anyone who has inhabited this planet for more than 50 years knows that is never true.
Apart from a handful of notable examples, Australian government involvement in the maritime sphere, whether naval or commercial, has invariably been financially disastrous. It and we, the taxpayers, should therefore be very wary of this proposal.
It can only be hoped that the Albanese government’s taskforce will include someone who knows the history of Australia’s appalling experience with government-owned shipping lines. It should also include a tough-minded chartered accountant with extensive maritime experience. That may help to counterbalance the self-interested proponents of the “strategic fleet” scheme.
Dr Neil Baird, Clareville, NSW
Budget goals
The last Liberal prime minister to insist that we live within our means, that intergenerational theft be avoided, that any new spending be offset by savings and that the public service follow a natural attrition course, was Tony Abbott. But Abbott’s sound budgetary approach was weaponised by Labor’s then leader, Bill Shorten, with his irrational cries of “austerity” and the shameful opting out of repairing a budget his party and predecessors had so badly damaged.
Indeed the last Labor prime minister to deliver a budget surplus was Bob Hawke. Anthony Albanese could and should set himself a goal to consign that fact to history. But I won’t hold my breath.
Mandy Macmillan, Singleton, NSW
Word count: 675
