Teal-Green coalition will come back to bite voters Not only would Simon Holmes a Court personally benefit from a Labor government being supported by his Climate 200 “teal” candidates (“Independent wealth and the route to climate riches”, 26/4), but so, of course, would the whole renewables industry through an acceleration of the gravy train of subsidies, grants, soft loans and market protection.
The economy and our living standards would suffer. Behind all of these subsidies and freebies are increased taxes and increased debt. It’s no coincidence that in Victoria the cost of a new house includes 40 per cent of state taxes and duties to help make up for a cavalier approach to economic management, including very generous renewables subsidies.
The ALP is promising to spend $20bn on new transmission lines to connect widely dispersed wind and solar farms. This gift to the renewables industry will bounce back on to consumers through higher electricity prices or higher taxes. There are no free lunches.
Ron Hobba, Camberwell, Vic
Silly me. I thought that Simon Holmes a Court was a true believer in emissions reduction for the sake of the good of the planet. Now I learn that he and his family stand to be enriched by their invest­ments in the renewable energy sector should the so-called independents that his group is funding to the tune of $10m vote in favour of the climate sector industry legislation in which he holds significant investments.
This may be his best investment of all.
Victoria Webster, North Adelaide, SA
The Libs should take heart from Malcolm Turnbull’s involvement with Simon Holmes a Court’s Climate 200 candidates. Turnbull, after all, twice lost the leadership of the Liberal Party, both times hoist on his own emissions obsession petard.
He also lost 40 Newspolls in a row, led the Coalition for its longest, lowest period of primary vote support in Newspoll history and at the 2016 election lost 14 lower house seats as well as three Senate spots.
Indeed, Turnbull’s “loser mozz” worked at last year’s Upper Hunter by-election. So here’s hoping he maintains form and that the Turnbull mozz rubs off on the Climate 200 candidates at next month’s federal election.
Mandy Macmillan, Singleton NSW
Could it be a case of sour grapes as a possible interpretation that Simon Holmes a Court, a wealthy businessman who epitomises Liberal Party values, may benefit from a clean energy, low-carbon future?
Fossil fuel lobbyists, whose wealth is based on the very thing destroying our planet, have had carte blanche access to our governments for decades; billions of our taxpayer dollars have gone to their pockets as subsidies.
Support rather than denigrate teal candidates who, if elected, will represent their communities and fight to transition away from fossil fuels, taking the lead in facing the reality that the current path will continue to lead to economy-wrecking climate change.
Let’s be sensible.
Isabelle Henry, Ascot Vale, Vic
One could almost feel sympathy for Liberal MPs Trent Zimmerman and Jason Falinski as they try to navigate their way through the mire that is the Coalition’s climate policy. The Nationals candidate for Flynn, Colin Boyce, is saying the quiet part out loud: the net-zero emissions by 2050 commitment made by the Prime Minister in Glasgow is “flexible” and leaves “wriggle room” (“Coalition climate change cold war heats up”, 26/4).
Barnaby Joyce made conditions for his agreement to net zero by 2050 and was never really in favour, but his stance allowed Scott Morrison to go to Glasgow and sign up. Now some in the Coalition are openly reneging. The short-termism of the Morrison government makes 2050 a theoretical target only.
The fallacy – and tragedy – of this thinking is that the world is overshooting safe emissions levels; net zero by 2050 is now recognised as redundant. As Australia squanders the enormous opportunities in renewable industries, the time left to reduce emissions diminishes.
Zimmerman and Falinski know this, and know that their constituents know. The party we call the Coalition is forever stymied by its deep divisions and will not do the hard yards to prepare the nation for the future. Fiona Colin, Malvern East, Vic
Word count: 692
