Twenty of the nation’s most marginal electorates have unemployment rates above the national average, showing the potential for a strong jobs pitch to swing the ­result of the election.
The Australian’s analysis of 25 electorates held by a margin of 3.5 per cent or less reveals only five had jobless rates under 4.2 per cent at the end of last year.
These include Corangamite on Victoria’s surf coast, which is held by Labor on a margin of 1 per cent and has an unemployment rate of 2.4 per cent.
The jobless rate was 2.9 per cent in both Wentworth in Sydney’s rich eastern suburbs, held by the Liberals, and in Indi on the northeast border of Victoria, held by independent Helen Haines.
The analysis shows the Liberal seats of Reid, running along the Parramatta River in Sydney (held on a margin of 3.2 per cent), and Boothby in Adelaide’s south (on a margin of 1.4 per cent) recorded unemployment rates of 3.8 per cent and 4.1 per cent, respectively.
At the other end of the scale, the Labor-held electorate of Blair, which is centred around the town of Ipswich, west of Brisbane, recorded the highest unemployment at 9 per cent.
Unemployment was between 7 per cent and 7.3 per cent in the Labor seats of Gilmore on the NSW south coast, Cowan in Perth’s northern suburbs and Moreton along the Brisbane River in southern Brisbane.
Launching the government’s $220m “forestry jobs plan” in Launceston on April 14, Scott Morrison was unequivocal about his campaign focus. “I’ll talk about what my priorities are: jobs, jobs, jobs, jobs and jobs,” the Prime Minister said.
Josh Frydenberg on Monday again emphasised that unemployment – at 4 per cent in March – was on the cusp of reaching its lowest level since the 1970s.
The Treasurer told The Australian: “Our continued investment in skills, with record numbers of Australians undertaking trade apprenticeships, is equipping our workforce with the skills needed for the jobs of today and tomorrow.
“But there is more to do – and the next stage of our plan will lead Australia’s strong economy into the future.
“Our plan with investments in small business, skills, infrastructure, renewable energy and our regions will help see the creation of 1.3 million jobs over the next five years.” Demographer John Black, chief executive of Australian Development Strategies, said working families and those whose jobs have been made insecure by the tide of digital change sweeping through the economy were most likely to respond best to the ­Coalition’s jobs pitch.
“Does it (a focus on jobs) work? Yes, it does. That’s the ­lesson from the last election,” Mr Black said.
He identified five key demographic profiles: what he termed the “goat cheese circle” of affluent inner-city residents; swinging voters; young “transitional” voters who are starting families; the “digitally disrupted”; and working families, where typically mum and dad have less-qualified jobs.
Mr Morrison, and before him John Howard, made “significant inroads” into these final two groups, Mr Black said, and winning them again this year would “go a long way” to putting the ­Coalition back into government after May 21.
“The problem for the government is if the focus is too much on one end of the political spectrum, then that’s not terribly appealing to the ‘teal group’,” he said, referring to the raft of independent challengers running on socially progressive platforms in Liberal seats such as Wentworth, Koo­yong, MacKellar, North Sydney and Goldstein.
The National Skills Commission lists jobless rates for suburb-level small area local markets on a quarterly basis, smoothed to reduce the volatility associated with the relatively low number of workers. Classified as “statistical areas level two”, as many as 22 of these small labour markets can be mapped across a single electorate. The Australian’s analysis ­averaged these local unemployment rates to obtain the electorate-level jobless rate.
CREDIT: PATRICK COMMINS; ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT; EXCLUSIVE
Word count: 649
