Whyalla steelworks owner Sanjeev Gupta is taking a world-leading, multi-million-dollar step towards a "greener" plant and mines.
In the journey towards a sustainable steel industry, Mr Gupta's company, GFG Alliance, aims to become "carbon neutral".
A magnetite expansion project by the company's SIMEC Mining arm has begun at the mines near Whyalla at Iron Knob, Iron Baron and Iron Duke. It will mean a significant transformation in the production of Greensteel in Whyalla.
The project is a significant step in GFG's Greensteel transformation of its integrated mining and steelworks in Whyalla and its mission for emissions to be Carbon-Neutral by 2030 (CN30). It involves magnetite high-quality iron ore expansion. The company is building the first of a two-phase "de-bottlenecking" process which will increase magnetite concentrate production to 2.5 Mtpa.
This work marks an important step in the company's journey to develop South Australia's vast magnetite resource to support its CN30 ambitions. Processed magnetite concentrate is a high-quality energy efficient iron ore product which is needed to feed the Direct Reduced Iron process.
The process enables the use of hydrogen as an alternate reductant to fossil fuels and, when fed by renewable energy, it makes Greensteel.
This magnetite expansion work offers the chance to increase exports to the company's steelworks in Europe and to strengthen its position as a consistent supplier of premium-quality magnetite to support low-carbon steelmaking. Company chairman Mr Gupta said the aim was to create a "sustainable future for industry and society and that starts right here with magnetite - a critical enabler of our global Greensteel strategy".
"Thankfully it is an iron ore that we have in abundance right here at Whyalla to create a world-leading Greensteel hub," he said. Mayor Clare McLaughlin welcomed the project, saying it assured Whyalla's future. "It is great to see stage one of the magnetite expansion project that will kickstart the transition to Whyalla Greensteel," she said. "The project secures the Whyalla economy and ties the city into a global steelmaking network using 21st century technology."
CREDIT: Greg Mayfield
Word count: 338
