THE Greens are on track to gain the balance of power in the Senate, where they foreshadowed using their numbers to push Labor into banning all live exports, cutting fuel tax credits and stripping 450 gigalitres of water from irrigation communities for the environment.
Adam Bandt and his Green team are set to gain 12 of the 76 seats in the Senate, with Labor likely to hold just 25 seats against the Coalition’s 30, plus three held by minor parties.
In the lead-up to the weekend’s federal election South Australian Greens senator and water spokeswoman Sarah Hanson-Young said it was clear that the only way to ensure the 450GL is delivered in full and on time to South Australia was with the Greens in the Senate. “The 450GL promised to SA cannot be delivered without restoring voluntary water buybacks,” Senator Hanson-Young said. “In Senate balance of power, the Greens will push to ensure this is included in the next government’s plan.” Labor has so far remained silent on whether it would enter the water market. The Greens have also taken aim at the fuel tax credit, which farmers, timber harvesters, fishers, miners and even tourism operators claim back on off-road fuel used in tractors, pumps, excavators, boats and other equipment. Leader Adam Bandt said it would put a “stop (to) the massive subsidies to big coal, oil and gas corporations – over $10bn each year – and reinvest the money into the clean energy transition”.
That $10b is based on The Australia Institute’s fossil fuel subsidies report, which states “the largest subsidy is the federal fuel tax credit scheme (which) … cost the Federal Government $7.8bn in 2020-21”.
The latest Australian Taxation Office breakdown shows that of the $7.38bn fuel tax credits claimed in 2019-20, $891m was paid to farmers, $3.3bn to miners and $493m to the construction sector. Cutting the FTC would free up desperately needed funds for Labor to deliver its $20bn election pledge to upgrade the power transmission network to feed regional renewable energy into the nation’s capitals.
But National Farmers’ Federation president Fiona Simson has warned scrapping or restricting the FTC scheme would effectively impose a levy on industries, such as agriculture, that are reliant on diesel fuel to generate power and operate vehicles and other machinery off-road. Minerals Council of Australia chief executive Tania Constable said the “FTC was not a subsidy and removing the scheme would in fact create a new tax for many of Australia’s industries … which are Australia’s largest export earners”.
CREDIT: By PETER HUNT
Word count: 424
