Just prior to the release of the 2022 State Budget, South Australia joined other governments and jurisdictions around the world in declaring a climate emergency in Parliament.
SA Climate Minister Susan Close introduced the climate emergency motion, which passed both houses on May 31, reaffirming the urgent need to decarbonise the SA economy and shift to renewable sources of energy.
The opposition says it unsuccessfully tried to amend the legislation to "include practical action such as transforming the SA economy to zero net emissions by 2050, and to 50 per cent by 2030". The opposition also wanted the the Department for Environment and Water to be quarantined from budget cuts.
Then came the State Budget on Thursday, June 2.
Conservation SA has issued its response to the 2022 State Budget, welcoming some aspects but criticising others. Chief executive Craig Wilkins strongly welcomed the full delivery of Labor's election commitments, funded by Treasury, rather than from departmental savings.
"This includes investment in Aboriginal Rangers, conservation on private land and a range of community groups, and the creation of the Commissioner for the River Murray," he said
Conservation SA was pleased with the formal scrapping of the Electric Vehicle Tax and the pause and rethink of the North-South Motorway project
The peak environmental group was disappointed in the loss of the Home Battery Scheme, the Grid Scale Storage Scheme and support for installation of Electric Vehicle home charging.
It said "surprisingly, greening of the city has been hit hard, with two programs costing $14.5 million cut".
While there was a net increase in operational funding of $27m over the four years in the Department of Environment and Water, however, the department, Green Industries SA and the EPA had all been hit with significant 'efficiency savings'.
Overall, there is a net increase in DEW operational funding of $27m over the next four years. However, the Department is already wearing operational savings of another $7m over the next three years built in from previous budgets. This is on top of $34m in efficiency cuts over the last four years, and around $160m over the last decade. The Department has lost over 500 FTE over the last 12 years and been reduced by around 40 per cent.
The opposition meanwhile was also critical of the environmental aspects of the budget. It says the state government cut more than $30 million of projects that encouraged the take up of renewable energy, and the Environment Department will have $25.9 million slashed.
CREDIT: Stan Gorton
Word count: 417
