A MATE flicked me an Airbnb link recently to a time-and-space-travel opportunity. Well. You can keep your schmick harbourside apartment, your tiny woodlands house. Time and space travel!
In Findon! Just a few hundred buckaroos then you take a List Of Questions To Your Higher Self, a light snack for after and a USB stick to a spot on Grange Rd to begin your adventure.
You could explore parallel universes and head to the Findon Hotel for happy hour (which, by the way, starts at 3pm and goes for a very generous five hours).
Apparently, it’s done with Quantum Healing. And that’s a rabbit hole I went down so you don’t have to. It all began with that famous woo-woo guru Deepak Chopra, who says blah blah neuroplasticity blah blah epigenetics blah blah shift in consciousness blah blah something about a network of intelligence that can cure cancer.
It’s just the latest iteration of sciencey-sounding flapdoodle. The sort that’s been around since Atlantis got lost in the Bermuda Triangle. This time, they’ve chosen the word “quantum” because the vast majority of us are deeply unlikely to understand even a particle of quantum physics.
It’s time for a star rating, or something like it, for dodgy health claims. For a way for people to know if they’re getting bovine collagen or a bum steer.
Consumer advocacy group Choice has just shown star ratings work on food products – revealing that Choc O Sugar cereal isn’t really a five-star breakfast. A study it released yesterday showed two-thirds of people relied on marketing gimmicks when trying to choose healthy foods but made better choices when there was a star rating.
There are issues with the ratings. The big food companies have good tactics to make even the most kilojoule-laden foods seem healthy. But at least they’re a start. A way to clue up consumers to what they’re actually consuming.
Imagine if something similar to a star rating was used on health claims. (Or for homoeopathy, for example, you might just declare it empty space. Quantum Healing would be a black hole.) Online advertisements would be almost impossible to police but governments could have simple websites that award alternative health treatments and products the stars they deserve.
In the real world, it should already be a rule. Next time you’re in a pharmacy, take a look at words used on labels.
The vague, unfounded claims made on vitamin supplements that sit on the same shelves as actual medicine.
There are miracle weight-loss pills, potions for anxiety, and for good hair. There are pricey products that promise to fix your digestion (and they’re vegan, gluten-free, GMO-free, radiation-free, lead-free, and science-free).
There are suppressants and expectorants and expecto patronums that promise to ward off all ills. (But try to get pseudoephedrine, which actually works, and you’re treated like a potential meth dealer.) Most pharmacists would have no choice in the matter. They’re often working in big chains, which probably make more from vitamin supplements than they do from prescriptions.
The only way to lure that business model back to the evidence-based side is to make it abundantly clear when a product is piffle. That copper bracelet? A lone tin star. That could shift the market.
Most pharmacists have useful evidence-based services and products then bung up their pitch by mingling them in with the rubbish. They’re giving the pseudoscience a false imprimatur.
You may well end up seeing more Rescue Remedy bottles in the clearance-sale bins and fewer on the shelves. It might increase trust in pharmacies if they were dedicated to evidence-based advice.
If people aren’t relying on a miracle weight-loss promise, they might turn to something that actually works. People would be healthier.
Just think – with all that cash saved up, some people might even be able to head to Findon, and from there to a parallel universe where homoeopathy works and Atlantis has risen from the ocean.Or they could settle for a nice cold pint and some fish and chips at the pub.
CREDIT: Tory Shepherd
Word count: 675
