SPECIAL CONGRATULATIONS Congratulations to Nell Bateman being one hundred and three not out ("Jean still looks pretty in pink after 103 years", The Daily Advertiser, August 16).
I remember you being a good tennis player who enjoyed a good laugh.
You bring back wonderful memories of the fifties and sixties when social tennis was flourishing, more interesting than looking into a screen. All the best.
John Kjeldsen, Lake Albert LET'S HONOUR NURSES, DOCTORS We have recognised our firefighters, police and SES personnel for their services with the National Emergency Medal.
It is now time we recognise our nurses and doctors for their services over the past two or more years.
It is their turn to be recognised for dedicated service to all of us.
They risked their lives to help save our lives and support those alone in their final minutes of life.
The COVID pandemic was a national emergency.
Michael McLinden, West Wodonga MUCH TO LEARN FROM DECISION The United States House of Representatives has just approved a major bill to fight climate change, with the Inflation Reduction Act committing US$530 billion on clean energy initiatives.
This includes billions of dollars in subsidies for industries investing in renewable technology.
Not only that, Americans will benefit from various incentives such as A$13 billion in rebates to electrify their homes, and tax credits of about A$11,000 to electrify their cars; thus saving them money and creating jobs in the process.
The clean energy race is clearly on, and Australia needs to keep up.
The federal Labor government is legislating a Climate Change Bill which targets renewable energy transmission and reducing emissions of big businesses. However, Australian domestic emissions need to be addressed too, and can be achieved through incentives such as subsidising electrical appliances and energy efficient measures, rooftop solar and batteries.
There is much to learn from the US's historic climate win, and the Albanese government will be wise to learn from our climate ally.
Ching Ang, Magill REAL CLIMATE ACTION NEEDED Labor's climate bill is set to pass both Houses of Parliament. So how does it compare with the US climate legislation passed last week?
The US bill introduces historic reforms including major tax credits and rebates for a range of renewable technologies including solar panels, wind turbines, heat pumps, energy efficiency, and electric vehicles, plus hydrogen, funded by an increase in corporate taxes.
Australia's legislation by comparison is extremely limited. Without comparable policy reform, we won't meet or beat 43 per cent by 2030, the emissions reduction target that's the main feature of the Australian bill.
Progress involves actual deep decarbonisation of the economy, and support, like WA's Collie Transition Package, for job creation and economic diversification in communities affected by closure of coal-fired power stations.
Jim Allen, Panorama, South Australia
CREDIT: Andrew Pearson
Word count: 466
