After more than two years coping with a pandemic, the last thing we want to hear about is another global health crisis.
But it’s becoming increasingly clear that as we continue to heat our fragile planet, we face a threat to public health that will eclipse even Covid-19.
In late 2021, as the novel coronavirus did its worst, the World Health Organisation declared climate change the greatest health hazard for humanity — not in the distant future but now. On April 7 this year, World Health Day, the WHO marked the severity of the challenge by focussing on the health impacts of global heating.
Yet in Australia, in the midst of a watershed federal election, we see multi-partisan neglect of the grave risks that climate change presents to public health.
The discussion of global heating and what to do about it still revolves around the economy. Liberal, Labor and Green parties all seem oblivious to the climate health crisis, despite the ravages of fire and flood.
Just look at the policies on the parties’ respective websites. The Liberal Party’s mantra of ‘technology not taxes’ emphasises support for investment and jobs through a gradual economic transition to renewable energy.
There’s grudging acknowledgment that more electric vehicles might give us cleaner air and therefore better health but you need to comb the fine print to find it.
The ALP’s Powering Australia policy is “squarely focused on the economic interests of Australian families,” letting us know the jobs, growth and opportunities that will be unlocked through mitigating climate change.
Even the Greens concentrate on the economic aspects of decarbonisation, assuring followers that “our fully costed climate action plan will create hundreds of jobs, bring electricity costs down and drive our economy into the future.” Nothing from any of the major parties about preventing the new health crisis and saving lives. The greatest health threat to humanity is not even mentioned in any party’s publicly facing health policy.
It’s true that if you delve deep down into Labor’s platform, you’ll find a few lines noting the party will treat climate as a ‘national health priority’ — whatever that actually means.
So much, then, for prevention and preparedness. Have our political leaders not learned anything from the current pandemic?
In the past year both the WHO and the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change have issued reports on the growing risk of human-induced global heating to public health, predicting millions of additional deaths each year, starting soon.
They present compelling evidence of the dangers of extreme weather events, such as drought and storms and flooding, along with the direct effects of heat.
Closer to home we have a statement from the Australian Academy of Health and Medical Sciences (AAHMS), issued on World Health Day. Some two years in the making, sidetracked by the urgency of dealing with Covid-19, the statement’s diagnosis of the risks of climate change to the health of Australians is firmly based on scientific ­evidence.
The evidence was collected through a series of expert roundtables or workshops which examined the specific health impacts on people in the region and how we might yet mitigate or limit the damage.
The key recommendation is that the duty of care of health professionals now includes a duty of planetary care. We need to alert the public and policymakers to the risks to the health of Australians, especially the most vulnerable Australians, from global heating and destruction of the planet’s life-support systems — and we need to demand nonpartisan and immediate real climate action.
This would require a public health campaign on an unprecedented scale, even bigger than the battle against big tobacco’s promotion of cigarette smoking, a struggle that saved so many millions of lives.
Confronting the fossil fuel lobby would presumably be necessary in order to protect public health and save millions more lives.
The statement from one of the country’s five learned academies, representing our leading health experts, also proposes further Australian medical research to advance our understanding of the direct and indirect health impacts of climate change, as well as to guide in mitigating the health effects.
We already know enough to recognise the threat and to seek to arrest the damage but we need more scientific knowledge, much of it ­interdisciplinary, to inform future decisions.
Aware of the need to put its own house in order, the Academy calls for fully sustainable medical research and healthcare systems as soon as possible.
Let’s hope that a scientific statement warning us about the greatest health threat to humanity can reset the political debate in Australia — before it’s too late. Professor Warwick Anderson is Professor of Politics, Governance and Ethics at the University of Sydney. Co-writers are Professor Fran Baum from University of Adelaide and Professor Tony Capon from Monash Sustainable Development Institute.
CREDIT: WARWICK ANDERSON
Word count: 802
