The spike in gas prices has been variously described as "apocalyptic" and "a perfect storm". But Australia's energy troubles didn't come from nowhere. A confluence of forces has sent prices soaring.
Why have prices skyrocketed? And is there anything that can be done?
Why have gas prices risen so much, so quickly?
A big part of the story has been the war in Ukraine. Energy prices were rising before the Russian invasion as the world economy accelerated out of a pandemic-induced slump. But the conflict triggered a sudden and dramatic global supply shock as businesses and governments around the world spurned Russia's enormous oil and gas supplies.
As the brutal invasion ramped up, millions of barrels a day of Russian oil were withdrawn from global markets.
There have also been domestic forces at work. Australia's ageing coal-fired power plants have been plagued by unplanned outages. This has cut the supply of electricity to the energy grid, adding to the pressure placed on gas, which (unlike coal) can be cranked up at short notice.
About 85 to 90 per cent of Australia's gas market is covered by long-term contracts between suppliers and businesses known as gas supply agreements, says the Australian Petroleum Production and Exploration Association's acting chief executive, Damian Dwyer. That has limited the impact of the extraordinary price surge - for now.
Dwyer says the remainder of the market is covered by more volatile immediate "spot" prices, subject to the whims of global markets. One way or another, high spot prices tend to flow into higher costs eventually as new contracts are negotiated.
Weather has also played a big part. Floods in Queensland and NSW affected coal supplies. And a recent icy blast has further fuelled demand for gas to warm homes. The situation hasn't been helped by relatively low electricity generation from renewable sources.
All of this underpinned an extraordinary 34.6 per cent increase in the use of gas-fired power in May, which in turn has sent prices to stratospheric levels.
Spot electricity prices this week neared $1000 per megawatt hour, or about 80 times the normal level. The surge prompted the Australian Energy Market Operator to intervene and set a $40 gigajoule (GJ) price cap, which was still well above the average.
What can the federal government do about it?
In 2017, the Turnbull government introduced an emergency power called the Australian Gas Reservation Mechanism, which allows the government to keep more gas for domestic use in a supply crisis rather than selling it for export. More than 70 per cent of Australia's domestic gas supply is exported.
But under the current rules, the export control could not be used until January 1 next year at the earliest, to give time to consider whether there will be a shortfall - and only if there was a shortage of gas. This time, the problem is not gas shortages but soaring prices. In other words, short of direct subsidies, there is little the government can do to control prices in the short term.
On Wednesday, Climate and Energy Minister Chris Bowen ruled out using the mechanism in the short term. "It's not an easy trigger to pull, it's complicated, and if it was pulled today it would have absolutely no impact until the first of January anyway," Bowen said.
How long will this situation last?
That depends on a range of factors such as the performance of coal-fired generators and the amount of wind and solar being generated over the winter, says EnergyQuest chief executive office Graeme Bethune.
In the longer term, years of political inaction and false starts on energy and climate policy have compounded Australia's problems. According to experts, those problems include a lack of investment to build the transition and storage needed to improve the reliability of the grid and keep prices down as the uptake of renewable energy increases.
What does it all mean for your power bill?
You can get a sense of where power prices might be heading from a recent ruling by the Australian Energy Regulator, which sets basic "default" power bill price increases in NSW, south-east Queensland and South Australia. It said from July 1 basic electricity bills for households would be allowed to increase by as much as 8.2 per cent above inflation.
It said that, since its last determination a year ago, wholesale electricity costs for retailers, who supply us all with our power, had surged by 41.4 per cent in NSW, 49.5 per cent in Queensland and 11.8 per cent in South Australia, due to power plant shutdowns, higher coal and gas prices and slowing investment in new capacity, among other things.
And power prices could rise even further for customers forced to sign up to new contracts in coming months, warns energy market expert Gavin Dufty, who is the St Vincent de Paul Society in Victoria's manager of policy and research.
Australia is less dependent on gas and coal for its electricity than it once was. But as long as prices remain high, the power bills faced by consumers and businesses will remain high too.
CREDIT: Josh Gordon
Word count: 851
