HOT TOPIC MARINUS LINK/AFL STADIUM AS a resident of Loongana to whom Mervin is commenting upon (June 7) I find his letter insulting to the core.
His clear lack of knowledge of either Loongana itself, the community and TasNetworks/Marinus’ proposed projects is astounding.
I question whether he even knows where Loongana is, let alone has any knowledge about this community and our issues in relation to both the transmission line and Marinus, or else he would have known the majority have been completely off-grid for decades and he’d have some understanding of what our actual issues are.
It’s all very easy for people like Merv, to sit from far far away, whilst sitting on their laurels, formulating their very own conspiracy theories and labelling an entire community with whatever they chose to make up in their head (I believe this is called gaslighting).
I would advise before he writes another ill-informed letter: Read Tasnets’ proposal, read the intention of Marinus – Power to Mainland. We neither want or need it nor does it benefit Tasmania in any way.
Come to Loongana, we will educate you.
Rebecca Piper Loongana
YOU HAVE NO IDEA It is not Marshall of Loongana with no idea (Mervin Reed, June 7) but Reed in far away Tolmans Hill.
Most people in Loongana are off-grid and an HV transmission line will be of no benefit.
The issues as I see them are: 1. The effect this line will have on our property values and businesses. 2. For those concerned about the environment the major effect it will have on a biodiversity hot spot.
3. The projected $7bn projected cost (which probably will blow out to $15bn like most government projects) of Marinus and associated infrastructure for only 1500MW of capacity.
4. No resident in Loongana wants the power line.
My problem (admittedly selfish) is a cheap and nasty old-school HV power line going right past my property with no compensation for the cost it has on me so city folk can get power less than $1 cheaper per year.
How would the good folk of Tolmans Hill like seeing a 50m tower on a lot adjoining them to be told the last century outdated legislation says they aren’t entitled to compensation as the power line isn’t on your property but the foreign owners of the adjoining property it crosses will be compensated even though they live half a world away.
Sounds like something that would happen in communist China and be pushed through for the greater good.
Seems very un-Australian treatment of the Loongana residents (watch out, it could be you next). And extremely wasteful use of taxpayer and electricity users’ funds in the name of so-called green power that isn’t needed.
Isn’t Tasmania already 100 per cent renewable.
Adam Moller Loongana
DON’T LECTURE US Most Loongana residents are off the grid so we are not going to be lectured to about renewable energy (Mervin Reed, June 7).
Marinus relies on a 200 per cent renewable target and the target relies on Marinus, but no one wants it or is prepared to pay for it.
Marinus is all about privatising profits and socialising the costs, all Tasmanians lose.
The 200 per cent target will see communities and environments, like ours, all over the North-West trashed.
Marinus is a dud and when it gets dumped, future Tasmanians will sigh with relief and marvel how their island became a world leader in climate action by protecting biodiversity, generating its own power and attracting clean green industries that created genuine long-term jobs.
Brenda Marshall Loongana
CAN’T AFFORD SUPPORT I read in the Mercury, June 7, that Premier Rockliff is going to invite eight AFL club presidents to Tasmania to feel the passion of footy.
How is he going to show this?
Take them to a local footy game, where the entourage would probably outnumber the local crowd watching the game?
What I see of the crowd at local games on the TV news clips is empty seats. It is about time that people wake up to the fact that the average Tasmanian cannot afford to support a local team, which will have to be bouncing all over the mainland, playing at grounds from Perth to Darwin, Brisbane to Alice Springs, and down to Melbourne and Adelaide.
Let us support housing and health first.
Bruce Reynolds Lindisfarne
SPEND CASH ELSEWHERE I cannot believe the little man on ABC talkback this morning waffling on yet again about an AFL team with a stadium for thousands of people who probably wouldn’t be able to afford a ticket.
We have mothers, children and older people being turfed out of their homes and living in cars or tents.
We have tents in the grounds of St Andrew’s church, in Royal Park, near the silos and numerous other places and all we hear is about a wretched stadium for overpaid guys who like nothing more than kicking each other.
It makes one’s blood boil.
When will our government put homeless people at the top of the list and do something about it?
Spend the AFL millions on something desperately needed.
Glennis Sleurink Launceston
Word count: 857
