After the shock of the doubling in petrol prices at the start of this year, many households are about to find their power bills are rising too. The Australian Energy Regulator announced last week that the default electricity price would rise by an average of at least 8.5 per cent in NSW, by 11.3 per cent in south-east Queensland and by 7.2 per cent in South Australia. In Victoria, the Essential Services Commission has raised the tariff by about 5 per cent. Price increases for small businesses will be even higher.
These increases are for the "regulated standard offer", a tariff that all electricity retailers must offer as a safety net to protect people from unjustifiably high prices. But the 90 per cent of households that have shopped around and found cheaper market rates will have to pay more, too, when their contracts expire. Gas prices are rising just as sharply.
These high energy prices will add to the burden this winter on many families already struggling. Some might be tempted to link the price rises to the growth of renewable energy and the Albanese government's plan to cut greenhouse gas emissions by 43 per cent by 2030. Peter Dutton, expected to win the Liberal leadership today, said last week that he was worried about Labor's target because "we want to make sure that people can afford to turn the lights on".
Yet this reveals a misunderstanding about what is driving the current jump in power prices and how to fix it. In announcing the price rise, the Australian Energy Regulator said it was due to "reductions in thermal generation resulting from unplanned outages and higher coal and gas prices". In other words, prices are rising because ageing coal-fired power stations are breaking down, causing shortages, and the war in Ukraine has sent global coal and gas prices through the roof.
The coal-fired power industry is slowly "going broke", to quote former chairwoman of the Energy Security Board Kerry Schott. Companies have already announced they will shut down about 20 per cent of coal capacity by 2030 and regulators say it could easily be 60 per cent.
Tech billionaire Mike Cannon-Brookes has bought an 11 per cent stake in power giant AGL and appears to have convinced the board to abandon its plans to split the company in two and send the old coal-fired power stations into a separate entity - which was seen as an attempt to delay their closure until 2045. He is not just trying to save the planet. He is doing it because he thinks he can make money.
The closure of uneconomical coal plants will reduce competition and supply in the short-term, but rather than wasting money prolonging their life, Australia needs a plan to balance the exit of coal with new sources of energy in the next few years. It must allow energy companies to increase renewable power and back it up with batteries and, where necessary, "peak" gas plants that can be turned on and off quickly.
The Albanese government's plan to invest $20 billion in new high-voltage transmission lines is a part of this process as it will guarantee new power sources can reach consumers at a reasonable price. It will take a few years for these investments to bring the grid back into balance. Meanwhile, governments should offer targeted help to families facing temporary price rises. The big shift in our energy grid away from coal and gas will create huge challenges, but renewables are not the cause of the problem. They are part of the solution.
  CREDIT:
Word count: 597
