SOME THINGS ARE WORTH MORE THAN MONEY IN RESPONSE to Tom Roe’s letter (GA 23/4), not only does he cast aspersions on the good citizens of North and West Geelong – that “soulless wasteland” – this letter also outs this former local Liberal Party member as pro development at the cost of the environment.
He must believe the Liberal Party’s dangerous lies of growth at all costs and the home having its greatest value as a profit-making asset class.
The people who choose to live in the coastal towns of Torquay, Armstrong Creek, Jan Juc and on the Bellarine Peninsula – live there for its semi-rural vibe and close to the ocean ambience.
They do not want to recreate the urban sprawl of Melbourne, with hectares of dark roofed, jerry built (but very expensive) houses on less than 400sq m blocks, and not a tree in sight.
Tom’s veiled threat of a developer’s compensation claim for $100m (should it ever happen?) is an insignificant amount when compared to the true value of our productive farmland, surrounding bushland, native wildlife and healthy waterways are calculated.
Some things are worth more than money Mr Roe, and rest assured that so many of us will continue to speak up and fight to maintain existing town boundaries.
Susan Meyer, Drysdale
NUCLEAR POWER IS NOT A NEW OR GOOD IDEA If Richard Worland (GA 18/04) John Calvert (GA 11/11) did their homework, they would find that the idea of establishing a nuclear power industry has been periodically investigated by governments.
South Australia held a royal commission in 2015 and a federal parliamentary inquiry followed in 2019. The royal commission concluded nuclear power was out of reach.
The federal inquiry recommended that any project should only go ahead if there was broad support from the public – highly unlikely. Both reports concluded nuclear power remained a time and money sink.
Construction of a commercial-scale plant would take at least 15 years. If Australia started work on a nuclear in 2022, it would not be in operation until about 2037.
Even modular reactors proposed by Mr Worland won’t be affordable until 2050. Nuclear power is not carbon neutral.
While the generation of power itself is fairly efficient and low-emitting, the process of mining the uranium, trucking it to be refined and pouring the concrete to build the plant creates significant emissions.
As Australia’s power grid becomes more decentralised with a combination of solar, offshore wind and onshore wind working to stabilise the system when one goes offline, and with the addition of battery technology to store and deliver electricity on demand, the business case for nuclear starts to look even more remote.
Australia is a long way from hitting peak renewable energy, and continuing developments will resolve the challenges associated with it long before any nuclear plant would even hit the planning stage.
Should trends hold, starting a new nuclear plant today would mean committing to a white elephant that would be too expensive even to turn on.
Geoff Foster, Cygnet
ENVIRONMENT THE WINNER THANKS TO TEAM EFFORT A SHOUTOUT to a great local community/ agency partnership.
Prior to March 2022, access to the windmill carpark and boat ramp at Reedy Lake, from Fitzgeralds Rd, was severely limited by enormous potholes and patches of soft ground along the track, such that only the ‘gnarliest’ four-wheel-drive vehicles could get through safely.
Parks Victoria manage this reserve but are under-resourced and underfunded and the tracks were in poor condition.
Birdwatchers and fishers including commercial eel fishers, as well as nature lovers, dog-walkers, kayakers and duck hunters all use this facility. It is the only boat access to the beautiful Reedy Lake wetland complex – part of the Lake Connewarre State Game Reserve.
Yet again, it is the duck hunters that have dipped their hands into their pockets and donated their time to look after this amazing local wetland.
The self-funded, volunteer community group, Geelong Field & Game, provided heavy machinery including an excavator and a tipper truck; 140 tonnes of gravel was provided by Parks Victoria and 130 tonnes of larger rock by Geelong Field & Game, and several members volunteered a day of their time. All-up, some 900m of track has been stabilised and made good.
Easy access is now ensured for all recreationists thanks to a great partnership between a community that cares and the land management agency. It would be great to hear of practical assistance from more community groups helping the responsible agencies manage the environmental assets we all love! Paul Brown, Portarlington
Word count: 758
