The Australian Energy Market Operator made an unprecedented intervention yesterday by suspending trading across the entire east coast electricity network as it scrambled to restore calm to an increasingly volatile predicament.
Typically, the electricity market works by power generators offering power supply for sale into the market and retailers buying what is needed for customers. But in the past week, power companies, which are paying sky-high prices for coal and gas, have repeatedly taken massive slabs of generation capacity offline as their businesses become less profitable, causing the volatility.
After the market suspension, AEMO chief executive Daniel Westerman said there was no expectation for blackouts across the market, covering Queensland, NSW, Victoria and South Australia, but asked NSW residents to "conserve energy where it's safe to do so". He said the balance between supply and demand would remain tight in coming days, particularly in NSW.
Earlier yesterday, Energy Minister Chris Bowen told people not to switch off their heaters and other necessary devices.
Westerman said business as usual was "impossible ... under the current conditions". It hit crisis point after the withdrawals triggered AEMO to issue legally binding directions forcing them to fire generation units back up to prevent blackouts, for which they are compensated.
AEMO on Tuesday forced generators to restart about 10 per cent of the grid's total generation capacity of 55 gigawatts.
The withdrawals came on top of a series of breakdowns and maintenance outages that have forced about a quarter of the east coast's coal-fired power stations out of action.
Westerman said taking control of the market would simplify and improve the running of the grid by enabling AEMO to direct electricity supply where it was needed.
"Suspending the market is the best way to ensure a reliable supply of electricity for Australian homes and businesses," he said.
"By suspending the market, we are creating a simple process where AEMO has true visibility of which generators are available and when in advance, rather than relying on last-minute interventions."
Energy analysts have accused power companies of "gaming the system" and "unconscionable conduct". Compliance watchdog the Australian Energy Regulator warned power companies they would be investigated for their role in the current crisis and chairwoman Clare Savage warned power companies they may have breached rules barring them from reckless behaviour without reasonable cause.
Economic pressures for power companies were ramped up this week because AEMO slapped caps on the price they can charge for wholesale electricity, which suddenly became far more expensive to generate due to a spike in prices for coal and gas.
The Australian Energy Council said its members were losing money selling power due to the soaring costs. The lobby group's chief executive Sarah McNamara welcomed AEMO's intervention.
"It is quite clear that in these unprecedented circumstances and following the application of [price caps], the power system was becoming unmanageable," she said.
AEMO will apply special suspension pricing for electricity generation and compensate power companies. Its effect on power bills is unknown.
Lisa Zembrodt of Schneider Electric, one of Australia's largest corporate energy advisers, said AEMO was "the foremost expert" and should be trusted to run what is a large and complex system.
The transition to renewable energy had not sparked the crisis, she said, but pointed instead to a "confluence of factors" focused on coal plant outages, record high fossil fuel prices and the cold snap across the eastern seaboard.
"We've got to this point because Australia exports so much coal and gas, much more than we consume, and the war in Ukraine has created near-record high prices.
With Sumeyya Ilanbey
CREDIT: Mike Foley
Word count: 600
