What used to be a small section of a forgotten aisle has steadily grown over the years as customers vote with their wallets and choose organic beef over commodity meat, free range eggs instead of those from cooped chickens in cages and fruit and vegetables minus the pesticides.
To help grow the scope of available produce, Coles established the Nurture Fund in 2015 and has since provided $30 million of financial support to innovative growers around Australia.
This week, the supermarket has granted another six small and medium sized businesses substantial sustainability grants.
Peninsula Fresh Organics, a family-run business, received a $300,000 grant. Founder Wayne Shields said the grant would have “a significant impact on our environmental and business sustainability”.
“With this grant we reduce our environmental footprint through substantial water savings and prevention of nutrient loss, while also improving produce quality,” he said.
Transforming the irrigation infrastructure at its two farms in Baxter, Victoria, and Barham, NSW, will save 60 million litres of water per year and prevent run off of nutrients into local waterways. The money will also pay for a cool room to improve product shelf life.
Coles Group CEO Steven Cain said Coles was proud to support new innovative and sustainable projects through the fund.
“We’re delighted to have now awarded $30 million in financial support through the Coles Nurture Fund to help drive innovation and generational sustainability on Australian farms and production facilities,” he said.
“At Coles, we want to be the most sustainable supermarket in Australia and we’re actively working with our food, grocery and beverage partners to inspire customers and continue our sustainability journey by helping to expand local production, reduce emissions and increase recycling.”
Other grant winners include Queensland’s Mt Alma Organics and Agricultural Networks, who will use the grants to produce a greater variety and volume of organic fruit and vegetables. McMahon Family Enterprises in South Australia, Jalna Feedlot in Victoria and Elansco in Tasmania received grants to improve sustainable meat production.
Mt Alma Organics owners Gary and Angela Spotswood said they were “ecstatic”.
“(We) are thrilled that our plans to improve production in our packing shed and increase our growing capacity can come to fruition much sooner,” Mr Spotswood said.
“We look forward to working with Coles and supplying Australian families with even more of our delicious, healthy, organic produce.”
Also successful was Agricultural Networks, whose operations manager Rodney Tripp said the business was “thrilled”.
“Over the past three years, Agricultural Networks has developed a group of organic growers and a packing facility in Gympie, South Queensland, for supply of organic fruit and vegetables exclusively to Coles,” he said.
“This grant will be used to expand the range and volume of organic produce for supply to Coles by developing a second organic hub in Gatton, including a dedicated pack-house, and supporting the transition of more growers from conventional to organic farming practices.”
Jalna Feedlot’s David Gillett said they were “very grateful” for funding for a solar energy project to reduce emissions in their production of beef for Coles’ carbon neutral beef range.
“The funding will assist us to achieve our aim to reduce our carbon emissions and the reliance on fossil fuels and generate clean renewable energy by installing a solar power system on the Jalna Feedlot roof,” Mr Gillett said.
Owned and managed by Lauchlan and Sarah Cole, Elansco’s $295,000 grant enables construction of an undercover animal management facility to improve the handling, welfare and management of lambs during the Tasmanian winter. The couple said they were “ecstatic”.
“As a proud Tasmanian farming family committed to innovation, sustainable agriculture and best practice animal husbandry, we are delighted to be recipients of a Coles Nurture Fund,” Mr Cole said. “The grant will enable us to increase supply of high quality, 100 per cent pasture-fed lamb utilising an all-season facility, enhance our sustainability commitment and further support businesses in the supply chain from paddock to plate.
“The investment will also underpin our ongoing commitment to caring for our land and growing our business for our children, as well as future generations.
“We sincerely thank Coles for this game-changing funding, allowing us to swing the doors wide open, and encourage other Australian farmers to apply for the Coles Nurture Fund.”
Better known as McPiggery, SA’s McMahon Family Enterprises said the grant “meant a lot”.
“It means we can operate sustainably,” said operator Kim Thorpe. “Sustainability means many things to us. It means we can ensure we are more resilient for the future, not just from a financial perspective, but also from a social and environmental perspective.
“We are custodians of the land and with this comes responsibility. We are excited to be implementing new systems and technologies that allows us to be at the forefront of environmental accountability and leave our business and our land in the best possible state to allow future generations to continue our farming legacy.”
Celebrity chef Curtis Stone was a panellist for the Coles Nurture Fund and said all six producers were worthy recipients.
“Australia produces some of the highest quality food in the world, and it’s exciting to see our Aussie farmers and producers consistently showcase innovations that contribute to a more sustainable future for our agricultural sector,” he said.
“With this round’s applications highlighting organic produce and sustainability, it’s important that we at Coles are able to support these farmers in carrying out initiatives that will innovate and expand the Australian food sector.”
Word count: 881
