Congratulations to all involved in the McDonald’s SE Qld Junior AFL finals, played at Metricon Stadium this weekend. Unforgettable memories for the 11 U12s-U17s boys and girls teams who played on the main ground.
Guns are guns and carrying a gun that is a gel blaster is no exception. It won’t be long and someone with a gel blaster will be shot by police and there will be outrage from some quarters. Mainly from people who have no respect for guns and no experience as to the damage they can do. Why are we the state that has no laws protecting us from these dumb people. GN
Notice we’ve never been asked to vote on the globalists’ Great Reset? That’s because the intention of their Fourth Industrial Revolution is to impose their will over ours. Democracy is dead in their opinion. Their system is feudalism where they are the lords and we are the slaves. Juss Sayen
Belligerent climate change activism is unwarranted and uncivilised. All opinions are valid.
Watching Trump getting hammered is the best thing I’ve witnessed in the 2000s.
Walked the Broadwater on Saturday and thought that dog owners were at last picking up after their doggies but then I got to the area near the Lagoon and all the way down through Len Fox park and it quickly became an obstacle course. From the amount of doggy doo on the path and the grass people just don’t care. Disgruntled Owner of two dogs.
Google news published that Australia is finally changing their military helicopters back to the proven Blackhawks after so many breakdown issues with the European helicopters Well done Australia. We need to be ready and stay working closely with our allies. Mike
Pedro, science is not simple my friend, for you however we can make it easy and tell you that CO2 does not warm the atmosphere but can increase after the global temperature rises. In periods between 500 and 240 million years ago when CO2 content was up to 25 times greater than now glaciation occurred. Stan Forgham
Dear Albo, we’ve extended your temporary protection visa. Please stay in Australia and fix the things you promised to fix instead of harping on about flags, voices, enquiries and the weather. Lucky Phil
Yet another loss for the Warriors and All Blacks, l guess it was hard to watch the Wallabies annihilate the world champions again religiously it seems in Australia. NZ need to take a good hard look at their rugby. Noel
Watched a couple of women’s AFLW footy over the weekend on TV, and couldn’t help notice that there scoring is a lot lower the men’s game, due mainly to their shorter length kicking on average at full stretch. So why not shorten the bigger grounds like they do in cricket with ropes, so not only you have more goals scored but make it fairer for all teams trying to play finals where percentage comes into it. Just move the boundary line and posts inward the necessary metres to average the size of grounds everywhere. DS
Wallabies winger Koroboite should have been red carded for his dangerous no arms tackle on Boks winger Mapimpi in Saturday’s Test in Adelaide. Doug
Congratulations Gold Coast Titans. Well played with only 12 players.
In England, Boris Johnson said he will make the UK the Saudi Arabia of wind. Albo says he will make Australia a renewable energy superpower. Both claims are ridiculous and it’s going to hurt low income families, many of whom probably voted for this fraud. Peter
How come gravy trains never break down or go on strike? Jack
Karen’s diner in Surfers get ready for lawsuits. What a deplorable business model. Making staff abuse people and then having those staff abused in return by members of the public. And all to make money. Get ready for out of court settlements and in court settlements. Lawyers are gonna love you. John
No, Judy (29/8) (and Anonymous, too) you don’t get to wriggle out of your alarmism by claiming record cold is “just weather”. Your side’s predictions have been “warming trends” and the “children won’t know snow” – and the date for the end of snow was 2015. Just because you devoutly believe something does not make it true. JS
I get so tired of those whingers like Jolly Roger, complaining about our world class health system. I doubt if he has ever seen a third world health system and what the heck is the “social fabric” of our state? Does he mean when it was run by a bunch of crooks and corruption back in Joh’s day? Learn your history mate and stop being a selfish whinger. I bet you would be the first in line at the ED if you got a sniffle or stubbed your toe. Count your blessings you live in one of the best places on earth. M Ashmore
Right On Jolly Roger, Monday’s Bully. Her and Mark Bailey must be using the same copy writers supplied by the Chook. Davey Baby
To anonymous texter GCB 29/8 who can’t understand why Tom goes overseas sealing deals at ratepayers expense, consider this. The prime industry and income earner created and sold by the Gold Coast is tourism. In Rockhampton it is beef cattle. Once income stops flowing into your district the economy stagnates and eventually you become a ghost town. This won’t happen here thanks to our past Mayor Sir Bruce Smalls proactive activities fifty years ago which started the avalanche of tourism that is now unstoppable. TerryS
Artie re Cowboys being “frauds”, how’s ur footy tipping going? Pretty bad I would say.
It’s time more cemeteries in Australia used above ground vaults (mausoleums) to greatly expand their capacities. MESSAGE OF THE DAY: I had the privilege to take my grandchildren to the Gold Coast Show at the weekend. A venue that the council chose. But they overlooked one major issue and that was parking. Australia Fair which you pay for and the pool or street parking which was totally inadequate. This weekend was all about families. But getting back to my vehicle to find a $179 fine for parking amongst possibly 200 other patrons was totally unjustified. Tom Tate you claim to be about family enjoying our beautiful Coast. This is nothing short of disgraceful for struggling families. Denise
Word count: 1059
