This energy company produces electricity in Australia and employs local people.
Nearly two decades after launching in Victoria with a mission to shake up the electricity and gas industry, Red Energy's reason for being hasn't wavered.
Having been the first energy company licensed to display the Australian Made logo is only part of Red's truly Australian story. Employing local people to serve local people remains its bedrock.
"We are proud to be Australian Made and owned," chief executive Iain Graham says. "And at our core we at Red Energy strive to help Australian families live their best lifestyle. We do this with simple, quality and reliable energy solutions provided by Australians for Australians."
The latter distinction shines like a lighthouse beacon. Graham describes energy as an incredible yet intangible phenomenon that plays a vital role in our day-to-day lives, something that facilitates all that we do as a modern society. You might not be able to reach out and touch it, yet Red Energy's Richmond head office hums with the energy of more than 1200 employees.
When you contact Red Energy, you won't find yourself speaking to someone offshore with no connection to your needs. Red Energy's 1 million-plus customers in four states are served by Australian workers who are passionate about what they do, who put people first, and who reflect the multicultural roots of the company's Snowy Hydro owner.
By not outsourcing overseas, Red Energy's profits stay in Australia, a source of great pride for the fourth-largest energy retailer in the country.
"We've attracted people who really love our customers," Graham says. "Our customers regularly tell us that buying Australian is important to them. And they tell us how they like their service - personal, simple and easy.
"When we launched Red Energy (in 2004), we wanted to make things simpler for our customers. Part of what makes that possible is the fact that we're an Australian energy provider, providing families across the country with Australian energy."
Snowy Hydro is an Australian engineering wonder, more than 70 years old and boasting nine power stations, 80 kilometres of aqueducts, 145 kilometres of tunnels and 16 dams that generate clean, hydroelectricity.
It will be a leading player as Australia transitions to a renewable energy future by supporting Snowy 2.0, the next chapter in Snowy Hydro's story that promises to provide on-demand energy and large-scale storage for many generations to come.
Its hand-in-glove fit with Red Energy, a business built on a platform of old-fashioned customer service, is a marriage made in heaven.
Befitting its fundamental customer focus, Red Energy regularly reaches out to its customers and listens to what they have to say. Midway through the COVID-19 pandemic, Red Energy surveyed those who matter most to ask them about how the change in our lives had impacted their spending. A staggering 85 per cent reported being more focused on supporting local businesses and buying Australian Made products.
"Our customers regularly tell us that buying Australian is important to them," Graham says. "For more than a decade, we've partnered with the Australian Made campaign because we believe the Australian Made logo is a symbol that consumers recognise and value, and we're proud to be able to attach it to our brand.
"I think the Australian Made certification is exactly that - it's a very high bar to meet. The Australian Made and grown logo stands above all else in establishing the credentials of those who display it."
Red Energy is also proud of its long-standing relationship with Breast Cancer Network Australia, with the Red BCNA Saver plan donating up to $120 per household each year to help raise awareness of breast cancer in the community.
By offering electricity in Victoria, NSW, South Australia, Queensland and the ACT, as well as gas in Victoria, NSW and SA, Red Energy has surged into the big four of the National Electricity Market. That its power stems from its people is evident in the number of new customers who turn to Red Energy after hearing glowing endorsements from friends and family.
Once on board, they stay; Red Energy is the only energy retailer to have won the Canstar Blue Award for Most Satisfied Customers for 12 years in a row.
"Our philosophy is business should be good for everybody," Graham says. "We're part of a community and wanted to put something back in. By supporting Australian products and the businesses that make them, we can all do a little bit to ensure the future health of our economy and the community."
  CREDIT:
Word count: 757
