No winners in jersey fiasco Former rugby league strongman Ian Roberts has spoken with admirable restraint about the refusal of seven Manly players to wear the rainbow jersey (Sorry day, but jersey stays on, 27/7).
After Roberts came out as gay in 1995 — an act matching his on-field courage — he was violently bashed.
Many others, like Professor George Duncan who was murdered in Adelaide in 1972, have been persecuted for the perceived ‘crime’ of being gay. Indeed, the shocking killing of Duncan initiated overdue law reform in Australia.
Manly was wrong not to consult its players and they have exercised their right not to play in those jerseys.
However, perhaps they could explain why the God they worship would have created gay people only to have them abominably persecuted.
Ron Sinclair, Bathurst ●●● I agree with Anthony Albanese that, in Australia, we respect everyone for who they are, regardless of their faith and opinions.
It is not being hateful just because you don’t want to wear a particular striped jersey.
I have several gay family members and friends; I accept love and respect them for who they are, but I don’t have to show my support for them by wearing an rainbow jumper, waving a pride flag, or going to Mardi Gras.
We should leave the sports people to play sports!
Margaret Wright, Pendle Hill ●●● Tuesday’s press conference by Manly coach Des Hasler was awkward to say the least.
The jersey fiasco wouldn’t have been Des’s decision.
This week was supposed to be about “Women in League” but the woke Manly jerseys put paid to that.
Just another way to undermine the worth of women!
Janice Russell, Malua Bay ●●● I don’t follow the Manly NRL team but I feel for coach Des Hasler who was tasked with the unpleasant job of facing the media and apologising for the decisions made by others around the gay pride jersey debacle.
It is astounding that nobody considered the probability of controversy due the number of Pacific Islander Christians playing in the NRL.
Brian Whybrow, Wanniassa, ACT ●●● It seems to me that the Manly football club and the NRL are saying to the players who have declined to wear the pride jerseys that we respect your views on this matter but not enough to allow you to play.
If that is inclusion you can count me out.
Hunter Ronald, Jerrabomberra Failure to deliver our gas leaves government in peril NSW citizens should be hopping mad at the state government’s lack of action to “fast-track/streamline” assessments for three gas projects at Port Kembla, Newcastle, and Narrabri – a $2bn deal signed by former premier Gladys Berejiklian two years ago (The $2b deal that delivers nothing, 27/7).
Eastern states are in an electricity supply crisis, with the Energy Security Board saying gas-fired generators are vital and should be part of the proposed capacity mechanism to keep the lights on while infrastructure is built. It begs the question, how did an energy-rich energy-­exporting state blessed with ­hundreds of years of gas end up with an energy crisis?
When Dominic Perrottet became Premier of NSW, I was filled with a degree of optimism, because I thought he was a truly conservative politician, but how wrong was I.
The Liberals in NSW, seemingly are now under the spell of green-left Matt Kean and are now sleepwalking towards defeat at the upcoming election, because of Kean’s obses­sion with renewable energy at the expense of fossil fuels, in ­particular gas.
Dominic Perrottet and Matt Kean need reminding that the Liberal Party are now not only out of government federally, but in every state and territory bar two, and in NSW they govern with a very slim minority and face an election in March next year.
Warren Cato, Manyana
Voters sick of the games One could be forgiven for thinking and saying we have a bunch of amateurs in government at Macquarie Street (Ayres on track for India ‘train wreck’, 27/7).
The Barilaro situation is a catastrophe. As for the Premier and his Trade Minister trying to convince us they knew nothing, this has a smell that reminds me of the old dunny carter’s overalls (as those who were about before sewage systems would relate).
Mind you Labor shouldn’t try to be too clever – they have been up to their eyeballs in jobs for the boys (and girls) for decades.
It’s par for the course in politics but the longer this nonsense drags out the less chance there is of the Perrottet government securing another term.
People have had enough of the child’s play. We need the adults to get back on the job.
Unfortunately I don’t think, with the odd exception, they are to be found on either side at present.
John George, Terrigal
No power bill relief in sight Prime Minister Anthony Albanese and Energy Minister Chris Bowen promised me that my energy bill would be hundreds of dollars ­cheaper if I voted for Labor ­(Coalition’s power play on $275 bills promise, 27/7).
Well Labor’s in and so is my ­energy bill, which is some 18 per cent higher with promises of further ­increases and potentially an ­unstable supply.
Chris Bowen’s climate change hat looms large and as such, securing ­affordable energy today, not in some fanciful renewable future, appears of little concern.
Peter Cattlin, Freshwater ‘Civility’ lasted one day In Chris Bowen’s presentation of Labor’s climate change legislation we saw the new “civility and tone” Albanese stated that he would bring to parliament (New politics in Canberra – Editorial, 27/7).
He spoke about his ongoing discussions with people of “good faith”, specifically referring to the crossbenchers with an all-encompassing wave of his arm.
Then, lifting his eyes to glaringly indicate the Opposition, he launched into those who do not ­support Labor’s legislation. These are ­obviously the people who are not of good faith.
Let’s face it, this “civility” is akin to Labor’s jeers on Monday when the Opposition nominated their own candidate for Speaker and it does not improve the “tone” at all.
Carol Pountney, Crestwood
Biden’s unusual logic President Biden (Trump ‘a coward’ on Jan 6: Biden, 27/7) condemns the post-election riot in the US ­Capitol because: “You can’t be pro-insurrection and pro-democracy. You can’t be pro-insurrection and pro-American.” Regardless of opinions on rights and wrongs, I’m guessing that Joe has forgotten about a certain ­kerfuffle which began, not far from his current address, in 1776.
According to his weird logic, it must also have been undemocratic and un-American.
Robert T. Walker, Wagga Wagga
Briefly...
Pauline Hanson hasn’t gone far enough (Pauline Hanson storms out of senate Indigenous recognition – Online, 27/7). She stormed out of the Senate chamber during an Acknowledgment of Country. She should have kept going out of the building and out of her job.
Dennis Fitzgerald, Box Hill, Victoria
HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
Word count: 1167
