If you want to optimise tax breaks on motor vehicles, the choice is ­obvious, the clear winner in this week’s budget are electric-vehicle owners and potential buyers.
Not only will you get the latest technology possible, but there are a batch of tax initiatives that are coming down the line relating to EVs whether you like them or not.
It’s not just that the government reaffirmed the preferential tax treatment for EV owners contained in a bill going through parliament, but it also committed to spending big on EV infrastructure.
Labor has committed more than $500m to the Driving the ­Nation Fund, which includes $146m in funding to the Australian Renewable Energy Agency, $89.5m to create “hydrogen highways” and $39.8m to establish the National Electric Vehicle Charging Network.
Best of all, the soon-to-be passed Electric Car Discount Bill will provide employees with salary sacrifice, GST and tariff waivers on EVs up to $84,916 at a cost to the budget of $345m over the four-year forward estimates period. Under the terms of the bill, leasing an EV will be 100 per cent tax ­deductible, while petrol and diesel cars will remain only partially ­deductible.
In total, about $850m has been allocated to the EV sector at the federal level. States and territories have also jumped on board the EV bandwagon and pledged hundreds of millions of dollars to various programs and incentives that vary from state to state.
NSW and the ACT have committed to replace all combustion engine buses with electric buses by 2030. Given there are 8000 buses in NSW and each electric bus costs about $800,000, the cost to the NSW government to transition its buses to electric will be more than $6bn alone.
Queensland has already built one of the longest “EV super highways” in the world allowing EV owners to drive from Coolangatta to Port Douglas without fear of running out of charge.
The Queensland government plans to make further investment into its EV super highways and reduce the distance between charging stations. In NSW, the state government wants to install DC fast-charging stations every 5km in metropolitan Sydney and every 100km along regional highways. Victoria is also doing something similar and has granted millions of dollars in recent years to fund EV fast-charging station locations.
It is clear the infrastructure is being built for EVs, so the old argument that you will not be able to take your EV on a road trip will be redundant in the very near future – if not already – depending on where you live in Australia.
If you fast forward 10-20 years, a likely situation is that it will be difficult for combustion engine ­vehicles to go on road trips as the existing network of petrol stations is likely to disappear, replaced by EV charging ­stations and hydrogen refuelling stations.
Depending on your state, there are financial benefits provided to new EV buyers. In Victoria, 20,000 new EV owners will receive a $3000 rebate from the Victorian government for EVs under $68,740. The same rules apply in NSW, but the allocation is for 25,000 new EVs and also includes a stamp duty waiver. Queensland and South Australia are also offering $3000 grants. Western Australia is the black sheep in the EV family, providing no financial benefit for new EV owners.
The ACT and Tasmania will waive EV stamp duty plus offer no registration fees for the first two years. In addition, the ACT has a 0 per cent EV loan program, while the Northern Territory offers up to $1500 in stamp duty.
Stacking the state and federal incentives to buy an EV together, the sweet spot appears to be for a new EV purchase under $68,740. In several states you will get the $3000 rebate as well as a stamp duty exemption, but at a federal level you can soon use the incoming novated lease arrange­ments and sidestep some or all of the GST, the 5 per cent import tariff and use your pre-tax income to fund the lease cost of the EV.
Many still aren’t convinced that EVs are the way of the future, with Australia lagging the world in the uptake of EVs. Only 3 per cent of new car sales are for EVs here, versus 10 per cent globally.
But as the rebates, waivers and infrastructure spending on EVs continues, we are likely to see the tipping point for mass adoption of EVs just around the corner – not to mention the influx, over the next two years, of next-generation EVs, which are more affordable to the average household. James Gerrard is principal and director of Sydney planning firm financialadvisor.com.au
CREDIT: JAMES GERRARD
Word count: 778
