Why should Victoria benefit over us?
THE government needs to get its story straight.
A megawatt of renewable electricity can provide benefit here in Tasmania, witness the just announced $1 billion Porsche hydrogen plant south of Burnie, or in Victoria via another inter connector. A unit of energy can’t be in two places at once.
Another cable will build businesses and jobs in Victoria, not here. One wonders why our government is so well disposed towards bearing the downside of more wind farms in our tourism dependent state, while delivering all the benefits to Victoria.
Geoffrey Lea Mount Stuart
NO JUSTIFICATION FOR HIKE Tasmanian wholesale electricity prices are tied to the Victorian quarterly base-load settlement swap price.
These prices are set through auctions in a market where generation costs are higher, generators are exercising market power and transmission constraints are affecting efficient trading.
By paying more than it costs consumers are being denied the advantage of their state’s secure supply of green, low-cost electricity. Lower wholesale prices would reduce household costs, make businesses more competitive, increase economic activity, and thereby, increase taxation receipts.
It is the case that Hydro Tasmania and the Government profit from the difference between the wholesale price of electricity and the cost of generation in this State. This is a financial decision.
There is no economic justification for imposing higher wholesale prices on Tasmanian consumers.
It is time to reassess Tasmania’s price setting and the reliance on the NEM to signal efficient prices.
The NEM is broken because of market failures emanating from its structure and conduct. It has not fulfilled its original promise of lower-cost electricity, with prices having risen by 36 per cent in real terms.
Chris Sayers Sandy Bay
NOT NECESSARILY A GOER AEMO accepts Marinus as a given because both the State and Australian governments say they wish to proceed.
It’s misleading to keep asserting that AEMO regards Marinus as a goer. For them it’s a given not necessarily a goer.
We could grow pineapples in Tassie if governments wished.
That doesn’t make it a goer.
John Lawrence Calder
WORLD OF UNKNOWNS I read with interest the Editor’s view that ‘Feds need to stump up on Marinus’ (Mercury, July 1).
The Editorial could have gone further to explain the full picture rather than echo Minister Barnett, so rejection of the Marinus by Tasmanians is better understood.
Right-to-Information shows Tasmania share is 6 per cent. Mainland and foreign companies need to stump up the rest – not the Feds and Tasmanians (more correctly called the taxpayer).
AEMO promotes Marinus and its $4 billion price tag but it is only a short-term fix to help fill a hole while the Mainland tidal wave of batteries, new wind farms and other renewables such as the booming rooftop solar supply comes on stream.
Tasmania will never be the battery of the nation. It is only a AAA battery in the national scene.
South Australia’s 500 per cent renewable energy strategy will see their supply going to NSW and Victoria.
Victoria is not interested in paying for Marinus because it is cheaper to store energy in batteries closer to the user and link into NSW and South Australian supplies. It is taking great strides to look after itself.
Victoria’s offshore wind farm (Star of the South) will be 2000MW and will supply 20 per cent of Victoria’s needs and has almost the same capacity as HydroTas.
Marinus is said to be 1500MW but more likely lower if Basslink’s performance is the example.
And what does Tasmania get out of it? Subsiding multinationals, increased power costs, most jobs going to the mainland and overseas, and ninety (90) windfarms and 3000 turbines scarring the Tasmanian landscape and brand because the Government won’t identify ‘No Turbine Zones” so wind farms go in the right place.
Tasmanians want a lot of questions answered before they become believers – do we need Marinus if there is a local hydrogen industry?
Is a modest local hydrogen industry a better fit for Tasmania than Marinus? Will hydrogen power be subsidised by Tasmanian taxpayers in Minister Barnett’s pricing model? Will foreign wind farm developers and hydrogen developers be paying their fair share of Marinus? When the mainland tidal wave of batteries, wind, and rooftop solar come on stream, will Marinus be financial or go broke like Basslink?
Yes Minister, please stump up with the full picture and plan with details and options rather than taking Tasmania into a Marinus world of unknowns, landscape harm, and taxpayer debt.
David Ridley Austins Ferry
WHAT A DEAL!
If the Tasmanian electricity Marinuslink Project was a advert for a new car it would be: Car of the Nation for sale, only $3.5b, fantastic opportunity for investors and political announcements.
It will mainly benefit driving in Victoria but Tasmania will help with capital and servicing the very long-term debt. We are however waiting on transmission (lines) and a (hydro) engine and some fan turbines to supply power, and to make it run efficiently.
More help later can be assured from Tasmanian Government with any debt risk or with the a great ‘buy in’ from foreign owned companies.
What a deal!
John Sandel Ridgeway
Word count: 863
