Victorians are being told of a challenge to energy supply due to the state's permanent ban on coal seam gas, while the federal government also warns that a potential gas field in NSW may not be big enough to supply customers south of the border.
Resources Minister Madeleine King said the Narrabri field in northern NSW would be needed to prevent a future energy crisis, but Victorians could not be guaranteed the gas would flow into Victoria if regulators approved the project.
In a pointed remark about the need for long-term gas supplies, King said she wanted to achieve net zero carbon emissions by 2050 - and Labor's policy is to accelerate the shift to renewable energy - but she said this would need gas to replace dirtier coal-fired power stations as fast as possible.
"While the government is now bringing in an energy plan which will get working on renewables, and that's our very determined ambition, gas is the transition fuel that is able to bring down emissions in the short term," she said in her first interview with The Age since taking office. "So it's not a perfect answer. We'd all love to switch straight from coal to renewables. But it's simply not possible."
King warned that Victoria could not expect to receive gas from the Narrabri project if the new field went ahead. Project developer Santos wants to extract coal seam gas from 2026 to supply Sydney and the rest of the state.
In a sign of the strength of demand, Santos chief Kevin Gallagher said on June 2 the company could sell the Narrabri gas "two or three times over" because customers were "crying out" for supplies.
King said Victoria might be able to gain "surplus supply" from the NSW field but this would depend on production capacity and the connection of a future pipeline south, adding that this meant Victoria had to look at its own supplies as well.
The Victorian moratorium was a barrier, she said, when household and industry customers needed gas supplies at a time when existing fields were likely to produce less in the years ahead. While the federal minister said she did not want an argument with her state Labor counterparts, she made a pointed reference to the Northern Territory as a jurisdiction that imposed a moratorium on coal seam gas but later eased the restrictions.
"I'm not going to get into any kind of argument with the Andrews government, I really want to work with them in all ways, whether it be resources and in relation to ... power production. But it is difficult and it's important that people realise that gas from Queensland is pretty similar to gas from Victoria - it just covers a lot more distance and therefore costs a lot more money."
While Victoria sources gas from Bass Strait and the Cooper Basin, the two regions have been producing gas for decades and have not been augmented by any additional fields of similar size in the southern states.
Santos intends to install an additional rig in the Cooper Basin in South Australia next year and Beach Energy is planning to extract more gas from Bass Strait, but these projects combined would not be big enough to meet AEMO's estimated Victorian shortfall.
The Australian Energy Market Operator said in March there was enough Victorian gas production to meet the "declared transmission system" demand until 2026, but cautioned that seasonal winter demand "may exceed available production and storage capacity" for the state.
In its Victorian Gas Planning Report Update in March, the regulator said the supply outlook had improved since its 2021 report, but "Victorian production continues to decline, with a large forecast reduction in capacity prior to winter 2023".
"Total available (existing plus committed) production is forecast to reduce from 360 petajoules in 2022 to 243 petajoules in 2026."
The challenges are not the result of a surge in demand. AEMO forecasts Victorian gas consumption to fall from 212 petajoules this year to 208 petajoules in 2026.
King emphasised that she wanted to "decarbonise" the economy by shifting to renewables but had to deal with household and industry demand. "We want to get to net zero emissions by 2050, but we just have to accept some of the realities of our current energy mix," she said.
"And for those people that will get angry at me for what I've said, I just want to let them know that I want [a] clean and decarbonised world as well. And that's what we're working towards. It might not be on the same timeline as others. But we are all going through the same goal."
CREDIT: David Crowe and Mike Foley
Word count: 782
