VOTERS’ MESSAGE TO PARTIES ANTHONY Albanese will be the next Prime Minister of Australia, after an extraordinary surge in votes for independents and minor parties across the country.
But it remained uncertain whether Labor would be able to form government in its own right, with a hung parliament a possibility.
It could be days before a final result in known, with extremely close contests continuing in key seats.
There were shock results in South-East Queensland amid a surge in the Green vote, with three-cornered contests between the minor party, Labor and the LNP in Brisbane’s inner-city seats, while teal independents were picking up seats in NSW and Victoria.
The Greens were also on track to pick up a second Queensland senate spot for the first time.
There was a bloodbath for the Coalition, which was set to lose about a dozen seats, including the Queensland electorates of Brisbane and Ryan, while Treasurer Josh Frydenberg was set to be a high-profile casualty.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison conceded defeat last night and confirmed he would step down as leader of the Liberal party, saying there had been “great upheaval” in the country in the past two years.
“Three years ago I stood before you, and I said I believed in miracles. I still believe in miracles,” he said. “I’ve always believed in Australians and their judgment, and I’ve always been prepared to accept their verdicts. And tonight they have delivered their verdict.” While Labor will form the next government, it was yet to secure the necessary 76 seats out of 151 needed to govern in its own right.
“We expect to be in a position to govern, but we hope to be in a position to form majority government,” a senior Labor source said.
Question marks over Labor’s seats in Griffith, Gilmore and high-profile candidate Kristina Keneally’s seat of Fowler, where she was parachuted in, make it difficult for Labor to claim the net seven seats it needs for an outright victory.
Mr Albanese took to the stage late last night with partner Jodie Haydon and son Nathan to say it was an “extraordinary honour” to be elected Prime Minister and that he wanted to unite the country.
“The Australian people have voted for change,” he said. “I’m honoured to be given the opportunity to serve as the 31st Prime Minister of Australia.” He confirmed he would attend the Quad leaders’ meeting in Tokyo this week, which will be attended by US President Joe Biden, as well as Japanese Prime Minister Fumio Kishida and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
Mr Albanese reflected on growing up as the son of a single mother on a disability pension and going on to become Prime Minister.
“Every parent wants more for the next generation than they had. My mother dreamt of a better life for me,” Mr Albanese said. “And I hope that my journey in life inspires Australians to reach for the stars.” The Labor leader paid special tribute to his mother, who died in 2002, saying she would be “beaming down on us”.
His first proclamation was that a Labor government would implement the Uluru Statement from the Heart in full, putting Indigenous affairs prominently on his agenda.
He reiterated promises for cheaper childcare, to protect universal healthcare and superannuation, establish an anti-corruption commission, end the climate wars, as well as turning Australia into “a renewable energy superpower”.
“Together we can be a self-reliant, resilient nation, confident in our values and in our place in the world. I’m here not to occupy the space but to make a positive difference each and every day,” he said.
LNP rising star Trevor Evans conceded defeat last night in Brisbane, but Labor’s Madonna Jarrett was yet to claim victory with the Greens slightly ahead on the primary vote last night.
Chaotic results saw the Coalition looking like holding some seats it was expected to lose in Tasmania and going backwards in other electorates thought safe.
There was a rise votes for independents and minor parties across the country as voters sent a message to the political establishment.
The record number of pre-polls and postal votes were expected to skew the early results, with both major parties cautioning against the initial count.
But senior Labor figures admitted they had work to do to win back voters turning to the minor parties, as the ALP’s primary vote fell to about 31 per cent, below where it was in 2019.
The Coalition was being punished in NSW, where Labor was ahead in Bennelong, Reid and Robertson, while Higgins and Chisholm were also likely to change hands, as well as Boothby in South Australia.
Early results from WA had Swan, Pearce and Hasluck likely to fall as well. Teal independents were set to defeat moderate Liberals including Dave Sharma, Tim Wilson, Jason Falinski, Trent Zimmerman and Mr Frydenberg.
The Coalition’s only likely win was in Gilmore where a NSW state government minister Andrew Constance was running for the Nationals. Opposition treasury spokesman Jim Chalmers said Labor was still hoping to form majority, when asked if they would still ruleout doing a deal with the Greens if needed. “Our intention is to be a majority government,” he said.
CREDIT: Matthew Killoran
Word count: 870
