JUVENILE INJUSTICE AS SUCCINCTLY addressed in your Editorial (C-M, Jun 9), the expectations of the public are not being met in respect of the juvenile justice system and something needs to change.
That a young thug, old enough to know better and with criminal charge sheets running to 12 pages, can be handed a sentence of 10 years for the mind-numbing manslaughter of two young adults and their unborn child be eligible to roam the streets again in four and a half years is beyond belief.
As your Editorial said, something needs to change.
Jim Anderson, Innisfail
FOR decades Queenslanders have considered that custodial sentences handed down to criminals by our judicial system have been inadequate.
Reasonable people think the punishment should fit the crime, so it is difficult to accept that a 10-year sentence with the possibility of an early release is adequate for the hardcore teenager who caused the deaths of three innocent people in Alexandra Hills – Kate Leadbetter, Matthew Field and their unborn child.
The legal defence for every alleged criminal uses mitigating circumstances to soften the verdict but it makes one wonder what terrible crime does a person have to commit to receive a sentence of 20 years or more in prison.
Every teenage delinquent from Cairns to the Gold Coast will see the result of this case as a green light.
They will now know they can continue to get high on drugs; drink lots of alcohol; steal vehicles from hardworking, honest, people causing them great inconvenience and heartache; drive at 100km/h through suburban streets to escape pursuing police; and get away with it if caught.
Lizzie Haydon, Runcorn
THIS is the most inadequate sentence for killing three people in living memory. Richard Kuskie, Maroochydore
BURYING COAL CASE COLUMNIST Andrew Bolt (C-M, Jun 9) bemoans the lack of coal-generating facilities, but bizarrely implies that having more would result in lower power prices.
This is false. It is the spike in coal and gas prices that has seen electricity bills skyrocket.
More coal power would see even more expensive power.
We know this because the state with the highest proportion of renewables (South Australia) has the lowest forecast increase.
Had previous governments paid attention to science and not ideologically motivated opinion writers, we could have developed much cheaper renewable energy.
Stored hydro could be a source of baseload power, as could geothermal generation from bedrock super-heated by solar power.
Coal may still be playing a role, but it would be much less, and the resulting price pain so much lower.
Instead, we have inefficient, massively overpriced and dangerously polluting coal, just as Bolt told us we should have.
And now he has the audacity to blame others for the failings of the outcome he campaigned so hard to achieve.
Coal hard facts? Sure. Coal is bad for the environment and costs much more than renewables.
Stephen Morgan, Carina Heights
BLAME GAME DEFICIT WITH all due respect to Jim Chalmers’ position as Federal Treasurer, if he refrained from using terms such as “Budget is absolutely heaving with Liberal debt” (C-M, Jun 8) and acknowledged what every intelligent Australian knows – that the former federal government brought us through uncertain times thanks to Covid by implementing various funding models to assist businesses and individuals.
We all know and accept this came at a cost to Australia’s bottom line. I wish all politicians would cease the blame game and get on with the job, namely to represent all Australians.
Lyn Kajewski, Roma
EXCUSES, excuses, excuses. Jim Chalmers is already blaming the previous government for the economic situation.
Quite the contrast to the election campaign when he and Anthony Albanese had all the answers and were going to deliver on the cost of fuel, housing etc.
Once again good old political dishonesty during the campaign is now making way for a raft of excuses.
Unfortunately the electorate believed him.
Peter Still, Glenore Grove
I AM fed up with politicians of all parties blaming any problems on their predecessors.
Do these elected representatives believe the electorate is so stupid? These people are elected to supposedly sort out problems, but if they are not able to do this they should not be there and should resign. Get in some people who are really committed.
Paul Norton, Lake Macdonald
STOP FOCUSING ON FINES TRANSPORT Minister Mark Bailey is shocked by the number of driver infringements recorded by cameras (C-M, Jun 8).
If the minister wanted to lower the number of fines by half he would have to reduce the number of cameras by half and suffer the loss of $100m in revenue.
The number of infringements is proportional to the number of cameras. There could have been 200,000 infringements if the camera numbers were doubled. This also applies to speeding infringements.
The government must find an answer to keeping road fatalities low in a fair and meaningful way and not rely purely on fining drivers.
It may be the case that the road rules are partially at fault in the high infringement numbers.
The purpose of rules and regulations is to prevent accidents and deaths on the roads.
How can a driver, sitting stationary in a traffic jam, at a stop light, or stopped on a road shoulder ever cause an accident or death?
Maybe the definition of a “driver” of a vehicle needs to be more specific when used in formulating road rules.
If the vehicle is in motion the person is an “active” driver. If the vehicle is stationary the person is a “passive driver”.
A passive driver should not be booked for rules pertaining to active driver infringements which could cause accidents or deaths.
If this was now the case, the 100,000 infringements numbers would be reduced by tens of thousands.
Harold Wrangell, Elimbah
WINNING ORIGIN DEFENCE THE standout performance of the Maroons when they defeated their much vaunted NSW opponents in the first State of Origin game (C-M, Jun 9) was definitely their defence.
To my memory, I have never seen such impregnable tenacious defence in my many years of watching this magnificent rugby league encounter between the two states.
Certainly their attacking forays showed a lot of class, particularly the deft kick by the young Selwyn Cobbo into the hands of the ever reliable Dane Gagai to score a try I will never forget for its execution and timing.
So I’m looking forward to the next game. Stephen Kazoullis, South Brisbane
Word count: 1074
