Ugly truth on plastic problems I write in support of Clarissa Bye’s article (Plastic flight of fancy – Opinion, 25/8) where she highlights the government’s inability to recognise the real polluters of our oceans.
I can’t wait to now sit down at a backyard barbie trying to balance a flimsy paper plate on my lap that collapses under the sheer weight of a sausage and salad, and then having to wash up all the cutlery instead of being able to bin a handful of plastic knives and forks, all while some of the big manufacturers continue to produce plastic products and materials on a large scale seemingly unchecked.
Steve Ross, Cambridge Gardens ●●● What a clever and insightful woman Clarissa Bye is. Her article regarding plastic waste and the pollution created by renewable energy infrastructure is spot on.
Perhaps she needs to be employed by the federal government as an adviser, or better still get rid of the current Energy Minister Chris Bowen and replace him with Clarissa.
Why can the majority of normal and sane-thinking Australians see the stupidity of the systems and policies currently in place regarding the race for carbon neutral in this country, but our elected officials can’t?
We are doomed to follow the likes of Germany and other European countries down the path to ruin while remaining energy poor.
And we will still fill the earth and oceans with hazardous waste in the meantime.
Phil Davis, Grabben Gullen State’s hospitals are in a very unhealthy condition I fear your story concerning the chronic lack of staff at Yass District Hospital is only the tip of the iceberg, with much of the state’s health system effectively on life support (Crisis a matter of life & death, 25/8).
Seriously depleted levels of frontline workers was evident long before the surge of Covid cases.
Nurse-to-patient ratios have blown out while other hospitals face shortages on intensive care wards.
The spokeswoman for the Southern NSW Local Health District’s claim that Yass Hospital continues to provide safe and effective care is most probably accurate, but that’s not by design and certainly not ­because there is adequate staffing.
It’s because, as with most NSW hospitals, doctors and nurses are having to fill gaps in rosters and work almost until they drop.
The spokeswoman also doesn’t mention the fact that “missed nursing care” not only results in serious negative outcomes for patients – ranging from increased falls to medication errors and pressure ulcers – but failing to staff the workforce has led to burnout, job dissatisfaction, higher staff turnover, and even feelings of betrayal among workers.
Jack Dikian, Mosman
Crisis we all saw coming I attended a medical receptionist seminar in 1985 in Canberra. ­During this, the speaker informed the attendees of two significant ­future failures.
The first being that Baby Boomers would eventually double the number of working taxpayers.
The second that there would be major shortages of all medical staff especially GPs and specialists.
This has now come to fruition (Crisis a matter of life & death, 25/8). It is way past time for these ­professions to be educated at the ­expense of government.
Forget your pettiness, Mr Albanese, and start dealing with the problems at hand. The nitpicking has to stop. Get on with the job you so desperately wanted. Carol F, Leppington
Step up efforts for citizens The imprisonment of Australian citizens Cheng Lei and Yang Hengjun by the Chinese government is disturbing, abhorrent and reprehensible (Tales of torture in a Chinese ‘black jail’, 25/8).
The mental health and wellbeing of these two individuals and also their families should be of paramount concern to all. How much more needless suffering do they all have to endure?
Foreign Minister Penny Wong must flex her muscles and demand action to call for their immediate ­release. Consequently, it’s also time for “Godfather” Don Farrell (who is Minister for Trade And Tourism) to take strong punitive action and contact President Xi Jinping to “make him an offer he can’t refuse”!
I call on all politicians from all sides of the political spectrum to ­reveal their true colours and ­demand action on this festering issue so that Cheng and Yang can be released and once again be able to enjoy the Australian characteristics she values and mentions of a “fair go, mateship, love for wide open spaces and freedom”.
Ultimately, their release would be a positive step in helping to ­repair the fractured China-Australia relations.
Don Deieso, Paradise, South Australia
Politics at play in strikes Sometimes I look at the way trade unions operate and think employees could be granted a 50 per cent pay rise immediately and they would still claim they are underpaid (Unions target ‘free riders’, 25/8).
This is why I believe that some strikes and/or industrial actions (like the current rail strikes) are for political reasons and not legitimate workplace or industrial disputes.
Just a thought; I wonder how many “underpaid” union officials there are out there. I suspect very few, if any.
B. Thompson, Cowra
Unions’ standover tactics The Rail, Tram and Bus Union doesn’t seem to care about anyone else but themselves.
The NSW government has given them what they requested to a reasonable point but the union keeps moving the line.
Now Unions NSW is asking for non-members to pay up if they ­secure benefits for the workers ­(Unions target ‘free riders’, 25/8).
This was a democratic country when I last looked.
When I was a young tradie I was threatened with the sack if I didn’t join the union. The boss wasn’t a unionist but it was all to do with the pressure they put on him.
Peter Brown, Soldiers Point
Protect essential services The ongoing irresponsible and ­politically-driven rail strikes in NSW, plus the proposal by the ACTU to give more “strike power” to unions should trigger the alarm bells for us all (Unions target ‘free riders’, 25/8).
Both state and federal governments need to enact legislation that prohibits strike action by critical ­service employees.
They need to establish an “essential service” listing as part of that legislation, including public transport, supply chains, emergency services, education and major food suppliers. Surely this is very much in the public interest.
Is there a politician who is prepared to take a lead on this? If we have I doubt it will be from the Labor Party representing unions.
John George, Terrigal
Briefly...
People forget that when unionism was compulsory we didn’t/couldn’t have flexitime – e.g. work three 12-hour days and then get four days off in a row without penalty rates ­(Unions target ‘free riders’, 25/8). Now they’re trying to forcibly take control again – no thanks!
Col, Cronulla ●●● Instead of going to a club that bans you from looking at other ­people, why not just go to a different club where they treat you like an adult (Stare and you’re kicked out, 25/8).
Jim Gardiner, New Lambton ●●● Alas, there goes the much-celebrated ‘love at first sight’ phenomena (Stare and you’re kicked out, 25/8).
Steve Ngeow, Chatswood ●●● Can we please let Megan have the anonymity she clearly does not want (Markle’s me moment – Opinion 25/8).
Peter Egan, Mosman ●●● My sister-in-law got stung by ­Robodebt, paid straight away out of fear and got nothing back (Prime Minister to announce probe into Centrelink scandal – Online, 25/8). Go Albo.
Peter Ross, West Ryde
HAVE YOUR SAY MAIL: letters@dailytelegraph.com.au SMS: 0427 016 533 (Normal messaging fees apply) POST: Letters to the Editor, The Daily Telegraph GPO Box 4245, Sydney 2001
Word count: 1256
