Train off track MARCH 31 was the last Overland rail service between Adelaide and Melbourne for a while, or maybe forever.
The Victorian Government provided money to keep The Overland running for the past 15 months, after the South Australian Government cut its funding to the service in 2018.
Journey Beyond, the operator of The Overland, has decided to suspend the service until the end of May, following the South Australian Government’s decision to close its state’s border.
My experiences of the service is it has carried about 200 passengers a trip, mostly of senior South Australians and some tourists.
Here’s hoping that, when the COVID-19 situation is over, the service for those valuable travellers can be recommenced.
TIM SPURDENS, Glenelg Video politics WHY don’t our politicians use available technology to hold Federal Parliament by video conference from the state capitals?
Use orderly conduct and save millions. There would be less theatre but is that important compared with running the country efficiently?
JEFF SCHOLEFIELD, Elizabeth Vale Ultimate sacrifice WITH the ever-increasing number of casualties across the globe because of COVID-19, people are likening this perilous time in our history to World War II.
There is, however, in this instance one very important difference: It is the elderly citizens, as opposed to our youth, who are making the ultimate sacrifice.
ANTONIO DE IONNO, Dernancourt Don’t ask Labor SO Des Kemp thinks Premier Steven Marshall needs to be consulting Peter Malinauskas regarding a pandemic plan (“Plan for pandemic”, The Advertiser, 2/4/20). Shutting down the Repat, turning Modbury Hospital into a Band-Aid station, privatising a couple more government departments and throwing another lazy billion dollars at EPAS.
Now that’s a plan – I don’t think.
PHIL GREEN, Modbury Heights Give up pokies THOUGH the coronavirus is undoubtedly catastrophic, conversely, with poker machine venues closed, it is an excellent opportunity for prob-lem gamblers to wean them-selves off their addiction.
Further, with family and friends’ involvement, professional counselling, advice and support is freely available.
I sincerely hope that for many this will be a positive outcome for those individuals and society as a whole.
BRENDAN WALKER, West Lakes Masking truth IT’S unfortunate that information on the wearing of face masks is so confused. My thinking would be that anyone wearing a mask in the shopping centre must be unwell.
In Asian countries, much of the population seems to have always worn masks when out and about. Yet they have huge numbers of people with the virus. Is the thinking that there are not enough masks for medical practitioners, so we should not be using them in the community?
Should we be wearing masks or not?
MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood No rent relief I JUST paid my full commercial rent for March, after getting a flat “no” for any kind of reduced rent.
How’s that for sharing the burden?
RUE VOGIATZ, Norwood Landlord help THERE is Federal Government assistance for employers and employees, rent relief for tenants and now free childcare because of COVID-19.
But what about self-funded retiree landlords of residential properties whose sole income is rent? When will the Government help us?
Will the emergency services levy be waived? Will Prime Minister Scott Morrison ask local councils to waive rates for six months?
The delay in property revaluations is useless for retiree landlords, who need help right now.
Residential landlords are an essential feature of Australia’s economy and we need assistance, too, if we are to survive this crisis.
But, then again, perhaps we are not deemed as worthy of assistance as are the AFL or poor Alan Joyce and his fleet of planes.
MARIA DEIESO, Paradise Lesson variety CONGRATULATIONS to The Advertiser, which is doing marvellous work in supporting families with children at home through your Kids@Home pages.
Other than reinforcing the fact that teachers are amazingly skilled, it is also helping those caring for children at home with some great resources. I was concerned, however, with the What’s Your Style (Years 7-8) feature in yesterday’s paper.
I am sure that published ideas are responsibly sourced, but more than 20 years ago, the notion of “best learning styles” was debunked by neuroscience. It is limiting to let children assume that they learn better in particular ways.
Enlightened educators have long argued this hocus pocus is unhelpful and have emphasised the need for us to harness the incredible neuroplasticity of the brain and to present children with lots of learning opportunities, experienced in many different ways.
JUDE HINES,Educational consultant
Word count: 745
