CEC BYTB
The global spike in coal and LNG prices should be seen as a wake-up call for Australia to further develop its renewable power capacity.
As European nations struggle with gas supply and China’s demand for commodities ahead of the northern winter, policy makers should be focusing on how to ensure the country is not ensnared in a global commodity crunch, says Clean Energy Council chief executive Kane Thornton.
“If you look at what‘s happening in Europe, it provides a warning that if we are overly reliant on fuels that are part of a global market and global supply/demand dynamics then it’s a pretty dangerous place to be,” he says.
With the price of east coast domestic gas linked to international LNG prices due to Queensland’s export industry, Australia’s gas-hungry manufacturers are also finding themselves at the mercy of global supply issues.
Our strength in renewables actually puts those manufacturers at an advantage relative to international peers, Thornton says.
“We‘ve got the best combination of wind and solar anywhere in the world,” he says. “All of these heavy industries are adjusting themselves for a decarbonised future and that’s where the competitive landscape shifts. If we can set those industries up with low-cost renewables, then they’ve got an extraordinary competitive footing to take on the world.”
Prominent Australians are already making big bets on renewable energy exports, with Andrew Forrest announcing a $1 billion investment into what would be the largest hydrogen electrolyser, renewable industry and equipment factory in the world in Gladstone. PwC estimates global demand for hydrogen will reach 100 million tonnes by 2030 and exceed 500 million tonnes by 2050, with green hydrogen seen as the most preferred product.
Forrest said his PHD studies in the last five years left him “utterly convinced” the rate of climate change taking place could lead to “runaway global warming”.
“Before we get to that tipping point, we have got to make sure we never get near it,” he said.
“I am convinced there’s thousands of times more energy available than we’ll ever need. And it’s all green. It’s all new. The world absolutely can, and therefore must move on from a polluting future.”
Renewable energy is here now - Clean Energy Council. Firefighter talks to local about how renewable energy will help during a bushfire and that renewable energy is the future.
Hydrogen is seen as an industry that can soak up excess supply of renewables, and according to research by Bank of America, the sector economics are rapidly becoming favourable.
“We actually see a complete dive down of hydrogen production cost,” Haim Israel, global strategist and head of thematic investing at BofA Securities, told CNBC, citing that electrolyser (the technology to separate hydrogen from water) prices are down 50 per cent in the last five years and renewable energy costs have fallen 50-60 per cent. “We believe both of them will go down another 60 to 70 per cent before the end of the decade,” he said.
It could fuel an Australian jobs boom on top of rapidly growing employment in the renewables sector that already employs more people than the domestic coal industry. It also has great potential for job creation in the regions, where much of the renewable power is generated.
“There are a lot of very significant investors focused on green hydrogen, meaning we’re going to build the capability. We‘ve got the renewable resources, we’ve got the export facilities, we’ve got the relationships and the access to Asia, which is hungry for low-emissions energy,” Thornton says. “I think in years, not decades, to come we’ll see green hydrogen dwarf some of the booms we’ve seen in the last century.”
The rapid fall in the price of renewable energy is also tipping the economics of power generation, with new solar or wind plants cheaper to operate than fossil fuel-based ones. The CSIRO and the Australian Energy Market Operator (AEMO) find that adding new variable renewable generation, such as solar and wind, to as high as a 90 per cent share of the grid will be cheaper than non-renewable options.
That should put to rest the argument that the sector could not exist without subsidies, Thornton says.
“If you‘re building a new power station in Australia today, then the lowest cost form of power station is the renewable one and therefore they are being built today free of subsidy. Uncertainty around policy and politics makes it challenging, but it is no longer a question about scale of subsidy for these projects,” he explains.
Where there needs to be greater government intervention, however, is in the management of the grid system. Currently the majority of major transmission lines are linked to coal or gas-fired power plants, while large-scale solar is located inland and in the mid to northern region of Australia. Wind farms are located in elevated areas and the southern regions.
Residential rooftop solar, already on nearly three million homes and growing, currently accounts for almost one quarter of the renewable energy generated. AEMO estimates rooftop solar could account for up to 77 per cent of electricity demand by 2026.
In their latest report on the National Energy Market, AEMO warns that the ‘transition to a power system supplied almost entirely by renewable and distributed resources (rooftop solar) represents a major change in power system and electricity market operation. A range of adaptations will be needed for the power system to keep operating securely, reliably, safely and affordably.’
To do that, Thornton believes the federal government needs to improve the regulatory framework, for instance co-ordinating between states, and potentially provide some upfront investment to help get these “capital intensive” assets off the ground.
“Just like major transport corridors, this is important infrastructure for the future,” Thornton says, noting that the vast majority of existing infrastructure was built with taxpayer funds. “Making these investments does cost money upfront but it pays off over the long term because it creates a more stable, stronger grid and that means lower power prices for many decades to come.”
South Australia has already proved that a more sophisticated grid, plus the deployment of utility-scale batteries, can solve the supply issues that once sparked criticism.
“I know South Australia was ridiculed four or five years ago, but they are rapidly transitioning to renewables, they‘re thinking deeply about how to do that,” Thornton says. “They’ve changed the way they’re managing the grid, they’re bringing on the right level of investment in energy storage and it is now a global success.”
Word count: 1060
