The solar farm has been part of John Laing’s renewable energy portfolio in Australia, but when the portfolio was placed on the market last year it was excluded from the transaction because it faced technical problems.
Also left out of the sale was the Finley Solar Farm in NSW – the rest of the wind farm portfolio was offloaded to First Sentier for $285 million before disposal costs.
Sunraysia has had about $220 million worth of debt owing to seven banks overseen by syndicate arranger NAB.
Chinese Australian renewable energy investor Maoneng also owns a small stake.
The farm, based near Balranald in southern NSW, has been plagued with technical problems.
Sunraysia has been built to have the capacity to generate 255 megawatts of power to 50,000 homes and was scheduled for completion last year. However, connectivity issues have slowed progress on the project.
The solar farm owners have been in a legal dispute with its contractor Decmil.
Working with Sunraysia has been adviser Houlihan Lokey, while the lenders have been advised by PwC.
The challenge for some solar farms, say analysts, is that they have locked in financing based on assumptions that they can sell a certain amount of power, but in reality the demand has been far lower.
Sources believe that Sunraysia is now close to completion but whether it is placed up for sale remains to be seen.
John Laing’s strategy has been to offload renewable energy assets, but the British infrastructure investor was recently purchased for $US2.8 billion by the global buyout fund Kohlberg Kravis Roberts, and it remains unclear what its strategy will be for the business.
Some good news for Sunraysia’s owners and lenders is the approval by electricity giant TransGrid of a $2.2 billion power cable to transmit renewables between NSW, South Australia and an added connection to Victoria.
The electricity interconnector was only approved after the federal government’s green bank stepped in with a $295 million hybrid debt deal that allowed TransGrid and its owners including Spark Infrastructure to sidestep funding hurdles.
The 900km transmission link, known as EnergyConnect, is being developed by TransGrid and SA’s ElectraNet and is seen as a critical link for NSW when old coal plants in the state retire by allowing cheap renewables to be imported from SA, avoiding big jumps in wholesale prices.
TransGrid faced a series of setbacks after a push for a rule change – easing hurdles for investors to secure debt – was rejected by the Australian Energy Market Commission.
Word count: 403
