RENEWABLE POWER GAP DONALD Maclean (Letters, Jun 11) trots out the mythical belief that electricity from solar and wind with battery backup is cheaper than from fossil fuels.
No renewable system I know of has paid for adequate battery, pumped hydro or gas support to provide baseload reliability.
Furthermore the miserly feed-in price paid for surplus solar electricity from residential rooftops is not a true indicator of the cost of this electricity.
South Australia has low costs because its $90 million megabattery only provides about 20 minutes backup while other states are covering the big gaps in its renewable supply.
Ian Wilson, Chapel Hill
DONALD Maclean states that wind and solar need “storage” to be cheaper and cleaner, with gas-fired supplements.
In truth he is requiring a second energy system with 100 per cent backup in lieu of the one system we once enjoyed.
During my lifetime, I have never experienced a crisis with fossil fuels as our energy source.
Maclean should read Vaclav Smil’s book, How the World Really Works, highlighted in Des Houghton’s column (C-M, Jun 11).
Complete decarbonisation is not possible without devastating Australia’s economy.
This newspaper, in its Mission Zero series last year, set as its benchmark a test that “no worker should be left behind and no household should be forced to pay more for their power bills”.
It is clear that the Labor policy of “Powering Australia” is not meeting such a test.
Eve Meredith, Annerley
STEPHEN Morgan’s comments (Letters, Jun 10) on coal-fired power do not mention how much some renewables cost.
Take away the substantial subsidies paid for solar and wind generators as well as batteries and the costly rewiring of our transmission lines to use these new sources of power to give a real cost.
We also have to look at the life of wind and solar.
Large wind turbines are currently lasting about 10 to 15 years with the blades having to be replaced during that time.
Solar panels will last 25 years for top quality panels, but degrade in performance from day one.
And the kicker comes when they have to be decommissioned, the majority going to landfill.
It could be that modern small or micro nuclear reactors using the latest technology could be the cleanest and cheapest power source.
Paul Collinson, Camira
NELLI Stevenson stated in her opinion piece (C-M, Jun 10): “Aside from contributing to the climate crisis that I believe is causing worsening bushfires, floods and droughts, coal and gas are expensive and unreliable.” Had she done some research before making that statement, she would have realised that we have had many severe bushfires, floods and droughts before the advent of motor cars and power stations.
Stevenson also did not offer any evidence that coal and gas were more expensive. The fact is that our climate is cyclic and always will be.
Bevan Bishop, Torrington
RICHARD Marman (Letters, Jun 11) writes that we find ourselves facing escalating electricity prices because renewable energy is in its “infancy”.
It’s true that until very recently fossil fuel energy was favoured. But total generation from wind and solar projects in some areas is growing like Topsy.
In South Australia, for example, in 2021, solar and wind provided 62 per cent of local demand.
By the time the nuclear option arrives, renewable will be mature and should outshine the latecomer as, on top of being a decade or more gestating, nuclear is notoriously expensive, thirsty and very unpopular with the neighbours.
We should persist with renewables. They are less trouble, less expensive and will emit less gas.
Dr Emma Gilberg, Kawungan
FAMILY STILL IN WAITING THE drawn-out saga of the Nadesalingam family seems to be drawing to an end with their return to Biloela (C-M, Jun 11).
Four years ago they were taken from Biloela and placed in detention by the Australian Border Force.
Since then locals and many others have campaigned for their return. Representations were made to the then immigration minister Peter Dutton but these fell on deaf ears.
The new Labor government has issued the family bridging visas to enable them to return to Biloela.
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese has said: “The family will need to undergo a formal application process to obtain permanent residency” and he sees “no impediment” to the process.
One must ask why the family must undertake another formal process and why it’s taken four years so far.
Surely the Immigration Minister by decree can immediately grant permanent residence to this long-suffering family.
Bob Meadows, Mansfield
THE return of the Tamil family to Biloela certainly tugs at the heart strings. They seem to be lovely people who would make good citizens.
Nevertheless, the fact remains that evidence presented at court hearings indicates they are not asylum seekers.
Rather, they are illegal immigrants whose supporters succeeded in gaming the system.
Trevor Sauer, Mapleton
HIGH HOME PRICES A CRISIS IN HER Love and Loathe list (C-M, Jun 11) Kylie Lang loves “Brisbane cracking the global top 10 for the cities with highest growth in property prices”.
I am fortunate to have interstate landlords who have been caring and mindful of the strains faced by all in recent times, and a property manager who follows their lead.
However, I am acutely aware, as is their prerogative, that at any time the rent can be raised beyond my means or the property be sold in this sky-high market.
I am constantly afraid of finding myself living in my car and losing the right to spend time with my daughters.
I am in a permanent work role, yet on a minimum wage, yet current rental prices are out of my reach.
Perhaps next Saturday, Lang could move that love of Brisbane property prices into her Loathe list.
Simon Martin, Deagon
SORRY Kylie, but despite being a homeowner, I cannot see anything at all to love about Brisbane cracking the global top 10 for cities with the highest growth in property prices.
To me it is a social and economic disaster.
Barry Harrod, Fig Tree Pocket
SPERM OF LIFE WHILE I am sympathetic to those children born through the rather loose sperm donation practices of the 1970s and 1980s, and the efforts of some of them in trying to trace their sperm donor fathers, I am slightly perplexed at statements by one such person that she “was destroyed by the thought that she was created from a cup of sperm dropped off on a shelf in a car park” (C-M, Jun 11).
It reminds me of that old saying about how old age is really not so bad if you consider the alternative.
Sympathetic as I am, I cannot help but wonder if these (now adult) children ever contemplate that but for those early medical interventions, they would not be here at all. Mike Butler, Deception Bay
Word count: 1137
