SATURDAY, DECEMBER 26, AND SUNDAY, DECEMBER 27
Moving picture
WHAT is it about the image of a partly demolished Moorfield home that has impacted so powerfully on people?
About 18 months after its demolition, it continues to capture people’s attention. Indeed, it has become the go-to photograph when discussing the urgent need to preserve some of our heritage buildings in the face of the rampant, and often soulless, development that threatens to engulf and nullify the character of our city and suburbs.
Perhaps the contrast between fragility and substance haunts the onlooker.
After standing for more than 150 years, and built when Adelaide was 27 years old, there was disbelief that, within days, something as substantial and as beautiful as this grand old house could be reduced to pointless rubble.
Perhaps looking through the graceful arched windows is a glimpse into our history and a timely reminder that not only the house but something else that’s important has been lost forever.
When literally building our future, it’s not always “out with the old and in with the new”.
We can take positive ideas from our past, like good house design, a decent backyard and proper landscaping.
That’s not the norm nowadays but with a bit of commitment it could be.
CHRIS BATES-BROWNSWORD, Cumberland Park
Wolf warriors
JIM Allen says Terry McCrann “rails at China for setting more ambitious emissions-reduction targets than Australia” (“Bank crusade”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
That is baffling considering that I believe that Terry’s column was entirely devoted to arguing exactly the opposite.
He points out that China would effectively “lift its CO2 emissions in 2030” by 70-90 per cent. But “ScoMo and Australia are vilified for promising a real cut of 26-28 per cent by 2030”.
A quick online search for coal-fired power stations reveals that “la-la land” is a fair way north and slightly to the left of us.
When it comes to climate change, China’s vaunted “wolf warriors” are the proverbial wolves in sheep’s clothing.
BERNIE COATES, Modbury North
Transport revamp
THERE’S been lifelong debate about the best way forward for Adelaide’s public transport system.
Environment Minister David Speirs has joined the list of previous ministers’ ghosts who also recognised the necessity from trams, trains, and buses to be more efficient.
Politicians should open their eyes to alternative approaches. If you defend your failures, you lose sight of new approaches.
We must change or the alternative is gloom. Adelaide’s residents, across many years, have expressed their views for change.
Nevertheless, their suggestions have been assigned to the dustbin.
Essential changes include fast-tracking electrification of all public transport and preparing for the coming e-bicycle revolution, for a start.
Climate warming is unequivocal. The primary cause of greenhouse-gas emissions is the burning of fossil fuels. The benefits from fewer cars on our roads, and more electric-powered public transport, would include improved air quality, better health and fewer traffic injuries.
LEN LEAN, Paradise
Love thy driver
I AGREE with our state religious leaders that love needs to be a dominant community theme during this Christmas season (“Festive spirit to help us recover”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
And, in that spirit, when an irate motorist tried to honk me into a dangerous turn the other day, I turned the other cheek and resisted the temptation to respond with a Yuletide two-fingered salute.
I wish that motorist a happy and, above all, relaxed Christmas and New Year.
TERRY HEWTON, Henley Beach South
Hard borders
I DON’T care what Caleb Bond or many letter and column writers think, the NSW border should have been closed immediately – not in 24-or-so hours.
Letting all those people through, pre-closure, was playing with fire.
As for Police Commissioner Grant Stevens apologising for any misunderstanding regarding the border closure, that apology should never have taken place.
Contrary to what an enormous number of Australians seem to think, the whole world is in an unprecedented health crisis and the situation seems to be escalating.
People are dying in their thousands because they have caught this dreadful disease from someone else, possibly a close family member or their next-door neighbour.
And this is where society has fallen down dramatically by behaving with gay abandon, with nary a care for their loved-ones or their neighbour.
This attitude of “It’s my right to do this or that or to act in some anti-social way” is the attitude of selfish people.
DENNIS PARKER, Yongala
Climate changes
EVERY state and territory government in Australia has committed to achieving net- zero emissions by 2050.
Most have enshrined the target into legislation.
Considering the enormity of the situation, it is extremely disturbing that our Federal Government is refusing to follow the examples set by the states and territories.
BRIAN MEASDAY, Myrtle Bank
The full Monty
THIS year Police Commissioner Grant Stevens accepted a huge pay rise for being on top of COVID-19.
And the crowds were very happy.
Lockdowns were in place to keep the Victorians out, and the crowds were happy.
Now, NSW has COVID-19 in the northern beaches area and Mr Stevens manages to stuff up a simple directive to close borders after a certain time.
And the crowds are not happy.
Monty Python could not have come up with a better script than this. Can I get a job where he works?
CLIVE CLARKE, Salisbury Downs
Gatehouse bid
RESTORE, and do not destroy, Urrbrae gatehouse.
MARGARET McRITCHIE, Myrtle Bank
Weather maker
AS Premier Steven Marshall is blamed by some Advertiser correspondents for everything that they perceive to be wrong in our fair state, let me offer him congratulations on arranging temperate weather on Christmas Day.
This was unlike Western Australian Labor Premier Mark McGowan, who could only offer the people of Perth an oppressively hot day. So, well done, Mr Marshall.
IAN GIBSON, Golden Grove
It’s a wrap
I’LL be rapt when this year is like yesterday’s Christmas presents were – all wrapped up.
PETER McCALLUM, Booleroo Centre
Burnside inquiry
ONCE again, the good name of local government has been marred by the misuse of credit cards (“Money to burn, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
The inquiry by State Ombudsman Wayne Lines into the behaviour of staff and councillors at Burnside Council raises questions.
What is the justification for providing any council personnel with credit cards? How many people connected to that council are given cards?
And, further, is the use of the cards scrutinised by the council’s auditors?
D. G. PITT, Plympton
Inept award
BURNSIDE Council wins my 2020 award for being the most inept, inefficient and greedy council in South Australia.
Congratulations. Unofficial records suggest that Burnside has retained this award for 17 of the past 20 years.
Special mention, as always, to Onkaparinga Council and its sustained efforts to challenge for the title.
STEPHEN RYAN, Tusmore
Fixing health
FOUR lives may have been saved if the Women’s and Children’s Hospital had the cardiac equipment (“Bubs ‘had no chance’ ”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Doubtless Opposition Lead­er Peter Malinauskas and his shadow ministers will be loud in their condemnation of the Liberal Government for this failure to take proper care of the people of SA.
Well, Mr Malinauskas, your party had 16 long years to ensure that the state had the best public health service in Australia. All of our politicians – federal and state – have failed the pub test.
You are all – ALP, Liberal, SA-Best, Greens and independents – quick enough off the mark when it comes to your own pay increases and in rorting expenses.
However, other than that, you are all a total waste of space, time and money.
ROBERT McCORMICK, Bridgewater
Appeal success
THE most outrageous decision in sporting history and a clear demonstration of how China is taking over this world.
That is how future historians will view the decision to refer the case of Chinese swimmer Sun Yang, who was found guilty of illegal drug use on the grounds it was racially motivated, back to the Court of Arbitration for Sport.
Since when has race been an issue with drugs? Does this mean that cyclist Lance Armstrong can appeal against his conviction and reclaim his Tour de France trophies? Or the East German athletes? The list goes on and on.
This decision has made the authorities who oversee the illegal use of performance-enhancing drugs the laughing stock of the world. They should be named, shamed and sacked.
ALLAN COX, Hindmarsh Island
Guards to guard the guards just a case of overkill
REGARDING “There’s now a watchdog for ICAC”, talk about paranoia (Sunday Mail, December 20).
You have to eventually trust someone or something to provide the checks and balances. Logically, if another body is formed to ensure ICAC’s integrity (let’s call it the RIICAICAC – the “Really Independent Integrity Commission against ICAC”) then another authority has to be set up to determine its efficacy. And so on, ad infinitum.
The formation of this unique body will ensure the creation of more high-level bureaucrats, public servants, posh office space, etc, at the public’s expense.
And don’t forget the inevitable oversee fact-finding study trips by the hierarchy and their hangers on.
This is “Quis custodiet ipsos custodes” (Who will guard the guards?) gone mad.
It’s almost fitting that such a ridiculous idea surfaces in 2020.
BRIAN SMITH, Littlehampton
Check-in made easy
I AM really struggling to understand some people’s attitude towards the COVID-19 check-in process.
No one is forcing anyone to buy a new phone. All you need to do is put your name, telephone number and the time on a form (If the shop doesn’t have one, they should).
This will take all of 10 seconds. You don’t have to provide all your personal details, as someone suggested.
If someone in the shop had the virus, wouldn’t you like to be contacted quickly so that you can get tested and possibly not pass it on to family and friends?
I’m an octogenarian and I can understand it.
EVE MILLS, Elizabeth North
Changing tastes
FURTHER to the comments on when cockles became pipis and squid became calamari, when did crisps become chips and when did chips become hot chips?
Confused? I am.
JOBBIE BOAK, Redwood Park
Nuclear reasons
A QUESTION often asked is: Why do so many groups oppose a nuclear waste depository at Kimba?
The reasons are that South Australia has already delivered a solid “No” to dumping nuclear waste here.
Then, of 824 eligible Kimba voters, 452 voted “Yes”. And we are supposed to believe that is wide support, with 62 per cent in favour? Some of us went to school. Also, if the Bill gets through, there is no guarantee that only medical-level waste will be stored there.
And, with a vast wilderness available, why choose prime farming land near an occupied town? Thank goodness for Labor and independent senators who place people’s safety before expediency.
BRYAN LOCK, Iron Knob
See China in new light
IF we treat China as an enemy, then that is what it will be. But if we treat it as if it was what it should be, then maybe we could coexist as neighbours. The political and cultural differences would be respectfully traversed through the same commitment to contact and connection that enabled the dismantling of apartheid.
The Australian Government wants constructive dialogue with China while proclaiming the right to selectively moralise about its poor human rights record. Why not select questionable behaviour exhibited by other countries, including ourselves? Why not criticise Donald Trump’s fake bleating of electoral fraud?
This is not to say that countries do not have the right to hold one another to account for violations of decency and liberty. Should we so choose, then let it be in concert with other like-minded countries through the UN or other suitable forums.
Hectoring from the bleachers has invited spiralling aggravation, with the major losers being Australian exporters. A measure of Jacinda Ardern’s laconic moderation is more likely to keep any hornets in the nest.
BRUCE NYLAND, Manningham
Gatehouse inside story
I SPENT the five happiest years of my adult life living in the gatekeeper’s lodge at the Waite Institute during the early 1980s.
During that time, I became friends with the elderly plumber, whose father had also been the plumber there, and he told me the history of the gatehouse as he knew it.
It was built in 1837 as the gatekeeper’s cottage for the original Urrbrae House, and consisted of four rooms in the front section with the twin-gabled roof and a big open courtyard.
The open part of the house was given a roof later. There were three bedrooms and the lounge room in the front, and a pantry/storeroom, billiard room, bathroom/laundry/toilet (all separate), kitchen/dinette and a foyer that we used as a formal dining room in the flat-roofed section – 11 rooms in all.
It looks small, but is big on the inside. The pantry had a big open fireplace as did the billiard room.
The gatehouse should not be destroyed. The money that has been allocated for the intersection should be spent on putting a railway line from Murray Bridge through to the Barossa, and connecting with the line to the city that already exists.
I watched a show on TV about trailers being taken to the railway depots, removed from the prime movers and, using a system similar to the O-Bahn, coupled together and taken from point A to point B by rail. From there, they were taken by another prime mover to their destination. There was no off-loading onto flat-beds – just very quick handling at each end.
It would be a way to get heavy vehicles off roads and save having to upgrade intersections with what will only be Band-Aid solutions as traffic increases. Forward thinking now by those who make the decisions would save a lot of money and hassles.
D. CAMENS, Lobethal
End of 2020
THE year 2020 is nearly over. The toilet paper hunters have finished their roll playing. The political situation in the US is quite “unpresidented”, and the big advertisers continue their daily war of retaliation.
JEFF MUNN, Windsor Gardens
Batters must walk
I SHOULD like to bring to the attention of Phil Robins, whose letters I generally enjoy, that if one is batting in cricket, and one knows that one is out, regardless of what the umpire says, one walks (“Kamahl’s hat-trick – but he didn’t get me … or did he?”, Sunday Mail, December 20).
Or it is simply not cricket?
Perhaps the views that I was taught have not been applicable for longer than I thought.
JOHN MURPHY, Salisbury East
Drama at Flinders
PETER Goers hits a raw nerve this week with his outing of academic doublespeak in the report about the decimation of the Flinders Uni drama department where he and I shared a few years of our misspent youths, for which we are both eternally grateful (“Dagger for the arts we see before us”, Sunday Mail, December 20).
This ranks on a par with the Sydney Conservatorium not requiring that its students can read music. A tragedy of Shakespearean proportions, really.
JUDY SZEKERES, Hove
THURSDAY, DECEMBER 24
Christmas treat
AMID all the gloom and bad news stories about COVID-19 it was a high point to see Daisy’s floral Christmas wreath (“Daisy’s floral Xmas decorating”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Australian wildlife has been decimated following the bushfires of last summer and the ongoing loss of habitat from a slash-and-burn environmental mentality.
I encourage readers to leave water out for our wildlife. We have just splurged on a long-awaited birdbath as an early Christmas present, so at least our birds will be happy this Christmas.
JENNY ESOTS, Willunga
Managing virus
THE State Government’s management of COVID-19 in South Australia in November and December can only be described as shambolic.
Premier Steven Marshall, chief public health officer Professor Nicola Spurrier and Police Commissioner Grant Stevens told us many times that there was no risk to the public from those quarantined in medi-hotels with the virus.
The authorities allowed the virus to escape and infect many people, resulting in a state lockdown. How is it that a medical professional allowed people to work in a highly infectious environment without testing? No apology was given to the public regarding this major blunder.
As the virus gained a foothold, a number of schools were closed. Students from Roma Mitchell College, and other schools, were required to quarantine with their families.
A week later, at Woodville High School, only students in the same year as the infected student were deemed close contacts, as well as specific staff members, and had to quarantine.
Other students were not required to quarantine because they were classified as casual contacts. The rules changed within a week of the initial panic.
During the lockdown there was confusion as to the businesses that could trade. This was inexcusable, as the authorities had seven months to refine the process for a second wave.
Further chaos occurred on the weekend when a misunderstanding over a simple instruction affected many NSW visitors.
B. WAYNE, Gilles Plains
Don’t blame staff
IAN, of Valley View, be careful that you don’t blindly believe all of what is said and written (Text talk, The Advertiser, yesterday).
If notification was only verbal, then Child Protection Minister Rachel Sanderson, conveniently, can’t recall it. And there is no proof.
An incompetent minister blames their dedicated staff.
The Child Protection Department currently has excellent leadership, has implem­ented many of the protocols from previous findings and has trained many non-government-organisation staff who now house neglected and abused children taken from their incompetent parents.
B. PAGE, Happy Valley
Council excesses
WHAT is it about the excesses of council employees that continues to disgust ratepayers, yet fails to surprise?
We have all heard these stories before (“Money to burn”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
It is Groundhog Day in light of the Burnside Council’s snouts-in-the-trough revelations. There were no sandwiches and cups of tea in sight as employees and their guests dined on lobster and whiskey.
I am certain they did not raise their glasses to the ratepayers as they enjoyed their freebies.
The perceived sense of entitlement of these individuals is staggering.
Perhaps it’s time for the ratepayers of this council to loudly register their displeasure and demand changes to what should be a strict criteria as to how other people’s money is spent.
GUY MUDIE, Highgate
Stop upgrade
I AM horrified by the plan to demolish the historic Urrbrae gatehouse that was bequeathed to South Australia by Peter Waite.
Aside from the value of the building and grounds to SA, which is enormous, I also wish to question the wisdom of the proposed so-called upgrade.
For 10 years, I have been passing through this intersection morning and afternoon every working day.
It is a long way from the worst intersection in Adelaide, and removing this corner of the historic grounds will not noticeably improve traffic flow.
From the Fullarton Road perspective, widening the corner south from Cross Road into Fullarton Road only improves the driving experience for residents of the immediate suburb, returning from luncheon in the hills.
For everyone else, the problem is further south, where there is a bottleneck as traffic veers towards Old Belair Road.
From a Cross Road perspective, the main issue along this section of road is speeding, not congestion.
Is the project a revenue-raising venture? Regarding the 65 jobs it is expected to create, these will likely go to interstate contractors.
The loss of the gatehouse and part of the university grounds would be a big price to pay for a small gain. Please, don’t knock down the gatehouse at the Waite Institute.
GRAEME ANDERSON, Colonel Light Gardens
Dementia studies
DAVID Bishop has suggested that mild dementia may be the cause of older drivers having car accidents (“Licence test”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
I have not seen the scientific evidence for this association.
Many older drivers lose their judgment ability and co-ordination without having demonstrable dementia.
Many drivers who have accidents do not have diagnosable dementia.
It be helpful if the author of the letter could provide evidence of this association of car accidents being caused by dementia.
ROBERT McRITCHIE, Myrtle Bank
Prayer answered
THEY have returned.
The tools that were taken from the tractor display at St Martin’s Heritage Cemetery have been delivered back (“Display stolen”, The Advertiser, Thursday). This is, indeed, a pleasing result.
It was never about the value of goods but more about moral value and the values that society needs to uphold.
I sincerely wish those responsible a very merry Christmas and a joyous 2021.
DARIAN LECKIE, St Martin’s Heritage Cemetery, Campbelltown
Population caps
WELL said, Bob Couch (“Steady numbers”, The Advertiser, Monday).
I agree the best thing we need for the future of SA is strict population control.
One of the few good things that have come out of the coronavirus pandemic is the fact that we have not significantly increased our population. Let this be a lesson well learnt.
Unless the human species stops increasing, we are surely on the slippery slope to extinction.
CHRISTINE PIERSON, Kensington Park
Bank crusade
TERRY McCrann rails at China for setting more ambitious emissions-reduction targets than Australia (“China the climate hero in la-la land”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
Meanwhile, Coalition politicians have embarked on a pointless crusade against banks that won’t take risks backing coal projects, and want a parliamentary inquiry to pressure them on this.
Responsible government objectives are to mitigate climate change and ensure a stable finance system.
Those who have lost sight of this, and think they know better, are the ones in “la-la land”.
JIM ALLEN, Panorama
Fixing pollution
THE State Government’s announcement that its car fleet will go electric, and all cars bought will be electric by 2035, is very welcome.
Apart from the potentially large reduction in greenhouse gases, which will only increase as the grid gets more renewable energy, the reduction in noxious tailpipe emissions will benefit everyone.
These emissions contribute to childhood asthma and higher mortality in adults from cardiovascular and other resp­iratory conditions.
A British court has recently agreed that traffic pollution was responsible for the death of a nine-year-old girl.
According to the Melbourne University Energy Institute, poor air quality from transport pollution leads to about 1715 early deaths a year in Australia.
The Federal Government has failed to address this problem after years of warnings from health experts. They could learn from their state counterparts.
GRAEME McLEAY, Stirling
Respect elders
I READ with dismay the article “Abuse of elderly rampant in care” (The Advertiser, Tuesday). It beggars belief that up to 40 per cent of people living in aged care suffer some form of abuse and neglect.
Here are society’s most vulnerable people living out the last years of their lives being subjected to unnecessary living standards such as food and medical provisions that are not readily available.
Prime Minister Scott “ScoMo” Morrison’s recent allocation of $1bn to assist the aged-care situation was obviously welcome.
But it has taken the Coalition Government six years to respond to this serious problem in our aged-care system.
Hopefully, improved living standards continue for our most vulnerable people in aged care. They are our loved ones and deserve the best available treatment.
DES KEMP, St Agnes
Shut up shop
I SEE the “shoppies” union wants its workers to have a public holiday on Boxing Day so they can have family time and eat their Christmas leftovers. Well, if that should be the case, what about all the firefighters, police, nurses, doctors, bus drivers, publicans and cafe workers?
Just close everything and we will all be able to stay home.
GRAEME HALL, Marion
Bee careful
HAVING planted a garden full of native plants to support native bees, over the years I increasingly see only honey bees on the flowers.
The European honey bee is an introduced species that competes for nectar and pollen with native insects and birds.
On top of that, many of the native insects are food for birds, while honey bees are not. Urban beekeeping is detrimental to urban biodiversity.
Please remove your backyard hives and buy Australian honey, rather than producing your own.
There will still be plenty of feral honey bees around to pollinate urban fruit trees.
Dr KATJA HOGENDOORN, Eden Hills
PM honoured
PRIME Minister Scott Morrison has received the Legion of Merit medal from US President Donald Trump for leadership in addressing global challenges, apparently.
Straight to the pool room for that medal, I reckon.
MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood
WEDNESDAY, DECEMBER 23
Burnside shame
REGARDING misspent council funds, surely there must be records regarding to whom the cards were issued (“Money to burn”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Naming and shaming, and repaying the money, are absolutely essential.
Otherwise it will happen again.
This is just another reason to amalgamate all the little tin-pot councils into one big one.
MICHAEL PRUS, Fairview Park
Council weeds
HAVING just paid my Burnside Council rates, State Ombudsman Wayne Lines’s report into that council’s spending provides little festive cheer – unlike that previously enjoyed by council staff.
There is no better way to highlight the council’s indifference towards its ratepayers than comparing what it enjoys and what it ignores.
Maladministration involving at least $34,000 in boozy get-togethers is beyond the pale.
No one would disagree with that.
But its increasing lack of interest in maintaining council-owned nature strips and letting once-pristine streets become eyesores is a sad joke.
One street, exactly 120m away from the Burnside Council offices, has been in a neglected state for months.
Weeds on the nature strip are now higher than surrounding garden walls.
This is just one of many streets throughout Burnside in similar condition.
At least we now know where some of the rate money was spent.
I suggest council cleans up its act on several fronts.
MIKE SMITHSON, Glen Osmond
Inventive output
BURNSIDE Council may lack creativity and innovation in infrastructure development.
But its burghers have certainly found inventive and groundbreaking ways to spend ratepayers’ taxes for their own indulgences.
PETER K. JONES, Glen Osmond
Rent not paid
ANY idea how I can get my tenant to pay his rent now that he has been told, due to COVID-19, you can’t get kicked out?
Seems he is not entitled to Centrelink as he “earns too much”.
However, his priorities lie elsewhere and not a roof over his head.
Seems tenants are of the opinion that everyday mum-and-dad investors are rich and don’t need the rent money to pay their mortgages.
Well, you are wrong. We are keeping you from being homeless so please consider that we need the money to pay our bills, etc.
Anyway, we’ll try to have a merry Christmas. Hope you do too.
DANNI TRUS, Semaphore
COVID-19 safety
CHRISTMAS for hundreds of Australians has been wrecked by the NSW border debacle (“Welcome to SA, the state of confusion, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Police Commissioner Grant Stevens seems to think his get-out-of-jail-free card is to repeat ad nauseam that our safety is his priority.
It all goes to show how draconian and unworkable border closures are.
A fact that the Federal Government recognised long ago and that the states continue to defy.
GEOFF FORBES, Kensington Gardens
Bike tragedy
IT is always so sad to read about the death of a young motorcycle rider.
It is most concerning that 18 motorcyclists have died this year in South Australia and nine of them were aged under 25. It seems the “it won’t happen to me” message has greater sway than the “ride carefully and don’t speed” message.
I’m not saying most motorcyclists are not doing the right thing. And, at times, vehicle drivers have caused some of the crashes.
But the behaviour of some motorcycle riders in recent times is nothing short of shocking.
When some can be seen mono-cycling down main roads and side streets, doing burnouts, and behaving in a totally moronic manner, it shows to me they have no fear of being caught by the police or winding up in hospitals.
I know the police are under great pressure at this time. But there seems to be a great absence of them on our roads.
A greater police presence on the roads, and a rigid application of the rules, are required to save lives.
A.W. HOPE, Pooraka
Licence test
AS Australians’ lifespans increase, we will find it’s mainly due to readily available and improved health options.
But there is one thing that is still a problem because, as we age, the chances of developing dementia increase. And it’s sometimes is hard to pick.
Dementia isn’t something that hits you like an illness, but can gradually happen across years. If people starting to develop dementia are faced with normal day-to-day issues, they usually cope quite well. And therefore it’s not that noticeable.
However, if they are faced with new challenges, perhaps when driving, they can fail to deal with it and a serious accidents can occur.
All of those driving incidents, when drivers mistake the accelerator for the brake pedal or similar situations, are older drivers. The chances are, in situations like this, these older driver may be suffering from mild dementia.
Therefore, there is a need for them to be tested and possibly have their driver’s licence cancelled. Yes, that may appear excessive, but lives are at risk. Especially with the older drivers.
DAVID BISHOP, South Plympton
Distribute wealth
WE are reminded about the obscene wealth of Australian billionaires such as Andrew “Twiggy” Forrest and Gina Rinehart.
And, in the same breath, we are asked to sponsor a child living in poverty so that they can have a chance at a decent life in Australia.
This is an absolute disgrace.
The wealthy could fix this in a moment without even noticing.
Governments could ensure that no Australian child need endure the horrors of hunger, ridicule, failure and exclusion through no fault of their own.
Why on earth is this society unable to prioritise the wellbeing of all of its children?
This is a shameful tragedy and the guilty continue to stand by laughing.
DIANA PALMER, Malvern
Wake up, UN
TERRY McCrann’s latest column exposes a couple of inconvenient truths about the UN (“China the climate hero in la-la land”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Too “woke” to stand up to China and too gutless to stand up for Australia.
BERNIE COATES, Modbury North
Solve cancer
AMAZING. A vaccine for COVID-19 in less than 12 months.
But after years of donations to cancer research, not a cure in sight for many forms (with the exception of a few early detections).
Not good enough.
More people die of cancer than COVID-19.
JEAN HARNEY, Highbury
Cat compassion
NOW we have “Machines to kill cats”, (The Advertiser, Saturday).
Our human species has already caused the demise of native wildlife through its massive habitat clearance, woodchipping, mining, pollution of the environment and poisoning of the waterways.
So now it wants to kill even more animals.
Two wrongs don’t make a right, and killing will not solve the proliferation of feral animals in Australia.
This poisoning via the Felixer, from what I researched, uses the dangerous 1080 poison.
It also endangers native animals, as mistakes have been made in the past.
This killing mania is coming from the Federal Government’s threat-abatement plan for feral cats, which is killing two million cats.
G. HANNAH, Kensington
Hobbling riders
CYCLISTS remind me of ducks.
On their bikes, they are graceful but when they get off and walk, they hobble because of the studs on their shoes.
Ducks are so graceful on the water but they waddle when trying to walk.
No disrespect intended.
BILL McCREATH, Adelaide
Cut Stengle
I CANNOT agree with comments made by Graham Cornes that Adelaide Crows’ repeat offender Tyson Stengle should be given a further chance (“The toughest decision of all”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
Among some of the excuses Graham offers for Stengle is blaming this player’s mate for posting a photo of a possible drug-taking incident.
The player should not be in that situation in the first place.
Graham also quotes Stengle’s offences as “a few speed humps along the way”.
Driving an unregistered vehicle while being over twice the legal alcohol limit is more than just a hump.
It is serious.
AFL players undergo a drug and alcohol education program.
Therefore, should he not be responsible for his own actions?
Annual contracts for AFL players average about the $350,000 mark so the underprivileged excuse could hardly be claimed for Stengle.
In discarding him, the Crows would also be sending a message to other would-be offenders that such behaviour is unacceptable.
BRUCE BURFORD, Adelaide
Missing members
WHERE were you?
The Adelaide Oval Test is a much-anticipated event. Enthusiasts come from near and far.
This year, due to COVID-19, it was decided to have a reduced crowd of about 21,000.
South Australian Cricket Association members had to enter a ballot to gain entry to the game.
All tickets to the game were snapped up within hours of their release.
The day-one crowd was only about 17,500, even though all tickets had been allocated.
The section that we sat in would normally hold 400 people – so 200 with COVID restrictions.
On the first day of the Test, there were no more than 50 people in the section.
Why go into a ballot and get a ticket and then not use it?
There were complete rows with not one person present.
It must have been frustrating for members who missed out on a ticket via the ballot.
While watching the game on TV, they would have seen an incredibly large number of empty seats.
As Lara Bingle might have said: Where the bloody hell were ya?
M. SWAN, Prospect
TUESDAY, DECEMBER 22
NSW flight anger
JUST hours after Premier Steven Marshall announced that travellers from Sydney who arrive after midnight on Sunday would need to quarantine for 14 days, confusion meant the rule was enforced immediately when many travellers were in mid-flight.
My daughter and family, visiting my son-in-law’s elderly mother, brought forward their return travel so they would arrive well before midnight, only to find on arrival at Adelaide Airport that the quarantine rule had already been enforced. Lots of incoming travellers were caught and many are extremely angry.
Mr Marshall couldn’t run a Wok-in-a-Box franchise.
Why on Earth are we trusting him then, to run our state?
South Australia has long been seen as a joke by some in the eastern states – and no wonder.
ALAN TYSON, Magill
Virus fatigue
MATT Smith is right: We do have a COVID-19 complacency problem (“NSW cluster must not mask our complacency”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
And it’s not just a complacency problem.
There is also a COVID-fatigue problem, as well.
In his novel, The Plague, set against a plague in Algiers in the 1940s, French writer Albert Camus refers to hardworking Algerian health workers strongly focused on their daily tasks in fighting the pestilence but “stolidly indifferent” to the ultimate goal of all that effort.
Camus likens this to combat fatigue in soldiers who, worn out by the incessant strain of battle, are mindful of their daily assigned duties but fail to maintain interest in the battle’s ultimate goal.
There are definite signs that we are now also starting to show signs of a COVID-19 fatigue similar to that associated with combat.
Somehow our leaders must help us to see what victory will look like as a real and tangible goal we can and must attain.
But that won’t be easy. It may be that we have reached our upper level of tolerance for COVID restrictions and that we have little capacity left for being jolted out of our complacency and our battle fatigue.
TERRY HEWTON, Henley Beach South
Stop the planes
SURELY it is time for our governments to govern for the greater good.
No more overseas travellers arriving until a vaccine is available and they get vaccinated.
Nothing less is good enough.
So, politicians, it is time to get decisive.
RADLEY KING, Mawson Lakes
Returning Aussies
AND so it goes on. Another three positive cases from overseas travellers.
I cannot accept that all the people clamouring to come back now are from overseas trips.
Many would be people who either made the decision to go to work overseas or immigrants who, having got their passport, moved back overseas to live.
Now, because Australia does not have the cases they have overseas, it is a desirable location for those who decide they are Aussies.
ROGER BATES, Paralowie
Cancel tennis
IT’S been more than 60 years since I first stood with my parents on North Head to watch the start of a Sydney to Hobart yacht race.
It has been an annual delight.
I am sad that this year’s race has been cancelled but applaud the decision to put the health of Tasmanians first.
Why then, are we endangering the health of all Australians by still planning to hold the Australian Open Tennis Championship?
Many players are coming here from preliminary matches in countries including the US, Turkey and Qatar.
I love to watch summer tennis.
But not at the risk of bringing in COVID-19 from known overseas hot spots.
LESLEY BRETAG, Warradale
Yacht-race bid
WITH NSW cancelling the Sydney Hobart Yacht Race, can SA add a bid for Australia’s premier yacht race to the bid for the World Rally Championship round next year?
Anyone have other major sporting event suggestions? Underwater Hockey World Championships perhaps?
Just asking.
PETER WILCOX, Ottoway
Danger signs
THE speed of COVID-19 vaccine development, approval and rollout is big global news. But societies are not having the conversation or education that is necessary to prevent future zoonotic diseases such as COVID-19, swine flu, mad-cow disease, bird flu and SARS.
Scientific and public health expert warnings of the connection between dangerous diseases and pandemic risk and our mass raising and slaughter of animals for food, should be a major concern for all governments.
The insatiable desire of humans to eat and use animals is a major factor in planetary deforestation, land and water degradation, changing climate, pollution and biodiversity loss.
Imagine how the world could be if wild animals were left to live as nature intended: Free from relentless human predation.
Industrialised animal agriculture, and wet markets where billions of animals are condemned to shocking cruelty as the standard, should become history.
The human race must transform to healthy plant food diets. This would give the Earth a chance to heal and regenerate from the damage humans are causing to fragile ecosystems and sentient animals.
SIMONE HUNTER, Hove
Chinese goods
IF it’s made in China, I don’t want it.
TONY SEWELL, Glenunga
Abuse response
DURING his tenure as Archbishop of Melbourne, George Pell set up the Melbourne Response protocol in 1996 to investigate and deal with complaints of child-sexual abuse in the archdiocese.
The protocol was the first of its kind in the world.
B. HINTON, Torrensville
Priests moved on
WHETHER Cardinal George Pell is guilty or not has been debated since the release of the Royal Commission into Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse.
What is clear, though, is his hand in moving paedophile priests from church to church instead of ousting these vile creatures. Not to mention his lack of empathy towards the victims of these crimes.
A nice man he is not.
JACK KYRIACOU, St Morris
Heritage ruling
SO, Colonel Light Gardens is to get special heritage protection.
Excellent. But what does that mean in reality when we see how easy it was for the State Government to plan the demolition of the heritage-listed 1890 Urrbrae gatehouse?
MICHAEL GUERIN, Belair
Moving history
EGYPT was able to relocate the Abu Simbel temple to higher ground when the Nile was dammed. Pisa succeeded in jacking up its leaning tower.
But, in SA, the challenge of moving the small, but classic, historic bluestone Waite gatehouse lodge a few metres is apparently not worth the bother.
PETER CRAMMOND, Kadina
Shift holiday
WITH reference to the Shop, Distributive and Allied Employees Association (SDA) calling for Premier Steven Marshall to increase the number of public holidays by adding December 26 to the current 14 public holidays (“Enough holidays”, The Advertiser, Friday).
I agree that an extra public holiday is unjustified. If they want to increase the number, then we could get rid of the public holiday held in October.
PETER DABINETT, Trott Park
SA tradition
SDA secretary Josh Peak is complaining about the lack of a public holiday on Boxing Day.
Boxing Day has traditionally never been a gazetted public holiday in this state.
Other states do, but we traditionally celebrate Proclamation Day three days after Christmas instead.
It has been the tradition for many years that the holiday for this day is usually observed on the weekday following Christmas.
Mr Peak knows this, yet is still pushing the pointless line that somehow this is unfair. His members, and the whole SA community, will celebrate the public holiday on Monday, December 28.
STEPHEN MARTIN, West Lakes
Rat racers
SOME of our backstreets seem to have been turned into racetracks.
Speed humps are annoying, though, damaging suspension and encouraging more noise pollution on acceleration.
Blocking off streets to local traffic only has the benefit of forcing hoon traffic on to the main thoroughfares where they are more likely to be caught.
It can only be a matter of time before more pedestrians are knocked over and seriously injured or worse.
BEN FISCHER, Para Hills
You want a bet?
I SEE where they are going to allow eating but not betting yet in the new Sydney Casino (“Eat at NSW casino, but not bet yet”, The Advertiser, yesterday)
Oh, yeah. I bet that I can eat more than anyone my age.
WAYNE NICHOLLS, Royston Park
Xmas let-down
EARLY every morning, our neighbourhood is adorned by deflated inflatable Christmas props.
The Father Christmas one, in particular, appears to be constantly hung over, sometimes finding himself in quite lurid positions.
Merry Christmas, indeed.
ELDERT HOEBEE, Torrens Park
Bowler’s award
IT seems impossible that Australian cricketer Josh Hazlewood, with a brilliant spell of five wickets for eight runs, couldn’t be the man of the match. What a Paine.
GERRY GREENWAY, Netherby
Players shifting
IF the Big Bash franchise is wondering why it’s losing its lustre, maybe the musical chairs of players switching teams every summer could be the reason.
Afghani import Rashid Khan is one of the few who seems to show loyalty to the Adelaide Strikers.
I now have no interest in watching a group of cricketers who, this year, wear the Adelaide colours, but are likely to move on next season. The same goes for the other teams in the franchise.
Hearing the names of participants in most sports means you have a good chance of naming their team. But not in the Big Bash.
MARK THOMPSON, Newton
MONDAY, DECEMBER 21
Quarry dust-up
EASTERN-suburbs residents with high anxiety have every right to be concerned about potential increased dust air pollution if expansion of the quarry proceeds (“Disease fear in quarry project”, The Advertiser, Friday).
Low levels may not cause silicosis. However, it’s well documented in scientific literature that harmful effects of fine particulate matter inhaled can cause respiratory diseases, cardiovascular diseases, lung cancer, and reduced life expectancy.
Despite extensive epidemiological research, there is currently no evidence of a threshold below which exposure doesn’t cause any health effects.
Children are more vulnerable to dust during foetal development and their earliest years. Their lungs, organs and brains are still maturing.
They breathe faster than adults and take in more air and contaminants. They spend more time outdoors playing and in other activities.
LEN LEAN, Paradise
Code cracked
THE tortured and tortuous saga of the proposed new planning system is stumbling to a close. The final truncated six-week community consultation process ended on the Friday.
The flaws and difficulties in this drawn-out, complex process began in 2016 and have spanned two state governments.
The manifesto for change, the convoluted planning and design code, has defied public scrutiny and effective parliamentary debate.
Many of the contentious issues in the code were predetermined by the construction and development industry. These included elimination of contributory items, weakened demolition protections, facilitation of crowded urban infill and restricted public notification and appeal rights.
Some of these provisions have been modified and corrections made to a few of the errors and ambiguities. However, we will still be left with a cumbersome and confusing system which will take years beyond its implementation date to refine and finalise.
The code has been dogged by sham public consultation exercises, a series of interim ­reports and rolling delays. Much of this has been the ­purview of the State Planning Commission and the Planning Department.
The government’s patience has now run out and new Planning Minister Vickie Chapman has announced final implementation plans for early next year.
What could have been an enlightened planning reform fell foul of a cumbersome bureaucracy which squandered time, money and community goodwill. Our lived amenity will pay the price for this flawed policy and process for years to come.
WARREN JONES, Protect Our Heritage Alliance convener
No vote winner
I WISH to add to the article “Heritage gives no protection” (The Advertiser, Friday).
We were hoodwinked at the last election moment, with a quickly thrown-together road-upgrade promise and a clue to this fiasco to come.
This came with few plans or information and was just to win Liberal votes. One gets what they voted for, and we did not know what that was.
The Liberal Party is still promoting this as a plus for South Australia. The latest leaflet shoved in my letterbox this week reads: Building infrastructure for Boothby and SA is $30.5m to fix the Fullarton Road/Cross Road intersection.
If this State Government was in France, it might bulldoze the Eiffel Tower.
It is a heritage vandal.
CLAUDIA TREGONING, South Plympton
Road slips past
THE Transport Department thinks it is necessary to create slip lanes for its planned upgrade of the Cross Road/­Fullarton Road intersection, even if it means demolishing a heritage-listed gatehouse in the process.
I am, therefore, surprised that a similar upgrading of the Portrush Road/Greenhill Road intersection earlier this year resulted in the removal of the two existing slip lanes.
I sincerely hope this was due to some important, but ­arcane, differences in traffic operations between the two ­intersections. And not because there are pro-slip-lane and anti-slip-lane factions within the Department.
It would be a pity if someone were to decide a few years later that the new slip lane into Fullarton Road was a bad idea that needed to be reversed.
Because, by then, the gatehouse would be long gone.
AYLWIN LIM, Kensington Park
Cyclists shop too
I’M impressed by how much A. Bowers managed to get wrong in such a short letter (“Swim, don’t cycle”, The Advertiser, Friday).
The accurate thing was “business needs customers”. Well, cyclists are customers.
Cyclists also make more shopping trips per week than motorists, and hence spend 20-30 per cent more than ­motorists.
This isn’t just opinion, it’s been studied – over and over again. Studies show cyclists and cycling infrastructure significantly benefit local businesses. As just one example, New York’s first protected bikeway saw a 49 per cent ­increase in retail sales in the area.
No study anywhere has ever found a negative economic impact on retailers. Any business that doesn’t want cycling paths in the CBD is only hurting itself.
Roads are funded by the taxes we all pay – including cyclists – not by some “road tax”.
Commuting by bike also saves the economy money through better public health, less pollution, less wear and tear on roads, and less congestion.
The economic contribution of cyclists supports our businesses and our roads, and cyclists deserve encouragement and respect.
S. BILSON-THOMPSON, Freestyle Cyclists president
Nose for evil
CARDINAL George Pell was not the only one who suspected “more than a whiff of evil” in the campaign to convict him of child-sex abuse (“Pell’s tell-all diary reveal”, The Advertiser, Friday).
The charges against him were preposterous. He was said to have abused two boys in a back room frequented by many others, shortly after mass, while dressed in layers of heavy vestments, at a time when he was greeting parishioners on the front steps of the cathedral.
No wonder all seven High Court judges rejected the case against him.
But, like Lindy Chamberlain, whose alleged baby’s blood in the family car was later found to be a sound-deadening compound, many still believe him guilty.
Sadly, that whiff of evil lingers on.
LINDSAY DENT, Campbelltown
Left out in cold
IT will be interesting after January 20 how the world will react to lonely Australia being left behind in its values and activities towards the biggest problem facing humanity – climate change.
As incoming US president Joe Biden takes control at last, the Morrison Government will be correctly challenged to move forward on climate change. Especially by our near neighbours in the South Pacific who have attempted to convey for many years that their islands and life are becoming increasingly unsustainable.
Again I predict Australia will, in the near future, be forced to receive islanders as climate-change refugees. Hardly a success story for Australia’s position as mentor and to influence enhancement in the South Pacific region.
GLEN CHENOWETH, Goolwa North
Steady numbers
IT is predictable that Property Council of Australia SA executive director Daniel Gannon calls increasing population growth in the state “promising news” (“SA brain drain in reverse”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
Well, you would expect him to say that, as he represents the property industry, which will not be happy until there are wall to wall buildings from Port Wakefield to Victor Harbor.
COVID-19 has given us a much-needed respite from the previous high levels of population growth in Australia and SA.
Australia’s population growth rate for the quarter ended June 30, at 0.1 per cent, was the slowest since quarterly population estimates began in June 1981.
This has meant reduced pressure on water supplies, roads, schools, hospitals, energy sources and many other items required for modern living.
It has also meant less Australian emissions generated and less impact on habitat for our flora and fauna. And there has been less competition for scarce jobs and housing.
Part of the reason Australia has been able to achieve such relative success fighting COVID, is our relatively low and spread out population.
Let us keep it that way.
BOB COUCH, Marino
Land-use changes
I AM deeply concerned that the State Government is now looking to interfere in the management of pastoral-lease land.
Especially those areas which are being maintained for conservation.
As the management of pastoral lands would, no doubt, involve native-title issues, why has Regional Development Minister David Basham not included any traditional owners on the board which is currently looking at this matter?
In my opinion, to potentially undermine decades of crucial conservation work by many volunteer groups and others by allowing grazing on fragile lands, leaving them vulnerable to desertification, is shortsighted and deeply disappointing.
Has this government no interest at all in maintenance of biodiversity? Or is the priority short-term economics?
ALEX HODGES, Birdwood
State-care farce
THOSE of us with a long memory and some sense of humour remember TV shows called Yes Minister and Yes Prime Minister.
One would have to conclude that the Child Protection Department of the State Government is being run by the legendary Sir Humphrey Appleby (“State care shambles”, The Advertiser, Friday).
He would be proud of the level of non-information being provided to Minister Rachel Sanderson.
It seems to me that it is the departmental leaders who must be removed, rather than a Minister, who may have been deliberately “Humphrey-ed”, to coin a phrase.
PAUL BUXTON, Westbourne Park
Word count: 8103
