The momentum to build a homegrown hydrogen industry has been growing slowly but surely in the nation’s capital, backed heavily by chief scientist Dr Alan Finkel.
The arguments are compelling: globally there is a shift away from fossil fuels and hydrogen is a zero emissions fuel, we have abundant renewable energy and gas with which to make it, and the jobs and revenue potential is enormous.
“There is potential for thousands of new jobs, many in regional areas – and billions of dollars in economic growth between now and 2050,’’ Australia’s National Hydrogen Strategy, prepared by Dr Finkel and his team, says.
“We can integrate more low-cost renewable generation, reduce dependence on imported fuels, and help reduce carbon emissions in Australia and around the world.’’
Dr Finkel’s report says there is a lot of uncertainty about how the new industry will come into being, but “there are risks in not acting early”.
One of the key elements in the Federal Government’s hydrogen strategy, as recommended by Dr Finkel, is the creation of “hydrogen hubs’’, or clusters of high-scale demand for hydrogen.
In the recent Federal Budget, $70 million was set aside for the creation of a hydrogen “export hub” with Port Bonython, adjacent to Whyalla, one of seven sites nationally in the running for the money.
Such a project would tie in with Whyalla steelworks owners GFG Alliance’s ambition to create carbon neutral steel using a combination of renewable energy and potentially hydrogen, however owner Sanjeev Gupta has a foot in two camps with his site at Bell Bay in Tasmania also in the running for the funds.
“With hydrogen production established, the benefits go beyond steel and could see Australia become a global hub of green and clean industries,’’ Mr Gupta told The Advertiser in September.
State Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan is a strong supporter of SA winning the bid, saying we can deliver it “more quickly than any other state” and, with a deepwater port at Port Bonython, next to Whyalla, the state has a competitive advantage.
Energy company Santos is also interested, with managing director Kevin Gallagher starting a concept study on a hydrogen future for the Cooper Basin gas fields in July.
Mr Gallagher said at the time that natural gas can be decarbonised at its source to make “zero-emissions” or “blue” hydrogen.
“The carbon dioxide produced as a result can then be safely and permanently captured and stored in the same reservoirs that the gas came from,’’ he said.
And SA is arguably well ahead of the curve, with the Hydrogen Park at Tonsley, currently undergoing final commissioning, before the start of a trial to inject a 5 per cent mix of hydrogen into the gas supply for 700 properties in the Mitchell Park area.
Craig de Laine, general manager people and strategy for Australian Gas Infrastructure Group which is spearheading the project, said hydrogen could be a game changer for Australia.
“If you are looking at where is the potential for substantial new growth in the economy, it is absolutely the hydrogen sector, and I’m not aware of any other sector that offers the potential that hydrogen does,’’ he said.
“It’s a new industry in low carbon jobs, and in regional areas as well. It’s an incredible opportunity.’’
Mr de Laine said you could think of hydrogen being where solar and wind were 10-15 years ago.
“We're at the very early stage of developing the industry,’' he said.
One of the state’s key competitive advantages is its vast resource of renewable energy, which can be used to split water into hydrogen and oxygen. Doing this in a way which is cost effective, and then getting the hydrogen to a customer who can use it is the key.
But if it’s achieved, the prize is large.
“A cautiously optimistic scenario could see an Australian hydrogen industry generate about 7600 jobs and add about $11 billion a year in additional GDP by 2050,’' Dr Finkel’s report says.
“If global markets develop faster, it could mean another ten thousand jobs and at least $26 billion a year in GDP. The jobs created will include technicians, tradespeople, engineers and professionals. Many of the jobs will be in regional areas, especially around ports and industrial clusters where development is most likely to occur.’’
Move to capture a new market
Carbon capture and storage could be a “real game changer” for the energy industry, allowing the production of emissions-neutral fuels and underpinning a new export industry, Santos managing director Kevin Gallagher says.
Mr Gallagher said there was already strong interest from international customers for zero-emissions liquefied natural gas and hydrogen, with carbon neutral LNG cargoes already in demand in Asia.
Santos has been working on a concept study for a CCS project at the Moomba gas hub, which would involve injecting an initial 1.7 million tonnes of carbon dioxide into depleted gas reservoirs per year.
The plan would be to eventually increase that rate to 20 million tonnes per year.
The company announced in mid-October that it had successfully injected about 100 tonnes of CO2 underground as part of its trial, which would see the creation of about 230 jobs during construction if it goes ahead as a fully-fledged project.
CCS would allow the production of so-called “blue hydrogen” which is made by stripping the hydrogen out of natural gas and storing the carbon.
The Federal Government’s $1.9 billion energy package, announced just before this year’s Budget, included a $50 million Carbon Capture Use and Storage Development Fund, to help the early-stage technology prove itself in the field.
Santos’s Moomba project is in the running for the money, but is up against projects in Victoria, WA and Queensland.
Mr Gallagher has said previously that Santos’s project is the “most advanced in Australia’’, and the company expects to be in a position to make a final investment decision on whether to go ahead with the project by the end of the year.
“Our Moomba CCS Project, which will initially capture and permanently store 1.7 million tonnes of CO2 per annum deep underground in the Cooper Basin, could be a real game-changer for our industry, enabling both zero-emissions LNG and zero-emissions hydrogen,’’ Mr Gallagher said this week.
“Australia, with huge potential for both CCS and nature-based carbon offsets, combined with a strong carbon accounting mechanism delivered through the Clean Energy Regulator, is uniquely placed to offer reliable, zero-emissions energy products to Asian markets where carbon-neutral LNG cargoes are already in demand.
“With South Australia’s Port Bonython in the running to be a national hydrogen export hub, it is already attracting strong interest from Japanese customers and investors who are looking to reduce emissions from coal-fired power stations using hydrogen.’’
Mr Gallagher said a CCS project would help underpin the economic future of the Moomba gas hub in the state’s far northeast for another five decades.
AA News Feed Playlist
Word count: 1112
