FROM PAGE 6 Amanda Kelly I was born and raised in Whyalla completing my education and working the past 19 years within the public sector supporting and advocating for children and families. I have been actively involved in several local sporting clubs fulfilling administration and coaching roles, I am also a volunteer with Lifeline. I am passionate about having a supportive and safe community to live and grow up in, one that provides opportunity and is inclusive. I would like to see investment into our sporting facilities to encourage participation and attract more sporting and entertainment events. I am keen to contribute to the continued growth and potential of our city, one that secures employment opportunities for now and into the future. I also believe it is crucial to support local businesses and promote tourism. I will offer fresh ideas, a modern perspective and encourage community consultation.
Fiona Moellner I am not a politician; Just a passionate member of the Whyalla community who wants to play an active role in shaping our future. I have called Whyalla home for most of my life and have witnessed Whyalla's ups and downs. I love our community's resilience through change! I am a firm believer in giving back to our community and have been an active volunteer for local organisations, such as Triple Y, Whyalla Players, and the Whyalla Show. Previously I worked for the City of Whyalla in events and tourism and now run my own business, with a focus on marketing. If elected, my primary focus areas will be; to include the community in decisions regarding our City's future, create tourism opportunities, support community-focused events, ensure all areas of Whyalla are beautified and maintained and create opportunities for our youth to have a future in Whyalla and all whilst keeping downward pressure on rates.
Jane Elizabeth Owens As a resident of Whyalla, I have a passion for the future of our city. I came to Whyalla in 1991 with my husband and two sons. Whyalla has been good to our family; both our sons are successful in what they do and we have five beautiful grandchildren who all live in Whyalla. My background is in health, initially, I was an enrolled nurse. When we came to Whyalla I studied Management & Leadership and Learning & Assessment. I have worked in the community, aged care, and disability services, I have also worked in retail and education. I have been a volunteer all my adult life, I am a member of the Rotary Club of Whyalla, and a Past District Governor. I am an executive member of Enterprising Women; was the inaugural Secretary for the Whyalla Suicide Prevention Network and I am currently the Secretary of Whyalla Business and Tourism. Having a vested interest in our city I look forward to seeing it go forward and thrive. If elected I will work collaboratively with the community and council.
Peter Klobucar My connection to and love for Whyalla is vast, with a local heritage stretching before and beyond my generation. Serving on several local committees, I aspire to further contribute to our community's progression believing that an effective, capable, and passionate council is paramount in driving a successful Whyalla into the future. With over 35 years of experience in the Banking and Finance sector, a Diploma in Information Technology and a Master's Degree in Business, I am resolute in my ability and commitment to working with like-minded community members to create a city continuously reaching its full potential. I believe my experience in administrative, operational, technical, and project management roles would be of great value. I would endeavour to implement these skills to strengthen the council's performance in governance, financial, administrative and operational accountability, animal management, health, lifestyle, and community.
Sharon Todd Whyalla has been my home for 42 years since arriving from the UK. I attended school, worked and raised my 5 children here. I am a business owner with a keen interest in Whyalla's economic development and future. As a grandparent of 10 I have a vested and real interest in the youth of Whyalla and have worked in childcare and education for over 25 years. I am passionate about the vulnerable people in our community, our children, our older residents and our small businesses. I am keen to hear from, be a voice for and represent our community members.
Sandra Walsh A rural health researcher, with an interest in mental health and attracting health professionals to regional areas, Sandra has worked at the University of South Australia for 15 years. I helped establish the Foundation Studies program at the Whyalla campus that provides an alternative pathway into university. In 2016, I was the South Australian Educator of the Year. Originally from North Queensland, I have lived in Whyalla for 25 years and raised my family here. I am a volunteer and board member at Triple Y, Whyallas community radio station. In 2020 I won the South Australian Community Broadcasting Association award for Volunteer of the Year. There are many opportunities for Whyalla that we can capitalise on, and the key is in diversification. I am passionate about creating sustainable spaces for the Whyalla community and I look forward to the opportunity to represent interests of the Whyalla community.
Tamy Pond I have been an educator in Whyalla for over 30 years and an extremely active volunteer. I am currently the President of the Whyalla Show society (10 years) and I sit on a variety of community committee's including the Whyalla NAIDOC committee and Whyalla Aboriginal Women's group. As well as the Whyalla Show I also work as a team to run Carols in the park, UneARTh festival, School holiday programs and NAIDOC week. I have 2 amazing daughters who have grown up and thrived in Whyalla. I am also very committed to providing our Youth with opportunities to succeed in life and making sure our residents have a voice to get their needs met. I feel that I have the passion and skills to be able to support our community in making decisions for a brighter future. I really enjoy connecting with our community and am really positive about our cities future growth and expanding services for residents. I would be honoured to be given the opportunity to continue to be an advocate for this beautiful City.
Adrian Thompson At a recent jobs and skills round table, I introduced myself as an unemployed whistleblower. As a long term resident of Whyalla with years of experience living close to, and below, the poverty line, I am asking the community of Whyalla to vote for me to become a voice for those of us that struggle to make ends meet. If I am trusted with the opportunity to represent you, I will diligently seek to advance the prosperity of our community while working toward improving the living standards of our communities most vulnerable. I don't normally seek praise, so I doubt many would know of my efforts to prevent our state accepting the high level radioactive waste dump, or my advocacy for the renewable energy powered hydrogen electrolizer to be built at Port Bonython. If I am elected, I will be an active and approachable team member of the council, who will happily explain any decisions I make, and when appropriate, I will not shy away from speaking the truth to power on your behalf.
Timothy Raymond Breuer Over 47 years I have seen the ups and downs that Whyalla has been through. We have exciting times ahead, but to capitalise on the opportunities for Whyalla we need to have leadership that has a shared vision and clear understanding of what it will take to see our community thrive and become a modern city. I believe I have the experience to build and deliver on that vision for Whyalla. I have previously served on Council for 2 terms where I was able to contribute to the strategic planning for our City. I have been involved in various community groups including the Whyalla Players, junior football, and the Friends of Whyalla Conservation Park. I am passionate about protecting our unique environment and support action on climate change. I believe that we need to work hard to diversify our economy in Whyalla, but not at the expense of the environment. I support action to make our city more liveable and appealing by improving visual amenity and encouraging a vibrant hospitality scene.
Paul Handley I grew up and completed my secondary school education in Whyalla and completed a boilermaker apprenticeship at B.H.P. steelworks. I worked as a boilermaker for about 20 years. I also played soccer in the local league and have played music in many Whyalla bands. I left Whyalla for 15 years, then I returned and completed a Bachelor of social work at the University of South Australia Whyalla campus. I have worked as a social worker in Whyalla in various roles for 20 years and I am very passionate about social justice, community development and equality for everyone. I have served on many sporting and music committee's over the years. I love living in Whyalla and I am very interested in the city's development and management. I am keen to serve the town as a Whyalla councillor to ensure that all development and city business is fair, positive and equitable for everyone in the community. My partner and myself are long term residents of Whyalla and are very passionate about our community.
Make your vote count Official postal voting material for both mayoral and councillor positions will be mailed out to eligible voters between Friday, October 14 and Thursday, October 20.
If anyone believes they have been omitted from the council voters roll due to an administrative error, they can request voting material by completing a form from the Electoral Commission South Australia at www.ecsa.sa.gov.au.
Postal voting will close at 5pm on Thursday, November 10 with scrutiny and counting of votes taking place on Saturday, November 12.
CREDIT:
Word count: 1665
