JAPANESE business leaders in South Australia have established a new chamber of commerce aimed at building closer economic ties in industries including tourism, renewable energy and space.
The move follows a surge in trade between the two regions, as Australian exporters continue to move away from China amid ongoing trade tensions.
South Australian exports to Japan grew by 57 per cent in the 12 months to April, reaching $745m, while imports grew by 30 per cent to $1.2bn.
That makes Japan the state’s fifth-largest export market and second-largest source of products.
Takayuki Inoue, president of the newly established Japanese Chamber of Commerce and Industry (Adelaide), said the organisation would unlock even more opportunities for trade.
“Business opportunities between Japan and SA are rising quickly in recent years, in terms of various industries and tourism, including green and blue hydrogen and space development,” he said.
“Many Japanese companies have strengths in energy efficiency, high-quality products and cutting-edge technology, and we believe that they can contribute to a more sustainable and comfortable living environment through their business activities in SA.
“A renewable-energy solution, next-generation vehicles, battery development and recycling, and the development of a new supply chain of green and blue hydrogen would be some of the most keenly interested opportunities.” Japanese companies have taken a keen interest in SA’s fledgling green hydrogen industry, including Marubeni Corporation, which is planning to export the zero-emissions fuel – produced using large-scale wind and solar energy in SA – to the Indo-Pacific region.
In space, there has been increased collaboration between the Japan Aerospace Exploration Agency and the Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency, while Japanese groups have directly invested in SA companies in industries ranging from biomedical to construction.
Mr Inoue said the local tourism industry could be the next sector to benefit from closer ties with Japan, given many of the state’s premier destinations are not currently on the radar of Japanese travellers.
Mr Inoue, who is also chairman of Japanese-owned, Adelaide-based water treatment company Osmoflo, backed calls for direct flights between Adelaide and Tokyo, suggesting it would be a boon for leisure and business travel.
“The Barossa Valley is famous for its wineries, but there is a lot of beautiful nature such as Kangaroo Island and the Flinders Ranges, where, unfortunately, they are not much known in Japan,” he said.
“Expanding tourism between SA and Japan needs visa requirements to be relaxed and increasing flights.” The former Liberal state government had been engaged in talks with international airlines about operating a direct passenger route from Adelaide to Tokyo.
It also had the backing of the state’s chief trade representative in Japan, Sally Townsend, who was appointed to head a new North East Asia trade office in 2019. A launch event for the new Japanese Chamber of Commerce and Industry (Adelaide) will be held on Friday at Adelaide Oval.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 477
