More than 300 construction jobs will be created by the project, Goyder South, which is proposed by Neoen.
“Goyder South will not only support South Australia in reaching its goal of net 100 per cent renewables by 2030, it will deliver income security to farmers, as well as jobs to the Goyder region,” Neoen Australia managing director Louis de Sambucy said.
The Goyder South project between Burra and Robertstown in the Mid North will be delivered in three stages.
Mr De Sambucy said the first stage for 400 megawatts of power would now move to finalising connection to the transmission grid and Australian Energy Market Operator arrangements.
“We are optimistic we will be able to start construction of this first stage in early 2022,” he said.
Energy and Mining Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan welcomed the planning permission.
“This approval means hundreds of jobs can be created in regional SA, boosting the economy as we recover from the global coronavirus pandemic,” he said.
“Goyder South builds upon the SA-NSW interconnector which the Marshall Liberal Government is working with industry to deliver.”
Mr De Sambucy said subsequent stages would likely depend on the $2.4bn interconnector - called Project EnergyConnect - going ahead. It has been proposed by ElectraNet in SA and TransGrid in NSW.
Once complete, Goyder South would need at least 20 operational jobs and comprise:
A wind farm of up to 163 turbines with maximum tip heights of 240m, creating 1200MW capacity;
A 600MW solar farm across two sites totalling 3000ha;
A lithium-ion battery with a capacity of up to 900MW/1800MWh.
The project was discussed by the State Commission Assessment Panel in December, with a confidential recommendation made at the time to Planning and Local Government Minister Vickie Chapman, who has now given the green light.
The battery installation is alongside the Hornsdale wind farm and uses renewable energy - Video supplied by Neoen
French-based Neoen last month reported revenue of Euro299m for 2020.
It owns and operates the Hornsdale wind farm and big Tesla battery at Jamestown, the Hornsdale Power Reserve.
It is building a $500m renewable energy park at Crystal Brook.
A further Goyder North project is on its horizon.
In November last year it announced it would build a 300MW battery in Geelong in partnership with Tesla.
That followed an October announcement of finalising $600m in finance for a 460MW solar farm near Chinchilla in Queensland.
Word count: 380
