It includes $400 million in Commonwealth funding for renewable energy projects in SA in key areas such as electric vehicles, carbon capture and storage and the fledgling hydrogen industry.
Project EnergyConnect, a planned interconnector between SA and New South Wales which aims to cut power prices for households and boost reliability in the grid, will also get up to $100 million for early works.
Scott Morrison and Steven Marshall announced the deal on Sunday on a visit to the Clare Valley.
The Prime Minister said the deal would ensure both governments were working together to push down power prices and ensure more reliable energy for households and businesses.
It would also support the creation of a lucrative hydrogen industry, he said.
Asked about the future of Whyalla steelworks after Greensill’s collapse, Mr Morrison said the State and Federal Governments had been working “very closely” on a plan to “get the right outcome”.
“We are committed to ensuring that Australia makes steel,” he said.
The Premier said he was “feeling cautiously optimistic” after conversations with Sanjeev Gupta last week and because the fundamentals underpinning the Whyalla business were right.
“If you look at the iron price at the moment, it is through the roof,” Mr Marshall said.
“If you look at the production rates of that plant, they are almost the best ever.
“We know they have a very full order book, courtesy of the Federal Government with some massive, massive contracts and we are seeing their credit payments come down, not blow out.”
Mr Marshall said: “I’m quietly confident. “When I spoke to Sanjeev Gupta this time last week, he was increasingly confident that he will be able to get the credit arrangement in place.”
Mr Marshall said energy prices were already coming down in SA but the new agreement with the Commonwealth would “take us to the next level”.
“It is all about lower-cost energy, about lower emissions, and importantly, it is about creating jobs in the renewables sector here in our state,” he said.
Under the deal, up to $110 million worth of Commonwealth loans for solar thermal and other energy storage projects will also be made available.
More gas would also be created to supply SA and the east coast market under the agreement.
It sets a target to create an extra 50 petajoules of gas per year by the end of 2023.
SA is the third state to sign an energy deal with the Commonwealth, after NSW and Tasmania.
Under the agreement, the Commonwealth will commit $660 million and SA will commit $422 million to energy projects.
Word count: 413
