Planning and environmental law experts from Adelaide University have also found that climate change is only mentioned nine times in the 7500-page planning and design code and there are no general development policies “specifically addressing” it.
But the State Planning Commission, which is overseeing the planning reforms, said planning policies strengthened the state’s response to climate change.
The code, which the State Government says will streamline development in SA, has been in gestation for more than five years and is replacing all existing 72 council and regional development plans.
The university’s Working Group on Planning and Climate Change has also accused the SPC of giving “minimal, if any guidance” to the “relative importance” of climate change. “The code only rarely uses the term climate change,” the report, produced by a group of working and retired planning and environmental experts, says.
“Applicants and relevant authorities have little guidance on how to determine which criteria under the code relate to climate change mitigation and adaptation.
“In light of the grave and costly impacts that South Australia is likely to incur from climate change, we suggest the new planning system be reviewed on an ongoing basis to ensure that climate change is given appropriate consideration in planning policy and assessment and determination of planning applications.”
It says the planning system has an “important role” in helping the government meet greenhouse gas reduction targets of net zero emissions by 2050. The interim study has been tabled to an inquiry by state parliament’s Legislative Review Committee into the state’s planning system prompted by a 13,000 signature petition, which also sought the government defer the reforms.
Chairman Michael Lennon said the commission had introduced a specific state planning policy on climate change in May 2019.
He said policies in the code – including minimum tree- planting requirements, water-sensitive urban design, fire and flood-risk mapping and renewable-energy policies – would strengthen SA’s climate change response and “create a more resilient economy, community and natural environment”.
Mr Lennon said the commission would evaluate more climate change policies in future iterations of the code.
Word count: 336
