The climate, conditions and collaboration found across high-quality SA food and beverage producers has created an $11bn sector that exports premium goods around the world.
International award-winning cheesemaker and SA Food and Wine Ambassador Kris Lloyd says her home base in the Adelaide Hills is a food bowl with the perfect conditions for excellent produce.
“We’ve got some of the best apples, cherries, strawberries, honey and, of course, milk in the world,” she says.
“We are so blessed with the environment we have to grow our raw materials. That, coupled with excellent biosecurity, ensures the finest quality food can be produced, perfectly positioning our food industry at the top of the ladder.
“We are always starting off with our absolute best foot forward.”
SA is renowned for its premium food and wine, wheat, barley, beef, seafood, lamb and poultry. It is home to more than 1600 wineries, food and other beverage manufacturing businesses. Including primary production, SA’s food, wine and agribusiness sector directly employs 76,000 people, and supports further jobs in the supply chain in areas such as transport and packaging.
‘We are so blessed with the environment we have to grow our raw materials’
About 80 per cent of Australia’s premium wine is produced in SA, which is home to about half the nation’s vineyards.
Total food and wine exports from SA totalled $4.8bn last year, and along with other primary products including wool and wood, account for about half of the goods exported from SA.
It is from this base that the SA government wants to grow the premium food and beverage business as a key economic priority, highlighting the cold chain logistics in place, food safety, agritech research, clean environment and counter-seasonal growing for international operations.
Authorities point to the successful agribusinesses already established, such as the $275m expansion of operations for chicken meat producer Ingham’s farms.
Likewise, the innovative Sundrop Farms has been developed using pioneering triple-bottom line technology to grow tomatoes, create electricity and desalinate water, all using renewable energy.
The Growth State Food, Wine and Agribusiness plan, devised by industry, was launched in September to map a pathway to increase the current earnings to $23bn by 2030.
It calls for increased technology to aid productivity, a skilled workforce, improved digital and transport infrastructure, new market opportunities, ongoing sustainable production, all underpinned by responsive and effective regulation.
Industry association Food South Australia chief executive Catherine Sayer says the plan provides a shared framework for industry and government.
She says SA has developed a strong range of its own food and wine brands over generations.
“We have probably more iconic brands in South Australia than anywhere else,” she says.
She points to the strong market share of independent retailers Foodland and Drakes as a reason for the groundswell of different food options.
“Those independents Foodland and Drakes [supermarkets] tend to give businesses their first leg up in retail,” she says.
She says the state has a strong industry built on small and medium-sized enterprises which are often privately family-owned businesses.
One such wine producer is the eponymous label of winemaker Mike Press.
Together with his wife Judy, they distribute 20,000 12-bottle cases of the classics — chardonnay, sauvignon blanc, pinot noir, cabernet sauvignon, merlot and shiraz — from their Adelaide Hills kitchen table.
A former chief winemaker for Penfolds and Seppelts, and later Mildara Blass, he set out on his own to find the perfect spot for viticulture in 1998. With his son he planted more than 60 acres (24ha) of grapes and let the vines, time and the conditions do their thing.
“The Adelaide Hills is an idyllic little spot,” he says. “We looked around for sites and really explored the district and got to know it and really love it.”
They sell direct to members, as well as some distributors, and provide wine for export to Japan, China and Hong Kong.
“It’s a toe in the water,” he says. “It’s got potential, and we’re interested in it.”
And best friends with wine, is cheese.
Lloyd’s Woodside Cheese Wrights turned a struggling cheesemaking business into a thriving operation over 25 years.
Kris Lloyd’s cheeses have featured at Madison Square Garden and achieved a Super Gold medal, ranking number 11 in the World Cheese Awards in 2017 out of a field of 3021 cheeses.
This accolade was for the Anthill cheese which blends the native ingredient of edible green ants, now a flagship product exported to the US.
“What we’ve got in our backyard is so incredibly important,” she says.
“It’s an Australian story we can and should be telling. That accolade wasn’t about Woodside Cheese, for me it was about Australia and our native ingredients, which are unique and indigenous to our country.
Their other specialist cheeses include the Monet, a goat milk cheese with savoury seasoning and edible flowers, while the top sellers are the goat curd.
“I’m really focused on innovation and doing things differently,” Lloyd says.
“Collaborating with other South Australian businesses is also very high on my list.”
-
Case study 1:
A taste of country life
Each year about 100,000 visitors pick strawberries and stroll the grounds of Beerenberg, the Adelaide Hills’ berry hill.
The Beerenberg Family Farm — named after the German for berry hill — in more than 45 years has grown into a key family tourist attraction for its pick-your-own strawberries.
Behind the fields, however, was the development of a premium food-production business that now sells its jams, condiments and sauces in 23 countries around the world.
Beerenberg has been run by six generations of the Paech family since 1839, transforming 50 years ago into a strawberry plantation.
Managing director Anthony Paech says they have been producing strawberry jam since 1971.
“We’ve got about 340,000 plants, we’re doing a lot more now because of demand,” he says. “People really want Australian fruit and they want to support local. And Australian fruit is the best in the world.”
Their flagship products are their award-winning strawberry jam, caramelised onion, tomato chutney and tomato sauce, but their range extends to more than 80 items.
Paech says their sales of tomato sauce are accelerating, thanks to its distinct “Beerenbergy” qualities.
“We say a product is Beerenbergy,” he says. “They’re generous and rich, and the flavour is a taste of country life.”
And that SA country life is travelling far and wide. Beerenberg dressings are being exported to Russia, jams and condiments to Saudi Arabia and the UAE, and six condiments are in stores in California.
They’ve been part of the in-flight experience of airlines for decades and exporting to Japan and Indonesia for three decades.
Paech says SA is a great environment for food and business, given conditions and the close connections between growers and producers.
“We work together in this state because everyone knows each other and we’re kind of small,” he says. “There’s a community here you wouldn’t get in the eastern states.”
-
Case study 2:
When only the best will do
Nick Whiting is a fourth-generation farmer and second-generation olive grower.
His family business, Pendleton Olive Estate, having been built over two decades to its current production of 600,000 litres each year, produces premium olive oil for the retail, restaurant and export markets.
Whiting, Pendleton’s executive director, says the region’s climate and the conditions are right for growing, which is spurred on by the high quality of food producers across South Australia.
“It’s very competitive, there’s a lot of really good food producers in South Australia,” he says.
“Having that support to explore new networks is helpful. It’s evidenced by the range of different businesses, all within the same sector, that are able to be successful.
“We’re very lucky to have a number of regions — Adelaide Hills, the Limestone Coast — that all have distinct climates and passionate people who make good quality products.”
Whiting says the region’s limestone topography has led to a distinct character that naturally gives the olives higher polyphenols — “robustness”, in industry parlance — that provide a key health benefit of olive oil.
‘It’s very competitive, there’s a lot of really good food producers in South Australia’
Their processing plant allows oil storage in ideal temperature and nitrogen-controlled conditions, where freshness is preserved before bottling.
“Having that storage is key to us having continuous quality fruit,” he says.
The business recently upgraded its groves to double growing capacity and is also planning to boost its processing plant, to again double production capacity within three to five years.
-
Case study 3:
Think big but keep it simple
Mark Pye searched the country for the premium location for his farm, and found it in the Mallee region of South Australia.
The Pye Group director, who oversees the Parilla Premium Potatoes and Zerella Fresh brands, identified the right combination of a hot and dry climate, biosecurity and available water to allow them to build their production of potatoes, carrots and onions.
It is a landscape that has helped them to achieve 17 per cent of the national market share of washed potatoes, 24 per cent of Australia’s carrots and 27 per cent of onions.
“Our family philosophy is, think big and keep it simple,” Pye says. “Instead of growing 20 or 30 different lines we grow three, and grow volume and specialise (such as low-carb potato options and tasty breeds from the Netherlands). We can specialise in the equipment and agronomy.
“Where we are has the right environment and conditions. It ticked all the boxes.”
The Pyes are in the process of planning a new $35m packing facility, to be completed by mid 2021, which will allow them to boost production up to 50 per cent. It could also allow a great capacity for export, currently 5 per cent of the business.
“At the moment we are maxxed out with our packing facility; that will allow us to double our capacity,” he says. “That will also allow us to export.”
Word count: 1583
