A large-scale recruitment drive has been launched to find a slew of new workers, with both casual and full-time positions available.
Adelaide Oval chief operating officer Adam Vonthethoff said the oval was seeking to bolster its staff numbers following the finalisation of its COVID Management Plan.
“In the lead-up to the footy season, our focus was on out COVID Managament Plan and ensuring we could provide a fun, safe and easy experience for fans,” he said.
“Now the season is underway, we’re excited to be able to expand our team.”
Mr Vonthethoff said it was a great opportunity for people of all ages and backgrounds.
“(There’s) a range of opportunities available for jobseekers whether they be university students, people looking for a second income or simply those keen to be part of the action at Adelaide Oval,” he said.
Roles on offer include casual kiosk, bar and wait attendants as well as full-time chef roles.
Other full-time and part-time kitchen roles are also available.
For those more inclined towards inclines, oval management are seeking to fill two roles in the RoofClimb Adelaide Oval team – a full-time senior RoofClimb leader and a casual RoofClimb leader.
Adelaide Oval general manager of food and beverage Matt Omond said event days at the oval “make for a vibrant, exciting workplace”.
“Our hospitality team members are pouring beers, waiting tables, serving in kiosks or making coffees in a world-class stadium with a fantastic atmosphere,” he said.
“We’re looking for people who thrive in that kind of environment and are keen to be a part of delivering this first-rate experience for fans and patrons.”
Ali Pope is a member of the food and beverage team at the oval and said there was “nothing better than the atmosphere of game day”.
“I get to work right in the heart of the action,” she said.
Oval chef Truong Nguyen agreed.
“It’s awesome to experience working in all areas of the business from functions and game days to a la carte service,” he said.
For more information or to apply, visit adelaideoval.com.au/careers.
Chip off the new block
Surge in demand for baked snacks during COVID-19 has inspired a multimillion-dollar expansion of a Regency Park manu­facturing facility, bringing around 30 new jobs to Adelaide’s north.
The new $18m production line, unveiled by US food manufacturer PepsiCo at its Regency Park factory, is the only high capacity baked potato line in the country, producing a range of snacks including Smith’s Oven Baked potato chips and Red Rock Deli premium crackers.
The double baked Smith’s chips contain 50 per cent less fat than regular potato chips.
The equipment was installed during the COVID-19 lockdown last year, with the State Government providing approvals to bring in interstate engineering specialists.
PepsiCo Australia & New Zealand chief executive Danny Celoni said due to a surge in demand for baked snacks, the new line operated 24 hours a day, seven days a week, supporting more than 28 full-time permanent jobs and flow-on contract work in the local community.
Turning waste into energy
New facility designed to turn the South-East’s forestry waste into a valuable source of renewable energy is planned to be up and running in two years.
Queensland-based company, Altus Renewables has secured a site 9km north of Mount Gambier for a proposed $100m to $120m plant.
The 18 to 24 month construction phase will employ the equivalent of 120 full time employees and on completion would create 30 onsite jobs with an extra 80 in harvesting and haulage contractors.
Managing director and chief executive Ian Sandeman said the Mingbool plant would produce at least 300,000 tonnes of bioenergy pellets a year.
He said the project was making strong progress securing fibre from within the local forest products industry and would capitalise on export opportunities by shipping from Portland in Victoria.
“Once the development application has been approved, we’ll get the project under way and will finalise funding,” Mr Sandeman said.
The energy pellets will be created with biomass such as sawdust, shavings and chips.
Word count: 641
