Leif, of Scott Creek, had set off from Adelaide on March 22, and had ridden through Wallaroo and Port Lincoln, and was heading across the Nullarbor Plain, when he was killed 70km west of Caiguna on Tuesday morning.
Leif’s father, Hugh, said his son’s main goal in life was to engage with others and protect the planet.
He encouraged people to call their superannuation providers and divest from fossil fuel contributions.
“He was passionate about engaging with people,” Mr Justham said.
“Leif would look for the positives in anyone he met. He was a positive and outgoing person who didn’t want to sit and be passive.”
Leif wanted to “minimise his impact on the world” and was happy to talk to anyone he came across about the effects of climate change and emissions.
Mr Justham said one of Leif’s motivations to journey around Australia was to promote the ways in which travelling could be achieved without burning fossil fuels.
Before he left last month, Leif was working as a tree planter, a vocation he thoroughly enjoyed.
He leaves behind his father, mother, Helen Taylor and brother, Brin Taylor, 23, as well as three half-siblings and three stepbrothers.
Mr Justham said he was a much loved “personal and outgoing” member of their family, who enjoyed playing soccer for Stirling Districts Football Club, surfing and enjoying music.
Stirling Districts Football Club president, Brent Prior, took to Facebook on Thursday to offer a tribute for Leif.
“Leif Indigo Justham cared. He cared for his family, he cared for his mates, he cared for SDFC and he cared for the planet,” he said.
“When I last spoke to him he was super excited about his bike trip and about raising awareness of environmental issues.
“To celebrate his life we are going to conduct a number of events to commemorate Leif’s amazing nature, his great character, positive energy and love of this club.”
In February, Leif posted on Instagram, excitedly announcing his news.
“If I told you I would ride my push bike 20,000km around this country just for you to change your super and bank to one with better rates, while simultaneously investing in renewable energy, regenerative farming, ethical investments, would you do it?” he wrote.
“In about a month I will be pedalling out of Adelaide and heading clockwise around this enormous and unforgiving island. My biggest challenge yet!”
The truck driver, a 37-year-old South Australian man, has been charged with dangerous driving occasioning death.
Western Australia Police say he will appear via video link at the Kalgoorlie Magistrate’s Court on Thursday, April 15.
To honour Leif, his family have created a website, where links can be found to contribute to climate activism and post tributes to the young man.
Word count: 438
