The combined annual savings would amount to $900m if all the people entitled to the savings got on-board, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission said on Tuesday.
Those looking to cut their electricity bills are encouraged to consult a government comparison website like Energy Made Easy or Victorian Energy Compare or to speak with their energy retailer.
ACCC chair Rod Sims said consumers should change to a cheaper plan if available.
But he also issued a warning to energy retailers that they needed to comply with new laws that require energy savings to be passed on to consumers.
“There are two ways that households and small businesses can get the hip-pocket benefit of recent reductions in retailers’ costs: by changing to a new, cheaper plan or by waiting for their retailer to lower the rates on the plan that they’re already on,” Mr Sims said.
“While we encourage consumers to cash in on the available savings by switching to a better deal, new laws require electricity retailers to pass on cuts in the wholesale cost of electricity.”
The possibility for savings vary by state:
Victorian households could save between $171 and $198 per year
NSW households could save between $80 and $88 per year
Southeast Queensland households could save $126 per year
South Australian households could save $118 per year
ACT households could save $46 per year
Mr Sims said new laws to force retailers to cut prices in line with energy production costs would be enforced, and companies that didn’t comply should expect scrutiny.
“The ACCC is now investigating whether electricity retailers’ current prices, including to their existing customers, are in line with recent wholesale price reductions, and if electricity retailers haven’t passed on the savings to consumers as required by law, they can expect to hear from us,” Mr Sims said.
The penalties for misconduct are steep – companies that don’t comply risk fines up to $10 million or 10 per cent of turnover per breach.
The new requirements on electricity retailers come as part of the Treasury Laws Amendment (Prohibiting Energy Market Misconduct) Bill 2019, passed by parliament in November that year.
The provisions requiring retailers to make “reasonable adjustments” to prices came into effect last June.
They are most likely to benefit consumers in the so-called national energy market regions, which include NSW, the ACT, Victoria, South Australia, Queensland and Tasmania.
Mr Sims said the wholesale costs of electricity had fallen over the past few years thanks to renewable energy generation and lower fuel costs. The new laws were designed to make sure those savings are passed onto consumers.
“Prior to this, we had a decade of sustained electricity price increases that placed unacceptable pressure on households and small businesses,” Mr Sims said.
Word count: 439
