As a nominally modern nation, it was betrayed by the West at the Treaty of Versailles in 1919, where it remained as a virtual Western colony and the German possession of Shandong was handed to Japan. The “100 years of humiliation” are seared into Chinese political consciousness. Add to that Mao’s statement that “Power comes from the barrel of a gun” and you have the reasons for the rise of China’s military power and expansionism.
If the West hopes to negotiate with China in an attempt to bring it within the international rules-based order, it will have to do it from a position of absolute military superiority and a negotiating stance that is unforgiving of duplicitous transgression. Anything less would be merely continuing to subscribe to China’s playbook.
Jim Wilson, Beaumont, SA
Is South Australia so inept at job creation that the nation is forced to link vital submarine procurement and capability attainment with burdensome local content requirements, lengthening the goal by years if not decades and counteracting the very benefits of the strategy in the first place?
Apparently South Australia is confident of having 100 per cent of its electricity powered by renewables by 2030. Wow. This statistic goes down very well in UN climate forums, green talk-fests and the related cocktail party circuit but there is a glaring dearth of associated industrial growth. Common with most of the country’s inept premiers, SA has fallen for the trap of placing virtue-signalling renewable energy before an efficient, reliable, 24/7 power system that actually encourages industry.
South Australia should build a HELE coal power plant or a nuclear plant on the Spencer Gulf and you would soon see manufacturing surging back.
Ron Hobba, Camberwell, Vic
Much has been said about the cost, design, manufacturing, maintenance and crewing of the next generation of Australian submarines. But what are they for? The primary role of an “attack” submarine is, as the term implies, to attack. But who, where and why? When do we expect a marine assault, and how would a handful of submarines – patrolling vast expanses of ocean with a limited supply of torpedoes – fend off that hypothetical invasion?
The $90bn could be much better used above ground over the next two decades than on a few metal tubes pottering undersea to no discernible effect, or – probably for about half the time – languishing in shipyards for repairs, refits or crews.
Rowan Scotcake, South Fremantle, WA
Our lost debate
Janet Albrechtsen’s nostalgia for the days when debate was debate reminds me of the contrast between the 1990s when we discussed a republic and the the same-sex marriage debate two decades later (“When smart debate on issues of the day is a bridge too far”, 22/9). Although a monarchist, I acknowledged good arguments put forth by republicans. There was generally respect on both sides and a readiness to debate whatever points came up. Malcolm Turnbull versus Lloyd Waddy was good entertainment.
When the same-sex marriage survey was approaching a few years back, social media and online comment had greatly increased the opportunity for all sorts of people to state their views publicly. Many supporters of a change in the legal definition of marriage refused to debate their case. Even otherwise highly respected people refused to debate and simply called their opponents homophobes and bigots. The sound-bite and short printed rant was apparently more important than discussion.
David Morrison, Springwood, NSW
Where’s the humanity?
There’s an old lady who hangs about our town centre, soaking up the sunshine and having a quiet ciggie. She looks homeless but she actually has a room in a hotel. I don’t imagine she would have any visitors. Sitting next to me, she was approached by the police. They said that if they saw her again in the afternoon they would arrest and fine her. They didn’t bother me, wearing a navy blue jacket, white shirt and polished boots. No understanding of humanity. I’m sure the police don’t like doing this work. It doesn’t bode well for their popularity with the lower echelons.
Gary Frances, Bexley, NSW
Word count: 665
