Private equity fund Denham Capital has hired US investment banking giant JPMorgan for the sale of its $1 billion-odd portfolio of Australian and Asian energy assets.
Denham Capital’s Singapore-based Nexif Energy includes renewable energy assets in Vietnam, Thailand, The Philippines and Australia.
In Australia, it is developing the 154MW Snapper Point gas turbine peaking power plant 22km northwest of Adelaide and the Lincoln Gap Wind Farm with 464MW of wind turbines near Port Augusta, also in South Australia.
Houston-based Denham Capital invests in energy and resources and it is among a number heading to the market in the renewable energy space.
In recent weeks, Elliott Management Corporation hired Azure Capital and Bank of America for the sale of its Australian solar assets, thought to be worth more than $500m.
Elliott owns Elliott Green Power Australia, with more than 300MW in solar energy assets.
Its projects include the Susan River Solar Farm in Queensland which delivers 180,000MWh of electricity each year, and the Childers Solar Farm and Nevertire Solar farms in NSW which deliver 144,000MWh and 265,000MWh respectively.
Elliott Management oversees two multi-strategy hedge funds that collectively have more than $US40bn ($54.8bn) worth of assets under management.
Investors include pension plans, sovereign wealth funds, endowments, foundations, funds of funds, wealthy individuals and families and employees of the firm.
The selling point for portfolios to such investors is that the assets are already contracted to the buyers of power.
Tilt Renewables, which has renewable energy assets in Australia and New Zealand, achieved a monstrous price when it sold to a consortium.
Queensland Investment Corporation, AGL Energy, Mercury Energy and The Future Fund paid more than $3 billion because of its development pipeline and contracted cashflows which appeal to infrastructure investors, according to one market expert.
The other sales process afoot is the divestment of New Energy Solar’s Australian assets.
Final bids were due on May 24. Azure Capital-advised Banpu out of Thailand is best placed to secure the 110MW Beryl plant and 55MW Manildra facilities in NSW.
The listed company, advised by Royal Bank of Canada, has a market value near $300m and owns 14 solar assets in the US. First Sentier, Palisade Investment Partners, Lighthouse Infrastructure, Dutch Infrastructure Fund and ICG have previously picked up renewable energy portfolios and are expected to be in the mix.
CREDIT: EDITED BY BRIDGET CARTER
Word count: 391
