The Northern Australia Infrastructure Fund (NAIF) is a Commonwealth Government development fund whose mission is to be an innovative financing partner in the growth of Northern Australia.
The NAIF recently approved a $280 million loan for a wind farm and battery near Cairns. The project included a 157-megawatt wind farm, 100MW battery, will provide jobs during and after construction, and is touted to reduce power prices. 100MW is not a lot of power in the scheme of things, but it's a good start.
However, the Morrison Government has vetoed the loan. Keith Pitt, the Minster for Resources, Water and Northern Australia, said "I am satisfied that providing NAIF support for the project would be inconsistent with the objectives and policies of the Commonwealth Government."
READ ALSO: St John Ambulance volunteer Debbie Benham honoured for her service He goes on to justify this decision saying that "Commonwealth policy is to support energy projects that provide dispatchable generation to the electricity market". That's a bit puzzling. A dispatchable power station is one that can supply power on demand. What batteries are good at.
The minister also said "I am not convinced that the project will result in lower energy prices". Again puzzling, as the similar well-publicised Tesla battery In South Australia has saved SA consumers around $150 Million since its debut in 2017. The government is being somewhat disingenuous here.
READ ALSO: BCCAN lunch time rally to support school climate strikers They are not supporting this totally clean renewable power project, and instead are supporting gas as the solution to all our problems. Gas still emits around 60 per cent of the carbon dioxide of coal. That won't get us to net zero emissions very fast. In the South Australian power blackout in 2016, some of the "dispatchable" fossil-fuelled peakload generators, that were needed to restart the system, failed.
Recently the Government wanted to use $1 billion of NAIF Funds for the proposed ADANI coal mine, which would contribute around 0.6 degrees to global warming over its lifetime. This won't provide us ANY dispatchable power, or savings, as its entire output will be shipped to India.
Nearer home, we of course have Blayney wind farm, and two companies are looking to install 500MW battery systems in and near the old Wallerawang power station which closed in 2014. An ideal site, as it's already fed by transmission lines.
READ ALSO: Australian Therapy bringing a new approach to better health The NSW Government is very supportive of these battery projects, with billions allocated to support a 2030 target.
Unfortunately, the Federal government is still seemingly stuck in the Abbott era.
David Ashton is a member of BCCAN.
CREDIT: David Ashton
Word count: 446
