Sources say Spark’s Bowmen Solar Farm will be on the block. Bowmen sits within Spark’s renewables unit and is estimated to be worth about $200m.
The 100 megawatt farm is located in Wagga Wagga and received development consent in October 2018. It began operating in the second quarter of 2020.
Bowmen is considered a side-show for Spark, which agreed to sell the business to Canadian pension fund Ontario and its backers for $5.2bn, or $2.95 per share, in August.
Spark’s core business consists of a 15 per cent stake in NSW electricity transmission network Transgrid, a 49 per cent stake in South Australia Power Networks and a 49 per cent interest in Victoria’s CitiPower and Powercor, known as Victoria Power Networks.
No doubt, the consortium’s advisers Barrenjoey Capital Partners and UBS will be positioning themselves for a mandate to sell the project.
Other renewable energy businesses currently on the market include a stake in Macarthur Wind Farm, Elliott Management’s Australian solar farms and Denham Capital’s Nexif Energy, a business that owns renewable assets in Australia and Asia.
It comes as investment bankers are gearing up for another big year of deals in the infrastructure space in 2023, as buyers of infrastructure businesses this year are set to offload assets.
One of the situations being closely watched is the $23.6bn purchase of Sydney Airport by an IFM-led consortium.
Many are speculating that some other airport assets will need to be sold by IFM for the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission to get comfortable with the Sydney Airport purchase.
The consortium, known as the Sydney Aviation Alliance, includes industry super fund investment arm IFM, QSuper, GIP and AustralianSuper.
IFM owns a 25 per cent interest in Melbourne Airport and 20 per cent of Brisbane Airport, among other airport interests.
But it also owns a 77 per cent interest in Darwin, Alice Springs and Tennant Creek airports, a 12.8 per cent stake in Adelaide Airport and stakes in Perth and Launceston airports. Under the airport ownership rules, it will not be able to own more than 15 per cent of the Sydney asset if its other holdings remain.
Word count: 344
