The company told the Australian Securities Exchange in an announcement it had started an independent investigation “into complaints received from employees concerning workplace behaviour within the company’’.
“The company’s board takes allegations of workplace misconduct very seriously,’’ the company said.
“The company’s managing director, Mr Jamie Summons, has been stood down from his duties pending completion of the independent investigation.’’
The nature of the allegations was not specified.
Mr Summons was appointed as managing director on January 4.
He has previously held senior roles with reinsurance company Swiss Re and Barclays, was acting chief executive of Intelligent Energy Systems and spent 11 years in various roles at EnergyAustralia.
1414’s executive chairman Dr Kevin Moriarty and the former interim chief executive officer and current chief operations officer, Mr Jordan Parham, will take over running of the company in the interim.
The company also said that Richard Willson had resigned as a director and the company secretary on May 24. He will be replaced by Tania Sargent.
1414 Degrees shares were trading 6.3 per cent lower at 15c on Wednesday.
The Adelaide-based company is focused on developing a hybrid power plant at its Aurora Energy Project near Port Augusta, as well as commercialising its technology which stores energy in the form of liquid silicon.
1414 paid $2 million for the Aurora project, buying it from SolarReserve, which had talked up a $750m plan for the site which did not eventuate.
The plan now is for one or two 70MWh silicon batteries to be built at the site, which would be charged by solar arrays.
The company has not yet been able to successfully commercialise its TESS (thermal energy storage system) technology.
The company’s share price took a tumble in June last year after an internal review was released which said that more work needed to go into making the company’s technology economically viable.
Around the same time the company announced that SA Water had completed its business case evaluation for the installation of the company’s GAS-TESS technology, and decided against moving forward.
The most recent company update said 1414 was: “reviewing the results from the gas-fired thermal energy storage system, GAS-TESS installation at SA Water’s Glenelg wastewater treatment plant, to identify the most appropriate path to commercialisation of this unique technology’’.
Mr Summons could not be contacted.
Word count: 369
