Banana Shire Mayor Nev Ferrier is yarning with locals at the opening of new cattle yards in Taroom, 3½ hours southwest of Gladstone, in Queensland.
Naturally, everyone is talking about the election. There’s plenty to ponder. Around here, the result could shape livelihoods, communities and ways of life.
The miners in this seat of Flynn worry about the end of coal, which would doom entire towns. Renewable energy is coming, but how and when remains unclear.
“So, Nev, what’s everyone reckon?” you ask.
Ferrier is a straight-shooter with a killer laugh.
He pauses to choose his words, then expresses a sentiment shared by voters in marginal electorates two plane rides and thousands of kilometres away.
“Everyone has sort of had enough of the election, you know,” he says. “People have picked where they are going. Now it’s just driving them mad.” An 11-hour drive south of Taroom, in the Hunter Valley, winemaker Rod Kempe is trying to do four things at once.
“This place is mental,” he says, then laughs, which he does a lot. He has never met Ferrier and probably never will. They may vote differently for all we know, yet the pair share a similar attitude to politics.
Kempe indulges questions from a slightly tipsy journalist about the upcoming election. He is over “the whole bloody thing”, he says, as he serves more wine and searches for Daisy, the golden retriever, who just bounded out the door.
We are bombarded by slogans and bribes and bluster, he explains. We, the voters, are the “poor buggers”.
Kempe and Ferrier amplify views which stretch from marginal seats in central Queensland to Adelaide. Call them the leading voices of an unfiltered Australia.
They both belong in places that will decide the next government. But talk to people in these seats and you find that they mostly shrink from the noise of political promises.
Some say “Albo” as if sounding out the word for the first time. Some scrunch their faces at the very mention of Scott Morrison, in shows of contempt that appear to unite farmers, tradies and doctors across the country.
Is this the most important poll in Australia’s history? It’s certainly unprecedented.
Traditions have been up-ended. Blue-blood Coalition seats seem set to fall, as might seats wedded to the ALP for generations.
Independents – and their quirky preferences – stand to throw up winners and losers.
Nothing can reconcile the pro-fossil fuel promises up north to the pockets of climate change zeal in the big capitals.
The fevered battlelines of Kooyong, in Melbourne, would be mocked in Flynn, 2000km away. The climate-change priorities of Boothby, in Adelaide, would be laughed out of the pub in Singleton, in the Hunter Valley.
If we are one Australia, we are a nation of conflicted interests. One size does not fit all.
Winemaker Kempe and farmer Ferrier are starting points to a national patchwork of hope and disenchantment. They are emblems of a wider mood.
Articulate and informed, Kempe is frazzled, friendly and drenched in the political cynicism that infects the whole nation.
“Joel knew when to get out,” he says of retiring Labor Hunter MP Joel Fitzgibbon.
“Until now, they could have had a crash-test dummy standing for Labor and he would have got in. It’s all changed. Now the poor buggers don’t know who to vote for.” The details are particular to the Hunter region, where oversized gates announce stately wineries beyond. The Hunter is also where coal dust tinges the sunset. There are dozens of mines here and coal is not a dirty word.
Similar sentiments thrive in Flynn, where the ALP candidate’s message competes against the party’s national line.
His policies would be derided as backward drivel in some wealthier seats of Melbourne and Sydney, where hip-pocket demands do not dim crusades for climate-change urgency.
Welcome to five marginal seats of Australia. Each is distinct, yet the results in all will be driven by local, rather than national, priorities.
Kev Spoor can always pick the non-locals. They’re the customers who want smashed avocado.
He almost moved to Victoria once. Instead, he opened a bakery cafe in Biloela, a couple of hours from the central Queensland coast, a town in the seat of Flynn that services a coal-fired power station.
Spoor’s bakery is open 363 days a year, 16 hours a day, for the mass of shift workers who start and end their workdays at 6am and 6pm. The workers can earn double what they might elsewhere; a mine truck driver can top $150,000 a year.
“Righto,” Spoor says, before plonking himself down after the lunch rush. Quick to smile, he has something to say.
This part of the world, and its unfashionable industries, generates the national wealth, he explains. And his customers, the workers who cram the bakery at 5am each day, are scared.
One of the nearby coalmines is due to close in 2028. The locals fear accelerated closures from an ideological stroke of the pen in a faraway city.
“Here we are with new energy sources that are subsidised,” Spoor says. “But to stand on their own two feet, they don’t stand up to scrutiny. Would you pay two or three times your power bill to say it’s coming out of wind or solar?” Biloela is 90 minutes by car from Gladstone, the notional hub of Flynn, an electorate twice the size of Tasmania. Gladstone boasts neat parks and nearby beaches. But no one chooses the city for a holiday.
Chimneys rise above every skyline. It has often thrived – and at times stunk – since the rise of alumina in the 1960s.
Coal comes through here – lots of it. Prices are high and customer queues long. Take coal away and the empty houses of Gladstone will multiply.
The coal debate plays differently to renewable energy debates down south. Here, both major parties affirm a future for fossil fuels. The ALP candidate for Flynn, Matt Burnett, is a local mayor who promises that Canberra “won’t know what hit them” if he is elected.
He is pro-coal and pro-renewable energy. He walks a philosophical tightrope, his degree of difficulty compounded by the ALP’s anti-mine rhetoric in the 2019 election.
It’s said many miners are not yet ready to forget.
Burnett’s opponent, the Liberal National Party’s Colin Boyce, has pooh-poohed his own Coalition targets of net-zero emissions by 2050. He cites “wriggle room”, in playing to the fears of the crowd that largely opted for minor parties, such as One Nation, at the election three years ago.
On the street, the understanding of net-zero emission targets is patchy. The side-effects are better grasped than the details.
David Mason, a retiree sitting outside the bank, puts it simply: “How many people will end up out of work?” The city complains about poor health services, a default frustration in many regions. There is also resentment toward the capitals, which blithely demand friendlier sources of power.
An acceptance for climate change policies collides with a distrust for blanketed visions from elsewhere. The speed and the nature of such change is the question.
Here, they call it common sense. Hydrogen might work as a power replacement, but might not. They hold up iPhones to argue that targets 30 years hence will be superseded by newer technologies. Who imagined the significance of an iPhone in 1992?
They are resistant to change and pessimistic about the possibilities, a stance that invites the dividing of Australia into two worlds – the cities and the regions. The haves and the have-nots.
It’s a random snapshot, perhaps no more than a trick of the camera. Treasurer Josh Frydenberg and his election rival, independent Monique Ryan, stand outside an early polling booth in Hawthorn, in Melbourne’s inner east.
In the photo, Ryan beams at the camera, while Frydenberg looks like he needs a hug.
He is fighting a political battle he never expected. He has been disarmed of his economic credentials and accused of guilt by association with Morrison and Nationals leader Barnaby Joyce.
Frydenberg fears he will lose.
He has dropped the Liberal Party badging and resorted to personal appeals for support.
“Keep Josh”, his latest billboards implore, including those oversized signs worn on the backs of workers earning $30 an hour.
It isn’t supposed to be this hard. Kooyong has had seven members – all conservatives meant for big things – in 120 years. Frydenberg extends the Kooyong pattern of prime ministerial aspiration. Yet some polls say the blue dynasty will end on May 21.
You cannot escape the faces of Frydenberg or Ryan, a paediatric neurologist running on a climate- change ticket. Former premier and Kooyong resident Jeff Kennett says you can’t see any houses anymore – too many damned signs.
There are no ready stats, but Kooyong might top the nation for beach homes per household. Rhythms of privilege and entitlement thread this pocket of eastern Melbourne, where flurries of autumnal leaves grow each day.
Clots of elite private schools flourish within the seat. If their students hit bother, the Bank of Mum and Dad will typically step in.
Frydenberg started early. His face multiplied on the streets. In what played as an early hint, he folded to the demands of Hawthorn residents opposed to a federally-funded train station carpark which would have attracted outer suburban commuters into their moneyed midst.
Then Ryan’s face started turning up everywhere, too, although the iconoclasts, or vandals, still preferred Frydenberg. Ryan set up an office bigger than Frydenberg’s, one corner down on Glenferrie Rd, Hawthorn.
She was the choice of a grassroots movement, inspired by ideals rather than policies, which snared funding from Climate 200’s Simon Holmes a Court.
Her vision has resonated in an electorate where rises in the cost of living are irritating rather than burdensome. Her singular campaign implies an unspoken truth – that the needs of Australians who earn livings from fossil fuels do not matter much.
Ryan seeks to save the world, though those ticklish issues of parliament – such as economics and defence – can be left to other members.
But, first, she wants to save Australian politics. She runs on a platform of decency and integrity.
This approach appeals to one of her volunteers, Catherine Krestyn, a swinging voter. She has never campaigned for a politician until she embraced the “centrifugal force” of the Ryan “groundswell”.
CONTINUED NEXT PAGE Slim pickings: ‘They promise everything’ FROM PREVIOUS PAGE Every day since December, Krestyn, of Hawthorn, has donned her teal army T-shirt. The volunteers claim to have knocked on almost five in six Kooyong front doors. Many are jaded Liberal voters and the mixed dynamics cast Kooyong as the most confounding seat in the country. They protest against the political orthodoxy, which Krestyn argues is “broken”.
“It’s a really sad reflection of our body politic that we hold up decency in politics as something amazing,” Krestyn says.
A mum to four and an educator, she says the campaigning is “the best thing I’ve ever done”.
“Decency should be a pre-emptor for everything in politics,” she says. “It’s just gorgeous to be part of the campaign. It may sound a little bit Pollyanna-ish, but it’s true.” The conventional versus new way divide sharpened in the story of Rob Baillieu, son of former Victorian premier, Ted. They live in the same Hawthorn house, yet publicly support opposing candidates. Rob Baillieu cites Liberal Party homophobia and climate scepticism among his motivations.
Kennett says he has “never seen anything like it”. He doesn’t get the rise of the teal movement.
He is hit with Ryan’s social media advertising whenever he reads an online newspaper.
“If people are there for just the one issue, I don’t know how they get the breadth and experience to consider all the other matters that parliament has to deal with,” Kennett says.
First-time voters Sam Wenn and Ty Beechey probably care more about the fortunes of their footy teams than the local representative. But like all Kooyong adults, they have been hammered by campaign noise.
“A lot of people are saying their parents will vote for Frydenberg and the kids will vote for Monique Ryan or the Greens,” Beechey says.
Wenn, a keen punter, says it will be “bloody close”. Climate change matters to him, as do student loans.
More critically, Wenn is unsure who to back. Two Sundays ago, the electronic mobile billboard of Frydenberg was parked in Union Rd, Surrey Hills. His face was the size of a truck. In the cab, the driver appeared to be asleep. Just another victim of a never-ending campaign?
Scott Morrison would be largely unwelcome in both Flynn and Kooyong. But if he turns up in Little India, or Harris Park, in Sydney’s west, he might be seconded into the kitchen at eatery Mad Down Under.
Morrison would be mobbed in the bustle of Wigram St. His apparent friendship with Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi couples his social media proclivity for posting every Indian curry he makes. Yet the currents in this piece of Parramatta churn deeper. Many Indian-born Australian citizens were outraged when they could not return to their new country during the pandemic.
President of the Little India Harris Park Business Association Sanjay Deshwal said at the time that it was “not a good look for Australia”. Deshwal, a visa and migration consultant, moved here from the city to be closer to his clients. Half of Harris Park’s residents were born in India, as were three in 20 voters in wider Parramatta, which is a tangle of ethnicities and demographics.
Indian is the prevailing heritage in the seat, followed by Chinese, then Australian. As Deshwal says: “In the last 10 years, Parramatta has grown up after not growing at all in the previous 90 years.” Michael Thangavelu, owner of Momozz restaurant, cites the rising cost of living as a key issue. He buys his own produce – such as coriander and parsley – from a nearby market to shave costs. At 42, he spruiks the climate ideals of many younger voters in Kooyong.
But he agrees with Deshwal. The most pressing issues for the area are visas, migration and the labour shortage. Oddly, given the Indian community’s significance, neither major party has engaged on these matters, which Deshwal diplomatically describes as “disappointing”.
Steve Christou is an ex-local mayor and former ALP member. The son of Greek Cypriots is running for the seat as an independent. Miffed by the ALP’s captain’s call of running Andrew Charlton, a wealthy eastern suburbs economics consultant, he will channel his preferences away from the ALP.
The “wannabe westie” tag applied to Charlton appears not to have stuck. Yet Christou is right about one thing – voters everywhere vote for local reasons. They care most about the challenges outside the front door.
Vietnamese beautician Jenny Nguyen is between appointments. Her shop nestles in a corner of Parramatta Square and is captive to the din of worksite jackhammers.
She is a success story – a nurse who got two degrees and plans to build on a farm. Yet it hasn’t been easy. A shop closed due to Covid-19, and the hefty cost of child care is a burden for her 19-year-old daughter, Emily.
This is the lucky country, she says, but expresses a wider view that federal governments don’t help as much as they might.
“They promise you everything,” she says of campaigns, “but it never happens.” Emily is less jaded but more pointed. Unsure how to vote, she feels Australia has been internationally humiliated by its climate- change reticence.
A female construction worker has more pressing priorities than elections. “I haven’t really thought about it,” she says.
Other workers volunteer similar apathy. “We’re doomed at this election, we’re doomed at the next election,” says one. “Make money while you can.”
The men have knocked off. They start arriving after 4pm. The Horse and Jockey is a miners’ pub in Singleton, in the seat of Hunter. Behind the bar, barmaids Abbie Wood and Emily Caelli have an easy shorthand with the crowd. These workers, in their blackened orange uniforms, come here often.
Hunter has been a mining bolthole for more than a century. Men followed their fathers and grandfathers in their jobs and political persuasions. Hunter was steeped in blue-collar ideals and unionism. The last election changed that. The ALP’s city-centric derision for coal challenged the generations.
Retiring Labor MP Joel Fitzgibbon suffered a big swing against him in 2019, which he blamed on his party being “out of touch”. His ALP replacement is a “parachute” candidate. Dan Repacholi is a man mountain and a Commonwealth Games gold medal-winning shooter. He would never get elected in Kooyong or Parramatta. In social media posts, Repacholi has described India as a “s--thole”.
In Hunter, his “larrikin” excesses may count as an electoral plus, along with his declaration that he is “not a misogynistic prick”.
The pub happens to be owned by Dale McNamara, the local One Nation candidate who has mining interests. Late in the day, bar chatter turns to the election.
“A load of bulls--t.” “They can get f---ed.” Someone speaks of “slim pickings”; another man will vote only because he doesn’t want to be fined. Behind the bar, Emily and Abbie sensibly nominate their pub boss as the preferred choice.
The locals here have been swamped. Pauline Hanson popped up at the Horse and Jockey the week before, a hit for her easy manner.
Repacholi escorted party leaders to a bike shop in the main drag, Vincent St. He did not, however, visit the other bike shop, Bike Trax, owned and run by David Cannings, who feels a bit left out. He’s been here 20 years.
The frame of a Paralympics bike sits in the window. Out back, the creaky boards and jumbles of parts bow to the shop’s pre-World War I origins.
Cannings offers a take on the fossil fuel/renewable energy divide. “People are reluctant to change,” he says. “It scares them. For any one person, it is confusing and difficult to get your head around. Will there be legitimate jobs to replace coal? You’re not going to stop technology. But we’ll see with renewable energy whether it will be enough.” Basil watches his granddaughter, Esme, scoot in a carpark at Seaview High School. Up the street, you can gaze down on the sea and Adelaide’s CBD.
He is being asked about the school, as a polling booth, where the result has matched the winning federal party for the past six elections.
Basil is unaware of this. He does know that as an ALP supporter he has been trapped in a blue-blood Liberal seat for the past two decades.
Boothby takes in beachside Glenelg to the Adelaide Hills. Crooked political signage clumps street posts, though frontyards appear blessedly devoid of the clutter.
Boothby hosted a car-manufacturing plant, from Chrysler to Mitsubishi, which closed after four decades. The seat stayed Liberal – and politically boring – throughout this time.
Its significance has been rewritten for this election. It appears likely to swing left.
Call it the vibe, but Boothby voters collectively resurrect the 1972 ALP slogan: “It’s time.” No one seems to believe that the Coalition and Morrison can retain power. Even Liberal voters sigh with defeat. The numbers at Seaview High School on May 21 could tell the bigger story.
“As Paul Keating once said, we really are the arse end of the world,” Basil says. “Not anymore.” In nearby Braeside Ave, two neighbours spar good-naturedly. Sam Goodrich is 35, worried about climate change and unwilling to give a major party his vote. He derides Morrison’s demeanour and language.
The grandfather next door, distracted from sweeping the drive, won’t give his name but does say he has always voted Liberal. Fixing the climate will cost too much, he says. Albanese speaks in a tumble of cliches. Yet the two men agree on one thing – Morrison pongs.
Families, joggers and the odd busker blur at Glenelg jetty. Morrison has sipped coffee here. Albanese took off his tie for his campaign visit.
Brett Adams was glad to miss them. The commercial carpenter plays his sax on the promenade on Sundays. He needs prodding for political views.
“Politicians tend to do what’s popular, not what needs to be done,” he says. “I’m fed up with it.” Nearby, Kurt offers the most scathing assessment of Morrison heard in any seat. The Prime Minister has “eviscerated the economy”, shattered our “moral/ethical code” and cast the nation “as a fraud”, he says.
Teacher Kate McKenzie is kinder, arguing that Morrison has faced unprecedented challenges. No political response could satisfy all.
Setting up a Mother’s Day picnic in Mitcham Reserve, she then explains why she will vote for Labor. McKenzie identifies a shift cited by so many others in the electorate.
The Liberal Party, goes the theory, will lose Boothby for the first time since 1949. There is no such thing as a national swing, nothing uniform that applies to specific seats with particular concerns. But if the Coalition loses Boothby, it probably loses office.
Back in the Hunter Valley, winemaker Rod Kempe has finally collared Daisy the dog. Amid the wine barrels out back, he tries to describe his take on the upcoming election and alights on idealism and regret.
“The business of being a politician is what brings these people undone,” he decides.
“They all start off with great views and great reasons for getting involved. But then they get consumed by the machine. It’s a great shame.” In Biloela, baker Kev Spoor puts the election in context. It matters, but not as much as the politicians would have you believe.
“Whether it’s a Labor or Liberal victory, we’ll still have a bakery on the following Monday,” he says.
ELECTION 2022 LATEST UPDATES COURIERMAIL.COM.AU
CREDIT: PATRICK CARLYON SPECIAL REPORT
Word count: 3639
