We should be grateful for this relief, and ponder how misguided plans to close our own power stations, with no benefit to the world, will continue to affect our future competitiveness. Surely, a lesson learned from the pandemic is the need to keep them going, to produce real, unsubsidised electricity costs, increase reliability of supply, return manufacturing to this country and, with it, reduce the now revealed supply chain uncertainty. We have to look no further than the current European winter to see the problems engendered by closing down coal, and relying on renewables and Russian gas. The scientific and economic debate is buried under misguided climate catastrophism. Old King Coal is no longer a merry old soul, but his crown is yet to be removed.
Graham Pinn, Maroochydore, Qld
As we know, South Australia has the highest percentage of renewable energy in the country and the cheapest wholesale electricity prices, and the government is forecasting that this trend, already evident in every Australian state, will continue.
I am puzzled that so many correspondents to The Australian appear to see the trend to cheaper electricity as something that will put the economy at risk.
Barry Harrod, Fig Tree Pocket, Qld
Thank you for the excellent article on hydrogen as an energy source. It was good to see that the scientific elite has theoretical answers to many of the future problems. However, being in my cynical mid-80s, I am reminded of the fact that in the Middle Ages the scientific elite spent much of their time as alchemists trying to turn base metals into gold. One of their number who considered the theory good was Isaac Newton. I hope future science is better.
Bob Hailstones, Leumeah, NSW
Your editorial stresses the need to keep using coal to power industrial and societal advancement, and makes some telling points to support that proposition. However, this is a very dangerous path. I am not a climate scientist but an Earth scientist who has studied palaeoclimates. I know personally one well-known climate scientist, and am very familiar with the published work of several others.
They, thousands of other climate scientists, meteorologists, scientists in related fields, and fire and emergency chiefs know the world must wean itself off coal as quickly as technologically and economically possible.
Coal, the fuel of the first Industrial Revolution has had its day; it’s time to move on – and there is no time to lose.
Douglas Mackenzie, Deakin, ACT
So Roy Eccleston (“The Burning Question”, 18-19/12) writes “It takes nine litres of water to make one kilo of hydrogen”.
But the fresh drinkable water so used is then turned by electrolysis into an undrinkable alkaline solution.
We should not decompose water and render it undrinkable. But the purveyors of “green hydrogen” couldn’t care less about water. Green hydrogen means greenbacks. We must wake up and understand that nuclear power is the only sensible option to reduce emissions.
Ewan McLean, Beecroft, NSW
Four cogent letters, doubting the rosy future promised by renewable energy (Letters, 17/12) – however, no mention of nuclear! A viable option dismissed by its absence.
Nick Watling, Smithfield, Qld
It should by now be clear that the constant refrain of the inevitable decline of coal-fired power is not a description of reality at all but an earnest wish to transform reality in an activist direction.
This is having some success. Sections of banking and finance have without foundation reassessed coal-fired power as risky, thereby bringing about what activists assert has already happened.
PJ O’Halloran, Melbourne, Vic
Word count: 571
