Tasmanian Chamber of Commerce and Industry CEO Michael Bailey said it was heartening to see the company’s plans to upgrade its Hobart facilities.
The Mercury revealed on Monday Nyrstar had lodged a development application with the Glenorchy City Council to build a new electrolysis plant – said to be worth $350m – to secure its long-term future.
While Nyrstar has stressed the project is in its early days, the new plant would guarantee the jobs of hundreds of workers and contractors.
The electrolysis plant will be built next to the existing one and replace it once commissioned.
“It is obviously a shot in the arm to the Tasmanian economy when a long term player such as Nyrstar says it wants to upgrade its facilities because it means they are here to say,” Mr Bailey said.
The building of a new electrolysis plant at the Nyrstar Hobart site will increase traffic over the 18-month construction period.
But Tasmania’s environmental watchdog said the extra traffic movements would not hinder the flow of vehicles on Risdon Rd.
The Environmental Protection Authority also found site noise levels would stay the same in Lutana and actually go down in East Risdon once the new plant was commissioned.
“From a traffic engineering and road safety perspective, additional traffic generated from this project is not expected to create any adverse safety, amenity, or traffic efficiency problems, as there is sufficient capacity within the current road network to absorb it,” a traffic study found.
The proposed facility will produce up to 300,000 tonnes per annum of cathode zinc.
A copy of the permit application and all plans and other documentation submitted with the permit application (including the EIS) are available for public inspection at Glenorchy City Council Offices.
Federal independent MP for Clark Andrew Wilkie said it was “fabulous” to see the zinc works having a future in Hobart and equally pleasing Nyrstar understood the importance of bringing the community along with its plans.
“The community consultation process is crucial to help ensure that all reasonable concerns are addressed and to help build the strongest case possible for any state and federal government co-contributions that might occur,” Mr Wilkie said.
“I have already made the case to the Federal Government for some sort of assistance but at the same time have impressed upon the company the need to continue environmental remediation of the site.”
The EPA said it recommended the new spent cooling towers be monitored when operating to ensure that the acid mist control systems operated as specified.
“As the site currently meets its noise emission criteria, the criteria for the new cell house alone would then be to cause community noise levels less than the current cell house,” the EPA said.
The new cell house will only be visible from Delwood Drive, the EPA said.
First look at the Zinc Works’ $350m revamp
ZINC processor Nyrstar is planning to build a new electrolysis plant in Hobart – said to be worth $350m – which would secure its long-term future in the state.
The new plant would guarantee the jobs of hundreds of workers and contractors.
Nyrstar has submitted a planning application to the Glenorchy City Council and an environmental-impact statement to the Environment Protection Authority for assessment.
“This development is a significant improvement both socio-economically and environmentally, and demonstrates Nyrstar’s commitment to safe, sustainable and long-term production in Tasmania,” the EIS says.
Nyrstar stresses it is early days in planning for the new plant which would replace the more than 100-year-old cellhouse.
A Nyrstar Australia spokesman said the company had submitted a planning application “to allow early consultation and feedback from the community and stakeholders”.
“The project is at the feasibility stage and details in relation to potential approval, timing, cost and employment impacts are yet to be fully scoped,” he said.
Nyrstar Hobart, known affectionately as the Zinc Works, has employed thousands of Tasmanians and is one of the world’s largest zinc producers.
Zinc is used across the world in a range of products including renewable energy components.
“NH is proposing the replacement of its existing electrowinning cellhouse, parts of which have been in operation for over 100 years, with a contemporary cellhouse considered global best practice,” the EIS said.
“This proposal is an integral step in creating a sustainable future for the site.”
The benefits would include replacing the outdated cellhouse with “modern, efficient and effective technology that will provide improved safety and production, and reduced operating costs.”
State Growth Minister Roger Jaensch welcomed the proposal and said the government would continue to “engage closely” with Nyrstar on the project due to the smelter’s importance to the state.
“The project would secure the longevity of Nyrstar’s Hobart operations along with the employment and economic benefits for Tasmania that Nyrstar generates,” he said.
Labor leader Rebecca White said Nyrstar had been a major employer and contributor to the Tasmanian economy for over 100 years.
“Any proposed investment at the site will help to secure the plant for decades to come and the employment of over 500 direct workers and 150 contractors,” she said.
“If it goes ahead it will also strengthen the minerals processing hub between Nyrstar’s Hobart plant and Port Pirie and thereby ensure the domestic processing of ore from mines across Australia, including from Tasmania’s West Coast.
Glenorchy mayor Mayor Bec Thomas said the public could make submissions on the application until February 12.
“As this application is under consideration, it is not appropriate to comment on it at this time. The application will proceed through the assessment process,” she said.
Australian Manufacturing Workers Union secretary John Short said it would be a major investment for Nyrstar.
“Everyone agrees that the old cellhouse is past its best days and this will have new technology and processes which will make it more profitable and more efficient,” he said.
Tasmanian Minerals Council chief Ray Mostogl said there was a good market for zinc and the minerals sector in Tasmania was breaking export records every month.
Word count: 961
