The dual Brownlow medallist retired at the end of 2020 and has spent much of this year at home with wife Jordan and young son Levi.
The family welcomed daughter Grace earlier this month.
Ablett, who spoke to the Geelong Advertiser in his role as an RACV Solar spokesman, said he has always valued the importance of family.
The premiership player lives next door his mum Sue and said the pair were finding ways to be more environmentally conscious – including by switching to solar energy.
“I love nature – one of my passions is getting out hiking. I did a lot of hiking when I was up in the Gold Coast and found some great areas down here on the Surf Coast,” he said.
“I want to make sure our kids can grow up and enjoy that as well.
“I’m learning a lot more about renewable energy and why it’s important that we continue to educate people.
“We’ve still got a lot to learn but we are glad we can play a small part.”
Ablett, who famously moved to the Gold Coast in 2011, said being close to family was very important.
“As you get older you start to realise the things that are really important to you and family is something that’s important to me,” he said.
“It’s just really nice to be near to mum, especially with everything that has been going on over the last couple of years.”
Ablett said while he missed being a professional footballer he had “really enjoyed” his first year of retirement.
“I thought I would find the transition a little bit harder than I have.
“Obviously doing something for 19 years is a long time and over those 19 years I really invested a lot of my time and my energy into my football career.
“For me, I’ve really enjoyed the extra family time (and) I’ve been able to invest time into other things I love,” he said.
Ablett said he missed being around his “best mates every day” and having the structure of training.
But, he said he was still in touch with a lot of his former teammates and did not rule out a return to a football role in the future.
“I really do love the tactical side of the game … I’ve been asked the question – do I see myself getting into coaching or media or anything like that? And my honest answer is I’m not sure at this stage. If I miss it, maybe but I’m pretty happy where I am at the moment,” Ablett said.
He said he would be following his former side closely and was just a “phone call away” if any players needed advice or help.
As for his personal ambitions, Ablett hopes to spend 2022 enjoying nature and the great outdoors with his family.
“Jordi and I would love to do some travelling around Australia … we did hire a motorhome and were planning to travel the east coast, but that had to get put on hold with everything that’s going on,” he said.
“If borders open up Jordi and I would love to do some travelling with the family – but we’ll see what 2022 brings.”
Stay Informed Geelong Advertiser
Word count: 519
