The agreement, which will be signed today, will open up North Queensland as a crucial link in the hydrogen supply chain.
Origin announced in November it would export hydrogen from Townsville as part of a collaboration with Japan’s Kawasaki Heavy Industries.
Queensland government Hydrogen Champion Les Walker said the North was key to the state’s emerging hydrogen industry.
“Part of the reason Townsville was established was its capacity as a major port and supplier of the services needed for the North’s agricultural and resources industries,” he said.
MORE NEWS>>>
• Townsville PhD student Tayla Dahms puts her hair to good use as wigs
• Hannah Paige Hite: former soldier drunkenly groped four men
• Father-of-nine takes police on lengthy chase near Ayr
“Fast forward to today and this is a region that has the local skills, construction know-how and scientific expertise to put Queensland on the world map for hydrogen.”
General manager future fuels at Origin, Felicity Underhill, said Townsville was ideally placed to develop a liquid hydrogen facility due to the deepwater port, industrial-zoned land, skilled workers, nearby renewable energy and sustainable water resources.
“This is one of the most advanced commercial-scale green liquid hydrogen projects in the world, and we and our partners are looking forward to commencing front-end engineering and design this calendar year,” Ms Underhill said.
Hydrogen Development Assistant Minister Lance McCallum said the MOU would cement future opportunities for new jobs.
“Over the past 18 months Origin Energy and Japan’s Kawasaki Heavy Industries have been working on a 36,500Tpa export liquid hydrogen project,” he said. “Today’s MOU formally adds the Port of Townsville to this mix and confirms the essential role our proudly publicly owned ports will play in Queensland’s hydrogen journey.”
Port of Townsville chairwoman Renita Garard said the city was a world-class location for renewable hydrogen production with significant export potential to Asian markets.
“Global demand for hydrogen is gaining momentum every day,” she said.
This will be just one element of an emerging hydrogen industry in Townsville.
Solar developer Edify Energy has plans for a hydrogen electrolyser plant at the Lansdown Eco-Industrial Precinct.
Last year, the state government also announced plans for Sun Metals to build North Queensland’s first renewable hydrogen plant in Stuart.
Labor has also promised a new hydrogen training facility and advanced manufacturing skills laboratory.
Word count: 368
