Join us on The Australian Facebook Page for these live events.
Wednesday 2 June, 7pm AEST
Infrastructure: The changing infrastructure needs of Australia’s cities and regions in the wake of COVID.
Moderator: Cameron England, Senior Business editor, The Australian
Panellists:
Daniel Gannon, South Australian Executive Director, Property Council of Australia
Jacqui McGill, Non Executive Director, Fausimm
Jeremy Conway, Chief Executive, Infrastructure SA
Event Overview:
The central role of cities in our economic landscape, and how they will evolve into the future, has been fundamentally changed by the COVID-19 pandemic. With an infrastructure-driven recovery on the cards, coupled with rapidly changing working habits, how we plan our future infrastructure needs is more important than ever. Senior Business editor for The Australian, Cameron England hosts this exclusive panel to delve into how South Australia will be reshaped in coming years, what our priorities are, and what the city of the future will look like.
Wednesday 9 June, 7pm AEST
Defence: How can Australia become a global centre of cyber and defence technology? We speak to industry experts who are leading the way
Moderator: Brendan Nicholson, Executive editor, The Strategist
Panellists:
Richard Price, Chief Executive, Defence South Australia
Audra McCarthy, Chief Executive Officer, Defence Teaming Centre
John Davis, Chief Executive Officer, Naval Group Australia
Event Overview:
It’s not widely understood by most Australians but in the 1980s a miracle of sorts was pulled off in South Australia. An area of swampland was cleared to become the construction site for a fleet of six Collins Class submarines that are regarded by naval veterans as among the best conventionally powered submarines in the world. They’ve been upgraded in that yard and there’s more major work to come that will see them operating for decades in what’s likely to be tense regional environment. It’s a dramatic illustration of what can be achieved in SA and in Australia generally. Brendan Nicholson, Executive editor, The Strategist hosts this exclusive panel to explore how Australia can become a global centre of cyber and defence technology.
Wednesday 16 June, 7pm AEST
Renewable Energy: Securing Australia’s energy future - challenges and opportunities
Moderator: Perry Williams, Energy Reporter, The Australian
Panellists:
Dr Attilio Pigneri, Founder and CEO, The Hydrogen Utility
Megan Ward, State Leader South Australia and Western Australia, Neoen
Craig de Laine, Executive General Manager, Customer and Strategy, Australian Gas
Infrastructure Group
Event Overview:
Australia’s renewables boom could see 90 per cent of power demand met through clean energy by 2035. But the investment challenge is immense: up to 50 gigawatts of large-scale solar and wind will need to be added under the most aggressive plan to cut emissions, representing nearly all the current capacity of the national electricity market to be built in just two decades. Some $60bn of power generation investment is forecast by 2030 with two-thirds spent on new-build renewables, split evenly between wind and solar. But ensuring supplies are delivered is not straight forward. Massive investment in infrastructure will be required to smooth the transition away from coal along with firm generation to back up renewables. Boosting grid reliability and security must also be prioritised to ensure the lights stay on and prices remain affordable while green hydrogen will also compete for investment dollars. Perry Williams talks to three industry leaders about the power system of the future and how renewables can provide a cheap and low emissions pathway to a sustainable grid for South Australia and the nation.
Wednesday 30 June, 7pm AEST
Premium Food and Wine: The hospitality and tourism sectors were hit hard by Covid-19. How can these critical industries claw back profits and ensure a successful 2022?
Moderator: Nick Ryan, Wine Columnist, The Australian
Panellists:
Andrew Bullock, Chair, South Australian Tourism Commission
Ray Borda, Managing Director and Founder, Macro Group Australia
Kathy Drogemuller, Owner and Co-Founder, Paracombe Wines
Event Overview:
With international visitors locked out and locals locked down, Australia’s food, wine and tourism sectors have been rattled like never before. With these industries facing threats on multiple fronts- Covid fallout, labour shortages, trade war carnage and the uncertainty surrounding how we restore the lifestyles we once had- there’s never been a better time to take stock of where these vital cogs in our economy are placed. Join The Australian’s wine columnist, Nick Ryan, and a panel of experts in search of the green shoots and new horizons for Australian food, wine and tourism in 2022 and beyond.
Word count: 707
