The problem is they don’t work without subsidies, and they put people out of work. I have already written to my local state MP telling her that the NSW government’s plans along those lines are a vote-changer for me.
I am retired, but I will not stand by and see my children and grandchildren put out of work simply on the feel-good whim of inner-city pretenders.
Ron Owers, Mollymook, NSW
Prime Minister Morrison and Energy Minister Taylor are right to declare that zero emissions by 2050 is but an aspiration, and that its achievement will lie with science, engineering, technology and innovation, not with bland political declarations that are unlikely to be adhered to or even remembered, especially by the larger emitters.
The government has laid out five priority technologies towards reducing emissions; this is to be applauded. It is extraordinary, however, that not one of these five includes reliable, safe, proven nuclear power; this from a sovereign nation that is the world’s third largest exporter of uranium.
Today nuclear power provides over 10 per cent of the world’s electricity in 30 nations. France, with over 70 per cent nuclear electricity, is the world’s exemplar of affordable, reliable electricity and low emissions.
Of course renewables — solar and wind — must remain part of Australia’s future generation mix, but so too must nuclear.
The widely held view that renewables alone, supported by massively costly batteries and huge pumped hydro schemes — both electricity absorbers, not sources — can economically and reliably achieve zero emissions or freedom from unwanted wastes is unsupportable.
Why then is nuclear not part of Australia’s crucial low-emissions debate? Simply because it remains illegal under long-outdated federal and state legislation. Investor interest is thus still negligible. For Australia — with its world-respected nuclear science and technology organisation — to continue to ignore the potential of nuclear power, especially with the range of ultra-safe small modular reactors now entering the market, would be a very serious mistake.
Martin Thomas, retired engineer, St Ives, NSW
Jennie George is correct to be concerned about the welfare of mining workers. Eleven mining communities in Australia and some 100,000 mining workers (1 per cent of the national workforce) would be directly affected if our fossil-fuel industry collapsed.
However, these good people deserve honest answers about their job prospects. The thermal coal industry is already in terminal decline from lack of demand. Even our main fossil-fuel importers — China, Japan and South Korea — have net carbon zero emissions targets. The truth is that the world is surging ahead toward cleaner and less carbon-intensive economies. It is long past time that our workers and their communities were supported in their transition out of the declining fossil-fuel industry.
Ching Ang, Kensington Gardens, SA
The most interesting aspect of Jennie George’s article is its constructive criticism of the government’s road map towards carbon abatement. The PM’s strategy of basing a goal of net zero emissions almost wholly on hydrogen energy certainly deserves scrutiny.
Tesla electric car chief Elon Musk says the use of hydrogen in cars is “mind bogglingly stupid”; VW claims it is “nonsensical” and recently GM invested $2.3bn with LG in a new car-battery plant.
Whether or not hydrogen can ever replace coking coal in the steel blast furnace is uncertain, and whether or not electric arc furnaces, which use steel scrap eventually replace the blast furnace is also unclear. What is certain is that both possibilities require cheap and 24/7-reliable power.
As Ms George noted, renewables don’t cut it. South Australia’s biggest battery would run the Tomago aluminium smelter for a paltry 15 minutes. In short, the vital and necessary ingredient towards technological advancement — cheap and reliable electricity — is missing from the government’s road map.
Ron Hobba, Camberwell, Vic
Word count: 612
