The battery is anticipated to discharge up to 100 megawatts, store 150 megawatt hours of energy, and power 57,000 Australian homes.
Construction began in October after Doosan GridTech Australia was awarded the engineering, procurement and construction contracts.
“We are delighted to be delivering the first stage of Vena Energy’s Wandoan South Project in the Western Downs region of southwest Queensland,” Vena Energy Australia head Anil Nangia said.
“The Wandoan South BESS represents the first milestone of Vena Energy’s overarching Wandoan South Project, approved to generate up to 650MW of solar electricity, and 450MW of energy storage across several stages.”
Mr Nangia said regional resources would be put to use during the duration of the project and would encourage local employment and procurement opportunities.
The workforce is anticipated to be “70 strong” during peak construction.
Chronicle subscriber group
“We look forward to participating in the transition towards renewable energy in Queensland by delivering the Wandoan South BESS in the heart of the Western Downs,” Mr Nangia said.
“The BESS represents a step change in Queensland’s transition to a cleaner energy future and will lead the way for more investment in Queensland’s adoption of renewable energy.”
AGL chief operating officer Markus Brokhof said AGL was pleased that financial close has been achieved on this 100MW/ 150 MWh battery.
“As part of our agreement, AGL will have full operational dispatch rights once it begins operating in 2021, providing critical support to our growing portfolio of energy storage assets,” Mr Brokhof said.
“Grid-scale batteries like Wandoan South BESS allow AGL to leverage excess solar and wind generation in Queensland while providing capacity when renewable sources are not generating,” Mr Brokhof noted.
In Australia, Vena Energy is progressing over 2.5 gigawatts of renewable energy projects across the country. The Wandoan South BESS will be the first construction milestone of the Wandoan South Project. In 2019 Vena Energy successfully commissioned a 95MW solar project at Tailem Bend in South Australia, and Stage 2 of the Tailem Bend Project is anticipated to begin construction in the near future.
Word count: 329
