The Upper Spencer Gulf is "rapidly emerging" as the powerhouse of renewable energy in country South Australia with investments worth $1.75 billion.
Port Augusta, Port Pirie and Whyalla are close to some of what have been described as the "best and most diverse" renewable and low-carbon energy resources in the world.
The area features a range of technologies, including concentrated solar thermal, pumped hydro, solar photo-voltaic, big batteries, wind farms and hydrogen.
It is considered to be an "attractive location" for more investment and opens opportunities for infrastructure, jobs, research and testing new energy technology.
With the economic transformation of the Upper Spencer Gulf as a renewable energy hub well and truly underway, chairman of the Spencer Gulf Cities Association and Port Pirie Mayor Leon Stephens says the region has much to offer.
"We are proud to be home to a range of new and planned, innovative large-scale renewable energy initiatives that will help to secure the economic future of our region and energy security for the state," he said.
"The renewable energy projects we already know about in the region are just the tip of the iceberg.
"Planned multi-billion dollar investment in renewable energy across region provides a strong base from which we can continue to build on our comparative strengths, as we pursue opportunities that help us become cleaner, more innovative, liveable and economically-diverse regional cities."
Mr Stephens said that while the gulf has a competitive advantage for generating renewable energy, it is important that government energy policies provide stability and certainty for investment.
"We are one of the first regions in Australia to transition from coal to renewables. It has been an incredibly difficult journey and we are not over the line yet. We need to get the policy settings right," he said.
"The upper gulf will only benefit from investment and innovation in renewable energy if the region has the skills, infrastructure and technical support to service this fast-emerging sector.
"This includes building local capacity to innovate and upskill the workforce to participate in the renewable energy supply chain.
"We want to develop a really strong local workforce in this industry and gain the benefit of having the education, training and research opportunities also delivered locally, through initiatives like our Spencer Gulf Uni Hub.
"We continue to work closely with all levels of government, regional stakeholders and developers to ensure we have the right legislation, the right policy framework and the right attitude moving forward, so that we all win."
Energy and Mining Minister and Stuart MP Dan van Holst Pellekaan agreed that the "Upper Spencer Gulf region is rapidly transforming into a renewable energy zone of global significance."
"We now have $1.75 billion of renewable energy projects operational or under construction delivering cheaper, cleaner electricity to South Australians and thousands of local jobs," he said.
"The proposed South Australia-New South Wales interconnector will drive even greater investment in renewable energy in the region."
But Port Pirie-based Independent Frome MP Geoff Brock said that although the upper gulf is the "best location" for renewable energy, there needs to be a greater push for regional infrastructure investment.
"Once we get everything up and running and we have the battery storage, it is going to be the green renewable capital of the world in this part of Australia," he said.
"With that and with the battery storage that will come with those projects, it is going to be silly for industries not to consider coming to the upper gulf.
"There is lots of infrastructure in Adelaide, billions of dollars worth of projects, but very little in regional South Australia.
"South Australia has done extremely well with COVID-19 with the containment and adhering to the precautions, but we need to create more jobs and the best way to create more jobs is to create infrastructure.
"They talk about infrastructure having to be upgraded, because if you are going to be having opportunities coming down, whether it is the grain industry, resource industry ... they need to have the best infrastructure in place.
"But what we need is the duplication of the highway from Port Wakefield through to Port Augusta and that needs to start now.
"We need infrastructure in the uppezr gulf to be able to accommodate the extra growth opportunities and the potential."
CREDIT: Katrina Muhsin
Word count: 718
