Hitting jab target DEAR South Australia, my name is Kate and I’m one of your biggest fans. I may have packed my bags and left my home state for the bright lights of Melbourne eight years ago, but you’ll always have my heart.
So much so that my friends call me “SA Kate”, I get weird looks when I say Lego and I still confuse my beer sizes.
I’m a bit of an unofficial ambassador. I’ve converted many a Victorian into a South Australia groupie, only drink Barossa Valley shiraz and fiercely defend our great state.
But I have a bone to pick with you. You see, I’ve just had a baby and I want to bring her home to meet my family and friends. Premier Steven Marshall has said I can when you reach about an 80 per cent vaccination rate. But you may not make that target on the date set. And November 23 is all I can think about.
I want my daughter to have her first beach swim at Port Elliot, go for walks down King William Rd, and play with her cousins in Heywood Park like I did as a kid.
We’ve endured 18 months of broken dreams and heartache in Melbourne while I’ve looked on in envy at your freedom. I’ve cancelled my wedding three times, missed family celebrations and navigated early motherhood without having my mum by my side.
So now I ask you a favour. Please get your vaccination.
Do it for your hairdresser who hasn’t seen her grandkids in months. Do it for the tourism operator who is desperate for interstate business. Do it for your own health and safety. And do it for my daughter Matilda who is craving cuddles with her family – and a dose of South Aussie charm.
KATE TRESCOWTHICK, Alphington, Victoria Restricted entry ON Friday we arrived on a flight from Darwin at 8.15pm.
On arrival we were informed, after a 45-minute wait, the rules had changed mid flight.
We are now required to take a Covid-19 test three times.
And, if we had not been doubled vaccinated, we would have had to quarantine. Darwin had one case notified in Katherine at that point.
Was this an over-reaction by SA Health? Surely the people that boarded that flight deserved to have the status quo maintained at the time of departure.
The process at the airport was, in my opinion, slow and laborious. DAVID JAMIESON, Seaview Downs Relevance lost I HAVE a ready answer for Roger Bates, who asked why some former prime ministers just can’t let go (“Past glories”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
They suffer from the dreaded RDS virus – relevance deprivation syndrome. RORY DREDGE, Aldgate Transport options WOULD it not be better to provide a lot more public transport, and different means of transport, rather than relying on the car?
Instead of most buses passing through Adelaide, provide direct connection to other suburbs. An example would be connecting Mawson Lakes interchange to the Port Adelaide region by bus or train.
There could be a light-rail link from the Adelaide Hills area to Tonsley. And an express service from new, and future, suburbs.
We need farsighted visionaries to plan, allowing for expansion. The attitude of accepting what was good for my grandparents is OK, but this now needs to be adjusted.
STEWART MARTIN, Salisbury Coal prices rise THE price of coal has nearly tripled in China in 2021.
Some pensioners cannot afford to heat their homes. There are more than 150 million pensioners in China.
There may be big trouble ahead for China. There could be many deaths from freezing this winter.
MICHAEL PRUS, Fairview Park Powering on IT is hard to believe a South Australian can be as down on renewable energy as Chas Barter is (“Power base”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
In the past year, wind and solar have averaged a 62 per cent share of SA’s electricity generation.
The shift to renewables has been accompanied by lower prices and improved reliability.
Eminent economist Ross Garnaut explains how harnessing Australia’s abundant renewable-energy resources, given the plummeting costs of doing so, could make us a global renewable-energy super-power quite soon.
I recommend correspondents who disbelieve the remarkable transition occurring, especially here in SA, add his book Superpower to their Christmas reading list.
JIM ALLEN, Panorama Too many people DAVID Sherwen of Whyalla is 100 per cent right (“Twin causes”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
The climate-change issue can be summed up in two words: overpopulation and deforestation.
Of course overpopulation is the main problem on the planet. The trouble is none of our leaders dare say it.
There are too many people worldwide demanding too many resources. These people are one of the reasons we dig for coal and mine for minerals.
Too many people want too many products. And they all need raw materials and energy to make them.
Basically, I hold out little hope for the planet.
I feel sorry for the future of my grandchildren who will be having to live with the disasters that my generation has created.
Birth control would be a good start. I believe people with more than three children should feel embarrassed.
Yes, folks, I’ve said it. RICHARD HOUSE, OAM, Victor Harbor
Word count: 873
