Windfarm to provide renewable power
Olympic Dam plans to reduce its emission position to zero for 50 per cent of its electricity consumption by 2025 by partnering with Iberdrola at Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park.
Iberdrola Renewables Australia is one of the companies behind the delivery of the energy park in Port Augusta and is set to become Australia's biggest solar-wind hybrid plant when it commences operations in July 2022.
BHP is set to become the primary customer of the new renewable facility after the mining giant signed off on multiple renewable energy agreements in in Western Australia in 2021, Queensland in 2020 and in Chile in 2019.
BHP Olympic Dam Asset President, Jennifer Purdie said "these arrangements will support an exciting new renewable energy project which will contribute to South Australia's renewable energy ambitions."
"Olympic Dam's copper has an important role to play to support global decarbonisation and the energy transition as an essential product in electric vehicles and renewable infrastructure.
"Reducing emissions from our operations will further enhance our position as a sustainable copper producer."
South Australian Minister for Energy and Mining, Dan Van Holst Pellekaan said the State Government welcomed the arrangements, and is another step on South Australia's pathway to cleaner, cheaper electricity.
"The arrangements highlights the good sense of BHP, Iberdrola and other companies getting the generation mix right, including wind and solar farms, grid scale storage and fast start gas, to provide cleaner and more reliable electricity," he said.
Iberdrola Australia Chief Executive Officer Ross Rolfe is happy to be partnering with BHP to help them meet their decarbonisation and sustainability objectives.
"We worked very closely with BHP to design these bespoke renewable energy supply arrangements. Olympic Dam is to be the primary customer for the Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park, a demonstration of their commitment to local procurement and sustainable economic development," he said.
BHP has committed to reduce operational greenhouse gas emissions by at least 30 per cent by 2030.
CREDIT: Christian Cominos
Word count: 331
