Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk has refused calls to bring emissions down 50 per cent, compared with 2005 levels, within the next eight years, despite increased lobbying from conservationists.
It puts the Queensland government – which in 2017 set a target of 30 per cent by 2030 and for net-zero emissions by 2050 – ­behind NSW, Victoria, South Australia and the ACT, which have all committed to reducing emissions at least 45 per cent.
As of 2019, Queensland, which is reliant on coal for power generation and royalties, has only ­reduced emissions about 14 per cent on 2005 levels.
Ms Palaszczuk on Friday appeared to confuse the issue with her government’s 50 per cent ­renewable energy target when asked about the 2030 emissions reduction target.
On Monday, a spokesman said the government would not increase the state’s 2030 emissions reduction target, despite NSW and Victoria upping their targets in recent months.
“Queensland is well on its way to achieving net-zero emissions by 2050,” the spokesman said. “To date, more than 40 large scale wind and solar farms have been committed to, with nearly $10bn of investment and 7000 jobs.
“The recently announced $2bn Queensland Renewable ­Energy and Hydrogen Jobs Fund means that investment will continue.”
Tasmania’s emissions target is the nation’s most ambitious, with the state planning on reaching net-zero emissions by 2030.
NSW has a 50 per cent ­reduction target by 2030, Victoria 45-50 per cent, South Australia 50 per cent and the ACT 65-75 per cent below 1990 levels.
Queensland Conservation Council director Dave Copeman said the state government needed to be more ambitious in its ­reduction target.
“We are determined that they decrease their emissions over the next 10 years,” he said. “We want to see 100 per cent renewable ­energy by 2030 and energy is 45 per cent of emissions in Queensland.
“By that alone, they would get themselves close to 50 per cent emissions reduction.”
The Palaszczuk government on Monday released a technical paper giving details about its planned Renewable Energy Zones.
The government plans to create three zones in northern, central and southern Queensland to co-ordinate wind and solar projects and connect generators cost-effectively.
Mr Copeman said there was still not enough detail about the zones and the proposed transmission lines.
“We are pleased to see the quantification for the first time of up to 3.3 gigawatt capacity, which could be unlocked in the first stage of each of the three REZ ­regions,” he said.
“The early indications of how the Queensland government will manage access, declare REZ and create REZ management plans is also much needed.
“Unfortunately, the REZ technical paper still leaves Queensland at the back of the race. All other states within Australia’s National Electricity Market have set more ambitious and clearer renewable energy pathways than Queensland.”
Word count: 447
