LABOR has nominated the steel city of Whyalla as the site for its $593m hydrogen power station, arguing the government-owned and operated plant would drive new jobs and industry for the state.
In an election campaign switch from health to economic policy, Labor Leader Peter Malinauskas labelled the proposed power station a “significant asset for our state” that would generate more than 11,000 jobs by kickstarting renewable energy and hydrogen export industries.
Labor did not pinpoint a site within the upper Spencer Gulf city but said, if elected, an expert panel would report within 90 days on the most appropriate land parcel in the Whyalla or Port Bonython areas.
The Liberal government has claimed a costing error and says the Labor hydrogen plant would cost at least $1.07bn.
The state government last October short-listed seven hydrogen projects for Port Bonython that were acclaimed as making the state one of the world’s most significant producers of the clean-energy source.
Mr Malinauskas has billed the hydrogen jobs plan as a centrepiece of his economic strategy. The plan has three elements: a 200MW power station, hydrogen electrolysers with 250MWe capacity, and a hydrogen storage facility holding two months’ supply, or 3600 tonnes.
“This world-leading hydrogen power plant is part of my vision for South Australia’s future. This isn’t about the next election but the next generation,” Mr Malinauskas said.
“Whyalla is the perfect location for our hydrogen power station, given its prime location, proximity to key infrastructure and diverse skills base.
“South Australia already has a strong reputation for leading Australia and the world when it comes to renewable energy – and this is our next big leap forward.” Labor will rely on an “expert panel” from nine groups to pinpoint the site. The group would comprise the Barngarla people, Whyalla Council, Infrastructure SA, SA Water, SA Power Networks and the Environment Protection Authority, along with Energy and Mining and Infrastructure and Transport departments.
Factors for consideration would include capacity to connect to the national electricity grid, future export potential and existing or proposed private investment in green hydrogen and access to water.
Labor says the costs have been “independently assessed” by respected firm Frontier Economics but rival Liberal analysis, revealed by The Advertiser last September, finds the project would cost almost double the $593m predicted figure. Treasurer Rob Lucas accused Mr Malinauskas of a reckless spending spree.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 399
