$150m power project to employ 160 workers
A $150m battery storage project – the largest in South Australia to date – will be built in Adelaide’s north by Australian renewables company Maoneng after it secured state government approval.
The 225 megawatt Gould Creek project will employ 160 people during the construction phase and have the capacity to power up to 40,000 homes.
It will be built adjacent to the Para electricity substation in the Playford Council area, about 22km north of the Adelaide CBD.
Maoneng co-founder Morris Zhou said the battery would improve the stability of the electricity grid by drawing power during off-peak periods for storage, and dispatching it instantaneously during times of high demand.
“South Australia has high levels of renewable energy generation, which is a positive development but can create challenges balancing supply and demand due to the intermittency of renewables,” Mr Zhou said. “Our proposed battery storage will help manage this, supporting local energy reliability and security while also promoting greater uptake of renewables as a whole.” He said the project would provide opportunities for local businesses to get involved.
The land has already been secured for the project and the company is now forging ahead with further required studies.
Mr Zhou said the battery would make money by trading on the difference between the highs and lows in the energy price, while also providing frequency control for the network.
Maoneng currently owns two solar farms, including a 255MW facility near Balranald in NSW and the 13MW Mugga Lane facility in the ACT.
“We see a much bigger need for stand-alone energy storage,” Mr Zhou said. “We do have quite a significant pipeline … in total 915MW of power (including Gould Creek.” Maoneng has another five battery projects at various stages of development across Victoria and NSW.
Trade and Investment Minister Stephen Patterson said SA was now producing about 60 per cent of its energy capacity from renewable sources, which was helping to attract investment to the state.
“This is a significant investment by Maoneng Australia into South Australia’s continuing commitment towards a sustainable future,” Mr Patterson said.
“I’m delighted to see an Australian-owned company that is so committed to the development of projects that are critical for powering a sustainable world.” Work on the new battery project is expected to start in late 2022 and be completed a year later. Maoneng brings in equity partners on its projects, and Mr Zhou said the company aimed to be a long-term investor in the sector.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 422
