Australian and international investors are lining up to invest billions of dollars at Port Bonython, with the potential to develop a hydrogen hub attracting seven projects that could create hundreds of jobs in the Upper Spencer Gulf.
Premier Steven Marshall revealed on the weekend that the state government was negotiating investment with parties shortlisted from their Expressions of Interest process launched in May.
Mr Marshall said the level of investment would transform the Spencer Gulf into a "world class" renewable energy industrial precinct, and deliver regional jobs growth for "decades to come" in Whyalla, Port Augusta and Port Pirie.
"Together, the seven shortlisted projects could produce over one and a half million tonnes of hydrogen per annum, which would make South Australia one of the most significant producers of hydrogen in the world," he said.
Finalised arrangements with the investors are expected to be announced in the coming months, and will build towards the state government's ambitions of producing 500 per cent renewable energy by 2050.
State Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said a hydrogen hub at Port Bonython would allow the government to export hydrogen internationally.
"South Australia was once known for the challenges in adopting renewables, but in three short years the world now sees us as the success story," he said.
"Wholesale prices are some of the lowest in the country, we're the world leader in home batteries, and we're securely running on over 60% renewables."
Whyalla Mayor Clare McLaughlin said it was fantastic to see a strong response to the EOI for Port Bonython, with the interest pushing the steel city closer to realising its hydrogen potential.
"The use of hydrogen is also a significant focus for us as a council, as it will play a key role in transitioning our heavy industry to a low-carbon future, which will be essential for the long-term prosperity of our city and local environment," she said.
"We're therefore keen to work closely with all levels of government to deliver these significant developments as soon as possible.
"We believe the decarbonisation of heavy industry presents an exciting opportunity for Whyalla to diversify its economy and support the development of new technologies that will deliver significant economic benefit to state and the national GDP."
Port Bonython has ccess to multiple renewable energy zones and boasts over 2,000 hectares of available land, making it ideal for a hydrogen hub.
The site is already home to Santos' processing plant, which receives natural gas liquids and crude oil piped 659km from the Moomba plant for export, and a diesel fuel import and storage terminal.
CREDIT: Louis Mayfield
Word count: 434
