EXCLUSIVE AUSTRALIANS are more concerned about health than the environment, worry about rising Chinese power, and want to see more goods being manufactured here, a national survey reveals.
The survey of 4010 people for the Sunday Tasmanian has provided an insight into the pulse of the nation ahead of an election likely to take place between March and May next year.
It showed that while health was overwhelmingly the major concern for voters, hip-pocket concerns such as increasing the pension and lowering energy costs were also top-of-mind issues.
Supporting Australian-made manufacturing came in as the third most important issue, possibly reflecting increased Australian concerns about the need to rely on foreign countries for medical and other supplies including vaccines during the Covid-19 crisis.
The survey also showed that while voters were concerned about the environment, they were more interested in protecting natural habitats such as rivers and bushland than they were in transitioning to renewable energy.
Increasing renewables was ranked the 15th most important issue out of 63 voter issues, immediately followed by rising security and economic competition from China.
By comparison, protection of natural habitat such as rivers and bushland was ranked the sixth most important issue.
The survey by Ergo Strategy was conducted over two weeks in September, before the climate conference in Glasgow and while Sydney and Melbourne remained in Covid lockdown.
It showed expanding Medicare to cover more health services was the No.1 priority, followed by the provision of quality aged care, and supporting Australian manufacturing.
Support for mental health services was ranked fourth – and was particularly strong among young people in Victoria, the most locked-down state of Australia.
That was followed by job creation and lowering unemployment. Coalition voters were more interested in supporting Australian manufacturing, while Labor voters were more interested in increasing Medicare coverage.
Sarah Cameron, political scientist at the School of Social and Political Studies at the University of Sydney, said health and management of the economy consistently rated as top voter concerns at election time.
“Covid-19 has really increased the salience of health as an issue,’’ Dr Cameron said. “It has dominated the media for over a year and a half now, so you would expect health to be a higher priority than it would be in ordinary times.’’ Dr Cameron cited another data set, the Australian Election Study, which showed 10 per cent of voters rated the environment as their No.1 issue of concern at the 2016 election.
By 2019, that figure had risen to 21 per cent. She said younger voters – up to 50 per cent of them – rated environmental issues as their top concern, while older voters tended to be more concerned about health issues and management of the economy.
With both major parties talking extensively about environmental issues – mainly focused on renewable energies and transitioning away from fossil fuels – the Ergo Strategy survey showed that environmentally motivated voters, including those in marginal and swing seats, nominated the protection of natural habitats (forests, rivers and natural bushland) as their No.1 issue of concern, followed by better preparation and resources to fight bushfires.
Increasing renewables came third, while phasing out reliance on fossil fuels was the sixth most important issue for environmentally motivated voters.
The data shows those most interested in protecting the national environment were more likely to be aged 18-29 left-leaning female voters. Those most interested in renewable energy were also younger voters aged 18-29, left-leaning, likely to be living in a metropolitan area, and living in a double-income, no-children household.
While 34 per cent of voters interested in protecting natural habitats were in households earning more than $100,000, that rate was slightly higher for those most interested in renewable energy, where 37 per cent of people were in households earning more than $100,000.
While developing a nuclear power industry was of interest to environmentally motivated voters, it was still ranked only the ninth most important issue. But across all voters nationally, nuclear power barely ranked, coming in as one of the least most-important issues, at 58th.
Committing to net zero emissions by 2050 – a strongly debated policy issue in Canberra – was important to Greens voters but did not register strongly across the national survey results, coming in as the 39th most important issue.
When asked to rank global issues, the survey participants rated the need to protect Australia from growing Chinese security and economic competition as their No.1 issue of importance.
These voters tended to be aged over 50, retired and right-leaning. The voters’ second most-important global issue was a need for the federal government to take greater responsibility for quarantine – something state and territory leaders have been calling for during the Covid-19 pandemic.
The voters ranked reaching net zero emissions by 2050 their third most pressing global issue.
Coalition, undecided, marginal seat and swing seats voters all ranked China as their main global concern, while Labor voters ranked committing to net zero emissions as their most important global issue.
ellen.whinnett@news.com.au
10 MOST IMPORTANT ISSUES RANKED BY AUSTRALIAN VOTERS 1 MEDICARE COVERAGE Greater Medicare coverage for more health services such as dental and specialist care. Free or heavily subsidised health care was the No.1 area of concern for marginal, undecided and swinging voters, and for people intending to vote Labor. These voters tended to be middle-aged women, working part time or in home duties, and on lower incomes.
2 QUALITY AGED CARE Coalition voters ranked this their No.1 concern, possibly reflecting the Liberal-National voters’ older demographic. Voters in Queensland, Tasmania and South Australia also ranked it as their top priority.
3 SUPPORTING AUSTRALIAN-MADE MANUFACTURING A significant area of concern in the big manufacturing states on the eastern seaboard, this issue is a perennial election favourite, and gained traction last year when Australians had to rely on personal protective equipment and vaccines from overseas to fight Covid-19.
4 SUPPORT FOR MENTAL HEALTH Mental health support was ranked highly in South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania, which did not experience lengthy Covid-19 lockdowns. It was also a major concern in Victoria – where Melbourne endured the world’s longest lockdown – particularly among people aged 18-29.
5 JOB CREATION AND LOWER UNEMPLOYMENT A concern across all states except the Northern Territory where it did not make the top 10, the need to boost jobs was important to marginal seat and swinging voters, and was tied closely to increasing local manufacturing. Most voters believed job creation was a federal responsibility.
6 PROTECTION OF THE NATURAL HABITAT (FORESTS, RIVERS, NATURAL BUSHLAND) The No.1 environmental issue ranked by voters was not lowering emissions but instead protecting Australia’s natural habitat. It topped the list of concerns in the ACT but didn’t make the NT’s top 10. Environmental voters also rated it No.1, followed by better bushfire protection.
7 PROVIDING GREATER ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE FOR RURAL AND REGIONAL AUSTRALIANS Voters widely believed this was the responsibility of the federal government. It was of equal concern to swinging voters and those in marginal seats, and slightly more important to Coalition voters than Labor voters.
8 INCREASED PENSION AND WELFARE ALLOWANCE Of particular concern to Labor voters, those over 50 years and the retired or unemployed, this was also an important issue for swinging voters. People on incomes of less than $50,000 and families with school-aged children also rated this an important issue.
9 ENSURING BIG BUSINESS PAYS ITS FAIR SHARE An issue with particular resonance for marginal seat voters and swinging voters, it ranks highly alongside job creation and supporting Australian manufacturing. Labor voters were more likely to be concerned by it than Coalition voters.
10 LOWERING THE PRICE OF ENERGY (ELECTRICITY & GAS) Another hip-pocket issue reflecting concerns about the cost of living in Australia. High energy prices were of particular concern to Coalition voters, undecided voters and those in marginal seats. Economically motivated voters rated it the second-most important issue. Source: Ergo Strategy for News Corp Australia, September 10-23, 2021
CREDIT: ELLEN WHINNETT
Word count: 1330
