THE hydrogen industry in South Australia is gaining momentum, with a Japanese company to formally evaluate exports and a leading mining company backing seven innovative ideas for the gas.
Japanese company ENEOS will investigate exporting green hydrogen from South Australia in a deal with Neoen, the company building huge solar and wind projects in the Mid North.
Australia had “excellent potential for cost-competitive hydrogen production” from renewables, ENEOS said. And SA was at the forefront of renewables backed by batteries, creating a stable, reliable energy supply.
“SA is one of the most developed regions in the world in terms of battery infrastructure”, it said.
Neoen Australia managing director Louis de Sambucy, pictured, said the company had been “extensively investigating the potential for large-scale production of hydrogen in SA”.
With ENEOS, it would explore “a unique opportunity for export of SA’s world-class renewable energy resource in the near term”.
Addressing a Committee for Economic Development of Australia forum on Monday, Energy and Mining Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said the hydrogen industry “is not a dream, it’s real”.
“The drive is coming from countries which are not blessed with our enormous land mass, sun and wind,” he said.
Large industrialised countries looked to hydrogen to reduce carbon dioxide output and address climate change.
The CEDA forum heard that SA-based copper miner OZ Minerals has run a competitive project inviting innovators from around the world to submit ideas on hydrogen for the mining industry.
From 158 entries, OZ has selected seven projects from Australia, the UK, Canada and South Africa to support.
“We will come together over the next three to six months to undertake experiments, studies and collaborations,” OZ general manager Katie Hulmes said.
Ideas include hydrogen-powered drones and storage.
The federal government’s hydrogen strategy predicts the export market will be worth billions of dollars but transport and storage are key challenges.
ENEOS said it already had ocean-going tankers and storage tanks and gas infrastructure in Japan.
This would help “development of a new energy supply system while curbing new investment”, it said. Hydrogen made by electrolysis in SA, would be transformed into liquid methyl- cyclohexane for export, with the process reversed in Japan.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 367
