GLOBAL resources giant BHP will spearhead plans for a desalination plant in the upper Spencer Gulf to supply water to northern mines and slash extraction of millions of litres from the Great Artesian Basin.
The Olympic Dam operator and Adelaide-based OZ Minerals will prepare a business case for a desal plant and pipeline, backed by $15m in state and federal government funds, to deliver a secure and sustainable water supply for their northern SA mines.
Sustainable water for Olympic Dam, along with OZMin’s Prominent Hill and Carrapateena mines, has been pinpointed as a priority project by Infrastructure Australia to help triple the state’s copper production to 1m tonnes annually by 2030.
The proposed coastal desal plant and associated pipeline network also could be linked to green steel, hydrogen, renewable energy and intensive agriculture operations near Whyalla and Port Augusta.
If the project proceeds, it is forecast to support up to 8000 construction jobs and, when operating, to lead to up to 6000 jobs.
Steven Marshall, whose government will contribute $10m to the business case after inking a memorandum of understanding with the mining firms, said previous attempts to provide a sustainable water supply for the vast region had failed because they lacked a strong customer base.
“This project is a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to secure a brighter future for South Australia and create jobs in an environmentally sustainable way,” the Premier said.
BHP asset president Jennifer Purdie hailed a “positive step forward” to make Olympic Dam operations “more sustainable”, part of cutting water use across the company.
“South Australia has an important role to play in producing the high-quality copper the world needs to grow and decarbonise, and these types of projects can help us deliver more sustainably now and into the future,” she said.
Deputy Prime Minister Barnaby Joyce said $5m in federal funds would help kickstart the Far North’s economic potential. OZ Minerals managing director Andrew Cole, whose firm does not draw water from the Basin, backed the plan to cut Prominent Hill and Carrapateena’s consumption of hypersaline groundwater.
Finance Minister and SA Senator Simon Birmingham said the project would strengthen SA’s economic growth and world-leading clean energy sector, while reducing reliance on the Basin and River Murray. SA Chamber of Mines and Energy chief Rebecca Knol, whose group has championed the project, said sustainable water supply was key to unlocking mining activity in the Gawler Craton and Far North regions.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 406
