MILLIONS of Australians will pocket extra cash through fast-tracked tax cuts to be included in today’s federal budget, designed to catapult the country out of recession.
Workers will reap between $1080 and $2565 by the end of this financial year. Australia’s debt ceiling is expected to be lifted above $1.1 trillion as the Federal Government splashes more than $314bn on COVID-19 relief and recovery measures.
South Australia’s GST slice will take a hit following a national dip of more than $7bn in revenue from the tax.
CONTINUED PAGE 6 Tax cuts injecting cash into economy FROM PAGE 1 But SA will get a minimum $625m cash injection as part of a $7.5bn infrastructure package to turbocharge the construction sector and create trades jobs.
Millions of Australians will pocket between $1080 to $2565 in permanent tax cuts, which were originally scheduled for 2022, but are expected to be backdated to July 1 this year.
The measure is expected to inject $12 billion into the economy. The “Stage 2” tax cuts will lift the top threshold for the 19 per cent bracket from $37,000 to $45,000, and top threshold for the 32.5 per cent tax bracket from $90,000 to $120,000.
“Stage 3” tax cuts scheduled for 2024, which slash the middle tax bracket to 30 per cent and abolish the 37 per cent tax bracket, are also likely to be brought forward.
It comes top of a $158bn personal income tax package.
The budget is also expected to have extra money for older Australians, after the aged-care pension increase was frozen when inflation went backwards.
There may also be more tax relief for low-income workers.
A deficit of more than $210bn will be revealed, and the budget is not expected to be back in the black within the next four years.
The debt ceiling is set to be lifted above $1.1 trillion to cover the deficits and the country faces being in debt for up to 30 years.
The 6.8 per cent unemployment rate is predicted to rise higher before December – but not as high as 10 per cent.
Leading economists say the Budget will look to create about 450,000 jobs over the next year to counteract the JobKeeper wage subsidy tapering off and help Australians looking to return to the workforce amid a recession.
The budget will also show when Australia is likely to be out of its first recession in almost 30 years.
AMP Capital chief economist Shane Oliver said fast-tracked tax cuts would be a cash injection for the economy, given people were likely to spend some of the money and save some.
“The important one to bring forward is Stage 2, because that yields a greater proportion of benefits to lower and middle-income earners and, therefore, a greater proportion of it will be spent,” Dr Oliver said.
Finance Minister Mathias Cormann yesterday said it would be a “pro-growth, pro-jobs, pro-recovery budget”.
He was coy on whether tax cuts would be backdated to July 1, but said: “We have a track record of always looking for opportunities to lower the tax burden on hardworking families.” The minister defended the mega-spend and debt-ceiling hike, saying the pandemic was a “massive hit on our economy”.
“There was no alternative but for the government to step up,” he said. PAGE 19: VALDMAN’S VIEW
2020/21 FEDERAL BUDGET — WHAT WE KNOW SO FAR INFRASTRUCTURE ■ $7.5bn national boost for road and rail projects, including $625m for South Australia. That includes a $200m upgrade for Hahndorf and its access routes, and $100m for sealing more of the Strzelecki Track MANUFACTURING ■ $1.5bn package of grants to create new products and scale up businesses across six manufacturing priority areas: defence, space, food and beverage, medical products, resources technology and critical minerals processing, recycling and clean energy ENERGY AND . EMISSIONS ■ $1.6bn for Australian Renewable Energy Agency to invest over a decade, with expanded remit for technologies including hydrogen, carbon capture and storage ■ $52.9m for gas market intervention ahead of potential federal investment in new pipelines ■ $211m for domestic diesel storage facilities ■ $70m hydrogen export hub HIP-POCKET RELIEF ■ Income tax relief for workers as tax cuts legislated to begin in 2022 and 2024 are fast-tracked ■ Cash boost expected for pensioners after payment rate remained frozen in September because inflation went backwards ■ Tough lending rules wound back to reduce roadblocks for consumers wanting loans, credit from banks APPRENTICESHIPS ■ $1.2bn to deliver 50 per cent wage subsidy for 100,000 new apprentices and trainees BUSINESS SUPPORT ■ Expected incentives for employers to hire those on the dole ■ $800m package to support businesses to transition to digital technologies ■ New investment allowance expected for businesses ■ Major rewrite of insolvency laws to spare small businesses from expensive voluntary administration processes from which many do not recover FIRST HOME BUYERS ■ Extra 10,000 places in scheme allowing first home buyers purchasing new properties to get home loans with just a 5 per cent deposit REGIONS ■ $100m for regional recovery partnerships targeted at areas, including Kangaroo Island, hit hard by drought, bushfires and COVID-19 restrictions ■ $250m for regional tourism recovery initiative and the “building better regions” fund HEALTH ■ $2bn extension of telehealth system until the end of March ■ $10.6m to help move those aged under 45 out of residential aged care by 2022 STATE OF THE BUDGET ■ Record deficit expected to top $210bn as debt soars toward $1 trillion ■ Plans to pay down debt, deficit paused until unemployment rate falls well below 6 per cent
CREDIT: CLAIRE BICKERS
Word count: 933
