KEY green lobby groups have challenged the environmental credentials of the government following a raft of funding cuts in Thursday’s state budget.
The government slashed millions of dollars in solar schemes, electric vehicles, home battery projects as well as reducing city greening grants – 48 hours after declaring a “climate emergency”.
Conservation SA chief executive Craig Wilkins said he was “disappointed” in the loss of the Grid Scale Storage Scheme ($20m), the Home Battery Scheme ($19m) and a subsidy scheme for home electric vehicle smart charging ($11.2m).
He was also surprised to discover Greening Adelaide’s Heart ($10m) and Greener Neighbourhoods ($4.5m) had been axed.
Mr Wilkins said Adelaide’s tree canopy was declining, with almost 10 per cent of residential tree cover lost in a decade.
The goal under the 30-Year Plan For Adelaide, initiated when Labor was last in power, was an increase of 20 per cent by 2045.
“We know we need to rapidly increase green and tree canopy in Adelaide to prepare for global heating,” Mr Wilkins said.
“Trees are essential air conditioners for our city streets, and we are far from meeting our green canopy targets. Now is not the time to scrap programs that increase greening.” Local Government Association president Angela Evans said she was concerned about cuts to greening “as this won’t help achieve the state government’s own targets for increased tree canopy cover”. “Councils invest millions of dollars every year providing and maintaining trees in streets and public parks because we know increasing green cover is essential to liveability and responding to climate change,” she said.
“I will be seeking further engagement from the state government on this matter to continue important work on this objective, including through an independent review of planning legislation and the 30-Year Plan.” SolarQuotes founder Finn Peacock said he was surprised, disappointed and “really, really sad” about the loss of the renewable energy schemes because it was “such a destructive act”.
“It just feels like we’re back to the climate wars. These policies are being used as a big stick for partisan means,” he said. “South Australia is leading the world in battery installations and solar installations and what the industry craves and consumers crave is stability. To have these big shocks almost overnight to industry and to consumers, it’s really destructive. ” Opposition Leader David Speirs said: “It’s rank hypocrisy to declare a climate emergency only to then cut nearly $70m worth of practical environmental initiatives days later.” But Environment Minister Susan Close said the budget was “a win for climate change and nature”, with new funding election commitments more than compensating for cuts. “The Department for Environment and Water will be better off in operating budget initiatives by $27m over the next four years,” she said.
CREDIT: CLARE PEDDIE
Word count: 462
