$37m Bonython jetty upgrade
South Australia's intention to create a green hydrogen export industry has taken a big step forward, with the launch of a world-leading $240 million hydrogen project at Port Bonython - near Point Lowly.
The project would be the largest green ammonia plant in the world, being sixty times larger than Australia's largest electrolyser at Tonsley in Adelaide.
The state government is allocating $37 million in the upcoming budget to upgrade the Port Bonython jetty as part of the ambitious plan to become and exporter of green energy to world markets.
Premier Steven Marshall said upgrading the jetty will unlock significant investment and export opportunities for South Australia, with hydrogen driving renewed interest in Port Bonython.
"South Australia's ambition to create, use and export green hydrogen is getting global attention, and has great potential to create jobs and sustain long-term investment," the Premier said.
"Maintaining this critical piece of infrastructure will unlock further export opportunities in key markets, particularly across Asia, boosting economic activity and creating jobs in our state.
Mr Marshall said the government has been working to assist the Australian company behind the project, H2U, to establish connections with potential international customers.
"The $240 million demonstrator phase of the project is of global significance, but it is just the precursor to a much larger production and export facility, that could see us also strengthen our energy ties with traditional trading partners."
The initial stage of the $240 million H2U Eyre Peninsula Gateway Hydrogen Project will see the installation of a 75MW electrolyser near Whyalla, capable of producing enough hydrogen to create 40,000 tonnes of ammonia each year.
This would be the largest green ammonia plant in the world and is targeting completion in late 2022.
State Energy Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan congratulated H2U on the project and committed to helping fast-track its development. "Our intention of net-100% renewable energy generation by 2030 will produce some of the most cost-effective green hydrogen in the world," he said. H2U CEO Dr. Attilio Pigneri said the project will offer the opportunity to export South Australia's abundant solar and wind resources.
CREDIT: Amy Green
Word count: 356
