Australia's uptake of household battery systems rose 20 per cent last year despite the economic downturn, in the latest sign the transition from fossil fuels in favour of renewable energy is gathering speed.
Defying predictions of a pandemic-led slump, installers have reported 31,000 new batteries across Australia for 2020, taking the nation's total number of small-scale batteries that store power from solar panels and utility-scale "big" batteries to 110,000.
"It was a surprisingly good year for battery installations in Australia," said Warwick Johnston of consultancy SunWiz, which provided the market analysis to the Herald.
"Home battery systems proved particularly popular in South Australia where there is such high demand from homeowners that the state government had to reduce its subsidy in order to avoid overheating the market."
South Australia had 26 per cent of all installations in 2020. Victoria (25 per cent) and NSW (24.7 per cent) trailed closely behind.
"In Victoria, the popularity of solar batteries for homes was so high the state government subsidy allocations were exhausted within minutes of each release - a situation only remedied when the government directed some COVID stimulus funding towards the sector," Mr Johnston said.
Australia has one of the highest rooftop solar penetration rates in the world. Domestic-scale solar grew 30 per cent nationally last year , adding 3.5 gigawatts, with the number of rooftop panels now surpassing 2.5 million.
After facing an initial collapse in solar panel and battery sales at the onset of the COVID-19 crisis, the nation's top power providers and installers were confident the decline would be short-lived as customers spent more time at home and looked for ways to keep a lid on rising residential energy bills.
"It makes complete sense," said John Grimes, chief executive of the Clean Energy Council, representing 1000 renewable energy and battery companies. "People are working from home so they are very conscious of power bills, but they have also got more time to actually research the technology."
Nick Toscano
CREDIT: Nick Toscano
Word count: 332
