With only four weeks until the UN's climate summit in Glasgow, it is too late for the Australian government by itself to provide a comprehensive, well-considered plan that will guide Australia effectively to net zero emissions of greenhouse gases by 2050. A plan cobbled together from a compromise between the parties within the Coalition is unlikely to receive the widespread support and commitment necessary for success.
Why not also bring together, and fully reflect, the work of the states, territories, local governments and private sectors? Already, all the state governments, from both sides of politics, as well as the capital cities, many other local governments and many private organisations are committed to the 2050 goal, and Tasmania is already there.
As practised in Canada, the role of the national government would be to support the states, assist collaboration and represent Australia internationally. Such an inclusive submission could save Australia from humiliation in Glasgow.
Graham Hunter, Canterbury
South Australia should be congratulated ...
Thank you to Peter Hartcher for painting a clear picture of a successful transition to renewable energy ("PM powers down, world fires up", Comment, 2/10). Steven Marshall's South Australian government should be congratulated for its forethought and ambition towards a sustainable future.
Humanity struggles with change. A clear and positive vision, however, can provide the necessary encouragement to assist the process. In addition to the obvious and significant environmental benefits, Hartcher has used the South Australian example to outline the economic benefits a renewables boom provides.
The Morrison government has a month left before the Glasgow COP26 conference to come up with a credible plan for climate action this decade. I remain hopeful that a positive vision can tip the balance away from excuses and towards a brave and opportunistic new world. Can they do it?
Amy Hiller, Kew
... but the previous government also deserves credit
Peter Hartcher has now put South Australia at the forefront, however, I do take issue with Hartcher in not giving sufficient credit to the previous Labor government under the leadership of Jay Weatherill, when he says that government "lacked competence" with the management of the grid's transition from carbon-based power to solar and wind.
During Weatherill's tenure, there was the big battery installation at Hornsdale and significant wind farm installations in the mid-north of the state. And let's not forget his role in saving the Whyalla steelworks, which included the use of renewable energy.
The present government is now riding on the back of these initiatives, so credit should be given to some forward thinking by the Labor government.
Bruce MacKenzie, South Kingsville
It's time to be part of the solution
Barnaby Joyce is effectively still sitting on his hands waiting for the Prime Minister to produce a fully costed climate plan for his consideration. Instead, he and his (admittedly dysfunctional) Nationals colleagues should be producing their own blueprint.
This would of course quantify the costs to his constituents of past and future climate-affected droughts, bushfires and floods and the jobs that are at risk to rural and mining communities as the world demand for our fossil fuels collapses.
His plan would then spell out the environmentally sensitive farming practices that could be practised (and funded if need be) and the new industries and jobs from renewables and related industries that will protect and transform rural communities.
Mr Joyce, stop being the problem and be part of the solution.
Peter Thomson, Brunswick
CREDIT:
Word count: 572
