The renewable energy sector was put in the spotlight late last week when delegates from across the country and overseas came together for a workshop during the ICID International Congress and Irrigation Australia Conference.
Hosted at the Adelaide Convention Centre, the event had a number of topics covered, with renewables just a small slice of the offering.
The workshop, hosted by chair Karin Stark, had presentations from industry professionals across all sectors including researchers, government and farmers.
"I think people really enjoyed the diversity of topics that were covered, with everything from EVs or solar pumping to hydrogen to batteries to agrivoltaics," she said.
"The feedback we got was it really opened their eyes to what they should be looking at and some of the work that's been going on in this area."
One of the key projects presented on the day was research from the University of NSW on the possibilities and challenges of on-farm ammonia production.
Spearheaded by Emma Lovell and Ali Jalili, the research delves into how ammonia can be created using renewable energy, resulting in a more sustainable and cost-effective way to make fertiliser.
"Ammonia is the second largest chemical produced worldwide and it's purely dependent on petroleum natural gas," Dr Jalili said.
"For that reason, it makes a huge amount of carbon dioxide. Also, because it depends on petroleum or natural gas it's not sustainable, so at some point we need to find another way."
Dr Jalili said the research had many trials and errors before it was successful.
At its present state, the project requires a combination of plasma and electrochemistry to create nitrogen rather than petroleum gas.
"Because it only requires electricity to run, which can be found through renewables like solar, it can be easily decentralised and created on-farm or in less populated areas," Dr Jalili said.
"Right now, we're refining the technology with students working on different components of the research while myself and Emma are looking at creating a patent and getting investors involved.
"If we're successful, we could have technology available in less than five years that is cheaper across all levels and produced in Australia so we won't be so harshly impacted by geopolitical issues."
With so much technology on the horizon, Ms Stark said the next step was further research and funding.
"There needs to be more funding put into research and development," she said.
"But there also needs to be more collaboration between scientists, researchers and governments and industry and farmers so the needs of farmers are better understood and they're involved in the development of new products and services so they meet the needs of their farm operation.
Although renewable energy is part of the ever-evolving agricultural sector according to Ms Stark, it does not come without its challenges, which she has experienced firsthand.
"On our farm (Narromine, NSW), we put in the country's largest solar diesel irrigation pump in 2018," she said. "During the drought, and for the first year, it performed really well.
"It had a five year payback - we saved $180,000 worth of diesel and 500 tons of emissions.
"But we've actually had a lot of problems with that since the first year because it's been more cloudy and there's issues with blending solar and diesel when there's sudden cloud events.
"So we unfortunately haven't been able to use that pump to its full extent.
"There's still a lot to learn for industry and for farmers in these new technologies and it's important for people like us, early adopters, to share those insights, learnings and challenges."
CREDIT: Katie Jackson
Word count: 598
