TransGrid’s chief executive Paul Italiano has resigned just months after the NSW electricity transmission giant sanctioned one of Australia’s largest energy infrastructure projects.
The power distributer said Mr Italiano would step down on July 31, with a global search for a new boss under way ahead of the company building the $2.2bn, 900km EnergyConnect power cable that got the go-ahead in May.
TransGrid’s executive general manager, Brian Salter, was named acting CEO. Mr Salter was dismissed from AMP in 2018 amid fallout from the fee-for-no-service scandal and joined TransGrid the following year.
While no reason was given by TransGrid for Mr Italiano’s exit, he is understood to have flagged he would move on once the EnergyConnect deal was completed.
“After more than five years at TransGrid and over 10 years at the helm of regulated network businesses, I found myself increasingly considering what my next career challenge might look like and where it may be,” Mr Italiano said in a staff email.
“Given the critical nature of a number of strategic transactions underway, including the regulatory reset, HumeLink development and the delivery of major projects, it is only fair that TransGrid has the opportunity to progress these with executive leadership that will see these initiatives through to completion. Consequently, I have tendered my resignation to the board effective from July 31.” Mr Italiano previously led Western Australia’s electricity network Western Power for four years and has held roles at Wesfarmers, HBF Health and EY.
His imminent departure adds to a raft of CEO exits from the nation’s big electricity companies so far this year, with AGL Energy boss Brett Redman unexpectedly quitting, EnergyAustralia’s Cath Tanna departing and the head of Queensland’s largest power ­company resigning in a coal row.
The Australian Energy Market Operator also has a new boss in Daniel Westerman, who ruffled feathers after setting a target for the electricity grid to be able to handle 100 per cent solar and wind penetration by 2025.
TransGrid is owned by a consortium of Spark Infrastructure, Utilities Trust of Australia, Canada’s CDPQ, Tawreed Investments and pension giant Omers. The group bought the poles and wires company from the NSW government for $10.3bn in November 2015.
Spark, which owns 15 per cent of TransGrid, recently rejected a $5bn takeover bid from KKR and superannuation player Ontario Teachers’ Pension Plan Board The company in May approved EnergyConnect to transmit renewable energy between NSW and South Australia, despite flagging concerns over difficulties sealing long-term financing.
EnergyConnect is seen as a critical link for NSW when old coal plants in the state retire, by allowing cheap renewables to be imported from South Australia, avoiding big jumps in wholesale electricity prices.
The company is also moving ahead with plans to deliver 10 gigawatts of renewable power after splitting off its commercial arm and accelerating a shift to cleaner energy and lower emissions.
The new business, called Lumea, will build the infrastructure and electricity connections required for a flood of solar and wind in Australia as the power grid moves away from coal to a system of renewables backed by fast-start generation, including pumped hydro, gas and batteries.
About 4500 megawatts of renewable energy is being produced in NSW and Victoria, with the same amount under construction. Lumea expects supplies to be developed over the next four to five years as the power system speeds up its transition, driven by cheap supplies of solar and wind. TransGrid operates the major power network in NSW and ACT, connecting generators, distributors and supplying power to three million households and businesses.
CREDIT: Perry Williams
Word count: 596
