ANDY PARK, REPORTER: The transition towards renewables is now happening at lightning speed. Australia has one of the highest & fastest take-ups of solar panels in the world.
ANGUS TAYLOR, FEDERAL ENERGY MINISTER: This is a time of great change in our energy system, as it is in energy systems all around the world.
ANDY PARK: But there are high-level concerns that the renewable energy revolution could affect the very stability of the power grid we depend on.
KERRY SCHOTT, ENERGY SECURITY BOARD: The big problem in electricity at the moment, we note, is not having dispatchable power - it's having system stability.
The pace of change is very rapid, much more rapid than people realise or, indeed, anticipated.
ANDY PARK: Across the country, that rapid change has sparked a race to build batteries to store renewable energy but the kind of batteries we're talking about, grid-scale batteries to power Australian homes & businesses, are the largest-ever conceived.
In fact, currently, one battery in the works will be 566 million times larger than the kinds of batteries we're used to, in a race to see who can build the biggest.
Built in response to the nation's first state-wide blackout, the Tesla battery in South Australia is the biggest in the country - for now.
KERRY SCHOTT: The Hornsdale battery in South Australia provides two really important services.
One is a ramping service. So when solar or wind suddenly stops, it can come on & the other service it provides is to maintain frequency. Their role is not so much in providing energy for days on end, which they can't do, it's to be able to come on very quickly.
ANDY PARK: Now the competition is hotting up on the eastern seaboard with a new 500 megawatt battery projected announced by French firm, Neoen, at Wallerawang near Lithgow. Origin Energy have ambitious plans for a 700 megawatts at Australia's largest coal-fired station at Eraring, & AGL is pushing ahead with 1000 megawatts distributed across several sites including the coal-fired Liddell Power Station due to be shuttered by 2022.
REPORTER (Archival footage): When complete the Liddell Power Station will use six million tonnes of coal a year.
ANGUS TAYLOR: What we need here is a balance in the grid, a balance between different types of technology, a balance between intermittent energy & dispatchable energy.
ANDY PARK: Last year, the Federal Government said it would build a 1000 megawatt gas-fired power station on the site if the market couldn't guaranteed a stable power supply.
ANGUS TAYLOR: We welcome all announcements to support dispatchable generation going into the grid & that includes batteries, it includes pumped hydro, gas.
There is a range of dispatchable technologies that are being invested in across the grid.
ANDY PARK: While the Queensland branch of his coalition partner continues to push for new coal-fired generators, Energy Minister, Angus Taylor says batteries alone can't provide the energy needed for heavy industry.
ANGUS TAYLOR: But that is a long way from providing long duration storage that is storage that can provide a supply over an extended period of time if there is a wind drought or if there is a period with little sun, & to put that in perspective, the Hornsdale battery, the biggest battery in Australia, can only keep the Tomago smelter going for less than 15 minutes.
MATT KEAN, NSW ENERGY MINISTER: The number one complaint I get from business & industry is that there is a lack of certainty because of the policy settings across the country.
ANDY PARK: The New South Wales Government, which has pledged to reach zero emissions by 2050 sees batteries playing an increasing role in grid stability.
MATT KEAN: New South Wales was one of the first states in the country to adopt a net zero emissions target.
We also are responding to the challenges that we face in our system. New South Wales, over the next 15 years, will see four of its existing coal-fired power stations come to the end of their technical lives, & our road map is all about ensuring that those existing power stations are replaced before they're closed to ensure that we don't see price spikes & blackouts as a result of not having a policy in place.
ANGUS TAYLOR: It does mean states & territories need to ensure there is the right balance in their systems. That hasn't been always the case in the past.
We saw in South Australia a loss of balance & in the process, a loss of affordability & reliability & that means the 2025 market design, which we're working on now, this year, will need to ensure that we are maintaining that balance in the system.
ANDY PARK: Kerry Schott, the independent chair for the Energy Security Board, will soon outline market design recommendations to help achieve that balance in the National Energy Market or NEM.
KERRY SCHOTT: So you need batteries in particular locations & some locations are definitely more favourable.
Where Origin & AGL have decided to locate their batteries is good because there is a lot of transmission there that currently is serving coal-fired generation.
ANGUS TAYLOR: The 2025 market design is absolutely crucial to the longer-term operation of the electricity market.
It is all about making sure that we have enough coordination between the states.
ANDY PARK: That coordination might be easier said than done.
TONY WOOD, GRATTAN INSTITUE: When you've got governments that have got fundamentally different objectives, you'll get some tension emerging even between a Liberal government in New South Wales & a Liberal government in Canberra.
It doesn't work to have uncoordinated, unpredictable interventions by various governments because if you want to find a way to absolutely deter good investment, that's the perfect way to do it.
ANDY PARK: The race to build Australia's biggest battery & to get renewables on line in this country whilst keeping the grid stable comes as the new US President re-joins the Paris agreement.
Now, just how that huge shift in global climate policy could be felt here in Australia ahead of a possible spring federal election campaign & our attendance at the next UN climate change conference in November means energy market regulators could be facing an even more delicate balancing act.
KERRY SCHOTT: Some people want us to go much faster, some people want us to go much slower & are still in the dinosaur age. We have really got to adapt quickly.
Word count: 1078
