With his Defence Minister hospitalised amid Parliament rape allegations, Scott Morrison says he’s been ‘totally open’ with parliament about the matter.
Former staffer Brittany Higgins has sent her best wishes to Defence MinisterLinda Reynolds who has been admitted to Canberra Hospital as a precaution for a pre-existing heart condition.
Craig Kelly has announced that he will be running as an independent at the next election, rebuffing questions about whether he will join the national party.
Rhiannon Down11pm: Thailand to scrap quarantine for tourists
Thailand may scrap quarantine requirements for foreign tourists who have been vaccinated against COVID-19, in a bid to revive the country’s tourism industry.
Prime Minister Prayut Chan-o-cha saidthe government was considering allowing visitors who can produce a certificate proving they have received the jab to skip two weeks in hotel quarantine, according to The Bangkok Post.
Thailand has also been trailing a program allowing international golfers to enter the country, with 40 South Korean tourists undergoing quarantine.
It comes as the southeast asian country received its first doses of the COVID-19 vaccine, after 200,000 doses of Sinovac Biotech’s CoronaVac arrived on Wednesday.
The Prime minister is expected to be among the first to receive the vaccine this weekend, along with medical workers.
READ MORE:Anti-vaxxers wage election crusade
Rosie Lewis, Ben Packham10.25pm: Doubts over Reynolds’ return to frontline
Government MPs and industry figures are questioning the future of Linda Reynolds as Defence Minister after she was admitted to hospital following increased pressure over her handling of the ­alleged rape of former staffer Brittany Higgins in her office.
Scott Morrison is standing by his embattled minister, who went to hospital on Wednesday as a “precautionary measure” after the stress of the past week exacerbated an existing medical condition relating to her heart. She remained in hospital overnight.
While government sources stressed the Prime Minister was not considering a reshuffle and expected Senator Reynolds would be back at work soon, some Coalition MPs said her position was becoming increasingly ­untenable given the importance and sensitivity of the defence portfolio.
FULL STORY
Paul Garvey9.50pm: ‘WA Inc’ Burke’s donations tip for McGowan
Brian Burke — the once wildly popular West Australian premier who led the state through the heady 1980s, only to end up jailed in the fallout from the WA Inc era — has warned the McGowan government to take action over the perceived influence of property developers.
Premier Mark McGowan has overtaken Mr Burke to set a high-water mark for electoral popularity, recording an approval rating of 94 per cent last year, and is on track to lead Labor to an unprecedented landslide at next month’s state election.
But while there is no suggestion Mr McGowan has ever acted inappropriately like Mr Burke, the two have more in common than just their astounding levels of popularity. The McGowan government’s links with parts of the business community and a string of deals that have benefited prominent business figures have increasingly prompted comparisons to WA Inc.
FULL STORY
Adeshola Ore9.10pm: Husar gives Labor leader a lash
Former Labor MP Emma Husar has called for Anthony Albanese to act on the “poor treatment of women” in the opposition after the rape allegation that has rocked the Coalition.
Ms Husar said Labor’s handling of the workplace conduct ­allegations she faced revealed the culture of silence towards the treatment of women was endemic in federal parliament and a problem across the political spectrum.
Ms Husar left parliament after one term in 2019 after she faced allegations of staff bullying and was disendorsed by the NSW Labor Party.
FULL STORY
Stephen Lunn 8.25pm:Winter influenza deaths fell to just two
Just two people in Australia died from influenza between late April and November last year, and the overall number of recorded deaths across the country was significantly lower in 2020 than in ­recent years.
The fall was driven by fewer ­fatalities from respiratory diseases, including pneumonia and influenza, new Australian Bureau of Statistics data reveals, and comes despite almost 1000 Australians dying from COVID-19 in the same period.
High levels of social distancing, greater attention to hygiene measures such as hand washing during the lockdown and a strong take up of the flu vaccination were also responsible for the decline.
FULL STORY
Will Glasgow7.55pm: Five Eyes ‘an axis of white supremacy’
China’s state-sanctioned media has accused Australia, Canada, Britain and the US of being members of an “axis of white ­supremacy”, as Beijing steps up its rhetorical attack on members of the Five Eyes intelligence network.
A provocative editorial by the nationalistic Global Times — headlined “Five Eyes today’s axis of white supremacy” — said Canada, Britain and Australia were taking co-ordinated action against China. “They have formed a US-centred, racist, and mafia-styled community, wilfully and arrogantly provoking China and trying to consolidate their hegemony as all gangsters do,” the tabloid wrote.
“They are becoming a racist axis aimed at stifling the development rights of 1.4 billion Chinese.”
The editorial was published hours after Chinese Foreign Minister Wang Yi defended China’s hardline approach in Xinjiang at the UN Human Rights Council and said that talk of human rights should focus more on economic development.
FULL STORY
Rhiannon Down7.25pm:NSW boosts restrictions on NZ
Travellers from New Zealand who have visited Auckland will be required to quarantine upon arrival in NSW, as authorities upgrade the country to hotspot status.
All travellers who have arrived from New Zealand since last Saturday, February 20, have been asked to get tested and self-isolate until they receive a negative result.
NZ recorded three new cases of COVID-19 on Tuesday in siblings linked to the Papatoetoe High School, in Auckland’s south, placing a number of venues including Kmart in Botany on high alert.
Travellers are being asked to check if they attended any of the venues of concern.
READ MORE:CBD under strain as workers return
Greg Brown 6.50pm:Media code passes Senate
The Morrison government’s amended news media bargaining code has passed the Senate.
The amended legislation passed through the upper house of parliament with the support of Labor.
It is likely to go to a vote in the House of Representatives on Thursday and become law.
READ MORE:China’s reckless labs put the world at risk
Charlie Peel6.15pm:Queensland’s ultimatum over $30m NSW quarantine bill
The New South Wales government has sent Queensland a bill for $30m to pay for hotel quarantine services sustained last year, but the deputy premier says it will not be paid until the Morrison government endorses the proposed quarantine facility at Wellcamp Airport.
Tabling a tax invoice for $30m in Queensland parliament on Wednesday morning, Steven Miles accused Scott Morrison of being a “bully” for supposedly giving permission to NSW to issue the bill.
The bill was incurred between March and October when 7112 Queensland residents returning from overseas quarantined in NSW.
“I am outraged to table an invoice from the New South Wales government for $30 million to pay for its hotel quarantine,” Mr Miles said.
“Scott Morrison is like a school bully telling us we have to give our lunch money to New South Wales.
“I can advise the House that we will not be paying that bill, not while the Commonwealth refuses to endorse our plan for a national quarantine centre.”
The Palaszczuk government last month submitted a proposal to the Commonwealth to use a purpose-built workers camp near the Wellcamp Airport in Toowoomba to house international arrivals in quarantine.
It has led to a disagreement between the two levels of government over who would manage the privately-built facility.
The federal government has said the Queensland proposal lacks detail.
Responding to Mr Miles’ claim, a federal government spokesman said the commonwealth continued to seek more information on how the facility would be run.
“We await their answers,” the spokesman said.
“We look forward to Deputy Premier Miles finalising his proposal, as his officials committed to doing so, only a few days ago.”
READ MORE: Pandemic no brake on rise of very rich
Melissa Iaria, Anthony Piovesan6.10pm:Robots may guard Vic quarantine hotels
The same robots that guarded hotel quarantine in the United States during last year’s US Open tennis championships could be used as surveillance in Victoria’s system.
COVID-19 Quarantine Victoria (CQV) authorities are considering the hi-tech surveillance as another CCTV option and have approached Australian security company Monjon to use the robots in a “trial”.
Monjon chief executive Bryan Goudsblom said the robots stood at about 158cm, had 60 different senses, 360 degree cameras and heat and temperature sensing features.
“Everything that a police officer could do on a hotel quarantine floor the robot could take that duty away,” he said.
“It would provide a barrier between human activity – a contactless communication tool to deliver hotel quarantine.”
FULL STORY
Matthew Denholm5.40pm: Spirited tax plan puts MPs over a barrel
Australia’s growing spirits industry is enlisting marginal seat MPs in its push for tax relief, with polling showing their voters back the move, while distillers argue their electorates will benefit most.
The industry, which has grown from 28 to more than 300 distilleries in 10 years, has businesses in all of the country’s most marginal seats — leverage that it is now harnessing in its tax push.
Polling commissioned by the industry from independent pollster Insightfully of more than 2000 voters in marginal seats, and those with multiple distilleries, shows 69 per cent of voters back its call for a bigger tax rebate.
FULL STORY
Sarah Elks 5.10pm:Quarantine needed: Queensland closes border to NZ again
Queensland health authorities have again closed the border to New Zealand, removing it as a “safe travel country” and requiring travellers to enter hotel quarantine.
Chief Health Officer Jeannette Young said the move to stop “green flights” from NZ to QLD would come into effect from 6pm tonight and followed increased community transmission in NZ.
Chief Health Officer Dr Jeannette Young said this is what needs to be done to protect the health of all Queenslanders.
“Unfortunately, over the past few days New Zealand has been recording some new positive cases, which is why we are closing the border from 6pm,” she said.
“Anyone who is permitted to travel to Queensland from New Zealand will be required to quarantine on arrival.”
READ MORE:Call for border plan to be linked to COVID jabs
Patrick Commins 4.55pm:Vaccine preparedness slammed after overdoses
Opposition health spokeswoman Mark Butler has criticised the government for its lack of preparedness after it was revealed a doctor who gave a COVID overdose in a Brisbane nursing home did not have proper training.
“We have known this was coming for months and months. Pfizer had been approved for many weeks now,” Mr Butler said.
“There is no reason why these arrangements were not in place for the aged care facilities and these sorts of arrangements being utterly assured. We have known this was coming for months,” he said.
Earlier today, Health Minister Greg Hunt corrected the record in parliament and told the chamber the doctor who administered the overdose had not completed the required training. Earlier, Mr Hunt had said all training protocols were in place for the doctor.
Mr Hunt said the government would take action against the doctor and Healthcare Australia, the company which helped administer the vaccine at the nursing home.
READ MORE: Rollout adds fresh jab of uncertainty
Patrick Commins 3.50pm:ATO wins first conviction for JobKeeper fraud
The Taxation Office has won its first criminal conviction for JobKeeper fraud, after a man pleaded guilty to falsely claiming he was eligible for $6000 in wage subsidies.
Raed Saleh was found guilty in the Heidelberg Magistrates Court of three counts of making a false and misleading statement.
Mr Saleh claimed his business had suffered a 30 per cent drop in revenue for the months of May and June. He also told the ATO that he was a sole trader, his business met all the eligibility requirements and he had not agreed to be nominated by any other employer.
But the court found that Mr Saleh was not operating a genuine business and that he had already been nominated as a JobKeeper recipient by his full-time employer.
Mr Saleh received $3000 from his false May 2020 claim, the ATO said, but his June claim was stopped pending further investigation.
In addition to the conviction, Mr Saleh was fined $3000, ordered to pay reparations of $3000 and costs of $282.
ATO Deputy Commissioner Will Day said defrauding the JobKeeper program was stealing from the pockets of taxpayers.
“We have an important role to ensure the integrity of the stimulus measures and when we uncover fraud or people seeking to exploit them, we will take action,” Mr Day said.
“Since the first payments were made in April, the ATO has monitored every payment, every day, every month, and will continue to do so until the last payment is made.
“We know most people are honest. However, as this case demonstrates, where people deliberately seek to exploit the stimulus measures, we will put a stop to it and apply the full force of the law,” Mr Day said.
As at 16 February 2021, $84bn JobKeeper payments have been made by the ATO to over 1 million businesses.
READ MORE: JobSeeker recipients ‘kept below poverty line’
Adeshola Ore 3.30pm:Doctor who delivered vaccine overdose was not trained
Health Minister Greg Hunt has confirmed that a doctor who incorrectly administered two vaccine overdoses at an aged-care facility in Queensland had not completed the correct training.
“The advice is that on further investigation Healthcare Australia has now advised that the doctor had not completed the required training,” he said.
Earlier, Mr Hunt told parliament that all training protocols were in place for the doctor who wrongly administered the Pfizer dose. After question time, he provided an updates statement from Healthcare Australia.
READ the full story here.
Richard Ferguson 3.20pm:Test your numbers: PM stares down Albanese
Scott Morrison has told Labor to test his control of the House of Representatives if they really believe Craig Kelly defecting has damaged his parliamentary authority.
With an effective minority on the floor now, Anthony Albanese said the Prime Minister’s government “now depends on the vote of a cross bench conspiracy theorist, who’s pushing discredited and dangerous treatments during a health pandemic”
Mr Morrison pushed back, saying the election victory of 2019 is the source of his parliamentary power.
“What I know is there are more of us on this side than there are more of them on that side. You know who made that decision? The Australian people. At the last election, we went to that election and the Australian people rejected the Labor Party to become the Government of this country,” Mr Morrison told parliament.
“If the Leader of the Opposition wants to test the issue that he seems to so boldly puff out his chest on today, Mr Speaker, if he thinks he has control of this house, I invite him to move the relevant motion or stop showing off.”
The government won the first attempt to tests its numbers since Mr Kelly’s defection to the crossbench, and voted down a motion condemning Mr Morrison’s handling of allegations of sexual assault and harassment 65 votes to 60.
Mr Kelly backed the government against Labor’s motion.
Adeshola Ore 3.03pm:‘I’ve been totally open’ on alleged rape: PM
Scott Morrison says he has been “totally open with parliament” as Labor used question time to press the government on its knowledge and handling of the alleged rape of a former Liberal Party staffer.
On Wednesday, Anthony Albanese pressed Mr Morrison on whether he would make public an internal review to investigate when his office was aware of the alleged rape of Brittany Higgins in 2019. The Secretary of the Department of Prime Minister and Cabinet, Phil Gaetjens, is investigating which staff in the Prime Minister’s Office were aware of the assault allegation. Mr Morrison has refused to confirm whether it will be made public.
“I’m awaiting that report and I will report once I receive it,” he told parliament.
“The Leader of the Opposition may not be aware but the Australian Federal Police have advised the department secretary that in relation to any of these matters, than any report here and the handling of any report must not prejudice any ongoing investigation into that matter,” he said.
Mr Morrison said he has “been consistent” in his timeline that his office became aware of the alleged assault on Friday February 12 and he became aware on Monday February 15.
During question time, Anthony Albanese attempted to suspend standing orders as he accused Mr Morrison of covering up his staff’s knowledge about the alleged assault.
“The Prime Minister always thinks about politics and never accepts responsibility,” he said.
Labor attempted to test the government’s numbers in parliament after Craig Kelly’s move to the crossbench on Tuesday saw the Coalition lose its one-seat majority in the House of Representatives.
Adeshola Ore 2.51pm:Morrison ‘not aware’ of references for accused rapist
Scott Morrison has told parliament he is not aware of any references written for the perpetrator of an alleged rape of a former Liberal Party staffer.
During question time on Monday, Deputy Labor Leader Richard Marles asked the Prime Minister about reports that the alleged perpetrator had used two “detailed references” to secure work in the private sector after he was sacked.
“I have no knowledge of any such references,” Mr Morrison told parliament.
Mr Morrison lashed Labor’s “imputation” that ministers had prior knowledge of the alleged sexual assault.
“As far as I’m aware, the only minister who had knowledge of an alleged assault in relation to this matter was Minister Reynolds,” he said.
Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton said he was made aware of the alleged incident on February 11, the Thursday before news.com.au reported the story.
He said he received updates about the alleged incident last week and this week.
READ MORE:Alleged staff rapist sacked for dishonesty
Adeshola Ore 2.45pm:PM has long wanted accused Kelly staffer sacked
Scott Morrison says it has “long been his view” that former Liberal MP Craig Kelly’s long-term staffer who faces allegations of inappropriate workplace conduct should have his employment terminated.
The Department of Finance is investigating allegations of inappropriate workplace behaviour towards young women against Mr Kelly’s office manager, Frank Zumbo. The Australian understands Mr Zumbo had been on Mr Morrison’s radar for years because of feedback relating to his competency, with the workplace alle­gations against Mr Zumbo first reported last year only deepening Mr Morrison’s concern.
“This is a matter that had been ongoing for a very long time. That relates to a whole series of matters and, most recently, another matter which I raised with him only very recently,” The Prime Minister said.
Last week, The Guardian reported that Mr Zumbo remained working in Mr Kelly’s electoral office despite the allegations made by a teenage female intern that Mr Zumbo kissed her on the neck. It reported that in one case, an apprehended violence order had been granted in September 2020 by police in Sutherland, in Sydney’s southern suburbs.
Mr Morrison said inquiries were made to his office in August last year the allegations faced by Mr Zumbo.
“On August 3rd and the 4th and the 5th it is indeed true that an inquiry was made to my office about a matter that had been raised and dealt with in the Sutherland local court on 8 July last year,” he said.
Mr Morrison said his office raised issues about Mr Hughes with Mr Kelly “informally and directly.”
READ MORE:I’m not gonna take it any more: cross Kelly
Adeshola Ore 2.14pm:Vaccine overdoses ‘unacceptable human error’
Health Minister Greg Hunt has told parliament that all training protocols were in place for the doctor who wrongly administered two vaccine overdoses at an aged-care facility in Queensland.
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says it is “just not good enough” that an elderly couple was given an overdose of the Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine, and demanded Prime Minister Scott Morrison call a national cabinet meeting.
An elderly woman who was one of two residents in a Brisbane aged care home incorrectly administered with multiple doses of the Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine will be taken to hospital for monitoring as a precaution. The 94-year-old woman spent Tuesday night at the aged care home in the Brisbane suburb of Carseldine, while the 84-year-old man who was also given the incorrect dosage went to hospital.
“The doctor in question was fully registered with APRA, had all credentials met and had indeed — and this has been confirmed by the provider and through examination of electronic records — completed the full training,” Mr Hunt told parliament.
“That training module involves ensuring that dose administration is carried out, that all stages are carried out, the proper techniques for drawing up doses, the supervisory roles.
“All elements of the training, which could have been done and could have been required were put in place.”
Mr Hunt said the doctor, who has since been stood down, had done the “wrong thing.”
“This is a case of human error, a case of unacceptable human error,” he said.
Mr Hunt said the provider, Healthcare Australia, had been in contact with the federal government to ensure this event never occurred again.
READ MORE:Palaszczuk blames vaccine fail on PM
Greg Brown 1.57pm:‘Naive’ Greens try to undermine press independence: Labor
Labor has accused the Greens of trying to undermine the independence of the press as the minor party delays the passage of the media code by pushing extra amendments.
Labor senator Louise Pratt said Greens senator Sarah Hanson-Young was “naive” for urging the major parties to force media companies into new public reporting requirements under the proposed code.
The annual report proposed by the Greens would require media companies to disclose how they spend the money gained from revenue sharing deals from social media giants.
“There is a clear risk, in our assessment, that this kind of reporting regime could undermine the independence of some news media outlets,” Senator Pratt said.
The Greens’ three amendments have failed in the Senate. Debate on the amended media code legislation will continue in the Senate on Wednesday afternoon.
Patrick Commins 1.30pm:ACCC head blasts online-offline media double standard
ACCC boss Rod Sims has labelled as “ridiculous” the inconsistencies in regulation which let online players such as Google and Facebook engage in practices which are banned to “offline” media such as TV and radio.
“I think it’s ridiculous that offline players are penalised and not allowed to do things online players can do,” Mr Sims said to a parliamentary committee.
The classic one of course is the blackout before an election: you can’t advertise (offline), but you can advertise online all you like.”
Mr Sims said aligning these rules so there is “commonality” was part of the 23 recommendations from a review done by his agency, and which is now being looked at by the Department of Communications.
Staying on media, Mr Sims said he thought the advent of the internet had made the media landscape more diverse than before – pointing to examples o ABC’s expanded online new presence, as well as the arrival of other players such as the Guardian.
“We have a problem (with media concentration), but it’s better than it was,” he said, referring to the 1980s when the Murdoch and Packer news empires dominated the market.
READ MORE:Facebook will remain scarred by its antics
Paul Kelly 1.10pm:Rollout adds fresh jab of uncertainty
The vaccine gives Scott Morrison a new instrument to advance what he calls Australia’s “world leading” COVID response. But the politics of the vaccine are also tied to backbencher Craig Kelly’s resignation from the Liberal Party, reducing the government to 76 seats in a 151-seat chamber before providing the Speaker.
While Morrison spearheads the idea that every day now “becomes more normal” — courtesy of the vaccine — the new normal will be different from the old normal. There are plenty of searching tests for any new normal.
The vaccine rollout needs to be successful by upholding the Australian tradition of about 90 per cent vaccination coverage. The medical test for the vaccine is critical — it needs to contain transmission as well as preventing death. In a major ask of the premiers, all governments should agree on a change to risk assessment and COVID policy that terminates the 2020 paradigm of state paternalism and mass lockdowns. And, finally, there is the Kelly-induced test — whether Morrison’s legislative agenda will be weakened and his government undermined by Kelly’s move to the crossbench.
These are substantial tests. There is one certainty: Morrison won’t sit pat and have his authority as Prime Minister dimin­ished. If the parliament decides to destabilise Morrison and his agenda, the parliament won’t be long for this world.
READPaul Kelly’s full commentary here
Nick Evans 12.40pm: Turnbull, the spy and Forrest’s moonshot
Former Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull and Australia’s one-time chief spy will join Andrew Forrest’s push to green the world’s energy supply, signing on to roles with the mining billionaire’s Fortescue Future Industries group this month.
Dr Forrest launched FFI at Fortescue’s annual shareholder meeting in November, laying out ambitious plans for the iron ore miner to become one of the world’s biggest renewable energy players, telling investors Fortescue plans to eventually produce 235 gigawatts of renewable energy, or five times the current capacity of Australia’s National Energy Market.
The mining billionaire has been travelling the world stitching up early stage agreements to develop renewable energy projects and green industry precincts in developing nations such as Papua New Guinea, Indonesia, Afghanistan and beyond.
Last week Fortescue said it planned to pump as much as 10 per cent of its annual profits into its clean energy ventures in the future.
On Tuesday Dr Forrest announced that Mr Turnbull and former Australian Secret Intelligence Service boss Nick Warner would join the ambitious project.
READ the full story here
Robert Gottliebsen11.53am:A hint at higher interest rates
In contrast to Australian economic punditry, US bond rates tells us interest rates could rise and a major sharemarket correction is possible.
The bond market is telling us that we will experience a substantial rise economic activity that will trigger inflation, particularly in the US, and will lead to higher interest rates.
The sharemarket will gyrate as it adjusts to the higher level of economic activity and the end of very low interest rates. A major correction is possible.
I detailed this scenario just over a month ago in a two-part series with the help of US bond expert Christine Todd, who is the Boston-based US fixed-income head for Amundi, Europe’s largest investment manager.
The scenarios we set out under the heading: 10 keys to the Biden economy and Market correction coming: orderly, or carnage? are developing as expected.
In the weeks after the series the 10-year US bond rate has risen from 1.1 per cent to just below 1.4 per cent. Remember back in August it was around 0.5 per cent, so US bond investors have received two drubbings: the big fall in bond prices and the lower US dollar.
The 10-year Australian bond has followed the US and is trading around 1.65 per cent, its highest since May 2019.
READ Robert Gottliebsen’s full commentary here
PATRICK COMMINS 11.47am:‘Whole world’ watching media bargaining code
Back to ACCC appearing in front of a parliamentary committee: competition tsar Rod Sims has said he is “very happy” with the news media bargaining code, despite a recent blow-up with Facebook that saw the social network remove news from its feeds. He said he expected brinkmanship from Google and Facebook, but the decision by the latter to follow through with its threats when it did was both “surprising and unusual”.
Shadow Communications Minister Michelle Rowland says while each side has been written up as the winner, a compromise has been struck between Facebook and the government.
The code, the legislation for which is making its way through parliament, “has already gone a long way to achieve its objective to improve the bargaining position of media companies”.
Mr Sims says he expects Google and Facebook will eventually offer “blanket deals” to smaller publishers once they have wrapped up deals with the larger players. He says these smaller publishers will benefit proportionately to their size.
Mr Sims says the “whole world” and the ACCC will be “watching closely to make sure journalism benefits from the code”, instead of simply, for example, the big listed publishers simply passing on the proceeds to their shareholders.
READ MORE:Facebook will remain scarred by its antics
Jess Malcolm11.37am: SA allows return of dancing, and Melburnians
South Australian Premier Steven Marshall has announced easing of restrictions for people entering the state from greater Melbourne, and dancing to be permitted.
From 12.01am Friday morning, returning travellers will be able to come into the state, and they will not have to undergo COVID-19 testing on day one, day five and day 12.
“Victoria has got on top of their outbreak, we are very grateful for the work they have done and we are looking forward to welcoming people from across that border,” Mr Marshall said.
The Premier also announced changes to restrictions on dancing in venues in South Australia.
In a venue of under 200 patrons, dancing is now allowed as long as normal social distancing and people are abiding by the two square metre rule.
In venues with more than 200 and up to 1000, up to 50 people at a time are able to dance in a designated area, also abiding by the two square metre rule.
In venues over 1000 people, the Premier flagged that plans still need to be drawn up.
“I know a lot of people are going to be quite relieved that dancing is allowed back in South Australia, we’ve had it, of course, in some circumstances around weddings, and functions, now it is going to be broadened out, we’re going to be very monitoring how this goes and hopefully it goes extremely well,” Mr Marshall said.
READ MORE: Airlines test health passes for travellers
PATRICK COMMINS11.29am:Complaints about travel, accommodation soar
The ACCC chief Rod Sims is appearing in front of a parliamentary economics committee this morning, and he’s noted the competition and consumer watchdog has been busy: consumer complaints about travel and accommodation services increased fivefold during the pandemic.
Travellers and businesses have struggled to deal with handling cancellations and refunds as COVID-19 restrictions have interrupted travel plans. Those “contacts” have reduced over the first six weeks of 2021, but are still up on a year ago. “Hopefully consumers and businesses are far better placed than they were a year ago,” Mr Sims said.
The ACCC set up a COVID task force, and Mr Sims said he believes the watchdog’s dealings with over a 100 companies during the pandemic would have played a big role in hundreds of thousands of Australians getting refunds.
Mr Sims also said that 28 applications for relief from competition rules – banks, medical suppliers, supermarkets have all enjoyed some relief – should not last beyond the pandemic, arguing that would undermine the “effectiveness of our market economy”.
READ MORE: ASX dragged down by miners, banks
Jess Malcolm11.22am:NSW raises visitor limit, singing and dancing return
Gladys Berejiklian has announced an easing of restrictions across NSW as the state records its 38th consecutive day free from community transmission of COVID-19.
From midnight Friday morning, people will be able to have up to 50 people over to the home.
Singing and dancing is back in NSW, with up to 30 people allowed on the dance floor at weddings.
Ms Berejiklian flagged if case numbers remained low, the 300 person cap on weddings could be lifted. She also said that in three weeks time, standing up at hospitality venues indoors will be allowed.
Gyms will stay at the four square metre rule, but classes will now be able to have up to 50 people.
Places of worship will still have the four square metre rule but singing will be allowed.
“These are a combination of very positive easing of restrictions and nearly there in terms of what burdens we are imposing on the community but we are also at a critical stage of the pandemic,” Ms Berejiklian said.
“The vaccine rollout is starting and we are confident that people will take up the opportunity for the vaccine.”
The NSW Premier thanked everyone who had come forward, saying she was seeing “enormous enthusiasm” for the vaccination program.
“I would like to thank New South Wales Health for being so efficient, for being so diligent and all that practice, all that preparation that we were able to do, even though we did not know what day the vaccine would arrive until it did,” Ms Berejiklian said.
While health authorities were pleased with the good news, the Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant warned there was “no room for complacency”.
“I would just urge the community to maintain their vigilance, particularly urge you to continue to do that QR check in,” Dr Chant said.
“While we are putting incredible protections at our borders, and rolling out vaccine to our border workers and quarantine workers is the highest priority, the risk of an event where we get that transmission is still ever present.”
READ MORE: JobSeeker recipients ‘kept below poverty line’
Rosie Lewis 10.56am: Higgins wishes ailing Reynolds well
Brittany Higgins, the former Liberal staffer alleged to have been raped by a colleague in Linda Reynolds’ office, has wished the Defence Minister well after she was admitted to hospital amid increasing pressure over her handling of the matter.
In her first tweets since Australia Day, Ms Higgins said:
Ms Higgins is due to give a formal statement to police about the alleged rape, which occurred on March 23, 2019 after a night out drinking.
READ MORE: Grieving family’s anti-vax torment
Sarah Elks10.49am: Palaszczuk demands answers on vaccine overdose
Queensland Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk says it is “just not good enough” that an elderly couple was given an overdose of the COVID-19 vaccine, and demanded Prime Minister Scott Morrison call a national cabinet meeting.
Ms Palaszczuk told parliament that the situation was “very concerning,” after an 88-year-old man and a 94-year-old woman were given an overdose at an aged care home in Carseldine on Tuesday morning.
Two aged care residents in a Queensland nursing home have been given incorrect doses of the COVID-19 vaccine.
She said Queensland authorities were only notified by the federal government late on Tuesday night, which she described as “just not good enough”.
Ms Palaszczuk said the federal government was using private contractors to deliver the vaccine, and it was only a nurse who noticed a doctor was delivering the vaccine incorrectly that stopped further overdoses.
She said she would write to Mr Morrison asking for more details of the federal program, and calling for a national cabinet meeting soon to discuss the issues.
“Mr Speaker, none of this is good enough and the federal government must explain itself,” she said. “Today I will write to the Prime Minister asking him to convene a National Cabinet as soon as possible.”
“I want to know what training is provided to the people the federal government is employing to administer the vaccines in our Aged Care facilities. I want to know about the communications strategies for the next phases of the rollout of the vaccine.”
She said the 88-year-old man was in St Andrews hospital for observation and had “no signs of adverse reactions” and the 94-year-old woman was being monitored in aged care.
The doctor who administered the incorrect doses has been stood down amid an investigation, Ms Palaszczuk said.
READ the full story here
Richard Ferguson 10.41am:Husar to Albanese: Labor also has a woman problem
Former Labor MP Emma Husar has called for Anthony Albanese to act on the “poor treatment of women” in the Opposition after the alleged rape allegations which have rocked the Coalition.
Ms Husar left parliament after one term in 2019 after she faced allegations of staff bullying and was disendorsed by the NSW Labor Party. She has strenuously denied those allegations and settled a defamation case on the matter with Buzzfeed Australia.
Former Labor MP Emma Husar says women are “treated with disdain” in a “boys club culture of cover up” and has accused her former ALP colleagues of adopting a “do nothing approach" to the political problem of sexual harassment in parliament.
In an open letter to the Opposition Leader, Ms Husar said he had not acted on her complaints on how the party handled allegations against her, and said it showed politics has a “woman problem”, invoking recent allegations ex-Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins was raped in a minister's office.
“This continued disdain for women, cover up culture, the abuse and the slut-shaming is leading to worse outcomes, and none worse than Brittany’s,” Ms Husar says.
“I have been galled watching my former colleagues speak out, yet were silent bystanders when I endured such horrendous treatment.
“You (Mr Albanese) are the leader responsible. The Labor Party cannot pretend that poor treatment of women exists on only one side of the political divide and I will no longer hold the secrets of and protect those who should have done better when they had the chance.”
Ms Husar slammed the Opposition Leader, saying she has patiently waited for him to do the right thing after the party’s internal investigation into the allegations against her. She said Mr Albanese had failed to provide Ms Husar with a public apology he acknowledged she was owed during a meeting with her in September 2019.
“The Labor Party had no authority to conduct the inquiry and was later warmed against doing so by the Party’s Ombudsman,” she wrote.
“Despite this, and my successful defamation case, the Labor Party has remained deadly silent.”
Ms Husar said she was made to be complicit in the poor treatment of women in the Labor Party.
“I was slut shamed on the floor of parliament by a colleague on the other side and when I took it to my senior Labor minister, shadow minister, his response was don’t talk about, it will draw more attention to it and the boys on our side do worse, if not the same thing and it will cause a problem for us,” she told Sky News.
“I was then told my experience was fine and then I was made to cover up the bad behaviour of the men on my side of the parliament and not stand up for on my side.”
Ms Husar said Ms Higgins' alleged rape was the “absolute back end of the system that has gone completely wrong.”
“It doesn’t get any worse than what’s happened to Brittany Higgins,” she said.
“My issue was slightly different but they are inextricably tied together. When we allow women to be treated in this way, whether it is being slut shamed on the floor of parliament or slut shamed by an ex-colleague who was legitimately fired, and everyone shuts up and says nothing, then we tell all those young men who are running around those buildings drunk on a sense of power that that’s OK.”
READ MORE: Sensible Labor MPs need to stand up to Albanese on nuclear
Anthony Piovesan10.30am: ‘Baffling’: Kennett slams Crown Casino probe
Former Victorian Premier Jeff Kennett has slammed a move to set up a royal commission into Crown Casino and not the state’s failed hotel quarantine scheme, saying the democratic processes in Victoria have “never been lower”.
Mr Kennett said he “could not understand” how the families of the 801 Victorians who died as a result of hotel quarantine failings were “still waiting for answers”.
“It’s baffling – So there’s still no royal commission into hotel quarantine, which is absolutely justified given the number of deaths,” he said.
The Victorian government announced the official probe into Crown Resorts’ suitability to hold a gaming licence for its Melbourne casino on Monday.
It comes in the wake of damning findings from the NSW regulator’s money laundering inquiry, and will be overseen by former Federal Court judge and senior barrister Raymond Finkelstein.
“Daniel Andrews clearly wasn’t prepared to put him and his team under scrutiny,” Mr Kennett said.
“The very fact he and his ministers and officials all get up there and claim loss of memory in front of an inquiry is very clear indication that the inquiry was established to give a result that would not pin blame onto the Premier.
“It’s another indication of the standards of this government – the democratic processes have slipped, they’ve never been lower.”
The NSW inquiry found the gambling giant unsuitable to hold the gaming licence for its new venue at Barangaroo in Sydney on the back of evidence that organised crime-linked money laundering occurred at Crown Melbourne and Perth.
Mr Kennett said a royal commission into the Melbourne venue should have been called much earlier.
“I found it amazing that once a number of Crown staff were imprisoned in China that at that point someone didn’t care to say what‘s going on here,” he said. — NCA Newswire
READ MORE: ‘Force Packer to offload Crown stake’
Jess Malcolm9.57am: SA weighs relaxing border to greater Melbourne
South Australian authorities are meeting this morning to discuss relaxing border restrictions with greater Melbourne.
Restrictions with Melbourne are expected to be eased at the end of this week, but authorities are discussing whether recent travellers from Melbourne entering South Australia will have to undergo mandatory Covid tests on day 1, day 5 and day 12.
There is a possibility that the requirements will be lifted all together.
South Australia installed a hard border closure on Victoria when they entered its snap five day “circuit-breaker” lockdown.
Regional Victorians have been free to travel freely into South Australia since then, but Melbourne residents are still locked out.
Richard Ferguson 9.30am:Linda Reynolds takes medical leave
Defence Minister Linda Reynolds has been admitted to Canberra Hospital as a precaution for a pre-existing heart condition. Foreign Minister Marise Payne will be acting Defence Minister.
Senator Reynolds pulled out of a much-anticipated address to the National Press Club today on medical grounds, as the aftermath of an alleged rape in her office continues.
Reynolds statement Feb 24 2021
PDF: Linda Reynolds statement
Press Club President Laura Tingle tweeted on Wednesday morning that Senator Reynolds had pulled out due to advice from her cardiologist.
“Defence Minister Linda Reynolds has just pulled out of today’s address to the National Press Club citing medical advice from her cardiologist,” Ms Tingle wrote.
Senator Reynolds has faced continuing questions about her handling of allegations her former staffer Brittany Higgins was raped in her office when she was Defence Industry Minister.
Under pressure for a week over the government’s handling of the incident, Senator Reynolds, now Defence Minister, was forced to retract comments she made to parliament on Tuesday in which she said she had twice met with the Australian Federal Police following the alleged rape.
Senator Reynolds said she met with the AFP on April 1 and 4 and was joined in that first meeting by Ms Higgins, a claim quickly rejected by Labor. Ms Higgins had texted the party as question time aired to say that had never happened, Labor sources said.
In a letter tabled late on Tuesday, Senator Reynolds clarified that she had met with the AFP only on April 4 and not on April 1.
Health Minister Greg Hunt said Senator Reynolds was “desperate” to appear at the National Press Club today.
“It was only on the strongest medical advice that she took the reluctant decision not to do it,’’ he said. “I think our compassion, our focus on the needs of others, in the most intense environment country, is something all of us need to bring to the floor.”
“I had some prior notification that she may have had an illness. I was not aware of the nature of it,” Mr Hunt said.
“Honestly, in this situation, we have to remind ourselves, this is the most intense, arguably, environment in Australia.”
“There are many intense environments and all of us need to be aware of the pressure, the pains, the impact of each of us on each other.”
“She’s a good person and she needs our support and she has our support.”
READ MORE: Alleged staff rapist sacked for dishonesty
Adeshola Ore 9.28am: Two elderly Queenslanders given excessive vaccine doses
Health Minister Greg Hunt has confirmed that two elderly residents in a Queensland aged-care home received excessive doses of the COVID-19 vaccine yesterday.
An 88-year-old male, and a 94-year-old female at Holy Spirit Carseldine facility received higher than prescribed doses of the vaccine.
Mr Hunt said neither patients were showing adverse reactions from the administration.
“The safeguards that were put in place immediately kicked into action,” he said.
The doctor who administered the incorrect doses has been stood down.
“The monitoring of the patients, which is the most important thing, has been ongoing in a partnership between the Commonwealth, the facility and Queensland Health,” Mr Hunt said.
Mr Hunt said a nurse stepped in when the wrong dose was administered.
“I want to thank her for her strength of character and her professionalism,” he said.
Mr Hunt said the commonwealth would investigate the circumstances of the incorrect administration.
“That will be ongoing. We will provide public guidance. But the most important thing is that we engage in transparency.”
Mr Hunt said the elderly patient’s lack of adverse reaction was in line with the fact that “significantly higher doses” were used in global clinical trials.
READ the full story here
Jess Malcolm9.20am: Rising debt worries Nationals senator
Queensland Nationals senator Matthew Canavan is worried about rising government debt, claiming Australia has the highest debt as a share of GDP since World War II.
Mr Canavan outlined his support for the increase in the JobSeeker payment, but forecasted the government’s inability to return the budget to surplus in the future.
The Morrison government is expected to stand firm on its $50 per fortnight Jobseeker increase despite fierce criticism from Labor.
“They commit us to spend year after year after year,” Mr Canavan told ABC News Breakfast. “Who knows how the world is going to change in the next 10 years. We have been shocked in the last year.”
“I just think another $9 billion over the next four years is a big concern.”
“Right now, how we pay for it is we borrow more money from overseas, about 60 per cent of our long-term debt comes from foreign borrowers. We have all seen how vulnerable a position we have been put in with our trade dependence on China in the last year.”
Mr Canavan also addressed the issue of Craig Kelly abandoning the liberal party on Tuesday, saying he would be more effective from within the party.
“If there’s a way of getting him back into the tent even if that’s with a different party, in the National Party in the coalition, that would be better for all of us.”
READ MORE: Labor on the fence over new JobSeeker rate
Jess Malcolm8.44am: ‘No way Rex can keep flying routes if Qantas competes’
Rex Deputy Chair John Sharp has accused Qantas of predatory behaviour for its decision to move into smaller routes, threatening the airline could fold when commonwealth assistance ends at the end of March.
Rex has argued that Qantas moving into smaller routes such as Sydney to Orange and Sydney to Merimbula could cause the regional airline to become financially viable, and has asked the ACCC to intervene.
“Regional airline business is far more marginal and precious,” Mr Sharp told ABC’s RN today. “It’s like carrying eggs, because the numbers are so small you can lose the viability of those routes.
“Both operators are losing money in those regional routes. You’ve got to be careful that you don’t lose those services all together.”
Mr Sharp addressed criticism that Rex was one of the few airlines that was able to expand during COVID-19, hitting out at Qantas for receiving $1.2 billion in commonwealth funding.
“If the commonwealth program for Rex is not continued, there is absolutely no way we will be able to continue flying those routes.”
“It’s worth pointing out that Qantas has received $1.2 billion from the government to keep their services going.”
“If the funding is scheduled to expire on the 28th of March, we have a moral and legal obligation to tell our customers when they’re booking tickets that we might not be able to fly those routes in the future.”
READ MORE: Rex cuts routes, blames Qantas
Adeshola Ore8.39am: Kelly’s staffer faces action if wrongdoing uncovered
Former Liberal MP Craig Kelly says he will take action if a Department of Finance investigation into his office manager for inappropriate workplace conduct against female staff uncovers wrongdoing.
The Australian understands the Prime Minister’s Office requested on Friday that the Department of Finance investigate allegations against Frank Zumbo of inappropriate workplace ­behaviour. Last week, The Guardian reported that Mr Zumbo remained working in Mr Kelly’s electoral office despite multiple allegations made by female employees, including one teenage female intern who alleges Mr Zumbo kissed her on the neck. It reported that in one case, an apprehended violence order had been granted in September 2020 by police in Sutherland, in Sydney’s southern suburbs.
Mr Kelly said young women currently working in his office had “no issue” with Mr Zumbo.
“At the moment there are no issues with my current staff and I don’t believe there are grounds to throw someone under a bus,” he told the ABC.
“Everyone is entitled to natural justice. There is an inquiry by the Department of Finance. If that inquiry finds there are some issues, I will act on that issue.”
Mr Zumbo has denied wrongdoing and no charges have been made against him.
He said on Tuesday the alle­gations published in The Guardian were “uncorroborated, false and defamatory”.
READ MORE: Craig Kelly’s staffer Frank Zumbo under investigation
Jess Malcolm 8.35am: Victoria records fifth day without local transmission
Victoria has recorded its fifth consecutive day with no new locally acquired coronavirus cases, following 20,201 tests.
There were also no new cases recorded in hotel quarantine.
There are currently 20 active cases in the state.
Premier Daniel Andrews said Victoria is “well-placed” to ease coronavirus restrictions this Friday, if case numbers remain low.
READ MORE:Alternative draft to emergency powers
Jess Malcolm8.27am: Seven West signing with Facebook ‘encouraging’
Communications minister Paul Fletcher says it is “encouraging” to see Seven West Media sign a deal with Facebook, saying Australia is a global front runner with its media bargaining policy.
“It is encouraging that Seven West Media announced that it reached a letter of intent with Facebook,” Mr Fletcher said.
“We do understand that there are other news media businesses in the market who are in discussions with Facebook, so we await any further announcements that they may choose to make.”
Mr Fletcher addressed issues that smaller media news players may not be able to strike a deal with the global tech giant, saying it is important regional outlets are considered by Facebook.
“The News Media Bargaining Code includes a mechanism for the digital platforms to make a default offer to smaller and regional players,” he said.
“It is important that small and regional players are supported through the News Media Bargaining Code and we’ve made that clear.”
Tech giants are yet to make any deals with smaller local media companies.
READ MORE: Frydenberg’s Facebook triumph
Jess Malcolm 7.59am:Kelly to run as ‘independent Liberal’
Craig Kelly has announced that he will be running as an independent at the next election, rebuffing questions about whether he will join the national party.
Mr Kelly dismissed claims that he would join the national party, saying it is part of a government that holds policies that he disagrees with.
“At the moment I’m going to sit as a liberal independent, if there is such a thing,” Mr Kelly told reporters at Parliament House this morning.
“That’s a contract I have if people vote for me.”
Mr Kelly said there was no proposed government legislation he planned to vote against, after his move to the crossbench on Tuesday.
Kelly’s resignation means Scott Morrison has lost a working majority in parliament.
The Hughes MP said he would support supply and confidence bills and “seek to vote in a manner consistent with all official policies that the Coalition took to the 2019 election”.
“As for future policies, I will be voting on those from my conscience as a traditional, Liberal Party member. The values of Sir Robert Menzies run through my veins and that’s how I will be proceeding,” he told the ABC.
“There’s no legislation on the table I can see I have any real great concerns with.”
Mr Kelly is expected to resist any move to legislate a target for net zero emissions by 2050.
Mr Kelly said he supported the government’s increasing of the dole by $25 a week, but had concerns that regional employers were unable to find workers in the agricultural sector.
“I think it’s fair enough that we increase it but I’m just concerned that there are many employers in this nation who say they have great difficulty in getting workers.”
— With Adeshola Ore
READ MORE: Greg Sheridan — Let’s hope this Trumpist outbreak is not infectious
Jess Malcolm 7.37am:JobSeeker payment ‘not intended as a job replacement’
Treasurer Josh Frydenberg has rejected criticism that the federal government decision to lift the JobSeeker payment to $50 a fortnight is too low, saying the payment is not meant to replace jobs.
At the end of March, the federal government will remove the coronavirus supplement, and increase the base rate of JobSeeker from $565 to $620 a fortnight.
The decision has been met with criticism that the payments will be $3.50 a day, with some welfare groups describing it as “a heartless betrayal”.
Mr Frydenberg emphasised the policy is not supposed to replace paid unemployment.
“That the government is trying to do everything at the moment to create the jobs for those who are unemployed to get into work,” Mr Frydenberg said.
“Obviously there are many, many difficult challenges for us in the face of this once in a century pandemic and the biggest economic shock since the Great Depression.”
“It was never meant to be a replacement wage. It was always meant to be a safety net. That is why the vast majority of people are receiving other supplementary payments.”
READ MORE:Jobs recovery flying as welfare gets $9bn
Jess Malcolm7.11am:National cabinet too powerful: Craig Kelly
Craig Kelly has defended criticism that he is spreading misinformation about COVID-19 that is not endorsed by chief medical officers, hitting out at national cabinet for having too much power in decision making.
Mr Kelly has come under scrutiny from medical experts and Prime Minister Scott Morrison for spruiking untested COVID-19 theories, leading him to quit the Liberal Party to join the crossbench on Tuesday.
Sky News contributor Jim Middleton says "things have changed" for the government as a "consequence" of MP Craig Kelly's decision to cross the floor, removing the government's working majority.
“I have spoken to immunologists, professors and some of the highest qualified medical people from all around the world, from Europe, the USA and Australia,” Mr Kelly said on Sunrise.
“If we look at the evidence, the problem we have, everyone here in Australia has been directed by this group called the national cabinet evidenced task force that has all the evidence.”
The federal government has been working hard to encourage Australians to get the coronavirus vaccine this week, but Mr Kelly said he thought governments should stay out of the doctor-patient relationship,
“I believe Australian doctors should be able if they think it can help their patient, they should be able to prescribe that,” he said.
“I don’t believe the government should be intervening in the sanctity of the doctor-patient relationship.”
READ MORE: Grieving family’s anti-vax torment
Jacquelin Magnay 7.05am: ‘Not a uterus holder’: bill erases women
What does it mean to be a woman in 2021? In Britain, it means finding yourself airbrushed out of constitutional affairs from the indisputably female experience of being pregnant.
In a bill proceeding through Westminster about paid maternity leave for Members of Parliament, the wording deems that there are no pregnant women, only pregnant persons.
Earlier this month at the Brighton and Sussex National Health Service trust, women lost their right to have breasts: they now chest-fed. Nor are women now mothers, for they are the birthing parent.
READ the full story here
Jess Malcolm6.52am: Spain extends ban on arrivals from UK, Brazil, South Africa
Spain has extended its ban on arrivals from Britain, Brazil and South Africa until March 16, to safeguard against the spread of new coronavirus strains from these countries.
The restriction on arrivals from Britain was imposed at the end of December to halt the spread of the highly contagious COVID-19 variant discovered there in November.
Researchers at the University of Lille are developing a portable COVID-19 test that plugs into smartphones they say can produce faster and more accurately. Soraya Ali reports.
The ban on arrivals from Brazil and South Africa came into effect on February 3. The only exception are passengers in transit who cannot leave the airport nor remain there longer than 24 hours.
Other European nations have also imposed curbs on arrivals from the tree nations due to fears the new variants may spread more easily.
The Spanish government has confirmed around 900 cases of the UK variant, but true figures could well be far higher. They have also confirmed six cases of the South African variant and one of the Brazilian strain.
READ MORE: Johnson delivers road map out of lockdown
Jess Malcolm6.39am:Ireland extends lockdown as UK strain rampages
Ireland has extended its third COVID-19 lockdown due to a rampant outbreak of the highly infectious UK strain of coronavirus.
Current lockdown measures which have been in place since late December were due to expire on March 5, but will now be prolonged until April 5.
The Irish Premier Michael Martin said all non-essential businesses, restaurants, pubs and gyms are to remain shut, and a five kilometre travel limit will continue.
Mr Martin said the UK strain of the virus had become a “major problem” and was now responsible for “up to 90 per cent” of new infections.
“We need to use the month of March to really drive down case numbers and get them as low as possible,” Mr Martin said.
“We just need to stay focused and get through these next few months safely together.”
The republic managed two previous waves of infection with relatively low case and death figures, but the virus surged after restrictions were relaxed ahead of Christmas in late December.
In early January the nation had the highest per capita infection rate in the world, according to Oxford University data.
READ MORE:Airport quarantine talks up in the air
Jess Malcolm6.30am:Scotland to ease coronavirus restrictions
Scotland is looking to begin a “substantial” easing of coronavirus restrictions from April 26, triggered by its successful vaccination campaign.
First Minister Nicola Sturgeon said the country plans to downgrade restrictions from level four to level three in April, as long as the data permits.
“At that stage, we will begin to reopen the economy and society in the more substantial way that we are all longing for,” Ms Sturgeon said, explaining the situation was “extremely positive and promising” but “still quite precarious”.
The government indicated the lifting of restrictions on non-essential business would be more cautious than plans outlined for England by Prime Minister Boris Johnson on Monday.
Mr Johnson unveiled a detailed four-step plan in parliament, with schools set to open again from March 8 and non-essential retail from April 12.
Ms Sturgeon told MPs there were “much brighter times ahead”, adding that restrictions were working well alongside a mass vaccination program that was “motoring”.
READ MORE:Rollout adds fresh jab of uncertainty
Rosie Lewis6.00am:Alleged rapist sacked for dishonesty
The man accused of raping former Liberal staffer Brittany Higgins was sacked for a security breach that included him gaining access to a minister's office on false pretence and for failing to behave “honestly, with integrity”.
Government sources, who spoke on condition of anonymity because they were not authorised to publicly discuss staffing issues, said this was not the first security issue flagged in relation to the former male Adviser, who is alleged to have raped Ms Higgins in then defence industry minister Linda Reynolds’s office on March 23, 2019, and indicated more serious offences had occurred within a short time frame.
The Australian understands one of the most serious security breaches a staffer can commit is leaving out highly classified documents in a minister's office or removing them from the office.
The Prime Minister’s office declined to confirm whether the man had committed such an offence or what the nature of the other offences were.
The Australian understands he was being closely watched by the government by the time of the alleged sexual assault.
The first rule of the statement of standards for ministerial staff says they must “behave honestly and with integrity in the course of their employment”.
READ the full story
Natasha Robinson5.30am:Women more hesitant about vaccine: survey
Scepticism about the corona­virus vaccine has grown over the past six months — most pronounced among young women — even as immunisations are rolled out around the world.
The belief that COVID-19 is not serious and Australians are not at high risk of contracting the disease are the biggest factors in making people less inclined to get vaccinated, a new study conducted by the Australian National University has found.
The study found a “substantial increase” in vaccine hesitancy between August 2020 and January this year, with 21.7 per cent of Australians now saying they probably or definitely would not get a safe, effective and free COVID-19 vaccine.
Last August, that figure was only 12.7 per cent.
A total of 32 per cent of Australians were “less willing” early this year than they were last year to get the vaccine.
“I think part of the reason that vaccine hesitancy has increased is there’s a view that, in a sense, COVID-19 is under control in Australia,” said Nicholas Biddle, a researcher at ANU’s Centre for Social Research and Methods.
READ the full story
Geoff Chambers 5.15am:I’m not gonna take it any more: cross Craig
Scott Morrison has lost a working majority in parliament after Craig Kelly’s resignation and move to the crossbench, with the Hughes MP warning he is prepared to vote against the government.
Mr Kelly’s decision to quit the Liberal Party came after the Prime Minister demanded he stop spreading misinformation about COVID-19 treatments and take action against his office manager, Frank Zumbo, who faces allegations of inappropriate behaviour.
“If I’m to continue to act in line with my conscience and principles … and to speak fearlessly and faithfully represent my constituents, I have no alternative other than to resign as a member of the Liberal Party effective immediately,” Mr Kelly wrote to Mr Morrison in a letter dated Tuesday.
Mr Kelly was facing a preselection defeat in his southern Sydney electorate after being saved before previous elections by Mr Morrison and Malcolm Turnbull, then the prime minister.
His departure increases the number of crossbenchers to seven and trims the government’s numbers in the lower house to 75, leaving Speaker Tony Smith, a Liberal MP, with the casting vote.
READ the same story
Word count: 10161
