Paul Kelly asks a very pertinent question “Can America be unified and reconciled as Biden pledges”’? (22/1). After four years of the Democrats doing everything in their power to tear down Donald Trump, the wounds are deep; it will be a Herculean task to reconcile his supporters.
As well, with President Biden’s stated policy of open borders and handing citizenship to 11 million illegal immigrants, the government is unlikely to ever change parties again, and 74 million Trump supporters will be disenfranchised and silenced.
This is not a recipe for restoring the unity, dignity and respect that President Biden has called for in his inauguration speech.
Iain Rae, River Heads, Qld
Even by modern reportage standards the media has gone into hyperbolic overdrive on the ascension of the Biden aristo — apologies — meritocracy. In an almost Biblical parody, Joseph the “Healer of a Nation’s Soul” now walks among the believers in the House of Woke.
The fact that Biden’s New Commandments will have no appeal whatsoever to the Trump heartland is of no consequence when you’re building the New Jerusalem.
Of course these poor souls will need to be re-educated (reprogrammed) in the ways of the elect or cast into outer darkness beyond government assistance.
In fact, this whole electoral fiasco reminds me of the B grade horrors movies of the 1950s. Coming soon to a theatre near you: Swamp People vs The Deplorables: The Revenge of the Elite.
Ashley Georgeson, Adelaide, SA
In his appeal to all Americans, you could say President Biden is off to a good start. Wall Street obviously thinks so. Yet the big danger of portraying his inauguration as the beginning of a new era is to neglect the solid economic foundations made by former president Trump.
Economic growth, employment and opportunity are the foundations of civil society. Under Trump, through deregulation and gas-driven cheap energy, manufacturing rebooted and unemployment reached record lows of 3.5 per cent. Wages started to rise.
While COVID halted these gains, Trump still received a boost in votes from African-Americans, Hispanics and Latinos. The risk is Biden weighting his policies mostly towards his left-green base, such as through a massive rollout of subsidised renewable energy which will only lead to unaffordable electricity prices, as California is experiencing, and higher taxes, which will put Wall Street into reverse.
The new president will need a good dose of pragmatism from his advisers to balance the left-green influence, otherwise his goal of national unity will go horribly pear-shaped.
Ron Hobba, Camberwell, Vic
Elementary, hydrogen
Hydrogen energy could be Australia’s ticket out of both the COVID economic crisis and the climate crisis (“Hydrogen energy jackpot ‘ours if we act fast’ ”, 22/1). In his book on the economic opportunities of a clean energy transition, economist Ross Garnaut argues Australia has the potential to be a global energy superpower.
As the world loses interest in our coal, we should be looking for ways to continue our reputation as significant energy exporters. Green hydrogen is an efficient, practical, and renewable solution to keep us in the energy trade.
Emma Storey, Campsie, NSW
Good sports never lose
The thrilling India-Australia test in Brisbane was a real treat to those who love watching a well fought cricket game. Yet I feel Australia still has a long way to go to correct their cocky attitude on the cricket field. Sometimes I wonder if it is part of the culture and cannot be corrected. Is it part of the game plan?
May I suggest that all Australian cricketers be required to watch the Viv Richards movie Fire in Babylon? It would be an excellent reminder for them to see sports in its proper light. Killer instinct and the intent to win are a must, but the Australian cricket team showed the attitude of sore losers when staring at the possibility of losing to India B team in the Brisbane test.
India B had a better game plan, stuck to it, and came out winning. Grow up, Australian athletes — sometimes you are outplayed. That’s the beauty of a thrilling good game.
Keshi Dayalu, Ann Arbor, US
Blissful, beery silence
John Lethlean and Nick Ryan’s idea of the perfect composition of guests to attend their dinner party is deeply flawed (22/1). All those talkers, each vying to get a word in edgeways while demanding they to be listened to.
Surely a better mix would be Harpo Marx, Marcel Marceau and a couple of Trappist monks who at least could be depended on to grace the table with finest quality beer.
John Dorman, Toowoomba, Qld
Word count: 739
