MORE than 300 jobs are being created in Port Augusta as work begins on two massive renewable energy projects.
With $670m of investment committed, the sites on either side of the Spencer Gulf are breaking ground and hiring contractors.
Premier Steven Marshall, who will visit the sites today, said Port Augusta was playing a critical role in “South Australia’s renewable energy revolution – delivering cheaper, cleaner electricity to households and businesses”.
Spanish company Iberdrola is investing $500m in wind and solar at the Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park, 8km southeast of the city.
Initial works had cleared access from the highway, said Catherine May, country manager of DP Energy, which is a partner on the project. The construction workforce would now grow to 200.
“We’re into the start of the construction process proper,” Ms Way said. “The intent is to draw as much of the workforce locally as possible.” Fifty wind-turbines would take about 18 months to install with work on the 250,000 solar modules to start next year.
On completion, 20 ongoing full-time jobs would be created.
Across the Gulf, Nexif Energy has begun the $170m Stage 2 of its Lincoln Gap wind farm, 15km southwest of the city – creating 110 construction jobs. It will require 10 continuing positions.
“These projects provide a critical boost to SA’spost-COVID economic recovery, and are encouraged by the SA-NSW interconnector, which provides them with new export opportunities,” Mr Marshall said.
Energy and Mining Minister Dan van Holst Pellekaan said the Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park was designed to provide predictable power more uniformly across the day.
It would put downward pressure on prices and stabilise the grid. “These regional renewable energy projects are an example of how the State Government is delivering on its vision for SA to achieve 100 per cent net renewable energy by 2030,” he said.
The Port Augusta Renewable Energy Park will have 210MW of wind and 110MW of solar.
Lincoln Gap’s stage 2 consists of 86MW of wind to add to the existing 126MW and 10MW/10MWh battery storage. Nexif is planning a third stage – worth $400m – and a gas peaking plant.
This would enable it to offer “firm baseload-style contracts from renewable energy generated predominantly from existing and future stages of our Lincoln Gap project”, Nexif Australian managing director Charles Rattray said. PAGE 24: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 394
