The federal government is backing the world's largest solar-powered vanadium flow battery to be built near Hawker in the Flinders Ranges.
The $20.3 million project, developed by Yadlamalka Energy, will also incorporate a 6MW solar photovoltaic array at the Neuroodla electricity substation.
The Australian Renewable Energy Agency has granted $5.7 million in funding to support the installation of the battery component of the project.
Located within the SA Power Networks distribution network, the project will be connected to the National Electricity Market and will help bolster South Australia's energy security.
Minister for Energy and Emissions Reduction Angus Taylor said longer duration energy storage is one of five priority technologies identified by the federal government in the Technology Investment Roadmap to accelerate the competitiveness of new and emerging technologies with higher emissions alternatives.
"Longer duration energy storage is a key focus because it will enable reliable, firmed wind and solar at prices around the average wholesale electricity price of today," he said.
"Getting the technologies of the future right will support 130,000 jobs by 2030 and drive down emissions."
The project will create up to 100 jobs during the construction phase as well as ongoing employment opportunities for locals.
Member for Grey Rowan Ramsey said there has been a large drop in the price of wholesale electricity with the heavy investment in renewables in South Australia.
"This has created an often, over-supplied market," Mr Ramsey said.
"This in turn has created more instability in the grid and stabilisation projects like this one are essential to back up the renewable generators."
The vanadium flow battery will charge from electricity produced by solar panels when the sun is at its peak.
This electricity can then be delivered when it is most needed, such as in the evening when grid loads are high from consumer demand, but solar generation is no longer available.
By using vanadium flow batteries to complete this 'time shift', solar power becomes 'dispatchable', meaning it can be deployed to the grid when it is most valuable, at any time of day or night.
Yadlamalka Energy Trust founder and chairman Andrew Doman said commissioning is expected to begin at the end of 2021.
"Through using breakthrough technology in the form of vanadium flow batteries, we can deliver strong, economic infrastructure benefit to South Australia and at the same time support a low carbon economy," he said.
CREDIT: Amy Green
Word count: 398
