SOME of South Australia’s best-performing stocks have taken a drubbing as investors run for cover amid a coronavirus-driven share rout.
After a brutal lead from Wall Street, which is on track for its worst week since the global financial crisis, the Australian market - also clocking up its worst performance in more than a decade - fell 3.4 per cent yesterday, to bring it to six straight days of losses.
Among Adelaide stocks, internet and telephony company Uniti Group closed down more than 7 per cent, aerial-mapping company Aerometrex, which listed recently, was off 6.6 per cent, and metal detector and radio manufacturer Codan was 3.5 per cent lower.
Investors should keep in mind that the market had a very strong run in January, with Codan, for example, now trading at around the same level it was at in mid-December.
The company recently delivered its strongest-ever first-half profit. Adelaide-based drug developer Paradigm Biopharmaceuticals closed 8.4 per cent lower at $2.85, which compares with its 12-month high of $4.50 earlier this month.
Santos was 2.6 per cent lower at $6.83, against a high of $9.07 in January, which makes that a 25 per cent drop in about six weeks.
Beach Energy is more than $1 off its January 21 high of $2.91, losing 5.9 per cent to $1.75, while Cooper Energy closed 4.9 per cent down at 48.5c. That stock hit 68c in September.
Agriculture-focused Elders was 4.2 per cent lower, while Adelaide Brighton, which announced job cuts and cost-cutting measures this week, was 1.9 per cent down.
Treasury Wine Estates, which makes Penfolds and Wolf Blass wines, has had a horror run before recently, and after early strength dropped another 2.3 per cent to close at $11.03 yesterday. A series of profit warnings has lead to a drop recently from highs of $19.47 in September.Managed investment fund Argo Investments performed better than the broader market, been a steady ship, down 2.3 per cent, while SeaLink closed 4.4 per cent down after early resilience.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND BUSINESS EDITOR
Word count: 339
