ADELAIDE aerial mapping and spatial technology company Aerometrex is aiming to list on the Australian Securities Exchange next month with a valuation north of $90 million.
The company is looking to raise $25 million in new capital through the issue of 25 million shares at $1 each.
The underwritten offer will value the company 1t $94.4 million on listing, which is scheduled for December 10. The offer closes next Monday, November 25.
Glynde-based Aerometrex specialises in aerial mapping and photography, LiDAR (light detection and ranging) and aerial surveying, and has been in business for almost three decades.
“Aerometrex delivers mapping solutions to a range of customers around Australia, from state and federal government, to tier-one large organisations, as well as a range of SMEs,’’ the prospectus says in a letter from chairman Mark Lindh.
“Aerometrex has always been at the forefront of spatial technology advances. “In 2015, Aerometrex began a journey to take this competitive advantage to areas outside Australia.
“With a particular focus on its 3D product, which Aerometrex sees as the next generation in mapping, Aerometrex has already conducted a number of assignments for organisations in the US and Europe.
“In particular, Aerometrex has produced 3D maps for clients in lower Manhattan in the New York area, the city of Philadelphia as well as projects in France and Germany.
“To accelerate the significant opportunity, Aerometrex now offers new investors the opportunity to join Aerometrex’s existing shareholders by investing through this prospectus.’’ The prospectus shows the company has been profitable for the past three years, growing net profit from $2000 to $2.57 million in the past three financial years.
Revenues have grown from $9.7 million in 2016-17 to $16.1 million in 2018-19. While the company has traditionally been strong in aerial mapping and photography, the prospectus says it is looking to grow its subscription-based MetroMap product, to provide a more predictable revenue base.
The funds raised will be used to grow the subscriber base of MetroMap, establish a US office, buy new equipment, invest in R&D and for working capital.
Mark Deuter will remain managing director of the business, on $302,000 a year, and will be among the largest shareholders with a 12.1 per cent stake in the business after listing.
Aerometrex was founded in Queensland in 1980 and relocated to SA in 2000. The current owners bought the business in 2011 and it is primarily owned by staff and management. It has 82 staff.
Shares are not being offered to the public and are only available through brokers.
In addition to the chairman Mr Lindh, the company’s directors include Mr Deuter, chief technical officer David Byrne, non-executive director Matthew White who is a chartered accountant, and non-executive director Dr Peter Foster, who has a PhD in physics and is managing director of Longwood Audio and VentureNext.The corporate adviser is Adelaide Equity Partners.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND BUSINESS EDITOR
Word count: 480
