SHARES in Adelaide company Aerometrex more than doubled in the first minutes after the company listed on the Australian Securities Exchange yesterday, vindicating almost three decades of hard work for the technology firm.
The stock hit a high of $2.07 before closing 83.5 per cent up on the $1 issue price at $$1.83, with 5.9 million shares changing hands. The company is now valued at about $170 million.
The Glynde-based aerial mapping and 3D visualisation company raised $25 million in new capital through the listing of $1 shares, before listing on the ASX.
Aerometrex specialises in aerial mapping and photography, LiDAR (light detection and ranging) and aerial surveying, and has been in business for almost three decades.
Managing director Mark Deuter said yesterday the successful listing was a great result for the team and a testament to the it’s commitment to quality and reinvestment in the business over a long period.
Mr Deuter said the company had grown by reinvesting its profits, but the time came to either reach out to the public capital markets or accept a slower rate of growth.
The company will now seek to grow internationally, with a US office currently being established, and to grow the company’s MetroMap business, which frequently updates aerial photography over metropolitan areas and increasingly rural areas.
The company is seeking to grow subscriber numbers for the product, as part of its “data as a service” model, Mr Deuter said.
Aerometrex has already won work in France, Germany, New York, Philadelphia and New Zealand in addition to its Australian base of customers.
In a company update on its first day on the ASX, Aerometrex said it had “continued to grow strongly in line with past growth metrics during the financial year to date’’, with growth across its four divisions.
“The MetroMap web browser interface is continuing technical development and now includes the facility to switch to a full 3D display within the same browser panel,’’ the company said.
New surveys had been flown across Dubbo, Mackay, Rockhampton, the Gold Coast and Ballarat. In the LiDAR division demand was strong and the company had brought two more aircraft into LiDAR production.
Mr Deuter told The Advertiser the company’s 3D products held great potential and the market for that division was large.
The prospectus shows the company has been profitable for the past three years, growing net profit from $2000 to $2.57 million in the past three financial years. Revenues have grown from $9.7 million in 2016-17 to $16.1 million in 2018-19. Mr Deuter will remain managing director of the business, on $302,000 per year, and will be among the largest shareholders with a 12.1 per cent stake in the business after listing.
Aerometrex was founded in Queensland in 1980 and relocated to SA in 2000. The current owners bought the business in 2011 and it is primarily owned by staff and management. It has 82 staff.
Adelaide-based broker Taylor Collison acted as co-manager on the listing.Adelaide Equity Partners acted as corporate advisor to Aerometrex.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 506
