The Andrews government has shocked many by announcing it will seek to convert Victoria's power supply to 95 per cent renewables by 2035. This shock no doubt stems from the fact it represents a huge change from what we are used to. For many, it seems inconceivable that such a vital part of our economy and our lives - our main energy source - could rely so heavily on the vagaries of the wind and the sun.
Yet looking through the rear-view mirror is not the best way to navigate forward. I would say by 2035 our worry will not be whether we have enough energy - it is likely we will be swamped with vastly more than we can consume. We are potentially in danger of overestimating the difficulty of the task ahead and wasting money and time on power projects we don't need.
It turns out decarbonising Australia's electricity system is unfolding more quickly and easily than any expert anticipated 20 years ago, or even 10 years ago. What was thought to be impossible back then is now a regular occurrence in the electricity system. The South Australian grid had almost no renewable energy in 2002, yet by 2005 regulatory authorities announced a halt to new wind projects claiming the system could not cope with any more than 500MW of variable renewables. In 2022, over 2100MW of wind operates in the state without incident and another 600MW is under construction. The state also manages to accommodate 2500MW of solar. Renewable energy now regularly exceeds 100 per cent of South Australia's power demand. And the state also copes with renewables sometimes falling to very low levels of supply, too.
In 2015, then energy minister Ian Macfarlane claimed we were running out of decent sites for wind farms and there weren't any other feasible options to expand production of renewable energy. At that time wind provided 4.2 per cent of supply in the National Electricity Market, while solar supplied 2.2 per cent. Yet last year wind supplied 11.1 per cent, and solar had expanded to 12.4 per cent. In Victoria, renewables grew from 9.9 per cent to over one-third of supply last year. By 2025, Green Energy Markets estimate renewables will have reached 45 per cent of Victorian supply.
In addition, the capacity of wind and solar projects proposed for future development in the country is far larger than in 2015. In fact, my firm's database of proposed renewable energy projects stands at almost 260 gigawatts; by comparison, Australia's total coal and gas capacity is around 41 gigawatts.
Of course, running on 95 per cent renewables necessitates a massive expansion in the use of energy-storage technologies, which right now face more challenging economics than wind and solar. Here, too, we could face abundance in 2035. Major vehicle makers are planning to move to entirely electric fleets over the 2030s. With vehicle-to-grid technology, already on some cars, this becomes a reservoir of stored power. To use the Ford's F150 Lightning ute as an example, it can export 7 kilowatts of power with a battery big enough to meet the average household's electricity needs for seven days straight without recharging.
Australians buy about 1 million new cars per year. Multiply that by 7 kilowatts, and within five years you've got 35,000MW of power. Australia's entire coal fleet is just under 23,000MW.
There are a multitude of opportunities for Australia and Victoria to expand the use of renewable energy. But this is why things get problematic for the Andrews government's plan to revive the State Electricity Commission to deliver on its vision for 95 per cent renewables.
Many within government think the answer is bigger is better. Big offshore wind projects, big power lines and big batteries and big pumped hydro projects. But modular, mass-produced technologies, like solar and batteries, rolled out in homes and businesses and cars look extremely promising. Given our options, we need a diversity of organisations and people trying different ideas, technologies and approaches that are refined, improved and disciplined by competition. A monolith like the old SEC is the opposite.
Tristan Edis is an energy and carbon abatement economist at Green Energy Markets.
CREDIT: Tristan Edis
Word count: 698
