Here are some of the SA companies registered for the Space Industry Work Experience Program – an initiative of the South Australian Space Industry Centre (SASIC) and the Department for Education’s Advanced Technology Program (ATP) Silentium Defence: Australia’s most experienced passive radar specialists, specialising in the design, engineering and R&D of passive radar systems.
silentiumdefence.com.au Neumann Space: Creators of the Neumann Thruster, a plasma propulsion system capable of fulfilling all requirements for Low Earth Orbit (LEO) mission profiles such as extending mission lifetimes, station keeping, orbit raising, constellation phasing, inclination changes, de-orbiting and more.
neumannspace.com BAE Systems Australia: Specialises in a range of areas including designing and manufacturing combat and trainer aircraft, land-based combat vehicles and surface ships as well as developing advanced technology for military markets. BAE also partners with academic and industrial leaders to develop new technologies to support future technology strategies.
baesystems.com/en-aus/home Nova Systems: Specialising in the provision of engineering and management services, providing industry and government with world-class independent expertise in delivering complex projects and solving technologically challenging problems.
novasystems.com Inovor Technologies: Offering specialist development services and satellite mission solutions, as well as providing turnkey nanosatellite solutions for clients using their Apogee nanosatellite bus. inovor.com.au Myriota: Global leaders in low-cost, low-power, secure direct-to-orbit satellite connectivity for the Internet of Things (IoT).
Myriota has also pioneered a new way to retrieve data from anywhere on earth, either on land or at sea. myriota.com Fleet Space Technologies: Offering global low-cost LoRaWAN coverage from Fleet’s cutting-edge NanoSatellites in Low Earth Orbit, built to scale with businesses. Fleet is opening the world up for Industrial IoT with select partners by connecting millions of LoRaWAN devices around the globe.
fleet.space Southern Launch: Strives to be the polar earth orbit launch facility operator of choice, as well as to provide specialised ancillary range and technology services.
southernlaunch.space Aerometrex: Aerial photography, LiDAR and mapping specialists, providing high resolution spatial data products and services based on the latest aerial mapping technologies available.
aerometrex.com.au Geoplex: Mapping and Geographic Information Systems (GIS) specialists, helping clients visualise data, drive competitive advantage and solve business problems.geoplex.com.au
Word count: 349
