The savage share selldown of aerial mapper Nearmap (NEA, $1.91) highlights the dangers of investing in tech stocks valued on lusty revenue multiples that leave little room for error.
Nearmap has been among the market’s very best performing stocks in recent times with a new wave of enthusiasm for the company found in a range of broker reports at the start of the year.
But Nearmap shares tumbled 30 per cent after management in late January issued a relatively benign revenue guidance downgrade, but one that pointed to wider issues of increasing competition and overly rapid expansion into the US.
Nearmap’s revenues are derived from subscription services to its database of high-resolution images, which are interpreted and enhanced with 3D and artificial intelligence techniques. Subscribers include builders, architects, town planners and tradies such as solar panel installers.
As with other cloud-based tech providers such as accounting software house Xero, the customer bases are costly to build but then are highly scaleable once they are in place.
As long as revenues are growing, investors tolerate years of losses because they know that earnings will flow like rivers of gold once the subscriber mass becomes big enough.
But what if this snowballing subscriber growth is interrupted? Indeed, what if the shorters sense a downturn? Nearmap is suddenly one of the most shorted stocks on the ASX with about 14 per cent of the register held by short traders.
Ahead of its February 19 half-year results, Nearmap disclosed the annualised contract value (ACV) of its subscriptions was likely to be $102m-$110m for the full year to June 2020, compared with the $116m-$120m guided at its November AGM.
Management’s preferred measure, ACV is the expected annual worth of customer contracts in place. CEO Rob Newman cited unforeseen “churn and downgrade” events in the US, including the cancellation of two contracts related to the emerging autonomous vehicle sector.
Another client was stymied because of a legal injunction and another bailed out because of “budgetary constraints”.
In Australia and New Zealand, where Nearmap still derives 60 per cent of its revenue, “internal execution issues” contributed to customer churn rates creeping up to 7 per cent, from 5 per cent a year ago.
Even on the dampened guidance, Nearmap still expects 18 per cent ACV growth over the 2018-19 year and management still expects 20-40 per cent annual growth in the “mid to long term”. Given the ACV downgrade at the midpoint is a 10 per cent decline, the punishment doesn’t seem to fit the crime.
But some investors clearly think that Nearmap’s US “land and expand” strategy — funded by a chunky $70m capital raising in 2018 — faces stiffer obstacles.
The sell-off is not the first for Nearmap: in August last year the stock fell 9 per cent after the company announced full-year results, even though they were in line with the pre-announced numbers (ACV climbed 36 per cent to $90.2m).
So far brokers who research the widely covered stock are sticking with their buy recommendations, albeit with more qualifications and shaved “price targets”.
According to Citi, Nearmap trades on a multiple of six times expected revenue in 2020-21, compared with 13 times for its tech peers. The firm forecasts a current year loss of $40.8m, improving to a $35.3m deficit in 2020-21. Citi opines that with an expected $22m of net cash in 2020-21, Nearmap will have enough to fund its existing growth plans but will probably delay entry into new markets.
The broader issue for the company is that the North American push has stretched management’s ability to keep an eye on its home market.
“We are confident in the long-term outlook for the Australian market,” Newman says.
Aerometrex (AMX) $2.30 While an acknowledged sector leader, Nearmap is not the only ASX-listed aerial mapping play.
Founded by three former Nearmap staffers, minnow Spookfish listed in early 2015 but in late 2018 was acquired by Washington-based industry giant EagleView for $US90m.
The buyout was a nice payday for local Spookfish backers including Rod Jones, founder of education group Navitas and telco entrepreneur Tony Grist.
Filling the ASX void is the Adelaide-based Aerometrex, which listed in January after raising $25m at $1 apiece. While Aerometrex may be new to the bourse there’s nothing new about the company itself, having been founded in 1980.
Aerometrex clients include the federal and state governments, Santos and OZ Minerals. In keeping with the philosophy that it’s better to co-operate with the tech giants rather than compete with them, the company has provided 3D image capture for Google and Microsoft.
On prospectus numbers Aerometrex generated a net profit of $2.57m in the 2018-19 year, with revenue up 22 per cent to $16.1m.
Investors ascribe a $200m market valuation to Aerometrex. Nearmap has dropped out of the billion-dollar club but is still worth close to $800m.
Tim Boreham edits The New Criteriontim@independentresearch.com.au
CREDIT: Tim Boreham
Word count: 815
