The Walkway Gallery is sharing its space with IlluminateAdelaide's Lacunae display, connecting Bordertown, Murray Bridge Regional Gallery and the South Australian Museum.
The motion-sensored space projects a figure mirroring an individual's movement onto the screen, sharing the dancefloor with South Australians in real-time.
Arts and Culture Director for the Walkway Gallery, Naomi Fallon said the Gallery's never-done-before interactive exhibit was putting Bordertown on the map.
"I've been here since 2010 and it has been very fun, we've done many great projects," Ms Fallon said.
"It is the first time we have been in the festival, which is such a big opportunity for us to do more than a local event."
"Hopefully this is the start of something new."
Lacunae features art from the Tasmanian tech-art collective Soma Lumia and music from local Jesse Budel.
Read more: Jesse Budel contribution to Lacunae
"It isn't very often that we get brought into a metro festival and it is nice to not have to travel far to interact with these," Ms Fallon said.
The exhibit works best when a single person interacts with the display at a time, as motion sensors are able to project them into a virtual landscape with others in South Australia.
"On the screen, we are the green-teal colour figure, red is the South Australia museum and blue is Murray Bridge," Ms Fallon said.
"We didn't know what to expect from people's reactions.... there was a lot of concern that this would be scary and it would literally be themselves projected onto the screen but it is only the stick-figure shapes."
The music speakers are connected with the motion detectors and start playing when a person is in the space, and people are encouraged to dance.
"Everyone was quite inventive with their dance moves, and our (Tatiara District Council) CEO, Anne Champness was doing pirouettes," Ms Fallon said.
Addie Smedley, a local went to the exhibit with her mother and dog, named Dottie and was joyous to see the display pick up on the small dog.
Miss Smedley also laughed at the idea of there being a ghost in the exhibit, as an extra dancer often appeared in Bordertown's teal colour on the large screen.
Ms Fallon said that opening night brought a father and his son into the building and connected them with the mother and daughter, who were visiting Adelaide.
"We now have IlluminateAdelaide and we have a few big shows coming after this, we have the local show, which is a massive show, and our local community loves to support local artists," Ms Fallon said.
The IlluminateAdelaide Lacunae opened on Friday July 15, and will close on Saturday July 30, matching with the schedule at the South Australian Museum and is free to the community.
Our journalists work hard to provide local, up-to-date news to the community. This is how you can continue to access our trusted content:
Bookmark borderchronicle.com.au Register to the Border Chronicle Make sure you are signed up for our breaking headlines newsletter Follow us on Twitter: @borderchronicle Got a story tip or a letter to the editor? Contact us at editor@borderchronhicle.com.au
CREDIT: Neave Moore
Word count: 522
