She wanted to understand how the experience of art – the aesthetic jolt of a sublime landscape or the deep empathy of a shared personal narrative – could be channelled into helping people suffering from trauma, anxiety and depression.
A professor at the University of NSW, Bennett has become an advo­cate for the arts and mental health, especially through the Big Anxiety festivals that she founded in 2017. Her research and public programs have drawn attention to the benefits of creative interventions into one of the most troubling and seemingly intractable public health issues: mental illness.
One of the projects developed for the Big Anxiety is The Edge of the Present, a virtual reality installation that has been designed as a therapeutic tool to help people with experience of depression, anxiety and suicidal ideation.
Users put the VR goggles on and immediately are transported into a view of a sublime landscape – snow-covered mountains, a tropical rainforest or a beach. The change of scene is so sudden and powerful – intense in its “communicative realism”, to quote a research paper on the project – that it has the effect of taking people out of themselves, relieving their mental anguish, if only temporarily.
“People with severe depression, when they think about themselves, tend to do so without emotion and feeling – everything is drained of emotional interest and purpose,” Bennett says. “In the (VR experience), people trigger images that feel awesome. Maybe you would get this if you went on a trip up a mountain – but there’s all of the planning and the travel. Here, you drop in for a 10-minute experience, and when we measure people after 10 minutes, everybody’s mood improves.”
Bennett’s aim with the Big Anxiety festivals is to raise awareness of imaginative, non-medical interventions in mental health. The festivals are run through UNSW, where Bennett is director of the Big Anxiety Research Centre, and presented in different cities with local partners. A Big Anxiety festival will be travelling to Melbourne in September in partnership with RMIT. Next month, a festival under the banner The Big Reach will be held in Brisbane in partnership with Metro South Health. The two-day event at QUT Gardens Point Precinct will include discussions, workshops and demonstrations of creative ways to promote mental health and wellbeing.
Bennett says her approach to mental health is not intended to replace medical treatment when required but may be considered complementary to it. She argues that medicine is concerned with the pathology of mental illness, its diagnosis, clinical treatment and medication. Her arts interventions – including immersive and creative exercises – are based on working with a person’s “lived experience” and giving them a safe, creative outlet in which to express it. It’s the difference between a clinical setting that asks “What is wrong with you?” and a person-centred therapy that asks “What happened to you?”.
“Mental health has traditionally been addressed in a very medicalised way,” Bennett says. “We now know that’s insufficient – it just doesn’t deliver for so many people. It’s not that it’s wrong … but we need to be far more people-centred and we need to extend beyond purely clinical offerings.
“Lived experience is becoming a really important concept in mental health. Initially it was quite marginalised within the medical model. Now everybody, including medical researchers, are interested in lived experience. But if you really want to find out what people are experiencing internally, you need to develop the languages to do that, and the arts are where we can do that.”
I’m talking to Bennett at the UNSW Arts, Design & Architecture campus in Sydney. She leads me into a theatrette in which 56 LED screens are arranged like a cyclorama. The screens are showing the opening minutes of Parragirls Past, Present, a 3D audiovisual presentation by women who, as girls, lived at the former Parramatta Girls Home. Girls there were subjected to cruel treatment and abuse; the video shows its prison-like sandstone walls. As Bennett explains, Parragirls was a way for the women to transform their experiences of the home through the creative outlet of “media-making”.
“It reinforces agency, it’s a way of reflecting on feelings and events and putting trauma into narrative,” Bennett says. “It’s not only telling the story to others – although that’s an important aspect – it’s about exercising some control and establishing perspective over the narrative. And being able to produce a high-quality media output has all sorts of benefits because people can use it to broker dialogue around their experience – in a larger political realm or with other survivors.”
Parragirls and other mental health projects will be shown and discussed at the Big Reach in Brisbane. Waumananyi: The Song on the Wind is a VR film that has been developed by Indigenous artists and traditional healers in the APY Lands of South Australia.
The VR program gives the viewer the sensation of being trapped in a hollow log, unable or unwilling to connect with the outside world. Holes in the log show a beautiful desert landscape outside, and a group of women who want the solitary person in the log to come out.
Other interventions include Body Mapping – using VR to “map” physical and psychological feelings on an outline of the body – and a series called Awkward Conversations, where participants are invited to have one-on-one conversations with actors, writers, musicians and other artists who discuss their own experiences of trauma, depression or alienation.
Bennett says that, increasingly, mental health must be seen as a community responsibility. The costs to society of mental illness are huge: to the people who are unable to enjoy their lives fully; and to the community at large, through lost productivity and the expensive provision of health services. The Black Dog Institute says about one in five Australians aged 16 to 85 will experience mental illness in any one year, the most common illnesses being depression, anxiety and substance use disorder. Young people are especially vulnerable. Suicide is the leading cause of death for people aged 25 to 44 and the second leading cause of death for those aged 15 to 24. Alarmingly, more than half of people who experience mental illness do not seek help, and this is where community-led, arts-based interventions can play a role.
“Trauma is, by definition, an overwhelming experience that can’t be processed immediately because it just exceeds your capacity for speech and language – it takes a while to conceptualise, and to put into words,” Bennett says.
“Visual resources and all art forms are hugely helpful in this. Sometimes the effect of trauma is that people are rendered powerless, so the exercise of creativity is really important and art is one of the main ways in which we can work through that process, to establish ourselves as being in control, as agents who can make meaning and create our destiny … Creative process is fundamental.”
Bennett grew up in London, and although she has lived in Australia for three decades she speaks with a faintly British accent. She studied art history and became involved in immersive media production and development.
Asked why she became interested in mental health, she says: “There are things from my personal background, obviously – understanding the process of living with and working through trauma, which is common to many people.
“It always seemed to me that was what you could do with art. The art that I was interested in always seemed to be able to provide that kind of support. But it took me a long time to work out how you could mobilise it.”
Bennett has published widely on the arts and mental health. She is also the editor of a new book, The Big Anxiety: Taking Care of Mental Health in Times of Crisis, published later this year by Bloomsbury Academic.
The techniques she has worked with often are based on psychosocial approaches to mental health, where individuals can discuss difficult emotions and traumatic experiences in a psychologically safe place. One of the advantages of using digital media such as VR, she adds, is that it may appeal to people who are otherwise resistant to seeking help.
“Culturally, we are not very good at supporting the expression of feelings; we often tend to squash down distress, anger, too much grief,” she says.
“But if it is niggling away, it needs to be worked through and processed. If you have a fantastic psychotherapist, you can do that in the long term – but most people don’t have that. The idea that it can happen in community spaces, social and cultural spaces is really important.”
The Big Reach is at QUT Gardens Theatre, Brisbane, May 26-27.
Lifeline: 13 11 14. Beyond Blue: 1300 22 4636.
Word count: 1437
