THE final grains and fodder entries are coming in this week, for the upcoming Royal Adelaide Show.
While the grains and fodder competition was conducted last year, RAHS grains and fodder committee member Bill Rowett said the prospect of showcasing the industry amongst the hustle and bustle of the returning show was exciting.
"We're all keen to get the show up and running," he said.
"We're a big industry in SA and we've got an important role to play in educating people in the city and putting good news stories out about farmers."
Mr Rowett said the last of grains and fodder entries were coming in this week.
Fodder is the feature competition and theme this year, with hay and chaff entries to be sent away for testing next week.
All of the customary classes will be showcased in the Golden Grains Pavilion, including wheat, durum, barley, oats, pulses, small seeds, oilseeds and prepared seeds.
Mr Rowett said close to 50 entries had been sent in for the prepared seeds section, with judging scheduled on August 18.
"It has been five years since that class was introduced and it has been well received," he said.
Junior competitions will include baled hay and grain, and junior grains judging.
"We introduced some junior classes for schoolchildren last year and we expect that to slowly grow," Mr Rowett said.
"It's an important addition as they're the future of our Show."
Mr Rowett said while entries were down slightly on last year, he expected the quality of entries to be as good as ever.
"Most of the grain and hay entries are very good. We did miss out on some hay entries because there was rain in parts during the haymaking period.
A grains and fodder photo competition will also be held, while the Golden Grains pavilion will be hosting a virtual reality farming experience, displaying a brand new $250,000 hay baler and tractors, as well as state-of-the-art building panels made of oaten straw.
Awards will be announced at 3pm, Tuesday, September 6 at the Goyder Mezzanine.
CREDIT: Quinton McCallum
Word count: 346
