THE terrifying voices inside a schizophrenic patients’ head are being brought to life though video game-style avatars as part of a revolutionary new treatment.
Allowing patients to “meet” and treat the hallucinatory voice using the virtual reality technology is proving three times more successful than traditional psychotherapy, research in Denmark, Canada and the UK has shown. The first Australian trial – run by Swinburne University and funded by the National Health and Medical Research Council – is due to start enrolling 200 participants in July.
Swinburne psychologist Associate Professor Neil Thomas, who is leading the trial, said it was hard to treat patients experiencing voices. This was because they were a very private experience for the person and it was rare for the experience to happen when they were in the room with the therapist.
“So, we’ve used 3D animation software that would be used in video games and in movies to create an avatar which represents the voice so the avatar can be presented on a computer screen, or can be viewed with a virtual reality headset and is a representation of what the person would imagine their voice to be like,” he said.
“The other element is using voice-modulation software to re-create the sound of the voice so it sounds as close as possible to the experience that the person has.” During an appointment, the therapist uses the technology to role play “the voice” in therapy sessions. Professor Thomas said this gave the patient the chance to act out responding to the voice, standing up to it and learning how to control it.
“The feedback that we get from people is that they are surprised themselves with how vivid this experience is, how much it sort of re-creates the feelings that they get when they’re experiencing hearing voices. So, that can be very helpful,” he said.
Up to eight in 10 people suffering from schizophrenia will experience a voice in their head. It is also common in people who have experienced childhood trauma, Professor Thomas said. The current standard treatment is an antipsychotic medication along with cognitive behavioural therapy.
CREDIT: SUE DUNLEVY
Word count: 354
