Vale Queen Elizabeth THANK you Queen Elizabeth II for being the person you were and how you gave all for Britain and the Commonwealth.
Your 2021 comment speaks so articulately about how many feel: “Grief is the price we pay for love.” IAN KENT Renmark
Support King Charles NOW that Queen Elizabeth II has died, the republican movement will be out in full force.
The transition to a republic may not be as smooth as they wish. We have the privilege of living with one of the greatest monarchies in the world – the British monarchy. It has always been the backbone of our lives.
Republics come and go, but monarchies remain, judging by the ancient ones that are still there and working well. Wars have been fought under our flag and our armed services are proud to serve under it and swear allegiance to our monarch. A lot of people have migrated out here from Britain.
The monarchy has had wobbles in its time, but it has always been able to get back on track and carry on.
If it ain’t broke, don’t fix it.
Long live the king.
ELSPETH LEWIS Whyte Yarcowie
Minimal changes REFERENCES to the Governor-General in the republic debate may be largely red herrings (”Republic renewal”, Sunday Mail, September 4).
If Australia had already become a republic under a minimalist model, a president would’ve had the power to dismiss prime minister Gough Whitlam in 1975. They would also lack powers in regards to PMs giving themselves multiple portfolios.
JEFF STEVENSON Adelaide
Eat healthily FOR about a decade YouTube has featured prestigious doctors saying the official dietary guidelines in Western countries are flawed and may lead to obesity and type 2 diabetes (“Can the carbs”, Sunday Mail, September 4).
Our guidelines encourage a much greater carbohydrate intake than is healthy. If you follow them to the letter you may become obese and increase your risk of diabetes. So, what do we do?
Reduce our intake of sugar, bread, pasta, pastry and processed carbohydrates. Also increase your intake of healthy fats including eggs, avocados, nuts, meat and fish.
If you do this, you should lose weight and get healthier. It turns out our grandparents’ approach of meat and three veg was a good idea after all.
MARK TAYLOR Somerton Park
Nature children SOUTH Australia’s Nature Festival is on next month and children, parents and teachers should enjoy some virtual reality events such as Herding Caterpillars (“Butterfly effect hits festival”, Sunday Mail, September 4).
Such experiences will surely make children more interested in nature and protecting it, a valuable lesson in today’s world.
And it may also help lead them into scientific careers.
BARBARA FRASER Burwood, NSW
Homes for everyone IT is supposed that MPs should have a hint of sense, but I think that my cat has more than many of them.
With this idea of bringing in 195,000 migrants, where are the houses for them? Public housing hasn’t been improved for years: For the homeless, evicted renters, flood victims, or people on waiting lists.
I haven’t heard of MPs offering to take in anyone who is in dire straits. Houses can’t be built in a week, so where are the new people going to live? Will it be in tents, cars and doorways?
How many are going to be brought in at a time?
Where are the hospitals, nursing staff and carparks that will be needed? What about schools?
What about unemployment?
And have we enough jobs or dole money?
TILLY BARBER Elizabeth
Packing troubles I NOW know I have something in common with columnists Nick Ryan and Peter Goers. We all cannot pack light.
I also procrastinate, pack madly and still manage to leave important items behind.
Key addresses and information, any jackets or coats on a winter trip, and so it goes on.
I bring along a swag of books totally optimistic that I will read the lot (even if it is just overnight).
As I am about to pack for my first big interstate trip since before Covid-19, I hope I can rewire my brain to downsize.
Or I can always buy a bigger suitcase.
JENNY ESOTS Willunga
Sceptics emerge I AGREE with almost everything David Penberthy says (“Lest we forget – this bordered on craziness”, Sunday Mail, September 4).
But where has this questioning and healthy scepticism been hiding for the past two years?
PAUL MITCHELL Barmera
Scaring animals I WENT to the Royal Adelaide Show with a few members of my family. It occurred to me at the event that, given the fact that fireworks displays frighten animals, it is cruel to have fireworks at an event in which numerous animals are being kept in captivity. If the show is to continue to be held, and continue to have animals in it, then it should not have fireworks.
MATT BUCKLEY Parkside
Haves, have nots THERE seems to be an increase in petty crime.
Sure, we will always have malicious crime spurred by greed or jealousy, but I feel the increasing wealth gap that seems to be happening is related to petty crime.
The basic wage is only just a liveable income, let alone unemployment and pension rates. I would suggest that losses incurred would reduce dramatically if more people had a living wage.
Apart from a reduced cost of crime, the economy may also improve if people could afford to at least provide basics for themselves and family.
If the wealth gap continues to grow, so too will the crime rates. ROD FORSAITH Flagstaff Hill
Word count: 924
