A NEW 360-degree screen and sound collaboration has also brought ceramic artist Gerry Wedd’s work full circle to the waves and coastline that he calls home.
For more than 25 years from the late 1980s, Wedd created iconic designs for the Mambo surf wear label, which took the world by storm.
His latest narrative urns and ceramic “flying” thongs capture the history and evolution of the coast where he has lived and surfed for more than 50 years on the Fleurieu Peninsula – which is also home to his WAVE collaborators, filmmaker Mark Patterson and soundscape musician Gabriella Smart.
“Mark approached me with some kind of virtual, augmented project in mind,” Wedd says.
“I didn’t know where it would end up being … in a gallery or in a headset.” The resulting WAVE installation has taken over Gallery One of the Art Gallery of South Australia’s Elder Wing, with a 4m-high, 7m-diameter screen.
“It’s very immersive because it’s a 360-degree screen,” Wedd says. “In a way, you are being pulled along by what is going on in front of you – but the thing I have enjoyed is to turn around and see that the action which has passed me is still happening in the background.
“Years ago, I dreamt of making a human-sized tableau out of clay but, of course, clay is so unpredictable and you’d have to have giant kilns.
“This is incredible because I can make things at a normal scale and all of a sudden you can be in a forest.” WAVE takes place in three acts, from a landscape before European invasion, through vast urbanisation and environmental collapse, to a final great wave which cleanses the way for renewal.
Patterson, who worked extensively with late SA film director Paul Cox, recently produced the acclaimed virtual reality work Square Circles, by Indigenous musician William Barton and the Australian String Quartet.
For WAVE, Patterson enlisted the digital team at Jumpstart to bring Wedd’s motifs to life through CGI animation. Rather than the usual practice of scoring a film after the visuals have been completed, Smart was also involved throughout the creative process.
“Some of her suggestions ended up being in the visuals – and then we had to respond to the aural,” Wedd says.
“There’s some really interesting juxtapositions of the visual and the aural, bits that make you smile where the music is very particular to a scene.” Blue and white ceramics have been used as a way of documenting life in many cultures throughout history, from Chinese porcelain, to Islamic earthenware, to England’s Wedgewood and then Delftware from the Netherlands.
Wedd enjoys putting his own, sometimes irreverent spin on that tradition, and says WAVE takes it even further in new directions.
“All of a sudden, you are walking in it, rather than observing it from the outside,” he says.
“It’s almost like you are on the inside of a decorated pot.” SEE: WAVE IS AT THE ART GALLERY AS PART OF THE ADELAIDE FILM FESTIVAL UNTIL JANUARY 8
CREDIT: PATRICK McDONALD
Word count: 506
