Tourists are finally arriving back to this tropical paradise, breathing life back into a much-loved region rocked by Covid-19 lockdowns, helped along by new direct flights from Adelaide book it now As the sun sets on another perfect Fijian day and tourists swarm to the water’s edge of the Sheraton Fiji Golf and Beach Resort to drink in the final rays, a smile appears on the face of Neeraj Chadha.
For the Marriott International vice-president of Fiji and Samoa, the noise of holidaymakers signifies the return of the lifeblood of the economy and the country’s biggest trade.
“Travellers have started to return in a huge way and it’s meant a huge deal to the country’s employment and the community’s wellbeing,” Chadha says.
“The Fijian people are very resilient and very happy people, so they understood the pandemic shutdown was part of their lives, but a lot didn’t have enough means to get through.” Fiji’s tourism sector employed more than 100,000 people and was responsible for more than 35 per cent of the country’s GDP.
So when the pandemic hit the country of just over 900,000 residents – where the minimum hourly wage is $3.34FJ ($2.20) – the impact was widespread.
Taxi driver Jeet Kumer says when the borders closed he didn’t work for a year, instead the father-of-two survived on their small poultry farm and by planting vegetables.
“At 11am we would have breakfast and lunch together, we were surviving on whatever we had,” he says.
With international borders reopening in December, the relief was instant. Fiji Tourism mounted a strong campaign, saying it was “open for happiness” – targeted at Aussie tourists to take a short flight to somewhere warm.
In July, Fiji Airways launched its fourth route available to Australians – its twice weekly direct service from Adelaide to Nadi, taking tourists to a comfortable 28C in just five hours.
Tourism Fiji chief executive Brent Hill says the resumption of Adelaide flights is an endorsement of what Australia means to Fiji – with 367,000 Aussies visiting pre-pandemic in 2019.
“Tourism is the lifeblood here in Fiji and we couldn’t be happier to see the ... route opening up so even more Australians are able to visit after a tough couple of years,” Hill says.
Such was the “faith in the recovery of tourism in Fiji”, Sheraton used the closure to undertake a $48m refurbishment of its 300-room resort on Denarau Island.
“We are well and truly up in the 90 per cent for occupancy, and what’s most encouraging is seeing the forward booking pace, which is a serious growth on 2019 figures,” Chadha says.
“We’ve seen a lot of new travellers. Typically, Fiji was a fabulous family destination and multi-generations have travelled to Fiji.
“Now, we’re seeing new couples and people who haven’t travelled before.” Having never travelled to Fiji myself, it was easy to relax into the five-star resort lifestyle. There are multiple pools, restaurants, shopping, a spa, daily activities and a virtual reality gaming room for the kids and kids at heart.
Given the updated additions and luxury feel of the hotel, it’ll be interesting to see what Marriott International does to transform its Westin Resort next door, which is expected to be open by the end of the year.
One of Fiji’s newest tourist attractions is Seventh Heaven – a solar-powered, floating double-storey platform with a restaurant, spa and gift shop.
It’s set idyllically among the coral reefs of the Mamanuca Islands, about 30 minutes from Port Denarau, with snorkels and canoes available to explore the crystal clear warm waters.
Co-director Eddy Rotteveel, who came up with the fun concept with a mate five years ago, says construction was nearly finished when the pandemic hit.
“We basically caught the last flight out of Fiji back (home) to New Zealand, but we kept most of the staff on looking after the Seventh Heaven platform for two years,” he says.
“Everyone went through the same difficult times and we thought we’d keep the staff and do the best to support them, and it worked out well because most of them are here and they’ve been with us from the very start.” As soon as you step off the water taxi and on to Seventh Heaven, you feel relaxed. There’s a welcome drink on arrival, before you work up the courage to take the “leap of faith” and jump 5m off the top deck into the water.
It’s among the archipelago of 20 islands where travellers who enjoy water sports will be most at home. Some of the world’s best snorkelling can be done by simply stepping off an Island Beach and into the water.
At Matamanoa Island Resort we snorkelled multiple days and each time was different, with new fish added to our spotting list and even a few reef sharks.
Deep Blue Diving and Watersports also offer scuba diving, fishing and snorkel safaris for island visitors, while those wanting to stay dry can visit a local village on a neighbouring island, or Modriki Island, where Castaway was filmed.
If you like the thrill of the chase, I recommend a fishing charter for a chance to catch a Spanish mackerel – not only are they sensational eating, but are a lot of fun to reel in.
For those visitors who want to travel with good purpose, there are new tours on offer in Fiji.
Marriott International has launched Good Travel, offering curated experiences around environment, climate change and community, while Fiji Airways has created Our Ocean, Our Life mangrove and turtle eco tours.
As part of the tour, visitors get to handfeed critically endangered hawksbill turtles at the Kula Wild Adventure Park, which is home to a breeding program for iguanas and birds – most of which are no longer seen in the wild.
But be careful, those hungry turtles will give you a nip if your fingers aren’t fast enough.
Next, visitors don gumboots and get their hands muddy helping to replant mangroves along the island’s Coral Coast – a major initiative of the country’s plan to replant 30 million trees in 15 years to combat global warming.
Tour guide and father-of-five Freddy Nianoca says Fiji is “championing replanting and reforestation” to protect the environment and rebuild natural habitat for fish and crabs.
“The effect of global warming is real here in Fiji, and mangrove planting is part of the plan to minimise that effect,” he says.
It will be rewarding to return to Fiji in the future and see the growth of these plants and environmental benefits they’re providing.
As for the tourists being back, Nianoca says the whole mood of the nation has lifted on the back of the tourism revival.
“Now that tourism is back, it’s put a smile on people’s faces. Families are back at work in hotels, transport and hospitality, and they’re beginning to put food back on the table for everyone to enjoy,” he says.
“Sometimes there was no light in the tunnel that we could see, but there was always hope.
“We still have the beautiful Bula spirit, the atmosphere is always welcoming, so feel free to come over to Fiji.” The journalist travelled as a guest of Fiji Airways
BOOK IT NOW fiji.travel and fijiairways.com Accommodation: Resorts are scattered across the island. Denarau Island is home to big names including Sheraton, Sofitel, Hilton and Radisson. For those looking for a resort stay, the Fiji travel website has plenty of options.
Rooms at Sheraton Golf and Beach Resort start from about $450 per night. Rating: 5/5
CREDIT: Story ERIN JONES
Word count: 1261
