JACOB Keen was just a schoolboy when he allegedly created the spyware tool that would be used by online perverts globally.
Using the online alias “Shockwave”, and the avatar of a panda dressed in a business suit (inset), from his messy bedroom in his mum’s Zillmere home he wrote the code that powers the tool.
Then he allegedly created an account on the underground online forum www.HackForums.net using his alias to start selling it.
The demand for his product was strong, and it was immediately popular online, selling in 128 countries around the world.
It was simple to use and required little technological knowledge to install on unsuspecting victims’ computers.
It also allegedly allowed abusers to monitor people who live thousands of kilometres away and can be used as a form of covert control by ex-partners.
The popularity of the spyware also increased along with society’s shift towards living our lives online, using webcams to communicate, banking online, and sending and receiving photos.
Keen is alleged to have pocketed nearly half a million dollars as he peddled his spyware online, but is alleged to have frittered away this cash before authorities could seize it.
It has been three years since his home was raided by police and his computer was seized. Photos taken during the raid show his curtains drawn tight, a desk with three monitors, and the remains of a snack in a bowl, chopsticks, and a yellow Pikachu soft toy from geeky toy franchise Pokemon. Keen’s pet cat is asleep on a chair, and an open laptop sits on his brown-stained bare mattress.
In his LinkedIn profile Keen describes himself as a software engineer, a “full stack web developer” and “game developer”.
He states he is working as a software engineer at US sports betting website FanDuel in Melbourne, starting the job in May.
He previously worked at ScoreSaber for four years, then was under contract for Canadian game developer Cyberspline Games Inc, which sells BoomBox, a virtual reality game to play music with a “furry companion called Pupa”. In 2018 and 2019 he was living in Brisbane and working as a software engineer under contract for Beat Games, his LinkedIn profile states.
CREDIT: VANDA CARSON
Word count: 368
