Doppelganger and Zombies presents new artworks created based on 3D scans of David Roche’s 18th and 19th century collection of art objects Objets d’art are replicated and reincarnated – although not always adhering to their original form or purpose – in a new hi-tech exhibition ominously titled Doppelganger and Zombies.
As part of a two-year research fellowship funded by the David Roche Foundation, UniSA and the Society of Interior Designers of Australia (SIDA) Foundation, German-born architecture and design academic Dr Rochus Urban Hinkel has reimagined objects from the late Roche’s collection of 18th and 19th century decorative art.
“It’s quite stunning what is actually there – it’s very diverse with long stories and histories,” Hinkel says of the North Adelaide house museum.
As an artist himself, Hinkel has also sought to explore the potentials and limitations of digital technologies, fabricating his “zombie” clones with 3D scanning and printing, CNC (computer numerical control) milling, photogrammetry, digital modelling, image manipulation software and algorithms, as well as augmented and virtual reality.
The results, as the exhibition title suggests, are not exact copies. The German term doppelganger – which translates as “double walker” – means not only a look-alike but can also reference an apparition, or ghostlike shadow of a person.
Similarly, as fans of the Walking Dead franchise can attest, resurrected zombies do not retain the exact character traits of their previous incarnation.
“The zombie is a hint and refers to the fact that these objects look like they’ve been raised from the dead,” Hinkel says.
“That’s what we are doing in a way. They are 200 or 300 years old, and we are bringing them back to life – but in our period.” Hinkel has also lived and worked in London, Amsterdam, Melbourne and Stockholm, before returning to Australia to become associate professor for architecture and design at the University of Melbourne in 2020.
“I started as a furniture and interior designer, then moved into architecture … then went back into teaching and practice,” Hinkel says.
Doppelganger and Zombies brings together elements of Hinkel’s many diverse fields of interest, from furniture and interior design, to art and the “architectural” structure of objects.
In some works, Hinkel’s doppelgangers have been “reanimated” with 3D modelling, enabling the viewer to travel around and through details of the object, or examine its form from within. Some of these digital animated works were shown at Fermoy House last year.
In the case of The Music Lesson figurine, made by the Chelsea Porcelain Factory in England circa 1760, the Roche collection’s is one of only four known to exist in the world, the others being in London’s Victoria and Albert Museum, New York’s Metropolitan Museum and Melbourne’s National Gallery of Victoria.
“There are really precious items. The proposal was, how can we make it more accessible, and look at them in different ways, using the digital technologies only as a vehicle. They are the tool to achieve what we want, in the investigation of that collection.
“You see parts where you can, for example, fly through a vase or a basket. At the same time, you could use your handheld device – your smartphone or tablet – and basically place it (the virtual object) into your environment.” For the digital doppelganger of The Music Lesson, Hinkel and his research assistant Melissa Irahetta also worked with a composer to create a soundscape which was also adapted and altered from historical music.
Other examples in this new exhibition reimagine and reproduce elements of the work in new forms or on different shaped surfaces, through 3D and digital printing.
“We start manipulating it and creating something else – but also testing what we can do now, that they were not able to do when they created these (original) pieces.” The exhibition will explore the creative process and screen the digital doppelgangers, as well as displaying the original pieces and new zombie objects. Because many of the objects in the Roche collection were acquired at auction, the exhibition will also include an online auction of NFTs – Non-Fungible Tokens – featuring the new works, as well as an auction of “physical collectibles” reproduced on a 1:12 scale.
“I think in the next five years, that will really change how we perceive the world – so it becomes this augmented and altered reality,” Hinkel says.
An artist’s talk will be held on July 22, then artist tours and the auction on July 23. ■ Doppelganger and Zombies, David Roche Foundation, July 1-23. rochefoundation.com.au
CREDIT: Story PATRICK McDONALD
Word count: 754
