No matter how you spend 72 hours in the Top End, you’re guaranteed it will be hot in one way or another
DAY 1:THE HARBOUR 0900 Darwin Harbour – four times the size of Sydney’s – is ground zero. I’ve checked into the Vibe Hotel on Darwin’s waterfront and hit the Flying Doctor Service museum at Stokes Hill Wharf, site of the Japanese bombing invasion in 1942, a cataclysmic event you can experience in vivid virtual reality at the museum.
1030 I’m on the harbour imagining warplanes and tropical cyclones on its horizon. I’m picturing the dugout canoes of the Larrakia as they fish for saratoga off Garramilla. I’m hearing the hoot of pearling luggers and the siren song of dugong.
But I’m imagining it from a jetski going 80km/h… I’d better open my eyes. I used to hate jetskis. It’s taken 10 seconds of fanging one for me to fall in love. We’re on a 00Seven adventure, hooning up Darwin’s coast, past beaches, over shipwrecks. 00Seven started a year ago with five skis and now has 21. Big fun!
1200 It’s noon. Time to do as Darwinians do and rehydrate, not with water, but beer. I perch at Wharf One with my jetski instructor, Damo Duffy, aka Wildman, a former army paratrooper, heavy metal singer and Discovery Channel star who turned to jetskiing after a crocodile jumped out of a river and snatched his hat off his curls.
“After that, I handed back the boat keys and walked me ruggers ’n’ pluggers down here,” grins Wildman. “I love it. Once I had a big manta ray jump over me ski!” He says it wearing his mate’s ex-wife’s short shorts, but that’s another story.
1400 To walk off the beers and Humpty Doo barramundi, I stroll to Fannie Bay, named for an opera singer but home to a jail. Then I get to a hot date with Sweetheart. The massive 5m stuffed croc, famous for up-ending local boats on Sweets Lagoon in the ’70s, now greets visitors to the Museum and Art Gallery of the NT at Fannie Bay. There are brilliant exhibits on Cyclone Tracey, a huge warehouse of pioneering sea craft, great photos of Darwin’s wild early years and powerful Indigenous art.
1638 I’m peckish, so I smash Darwin’s signature dish, a laksa. Although Mary is the laksa queen, ruling over huge queues at Parap Markets, Chok’s Place on Smith Street was the 2019 Golden Bowl winner. Fat prawns in fragrant broth? Chok’s rocks!
1800 The harbour is calm as I board a sunset cruise. Then Nungalinya takes the stage. The Dreamtime ancestor commands the cyclones and storms that give Darwin its “live today, worry tomorrow” ethos. Now she unleashes a light show across the sky that is stunningly beautiful, slightly terrifying – and uniquely Darwin.
2120 After the storm spectacle, I need a simple pleasure. I head to Frying Nemo at Tipperary Waters, not far from the city, and grab a few fresh prawns with mango, river mint, a bag of hot chips and a longneck beer and relax under the Darwin stars.
DAY 2:THE BUSH 1000 To the north is the Van Diemen Gulf and Snake Bay. East is the South Alligator River and south lies the Rum Jungle. Right now my GPS is focused on the skinny 2m gap between me and the 4.5m crocodile locals call Bonecruncher.
Luckily, we’ve got a friend in common: Matt Wright, ex-soldier and buffalo wrangler turned tour guide. We’re on one of Matt’s Explore the Wild experiences, an adrenaline-charged day of airboats, helicopters and close croc encounters.
Matt and Bonecruncher are business partners. Matt nursed and fed the big croc back to health after he lost his bottom jaw, an eye and a foot in a territorial biff. In return, Bonecruncher now lets Matt’s punters get scarily close to one of the Territory’s most famous residents (fact: Darwin has more crocs than people).
1300 The morning was all action sports and apex predators. This afternoon is all about knowledge, as shared by Ethical Adventures’ Rob Woods. He takes us around Litchfield National Park. We snorkel the waterhole at Florence Falls and walk monsoon forests, shadowed by huge termite mounds and brown kites flying overhead.
1515 Because Litchfield is disputed territory – four Indigenous clans claim it – signage in the national park is painfully absent. Rob tells the stories instead, and they’re brilliant. “I love how raw this country is,” he says. “Two-billion-year-old rocks, prehistoric palms and cycads, incredible animals. But it’s under threat from fracking and farming. Tourism can protect it, if it’s ethical, but everyone has to do their bit.” 1630 Rob’s challenge is fresh on my mind when we arrive at Lambells Lagoon for a Pudakul Aboriginal Cultural Tour. Run by elder Graham Kenyon and daughters Selena and Deanne, Pudakul teaches basket-weaving, spear-throwing and didgeridoo before a walking tour of native plants used for food, medicine and shelter.
1800 With a belly full of damper and the vitamin C-rich kakadu plum and green ants, I head back to Darwin. It’s the Sunday of a long weekend and Darwin is thirsty.
We head for the Mindil Beach Sunset Markets, a snaking smorgasbord of tent kitchens showcasing Darwin’s incredible multiculturalism: laksa, kebabs, curries, pizzas and roast roo.
1830There’s a sunset Welcome to Country by Trent Lee of Saltwater Cultural Tours but he refuses my offer of a calamari ring. Octopus is his totem so he’s forbidden to eat it. “Could’ve been worse,” he smiles. “My mate has a barramundi totem.” 2045 I’m as stuffed as Sweetheart when I waddle out of Mindil with some Darwin souvenirs: a Mick’s leather whip, a beer-can hat and a cane toad bottle opener.
DAY 3:THE CITY 1000 After a dingo’s breakfast, I do an art crawl of the city galleries. I love Indigenous art – even more so the Dreaming stories behind them. Boxer Milner Tjampitjin has said of his epic series of river paintings that he started life as a fish in Sturt Creek. Only when his parents fished him out and tasted his flesh did they realise he was the jauriny (spirit dreaming) of their unborn son. He then took human form.
1200 With the money I saved not buying Boxer’s painting, I skip the two-hour ferry and hightail a flight to the Tiwi Islands, 20 minutes airtime away. The view over Bathurst Island is spectacular – miles of azure sea streaked by sand spits. Little wonder the Tiwi have achieved such fame as artists, despite their isolation. Even the tiny airport is an explosion of vivid murals and traditional designs.
1300 I meet Buffy, a Tiwi man identifying as female and known as a Sistergirl. Once revered figures, they were exiled by the island’s un-Christian missionaries. Only recently have the Sisters reclaimed their rightful place as protectors, carers and conduits between the deep and secret tribal rites of Tiwi men and women.
Buffy is the consummate ambassador, respectful of Tiwi history and traditions, yet adding the flourish and fun only a 21st-century Sistergirl can. She’s also a brilliant screenprinter, proven when she guides my own not-half-bad print using ancient Tiwi motifs and woodcuts from the studio founded in 1968.
1600 Back in Darwin, I’m as dry as a dead dingo’s doolacky, so I grab sundowners at Darwin Ski Club, a cool lawn bar at Fannie Bay full of tipsy locals and happy dogs.
1930 Hanuman is probably the best diner in Darwin. It’s owned by the great Jimmy Shu, a Malay-born chef but Territory local for 30 years. His white tablecloth doesn’t stay white for long when those mud crabs arrive, though. Like a hog in heaven, I send them spattering and splintering far and wide, turning our elegant long table into a dot painting canvas of heinous hedonistic food worship. Je ne regrette rien!
2215 It’s my last night in Darwin and every great mud crab massacre deserves a nightcap chaser. I find Charlie’s of Darwin, a bar-diner-distillery overlooking Raintree Park on Smith Street. A Mulberry Gin Spritz gets things loose, a Dark & Monsoonal really gets things going and a Mandrake’s Tears gets me kicked out.
11.59 I’m not the first frontiersman to leave Darwin with a sore head and a smile. And if I find myself with another 72 hours, I’ll make damn sure I’m not the last.
The writer was a guest of Tourism Australia We head for the Mindil Beach Sunset Markets, a snaking smorgasbord of tent kitchens showcasing Darwin’s incredible multiculturalism.
Writer Angus Fontaine and Darwin are both sweaty, stormy, crazy and thirsty. Their 72-hour love affair was a shotgun wedding waiting to happen.
See more top Darwin spots at escape.com.au/ godarwin
CREDIT: Angus Fontaine
Word count: 1452
