CHALKFACE STATE THEATRE DUNSTAN PLAYHOUSE UNTIL AUGUST 20
BY all accounts there were a lot of teachers at the opening night of Chalkface, if the chuckles-cum-groans of recognition were anything to go by.
Chalkface is a breezy comedy from Australian playwright Angela Betzien, receiving its world premiere in a co-production with Sydney Theatre Company.
It’s set in a down-at-heel suburban school, where burnt out staff do their best with a motley bunch of students, the overwhelmed principal has resorted to bureaucratic Newspeak, and the jaded administrator keeps the storeroom locked, lest the staff use all the coloured paper.
And the unseen Hurricane Little, the teachers’ nemesis who’ll probably wound if he doesn’t actually kill. It would be even funnier if it didn’t ring at least partly true.
Pat is one of the longest-serving teachers. She’s committed, but weary and more than a bit jaded, and is in no mood to accommodate eager new teacher Anna (“I have a Masters in Neuroplasticity”). Even Anna’s declaration that Pat, an award-winner in the past, is the reason she’s in this dump goes to no avail. It’s their evolving relationship that is at the heart of the play.
Given in a continuous hundred minutes, the first half is given over to setting the scene. We clean out the fetid fridge with Pat – a winning performance from Catherine McClements – while we accentuate the positive with Stephanie Somerville’s unflappable Anna. Well, almost unflappable: when she cracks it’s a riot, pictured.
The second half is more episodic, and partly given over to a white-collar whodunit alongside the character-driven story. We groan at the headmaster’s chirpy pep talks and inane jargon, which transforms a parent-teacher night to a client-focused consultancy seminar: Nathan O’Keefe is in fine uninhibited form. We loathe the tyrannical administrator (Michelle Ny).
There’s much excellent writing in Chalkface, and slapstick comedy that’s beautifully directed by Jessica Arthur. Ailsa Paterson continues her reputation for brilliant design with a marvellous set, a staffroom with peeling paint and mismatched furniture speaking volumes without a word being said. Chalkface shares with Betzien’s last outing with State Theatre, Mortido (2015), a loss of focus towards the end, when the urge to tie up all the loose ends might have been resisted. But let that pass, settle in and have a good laugh.
CREDIT: PETER BURDON
Word count: 387
