CONSTRUCTION of a $265m tower – described by its developer as Adelaide’s most sustainable office building – has been completed at the former Planet nightclub site in the CBD.
South Australia’s Department for Infrastructure and Transport was secured as an anchor tenant for the 22-storey, 30,000sq m project in 2020, and will consolidate several of its CBD sites into the new Pirie St building.
Developer Cbus Property chief executive Adrian Pozzo said the project represented “the next generation of office design”, featuring several sustainability, wellness and technology initiatives.
“This office tower is destined to capture a lot of firsts for Adelaide – the first all-electric, carbon neutral-ready building; the first Platinum WELL v2 pilot pre-certified building; and the first commercial and retail mixed-use building that will not use natural gas,” he said.
Mr Pozzo said the building’s rooftop terrace, a multi-purpose wellness centre and the tower’s indoor air quality had helped it secure Platinum status, representing the highest benchmark in a global rating system used to measure how a building’s design contributes to the physical and emotional wellbeing of its occupants.
Designed by Woods Bagot and built by Multiplex, the building is also targeting a 5.5-star NABERS Energy rating, with Cbus entering an electricity purchasing deal that ensures the base building infra­structure is powered entirely by renewable energy.
DIT has agreed to a 10-year lease at the building, and will occupy about 18,500sq m, with Colliers’ Andrew Beasley and Jeevan Deut handling the leasing of three remaining floors.
Departmental staff will begin moving into the building in the coming weeks. Property Council figures reveal that occupancy levels in Adelaide are among the highest in the country as the impact of Covid-19 subsides, with 64 per cent of CBD workers having returned to their offices.
However, the city’s office vacancy rate is at the higher end, at 14.2 per cent, and it is expected to come under further pressure as a 130,000sq m pipeline of new developments reaches completion over the next three years. Meanwhile Cbus Property – the property development and investment arm of industry super fund Cbus – is on the hunt for tenants to fill 60,000sq m in a $1bn office tower development planned for Bourke St in Melbourne, and this month acquired the remaining 50 per cent stake in its 205 North Quay office project in Brisbane.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 393
