Jennifer Ennion rounds up 17 new and exciting outdoor experiences so enticing they’ll drop their devices and run Teaching my son to snorkel is one of my most treasured experiences. We started at our local beach and in less than a year he was jumping off boats in Fiji and diving down to coral reefs. Cone snails, urchins and anemones are part of his everyday vernacular. But a child doesn’t have to live beside the sea to enjoy a deep connection with nature. Try these bite-sized forays into the bush, down a river and into the trees to spark fascination and joy.
1 BREAKFAST WITH KOALAS Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary Qld If you’d like to get up close to koalas, the Gold Coast sanctuary now offers breakfast with the fluffy marsupials. Although the koalas won’t be sitting at the table with you, you will be surrounded by them, have the chance to cuddle one and have time to chat with the sanctuary’s keepers. currumbinsanctuary.com.au
2  LEARN INDIGENOUS WAYS Wunyami Cultural Walking Tour, Qld In Queensland’s north is Wunyami,  also known as Green Island, a coral cay covered in rainforest on the Great Barrier Reef. Families can now explore the island and learn about Aboriginal cultural ceremonies as part of a new one-hour tour with an Indigenous guide. Go there via Cairns aboard a Great Adventures cruise. greatadventures.com.au
3 RIDE A THAI RIVER Andamanda Phuket, Thailand A new $190m water park has opened in Thailand’s popular tourist precinct of Phuket. Although it’s a theme park, it features a 550m-long lazy river – the longest in Asia. It also runs on solar power and more than 100,000 trees have been planted.
andamandaphuket.com
4 PLAY IN THE TREES WildNets suspension playground, NSW      Australia’s largest suspended forest playground has opened near the popular tourist town of Port Macquarie. Aside from hanging amid the canopy of gum trees, what makes this netted play space special is that it’s been built around a new koala breeding program in Cowarra State Forest, and 50 per cent of WildNets’ profits go to koala conservation. As for the attraction, it caters to children as young as one, with tree houses, slides, ball pits and giant toys above the ground. You’ll find WildNets in the Guulabaa tourism precinct, also home to a 2.5m-tall Big Koala.
wildnets.com.au
5 FLY THROUGH THE SKY Cable Bay Adventure Park, New Zealand The world’s longest flying fox is bound to impress. Found in Nelson, on the South Island, Skywire is a 3.2km ride 150m above native forest. You can go quad biking, mountain biking or try an e-bike. For young children, there are river walks, animal petting and eel feeding.
cablebayadventurepark.com
6 GO OFF THE BEATEN TRACK Tablelands Trails, NSW Discover something new about the Southern Tablelands on one of five tourism trails recently launched by the NSW government. Of the self-guided Tablelands Trails, our pick is Off the Beaten Track, which links Queanbeyan to Braidwood via heritage and nature walks, historic mining towns, parks and waterfalls.
visitnsw.com
7 PEDAL ON A RIVER Launceston Kayak Tours, Tas Glide through Launceston, past the old seaport to Tamar River on a gentle kayak tour perfect for tweens and teens. The 90-minute journey is in Hobie pedal-powered boats, so young kids won’t have to worry about clunky paddling.
launcestonkayaktours.com.au
8 BRING A BOOK TO LIFE The Gruffalo Spotters Trail, NSW The Blue Mountains’ Scenic World has launched an exciting virtual reality experience for lovers of Julia Donaldson’s The Gruffalo books. Download the free Gruffalo Spotter 2 app on your phone, then keep your eyes open for interactive signs that bring the books’ characters to life. You’ll be able to take photos and videos with Mouse, Fox and company via the app, and there’s even an opportunity to meet the Gruffalo in real life. Buy an Unlimited Discovery ticket and book in advance. Kids under three are free.
scenicworld.com.au
9 MINGLE WITH MEERKATS Monarto Safari Park, SA A wholesome animal encounter is   a trip to Monarto Safari Park, in South Australia’s Murraylands region. There, play keeper for a day, meeting meerkats, white rhinos, Tassie devils, cheetahs and chimps.
monartosafari.com.au
10 ESCAPE TO THE COUNTRY Upland Farm, WA Australia is home to a  growing eco-accommodation scene but not all places welcome families, which is why we’re excited about the new Upland Farm. At Denmark, in WA’s far southwest, this small working cattle farm has two buildings that take advantage of the sun and wind, with large windows, wood fires and rainwater tanks, complete with compost bins. Adults will appreciate the solitude, while children will love having so much space to run around in.
uplandfarm.com.au
11 FACE A SALTIE CrocArena, Qld   Reptile-loving children   will be thrilled to spend   their next holiday meeting the salties at Wildlife Habitat Port Douglas. There are daily croc shows in the CrocArena, plus an underwater viewing area where you can watch them devour lunch.
wildlifehabitat.com.au There are daily croc shows in the CrocArena, plus an underwater viewing area where you can watch them devour lunch
12 BIKE IN THE DESERT Adero Scottsdale, USA If you’re keen to give the kids an out-of-the-box experience, book a trip to a retreat that overlooks the Sonoran Desert in Arizona. One of the drawcards is the mountain biking on Adero’s doorstep. Families can spend their days flying along trails that cater to all experience levels and their nights stargazing in this certified Dark Sky Community.
aderoscottsdale.com
13 CANOE IN THE MANGROVES Amami Ōshima, Japan  Many of us head to Japan for the skiing or cherry blossoms, but a new UNESCO World Heritage site off Kyushu gives us another reason – or a great side trip. On Amami Oshima island, in the country’s southwest, you can go canoeing through an otherworldly glade of mangrove trees at Kuroshio Forest Mangrove Park. It’s an unexpected Japanese experience on a balmy island and that’s why we like it.
visit-kyushu.com
14 WALK WITH GIANTS Mandurah’s wooden trolls, WA For a back-to-nature experience out of this world, set your sights south of Perth, to see wooden giants “protecting” the environment. The fantastical 5m-tall creatures are being created by Danish artist Thomas Dambo from recycled wood and materials.
They’ll form a mesmerising sculpture trail, with their exact locations revealed later this year. Dambo hopes the giants will inspire people to be kinder to Mother Nature.
mandurah.wa.gov.au
15 TAKE IN ANCIENT TRADITIONS Budj Bim Cultural Landscape Tourism, Vic A new experience at the UNESCO World Heritage-listed site gives families a chance to learn about Indigenous aquaculture practices. Indigenous owned and operated, the experience is in and around Budj Bim National Park and Tae Rak (Lake Condah), 40 minutes’ drive inland from Port Fairy. Visit an aquaculture centre to learn about traditional farming and cooking, and try smoked kooyang (eels). There are also walking trails and small group tours. budjbim.com.au
16 SPOT BEARS AND WOLVES Yellowstone National Park, US Celebrating 150 years since it was named the world’s first national park, Yellowstone is a family favourite.
With more than 200 species of animals, plus hiking, fishing, boating, biking and camping, it is a bucket-list destination.
nps.gov/yell
17 FAMILY SNOW TIME Colorado, US Aussie ski families are itching to return to North America’s top snowfields, and one of the best states is Colorado. There, you will find 22 ski resorts, including Telluride, which recently opened 16ha of new beginner and intermediate terrain.
Families will love the Galloping Goose, its longest run at 7.4km. tellurideskiresort.com Scan the code for 20 fit and fun adventures you can have with the kids.
CREDIT: JENNIFER ENNION
Word count: 1261
