Smileyscopes are virtual reality goggles that take children out of the sterile hospital environment and transport them into colourful underwater worlds or snugly cat cafes.
This isn’t gaming – these special goggles for patients aged four to 11 allow procedures to be completed faster and without the need for sedation, reducing the likelihood of children needing to stay in hospital.
Smileyscope goggles have been shown to reduce a child’s pain by up to 60 per cent and reduce the need for restraint by 48 per cent while undergoing needle treatments such as blood tests, vaccinations and chemotherapy.
The Women’s and Children’s Health Network (WCHN) in Adelaide is the beneficiary of 10 new headsets, thanks to fundraising efforts by Coles and Curing Homesickness, a charity that helps gets kids home from hospital sooner.
Women’s & Children’s Hospital Foundation manager of organisational mission, Verity Gobbett, said these medical grade virtual reality headsets help distract children so that injections can be administered stress-free.
“Clinicians tell us that for some patients, the use of the Smileyscope headsets means they can complete a procedure much quicker and with reduced patient anxiety,” Ms Gobbett said.
“We’re very grateful for the support of Coles and Curing Homesickness. Without it, projects like this would not be possible.”
In the last three years, Coles has raised more than $3.4 million for Curing Homesickness, but there is more that needs to be done.
Smileyscopes at the WCHN is just one of the projects that has benefited from this that national initiative that helps fund children’s hospital foundations and paediatric services across Australia.
Funds raised in Victoria will help Monash Children’s Hospital to purchase the best technology to deliver its stem cell program for premature babies, while money raised in NSW will help support the virtualKIDS service at Sydney Children’s Hospitals Network and enable John Hunter Children’s Hospital in Newcastle to pilot an early transfer home service for Neonatal Intensive Care Unit patients.
Curing Homesickness director Nicola Stokes believes this simple campaign makes a significant difference in the lives of thousands of sick kids across Australia.
“We believe kids don’t belong in hospital; they belong at home,” she said. “By purchasing a $2 Curing Homesickness card or a Mum’s Sause pasta or pizza sauce, you’ll be helping to fund vital projects to minimise the amount of time kids spend in hospitals.”
You can help while you shop by buying a $2 donation card at Coles check-outs between March 30 to April 12 to support Curing Homesickness. Or purchase a jar of the “Mum’s Sause” brand of pasta or pizza sauce throughout the year, with 50 cents from every jar going to a children’s hospital foundation or paediatric service.
Word count: 435
