THE AFL will host a virtual national draft on December 9, as clubs salivate over the goldmine of talent that could be snapped up in three early-­season windows next year.
As revealed by the Herald Sun last month, the league will hold a one-night national draft that will see clubs across the country submit selections online, instead of at one location.
The league will turn the event into a two-day process by holding the rookie and pre-season draft the next day.
Greater Western Sydney midfielder Jackson Hately is expected to be taken in the pre-season draft by Adelaide.
It means the league will be robbed of the usual ceremony that involves an AFL coach or prominent figure from each team presenting the draftees with their new jumpers.
This year as many as 15 of the 30 first selections could be father-son or next generation academy players, so bidding will be fierce.
Adelaide has made clear it will seriously consider matching a bid for Western Bulldogs-linked young forward Jamar Ugle-Hagan, said to be the draft’s most talented player.
The Crows have a draft order that they have rigorously followed in recent drafts, and have often bid on rival talent linked through NGAs. But if they bid on Ugle-Hagan, they would do so certain that he would still go to the Dogs under a bidding system, meaning the player they got to their club was their second choice.
The league is yet to officially introduce its new-look mid-season draft, but AFL football boss Steve Hocking said on Thursday the league was keen on marching forward with the proposal.
Clubs with spare list spots would be able to secure players overlooked in the national draft or all state league players in Rounds 4, 8 and 12.
The AFL’s May 2019 mid-season draft was a strong ­success. Marlion Pickett was the inspirational story, but Will Snelling, John Noble and Ryan Gardner are still on AFL lists from that season.
What might normally have been a good chance to mine state league talent could be so much more, given the raft of AFL aspirants set to be overlooked in December’s draft because of a lack of 2020 football.
Players who nominate for the draft, but are overlooked, could be picked up early in the 2021 season instead of waiting for the next draft.
It will be a key opportunity for clubs to add talent.
Clubs can also leave a spot open on their lists during ­summer and have a player train with them. jon.ralph@news.com.au
CREDIT: JON RALPH
Word count: 423
