THE failure of Australia’s energy policy is coming home to roost as an electricity supply crisis grips four states, creating the risk of controlled blackouts.
In a resource-rich country like ours, we are bungling the transition from fossil fuels to renewable energy.
Like it or not, Australia’s national electricity market is still overwhelmingly dependent on coal, even if that has become a dirty word for activist shareholders pushing a renewable energy future.
Both state and federal governments have been recently elected on platforms of promoting a clean energy revolution.
This revolution might have started but it is by no means complete. Our nation is in a transition period in which gas, in particular, will play a vital part.
The perils of the electricity grid becoming disastrously unstable were illustrated strikingly by the South Australian statewide blackout on September 28, 2016. A failure of wind turbine control settings responding to multiple disturbances – ultimately caused by appalling weather – triggered a cascading series of events that led to that blackout.
The pioneering nature of SA’s renewable energy embrace, including the May 2016 shutdown of Port Augusta’s coal-fired power station, left the state dangerously exposed.
A similar situation is unfolding on the eastern seaboard. Coal-fired power stations have been neglected or shut down. Nobody wants to invest in coal.
Gas prices have soared and supplies are being sent offshore. However much we hope for a renewable energy future to cover the supply shortfall, it has not yet arrived at sufficient scale to meet demand.
The national market, as state Energy Minister Tom Koutsantonis argues, is not equipped to deal with the present reality.
It is bitterly ironic that in a resource-rich country like Australia we are struggling to meet demand for energy generation. Even the most strident of climate activists need electricity to charge their mobile phones. Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Gemma Jones, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 323
