The creation of South Australia's first online Aboriginal screen and new media arts channel will provide Indigenous artists with a platform to promote, host and sell their work.
iDreamingTV is a screen and new media arts channel that will be available both online and through an app, and will be a one-stop shop for those interested in the work of Aboriginal artists, and for the artists themselves.
Experienced Aboriginal filmmakers David Wilson and Albert Lovegrove-Buckskin, plus radio producer Samantha Lee from Umeewarra Media, are involved with the project.
Mr Wilson said this had been more than a decade in the making.
"Over 10 years ago, iDreamingTV did a survey across South Australia of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities about what they wanted to see with screen and multimedia in SA - the results of that survey were over 700 pages long and the strategy was released in 2011," he said.
"It has been implemented since, and one of the main objectives was the development of this online space.
"A year ago iDreamingTV received the funding for the project."
Mr Wilson, a project coordinator, said the website and app were being built and hoped they would be live by the end of the year, after receiving funding through the federal government's Indigenous Languages and Arts program.
He said this was a "unique" offering that would give South Australia its first screen and new media Aboriginal arts channel.
He said it would include artist profiles, include photos and videos of their work and a shop to purchase artwork, while the website and app would also include documentaries, podcasts and news.
"Our version of new media arts includes all forms of art and will be a place where all artists can have their work hosted," Mr Wilson said.
"People in the community can go to one place and see a diverse range of performing arts and visual arts of Aboriginal artists.
"It is a place where people can hear stories from the artists - about who they are, where they learned their art form and their future."
Mr Wilson said this would promote art from Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander artists across South Australia to the world, which would ensure the artists would not have to travel as far to promote their work.
"This is a place where people can see a whole lot of art forms in one place, and it can go anywhere across the world," he said.
"People from remote areas to urban centres will have access and so artists could do their work in their own community and promote through the app, rather than travelling."
Mr Wilson said they would be getting in touch with artists across mediums - from sculptors to wood carvers, dancers and poets - to be involved with the channel.
He said they also wanted to move into projection art, 3D, animation and virtual reality art, and would look to do so once the channel was up and running.
The app will be available on phones, tablets and on desktop computers.
CREDIT: Luca Cetta
Word count: 510
