With the COVID-19 pandemic accelerating the need for health services and disrupting the economy, many have decided to boost their qualifications or retrain to find a more secure career path.
He is studying full-time for his master’s degree at Monash University while continuing to work as an emergency nurse with Alfred Health in Melbourne. Mr Bruce, 28, takes care of trauma cases and accident victims who often need immediate treatment to keep them alive.
“Critically unwell patients present to the emergency department very, very unwell and they need lifesaving interventions,” he says.
According to Australian Bureau of Statistics census data, about 260,000 midwives and nursing professionals were employed in Australia in 2016, and about 12,000 of them had a master’s degree in the field.
In 2019, according to the federal Department of Education, Skills and Employment, there were nearly 47,000 masters students studying in the field of health, an increase of 39 per cent since 2015.
Students like Mr Bruce, working towards a master’s degree in nursing or an allied health program, are usually nurses building on their existing nursing degree or professionals with degrees in other disciplines who want to pursue a career in healthcare.
Mr Bruce decided to work towards a postgraduate degree in emergency care for a range of reasons. “It allows you to do more,” he says. “It teaches more about anatomy and patho-physiology, disease progress; it gives you an in-depth and well-rounded knowledge of everything that can present in an emergency department.”
Masters students can select their subjects strategically for the career path that suits them best, Mr Bruce adds.
“You can choose to go down the nurse-practitioner role, you can choose academic research, you can go into education, leadership, disaster nursing, you can work with the World Health Organisation,” he says.
Mr Bruce worked through the worst of the COVID-19 pandemic in Melbourne, following strict health protocols and continually wearing an N-95 mask whenever he was at work, which eventually meant he had to take sick leave because he had pressure damage on his face.
“It’s put a significant strain on the hospital, especially trying to work with isolation precautions,” he says. “It’s presented a lot of challenges, particularly for me. I feel I’m not engaging with patients as much.”
Chris Brebner, education dean of the College of Nursing and Health Sciences at Flinders University in South Australia, says the COVID-19 crisis had a “massive impact” across the state.
Because of the need for the health workforce to be ready for action, the university managed to still maintain most of the practical experience elements of the nursing and allied health worker master’s degrees, even when Adelaide was in lockdown, when the theoretical component of the courses was offered online.
Now, students have returned to their usual classes, Professor Brebner says, with precautions including smaller class sizes and more student spacing.
About 400 students are studying for the two-year graduate-entry master’s degree in nursing at Flinders this year.
“That’s been really popular,” she says. “Students are saying, ‘Well, actually, I’ve lost my job – there’s some real opportunity here in the health workforce’.”
Professor Brebner says that, even in uncertain economic times, qualified nurses and allied health workers can always find employment, particularly in rural and remote areas.
Allied health workers, too, have a crucial part to play in modern healthcare, she says, including physiotherapy, speech pathology, occupational therapy, psychology, social work, nutrition and dietetics.
Professor Brebner says there’s a real need for all specialities to keep people healthy, to keep them at home, and to help them recover from smaller ailments.
She says the recent Royal Commission into aged care highlighted the need to maintain health in the home.
Flinder University - Brand Reveal
“There’s a really important role to keeping people going as best they can, for the allied health professionals,” she says.
Professor Debra Griffiths, head of nursing and midwifery at Monash University, says that at any one time the university has 500 to 600 students enrolled in the traditional nursing master’s degrees designed for working nurses, and about 300 in the master of nursing practice degree, which provides graduates in other disciplines with qualifications to work in nursing.
Nurses who are passionate about a particular field of healthcare, she says, and who want to lead in that speciality, understand it’s important for them to get a postgraduate qualification in the field. “It sets them for senior roles, wherever they’re working,” Professor Griffiths says. “Some of these nurse managers have huge budgets, multi-million-dollar budgets, so they need some extra skills to be able to work through and lead.”
Associate Professor Julia Morphet, director of education for nursing and midwifery at Monash, says the university’s masters in nursing courses moved online during the pandemic, with some exemptions for students who needed to learn practical clinical skills before going into the health service.
“We already had quite a lot of content online,” she says. “Now workshops have moved online. We have built a bit more interactivity into some of our online resources, and a bit of virtual reality. It was always in the pipeline but it’s come in a bit sooner.”
The federal government has subsidised some nursing master’s courses, with commonwealth supported places reducing the cost from $30,000 to $10,000, clustered in certain specialties.
This year Monash has decided to subsidise all the postgraduate nursing streams. Monash leaders understand their value, says Professor Morphet, and often nurses can’t afford to undertake a master’s degree, and it brings them little financial reward.
“In some professions, if you complete a masters’ degree, your salary will increase by 10, 20, 30 thousand dollars a year,” Professor Morphet says. “In nursing, a masters degree in Victoria earns an extra $1.60 per hour.”
Frank Donnelly, interim dean of nursing at the University of Adelaide, says the demand for highly skilled health workers continues to grow, and there are always new skills to master and new health practices to understand.
“Health accelerates at a phenomenal rate in terms of innovation and technology – it’s a never-ending story,” he says.
Adelaide has about 350 postgraduate nursing students enrolled this year. Most will leave with a graduate diploma after one year, rather than studying for two years to earn a master’s degree. These working nurses get most of their clinical reinforcement in hospitals and clinics, helping take care of patients, Associate Professor Donnelly says.
“If it’s a coursework masters, then probably the emphasis for us is on how they apply their understanding of research back into the clinical setting,” he says.
“If it’s a research masters, then clearly the obligation on them is to pursue a research agenda. They might do a small project in their clinical environment – they’d write that up, apply appropriate methodology to that.”
Word count: 1094
