After trawling through the weird, the funny and the downright rude, we've found the biggestand best YouTube stars who hail from the great state of South Australia.
As well as the big players, we’ve covered some of the smaller accounts deserving of a mention who are keeping subscribers hooked with their content.
See our ranked list below, along with each YouTuber’s most popular video to date.
11. A Jolly Wangcore – 682k subscribers
Jolly Wang Core runs a video gaming focused channel with a particular focus on ‘mods’ or modifications to already-released games.
Known simply as ‘Jolly’, the SA streamer describes his channel as ‘dedicated to showcasing the best mods the internet has to offer.’ Check out this channel.
10. The Master Bucks – 683k subscribers
With a sports focus, this channel created and run by Jake Buckley has amassed a hefty 683,000 loyal fans who adore Jake’s sense of humour and insights into the world of FIFA and other video games.
Buckley started the account ten years ago, with his passion for football and the English Premier League drawing followers from across the globe.
Check out this channel.
9. DankPods - 758k subscribers
Adelaide local Wade Nixon, 30, started his audiophile Youtube channel in 2018 and in a relatively short period has become an established commentator on all things audio.
His videos often revolve around his iPods and MP3 Players, including upgrading and repairing them or as Nixon’s channel states “I do stuff with portable music players”.
Check out this channel
8. Freelee the Banana Girl – 764k followers
Freelee the banana girl, aka Leanne Ratcliffe, is a YouTube star who bases most of her content around dietary advice.
Her advocacy surrounding a raw vegan diet gained national scrutiny when in 2014 she promoted a 51 bananas a day diet.
The former Adelaide woman has since moved ‘off the grid’ and lived in a South American Jungle, before moving back home to Queensland.
Check out this channel
7. Luke Towan – 1.12m subscribers
Luke Towan is a Qantas pilot from Adelaide who also happens tro be an extremely talented model railroad and scenery builder in his spare time.
He has been able to transform this passion into YouTube stardom through his insightful and relaxing videos describing the building process.
Check out this channel
6. BeatEmUps – 1.24m subscribers
Wood Hawker, a former Reynela High School student, now living in Forth Worth, Texas, is a vlogger and video games reviewer whose YouTube videos are mostly focused on Nintendo related products.
Check out this channel
5. The Royal Stampede – 1.48m subscribers
The Royal Stampede is an Adelaide duo who regularly push the envelope through their pranks on the public.
Richy Sandham and Mark Reynolds started the now hugely-popular channel from small beginnings at Blackwood High School while only in year 10.
Check out this channel
4. Fairbairn Films – 1.53m subscribers
Fairbairn films was started by Murray Bridge brothers Lachlan and Jaxon Fairbairn, with the help of producer Darcy Ahrens.
Having started the channel three years ago, the trio’s humorous takes on daily Australian life has been well received around the world.
Check out this channel
3. Unlistedleaf – 2.25m subscribers
UnlistedLeaf is a YouTube channel focused on Pokemon, run by Adelaide local Michael Anderson.
After posting his first YouTube video in 2012, Anderson’s hobby and passion has seen him become extremely famous and respected in the Pokemon community.
Check out this channel
2. RackaRacka – 6.47m subscribers
RackaRacka was started by Pooraka brothers Danny & Michael Philippou, who describe themselves as wannabe filmmakers on a budget.
Their shock humour and skits regularly gain millions of hits with their signature Ronald McDonald videos seeing Ronald swearing, breaking letterboxes and more.
They also attracted global attention when they drove a car filled with water through an Adelaide bottle shop and in 2020 secured funding for their debut feature film.
Check out this channel
1. JoshDub – 8.88m subscribers
Josh Dub, 30, is an Adelaide YouTuber regarded as pioneer in virtual reality gaming videos.
His humorous videos often see him collaborating with other YouTube gamers, where players embark on hilarious in-game journeys complete with ongoing commentary.
Check out this channel
Did we miss anyone? let us know in the comments.
Word count: 662
