THE INTERNET IS BEING REBORN AS A CONNECTED VIRTUAL EXPERIENCE WITH AVATARS, BUT WHAT DOES THAT MEAN?
TECHNOLOGY The internet has come a long way since its birth on January 1, 1983. Depending on who you believe, however, it’s about to be reborn.
Some of Silicon Valley’s most powerful firms claim the “metaverse” is coming and will change all of our lives.
Mark Zuckerberg, founder of Facebook, which is now rebranded as Meta, says this “next chapter” will “be even more immersive; an embodied internet where you’re in the experience, not just looking at it”.
But will the metaverse really be about virtual concerts, art, work, play and digital currency or will it just give you more ways to keep your camera off during work calls?
Facebook staked a large claim on the metaverse with its company rebrand, delivered with a lengthy demonstration of Zuckerberg meeting friends for virtual table tennis.
The company attracted criticism, given its mid-scandal timing, but Australian managing director Will Easton says the company is serious about investing in the metaverse and does not plan to monopolise it.
“Facebook isn’t going to build, own or run the metaverse on its own – we will be collaborating at every stage with policymakers, experts and industry partners,” Easton says.
And other big tech firms are staking a claim in the new frontier, too. Within days of Facebook’s launch, Microsoft announced its plans for the new landscape, chiefly focused on business.
Microsoft mixed reality director Greg Sullivan says its new Mesh for Microsoft Teams will transform 2D into 3D spaces with “a feeling of presence”, and let users create their own avatars that show live reactions.
Research from Microsoft’s Human Factors Lab found more than 80 per cent of people felt comfortable expressing themselves in meetings when represented by an avatar and did not have to “worry about their appearance”.
“Being on camera tends to enhance people’s sense of presence and engagement during meetings, but it can sometimes be impractical to turn the camera on, as well as there being times when people simply prefer not to be seen on camera,” Sullivan says.
Other companies joining the virtual future include Atari, which plans to launch metaverse gaming, Balenciaga, which creates outfits for Fortnite and Hyundai, which has created a world for Roblox. Coca-Cola and Dolce & Gabbana have released non-fungible tokens to join the metaverse.
But while the metaverse spotlight might be new, Swinburne University social media senior lecturer Dr Belinda Barnet says technology has been moving towards it for some time.
Pokemon Go and in-car head-up displays have introduced Australians to augmented reality, she says, making it easier to accept an all-encompassing internet experience in future.
“The concept of moving towards a future where we’re not staring at four-inch screens and technology comes to us outside mobile devices is definitely occurring,” Barnet says.
But she calls Facebook’s vision of the metaverse clumsy and “a bit weird” and warns the social media giant will need to reassure users about the use of their data inside it.
Digital media strategist Meg Coffey says she is also reluctant to trust Facebook’s involvement.
And she says while the metaverse has great promise – like remotely teaching doctors how to perform surgeries – it also raises questions about humanity.
“We’re only just scratching the surface by working from home and beaming in by Zoom, we know technology is going to change how we do things. I just worry we are going to lose that human touch. Humans are capable of doing so much more than sitting in a dark room.”
WHAT IS IT?
The concept of the metaverse is ripped from the pages of a science-fiction novel.
The 1992 book Snow Crash opens with a harried gig worker racing through a dystopian, decentralised world to deliver pizza to the Mafia.
In 2021, the tech industry has latched on to its concept of the “metaverse”, which described simply, is a virtual world in which humans can visit 3D environments, attend online events and interact as avatars.
This could be through virtual reality, augmented reality using a device with a camera, with a holographic image projected in front of you, or another kind of digital simulation.
Second Life took place in a metaverse, but the next iteration promises to be more sophisticated than that 2003 creation.
Pundits are discussing whether the metaverse will have its own cryptocurrency economy, boost sales of non-fungible tokens, or be the best place for concerts (Ariana Grande recently performed inside Fortnite).
And there is talk of remote education held digitally, workplace training delivered in virtual reality and for connected conferences to cut out real-world travel. We might even get to order that pizza (though we’ll have to log off to eat it).
CREDIT: Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 796
