SCHOOL students in future may be able to hand in their projects on virtual reality platforms to demonstrate they really know their stuff.
In a project next year, three South Australian schools will teach students to create content in virtual reality, rather than just use the technology.
Pembroke, Trinity College and SEDA College will work with Newcastle University and a virtual reality company in what researchers believe is the first project in the world to run a year-long classroom trial.
The project, Students Create Virtual Worlds for Learning, has been initiated by the Association of Independent Schools SA. Chief executive Carolyn Grantskalns said schools were investing in VR technology, but there was limited evidence about how teachers could use it to accelerate student learning.
The software developed by Sydney company VRTY will allow students to take a 360-degree image and then drag and drop content into the picture.
This could be videos, sound bites, text, graphics or more images. A key aspect is that students will not need to learn complex coding. Newcastle associate professor Erica Southgate said this made it accessible for all students.
“The result could be an alternative to an essay or other presentations of work and it can easily be shared with others,” she said.
In a trial at Trinity College, year 8 students filmed and examined their school playground as part of science and maths.
They labelled and described the playground, identifying different forms of energy such as gravitational, potential, kinetic, electrical and thermal – and prepared a VR presentation for the year 6s.
Trinity College head Nick Hately said it would help to develop and embed science, technology, engineering and maths skills.
He expected students to develop skills “which they can apply in a whole host of problem-solving contexts”.
SEDA College has highly advanced sport programs and hoped the VR options would be useful for tagging and explaining game play visually. Pembroke principal Luke Thomson said it would create opportunities to engage with industry.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 334
