ONE in five Australians will develop chronic pain in their lifetime – and sufferers are most likely to be women of working age. Pain is a leading cause of suicide and it costs the economy nearly $140 billion a year. Making matters worse, many pain conditions are being managed poorly, with sufferers dependent on harmful medications.
But as SUE DUNLEVY reports, major advances in understanding the condition are behind innovative new treatments.
LATEST THINKING Traditionally pain was thought to be a bottom up process – damage to the body prompted events in the brain that made the body recognise it was in pain.
Now researchers have shown that some pain – including fibromyalgia, complex regional pain syndrome and chronic back pain – is caused by the malfunctioning of the immune system and the pain signalling apparatus in the central nervous system.
Women are more likely to experience chronic pain than men because their immune systems are more active. It means they die less in a pandemic, but the price is a higher rate of auto-immune conditions and chronic pain, gynaecologist and researcher Associate Professor Susan Evans says.
The best way to manage pain is to get moving. And pain expert Professor Michael Vagg says physiotherapy and psychology are crucial to giving people the confidence to do this.
VIRTUAL REALITY Virtual reality headsets that offer games, scenes or psychological breathing therapies to distract are helping people manage chronic back pain and the agony caused by changing the dressings of burns patients. They have even been found to help women deal with the pain of childbirth.
In November last year the US FDA approved a new virtual reality system to treat back pain called EaseVRx. It can be used at home and consists of a VR headset, a controller and “breathing amplifier” that directs a patient’s breath toward the headset’s microphone for use in deep breathing exercises.
It offers deep relaxation, attention-shifting, distraction, immersive enjoyment, self-compassion, healthy movement and other techniques to relieve pain. Nearly half (46 per cent) of those using the VR therapy had a 50 per cent or greater reduction in pain compared to 26 per cent of those not using it. Professor Steven Faux of Sydney’s St Vincent’s Hospital is working with Samsung to trial virtual reality pain relief.
MIGRAINE HELP Millions of Australian migraine sufferers may not be getting high enough doses of medicine to cut their pain.
Australian neurologist Professor Peter Goadsby, who works at King’s College London, said the typical 70kg patient needed 900mg of aspirin to relieve a migraine, not the standard 600mg dose.
Medications used on migraines (such as blood pressure medication propranolol (Inderal) and anti-epileptics like Topamax) are often not given in high enough doses to make a difference.
A new class of medicines to treat and prevent migraines called Calcitonin Gene Related Peptide inhibitors are available. Two of these – Emgality and Ajovy – are subsidised on the PBS.
Botox can be used to prevent migraines if you have more than 15 a month. It is injected into 31 sites in the head and neck every three months.
There is evidence a neuromodulation headband called Cephaly that sends electrical signals to the brain reduces migraines in 38 per cent of patients.
Another Gammacore device applied to the vagus nerve reduces headaches in about half of all patients if used for eight months.
Using the drug naproxen for seven to 14 days before a period can reduce menstrual-related migraines.
EDUCATING KIDS The Pelvic Pain Foundation of Australia’s Periods, Pain and Endometriosis (PPEPTalk) schools program is now available in all states.
It helps teens understand if their pain is normal, and what to do if it isn’t. And it helps boys learn to support the women in their lives who may be suffering.
KNEE SURGERY A two-page survey to be given to knee surgery patients aims to predict the 15 per cent of them who will experience ongoing pain after surgery – and intervene to prevent it.
Professor Vagg will use the research to make it easier to identify patients who have chronic pain that’s not getting better in the normal time frame following surgery and take action early to stop it becoming a lifelong problem.
TOMORROW How you can manage your pain Go online for full audio interviews with the experts ADVERTISER.COM.AU
CREDIT: SUE DUNLEVY
Word count: 724
