A POSSIBLE extinction level event has inspired development of a unique virtual reality experience by Flinders University’s 2021 digital artist in residence, cinematographer and video virtuoso Liam Somerville.
The artist says Flinders’ new Assemblage Centre for Creative Arts offers the perfect environment to push the boundaries of what’s possible with moving images and VR worlds.
“I aim to create a VR experience – Anthropocene – which is a simulation of the last 100 seconds of humanity on planet Earth,” Somerville says. “The player is given no objectives but is free to explore the landscape to discover virtual dance, digital sculptures and the last remains of human life before their time runs out.” Assemblage’s artist-in-residence program runs from September to November and provides funds for collaborating with industry leaders, academics, and students to develop trans-disciplinary work.
Somerville’s work will explore human interaction in the digital realm using interactive sensors and hardware at Flinders’ virtual reality and motion capture lab The Void, the largest facility of its kind in SA.
“The project will be created using the cutting-edge motion capture technology,” he says.
“Data from actors and performers will then be piped into (3D creation platform) Unreal Engine to influence particle systems and character models.
“This world-class technology allows creatives like me to achieve hyper-realistic virtual 3D animation.” Assemblage director Garry Stewart, who is about to finish his 22-year role as artistic director of Australian Dance Theatre, says Flinders is thrilled to be hosting a visionary emerging artist like Somerville.
“Liam is an engaging communicator who will be sure to make his presence felt among our staff and students,” Stewart says.
“We look forward to seeing what emerges from his experimentations.” Deputy director Tully Barnett says the artist-in-residence program was developed to facilitate conversations about art-making and its influence in the world.
“It also gives our academic staff, students and postgraduates insight into the process of creative practice,” Dr Barnett says.
The Advertiser #FEARLESS CONVERSATIONS Flinders University
CREDIT: PATRICK McDONALD
Word count: 329
