TECH giant Microsoft has made an all-in bet on the future control of the internet and this time it doesn’t want to get left behind.
A $US68.7bn ($95.5bn) all-cash move on Activision Blizzard, the gaming major behind titles such as Call of Duty, Candy Crush and World of Warcraft, is shaping up as more than a land grab for content, it’s designed to muscle out arch rivals Apple, Google and Facebook in the distribution game.
What many of us used to call virtual reality has evolved into the metaverse – a totally immersive online experience. There’s big dollars at the end of this tech rainbow but no one, including Facebook’s Mark Zuckerberg, is sure how to make them yet.
Microsoft has a bit more of a real-world use for it in the battlefield of tech. The gaming experience is immersive and titles like shoot-them-up game Call of Duty rely on multiple players – or communities – anywhere in the world. This makes it ideal for when the metaverse arrives.
In the not-too-distant future, games will be streamed through mobile handsets using hardware including virtual reality headsets and gloves. There is much evolution needed. The devices are still expensive and can’t be worn for a long amount of time, while users report a very undeveloped experience.
But Microsoft, which is the world’s fifth most profitable company, is not paying a 45 per cent premium for Activision’s shares for mere blue sky, it’s got a hard gaming business model in mind, where it will own the distribution and data. The scale of the deal is significant, given it ranks as Microsoft’s biggest ever acquisition coming after the $US26bn buyout of LinkedIn in 2016.
After the deal, Microsoft will be the world’s No.3 gaming company by revenue, behind China’s Tencent and Japan’s Sony.
Activision Blizzard has nearly 400 million monthly active players across the world and the hope is to build this out into recurring revenue streams and move them on to Microsoft’s Game Pass store, which has more than 25 million subscribers.
Sony’s shares fell 10 per cent in Tokyo on Wednesday with the prospect of a very big gorilla playing even more aggressively in its space. Tencent’s Nasdaq-listed shares were off 5 per cent.
Gaming is the largest and fastest growing category in the entertainment industry. Lockdowns around the world and more people staying at home over the past two years have turbocharged the growth. The industry is expected to grow to 4.5 billion consumers by the end of this decade, up from 3 billion now. Microsoft’s move expands its library for its two-decade-old Xbox console, adding to titles including Minecraft, Halo and the recently acquired Fallout and Doom. But it is the additional reach in mobile – the single largest segment in gaming – where it sees opportunity.
Gaming remains an intensely fought contest and is littered with expensive titles that didn’t make it. Like Hollywood, it has relied on rebooting the big hits. It’s worth noting games such as Minecraft are more than a decade old. Call of Duty and Warcraft are pushing 20 years, while Doom is positively middle-aged and is about to hit 30 years old. All have years of longevity left by moving into the mobile and metaverse-style experience.
For his part, Microsoft chief executive Satya Nadella also has a firm eye on the dollars with controlling the distribution. Even though Microsoft itself is one of the largest companies in the world it too feels the pinch from Apple’s App Store and Google Play Store that dominate the distribution of mobile gaming. Nadella concedes companies such as these make more money from distribution than Microsoft does from its share of selling game titles. In the future of the internet, he wants to change the script.
CREDIT: ERIC JOHNSTON
Word count: 632
