Two Port Lincoln schools have been included in a pilot project focussing on bushfire awareness and wellness.
A collaboration of Bushfire Kids Connect and Makers Empire, the Bushfire Awareness and Wellness Program involves 10 South Australian schools who have been invited to take part in a project organisers hope can one day spread across the country.
Port Lincoln Primary School and Lincoln Gardens Primary School have been selected for the pilot, which will see students create a design-based challenge course in the Makers Empire app.
The program aims to help students be informed and understand why bushfires happen, how they are controlled, their environmental impact and approaches to bushfire management that promote sustainability.
Year 3 to 7 Port Lincoln Primary School students are involved in the pilot and digital technologies and cultural studies specialist teacher Jackie Fiebig said they would utilise many skills.
"They will be collaborating with fellow students, challenge existing ideas and generate solutions to any problems, and it is an opportunity to test a lot of their thinking, make prototypes and problem-solve designs."
She said it was a great way to build skills in students and develop a greater understanding of bushfires.
Lincoln Gardens Primary School teachers Brett Cochrane and Kylie Fitzgerald were grateful to have year 3 to 7 students involved.
"We are hoping the students gain valuable skills in empathy and develop knowledge in the design thinking process," they said.
Bushfire Kids Connect was founded by nine-year-old Sebastian Ascott and his mother Carly in the wake of the 2019 Cudlee Creek bushfires, as a way for the youngster to show support to fellow Adelaide Hills children.
Makers Empire SA director Mandi Dimitriadis said this provided students with a challenge of what they could design to help a bushfire-affected family.
"It might be something that helps kids feed their animals, or maybe a board game."
She said the 10 schools would showcase their creations next month.
CREDIT:
Word count: 321
