A local artist has begun her mentorship under renowned screen printing talent Rae O'Connell as part of a $15,000 Country Arts Step Up Grant.
Jenny Bourne recently met with her mentor in Port Augusta to begin a project that will utilise her 10-metre yardage table, which was imported from Queensland.
Yardage screen printing is a unique art medium, which gives artists the ability to produce clothing, objects and artwork out of textiles. The table will produce 10 metres of fabric at a time.
Ms Bourne will work with Ms O'Connell, who is the chief executive of Guild House, to develop her large screen printing technique and plans to later exhibit artworks produced with her yardage table.
"A few years ago I bought this table for printing yardage because it's something that I've always wanted to do, but it's so big and I found it a little overwhelming," she said.
"I'm learning how to do designs for that size print, which is quite huge ... I've spent four days in Adelaide working with her learning different ways of designing and scaling up designs.
"I've come home and worked on those to get them screen ready."
Jenny is not the only person in the community keen on using the yardage table, with interest from local Aboriginal artists who had seen the process used in the Northern Territory.
"It's a great opportunity for them to wear their own designs," Ms Bourne said.
One of the challenges for Ms Bourne has been working on the table, which was found to not be level.
"I had to have some equipment modified and I've ordered some materials to have a new top put on the table to make it flat enough," she said.
"When that's done Rae will come up for a second trip which will be the conclusion of the mentorship and hopefully we'll be able to print off a few lengths of fabric."
The fabric will be sold through a website to interested buyers in the region and beyond.
The Country Arts Step Up Grants of up to $15,000 are available for artists to undertake small cultural projects, or to develop a small project leading to a larger cultural project or for individual artists to undertake professional development.
Country Arts SA is encouraging interested parties to apply for funding.
CREDIT: Louis Mayfield
Word count: 388
