Some groundbreaking work is happening at the Naracoorte Caves as part of the Australian Research Council linkage project.
Paleontologist Dr Liz Reed addressed the Naracoorte Lucindale Council last month at the local government meeting, sharing the work the team had been undertaking at the caves over the past 12 months.
The Australian Research Council linkage project is funded as a partnership between industry partners and universities, with Naracoorte Lucindale Council being a major partner.
Dr Reed said 40 scientists were working at the caves on a variety of projects.
"We are working on quite a few parks in the region, within the park and private land," she said.
"We are excavating fossils in four caves - we found a 90,000-year-old kangaroo skeleton in a cave under a vineyard.
"We are doing lots of detailed dating work, trying to work out the age of the deposits, we now have new dates for 14 different caves and we are piecing together a picture of environment overt the last half a million years at Naracoorte.
"One of the things we are really interested in is when did the big animals die out at Naracoorte and it seems to be between 42,0000 and 45,000 years ago, those animals were no longer in this region."
A lot of work has been done using 3D scanning and Dr Reed said there was more to come.
"We've been working on 3D printing skulls of extinct animals and hope to distribute those to local schools and also doing 3D scanning of caves," she said.
"We've done a lot of 3D scanning, we are using our laser scanner to create 3D models.
"We have contributed scanning imaging to the caves for new displays and I can't tell you too much now, but we are developing, with engineering students at Adelaide, a cave scanning robot, we will be trialling that in October.
"We flew a plane along both ranges from Naracoorte through the Struan and 3D scanned those at 10 points per metre, and those scans will be available to the council to use."
Since 2018, nine honours students have completed projects with two currently working and three PHD students and one masters student have finished.
Dr Reed said there are 10 PHDs currently working on a range of projects, from fossils, through the 3D modelling through to ancient DNA and working out age and climate from stalagmites, which has great outcomes for Naracoorte.
She said only 24 student projects had been completed since 1970, but from 2018 there were 25 projects and the increased research activity had led to more public awareness, tourism opportunities and flow on benefits to the town.
Naracoorte Caves has been featured in local, national and international publications including a chapter in an upcoming international book series, a paper in an international journal and conferences online in Vienna and Spain.
CREDIT: Elisabeth Champion
Word count: 478
