A pandemic couldn’t stop Ten Days on the Island coming up with a captivating schedule of mostly local artists and performers for its 2021 festival.
Ten Days on the Island dodged a COVID-tainted bullet last year: Tasmania’s iconic biennial arts festival happened to have its off-year in 2020.
The serendipity of effectively straddling the year of the global pandemic – with its global shutdowns decimating the arts sector for the best part of a year – is certainly not lost on Ten Days artistic director Lindy Hume.
And the organisers had the foresight to adapt the next festival to be as COVID-proof as possible.
“The festival starts in March, which happened to be right when everything started getting bad with the pandemic, so if 2020 had been our year it would have completely shattered us,” Hume says.
“Fortunately our next festival was 2021 but we didn’t know what things would be like in a year, so we moved really swiftly and confidently to start planning for an almost exclusively Tasmanian program.” With its annual themes of island life and culture, Ten Days traditionally features art and performances from other islands and island-based artists from both Australia and around the world.
With travel restrictions and quarantine periods in place for much of last year, organisers knew it would be difficult to guarantee anyone from outside the state would be able to take part, so they decided to localise. Only a handful of the artists are from outside of Tasmania this year.
While Ten Days 2021 has been heavily shaped by the pandemic and some events are even plague-themed, Hume says they were careful to not make this year’s festival all about COVID-19.
“COVID is definitely an influence, of course, but what we want to focus on is how that experience has made us all more optimistic about each other and about gathering to share something,” she says.
“I think it is an upbeat festival this year but reflective as well, a consideration of how we want to live our lives going forward from this past year.” Ten Days on the Island spans the three regions of Tasmania. It started in the West and North West on Friday, where it will run until March 8, then moves to the North/North East from March 12-14, and finally to the South from March 19-21.
The festival commenced with Mapali, a welcome to country ceremony in Burnie at dawn, telling the traditional story of the creative spirit, moinee, creating lutruwita/Tasmania and its people.
The West/North West section of the festival will also include such events as the Slipstream Circus workshop for Kids; the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra performing with the Cradle Coast Orchestra; the Atrium Festival Lounge at the Burnie Arts and Functions Centre; Women of the Island, a collection of short films about the lives of extraordinary Tasmanian women; Monique Brumby; and the Burnie 2.0 Living History QR Walk, which allows you to follow a trail of QR codes to learn more about the area’s past.
The North/North East leg includes Mapatazi, an all-female onslaught of more than 20 electric guitarists and bassists playing metal at the Launceston Workers Club; Bach by Dark, chamber music by candlelight; Venus and Adonis, Shakespeare’s erotic poem performed by Marta Dusseldorp and Ben Winspear; and The Marvellous Corricks, a special event celebrating Tasmania’s first family of vaudeville and showbiz.
And in the South, highlights include Hobart Current: Liberty an exhibition at TMAG which will feature 10 contemporary artists exploring the idea of freedom in new works; Hide the Dog, a family theatre production about two friends who discover a Tasmanian Tiger; and Echo’s Scribe, where a single room inside Willow Court is transformed into a text-based art installation by Alexander Okenyo, drawing from public documents and private stories related to the old asylum.
Hume says she is particularly excited about The Marvellous Corricks, and the opportunity to share this amazing and little-known story with the people of Launceston, where the Corricks lived.
“All of these films were found in a garage in Launceston and they’ve been digitised and set to music,” she says.
“They were this fantastic family, all singing and dancing, seven girls, one boy, and mum and dad. They toured the world for 15 years and settled back in Launceston.
“That young boy, Leonard, at 14 was given his first movie camera in 1914 and he started filming his amazing family and I think people will be captivated by their story. And there are still lots of Corricks around, some of them even remember their crazy grandparents and their life of entertaining.” One of the big drawcards this year, and one of the few artists from outside of Tasmania, is Sydney filmmaker Lynette Wallworth, who is presenting three of her interactive video installations at Rosny Barn for the festival.
Two of these are completely immersive virtual reality films, Collisions and Awavena, which are experienced in a VR headset with full 360-degree vision.
And the third, Evolution of Fearlessness, is an exercise in “digital touch”, where the viewer stands in a small room and places their hand on a virtual doorway, where a woman will appear, placing her hand against yours.
“For Evolution of Fearlessness, prior to entering the room, there is a story about 11 amazing women, who I filmed, and you can read as many of their stories as you want,” Wallworth says.
“Then, you go inside, stand on a little platform in front of a doorway with a screen. When you place your hand on the screen, one of those 11 women is selected at random, and appears in front of you on the screen, life-size, with her hand pressed to the screen from the other side.
“They don’t speak. They are simply standing there, their hand on yours, looking you directly in the eye. It is a moment of presence, feeling that proximity, seeing them face-to-face after reading about them.” Collisions and Awavena were both filmed using revolutionary ball-shaped cameras that allow for full 360-degree filming, a technique that allows the viewer to essentially occupy the spot where the camera stood, and look in any direction.
Collision is the story of Indigenous man Nyarri Morgan, whose first contact with Western culture came in the 1950s when he witnesses a nuclear explosion in the South Australian outback, part of the British Maralinga tests.
“In the 1950s and 1960s many local Aboriginal people were still living nomadically, moving between Western Australia and South Australia, because that red desert region wasn’t wanted by anyone for growing or grazing,” Wallworth says.
“And Nyarri wanted to tell his story of how one day he saw this apparition in the desert, something he couldn’t understand, something he had to try and interpret from his pre-contact perspective.
“It is a very powerful and moving story, and the film is basically 17 minutes in which you travel virtually to where he lives, you meet him and his family, and he simply tells you what happened.
“We show some of what he saw in animation but mainly it was just filming him talking in his country with his family around him.” Following the premiere of Collisions in 2016, Wallworth was invited by the Yawanawa people of the Amazon to come and visit their rainforest home to use her VR techniques to film their world.
“They said to me, we have a story to share, you have to come to the Amazon. We took three canoe-loads of gear into the rainforest to do it.
“Calling it a film shoot doesn’t seem right, because it was much more ceremonial than that. We had a formal invitation, and when we left we were carrying with us something that the community saw as a gift to the Western world, the gift of their story.” Wallworth says she has fallen in love with the VR medium because of the way it immediately personalises the story being told and directly immerses the viewer in the world they are watching.
“There’s a kind of intimacy in all three of these pieces, it feels very one-on-one,” she says.
“Usually when watching a film, we are aware of the audience around us in some way and we experience it like that. But these three films are very intimate, there’s a connection between you and the person who was filmed.
“That person was aware you would be standing in front of them as they looked at and told their story to that camera, and as you watch it, it is as if you are standing there with them.” Ten Days on The Island runs until March 21 across the three regions of Tasmania. For full program information and bookings visit tendays.org.au
CREDIT: WORDS TIM MARTAIN
Word count: 1453
