Rivergum Homes has created a purpose-built virtual reality studio to showcase life-size floorplans and housing facades by projecting them onto the walls and floors.
Known as Plan Lab, the projected space allows those considering building to walk through different housing designs with furniture in place and see potential home facades in full scale up to two storeys high.
Rivergum Homes managing director Victor Said said it had taken 18 months to develop the technology and construct the purpose-built Mile End studio, which is a first for South Australia.
Top selling suburbs of 2020
“Plan Lab offers a customised private studio session for individual customers immersing
themselves in the design journey, whether looking to optimise a home layout, its orientation or facade appearance,” he said.
“It has also been designed to support development projects where showcasing completed product or having a permanent project sales environment is not feasible.”
“For developers of apartment projects, Plan Lab offers a virtual space to present to
customers every floorplan or every level – even matching the wall projection with the
actual views from that height. It is a remarkable and immersive experience.”
Anyone considering building can use Plan Lab, with a one-hour session priced at $500.
However, there is no cost to Rivergum customers who have paid a deposit for a house, and those who have paid for a session then decided to build with Rivergum will get it credited back to them.
Jessica Micarone and Jordan Lehman tested the technology to get a feel for their new home ahead of construction.
“We’re building with Rivergum and it was offered to us, we didn’t even know about it,” Ms Micarone said.
“I love the idea of it. Having the floorplan projected like that, you really get a conceptual feel of the room.”
Ms Micarone said it was a helpful experience because it made them reconsider certain aspects of their design.
“I think it’s made me rethink furniture and power point placement,” she said.
“It’s well worth it, especially for custom designs.”
Bookings for the one-hour experience can be made online.
Word count: 327
