The creation of South Australia's first online Aboriginal screen and new media arts channel will provide Indigenous artists with a platform to promote, host and sell their work.
iDreamingTV is a screen and new media arts channel that will be available both online and through an app, and will be a one-stop shop for those interested in the work of Aboriginal artists, and for the artists themselves.
Experienced Aboriginal filmmakers David Wilson and Albert Lovegrove-Buckskin, plus radio producer Samantha Lee from Umeewarra Media, are involved.
Mr Wilson said this had been more than a decade in the making.
"Over 10 years ago, iDreamingTV did a survey across South Australia of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities about what they wanted to see with screen and multimedia in SA - the results of that survey were over 700 pages long and the strategy was released in 2011," he said.
"It has been implemented since, and one of the main objectives was the development of this online space."
Mr Wilson, a project coordinator, hoped the website and app would be live by the end of 2021, after receiving funding from the federal government's Indigenous Languages and Arts program.
He said this was a "unique" offering that would give South Australia its first screen and new media Aboriginal arts channel.
Mr Wilson said it would include artist profiles, include photos and videos of their work and a shop to purchase artwork, plus documentaries, podcasts and news.
"Our version of new media arts includes all forms of art and will be a place where all artists can have their work hosted," he said.
"People in the community can go to one place and see a diverse range of performing arts and visual arts of Aboriginal artists."
Mr Wilson said it would promote art from Indigenous artists across South Australia to the world.
He said they would be getting in touch with artists across mediums to be involved, and they also wanted to move into projection art, 3D, animation and virtual reality art.
CREDIT:
Word count: 339
