AN international music festival and a revamped motorsport event are part of a new campaign highlighting South Australia during spring.
The packed annual program, called Bloom, will also feature a Barossa food and wine festival and an Adelaide Oval concert starring Kate Ceberano, David Campbell and Anthony Warlow. There are also plans to return the Christmas Pageant to the city’s streets.
For motorsport lovers, an expanded Adelaide Rally – formerly the Adelaide Motorsport Festival – will be held in the East End, along with a round of the Australian Superbike Championship at The Bend Motorsport Park.
They join a slate of existing events between September and November, including the Royal Adelaide Show, Bay to Birdwood, OzAsia, CheeseFest, Feast Festival and the Christmas Pageant.
At Thursday morning’s launch, Premier Steven Marshall revealed he was hoping to bring back the pageant, which usually attracts more than 300,000 spectators, to the city in November.
Last year, Covid-19 restrictions meant the annual festive season event was held at twilight at Adelaide Oval.
The new two-day Harvest Rock festival, from the owners of Falls Festival and Splendour in the Grass, will debut in November next year in Adelaide’s city parklands. Art lovers can also enjoy IMMERSE, a virtual-reality show featuring high-end technology and music in Light Square.
Mr Marshall said it was spring’s “time to shine” in SA, with Bloom set to boost tourism numbers around the state.
“Springtime is when Adelaide is in full bloom, so it is the perfect time to hold more events more often,” he said.
“Four new festivals and a whole range of expanded and existing events held through the season from Adelaide to the Barossa and the Riverland – our state’s spring calendar is more exciting than ever.” But opposition tourism spokeswoman Zoe Bettison said there was nothing new in the announcement. “We need more events to create and support jobs – not a rebadging of events that have been around for years,” she said. PAGE 15: DAVID PENBERTHY
CREDIT: ANTIMO IANNELLA
Word count: 334
