Virtual heritage GERALD Matthews’ suggestion we turn our city’s heritage buildings into virtual-reality experiences reminds me of Dennis Potter’s science fiction series Cold Lazarus (“Bold idea to revitalise our historic buildings”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
In Cold Lazarus, all future experience becomes virtual, accessed via the memory banks of those living today.
In this scenario we wouldn’t need national parks – too expensive to run. We could make walking the Heysen Trail a virtual experience. And why go for a drive in the Adelaide Hills or holiday in the Flinders Ranges when you can have the same experience from the comfort of your loungeroom?
It won’t be long before we’re drinking virtual wine.
And who needs old trees? Let’s thrown in some virtual tree hugging while we’re at it.
Dennis Potter’s dystopia spawned a revolutionary movement – real or nothing. STEPHANIE JOHNSTON, Adelaide Unhealthy roads THE cost of re-establishing the rail service between Mount Barker and Adelaide, versus the cost of upgrading the capacity of the South Eastern Freeway and Glen Osmond, Portrush and Cross roads shouldn’t be limited to just the consideration of the price tag.
What also should be taken into account are the community health costs of having high volumes of traffic near residential areas.
Research on 700 studies undertaken worldwide by the US Institute of Health Effects concluded the short-and-long-term impacts of living, working, and attending school within 500m of very-high-trafficked roads has shown there are major environmental and health risks.
These include elevated rates of heart disease, strokes, preterm birth, immune damage, cancer and asthma.
In 2005 the Bureau of Infrastructure, Transport and Regional Economics estimated the cost of vehicle air pollution on life and illness in Australia was $2.7bn.
Costs like this need to be factored into any proposed road upgrades. KEVIN O’LEARY, Crafers Spreading hate THE federal government allowed far-right commentator Katie Hopkins to fly in from the UK and she boasting about breaching quarantine rules.
The government also allowed far-right commentator Lauren Southern to move here from Canada.
These are people who have been banned from social media, and even countries, for spreading race-based hate.
But they seem to be acceptable to this government.
NICK HASKELL, Athelstone Spy games GOOD old China.
Sends a spy ship into Australia’s economic zone, but outside the national territorial water zone, and claims no problem.
This is the same country that is threatening those who sail into the South China Sea, but are outside of China’s territorial water zone.
How many ways do you want it?
China needs to get its act right. Especially as the country has now set up quite a big compound in Adelaide.
ROGER BATES, Paralowie Protect lambs JANINE Clipstone points out newborn lambs exposed to our wintry conditions have a poor survival rate (“Animal shelter”, The Advertiser, Monday).
Recently visitors from New Zealand were shocked to see dead lambs in the Adelaide Hills.
And a family excursion to the Fleurieu Peninsula was spoiled by the sight of lamb losses.
More compassionate NZ and UK farmers erect permanent shelters for lambs born in freezing conditions.
Australian farmers would do well to show the animals some compassion and emulate overseas practices.
As we are now experiencing continuing weather extremes due to climate change. DIANE CORNELIUS, Seacliff Park Struggling Crows DANE Swan’s assessment of the Adelaide Crows being the “Worst team in the league” resonated with me (The Advertiser, Tuesday).
In addition to the uncertainties created by Covid-19, one significant reason for me to not renew my Crows season tickets this season was the failure to re-sign players Alex Keath and Hugh Greenwood.
Both are now among the best in their respective teams.
One, a key defender, could have taken the place of the injured Daniel Talia. The other, one of the best tacklers in the league and a dominant centre player, could have helped out the battered Rory Sloane.
Yes, rebuilding makes sense.
But it makes no sense to gut the team of key senior players with four years of playing at the highest level still left in them.
Port Adelaide Power tried a similar experiment in the Matthew Primus era. Fans deserted them and empty seats had to be covered with tarpaulins. MARK THOMPSON, Newton
Word count: 703
