ADELAIDE-based Australian String Quartet has named Melbourne Symphony Orchestra associate principal viola player Christopher Cartlidge as its newest member.
It comes as current ASQ violist Stephen King, who has been with the quartet since 2012, steps into a new role as its director of learning and engagement.
Cartlidge spent eight weeks with the quartet earlier this year, performing as part of the Adelaide Festival’s Chamber Landscapes series and for its world premiere season of Impermanence with Sydney Dance Company, as well as at regional festivals.
“For me, this is a new frontier to be explored: to express myself in new ways; to be a better musician, violist and communicator,” Cartlidge says. “I can’t wait to see what the future holds.” ASQ violinist Francesca Hiew says she, recently appointed cellist Michael Dahlenburg and fellow violinist Dale Barltrop are excited to welcome Cartlidge into the fold.
“Christopher’s time as guest violist with the ASQ at the beginning of the year revealed a natural musical affinity that we look forward to sharing with our audiences around the world,” Hiew says.
The appointment, and King’s new role, will enable ASQ to continue to produce cutting-edge, cross art-form collaborations, and initiate new education and digital strategies.
ASQ will also reunite with ARIA-winning didgeridoo player and composer William Barton for a Town Hall concert on Wednesday as part of this month’s Illuminate Adelaide festival.
They will perform the score to their seminal collaboration, Square Circles Beneath the Red Desert Sand, which draws on the spirits of Barton’s homeland on Kalkadunga country at Mount Isa and seeks out common resonances between two musical traditions that evolved on opposite sides of the world.
Barton and the ASQ’s recorded score is also the soundtrack for Square Circles VR, an immersive virtual reality experience that uses digital storytelling to create breathtaking visual landscapes, and runs at the Queen’s Theatre until Saturday. BOOK AT ILLUMINATEADELAIDE.COM
Word count: 315
