SANFL clubs are trialling new concussion management technology that could prove a game-changer.
With concussions – and their serious side effects – one of the biggest issues facing Australian football, Sturt, North Adelaide and Norwood have teamed with international company NeuroFlex to try to improve concussion detection and provide a safer return to play model.
NeuroFlex’s state-of-the-art, eye-tracking technology, which uses VR goggles, a laptop and software, uses virtual reality to assist medical teams detect concussions and their severity.
The result of 30 years of research, it focuses on a set of scientifically validated ocular motor functions.
There are eight different tests, each lasting between 30 seconds and just over a minute, that can be conducted on players during games or at training.
Base levels are established in the pre-season and then compared following any concussions.
Former Adelaide Crow and 1991 North Adelaide premiership player Sean Tasker is involved in distributing the technology to SANFL clubs, saying it should provide players with “greater confidence’’ when it comes to dealing with concussions and protecting their brain health.
Under current SANFL and AFL concussion protocols, a player diagnosed with concussion cannot play again for at least 12 days.
“We are so pleased to be able to support the SANFL clubs in providing cutting edge technology which gives them the ability to baseline test their players and collate data for objective assessment of player brain health,’’ said Tasker, who is head of education at NeuroFlex. “This should allow players the capacity to return to play when their brain health is ready and not feel pressured to get back on the field.
“They will now be able to return in a more confident and ready state.’’ NeuroFlex scientific and medical officer Dr David Stevens said the technology would allow club medicos to make more informed decisions about player safety.
“The rehabilitation and return to play timing is still poorly understood so these subjective measures will help improve the return to play decisions,’’ he said.
SANFL general manager football Matt Duldig said the technology being trialled was a positive step forward in assisting clubs to provide optimum player safety.
“The NeuroFlex trial, together with the current AFL adopted guidelines and practices around concussion, including SCAT testing and mandatory rest periods, supports SANFL’s commitment to the health and safety of all players at every level of the game,” he said. “Concussion is an extremely serious issue and it’s important that, as a football industry, we support new developments in technology.’’
CREDIT: ANDREW CAPEL
Word count: 418
