Creative arts industries have taken centre stage offering participants an exciting, global future SINCE playwright Noel Coward wrote “Don’t put your daughter on the stage, Mrs Worthington … The profession is overcrowded and the struggle’s pretty tough”, many parents have tried to steer their children away from careers on the stage.
But Coward is no longer right.
The state government is moving in the opposite direction, encouraging young people to find a career in the arts. In particular, they are urged to consider the burgeoning screen-based creative industries which are increasingly offering a sustainable and higher than average paying career. It is also an exciting and rewarding choice, offering the possibility of a global career.
Confident of the sector’s potential, the state government has targeted the creative industries as one of the nine areas for growth support.
This includes the Education Department’s new Adelaide Film Festival Youth, or AFF Youth, which is being held July 25-30.
AFF Youth includes a world-class screening program of films, plus a one-day careers expo for secondary students, which offers the opportunity to engage directly with leading creative companies and practitioners. Tertiary education and training providers will also be on hand for aspirant jobseekers to discuss their pathway to a career in the sector at the expo, to be held at Lot Fourteen on July 28.
Adelaide Film Festival chief executive and creative director Mat Kesting says AFF Youth is a film festival for young people that also highlights how they can become involved in the industry itself.
“There’s never been a better time to pursue a career in the creative industries,” he says.
“The screen industry in SA is booming and relies on diverse skills and talent that include a variety of technical and skilled roles. There are many jobs in screen, not just the highly visible roles of acting or directing.” The creative industries contribute enormously to the South Australian economy. The South Australian Film Corporation (SAFC) is embarking on a new study to capture recent growth, expansion and economic impact of the sector, however figures from the Deloitte Access Economics Report March 2019 show the SA screen sector contributed $119.5m to gross state product, while 1170 new jobs were created in the 2017/18 financial year.
Demand for SAFC’s Adelaide Studios production facilities has been at record highs, with a record level of production activity forecast for the remainder of the 2021 calendar year. It includes Stan, HBO Max and BBC One’s production The Tourist, and AMC Studios and See-Saw Films’ production Firebite – both of which are currently in production.
A series of 12 industry sessions also will be presented as part of the AFF Youth program. Organisers say the skills-oriented sessions have been carefully developed to complement the careers expo and feature experts such as Rising Sun Pictures VFX specialists working on Hollywood blockbusters. The sessions cover production areas including sound, special and visual effects, virtual reality and games production, plus several writing-oriented sessions. For screening program and careers expo details visit AFFYouth.org
Word count: 503
