These start-ups a quickly making big impressions on the world stage Australia’s buzzing technology sector is ripe with promise and on the radar of savvy global and local investors.
Here are the top 20 rising tech stars across the nation.
CANVA Design start-up Canva has become virtually a household name across Australia, growing from its humble roots as an online tool to create school yearbooks in 2007, to a tech powerhouse employing thousands of Australians and used by millions of users globally.
The company’s most recent capital raising valued it at $US16 billion, and it’s rumoured to be quietly plotting a lucrative public listing, which would probably be on Wall Street, like Atlassian before it.
Canva was born in the Perth bedroom of its founder, then-university student Melanie Perkins, but is now headquartered in Surry Hills, Sydney, with offices spread across Manila, Beijing, Wuhan, San Francisco and Austin.
The company is hiring hundreds of workers and is showing no signs of slowing down. It now has nearly 2000 employees, and 55 million users, while 250 million presentations have been created on its platform.
“For us, growth is what it’s all been about, from both the product side and the customer side,” says co-founder Cameron Adams, a former Google executive.
“The last 12 months have been a rollercoaster for everyone, but our growth has powered on, and been even stronger than ever before.”
SAFETYCULTURE SafetyCulture – which counts Atlassian co-CEO Scott Farquhar, Morgan Stanley executive Paul Kwan and Blackbird Ventures managing director Rick Baker as advisers – has grown from being a modest safety checklist app to a fully featured holistic platform for a company’s safety and compliance needs.
The start-up was founded in a Townsville garage, but now employs hundreds of people and has grown to become one of Sydney’s hottest tech companies to watch.
The company was most recently valued at $2.2 billion, smashing past its previous “unicorn” status from April last year, receiving funding from former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull and wife Lucy Turnbull and heavy-hitting investors including Index Ventures TDM Growth Partners.
“We recently surpassed 100 million completed inspections in our flagship product, iAuditor, and this new funding allows us to continue that momentum,” SafetyCulture founder and CEO Luke Anear says.
“It also allows us to invest in the development of our platform which will ensure the information captured by workers can easily be acted upon to improve quality, ­efficiency, and safety in the workplace.” SafetyCulture currently helps 28,000 companies improve every day by streamlining the flow of critical information through their mobile-first platform, and its ­platform is used across a range of industries including manu­facturing, hospitality, retail and logistics.
DEPUTY Cafes, restaurants and other hospitality businesses across the globe use Sydney-based workforce management software start-up Deputy to modernise their HR processes and simplify time sheets and workplace communication.
Before starting Deputy 12 years ago, chief executive Ashik Ahmed began his first job at Hungry Jacks in 1994.
He was the first in his family to find a job after migrating from Bangladesh. Now, Ahmed has built up Deputy into one of the nation’s leading tech start-ups, working with more than 250,000 workplaces internationally, with a motto of “simply shift work”.
It has offices in Sydney, San Francisco, Atlanta and London, and has bounced back from a difficult 2020 – in which Covid-19 ravaged the global hospitality industry – to resume its rapid growth trajectory.
The company is estimated to be worth almost $1 billion, which would give it the esteemed “unicorn” status.
STAKE US stocks such as Tesla, Apple and Gamestop are all the rage with investors, and Australian fintech Stake is helping Australians take advantage. The start-up closed a $40 million funding round from Tiger Global and DST Global this year and is expanding globally.
Stake, founded by Matt Leibowitz in Sydney in 2017, was the first company to offer commission-free brokerage for customers to buy and sell US stocks in Australia, and Leibowitz says the company is now ready to offer its app to customers in even more countries.
In the past year alone, Stake’s customer base has grown by more than six times, and it now has more than 330,000 customers globally.
“Our mission drives our focus to put the US stockmarket at the fingertips of investors and traders around the world,” Leibowitz says.
“To achieve this, we push the boundaries with innovative technology and systems.” The Stake team describes its aim as to democratise global share­markets in order to bring the world’s largest and “most dynamic” market to the rest of the world.
WITHYOUWITHME Much has been made of how Australia treats its veterans, and WithYouWithMe is a tech start-up doing something about it.
The Sydney-based company, founded by ex-veterans, has attracted thousands of Australian military veterans to its program, which helps them gain meaningful employment in high-growth areas including cybersecurity, robotics and data analytics.
George Frazis, Bank of Queensland chief executive and a former engineer in the Royal Australian Air Force, says he has experienced first-hand how the skills developed through military service can translate to a long-term business career.
“Every defence member receives exceptional leadership training; they know how to work in cross-functional teams in an agile manner and are extremely strategic and resilient,” Frazis says.
“Veterans work hard and understand how to deliver on a mission and be motivated by a higher purpose.” According to WithYouWithMe co-founder Luke Rix, about 5500 military personnel leave every year, with about 4000 of those then active job seekers. Most are under 30, and have had about $2 million worth of training over their careers.
For tech companies, they get job-ready, hungry workers and can save recruitment costs by 90 per cent, while veterans gain access to the jobs of the future. A genuine win-win.
COMPLEXICA Helping some of the biggest brands across Australia and the globe make better decisions is a simple way to explain what Adelaide-based artificial intelligence firm Complexica does, but it also vastly undersells it.
It’s by no accident that the company has been able to bring on brands such as Pfizer, Pernod ­Ricard and Metcash over the past seven years, with products such as Decision Cloud and Larry, the Digital Analyst helping Complexica’s customers navigate decision-making processes well beyond the capacity of human managers.
Managing director and co-founder Matthew Michalewicz explains that when making a business decision, ideally you aim to collect and examine all the available data.
Unfortunately in a business with perhaps 5000 or more product lines, affected by vagaries such as the weather, cost inputs, consumer trends and logistics, to name but a few factors, the process becomes too complex, and humans fall back on their instincts.
Complexica, backed by the 20 PhDs on its advisory panel and with co-founder and globally recognised AI pioneer Zbigniew ­Michalewicz guiding technology development, allows its customers to optimise their processes, whether they be supply chains or sales funnels.
One of the larger projects to go live recently was their execution for Pernod Ricard, with which Complexica has been working for the past couple of years to help it optimise the winemaking process from vineyard through to bottling.
Complexica now employs about 70 staff across two Australian and one European office.
FLEET SPACE TECHNOLOGIES It’s heady stuff but with the dynamic Flavia Tata Nardini heading the ship, backed by co-founder and chief operating officer Matthew Pearson, the Beverley-based firm has already put five nano satellites into low-earth orbit, with another two to follow by the end of the year.
The company says it’s aiming for mass production by the end of this year, with the goal of a constellation of 140 satellites in space by 2027.
Funding rounds of $5 million and $11 million in 2017 and 2019, backed by the likes of Blackbird Ventures, Horizons Ventures and Atlassian co-founder Mike Cannon-Brookes, helped fund the jump into space, and the company now has numerous customers including SnowyHydro, CSIRO and BHP.
It is also collaborating on research projects with the likes of OZ Minerals and the University of Adelaide.
Fleet has applied for a $5 million federal government Modern Manufacturing Initiative grant which, if successful, would allow it to scale up to become a manufacturing hub, and quadruple staff numbers to more than 120.
“Space is no longer just for governments and multibillion-dollar satellites,’’ the company says.
“Space is open for business and we are making its technology accessible for everyone.’’
MYRIOTA Myriota’s journey from a university spin-out to a growth business has been stellar, with the business having raised more than $50 million from local and international investors since 2015.
Japanese giants-backed fund InterValley Ventures is among the latest investors attracted to the business, offering advanced satellite communications for remote and urban Internet of Things (IoT) devices, avoiding the need to use cellular networks.
The fund is led by former Virgin Entertainment Group CEO Simon Wright, and is backed by Japanese investment bank and securities firm Mizuho Securities and large private group Daiwa House Industry Pension Fund.
Other investors in Myriota so far include Boeing Horizon-X, Right Click Capital, Singtel Innov8, superannuation fund Hostplus and the CSIRO’s Main Sequence Ventures.
Former prime minister Malcolm Turnbull is also an investor.
Co-founder and CEO Alex Grant says Myriota has a steady stream of customers across traditional asset-rich sectors such as agribusiness and mining.
LUMARY Lumary says it will launch an evolved version of the software management platform it developed for Australia’s complex ­National Disability Insurance Scheme for the US market by the end of the year.
“It will be fundamentally a specialised offering for behavioural health services providers, which combines our platform’s capability and our experience in a niche healthcare setting,” co-founder Joseph Mercorella says.
“We know there is a huge gap and, together with Salesforce’s platform capability and partnerships, I think we will be offering something unique and much-needed in the market.” Mercorella and co-founder Matthew English were long-time colleagues working in disability services before they identified an opportunity to be a part of the ­National Insurance Disability Scheme, which has been fully operational since last year.
Lumary was born as Enrite Care in 2017 with a goal to help simplify the back-end software needs of the NDIS.
Lumary integrates with several other software products such as Xero, MYOB, Pendula, Formstack and Netsuite to provide a single workflow platform.
“We are a sum of integrated ­applications,” Mercorella says. “There is a lot of wastage in technology, so we want to be ambassadors of repurposing (existing) technology to suit the needs of customers.” The company, which has 200 customers, processes more than $2.5 billion in NDIS funding for more than 200,000 users.
TEAMGAGE Teamgage’s 20-second, regular check-in with teams became a critical need for some major Australian businesses during the pandemic-forced lockdowns last year.
As they grappled with the challenges of dispersed staff working from home, Teamgage’s software check-ins, available as often as possible, ensured businesses had an ongoing connection to sustain workforce morale through unprecedented challenges.
As demand for its product grew, so did investor interest, leading to its first external investment.
Melbourne angel investors Matt and April Allen, founders of Tractor Ventures, invested in the already-profitable business last month.
When Noelle and Ben Smit started the software business in 2016, the goal was simply to build great workplaces by enabling a sustained oversight of team ­engagement and improvement for all stakeholders.
The team has grown to 20 on the back of its biggest influx of demand last year, with its client list now including the UK government, federal government, NSW government, Westpac, Allianz, DXC Technology, SA Water, Microsoft and Santos.
“It’s been awesome to join the Tractor Ventures family and, beyond the capital, it’s about having people like Matt and April Allen supporting us, offering their experience and insight,” Ben Smit says.
CANOPY TOOLS GROUP Craig Adams reckons there’s an ocean of data out there looking for meaning. And that’s what Canopy Tools Group is doing within the Internet of Things realm, which encompasses the billions of physical devices around the world that are connected to the internet — all collecting and sharing data.
The chief executive and co-founder of Canopy with Dan Pearson, Adams says there is a sea of raw data generated by IoT devices that is forecast to reach 73.1 million petabytes by 2025.
“It’s important to remember that data itself is not the answer, data itself doesn’t provide an outcome,” he says.
“There’s so much of it flying around and a lot of businesses are not managing or using it the way they could. It’s all about how they harness the data.
“Our software focuses on collecting the data from IoT or connected devices, then analysing that data and taking action based on the analysis and criteria that’s set by the customer.” Headquartered in Brisbane, Canopy started in 2009 as a cloud-based business hosting data centres and evolved into an IoT-focus data analytics company.
The company has doubled its r team in the past 2½ years to 88 full-time staff around the world working with a range of clients, extending across healthcare, defence, education, facilities management, government, housing, tourism, bio-secure cruises and mid-tier organisations.
Adams says Canopy has recorded an increase in revenue every year since 2017, and in 2019-20 its audited result was $17.2 million.
Last year Canopy closed a $21 million pre-IPO fundraising round in advance of a potential float. While at this stage there is no scheduled float date, there is the potential for a further capital raising in the near future.
SEND PAYMENTS Send Payments co-founder Paul Billing, 37, says the company, headquartered on the Gold Coast, has grown quickly from inception two years ago and is looking to expand further.
Billing says for a country with a huge amount of foreign currency exchange transactions, Australia has lagged behind with one of the most expensive systems beset with delays and compliance issues that Send’s platforms aim to fix.
The firm’s products are used by Flight Centre’s Travel Money Group, Woolworths Team Bank, as well as Jetstar.
“We also work with some of the best relocation companies such as Grace and Crown. We have just signed a great relationship with Pepperstone,” Billing says.
“By proxy we are probably the biggest payments company in the world that no one has ever heard of. There is no vanity there for us. We are there to get in behind the scenes and improve what’s on offer.
“We’ve grown 20-30 per cent month on month,” he adds, noting it now has about 30 staff across Australia, New Zealand, the UK and The Philippines.
He says Send will start to “seriously look over the next few months” to raise between $5 million and $10 million.
CLIPCHAMP A global video editing platform has added an extra five million registered users over the past 12 months with a surge of activity in non-English-speaking countries backed by a range of new product features and collaborations.
Brisbane-based Clipchamp notched up 16 million registered users in April – up from 10 million 12 months ago – with a growing customer base of more than 390,000 small and medium-sized enterprises, Fortune 500 companies, creators and influencers.
The company’s co-founder and chief executive Alex Dreiling says up to April year-on-year template usage was up 183 per cent, with the coronavirus pandemic creating a “permanent impact” on the use of video platforms, as businesses needed to stay in contact with clients during lockdowns. Clipchamp is an in-browser platform that gives users access to video editing tools and features, from simple cropping and resizing to special effects such as transitions, motion titles and green screen.
It has partnered with Dropbox and Box to enable customers to import and export their content with ease. Last year Clipchamp launched several features to help accommodate changing user needs, including webcam and screencam recording, green screen, audio-video separation and freehand positioning of video elements.
Clipchamp, which launched in 2014, has a variety of backers including high-profile Queensland entrepreneur Steve Baxter.
Dreiling says it has raised about $14 million and in the future will be looking to raise more to expand its rollout of intuitive features and ­focus on collaborations with major online platforms.
YOULY While a new player on the scene, this start-up has honed in on a very specific market that it sees as ripe for disruption.
And the rise of telehealth during Covid-19 has played right into the hands of Brisbane entrepreneur Nic Blair and his latest ­venture.
Billed as providing Australia’s first emergency contraception delivery, Youly was launched by Blair in February to target what he saw as gaps in women’s health for hassle-free and discreet access to medical treatments.
With cash from the sale of his previous digital marketing business, serial entrepreneur Blair was researching where next to make his move just before the pandemic hit.
With $450,000, he and his partners built the platform that currently offers assessment, con­sultation and fast delivery of prescription and over-the-counter medication from emergency contraception to thrush and cold sore treatments.
Blair says the company was currently seeking investment from venture capital firms in Brisbane and Sydney with a view to raising $500,000 now and up to $2 million later in the year.
TANDA It’s the start-up tech company that investors would love to own a piece of. It all began when four QUT mates were trying to figure out why their student bar was losing money and paperwork, and what was created from those discussion – Tanda (the shortened version of time and attendance) – has grown into a global powerhouse with 10,000 companies on the books.
Alex Ghiculescu, Josh Cameron, Jake Phillpot and Tasmin Trezise – who launched Tanda in 2014 with the software to automate the payroll process for shift-reliant companies – still own the company.
It is the ultimate bootstrap company, which has grown without needing to raise outside funds, and the four shareholders have no intention to do so in the future.
As a mark of success as a tech start-up, Tanda has its r signage on top of an office building that houses its new Australian base at 545 Queen St in the Brisbane CBD.
Unfortunately, the four owners were not there to see the sign go up because they’re holed up in their US base in Chicago unable to return home because of the Covid-19 pandemic.
However, Brisbane-based general manager Phil Johnson, 30, says it is business as usual with Tanda, which is focused on global expansion.
CULTURE AMP Culture Amp chief executive Didier Elzinga has traded in the flashy world of Hollywood visual effects for start-up life, building a small, scrappy team of four into a culture analytics company now employing hundreds of “people geeks” globally.
Founded in 2009, Culture Amp produces software for companies to ­collect and understand employee feedback, and Elzinga says 2021 is so far proving a pivotal year for his fast-growing tech outfit.
The pandemic has forced companies everywhere to focus on retaining and attracting staff, who are now more picky than ever.
“The workplace is changing and things aren’t going backwards,” Elzinga says. “There’s been a big change, with remotely distributed workforces, to a whole range of issues and conversations that we weren’t having before in the workplace.
“It’s not going to be easy, but we see a huge opportunity for us to be at the heart of helping companies navigate those questions and those challenges, as we pull the handbrake after last year. We’re looking at a year now where we can’t hire fast enough.” The Melbourne-based company, which was founded in 2009, was most recently valued at $US700 million in 2019, after raising $US82 million in a funding round led by Sequoia Capital China.
AIRWALLEX Airwallex was started in Melbourne by five university student friends in 2015, and was the fastest Australian start-up to ever reach a billion-dollar valuation. The fintech’s platform allows other businesses to operate internationally, by enabling quick cross-border transactions.
Airwallex CEO Jack Zhang says his company has now grown to 420 people, from about 200 a year ago, and he aims to appoint more staff over the next 12 months.
“We would have had an even higher valuation without the Covid-19 issue, but it’s hard to say – I’m just guessing,” he says.
According to Zhang, Airwallex has grown its revenue 10 times in the past 12 months, with its first-quarter 2021 revenue for Australia nearly reaching the entire figure it achieved in 2020.
He says he is confident his company will have triple-digit growth in the next three years, and has set a milestone target of reaching $US1 billion of revenue in 2025.
LINKTREE Linktree was founded as a mere side hustle three years ago by Zaccaria brothers Alex and Anthony – along with their friend Nick Humphreys – and is quickly drawing comparisons to the likes of Canva and Atlassian in terms of growth.
High-profile social media users Elizabeth Warren, Chrissey Teigen and Jamie Oliver are all using the Linktree platform, which now has 14 million global users and more than 30,000 new sign-ups a day.
In March, the Melbourne-based start-up landed a $US45 million Series B funding round co-led by Index Ventures, a heavyweight investor in Patreon and Discord.
Linktree’s platform connects a celebrity’s online feeds, giving them one link to share to all their followers and allowing them to house all their content in one place.
By allowing high-profile users to direct their followers to multiple websites and YouTube posts from a single link, the start-up is looking to capitalise on the changing tastes of social media users.
“There’s been a sea change when it comes to how we interact with the brands and creators we love,” co-founder Alex Zaccaria says.
TRIBE Radio and television personality Jules Lund started Tribe in 2014 in a bid to help brands hire and connect with influencers, and has since scaled it up to be something much more significant.
The entertainer-turned-start-up executive, who has hosted TV shows such as Getaway and hosted drive time radio alongside Fifi Box and Sophie Monk, tapped now-CEO Anthony Svirskis to help build out his idea, which is now a fully fledged subscription marketing platform for businesses.
Tribe has evolved from its influencer marketing roots to become a place where brands can source content, often produced by their everyday customers, to be used as sponsored content, social media ads, digital ads, out-of-home ads, website collateral and in e-commerce.
The company is busy planning an IPO to raise capital to scale its subscription product, expand product integrations into more ­social media networks, and continue growth in the US, following a $5.5 million pre-IPO funding round this year to support its plans.
Svirskis says Tribe creators have earned $24 million producing more than one million branded pictures and clips, and that brands are just scratching the surface when it comes to the broader influencer marketplaces.
PHORIA Virtual reality and augmented reality are sometimes perceived as fad technologies, but Phoria is the real deal.
The company runs a Melbourne-based immersive tech studio, producing futuristic VR and AR content in partnership with the likes of Netflix, Google and OnePlus.
Phoria recently produced a major installation, Rewild Our Planet, featuring narration from David Attenborough. The project toured the world, including stops in Singapore, Bristol and New York, and is now available to billions of smartphone users worldwide via an app.
The studio has also made a free virtual reality nature documentary series with Facebook-owned Oculus, Ecosphere, and more than 200,000 people have downloaded and experienced it. Ecosphere has won numerous awards, including Best VR Film at the Los Angeles Film Awards, Best 360 Storytelling at the Jackson Wild Media Awards and Best Immersed Audience Award at the Vancouver International Film Festival. Phoria co-founder and CEO Trent Clews-de Castella says technologies such as augmented reality have many implications for collaborating in the real world.
CREDIT: Cameron England; David Swan; Valerina Changarathil; Chris Herde; Emmaline Stigwood
Word count: 3984
