COVER STORY Festivals are back on the agenda. Paul Chai pops a cork on the many places you can travel to get your fix of one our favourite ways to celebrate
What’s not to love about festivals? Whether big, small or somewhere in between, they’re a welcome way to reconnect with music, culture, art, food, comedy and so much more.
In the spirit of festival going, I’ve contemplated the Nude Solstice Swim at Dark Mofo, wolfed down barbecued bug cooked by a celebrity chef on the sands of Geographe Bay and split my sides laughing in a Melbourne comedy club.
These celebrations have the ability to bring a town, a city, even a state to life, the locals are friendlier, the visitors are happier and everyone is on the hunt for a good time. A festival is everything Covid tried to take away from us – a massive messy get-together where you share food, drinks and fun with other eager participants. They are food trucks and pop-up bars, they are standing shoulder-to-shoulder at the altar of live music, they are discovering new artists, they are one drink too many, and a couple of hours’ sleep too few.
Festivals can change a way you see a place whether it is lighting up dark winter streets or sharing insights into the stories of our First Nations culture. Discover a festival that just might change you.
NSW Shine on SYDNEY SOLSTICE Running until June 20 and encompassing not just the CBD, but the inner west and Goat Island, NSW’s shiniest new festival has a distinctly youthful vibe with dance parties, outdoor illuminations, speakeasies and enough cocktails to have you sneakily Googling hangover remedies from your work computer the next day. Better still, many of the events are free.
June 8-20; sydneysolstice.com
Grape expectations ORANGE WINE FESTIVAL Not to be confused with orange wine – skin-contact white wine – this regional festival celebrates the winemakers of Orange in the Central Tablelands, NSW. It includes a festival night market, wine show and tastings. Throughout October; orangewinefestival.com.au
Dance like no one’s watching BYRON BAY BLUESFEST After the last-minute cancellation in April, expect a crowd with a headful of steam at this all-Australian multi-day, multi-stage music bash in Byron Bay. Headliners are a mix of old and new, with Midnight Oil, Kate Ceberano, Tash Sultana and Ocean Alley hitting the stage.
October 1-4; bluesfest.com.au
Loud and proud SYDNEY GAY AND LESBIAN MARDI GRAS All the floats, marches, parties and performances that make this festival one of the best and brightest on the Sydney – and international – calendar. March 2022; mardigras.org.au
The future’s so bright VIVID SYDNEY, NSW Vivid is best known for filling the chilly winter nights with dramatic light shows, glowing installations and luminous tapestries projected onto landmark buildings such as the Sydney Opera House. But it’s also a showcase of music, art and diverse discussion with Sampa the Great headlining a night of African culture, conversations about LGBTQI+ culture, love and consent, isolation and escapism and an evening with electronic duo Flight Facilities. August 6-28; vividsydney.com
VIC Eat, drink and be merry MELBOURNE FOOD & WINE FESTIVAL This year saw this food fest split into three instalments. March brought some of 2020’s cancelled events back while the Winter Edition (July 30 to August 8) will be all about Melbourne, celebrating the chefs, dishes and inspiration that make the city a magnet for hospitality talent. In November, the Regional Edition turns the heat up on the best of country Victoria.
July, August and November; melbournefoodandwine.com.au
Dirty digging TRUFFLE MELBOURNE Federation Square devotes a weekend to celebrating this not-so-humble fungus. August 21-22; trufflemelbourne.com
Shining a light WINTER WONDERLIGHTS Ballarat’s famous Sovereign Hill, the living museum honouring the gold-rush era, gets the night-time illuminations treatment.
June 25 to July 18; winterwonderlights.sovereignhill.com.au
The white stuff WHITE NIGHT White Night heads inland this year with light displays, performances and street food in the regional capitals of Bendigo and Geelong. Bendigo, October 2, Geelong, November 6; whitenight.com.au
Guffaws and giggles MELBOURNE INTERNATIONAL COMEDY FESTIVAL During March and April in Melbourne everything from the town hall to tiny laneway bars morph into comedy clubs as comedians from near and far descend upon the city. March 30 to April 24, 2022; comedyfestival.com.au
QLD Arts in the right place BRISBANE FESTIVAL This festival is an explosion of arts and culture with the curvaceous Brisbane River as the backdrop, curated with a Sunshine State eye to reflect the city and its residents. This year highlights include Queensland’s Finest, a concert that includes a new work by young composer Sebastian Lingane, Boy Swallows Universe, a stage adaptation of the novel about growing up in outer Brisbane, and rising star Jess Hitchcock celebrating her Saibai Island/Papua New Guinean heritage in song. September 3-25; brisbanefestival.com.au
Big ideas on the big screen VISION SPLENDID OUTBACK FILM FEST Inspired by US film fest Sundance, this home-grown event takes place in Winton, Queensland, the birthplace of Qantas.
June 25 to July 3; visionsplendidfilmfest.com
Connecting to country LAURA QUINKAN DANCE FESTIVAL Believed to be the longest-running First Nations festival, it attracts thousands who come to Cape York to witness the communities celebrate their history via shared stories and dance performances on traditional Aboriginal land.
July 2-4; lauraquinkanfestival.com.au
Drawing people together CAIRNS INDIGENOUS ART FAIR Providing an ethical art marketplace and promoting First Nations culture, this fair is a must for those interested in emerging local artists. August 17-22; ciaf.com.au
New wave art SWELL SCULPTURE FESTIVAL, QLD Taking place along the Currumbin coast, the Swell Sculpture Festival sees largescale sculptures installed on and by the beach. You might see alien spacecraft landed on the Gold Coast sands, a giant metal teddy bear watching over surfers or shopping trolleys twisted into art glistening in the sun. September 10-19; swellsculpture.com.au
TAS Dabble in the arts DARK MOFO Culminating in the now-famous Nude Solstice Swim, Mona’s Dark Mofo lays bare the artistic side of the Apple Isle with ever-more-controversial happenings and feasts. This year has music from post-punk outfit the Slag Queens, the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra performing Jesus’ Blood Never Failed Me Yet, a composition based around a phrase unearthed from tapes made of rough sleepers in London in the ’70s, and walks in Hobart with local teenagers guiding.
June 16-22; darkmofo.net.au
Make a racket HUON VALLEY MID-WINTER FESTIVAL Presented by Willie Smith’s cider makers, this festival celebrates the harvest season with a wassail ceremony, an old English tradition that sought to scare away evil spirits by banging pots and pans and waking up the apple trees for a new year of fruit. July 16-17; huonvalleymidwinterfest.com.au
Have a wee dram TASMANIAN WHISKY WEEK The current boom in Australian distilling has its roots in Tasmania making whisky, when they realised how similar the climate and natural resources were to Scotland. Spend the week tasting these new-world tipples that impress people the world over.
August 19-15; taswhiskyweek.com
Get loud FESTIVAL OF VOICES A series of performances all devoted to the art of singing.
June 30; festivalofvoices.com
SA Get your glow on ILLUMINATE Light and art converge with a luminous multi-media experience stretching over 2km through the Adelaide Botanic Garden, an immersive gallery of Vincent van Gogh’s works displayed as projections and a recreation of Ernest Shackleton’s trans-Arctic exhibition for virtual reality. July 2021; facebook.com/adelaideIlluminate
Party your arts off ADELAIDE FRINGE FESTIVAL If its edgy and its arty you can expect to see it at the Adelaide Fringe as it continues its run as one of the biggest arts festivals in the southern hemisphere. Stretching from Whyalla to Mt Gambier it includes over 6000 artists holding court in 300 venues.
February 18-March 20, 2022; adelaidefringe.com.au
Raise a glass HANDPICKED FESTIVAL A celebration of wine and song in the lush surrounds of Lake Breeze Wines. November 13; handpickedfestival.com
Living legends SALA FESTIVAL The South Australian Living Artists Festival is dedicated features some 9000 participants across the state.
August 1-31; salafestival.com
WA Discover your inner gastronome WA GOURMET ESCAPE What started as a Margaret River food festival that drew celebrity chefs from all over the world is now a state-wide celebration of food and wine. The 2021 edition will be an all-Aussie chef affair featuring incredible culinary events such as the famous Gourmet Beach BBQ.
November; gourmetescape.com.au
Feeling the heat BROOME CHILLI FESTIVAL Chilli lovers flock to Broome for this spicy celebration and the chilli-eating contest that pushes the top end of the Scoville scale.
August 8; broomechillifestival.com.au;
Summer of arts PERTH FESTIVAL Started in 1953 at the University of Western Australia, this event showcases arts, music, film and literature. February 11 to March 6, 2022; perthfestival.com.au
NT Top draws to the Top End DARWIN FRINGE Billed as the “independent arts festival with bite”, the Top End arts festival has a huge 10-day program that includes promoting young artists (12-25 years), Celtic folk afternoons and comedy shows. Plus you‘ll hear directly from local artists about how the north of Australia has inspired their creative experimentation.
July 2-11; darwinfringe.org.au
Hot August nights DARWIN FESTIVAL, NT This year you can see Hannah Gadsby’s new show Body of Work, attend the National Indigenous Music Awards, or see Opera Australia’s latest take on Carmen.
August 5-22; darwinfestival.org.au
You can leave your hat on ALICE SPRINGS BEANIE FESTIVAL This community event was started in the ’90s to sell beanies crocheted by Aboriginal women in remote communities but has grown to a wider celebration of First Nations culture and their handmade textiles.
June 25-28; beaniefest.org
ACT Blooming marvel FLORIADE A sensory celebration of spring in the nation’s capital, Floriade invites flower lovers to marvel at more than a million blooms in Commonwealth Park. All of Canberra gets in on the act with Floriade Community, an initiative that sees local areas plant bulbs to create a tulip trail through the suburbs.
September 11 to October 10; floriadeaustralia.com
Take to the skies CANBERRA BALLOON SPECTACULAR Running over nine days in early March, hundreds of hot-air balloons take flight around Canberra.
Dates yet to be announced for 2022; balloonaloftcanberra.com.au
5 festivals we miss around the world 1 GLASTONBURY, UK A mud-soaked musical immersion at Worthy Farm.
glastonburyfestivals.co.uk
2  SONGKRAN, THAILAND Ring in the New Year with water fights, sky lanterns and street parties. tourismthailand.org
3  OKTOBERFEST, GERMANY Bring back the raucous beer halls of this month-long German beer fest. oktoberfest.de
4  CANNES FILM   FESTIVAL, FRANCE Red carpets and movie stars take    over the seaside locale as do the mega-yachts moored offshore.
festival-cannes.com
5  TANGO FESTIVAL, ARGENTINA Gather in Buenos Aires, the    birthplace of the tango, for free concerts, performances and classes.
turismo.buenosaires.gob.ar See 10 weird, wacky and fun Australian festivals at escape.com.au/festivals
Word count: 1774
