WITH international travel at a standstill, the grains industry has come up with a solution to inform their international markets about the quality of the local product.
In 2020, AEGIC began hosting "virtual" crop inspections, aimed at international grain markets.
The videos are a collaboration between grain producers and organisations across Australia, and cover eastern Australia, SA and WA.
The videos help maintain the connection with customers who would usually travel to see crops first-hand, visiting farms, receival sites, ports and research companies.
AEGIC chief executive officer Richard Simonaitis said maintaining these customer interactions was critically important.
"Our customers highly value keeping track of growing conditions and seeing our supply chains in action," he said.
"It gives them confidence in our production systems and supply chains, and just as importantly, it helps maintain the human connections between producer, trader and customer.
"The virtual crop video series is able to support these requirements and build new relationships within the industry."
Mr Simonaitis said there had been strong demand for the Australian industry to continue the series in 2021.
"We received an abundance of great feedback from international customers," he said.
"This is a fantastic example of the industry working together for a great outcome."
RELATED: Rabobank rolls out virtual property valuations
AuctionsPlus to launch virtual reality sale
The videos are translated into five languages and distributed to flour millers, brewers, maltsters, government agencies, traders, and other stakeholders across 12 countries.
The first 2021 videos have already been released and are being well-received.
"Wow! So useful!! We highly appreciate your effort!", one Japanese flour miller said.
"This kind of information is very useful for us," a Thai flour miller said.
"Very informational & straightforward videos," a grain buyer in the Philippines said.
The videos are a collaboration with ADM, CBH Group, CHS Broadbent, GrainCorp, GrainGrowers, the Grain Industry Association of WA and Viterra.
The videos are also supported by GIMAF, Grain Producers Australia, Grain Producers SA, and Grain Trade Australia.
Details: View the videos at aegic.org.au/international-customers/virtual-crop-inspections Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 355
