The Wayville showgrounds have been a hub of activity this week, with the SA Heifer Expo having kicked off on Monday, and finishing up tomorrow (Thursday).
Expo coordinator Justine Fogden said it was "fantastic" to be back, after COVID-19 forced the cancellation of the 2020 event.
"There haven't been too many youth ag events happening recently, and two were cancelled in NSW last week, so it's great to have this up and running again," Ms Fogden said.
This year, entrants were capped at 150, with 146 entrants having participated. Five entrants from Qld and 1 NSW entrant were initially enrolled, but unable to attend due to COVID-19. Three sisters from WA, three Tasmanians and 13 Victorians have taken part in the event.
In a "normal" year, Ms Fogden said the event usually attracted about 180 entrants, including about 10 from NSW.
"With the interstate kids, it really depends on when school holidays fall, and if they line up with ours, and this year Covid has had to be a consideration on top of that," she said.
Despite recent Covid scares in SA and across the border, Ms Fogden said the event was still able to run to a fairly similar schedule as previous years.
"Not a lot has had to be changed, but if we were on level 1 or 2 restrictions it would have been a lot more difficult," she said.
"A lot of committee members have spent a lot of time organising how it was going to run, if we were on those really tight restrictions, but we've been able to fit the same number of people into rooms as what we normally would."
Twelve-year-old twins Maddison and Emily Hann, Lucindale, are competing in the Expo for the fourth time this year.
"I love everything about the SA Heifer Expo," Emily said.
RELATED READING: Show experience pays for Grey
"It's a great educational experience - I've learned how to handle my heifer properly, where to place my hands on the halter, how to stand her up, and how to lead her around properly."
For 12-year-old Harry Cartledge, Meningie, the Heifer Expo is an opportunity to improve his skills in the showring.
"I'm hoping to get a bit more experience leading in the ring, because I've only competed in two shows, the Heifer Expo and the Royal Adelaide Show in 2019," Harry said.
"I like cattle, most of the time they are nice peaceful creatures."
Harry's twin sister Elizabeth is taking part in the event for the third time.
"I like to learn all the things most people wouldn't like, like how to tie the knots, and make halters," she said.
This year's program has included some virtual reality sessions, interviewing and public speaking sessions, a red meat session run by TFI, a presentation from AuctionsPlus, a careers session, as well as marketing and show preparation sessions.
Full coverage of the SA Heifer Expo in next week's Stock Journal. Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: Claire Harris
Word count: 513
