Hobart writer and director Willoh Weiland has an incredible urge to seek some form of truth in a radically complicated and confusing world After chatting for only a few minutes, it quickly becomes clear that there is nothing obvious about Willoh Weiland.
The Hobart writer/director is in the process of writing the screenplay for her debut TV series, Rainbow Girls, supported by Screen Australia. The 12-part drama/comedy is set in 2045, when the Australian Republic’s first President Rachel Radford, a Ngunnawal woman, is sworn in. Meanwhile 24-year-old Abigail Bread becomes the first woman to enter into the Freemasons.
Weiland says the story is a critique of the polarising public discourse that is so common these days, a collision of feminism and white nationalism and a look at the spectacular ways women negotiate power. Yep, there’s a lot going on in that plot: future setting, women in power, Aboriginal world leader, the glass ceiling shattered inside Freemasonry.
Weiland knows it’s a lot. She laughs about it as well. But that’s kind of the point. There is no real reason why any of the things in her story couldn’t really happen. But the fact that it all sounds so sadly distant is something she wants to dissect and explore.
“Australian politics is inarguably misogynist,” she says. “There isn’t gender parity in any single party, I don’t look at our parliament and see myself represented there. And I certainly don’t think the voices of our first nations communities are being heard. It sucks, quite honestly.” And if her TV series sounds intriguing, Weiland herself is almost as surprising. Even the question “are you a local?” leads to a fascinating and unexpected response. “Well, I’ve been here four years, so not quite a local yet,” she says. “I was born in Belize in Central America and my family moved to Australia when I was 14. We lived on Kangaroo Island and I went to boarding school in Adelaide. Then I lived in Melbourne for nine years until I had the glorious opportunity to fall in love with Tasmania and now I’m so dedicated to the place, I’m not going anywhere else.”
Weiland describes herself as an artist, writer and curator and is also an Honorary Fellow at the University of Melbourne’s Interaction Design Lab, with an interest in interactive digital artworks and virtual reality.
Since living in Tasmania she has co-curated night-time programming, including Faux Mo, for the Mona Foma festival with James Brennan, and she was once the artistic director of APHIDS, a Melbourne-based experimental arts organisation and has spent a lot of time creating works in visual art, which she says was where her interest in TV and cinema began.
In 2019 she created a work for the Museum of Contemporary Art in Sydney called Lick Lick Blink, in which one audience member at a time sat alone in a cinema to watch a film featuring only women, while eating an ice cream shaped like a woman’s breast.
“My interest in cinema has been growing alongside other aspects in my practice. Lick Lick Blink was my way of looking at the representation of older women in cinema, featuring 100 women over 50.” She says the idea for Rainbow Girls, her first screenplay, came from a random experience in Adelaide several years ago, when she was at an art gallery that sat across the road from a Freemason lodge and she decided to go in for a look.
“More specifically, it was the Freemasons Grand Lodge, this enormous $50m building that basically took up a whole city block,” she says. “I was interested in how women work in the face of these big institutions, so it made me wonder if any women were involved with the Freemasons.
“There was a woman there at a front desk and I interviewed her in the ‘ladies’ lounge,’ which was this tiny windowless pink room in the basement of a massive four-storey building with at least three enormous halls and marble floors everywhere.
“She was very sweet — and very racist — and told me about the Rainbow Girls, which is the name of female youth league of the Freemasons. It was such an extraordinary insight, she loved communicating her sense of female empowerment, which was against women participating at any level of power.
“She took me to their library, where an old man told me there were some things I couldn’t look at while I was there. It was quite gripping, it made me very interested in how it connected to the idea of property and ownership in Australia.”
The image of that grand, secretive building sitting proudly on land taken from its traditional owners, and openly telling the world that nobody was allowed to see the secrets it held, was an intoxicating one for Weiland. It was an image that set her down the path of contemplating just what is meant by “property” on any land that is as contested as it is in Australia, and what happens when the very idea of ownership is challenged.
And in parallel to that, she wanted to take the kind of deeply polarised discourse that often follows such debates and thoroughly muddy the waters.
“The story starts from a struggle around property, the government attempting to return land to public use, but it affects church grounds and Freemasons property, and this is a government where our first Indigenous president, Rachel Radford, is being sworn in, but she is also a conservative. Then you have Abigail Bread, who is the insufferable favourite child of a Freemasons Grand Master, becoming the first woman to enter the upper echelons of that very old organisation’s structure.
“Because what really struck me as interesting is that there are actually lots of women involved in the Freemasons but all in the background. Women are always influencing power and powerful institutions, they’re just not always visible.
“I think this is something problematic for white women and feminists alike, a refusal to recognise our own participation in this system and the problem of inequality. You see it in TV shows like Sunrise and these women at the forefront of the Trump administration, people like Linda Reynolds, the idea that it is just white men is not accurate.
“That’s something I’m trying to look at through elevating Indigenous and queer women’s voices through my work. It’s a conversation we have to have and I’m interested to see how it plays out in the storyline.”
De-polarising public discourse is a passion for Weiland, as well. She finds it frustrating that in so many big issues of our time, people immediately split into their opposing corners leaving little possibility of finding common ground. She finds very the idea of binary politics to be problematic, the assumption that to be a feminist, one must also be a socialist, and so forth, when the spectrum of beliefs is so much more complex.
“It’s really unhelpful, especially when talking about women in politics,” she says. “They won’t all be progressives, there will always be Maggie Thatchers as well. We all suffer from this tendency to put all feminists, or all indigenous communities in the same box, assuming they all have the same perspective or opinions. In one proposed storyline, Rachel’s parents are these radical hippies from the 60s who are disappointed with how conservative their daughter is.” Weiland says she finds the pettiness of politics exhausting and laments our modern inability to debate any topic respectfully as individuals, polarising ourselves almost instinctively, when once upon a time we might have just agreed to disagree.
“I want to use this series as a way of depolarising a lot of these things. Even the Freemasons in this story, I’m not casting them necessarily in a conservative light, there’s a lot of progressiveness in their ideas of charity and good works.
“That Left-versus-Right rhetoric is too simplistic. I want the opposite of that, to explore the complexity of those ideas of conservatism and liberalism. On both sides I think we suffer from an over-simplistic approach to each other’s views.” The series is in the writing stage with no timeline for shooting or screening yet, but Weiland hopes production could take place in Tasmania if possible, even though the series is set mainly in Canberra. “I would love to shoot it here, there are so many great examples of work being shot here now and parts of it could definitely be done here, it’s all possible. And even though it’s set in Australia, I think the diverse makeup of the characters and the universal storylines and the involvement of an ever-fascinating organisation like the Freemasons could propel it to an international audience.”
CREDIT: WORDS TIM MARTAIN
Word count: 1451
