AUSTRALIAN OPEN 22 Free, iOS/Android There’s a good chance you’ve heard plenty about tennis recently or, more specifically, tennis players. This app is all about the game and will show you who’s playing at the Australian Open currently and how they’re faring. The app will also let you save your favourite players and send you notifications when they’re due to take to the court. The app features match highlights and, if you happen to be in Melbourne, details about where to go and where to eat.
PLANNER 5D Free, Google Android/$11.99/m, Apple iOS Whether you’re planning a big renovation or just want to make more of your existing furniture, this app can help you refine plans or move things around without the heavy lifting. Planner 5D lets users create a space, move the walls to match their home, and add items to see what works and what isn’t practical. The app will also let users inspect rooms in 3D and, if they have a Google Cardboard headset, in virtual reality.
EATWELL Free, Apple iOS/Google Android Life with food restrictions can be tricky, particularly when dining out. This Aussie app, launched in Sydney, recently arrived in Melbourne and will be released nationally at the end of the month. It lets diners find restaurants that cater for halal, gluten-free, dairy-free, vegan and other requirements, taking away awkward moments before ordering. Menus are listed alongside reviews so you can be confident in your choices.
HALIDE II $17.99/year, iOS This app unlocks plenty of advanced photography features you wouldn’t necessarily expect from a smartphone. They include focus peaking (so you can see what’s sharp), fine exposure controls, highlight warnings, histograms, horizon levels, multiple options for handling RAW files, and manual exposure. The app will let you try these extras free of charge for seven days, or you can subscribe for $17.99 for a year or $79.99 for life.
MIMELET Free, iOS/Android This cute platform adventure game is suitable for all members of the family. It asks players to guide a blocky character, Mimelet, up trees, over mountains, through rivers and other obstacles by collecting fruit and jumping on enemies to gain their powers. The controls are simple, the gameplay familiar, there are plenty of tips and no nasty surprises.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 380
