ROBOTS capable of delivering packages, portable TVs for video chats, and a home on wheels that you can use to party, sleep or exercise in while your car drives itself – the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas delivered a strange window into the future on Wednesday.
Some of the world’s biggest tech firms showed off their prototypes and future visions the day before the tech event officially launched in Las Vegas.
Sony was one of few tech giants to appear in person, using its CES announcement to officially enter the car market with its new arm called Sony Mobility.
The Japanese firm showed off a prototype of its Vision-S SUV with a touchscreen spanning the car’s entire dashboard for enter-tainment and controls, as well as 40 sensors inside and outside for safety, and a 5G internet connection.
Sony chief executive Kenichiro Yoshida said the firm decided to launch an electric vehicle spin-off after a positive reception to its earlier prototype and would seek to shake up the market.
“The excitement we received after the announcement of Vision-S encouraged us to further consider how we can bring creativity and technology to change the experience of moving from one place to another,” he said.
The company also revealed a big change to the PlayStation 5, announcing a next-generation virtual reality gaming device.
Sony Interactive Entertainment president Jim Ryan said PlayStation VR2 would be a big step up from its early efforts, with the new VR headset tracking the user’s eye movements, delivering subtle vibrations, using two advanced hand controllers.
Sony’s big announcements came after LG kicked off the pre-show day at CES 2022, with LG chief executive William Cho saying the pandemic had posed interesting questions about whether technology needed to change to better suit us.
“Are to we return to the normal, old way of doing things or move forward to something better?” he said.
LG’s vision of the future included a “mobile concept” vehicle called the LG Vision Omnipod shaped like a mini-van but with a floor-to-ceiling screen with virtual assistant Reah acting as a concierge – or even a workout instructor.
Furniture within the Omnipod could be moved to create a mobile office, a sleep capsule or a moving movie theatre. – even though the technology is still a long journey away. The company also showed a portable TV concept called the LG One:Quick Flex designed to deliver video calls for remote working and virtual chats with family members and friends.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 416
