Family adventure holidays are awesome fun and sneakily educational
The list of holiday attractions kids find dead boring is long and strongly felt – scenery, museums, galleries, markets, old buildings and volcanically hot hipster bars are all definitely out. As is watching ice cry into your lemonade while your parents sip cocktails and exchange dreamy looks by the resort pool. If it’s appealing for adults, it’s almost certainly torture for children.
What kids of all ages and temperaments crave on holiday is excitement and novelty. Whether you own toddlers or teens, adventure travel is a sure path to a “totally sick” holiday. Let’s be clear – family adventures don’t have to involve river guides, bungee cords or indemnity insurance. You don’t need to fly to Nepal, swaddle your newborn in exotic fabrics and trudge to Everest base camp to be a good modern parent.
Adventure travel can be as simple as camping under the stars. Suburban kids can get so swept up in the outdoors experience – pitching tents, making camp fires – they don’t even know they’re doing chores.
At campgrounds all over Australia you see gangs of dirty-faced shorties roaming in packs, loudly making their own fun. You wouldn’t know it but these wild-eyed hoons are on the highway to achievement and success. They’re learning important life skills while they climb trees, chase bush turkeys, jump off bridges and tear skids on their bikes. The physical and social benefits of outdoor play are obvious, but psychologists also stress significant mental health advantages.
Studies show that just spending time in nature can improve cognition and creativity while reducing the chances of depression and anxiety disorders. Outdoor adventure is especially beneficial in the modern age of screen addictions, anxiety disorders and pandemic isolation. “Face out, not face down” is the buzz parenting phrase coined by psychologist Linda Blair. “Children are so used to two-dimensional play, so we need to encourage their spatial skills and three-dimensional play,” she advises. Three-dimensional play doesn’t mean virtual-reality goggles; it means swings and trees and skateboards and, until they learn to wear shoes, stubbed toes.
Some holidays that appear to tick the adventure box may not. Roller-coasters are exciting and fun parks are fun, but neither are adventurous. Adventures involve the risk of failure and that can’t happen on roller-coasters or at fun parks. It’s also why some parents instinctively shield their offspring from genuine adventure – to protect them from potential harm. But teenagers – and especially boys – are drawn towards risk-taking by evolutionary instinct. Researchers believe it’s because risky play teaches young minds self-reliance and how to manage fear and anger and learn emotional balance. It’s also super-fun.
My boys have been into adventurous stuff since they were old enough to fall over and I feel it’s been good for them. But furthering their development and ensuring we raise resilient and capable young men wasn’t the core motivation. We took our kids snowboarding in Japan’s Hakuba Valley, snorkelling on the Great Barrier Reef, mountain-biking to Kozi and surfing in Indonesia because they’re all things my wife and I enjoy doing. That noted, it’s not easy to teach your children to surf and it’s murderously expensive to take them skiing. So choose your family adventure wisely.
From my own parents I learnt you can get up to all kinds of risky business in the holidays with very little outlay. We camped – even in the snow – and never went to restaurants or, heaven forbid, cafes. The family that plays together, stays together, as they say. Especially if they don’t know the way back to the car.
Kirk Owers is a freelance writer and photographer from Boomerang Beach, NSW. Raised by keen travellers and outdoor enthusiasts he is enjoying passing on the adventure gene to his own kids.
CREDIT: Kirk Owers
Word count: 639
