FAMILY FUN ASK YOUR KIDS TO SET A HOLIDAY BUDGET TO GUARANTEE SAVINGS At the start of every school holidays, I get my boys to write down all the fun activities they want to do over the break. Like most teenage boys, they go crazy. If I added up the cost of everything they wanted to do, I’d need a mortgage on my mortgage and probably need to sell one or both of my kidneys – or one of the children – to fund them.
So a few years ago I came up with a plan: I would give the boys a school holiday activity budget and it was up to them to make that budget stretch to cover all the activities they wanted to do. I don’t think there has been a single activity we have done where we have had to pay full price. There is nothing as frugal as a teenage boy in control of his own budget.
Here’s where we found great deals.
HEALTH FUND MEMBERSHIPS If you are with a private health fund, log into your membership. They always have member-only offers for discount tickets. I am with Bupa and they have offers such as 25 per cent off movie tickets; $8 mini golf; 30 per cent off treetop adventures; 30 per cent off Legoland Discovery Centre entry; 30 per cent off Sea Life Melbourne entry; and $8 bowling tickets at Strike.
These offers change all the time, but most were 30 per cent off and that is nothing to be sneezed at.
RAC MEMBERSHIP If you have car insurance with RACQ, RACV, RAA or NRMA or even just a membership to their breakdown service (most of us do – it’s awesome) check out member offers. Some of the best discount tickets I hope to use include the Gold Coast theme parks, Australian Outback Spectacular, Australia Zoo and Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary.
SCOOPON AND GROUPON Discount apps Scoopon and Groupon are perhaps the very best place for parents to find discount tickets for their kids when school is out.
You can set the app to search the area you live in and see all the local deals, and if you sign up to their newsletter, you get an additional 10 per cent off. Plus, there are lots of deals for adults, too.
Some of the best deals for kids and teens include a three-hour paintball session from $10, discount aqua park sessions from $15, painting classes from $12, ninja obstacle course classes from $15l and virtual reality escape rooms from $75.
WHAT’S ON WEBSITES Many discounted tickets are offered for promotion on local tourism and government websites.
Quite often they are even giving tickets away or promoting free events, so it’s worth bookmarking these websites to see what deals come up in your area.
A few websites to check out include visitbrisbane.com.au, whatson.cityofsydney.nsw.gov.au, halftixmelbourne.com, experienceadelaide.com.au, hellogoldcoast.com.au, discoverqueensland.com.au experienceoz.com.au, eventfinda.com.au, familiesmagazine.com.au, and moneysmart.gov.au.
MUMMY BLOGS Before you roll your eyes, mummy blogs are actually a treasure trove of information to get you discount tickets for kids’ activities. They often have exclusive discount codes, so they are worth checking out.
Some of the best ones include stayathomemum.com.au (my website), mumcentral.com.au, mumslounge.com.au and whatson4kids.com.au
GOOGLE If you have exhausted all of the above, whatever activity you decide on, put it into Google followed by “discount” and just see what comes up. You might find a good coupon code you can use.
Even 10 per cent off may not seem like much, but it all adds up.
■ School holidays are exciting for the whole family.
For me, I save money all year so I can splurge a little and enjoy the holidays with my boys.
After all, what’s the point in having kids if you can’t spoil them? Jody Allen is the founder of mothers’ network Stay At Home Mum. Find her at @StayHomeMum on Facebook, @jodyallen.stayathomemum on Instagram, @JodyAllen_SAHM on Twitter
CREDIT: Jody Allen
Word count: 656
