BEACH HEROICS DRAMA APLENTY AS HOPPO AND NEW-LOOK BONDI RESCUE CREW RETURN There’s a silver lining in every grey cloud — for Bondi Rescue’s head lifeguard Bruce “Hoppo” Hopkins being caught up in the Northern Beaches lockdown meant he had his first relaxing Christmas Day in decades.
He and wife Karen had only moved to Avalon last year and while it obviously wasn’t ideal being confined to home in the festive period, he didn’t really miss the flat-out pace that is Bondi Beach in the peak of summer.
His wedding was also a casualty of the pandemic. Initially planned for April — “obviously the worst period you could have planned one”, Hoppo laughs — it was rescheduled for September in the hope English-born Karen’s overseas family and friends could come. When it became apparent that still couldn’t happen, the pair celebrated with an intimate ceremony in front of 26 close family and friends. Although again, Hoppo says it was another blessing. “I think Karen liked it better that way, rather than having way too many people,” he says.
It’s been a weird 12 months for everyone, and the Bondi lifeguards are no exception. Their beach closed for the first time since World War II in the early days of the pandemic. The lifeguards were still on duty, watching over an empty beach.
“(Bondi) closed for five weeks and it was quite eerie,” Hoppo says. “It was like being down on the south coast. There was no one around. It was also amazing the difference — the sand got really white, the water was so clean. That was the real positive side. The negative side was people couldn’t get on the beach or in the water.”
BACK ON THE BOX Bondi Rescue returns with its 16th season on Thursday featuring the aftermath of the pandemic. With 10 new recruits ready to put their training into action, a shocking scene unfolds as a paraglider crash lands into the water, leaving the lifeguards rushing to their rescue. It’s possibly not as crazy as the time a car landed on Bondi, or even when an unexploded bomb rolled up on the shore break, but it’s certainly up there.
“You can’t script these things – that’s just Bondi,’ Hoppo says. “People say you must make all that stuff up, but nah, that’s just the way Bondi is. I always say you should bring (director Steven) Spielberg down and sit on the beach for three months and he would have the best movie ever made.” With international travel largely off the cards in the near future, crowds are down some 50 per cent on the renowned beach. However at Bondi, and across Australia, drownings have increased.
Hoppo attributes it to lack of education in schools.
HOPE FLOATS “We’ve got the Float to Survive campaign — floating is the best way to survive,” he says. “So many people who have moved to Australia in the past 20 years don’t have that culture of going to the beach. When I was growing up you went to the pool (as part of school swim lessons) and you’d dive on with your clothes on and learn to float and survive. That’s not compulsory any more. That’s probably where we are losing that culture of the water.” With 30 years as a lifesaver, and 16 on Bondi Rescue, Hoppo’s become quite a passionate educator and says he wants to be remembered for more than being that “bloke on that show”.
“There’s more drownings in flat water in Australia than in the ocean — obviously there’s an issue if people are drowning in rivers and backyard pools. I’ve been pushing with all the politicians I’ve been meeting lately to get all that (education) back in schools. We’ve also got to educate parents who are scared to put their kids in the water. I’ve been doing a lot of work with India and what’s happening there is so many have a fear of water. Parents don’t let their kids go in.”
RIPPER VR Hoppo’s been developing a virtual reality water safety experience with a tech company. It’s been three years in the making, and they are now in the finetuning stages. Users feel like they are in the water, caught in a rip. To escape the rip, they have to hold their arms in a floating position. When you are not in the floating position, you start “sinking” and can feel yourself going under the water.
“It’s funny watching people — I can tell when they’ve gone under. They’re in a chair, but this is how real it becomes for them, they’re trying to lift their head as they sit in that chair to get back above the water.” He’s spoken in schools for many years, but knows a simulated real-life experience works better. “I stand up and talk and they go “Oh yeah’, but when they are faced with the actual situation and panic sets, it doesn’t matter what I’ve told them in the classroom.” He’s securing more funding so he can roll his VR out to schools. And he’s grateful for the profile Bondi Rescue has given him.
“I guess I’m kind of moving to my next chapter – educating people. A lot of people get in touch from all over the world because of my profile, now that Bondi Rescue is international.” Bondi Rescue, Thursday, 7.30PM, Channel 10
CREDIT: Lisa Woolford
Word count: 902
