Vocational education and training programs are opening doors to exciting career pathways infused with opportunites to engage with the latest technologies and innovation. And, with the chance to put learning into practice, they are also helping make dreams come true As an avid gamer, Annabelle Macfarlane was somewhat hesitant about a career in game development and design, fearing she would lose the magic of the fantasy in the reality of the job. But as a tech artist for Mighty Kingdom – the largest independent game developer in Australia – she has found a new kind of magic ... in the details.
Macfarlane specialises in creating real-time visual effects for video games. “If you are playing a video game and your character walks under a waterfall, I’m the person who will make the water fall and the character look wet once they come out from under it,” she explains. “Often I describe myself as people saying, ‘It looks better but I’m not sure why’. I live in those tiny, pretty details.” The beauty in those details was revealed to a young Macfarlane uncertain about which career pathway to choose through another technology platform – YouTube.
“When I was young I jumped around as to what I wanted to do, from blacksmithing to science to creative writing,” she says. “Looking back, I can see how those all influenced me to wanting to become a tech artist.
“I’ve always loved video games but I had the mentality that learning how to make them would remove the magic for me a bit. I was watching some YouTubers back when Minecraft was relatively unknown and they were making their own story through Minecraft – that was the moment I knew I wanted to do that, to give people the tools to express their own creativity and have their own worlds and experiences through a medium I helped to produce.” Macfarlane joined Mighty Kingdom in 2019, having studied a Bachelor of IT majoring in games design and development, followed by an Advanced Diploma of Professional Game Development specialising in game art and animation through a VET pathway at the Academy of Interactive Entertainment.
“I learned a lot of the art assets production that goes into video games, which I was able to apply to the previous programming skills I had learned, and then use that to go into the tech art field,” she says. “It’s amazing – no part of my education feels wasted or that I wasn’t learning something that was productive and useful for me to be able to use in my day-to-day work.” After time spent on the other side of education, as a casual educator and demonstrator at Macquarie University and Powerhouse Museum in Sydney, today that day-to-day work involves sprinkling her own magic on action-adventure game Conan Chop Chop. Previous projects include Danger Days and Sugar Slam.
“There’s an amazing satisfaction in being able to put that nice ribbon on things,” she says. “Because tech art is a bridge between programming and art, you have this fantastic support role where you’re able to talk programming and code with one person and art and lighting with another; so you’re constantly getting to use both sides of your brain and switching between them. Every day is so different and so exciting – it constantly keeps you on your toes and it’s a lot of fun.” The fast pace at which technology is evolving also keeps Macfarlane on her toes, and she is keen to grab any opportunity to continue to grow her skills and learning. “Mighty Kingdom has a great culture of learning and development so there are opportunities for me to grow here,” she says. “And the games industry is filled with new technology so there is always going to be the need to learn the latest tech, like virtual reality.
“We have no idea of what is coming around the bend in 10 years’ time – at the games we play on our phones now compared to 10 years ago are miles apart. The sky is the limit – it’s really exciting.”
Security for the future Say the words “cyber security” and most people will likely think of hackers sitting at their keyboards trying to uncover state secrets or bring down global empires. But cyber security is so much more than technical geniuses using their talents for no good while other technical geniuses try to stop them: today’s cyber security also relies heavily on those not-so-technical people who create the policies and procedures to keep everything running smoothly.
Laurie Tonks is one of these people. The cyber security governance and awareness officer for Nova Group spends her days conducting reviews of the company’s governance policies and procedures, managing security awareness training and phishing simulations, and sending out internal and external communications.
“It is such a varied role, which is what really attracted me to it,” she says. “I also do a lot of cyber projects – at the moment I’m working on classifying our emails and documents.” Tonks arrived at Nova Group in April this year after a career background that included retail and finance, as well as a Certificate IV in Project Management Practice. “A lot of people coming into the industry are bringing skills from other careers,” she says. “My Certificate IV in Project Management taught me about being a business analyst and gave me the proper background in stakeholder engagement and communications, which I have transferred to this role.” Tonks is also transferring the skills she is currently learning from studying her Certificate IV in Cyber Security at TAFE SA to her job at Nova Group. “I’m about three quarters through my course and what I love about it is I can choose the subjects I want to work on in any semester,” she says. “One unit relates to simulated phishing training and incident response processes, which is what I’m doing at work. Last semester I did more written-type subjects and this semester is more technical.
“Because this role is not so technical focused, the course has given me the opportunity to understand what the technical people are doing and then relay it back to the wider group. Being able to see how my TAFE studies have helped in that aspect is really great.” Having already secured permanent employment while still studying, Tonks is excited for what lies ahead. “I feel I have landed on my feet with this role but there are so many opportunities,” she says. “Cyber security is going to be a really exciting space to work in down the track because of the variety of skillsets people are bringing to the industry.”
CREDIT: WORDS LYNN CAMERON
Word count: 1113
