YOUNG GUNS OF BUSINESS
While Silicon Valley is in lockdown right now, young Australian inventors, innovators and entrepreneurs are making their mark on the technology world. From creating therapeutic robots and revolutionising clinical trials to devising better coding kits, cryptocurrency platforms, virtual reality experiences and kangaroo meat produced in a lab, Aussies are smashing it. JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON reports on some of the country brightest minds under 30 who are thinking big,winning investments and changing lives.
MANURI GUNAWARDENA, 28, HEALTHMATCH FOUNDER As a fifth-year medical student, Manuri Gunawardena was “focused on neurosurgery with a passion for brain cancer research” but she uncovered a serious problem. Doctors were struggling to find patients to fill clinical trials, while patients found the process “hit and miss”. Her proposed solution, a platform called HealthMatch helping consumers find suitable trials, won Australia’s first TechCrunch Startup Battlefield and has since attracted more than $25 million in investment from Australia and abroad. The funds helped Ms Gunawardena, of Sydney, expand her business from five to 20 employees last year and rapidly attract new clients. “In six months we went from 8000 to 80,000 users on the platform,” she said. “It was also great in terms of actual placements in trials: we went from placing about 50 people to placing over 2000 people a month into clinical trials.” That included finding enough candidates to fill an arthritis trial in one month, even though researchers had been searching for 18 months. Ms Gunawardena said her next goal was expanding HealthMatch to Singapore, followed by the United States, but her ultimate goal was to make the healthcare industry easier to navigate. “I’m really passionate about changing the way healthcare is done to be more patient-driven,” she said. “Traditionally a lot of problems occur because healthcare is very paternalistic.”
NICOLE LIU, 25, KIN FERTILITY FOUNDER Nicole Liu has turned a medical misdiagnosis into something positive with Kin Fertility, a digital platform offering women health advice, access to doctors, and subscriptions to the contraceptive pill. Ms Liu, of Sydney, said the idea for the business came after she was mistakenly diagnosed with polycystic ovary syndrome at 24 and found it difficult to find information. What she started as a site for women’s health news then expanded to offer pill prescriptions and deliveries with oversight from a GP. Only those prescribed the medication from a GP in person within two years qualify. “We launched last February and we’ve now got over 40,000 subscribers to the pill service,” she said. “My ultimate goal is how can we become the place that women turn to first for women’s health, reproductive health and fertility health.”
COLINA AND HRIPSIME DEMIRDJIAN, 29, DOUBLE TROUBLE CREATIVES FOUNDERS Dropping out of law school to focus on an emoji business is paying off for twin sisters Colina and Hripsime Demirdjian. “Our creativity and push for innovation wasn’t being met by our law degrees,” Colina said. “We passed all our exams and thought ‘Why not launch a passion project?’.” That project began as an Instagram account and, after studying Swift programming and encouragement from followers, turned into the Moji Edit app that has now been downloaded more than 10 million times. Sydney’s Double Trouble Creatives now employs 10 people, including developers who helped deliver “AI-powered avatars created by taking a single selfie” and real-time emoji videos now popular on TikTok. Colina said the app was “just beginning” to tap into technology, with an Android version planned.
WILL BISHOP, 18, CHIRP APP DEVELOPER If you’re reading tweets on your Apple Watch, you’re probably looking at the work of Adelaide app developer Will Bishop. After teaching himself to code and creating an app to access his high school’s timetables and grades, Mr Bishop turned his attention to Apple’s smallest screen. The result, Chirp, is one of few apps to deliver tweets, trends and Twitter lists on your wrist – and earned the developer two scholarships to Apple’s Worldwide Developers Conference in San Francisco. Along with his other Watch apps, Nano and MiniWiki, the 18-year-old has earned more than 670,000 downloads. Mr Bishop said he planned to pursue a career in software development but would be using funds from the App Store to buy a van and take a gap year after “working since Year 11 on these apps”.
CHRIS DILGER, 22, WATERWISE AND HELPING GROUP CO-FOUNDER Whether it’s advising gardeners how to avoid “urban heat stress” or helping bushfire victims find safe places, Chris Dilger is determined to use technology for good. The computer science graduate claimed the global Deloitte Australia-UK Gravity Challenge prize with Waterwise collaborator Amber Truong in December. Their creation – a platform to help consumers work out how much to water their garden and when based on environmental factors – will now be used in a pilot for water providers. And the venture came after Mr Dilger, from Melbourne, set up an Amazon cloud infrastructure for the Helping Group, assisting bushfire victims connect with accommodation for themselves and livestock. Their next project, he says, is a “digital democracy tool” to hold MPs accountable. “I think we have so much unrealised potential in this country,” he said. “We could do so much more with technology in Australia.”
ELAINE YANG, 20-SOMETHING, ASKBELLA FOUNDER After working with beauty brands, Elaine Yang noticed a gap in the market. Consumers – herself included – often had to experiment to find the best skin product while brands struggled to find the right customers. Her solution is an automated “beauty bot” to recommend products. “I came up with the idea last year during COVID,” she said. “I reached out to a few beauty brands and the feedback was very positive.” Ms Yang, of Sydney, hired a developer to help create Askbella, a bot that uses Facebook Messenger to ask users a series of questions and recommend products from brands including Dr Jart and COSRX. The bot has only been in operation for a month but Ms Yang says early figures are promising. “Artificial intelligence will be involved in the beauty industry and will become a real phenomenon in the next five to 10 years,” she said.
MADDY SCARF, 29, TECMASK FOUNDER When Tecmask launched fashionable face masks in Australia three years ago, founder Maddy Scarf said a lot of her effort went into educating the public and reducing the “stigma” around wearing a mask. That became a moot point after the 2019 bushfires and 2020 pandemic when, she said, demand for the colourful creations spiked by 8000 per cent in two months. “We had to adapt quite quickly,” she said. “We had to start growing the team and getting as many resources as I could to keep up with demand.” Ms Scarf, of Sydney, then six months pregnant with her first child, also swapped from disposable to reusable masks, and moved manufacturing to Australia. She said the company was now looking to expand, following interest from the US and UK.
Alex and Chris Naoumidis, 25 and 23, Melbourne, Mindset Health founders They call them “digital therapeutics,” and the apps produced by brothers Alex and Chris Naoumidis are designed to make a medical difference to users. The Victorian duo’s first app, Nerva, saw the pair partner with Dr Simone Peters from Monash University to deliver a six-week hypnotherapy course inside an app to provide relief from Irritable Bowel Syndrome. “There was such a big need for it,” Alex said. “There’s no strong treatments for IBS. There’s a low FODMAP diet but it doesn’t work for everyone.” The pair’s vision for hypnotherapy apps focused on treating single conditions won them a place in the esteemed Y Combinator accelerator as well as 15,000 subscribers. Alex said the pair planned to target menopausal hot flushes in their next app, and launch an investment round.
BENJAMIN XIA, 25, SYDNEY, CONTACTILE CO-FOUNDER It sounds like something from science fiction but the young, three-person team behind Contactile is trying to give robots a sense of touch. Benjamin Xia, the electrical engineer behind many of the company’s hardware and software prototypes, said he, Heba Khamis and Stephen Redmond developed the technology at UNSW and participated in accelerators within the CSIRO and University of Sydney to commercialise the technology. “It could be used in essential applications where we still require humans to use their hands because robots can’t do it yet,” he said. That could be manufacturing applications, he said, or used in prosthetic hands. Contactile, which is working to release a pilot program, recently won the iAwards NSW Startup of the Year.
JAMES DALE, 20, CLEANSKY CREATOR He might be a university student but James Dale’s “side hustles” attract a lot of attention and investments. The 20-year-old’s recent project – a virtual yearbook for US students called HAGS (have a great summer) – has attracted $US1 million in investment, including money from Google’s venture capital arm. He also led the Apple development side of Stanford University’s Pneumask Project to turn snorkel masks into medical equipment last year, and is probably best known for creating the app CleanSky that visually plots pollution levels and air quality on a map – an app he launched after the 2019 bushfires. Mr Dale, of Melbourne, said he planned to expand the app in future but finishing his university degree was also a priority so he could return to Apple in the US where he completed an internship. “I really want to keep that door open to go back to Apple,” he said.
30 UNDER 30 - More inspiring stories of young entrepreneurs advertiser.com.au
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 1586
