Blow the dust off your passports and set your wanderlust to 11 as Dilvin Yasa presents our top travel picks for the year ahead We’re not sure if we’re the ones who should be telling you this, but you’ve changed. Happily (instead of, say, hearing those words from a partner or a manager) we mean it in a positive way and the best part is that you’re far from alone.
The truth is that in 2022, we’re all more likely to seek meaning in our holidays and remain mindful about how our actions affect local communities and/or the planet. This year, we’re all about using our travel experiences to connect with loved ones or with nature, and many of us will take a “now or never” approach to dream holidays we’ve been putting off.
Got analysis paralysis when it comes to booking this year’s holidays? From highly anticipated openings to key travel trends, we’ve got everything you need to create your ultimate travel bucket-list.
HOTELS/HOMES All-inclusive packages, secluded properties and large homes for multigenerational gatherings are all trending this year.
COMO LAUCALA ISLAND, FIJI Nothing says “welcome back” quite like 25 ultra-luxurious residences in a spectacular private island resort. This new resort is tipped to become one of our favourite getaways.
comohotels.com CLUB MED QUEBEC, CANADA All-inclusive packages and Canada have never been so popular. Happily, Club Med gives travellers the best of both worlds with Quebec Charlevoix, the brand’s first North American mountain/waterfront resort.
clubmed.com.au SPICERS PRIVATE COLLECTION, AUSTRALIA Will it be a superyacht or snow chalet? Private Collection by Spicers – a large range of private holiday homes – adds a new layer to the luxe rental market and best of all, it’s rapidly expanding across the country this year.
spicersretreats.com ELYT BORA BORA, TAHITI Upgrading the overwater villa concept is ELYT, an eco-friendly solar houseboat in Bora Bora that takes social distancing to a breathtaking level.
elytchartertahiti.com BIG COTTAGES, UK Bringing loved ones together has never been more important and Big Cottages is a onestop shop for properties geared for eyewateringly large groups. Castles, mansions mansions and cottages are dotted across the UK. big-cottages.com ARC PAVILION, FORTHSIDE, TAS Need a little alone time? Tiny homes continue to boom in popularity and this 7m wonder on Tassie’s north coast includes spectacular countryside and ocean views as well as a private garden.
compasshut.com.au W SYDNEY, NSW Set to be the largest W hotel globally, the 585-room anchor of The Ribbon building in Darling Harbour opens in November. The hotel will feature a two-storey rooftop bar and level 29 WET Deck with heated infinity pool overlooking the city.
whotels.com
SUSTAINABILITY Fancy a side of clear conscience with your next holiday? These travel marvels have got your back.
AURORA EXPEDITIONS VOYAGE, ANTARCTICA She sails in February 2023 but 2022 is the year to answer Aurora Expeditions’ call for applications to join the world-first Antarctic Climate Expedition led by renowned oceanographer, marine biologist, explorer and conservationist, Dr Sylvia Earle.
auroraexpeditions.com.au THE VIETAGE, VIETNAM Enjoy a six-hour slow travel adventure linking the cities of Danang and Quy Nhon.
The elegant carriage (run by Anantara) is exclusive to just 12 passengers and onboard services include massage treatments and gourmet dining.
thevietagetrain.com TRAFALGAR FLORIADE TOUR, THE NETHERLANDS Once a decade, the Netherlands erupts in a fiesta of blooms and this year, Floriade Expo 2022 will showcase the “Growing Green Cities“ theme in Almere. Several of Trafalgar’s tours between April 14 and October 9 will cover the expo.
trafalgar.com RANCHO MARGOT, COSTA RICA Nothing says “sustainable practices“ quite like a self-sufficient ranch that recycles used cooking oil into artisanal soap. Guests at Rancho Margot get in on the act too; expect lessons on organic agriculture and community immersion programs.
ranchomargot.com ISLAND BIRDS & WHALE SHARKS TOUR, NINGALOO, WA Getting involved in meaningful conservation is a cinch now that Echidna Walkabout has launched this eight-day tour assisting wildlife in Exmouth Gulf. Bird surveys, rock wallaby counts and whale shark swims are included.
echidnawalkabout.com.au ROOM2 CHISWICK, LONDON The world’s first whole life net zero “hometel”, this energy-efficient central London retreat has 75,000 bees and onsite initiatives such as a jungle roof and a zero waste policy.
room2.com
ADVENTURE Pack a defibrillator; after two years of relative confinement, the first step to a more thrilling life begins with the following experiences.
HELICOPTER SKYDIVE, SURFERS PARADISE, QLD What beats jumping out of a perfectly good aircraft? Adding a rotor and freefalling 10,000 feet above the iconic sands of Surfers Paradise in this tandem helicopter skydive experience.
skydive.com.au SONEVA FLYING SAUCES, MALDIVES Dining in the Maldives is one thing, but ziplining through leafy forest to an elevated dining platform is something else entirely. Soneva’s Flying Sauces offers a seasonal menu in their open treetop kitchen.
soneva.com LE SEINE BIKE TRAIL, FRANCE See the Seine Valley on two wheels, tackling the 420km Seine a Velo cycle route from Paris along the river to Le Havre or Deauville. Allow a week to complete this once-in-a-lifetime trip.
en.francevelotourisme.com SEA SCOOTER SNORKEL TOUR, COOK ISLANDS Explore Lonely Planet’s destination of the year for 2022 by strapping yourself to a sea scooter for an underwater adventure with KiteSUP Watersports that takes in azure waters filled with all manner of marine life. kitesup.co WILD DOLPHIN SWIM, GLENELG, SA A wild pod of bottlenose lovelies who come to greet you once you get in the water? Marine biologists on Temptation Sailing are with you every step of the way as you try the front or back swim, each experience allowing you to cruise along with the boat.
dolphinboat.com.au SELINDA CANOE TRAIL, BOTSWANA Picture 45km of a wildlife-heavy waterway and sign up for a four-day adventure linking the Okavango Delta to the Linyanti and Kwando water systems. The Selinda Canoe Trail is available between June and October.
journeysbydesign.com
TOURS From bucket-list adventures to holidays with quirk, tours make taking on the world’s highlights so much easier.
Australia by private jet Life-changing experiences are leading the charge in 2022 and it doesn’t get any better than Captain’s Choice Whale Sharks and Wines of the West by Private Jet tour, a seven-day odyssey taking in the best of Uluru, Ningaloo Reef, Coffin Bay and more. captainschoice.com.au GOTTA SEE EUROPE Nothing spoils a gap year quite like a pandemic, but G Adventures is helping our kids make up for lost time with their 17-day Roamies tour, which takes in some of Europe’s top destinations, from Amsterdam to Venice to Prague.
gadventures.com ABANDONED TAIWAN Offbeat tourism is trending and this 11-day wonder from Crooked Compass strikes all the right chords. From haunted mansions to abandoned hospitals surrounded by hot springs, this is a side to Taiwan not usually seen.
crooked-compass.com WESTFJORDS WILDLIFE Voted the No.1 region in Lonely Planet’s Best in Travel 2022, this three-day tour with Arctic Adventures takes in the sights via kayak. Enjoy the midnight sun while hiking and staying in a remote farmhouse. adventures.is KIMBERLEY AND THE TOP END Holiday here this year? The dangled carrot couldn’t be sweeter than a 17-day luxury APT tour of the Kimberley and Top End.
Expect top-notch experiences in 24 destinations, including a chopper ride over Mitchell Falls. aptouring.com.au JAPAN DISCOVERY Australia’s love affair with Japan continues – a relationship helped along with tours such as Bunnik Tours’ 16-day Japan Discovery. This one not only covers the country’s top landmarks, but includes experiences such as noodle making and calligraphy. bunniktours.com.au
CRUISE When it comes to comebacks, ageing rockers have nothing on this relaxing way to holiday.
ANTARCTICA WITH VIKING Viking Expeditions makes its debut in Antarctica later this month in the form of Viking Octanis, a luxury 378-passenger expedition vessel soon to be joined by sister ship Viking Polaris.
vikingcruises.com.au WESTERN MEDITERRANEAN WITH ROYAL CARIBBEAN Australians are notorious for their love of oversized things so raise a glass (and make a booking) with Wonder of the Seas, tipped to be the world’s largest ship when it launches this year. This seven-night cruise takes in Italy, Spain and France.
royalcaribbean.com AUSTRAL ISLANDS WITH ARANUI Explore what is considered the secret archipelago of the islands of Tahiti with a cruise around the Australs, comprising seven islands – only four of which are accessible by air.
aranui.com CAPE YORK/ARNHEM LAND WITH CORAL EXPEDITIONS This Cape York and Arnhem Land voyage will be undertaken for the first time in October by Coral Adventurer, the 11-night journey also taking in the Tiwi Islands as it makes its way from Darwin to Cairns.
coralexpeditions.com MOROCCO & THE IBERIAN PENINSULA WITH SCENIC Keen to rock the Kasbah but prefer to do it in the lap of luxury? Scenic Eclipse, the world’s first discovery yacht, comes to the rescue with its brand new 13-day Morocco & the Iberian Peninsula voyage, debuting in April. scenic.com.au CALIFORNIA COAST WITH PRINCESS There’s nothing hotter in 2022 than holidaying in destinations with a high vaccination rate, and the seven-day California Coast Classic on board the Discovery Princess provides a brand new ship and a safer all-round experience.
princess.com
FAMILY Teachable moments with the kids are much more fun when you’re all on the road together.
STAR WARS: GALACTIC STARCRUISER EXPERIENCE, US Take a starcruiser voyage through space in a galaxy far, far away with the highly anticipated Star Wars: Galactic Starcruiser. The two-day adventure is set to launch at Walt Disney World Resort in Orlando in March.
disneyworld.disney.go.com MELBOURNE SKYDECK, VIC The Victorian capital’s popular Skydeck has rebranded and relaunched with a wide range of attractions for kids of all ages, who can enjoy virtual reality experiences, the Voyager Theatre, the Melbourne Skydeck App Challenge and more.
melbourneskydeck.com.au SQUID GAME RE-ENACTMENT, SOUTH KOREA Got a teen obsessed with Netflix’s Squid Game? Take a trip to Ssangmun-dong in Dobong-gu district, Seoul, a neighbourhood the emotional Kkanbu episode was set up to mimic. Your challenge? To eat your body weight in mouth-watering classic Korean street food.
SOUTH ISLAND ROADTRIP, NEW ZEALAND Road trips continue to be big news in 2022 and they don’t get any more family-friendly than Intrepid Travel’s seven-day New Zealand South Island Family Holiday. Cycling, hiking and cruising around the island’s top spots – covered. intrepidtravel.com MY SYDNEY BOAT WATERSPORTS ADVENTURE, SYDNEY, NSW Experience Sydney Harbour like a rock star with My Sydney Boat’s four-hour Watersports Adventure, an outdoor experience combining high-speed cruising with a range of aquatic activities. mysydneyboat.com.au Scan the code to see nine European cities to explore in 2022.
CREDIT: DILVIN YASA
Word count: 1742
