Whether it’s a colossal round-the-world tour or a designated destination jaunt, there’s no doubt that cruising provides a window into otherwise inaccessible locales. There are unique opportunities to breeze by coastlines only ever seen by marine life and to wake to a remarkable new view each morning. To delight in culinary experiences from award-winning chefs and experience exceptional on-board entertainment in between exploring.
In celebration of our love of cruising, we asked loyal and enthusiastic ocean and river cruisers to reminisce about their favourite times on the water. And to share the itineraries and shipboard activities they’re looking forward to when they next set sail.
Andrea Black ITINERARY: The Baltics with Norwegian Cruise Line There was a time when, in the space of just nine days, I was eyeing off the artworks at the Hermitage in Saint Petersburg, wandering the medieval cobblestoned streets of Tallinn in Estonia, taking in the colourful carnival atmosphere of Copenhagen’s Tivoli Gardens, drinking a stein of beer on the harbour in Germany, strolling by the incredible design in Helsinki and stopping off to sing with 3D holograms of Frida, Agnetha, Björn and Benny at the Abba museum in Stockholm. All of this without any airports or coaches to navigate. That, to me, is one of the true joys of cruising: the vessel transports you to a new destination every day. Every morning on Norwegian Cruise Line’s Baltics itinerary, I would disembark and hire a bike at port and cycle around the cities.
I can’t wait to sail again – perhaps on a small-ship cruise spotting wildlife among the Aleutian Islands with Aurora Expeditions, Uniworld’s Peruvian Rivers and Rainforest Discovery in South America, or a Ponant sailing of Western Australia’s Kimberley region. On a cruise you can see things you might not spy if you were travelling by land. It offers a new panorama – one where you can wake up in comfort, have breakfast on your balcony and map out your day. By evening, after a long day exploring, you can sit at a table for two, then take a short stroll back to the cabin before being lulled to sleep by the sound of the ocean or river, anticipating another new port. ncl.com.au
Brad Crouch ITINERARY: Myanmar and the Irrawaddy with Abercrombie & Kent An ideal trip should be bookended by Yangon and Mandalay to marvel at sights such as the magnificent Shwedagon Pagoda in the capital. In between, a cruise on the majestic Irrawaddy River gently showcases a vibrant slice of this extraordinary nation of some 135 recognised ethnic groups. Waving fishermen, excited children with faces pancaked with sunblock powder from the thanaka tree, women immaculately dressed in silk, men squatting for a chat dressed in the national longyi skirt, busy markets – it’s a voyage that mixes adrenaline with tranquillity.
Abercombie & Kent have Irrawaddy cruises of up to 11 days, such as a four-night trip on the 21-suite Sanctuary Ananda where mornings start with yoga and meditation classes and hot afternoons are soothed by the plunge pool.
The trip from Mandalay to Bagan took in sights that embed in the memory – a sunset at the world’s longest and oldest teak bridge at Amarapura, monks and nuns at the holy city of Sagaing, the markets at Pakokku, a sunset barbecue on a sand island. And a dawn balloon ride to marvel at the temples, pagodas and stupas on the riverside plains of Bagan.
When vaccines restore some normality to the world, I have to fulfil a promise to my bride to take her on an Alaskan cruise and voyage from Anchorage to Vancouver via the placid Inside Passage, taking in huge glaciers, ports like Ketchikan, Juneau and Skagway, and shore tours where bears swipe salmon out of rivers. abercrombiekent.com
Paul Ewart ITINERARY: Silversea’s South America Buenos Aires to Rio de Janeiro The Silver Muse was touted as one of the most luxurious cruise ships ever built. When I boarded in Buenos Aires for a voyage to Rio, I was blown away by the opulenceof the $500-million build. With private butlers as standard and a suite for every passenger, this was my first experience of luxury on the high seas. I spent mornings exploring beautiful Brazilian beach idylls, afternoons sipping Champagne in the jacuzzi on deck, and evenings working my way through the eight dining venues, including the plush Relais & Chateaux French restaurant La Dame and its six-course tasting menu. Then, I’d kick on at the bar with guests who hailed from all over the world.
When the seas are open again I plan to set sail on Silver Origin to see the islands that inspired Darwin, the Galápagos. For now, I’m daydreaming of giant tortoises and iguanas on land, and playful dolphins and turtles at sea. silversea.com
Fleur Bainger ITINERARY: Kimberley luxury cruising If I mentally transport myself to my first cruise of Western Australia’s Kimberley coast, I’m instantly surrounded by towering red rock and cornflour-blue water, a humid breeze tangling my hair and sunscreen the only thing on my face. A sensation of calm and wonder settles on my shoulders – the Kimberley is as much a feeling as it is a sightseeing expedition – and wisdom seems to emanate from every rugged, two billion-year-old surface.
Numerous boats numbers navigate the 1000 nautical miles between Broome and Wyndham. I love the small, boutique style of both the MV Great Escape (topped with a helicopter) and the Kimberley Quest (it tows a speed boat). Each has a spa on deck. I’m partial to a soak as sunset’s colour wheel of pinks reflects in my Champagne glass.
Kimberley landmarks loom into view with the flip of each new calendar day. My favourite section weaves through the Buccaneer Archipelago’s thousand islands. Many rise from the water with bands of burnt orange, soft beige and rhinoceros grey ringing their rocky bases; others are edged with powdery sand and crocodile tracks. I also love the majestic 80m King George Falls, found at the end of an ancient, wending river. The twisted, folded rocks of Talbot Bay bend my mind, while the whirlpools of the Horizontal Falls thrill my senses. Then there’s the ballroom staircase of Kings Cascades, the tiered masterpiece of Mitchell Falls and wondrous Montgomery Reef, surfacing from the ocean as the tide sucks water away. Intersperse all that with whales and turtles, flying fish and lemon sharks, plus gorge swims, tropical scrub hikes, fishing adventures and eating like Michelin reviewers and, oh, I think I need to go back.
I’m dreaming of returning to cruise the Galápagos Islands one day, but while I’m Australia-bound, I’ll repeat the Rowley Shoals dive and snorkel cruise I did last decade. You travel to a trio of coral atolls in open ocean, 300km west of Broome, where a clearly visible aquarium lies beneath the surface. greatescape.net.au; kimberleyquest.com.au
Amanda Woods ITINERARY: Antarctica: The White Continent, Lindblad Expeditions Antarctica is the coldest, driest and windiest place on earth, and it’s also one of the most magical and beautiful. Nothing, and I mean nothing, compares with taking an expedition ship over that crazy passage called the Drake and entering a frozen world. Before I’d even returned I was already dreaming of going back. Of having every sense heightened by the alien landscape and feeling snowflakes on my face as penguins waddle past my seat in the snow.
I love and miss the adventure of expedition ship life. The way itineraries are never set in stone and the sense of camaraderie as you experience things together for the first time, from glaciers carving into the sea to the (unfortunately) unforgettable smell of penguin guano.
If I had a magic wand I’d wave myself straight back into a Zodiac slowly cruising through nature’s ice sculptures where sapphire-blue bergs sparkle like gigantic gems. To look into the eyes of curious humpbacks when they pop their heads up, and to be faster to cover my face when they exhale a mixture of water and whale snot. Just the thought of waking up to the sound of ice scraping the hull of the ship and watching icebergs glide by from the warmth of my bed fills me with joy. Next time I’ll do it in pure luxury on Scenic Eclipse where I can take a ride in a submarine to see below the surface of this extraordinary part of our world. expeditions.com; scenic.com.au
Dilvin Yasa ITINERARY: China with Royal Caribbean As a mother of two, if there’s one thing I know, it’s that adulting never quite compares to the fun of childhood. How can working and paying bills ever hold a candle to hours of free play each day? So, when an opportunity to sail on Spectrum of the Seas, the fourth in the cruise line’s Quantum Ultra-class series, came up, I couldn’t get to China fast enough to board this particular ship.
Passengers oohed and ahhed about the ship’s impressive size (sleeping nearly 5000 passengers) and its facilities, but, for me, it was all about letting myself be a kid again. I filled every hour with juvenile activity (I was travelling alone). I terrorised other passengers on the dodgem cars, I rock-climbed, played laser tag and fenced very badly. Out on deck, it was sessions on the surf simulator FlowRider, the skydiving experience that is RipCord by iFly, and what quickly became the virtual-reality bungee activity, Sky Pad. By the time I disembarked, I was exhausted but had a youthful spring in my step again.
It’s been a rough year and I’m champing at the bit for some light-hearted fun, so as soon as cruising comes back, I’m looking forward to booking and enjoying a similar experience, whether it be on Royal Caribbean or on Carnival. This time, I might even let my girls come along for the ride, but they’d better be prepared to get in line behind Mum. royalcaribbean.com; carnival.com.au
Jana Frawley, Escape Content Director ITINERARY: Bordeaux river cruise with Scenic Location! Location! Location! It was this catchcry that went through my head every morning when I woke up on a Scenic’s river ship Scenic Diamond in Bordeaux. We were docked in prime position minutes away from outstanding patisseries, food markets, bars and bistros, and within easy reach of many of the world’s most famous vineyards as we sailed along the Garonne River. Eating and drinking are my standout memories of this trip. The springtime vineyards surrounding some of the behemoths of the wine world– Château Latour, Margaux, Mouton Rothschild, Pétrus, d’Yquem and close to 6000 more – added a fairytale level of magic to the wine-tasting.
I loved the canelés, the petit cakes of the region made in small fluted tins and eaten in a bite or two, and the oysters in Arcachon where the menu consisted of nothing more than bread and butter, white wine, and mouthfuls of salty, creamy, just-shucked oysters.
I love the Scandi aesthetic of Viking Cruises so can think of no better place to get hygge with it than on its Amsterdam to Bergen itinerary. scenic.com.au; vikingcruises.com.au If I mentally transport myself to my first cruise of the Kimberley coast, I’m instantly surrounded by towering red rock and cornflour-blue water. See 27 of the most romantic places on Earth at escape.com.au/romance
Word count: 1877
