Charles Sturt University has signed a memorandum of understanding with electricity grid operator Transgrid to create opportunities for training, research and infrastructure in Wagga as billions of dollars in power line projects take shape.
The agreement was designed to bring opportunities for students and research, as well as helping to create jobs and a substantial economic boost for the Riverina.
The agreement also aims to bring substantial economic growth and job opportunities to the Riverina through scholarships, cadetships, training and graduate employment opportunities for CSU students and Indigenous people.
Transgrid senior health, safety and environment strategy and culture manager, Leonie McCallum, who has worked for the company in Wagga for 36 years, said she had wanted to see this type of agreement for a long time.
"I started from school and I've worked for the company and been able to have an amazing career doing lots of different things," she said.
"With this relationship between Transgrid and CSU, I just see that opening similar opportunities up to so many more people."
The collaboration was tied to two major power line projects being developed by Transgrid that will centre on Wagga: EnergyConnect, a 900-kilometre line to South Australia and the HumeLink line to the expanded Snowy Hydro Scheme.
CSU and Transgrid have agreed to discuss several projects stemming from the memorandum, including the co-creation of educational programs in electrical engineering, virtual reality and drone training.
CSU vice-chancellor Professor Renée Leon said the MOU was in keeping with Charles Sturt's strategy and standing as Australia's leading regional university.
"We welcome the start of what we believe will be a long and important partnership with Transgrid which will benefit the Riverina and regional Australia," he said.
Wagga mayor Greg Conkey welcomed the prospect of more diverse educational opportunities for students.
"[Providing] more opportunity in specialised fields, whilst engaging new technologies, puts this city in a perfect position to attract more students," Cr Conkey said.
Transgrid's executive manager for delivery, Craig Stallan, said the partnership with CSU was an important part of investing in the region and developing a local workforce to run and maintain new infrastructure.
"We are leading Australia's transition to clean energy future and it's incredibly exciting, particularly for Wagga, as it will become the hub of the energy transformation in NSW," he said.
CREDIT: Rex Martinich
Word count: 386
