ARTS AND DESIGN Melanie Perkins, Cliff Obrecht and Cameron Adams – CANVA Design startup Canva has become virtually a household name across Australia, growing from its humble roots in the Perth bedroom of its founder, then-university student Melanie Perkins, as an online tool to create school yearbooks in 2007, to a tech giant employing thousands of Australians and used by millions worldwide. The company’s most recent capital raising, in April this year, valued it at more than $21bn, and it is rumoured to be quietly plotting a lucrative public listing, likely to be on Wall Street, like Atlassian before it. Now headquartered in Surry Hills, Sydney, with offices spread across Manila, Beijing, Wuhan, San Francisco and Austin, the company is filling hundreds of roles and is showing no signs of slowing down. It now has nearly 2000 employees, as well as 55 million monthly active users, while 250 million presentations have been created on its platform.
Gaurav Kawar – BOOK AN ARTIST Dubbed the “Airbnb of artists”, Aussie startup Book an Artist was born from founder and CEO Gaurav Kawar’s love of street art and the question of how to connect graffiti artists (and mural and portrait artists and illustrators) to those who want to hire them. In the vein of many art startups, Book an Artist seeks to bypass the often onerous and heavily commission-based traditional art market and let artists negotiate the terms themselves. With former clients including WeWork and Netflix, it recently raised $400,000 in seed funding (led by earlystage investment firm Skalata Ventures, and including the US VC Hustle fund) – a success after the tumultuous year that plunged Melbourne into a months-long lockdown and forced Kawar to pivot into marketing in Sydney, Brisbane and Perth. And while Book an Artist is still a platform for artists, its expansion into the construction 0industry and even wallpaper design has broadened its appeal and growth potential, enabling it to make $1m in commissions and expand into the UK.
Philip Slusarski, Edward and George Hartley – BLUETHUMB Founded in 2012 in Adelaide by Philip Slusarski, and brought into being by former accountants (and now owners) Edward and George Hartley with nothing but the dream of creating an online marketplace for Aussie artists, Bluethumb has become a leader in online art sales and a challenger to Australia’s established art galleries. It now boasts 11,000 emerging and established artists from Australia on its platforms, as well as partnerships with 20 of Australia’s most remote Aboriginal Art Centres. Since its inception, it has gone from being a bootstrapped side project to Australia’s largest online art gallery, selling tens of thousands of dollars’ worth of art each month (in 2016, it was selling as much as $60,000 worth a month). In 2017, the company closed a $1m capital raise from QUT Creative Enterprise Australia and Grand Prix Capital to expand its Indigenous Art Centre outreach programs and further develop its platform. In 2019, Bluethumb hit an impressive milestone of selling a total of 15,000 artworks, most of which were by traditionally underrepresented female artists. Today, it has doubled that number to 30,000. And while at heart the startup may be a struggling artist, the Hartley brothers know that it is technology that keeps the wheels of sales turning, investing 100 per cent of Bluethumb’s proceeds back into building technology that enables smooth transactions around artworks.
Tony Holzner, Nic Whyte – ART PROCESSORS For Art Processors co-founders Tony Holzner, Nic Whyte, Scott Brewer (who has since departed) and David Walsh, now occupying the role of ‘Visionary’, it started with a desire to do things differently: how to get people to engage with museums and other cultural spaces in an interactive, digital manner. The now 10-year-old Melbourne experiential design consultancy, which specialises in rich, immersive visitor experiences for museums and visitor attractions, has gone on to make a name for itself after transforming the visitor experience at Hobart’s iconic Mona (Museum of Old and New Art) using app technology. Since 2011, Art Processors has worked with a range of cultural institutions worldwide, developing customised, immersive experiences with art and cultural artefacts through technology for Bendigo Art Gallery, Art Gallery of NSW, the Australian War Memorial, the Australian Sports Museum and more.
Lynette Wallworth – ARTIST, FILMMAKER Filmmaker Lynette Wallworth has won two Emmy Awards for Outstanding New Approaches to Documentary Film. The first was in 2017 for Collision, her immersive virtual reality narrative, which took viewers into the world of indigenous elder Nyarri Nyarri Morgan and his experience of nuclear testing in the Australian desert. The second, in 2020, was for Awavena, made in conjunction with the Yawamawa people of the Amazon. With a frequent focus on the natural world and our interactions with it, Wallworth’s work has been shown not only at film festivals around the world but at the World Economic Forum, where the filmmaker now leads the New Narratives Lab, a 12-month fellowship program that seeks to support artists from under-represented communities to become cultural leaders.
Kate Armstrong-Smith and Joe Couch – OMELIA Omelia’s co-founder Kate Armstrong-Smith has described its storytelling technology as “a new writing tool for the next generation”. It helps writers – or game designers – develop and plan longform series or large and complicated games by modelling characters and relationships rather than traditional text, allowing different perspectives on the structure of a story and its theme, and a way to model the impact of changes. Part of the technology had a run as part of the R+J Remix production at the Sydney Opera House, which allowed the audience to remix the story of Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet on their mobile phones in real time.
Word count: 947
