Tasha Stanton, clinical pain neuroscientist, 40
Is pain an illusion? Calling it an illusion makes it sound like it's fake; if we are experiencing pain, it is real. But pain is a construction of the brain that emerges into our conscious awareness when the available evidence suggests we're under threat. Our bodies are full of nociceptors, which are the nervous system's danger detectors; if we touch something hot, for instance, they ping messages to the spinal cord, which relays them to the brain - and the brain, using all the evidence, may then create the sensation of pain. Pain's purpose is ultimately to protect us from harm. Some people have a genetic condition that means they can't feel it, and they don't tend to live long.
We assume there's a linear relationship between injury and pain - the more severe the injury, the more severe the pain. But research shows that's not the case ... What we're discovering is that how much pain you feel is not representative of what is going on in your body. If I stepped on your toe, how much that hurt would depend not only on the signals from your nociceptors but on other factors including your mood, whether your environment is safe or not, the other sensory information, and where your attention is. Your brain takes all these factors in - very quickly, on a subconscious level - and then "decides" how much pain to output.
How do you inflict pain in a research setting? We zap people with lasers, and use heat, pressure and electrical stimuli. (Volunteers are reimbursed for their time, and their willingness!) Often there's an element of deception in pain studies: one well-known experiment involved volunteers putting their heads into what was described to them as a head-zapping machine, and it had an "intensity knob" that they could see being gradually turned up. In fact, the machine was totally inert, a sham, and the knob did nothing. But nevertheless, these people all reported experiencing pain.
Some of your work uses illusions created with virtual reality. Can you explain? We see remarkable changes in the pain that is experienced in a certain body part when we alter how that body part looks to someone. So we put a VR headset on patients with arthritic knees, say, and manipulate the image of their knees, stretching them out thin and long and this results in clinically meaningful reductions in pain.
Often there's an analgesic window up to 20 minutes after the illusion ends. We don't know how it works, exactly; perhaps the visual information is modulating the nociceptor signals, or it's changing the way information is processed in the brain.
In people with chronic pain, there's a distinct change in their nervous system, right? It's often stuck in an oversensitised state, so the slightest touch or movement will activate the danger pathway to the brain. Movement, particularly early on, is critical to recovery - but if something hurts we tend to avoid it. And by avoiding movement, the problem is perpetuated.
Chronic pain is said to cost Australia more than cancer, cardiovascular disease and diabetes combined. Drugs are fraught with difficulty. Your research points to a different approach ... Yes, we're working on new brain-based therapies that promote our innate bioplasticity to "reset" an oversensitised nervous system. Teaching people with chronic pain about the condition, and about the importance of pushing into that pain a little bit with movement and exercise, is also key. We want to help them get back to a more normal life.
Associate Professor Tasha Stanton (University of South Australia) will speak on "The End of Pain" at the World Science Festival Brisbane, March 9-13; worldsciencefestival.com.au
CREDIT: Ross Bilton
Word count: 621
