EXPLAINEREvery three seconds, someone in the world develops a form of dementia. So what is it like to live with the condition? Jewel Topsfield reports.
Natalie Ive was in her 40s when she started forgetting the names of children in her kindergarten class. She loved being a teacher and quickly developed workarounds, such as checking the roll or a child's name on a painting to prompt her memory.
But her family was noticing changes, too. She had to consult recipes to make meals she once cooked effortlessly. Sometimes her children helped her cross the road because she couldn't work out how far away the cars were.
One day her daughters went to the movies. "I just lost where I was," Ive says. "I had put eggs on to boil and the water all evaporated. The girls tried to call me; I didn't know how to use the mobile to answer it. I didn't know how to open a door or anything. I was just sitting there."
Geoff Fairhall was an academic and senior executive who learnt seven languages, was passionate about music, the arts, architecture and design, flew light aircraft and was a keen sailor. And then, out of the blue, he began struggling to tie his boat to the trailer.
When Mithrani De Abrew Mahadeva was diagnosed in 2015, she was told to prepare for a nursing home. She was 65. "I said, 'I don't want to go into a nursing home. This is my own home, something I am familiar with'." Her friends didn't believe the diagnosis. "That's because I was talking," she says. "But I was struggling. I was stuck inside the house because I was having falls and memory problems."
Ive, Fairhall and De Abrew Mahadeva all live with dementia, the second leading cause of death in Australia after heart disease, and the leading cause of death among women.
There are 472,000 people in Australia living with dementia - about 2 per cent of the population - and someone in the world develops a form of it every three seconds.
But it remains poorly understood. Many people wrongly believe dementia is a normal part of growing old. And memory loss is not the only symptom: dementia can affect behaviour, mood, the ability to experience pleasure, language, planning, problem-solving, spatial awareness and sensory perception.
What is dementia?
Dementia is not one specific disease but the umbrella term used to describe symptoms caused by a group of brain diseases.
"Two of the biggest myths are that dementia is a normal part of ageing and only old people get dementia," says Dementia Australia chief executive Maree McCabe.
There are more than 200 different diseases that cause dementia, although most are very rare. The most common is Alzheimer's disease, which accounts for about two-thirds of cases. Other common forms include vascular dementia, Lewy body disease and frontotemporal dementia. Another disease that can cause dementia is chronic traumatic encephalopathy. It is linked to repeated blows to the head and was found post-mortem in former AFL players Polly Farmer, Danny Frawley and Shane Tuck.
Of the Australians who have dementia, 28,300 (about 6 per cent) have younger onset dementia.
"It's much rarer for younger people to get dementia, but it's certainly not as rare as we would like it to be," McCabe says. "Often some of the younger forms of dementia that occur are inherited."
Dementia is progressive and ultimately terminal, although a person can go on living for many years. In late-stage dementia, people may lose the ability to walk and speak. Swallowing difficulties increase susceptibility to aspiration pneumonia, caused by accidentally inhaling food or fluids into the lungs.
Dementia Australia recommends using the phrase "a person living with dementia" to emphasise the person first. It says terms such as "victim" and "afflicted" contribute to the stigma surrounding dementia.
What's it like to live with dementia?
People living with dementia often find that everyday situations - making cups of tea, remembering instructions and going to the toilet in the middle of the night - become more challenging. Ive, now 49, was diagnosed with younger onset dementia/primary progressive aphasia, a type of dementia that makes it difficult to express thoughts or find words.
She meticulously plans trips to the supermarket. She carries a shopping list, ticking off each item in the trolley, and listens to music through headphones "to block out all the other stuff so it doesn't become overwhelming".
As a teacher, Ive excelled at communicating. Now it is sometimes hard to get her thoughts across. She uses strategies to help her understand and express herself: requesting frequent breaks, asking for information to be repeated and broken down into single steps.
"That allows for me to be able to continue to the best of my capabilities," she says.
Ive continues to live a fulfilling life and enjoys painting, diamond art (a form of mosaic), gardening and beach walks. "The beach gives me great calm, it centres me," she says. "It's very therapeutic. When I go there it just helps with some clarity."
Instead of reading, she now listens to audio books. "I want to really highlight the positives," she says. "Even on bad days I am still doing things for myself. Yes, aphasia is a part of me, but it doesn't define me."
De Abrew Mahadeva was diagnosed with mixed dementia (Lewy body disease and Alzheimer's) when she was 65. Now 71 and living in her home, where she is cared for by a daughter, she has "my very good days" and then "really bad" nights, when she is kept awake by traumatic memories.
Her handwriting is getting messier, she says, and sometimes when she reads in the morning she can't make out the words.
To give others a sense of what it's like to live with dementia, Dementia Australia uses virtual reality. Strap on goggles and you see the world through the eyes of EDIE (which stands for Educational Dementia Immersive Experience), a man living with dementia who has to go to the toilet in the middle of the night.
It's wildly disorienting: the walls rustle like a living creature, furniture rushes at you at distorted angles and the toilet - a muted blur of shapes in the dark - turns out, too late, to be the washing basket.
McCabe says: "We'll have family members say, 'Look I don't get it. Mum or Dad walks into the bathroom where the toilet is and they wee in the corner. Why don't they wee in the toilet?' Well, they can't see the toilet. So the toilet seat needs to be a different colour so that they can actually see it."
The diagnosis often comes as a relief, although there is also a grieving process.
Chris White was a high-profile union leader for 40 years. As secretary of the Trades and Labor Council in South Australia, he argued the state wage case. He kept detailed diaries and was a persuasive public speaker, featuring regularly in the media.
"Now he can't organise appointments and he also struggles with recording them," says his partner, Kathryn Moyle. "He doesn't even remember emergency numbers. So he went through an enormous grieving process, as did I, and at one stage he said, 'I'm no longer Chris; you can call me somebody else because I'm not Chris any more'."
Moyle noticed changes a decade before White was diagnosed five years ago with frontotemporal dementia at the age of 67. He began sleeping a lot in the afternoon and behaving in an antisocial way that was out of character. Once he loudly told two people they were too fat to fit in a lift.
"The diagnosis was really comforting at one level and distressing at another," Moyle says. "I was relieved to know that this is what was wrong with him."
People with the behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia often have trouble controlling their behaviour.
"One of the things that I spend a lot of time doing is apologising to people," Moyle says. "For example, if Chris doesn't get what he considers to be the right answer at the library when he wants to borrow a book, he will just get really angry and start yelling. So he actually needs to be accompanied most of the time, and that generates its own challenge for me."
"That being said, I am glad I retired in 2019 because it means that we have a lot of time together. And when Chris is firing on three out of six cylinders, which is the best we can expect, it's lovely to have him around - he's charming, he's voracious, he wants to go to the theatre, he wants to go to the galleries."
Geoff and Anne Fairhall went on a round-the-world trip in 1991. Geoff, then 51, struggled to cope with things that normally wouldn't faze him, such as delayed flights and hotel alarms going off in the middle of the night.
"He was really cranky in London," Anne Fairhall says. "I put that down to being tired, but it was unusual because he was a gentleman and always very diplomatic and controlled."
Once, he hit her while on a plane. She was flummoxed because it was so out of character for her gentle husband. "He had never whacked me in my life."
He was finally diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia at 66, after 10 years of incorrect diagnoses, including anxiety and depression. One doctor told him he was "too young" and "not the type" to get dementia. "It was terrible - in those days doctors didn't have a good understanding," Anne Fairhall says.
Family carers often experience a particular kind of grief. "It's not like an end-of-life grief, where it's very final, it's a living grief and it's an anticipatory grief," Fairhall says.
"But you need to concentrate on the things you can do, not the things you can't do."
How do carers cope?
Anne Fairhall recalls creeping into the offices of Dementia Australia and being surprised by how normal everything looked. "Maybe I thought it was going to be like a leprosy hospital or something." She attended a course for couples who had just received a diagnosis, where she met other carers and learnt about services available.
Aggression can be an issue with frontotemporal dementia and Fairhall had a bag permanently packed so she could leave the apartment in times of emergency. She coped by reminding herself this was the disease and not her husband. "This is not who he is, this is an aberration. I've known him long enough to know he loves me, I love him."
Moyle recommends carers maintain their own interests and friendships and ask for help. "There is a danger of your being absorbed by it," she says. "It's really important for carers to have social workers and counsellors who are on your side."
She also advises telling people about the diagnosis. "When Chris was diagnosed we decided we would just tell a few people and then we decided that was ridiculous because it was asking people to keep a secret. We also felt it would be better to keep our friends in the loop if Chris started behaving weirdly."
Do people treat you differently?
There is a scene in The Father, a new film starring Anthony Hopkins told from the perspective of a man living with dementia, where a carer tries to coax him into swallowing a "pretty blue" pill. The man snaps at her, telling her not to talk to him as if he's "retarded".
Natalie Ive's daughter, watching the film with her, dug her in the ribs. "She's like, 'That's you!"' Ive says.
Ive rails against being treated differently and finds it irritating when people think of her as "suffering".
"I'm struggling, in a sense, but I am not suffering. OK, there are difficulties and challenges, but I can do things in a different way."
In a survey of more than 5700 people released by Dementia Australia in 2020, three-quarters of those who live with dementia said people didn't keep in touch like they used to. Two-thirds said people they knew had been avoiding or excluding them. Ninety per cent of carers, friends and family members felt people living with dementia were treated with less respect, and 81 per cent felt they were treated differently in shops and restaurants.
What not to say?
McCabe says: "When you say to somebody, 'Don't you remember? We've had this conversation 30 times', what it highlights for people is their deficit. It's absolutely confronting for them. It's better to just give them the answer to the question. They're not doing this to drive people crazy; they're doing this because it is the first time they're asking, in their world."
It's also advised not to argue with someone living with dementia, because it could upset them or make them angry. "You're constantly swallowing your pride because you don't get to ventilate what your view of it is," says Kathryn Moyle. "But there's no value in having that kind of discussion ... Chris can't cope with any level of conflict any more."
Geoff Fairhall grew up in Tasmania and the couple honeymooned on Lord Howe Island, so Anne will often bring in mementos from those places when she visits the aged care home.
She will always bring chocolates, which her husband loves, and the couple will read together. "He still has the ability to read in the moment."
Dementia Australia encourages grandchildren to visit, too. The organisation suggests playing games, watching a well-loved video, listening to music, helping with personal grooming and outings such as a stroll or short drive.
Can you prevent dementia?
No, but there are ways to reduce the risk. A landmark report in medical journal The Lancet in 2020 identified 12 risk factors that, if addressed, might prevent or delay up to 40 per cent of dementias. These include less education in early life, hearing loss, smoking, high blood pressure, obesity, depression, physical inactivity, diabetes, infrequent social contact, excessive alcohol consumption, head injury and air pollution.
Studies have shown that the brains of people with hearing impairment atrophy more quickly. The brain must also work overtime to understand what people are saying, so there are fewer resources available for other functions, such as learning and memory.
The Lancet report found hearing loss was the largest modifiable risk factor, accounting for 9 per cent of cases. It recommended hearing aids.
What treatments are available?
A number of drugs are available in Australia for use by people with dementia. These include drugs used to improve memory, known as cholinergic treatments (donepezil, sold under the trade name Aricept, is an example).
Associate Professor Michael Woodward, director of Austin Health's Memory Clinic and adviser to Dementia Australia, says: "Cholinergic drugs are not very effective, they have lots of side effects, but they are currently the standard of care for Alzheimer's."
He says a low dose of an antipsychotic can be useful in extreme cases, such as when someone is taking "swipes at hallucinations".
"We tend to try and use those drugs very, very sparingly; they have certainly been overused, particularly in residential care," he says.
The first new treatment for Alzheimer's disease in 20 years is under consideration for regulatory approval by the US Food and Drug Administration, with a decision expected by June. The drug, known as aducanumab, removes amyloid plaques that accumulate in the brains of people with Alzheimer's and slows the progression of the disease. It has been trialled in Australia and throughout the world.
"If the FDA feels that the results are clinically significant then they will give the nod of approval and we will have our first-ever marketed drug that has true disease-modifying effects," Woodward says.
He is optimistic he will see a cure for dementia in his lifetime. "I've been saying it's five years away for the last 20 years," he says.
It's now 30 years since Geoff Fairhall started showing signs of dementia on that round-the-world trip. For some years after his diagnosis he was able to do short-term projects in academia, sail, travel overseas and attend concerts.
His wife says an early diagnosis is critical because it helps people with dementia and their families adjust and manage their lives.
"You live in the present a bit more and look for moments of creating joy," Anne Fairhall says. "People have always seen dementia as a death sentence, but you can go on living well with dementia for many, many years."
CREDIT: Jewel Topsfield
Word count: 2749
