Concerts, art shows, fairs and more – there are plenty of ways to wind down after the working week, discovers TARA NASH CITY Bondi Cigars With their mix of blues, soul, funk and R&B, Bondi Cigars will perform live. The Gov, 59 Port Rd, Hindmarsh, tonight, 7.30pm. Cost: $25. Also at Port Noarlunga Arts Centre, 22 Gawler St, Port Noarlunga, Saturday, 7.30pm. Cost: $35. Details: thegov.com.au Walk a Mile in My Boots Step out on the right foot and support the almost 6000 people experiencing homelessness in South Australia every year. From Victoria Park, Wakefield Rd, city to South Park Lands/Wita Wirra Park, Hutt Rd, city, today, 7am for 7.30am start. Cost: Adults $30, concession $10, children $5. Details: walkamile.org.au Great Moments in Science with Dr Karl Experience an evening with the enthusiastic Dr Karl as he helps explain science. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, city, Saturday, 7pm-8.30pm. Cost: Adults $11.64, under 16s free. Details: eventbrite.com Indian Bilingual Family Friendly Art Tour Families, elders and children are invited on this art tour co-hosted by art historian and artist Zoe Freney and multilingual volunteer guide Tina (Prabhjot) Parikh. On the tour, visit Art Gallery of South Australia and Royal South Australian Society of Arts and finish at the SALA Parlour for some children’s activities. Art Gallery of South Australia, North Tce, city, Sunday, 12.30pm-2pm. Cost: Free. Details: salafestival.com/tours Girls Night Out Conductor Simone Young will lead the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra in this concert, celebrating the music of the classical great Richard Strauss with an all-female cast of operatic powerhouses. Adelaide Town Hall, 128 King William St, city, tonight, 7.15pm. Cost: From $110. Details: stateopera.com.au
SUBURBS Saint Ignatius Art Show More than 87 selected artists will have their work on display, including Yuro Cuchor, who is featuring his Welcome to Jungle installation. There will be fine paintings, drawings, prints, sculptures and jewellery. Saint Ignatius’ College Junior School, 62 Queen St, Norwood, tonight, 7pm-10.30pm, and Saturday and Sunday, 10am-4pm. Details: saintignatiusartshow.com.au New Dog Park Grand Opening FREE Bring your pets to a new dog park where all sorts of goodies will be on offer including pooch products, giveaways, a barbecue and a coffee van. Hazelmere Reserve Dog Park, on the corner of Hazelmere and Oaklands roads, Glengowrie, Saturday, 9am-noon.Cost: Free. Details: marion.sa.gov.au Eric Marshall Quintet live The Newmarket Hotel has live jazz and food every Sunday afternoon and this week it’s the easy-listening sounds of the Eric Marshall Quintet. They will perform songs made famous by the likes of George Benson, Frank Sinatra and Michael Buble. Newmarket Hotel, 132 Commercial Rd, Port Adelaide, 1pm-4pm. Cost: Free. Details: newmarkethotelptadel.com.au Historic Ketch Falie Centenary Open Day Get aboard and explore the 100-year-old ketch and visit the history library on board.
Port Adelaide Inner Harbour, McLaren Wharf, Sunday, 10am-2pm. Cost: Gold coin donation. Details: facebook.com/historicketchfalie Experience Marine Life in VR Dive deep into the Great Southern reef without even getting your feet wet. Immerse yourself with virtual reality and see colourful giant cuttlefish, sea lions, sea dragons and weave around the jetty. Cove Civic Centre, 1 Ragamuffin Drive, Hallett Cove, Saturday, 10am, noon and 4.30pm. Cost: $4. Details: emsau.org Singapore Bazaar FREE Celebrate the island nation’s 54th birthday with Singaporean food, crafts and entertainment.
Thebarton Community Centre, corner of South Rd and Ashwin Pde, Torrensville, Saturday, 10am-3pm. Cost: Free. Details: sbsa.org.au After Dark in the Port FREE Follow a trail of art and enjoy live music, food and historical sites of the Port Adelaide. Local artists will be scattered across 21 venues with a trail map to help you explore the exhibitions. Various locations, Port Adelaide, today, 4pm until late. Cost: Free. Details: portafterdark.com Virtual Reality and 360 Video FREE Learn more about virtual reality and experience music, guided meditation, a tour and more. Civic Library, 72 Woodville Rd, Woodville, Saturday, 2pm-3.30pm. Cost: Free. Details: charlessturt.sa.gov.au Festival of Miniatures and Dollhouses Browse exhibitions of miniature dollhouses and tiny work by local and interstate artists. Town Hall, 76 Woodville Rd, Woodville, Saturday, 10am-4.30pm, and Sunday, 10am-4pm. Cost: Adults $6, concession $5, children under 16 $3, children under three free. Details: Search ‘SAME Festival of Dollhouse Miniatures 2019’ on Facebook Love Your Bookshop Day Give some love to your local bookshop. Various shops will be holding events including story times, face painting, family activities and more. Saturday, various times and locations. Details: loveyourbookshopday.com.au
Greg Hart Live Greg Hart, along with pianist Trish Hart and cellist Heather Lander, is performing two concerts: Acoustic Hart with acoustic renditions of classic hits for artists such as Bob Dylan, Elton John, Buddy Holly and Johnny Cash, then Beautiful Noise – The Songs of Neil Diamond. Marion Cultural Centre, 287 Diagonal Rd, Oaklands Park, Saturday, 6pm-7.10pm then 8pm-9.10. Cost: $30 each concert. Details: marionculturalcentre.com.au SA Variety Bash Start Line FREE Support those taking off in all kinds of purpose-built vehicles on the SA Variety Bash from Mawson Lakes to Murray Bridge. There will be festivities and giveaways for the kids. Codan Head Office, 2 Second Ave, Mawson Lakes, Saturday, 7am-9am. Cost: Free. Details: Search ‘SA Variety Bash Start Line (2019)’ on Facebook
REGIONAL Barossa Medieval Fair Round up the family for an historic day out with medieval knights, food, games, artisan crafts people and more.
Heinemann Park, Tanunda, Saturday, 10am-4pm, Sunday, 10am-3pm. Cost: Adults $19, concession $16. Details: facebook.com/BarossaMedievalFair
Crocodile Rocket Enjoy a unique and entertaining salute to British rocker Sir Elton John, starring Brenton Edgecombe. This show covers John’s career from his first hit song through the disco era to his music for the Disney film The Lion King. Gawler Civic Centre (Institute Hall), 89-91 Murray St, Gawler, tonight, 8pm-10pm. Cost: $30 to $56. Details: eventbrite.com.au Magic & Music On The Murray FREE Enjoy views of the mighty Murray River as Nick & Tash Acoustic Duo perform live. Wines and platters available at Whistling Kite Wines, 73 Freundt Rd, New Residence, Saturday, 11.30am-4.30pm. Cost: Free. Details: 0421 384 658 Hahndorf Winter Lantern Festival workshopsGet along and make pyramid, curved or original-shaped lanterns to light and carry in the coming Hahndorf Winter Lantern Festival parade. Hahndorf Memorial Institute, 59 Main St, Hahndorf, Saturday, 1pm-3.30pm. Cost: $15, concession $12. Details: trybooking.com/BDOMH
CREDIT: TARA NASH
Word count: 1031
