ASPIRING veterinary students should be screened to find out which ones genuinely want to work with pigs and fish – not just cats and dogs – so they will take hard-to-fill jobs.
Adelaide University’s Dr Adele Feakes says eye-tracking technology and virtual reality games are among tools used by marketers that could be adopted to determine applicants’ real career intentions.
She says there are labour shortages in several fields but particularly in intensive animal production and aquaculture.
Her study of 844 veterinary students from five universities found students generally expressed preferences to work with household pets.
This was followed by wildlife or zoo animals, then cows, sheep, alpacas and horses.
Intensively farmed pigs and chickens were less popular, and students were least likely to want to work with fish or lab animals.
However, more students want to work in mixed practices that include large farm animals than those dealing exclusively with pets.
“Educating veterinary students is expensive and there is an undersupply of graduates for high-need sectors such as biomedical research, industry and rural practice, despite some veterinary programs focusing on rural supply,” Dr Feakes said.
The study found the types of animals students wanted to work with was the key determinant of their future work aspirations.
This trumped income and leadership opportunities, except for those who wanted to run their own businesses.
Gender was found to be irrelevant to preferences.
“This finding could be applied in veterinary school admissions processes, to help boost supply of veterinarians to undersupplied sectors,” said Dr Feakes, a senior lecturer in veterinary practice management.
“I am very interested in exploring innovative adoption of tools from marketing to reveal students’ species preferences such as choice experiments, eye tracking analysis, facial recognition and/or virtual reality games.” Questionnaires or interviews would not suffice in this area “due to risk of coached answers”.
She says her findings also have implications for primary and secondary school materials.
“Children’s books, games or activities about caring for animals and veterinarians could help by featuring a wide range of animal types, with less use of dogs and cats,” she said.
Adelaide University runs the only veterinary medicine school in South Australia – one of seven around the country.
Applicants currently need an ATAR of 90 and have to complete a questionnaire about their life experiences and knowledge or interest in animals. These determine who is eligible for an interview.Dr Feakes’ study was published in BMC Veterinary Research.
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 411
