VIRTUAL reality is unlocking time travel for aged-care residents, who are returning from the past with elevated moods.
Wearing a mask which transmits realistic images, Peter Smith, 91, who lives at Helping Hand, Golden Grove, spent up to 20 minutes “flying” a Cessna.
“It was just exactly as it used to be when I was flying light aircraft at Parafield,” he says.
“It was spectacular.” Mr Smith got his pilot’s licence for recreational flying in his early 40s and flew for about 30 years.
A retired projectionist for the Regent Theatre, he says the virtual reality technology was so convincing that he was reaching for flight instruments which were only pictures inside his mask.
“The most amazing thing that I did with that virtual reality is that they put me in the cockpit of a 737,” he says.
“It was real. I put my hand out to touch the throttles and they weren’t there. “It only lasted about half an hour but I could have stayed there.” UniSA PhD candidate Dimitrios Saredakis interviewed 17 residents at Helping Hand’s North Adelaide home in July to learn about their pasts and where they had lived, worked and travelled.
He then used software similar to Google Street View, to put together scenes they would recognise.
“A few residents hailed from the UK, so we were able to show them around their hometowns,” he says.
“The feedback has been overwhelmingly positive, with residents saying they were able to visit places they thought they’d never see again and that they had the feeling of being there, of almost stepping back in time.” Mr Saredakis says apathy is common in aged-care residents and is associated with a faster rate of cognitive decline.
Reminiscence therapy is used to help alleviate apathy but usually employs books and photographs.
Mr Saredakis is looking at whether reminiscence therapy is more effective in reducing apathy in residents with cognitive decline when it is delivered through virtual reality.
The research is being conducted through Helping Hand’s Future Design Hub, which is a collaboration of the aged-care provider and UniSA.
In the next phase, Mr Saredakis will work with 30 aged-care residents and assess them before and after three sessions of reminiscence.
Helping Hand chief executive officer Chris Stewart says the Future Design Hub is well-placed at North Adelaide to allow researchers, including engineering students designing equipment prototypes, to interact with residents when needed.
The Hub also is hosting design efforts to bring the outside in for residents, such as outside beach scenes, sights, sounds and textures.
Helping Hand has nine sites in South Australia, including six in the metropolitan area, as well as homes at Port Pirie, Jamestown and Clare.It also provides home-care services to about 4000 clients.
CREDIT: JILL PENGELLEY
Word count: 460
