WHO YOU THINK I AM *** 1/2 Rating MA15+ Director Safy Nebbou Starring Juliette Binoche, Francois Civil, Nicole Garcia Running time 102 minutes Verdict Compelling tale of love and self-deception
A MIDDLE-aged university lecturer makes a Faustian pact with Facebook in this gripping psychological thriller.
There no portraits gathering dust in Claire Millaud’s (Juliette Binoche) attic. Instead, it’s the woman herself who is wasting away – consumed by her eternally youthful avatar.
Recounting her story to a locum psychiatrist (Nicole Garcia) – a smart and economical plot device – Claire peels back the layers of her online obsession with Alex Chelly (Francois Civil), a young man who is 20-plus years her junior.
After being traded in by her husband for a much younger model (Marie-Ange Casta), Claire forms a casual sexual relationship with arrogant 20-something architect Ludo (Guillaume Gouix) – at least, that’s how he sees it.
When Ludo refuses to take one of her phone calls, Claire creates a fake online profile to track his whereabouts.
That’s how she “meets” his friend and flatmate, Alex, a budding photographer with whom she quickly becomes infatuated.
And vice versa.
Their online chemistry is immediate and intense.
Revelling in her ability to wind back the clock, thus becoming young and desirable again, Claire’s real identity slowly begins to merge with that of her girlish fantasy.
But, of course, there’s no way for Claire to bridge the gulf between her virtual and physical personas.
Experiencing a kind of age dysphoria, the mother of two becomes increasingly unhinged.
Directed by Safy Nebbou, Who You Think I Am plays out as a series of extended flashbacks told from the relatively safe confines of a psychiatric institution — until a series of melodramatic plot revelations catapult us into the present.
What makes this tale of projection and desire so compulsive is the committed performance from Binoche, who rarely goes for the safe choice. While her character’s actions become increasingly wild and deranged, the Oscar-winning French actor plays the role with minute precision — it takes just a small twitch of those barely perceptible crow’s feet to suggest a shift between, say, emotional candour and wilful self-deception.
Garcia’s old-school psychologist is deliciously inscrutable. This well-matched pair’s watchful, professional banter is one of the film’s unanticipated delights.
Who You Think I Am has as many endings as a Peter Jackson fantasy, but the final twist plays out just right.VICKY ROACH, NOW SCREENING
CREDIT: VICKY ROACH
Word count: 408
