Virtual reality now critical in huge range of industries
HI-TECH INDUSTRY
SOUTH Australia will bid for a slice of the booming international 3D virtual reality games industry with a 10 per cent rebate on offer from July 1 – the only state in Australia to offer the deal.
The pitch is aimed at the multibillion-dollar video gaming industry but officials say their technology is now being used in a range of industries including manufacturing, construction, urban planning and much more.
The advanced games-based technology allows planners to create precise hologram-like images, viewed from any angle and taken apart and rebuilt at will, for anything from “walking” through a house for sale to building a frigate.
Planners can immerse themselves in the project before it physically exists, checking for mistakes or unintended consequences, just as a gaming player explores fantasy worlds.
Companies are now buying the real time 3D technology from game makers, rather than taking the time and cost to design it themselves.
Trade and Investment Minister David Ridgway said extension of the Post-Production, Digital and Visual Effects (PDV) rebate for video game development will give a boost to key growth sectors.
“This is an incredible growth industry and this rebate will not only help attract international gaming companies to South Australia, it will bolster the long-term growth of local players and other industries using the same technologies,” he said.
“What is even more exciting is the skills transfer into other industries as the uptake and adoption of gaming technology, 3D simulation and virtual reality increasingly crosses over into multiple hi-tech industries.
“This technology is now widely used by some of the biggest global players in defence, space, engineering, construction, health industries and more and skills in these areas will only become increasingly sought after.” While some may dismiss gaming as child’s play, it is now a $150 billion industry whose cutting edge reality has been seen in TV coverage of “virtual” supercar races as top drivers reverted to online gaming challenge races during the COVID-19 lockdown.
South Australia has seven medium companies and 15 registered entities in the game sector, such as Mighty Kingdom and Foxie Games.
Foxie Games has grown from three employees to more than 25 in two years and expects to increase this to 80 jobs.
Mighty Kingdom chief executive Philip Mayes believes the rebate for gaming will further cement the state’s leadership position.
“It makes South Australia an attractive destination for investment and growth,” Mr Mayes said. “This incentive is quite literally a game changer for the game development industry in Australia.” page 18: Editorial
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 434
