BELAIR
VIRTUAL reality headsets can help inexperienced residents appreciate the need to prepare a bushfire survival plan and put that plan into action before it is too late.
Together with the CFS, UniSA researchers gave residents in Belair, as well as Tea Tree Gully, Mylor, Hahndorf and Gawler a computer-generated bushfire experience last summer.
Associate Professor Delene Weber said the 15-minute scenario went through the types of decisions that needed to be made as a fire approached.
“People said it was very useful, because they could experience what a fire was like,” she said.
“It made them realise that even if they felt they were physically very well prepared, they weren’t very well prepared emotionally.” The scenario builds on research conducted as part of a joint UniSA and University of Adelaide Australian Research Council grant.
Surveys have revealed the extent of complacency within the community – including some disturbing misconceptions about what to do in a bushfire scenario. Authorities say people should either leave early or they should stay and defend their property, meaning defend actively right away.
But Dr Weber said “the scariest result we found was the percentage of people in this really dangerous zone in between”.
“A lot of people (55 per cent) were choosing another option, to ‘wait and see’, which is obviously never an option the CFS talk about because it’s a really dangerous space to be in, not really doing anything,” she said.
“It’s really important that people get the message they are not going to be told to evacuate.” People also needed to have a good idea of what to do if they were stuck in a house, including what room to go into.
She found 63 per cent elected the bathroom and 7 per cent would go outside, but both options were dead ends.
It was, she said, better to pick a room with multiple entrances and a view of the fire, such as a laundry or hallway.
“The virtual reality scenario replicates typical conditions experienced in a major fire, including strong, changeable winds fanning the flames,” she said. “It puts users under pressure to decide whether to leave their homes early or stay and defend – in essence, what a bushfire survival plan is designed to do.” Virtual reality headsets are now being used by several emergency service groups to train their own staff, but involving the public is an Australian first.The bushfire experience was developed by UniSA PhD student Safa Molan.
CREDIT: Clare Peddie
Word count: 415
