IT was a car crash and nightclub explosion - but thankfully it was only a simulation.
Charles Sturt University Graduate Diploma of Clinical Practice (Paramedic) students took part in the exercise last week as part of their five-day residential school in Bathurst.
A group of 20 postgraduate students completed three days of clinical skills and finished off the week participating in simulations to enhance their practical training.
The simulations involved representatives from the NSW Fire and Rescue Department and NSW State Emergency Service (SES), which added some realism to the exercise.
As well, the very hot temperatures in Bathurst as the city was gripped by a heatwave made for a challenging working environment for the students.
Paramedic subject co-ordinator Dr Brian Sengstock said the simulations are an opportunity to put students in real life situations and apply their clinical skills.
"While the simulations are part of the course requirements, it will also prepare these students for upcoming placements in February this year," Dr Sengstock said.
"We aim to make these simulations as realistic as we possibly can, which is why it's fantastic working with members from the NSW Fire and Rescue and SES."
Dr Sengstock said they often have a range of reactions to the simulations from the students who participate.
"For some, this will be the first time they've been confronted in this type of situation," he said.
"It can be very overwhelming."
READ ALSO:
UK honour for former CSU academic
CSU lecturer's water pitch impresses in national program
CSU name change: Western Sydney University's experience
After the simulations occur, students participate in a mandatory debrief, which looks at what worked, what didn't and their individual role.
Paramedicine student Paul Neil, who drove from Coober Pedy in South Australia to Bathurst for the residential school, said the simulations are a great way to go through the paces of an emergency situation realistically.
"My role during the car crash simulation was the scene commander," Mr Neil said.
"This was the first time I've ever completed a simulation that involved mass causalities, so it was a really great learning experience."
CSU says paramedicine grows in popularity each year as a course choice.
The course is delivered by national and international leaders.
Word count: 370
