WA’s arts institutions face serious funding shortfalls and policy stasis At a recent arts and culture breakfast in Perth, the crowd was large, and West Australian Arts Minister David Templeman, a keen amateur thespian, gave an upbeat account of cultural activity in the state. Templeman spoke about the spate of films and television series being shot in WA, from the film Dirt Music, based on the Tim Winton novel, to TV series The Heights. He also mentioned the first virtual reality festival for Perth to be held this month and a $100,000 pilot fund to encourage a new augmented reality and video games industry.
He noted that Perth hosted Fringe World, the world’s third largest fringe festival, and that cultural assets such as the new $396 million WA museum, due to open next year, will boost interest among cultural tourists who he claimed were coming for longer and spending more in the state.
Noticeably absent in Templeman’s speech and the few questions that followed was any reference to the significant problems looming over the main cultural institutions in the state.
No mention was made about a controversial proposal being mooted by the McGowan government to amalgamate the boards of the state’s public cultural institutions: the Art Gallery of Western Australia, the WA Museum and the State Library of WA.
Neither did anyone ask why the art gallery’s director position was about to be vacated but the position had not been advertised, even though exiting director Stefano Carboni was informed a year ago by the government that his tenure was up. Last week, Templeman announced an “interim leadership team” had been appointed to run the gallery.
Then there was the sudden removal of Black Swan State Theatre Company’s executive director Natalie Jenkins by the company’s board and her replacement by a board member with no arts experience.
Black Swan’s board — which called in a crisis management company to handle media questions — is chaired by Nicola Forrest, who was recently awarded an Order of Australia for her philanthropy via the Minderoo Foundation, the charitable body she founded with her mining entrepreneur husband, Andrew Forrest. Minderoo’s chief financial officer sits on Black Swan’s board.
The removal of Jenkins raised questions from arts leaders far beyond WA’s borders about board representation and the power of corporate and private patrons as arts organisations find themselves “hyper-dependent” — as one source wryly put it — on private money as government funding flatlines.
Yet not a single opinion on this topic was put to the arts breakfast panel, even though one of the panellists was Minderoo Foundation chief executive Andrew Hagger. Templeman ended his speech to the largely business audience by inviting “anybody in this room to see the value of investing in this sector”.
Although many in the audience might have thought it, nobody was impolite enough to suggest the minister might heed his own words.
Arts funding as a percentage of the state budget has declined across 17 years to a low of 0.65 per cent, according to Chamber of Arts and Culture chief executive Shelagh Magadza.
Perth is gripped by “arts policy stasis”, she says. “The cumulative effect is a cultural infrastructure urgently in need of maintenance and upgrade to make it fit for purpose and a sector struggling to keep up with global trends that have seen creative economies become a dynamic source of growth and innovation elsewhere.” Templeman routinely defends the lack of substantial boosts to arts organisations by saying the McGowan government inherited a huge deficit in a post-boom era. Yet even in the decades in which WA’s economy was powered by the nation’s biggest mining boom, the arts share has barely topped 1 per cent of the state budget.
Meanwhile the State Library has lost 40 per cent of its staff in the past 12 years, while nearly 100 artworks in the Art Gallery of WA’s collection have languished for lack of repair for more than seven years, according to last year’s Auditor General’s report, due to an acute shortage of proper maintenance and storage.
WA’s much-lauded film sector, which unlike South Australia and Queensland lacks a single large-scale film lot, relies heavily on funds from the state’s scratch ticket agency, Lotterywest. Senior arts leaders worked on a “Strategic Directions” document with the previous government for two years in a bid to shape cultural policy to 2031. The document has been sidelined by the McGowan government.
“We need to change things dramatically,” says Ted Snell, chief cultural officer of the University of Western Australia and former Curtin University art gallery director. “Although blessed with extraordinary creative talent across all sectors of the arts, we have inadequate cultural infrastructure, poorly maintained and no longer fit for purpose. A thoroughly researched plan on the provision of crucial cultural infrastructure is now an urgent project.” Snell cites the State Theatre Centre and the new WA museum as outstanding exceptions, although he could have added that the museum budget was cut under Labor from $430m to $396m. “But there is no recital hall, lyric theatre or Aboriginal cultures museum to showcase the extraordinary 50,000 years of continuous cultural life of this place.” The South Australian government has just stolen from Western Australia the first and only national institution it had in its sights.
South Australia has announced concrete plans for a National Gallery for Aboriginal Art and Cultures to be built on the former Royal Adelaide Hospital site. Two weeks ago, Liberal Premier Steven Marshall announced his state budget featured $150m to construct the “national centrepiece of contemporary and historical Aboriginal art”. It already has the promise of $85m in federal funding.
The WA government had plenty of notice that the race was on, long before Marshall made it a promise in last year’s South Australian election. “We should all be galled that other places are moving ahead of us,” Committee for Perth chief executive Marion Fulker says, “and we should be ashamed of ourselves.” Fulker and her committee were the driving force behind a detailed report in 2009 outlining a vision for a world centre for indigenous culture, based on study tours they made to similar centres in Canada, the US and New Zealand. In 2017, a Perth City Summit restated the urgency of an indigenous cultural centre for the capital city.
Then, in April this year, state Governor Kim Beazley held a series of cultural summits in which an indigenous centre was an agreed aim.
And in May, Premier Mark McGowan and Aboriginal Affairs Minister Ben Wyatt floated the idea of turning a derelict 19th-century industrial site, the East Perth Power Station, into an indigenous art centre. While they matched the rhetoric with $30m towards site works to remove an electricity switchyard next door, there were no sketch plans and no indigenous cultural representatives present — not even Arts Minister Templeman.
Richard Walley, one of the state’s senior indigenous cultural advisers, has participated in every round table, every unfulfilled plan for an indigenous cultural centre across nearly two decades.
“This is the moment for holding people accountable,” says Walley, who believes a cultural precinct of some kind can still emerge in Perth. “If you do a business case for indigenous culture for tourists, there’s a big demand. But what’s lacking is supply.” Walley identifies a lack of political will to commit substantial sums to culture in WA. “Any time our economy is challenged, it’s the arts sector that suffers.” Templeman will say only that there are “important conversations going on within government and the private sector” on that topic. “Western Australia has a far better story to tell when it comes to indigenous culture than any other state,” he says.
Sandgropers watch from across the Nullarbor as Victoria invests substantial new funds under Creative Victoria for a far-reaching vision to aggregate arts, screen and creative industries in the state. Meanwhile, Templeman talks about “activating space and place” in the Perth cultural precinct, where the state library, art gallery and museum are located.
He says all three institutions have their own modest marketing budget which, if brought together under one broader governance model, could make a bigger impact. “If we’re promoting the state and its vibrancy and life, does that have to come from different messages?
“We’re looking at (rewriting) the legislation that oversees those boards,” he tells The Australian. “They date back to the 1950s and 60s, and I think it’s appropriate to look at the legislation that underpins those associations.” He says it could provoke Western Australia’s parliament to turn its attention to the importance of the arts.
“We haven’t seen that for decades,” he says. “I’ve been in parliament for nearly 20 years and I can’t remember us having a debate about the importance of our cultural institutions to our way of life, to our narrative, to our story.”The minister may have put his finger on the biggest impediment to progress in the west.
CREDIT: VICTORIA LAURIE
Word count: 1490
