A pioneering research project is hoping to use technology to create opportunities for people with intellectual disabilities What started as a sports training research project now has the potential to change the lives of people living with intellectual disabilities.
An interdisciplinary team of researchers from the University of South Australia and industry is looking into the ways virtual reality (VR) can help to develop social, cognitive and vocational skills in people with intellectual disabilities, to create opportunities for independent living and open pathways to new experiences.
With its initial focus on how VR can complement sports training to improve real-world skills, researchers tested two groups of table tennis players – the sport chosen for its fast-paced, unpredictable nature that requires flexibility in visual attention, quick decision-making and fast interceptive actions in response to an interactive opponent.
One group trained by using a VR game, while the other group received no training. At the end of the seven training sessions, the study found the group that trained in VR had significant improvement in their performance post-test than the no-training control group.
Now one of the project’s lead researchers, Stefan Michalski, is using his PhD studies to advance the research and investigate the benefits of VR for those with intellectual disabilities.
“People with intellectual disabilities can be deprived of opportunities,” he says. “Using VR as a safe place where they can practise dangerous tasks over and over without a caregiver needed, they can eventually gain confidence and prove as much to themselves as to caregivers and others that they can develop skills.
“So many times there are things they are told or think they can’t do, but practising in VR and then taking the next step to the real world, maybe that’s the way to go.” With the research still in its very early stages, there are lots of questions yet to be addressed in terms of program development and implementation; but before they get that far, researchers have one very important aspect to consider: how – and if – people with intellectual disabilities will actually react to the VR experience, from the potential difficulties of wearing the headset and working the controls to the chance of suffering cyber sickness.
“There are so many unknowns at the moment,” Michalski says.
“That’s our first step, to see how people react. It’s really going to answer a lot of questions.” Initial tests are proving positive.
“We’ve had some people go through the experience and pretty much everyone has loved it so much,” Michalski says. “We have an underwater simulation – snorkelling isn’t something they’re generally going to be doing in day-to-day life. That just blew them away and I couldn’t get them out of the room.” Safety is also a priority. “We know VR is powerful but we’re not saying everything has to be done in VR,” says Tobias Loetscher, NHMRC dementia research leadership fellow at UniSA and part of the research team.
“We should have a lot of concerns, such as can people distinguish between the virtual and real worlds? Especially people with intellectual disabilities: depending on what they’re doing, can that pose a problem afterwards? If you’re training someone in the kitchen, in VR the pot isn’t hot; but in real life it is. So if people learn through VR it’s not dangerous and then go and touch it … ” “The VR has to be realistic for the danger that could happen,” Michalaksi continues. “There has to be a thought-out plan for how we package up the content. With sensations like temperature, it’s hard to replicate in VR. And you don’t want to make someone’s hand feel burned. So potentially not everything is going to be possible in VR.” What is possible in VR, however, has the potential to open not just doors but also worlds to people with intellectual disabilities.
“We want to use this to give people opportunities they don’t currently have,” Michalski says.
“Rather than trying to improve productivity with things they’re currently doing, which might be quite basic or restrictive, we’re asking, ‘What do they want to do?’ That’s what VR can be used for – to help people fufil their goals and ambitions.” Professor Caroline Ellison, Crossing the Horizon associate professor of ageing and disability at UniSA and another member of the research team, is excited about the unlimited potential VR can offer all people living with disability. “VR can give them access to things that would otherwise be inaccessible,” she says. “So someone with a physical disability might go down to Deep Creek with their family, do the parts that are accessible but then, while others are doing parts that are not accessible, like going to Blowhole Beach, they can experience that using VR. So when their family members come back, they can socially share in the experience, they can talk about it and not feel like they’ve missed out.” There is also the possibility of using VR to help people with intellectual disability and caregivers cope with behavioural issues.
“We might use it to relax people, to give them a break from stressful situations,” Prof Ellison says.“VR can offer people living with disabilities ways to manage how they feel about the world.”
CREDIT: WORDS LYNN CAMERON
Word count: 873
