BRITISH stage and screen icon Juliet Stevenson will bring her hit play The Doctor to next year’s Adelaide Festival, before it transfers to Broadway and London’s West End.
It is among 19 Australian exclusives for the Festival’s 60th anniversary program, including the Lyon Opera Ballet, an opera based on the film Breaking the Waves,and a new virtual reality installation featuring Kate Miller-Heidke.
Stevenson, 62, came to fame in the late 1980s with her film roles in Drowning by Numbers and Truly, Madly, Deeply.
In The Doctor, Stevenson plays the title character, who refuses to let a priest deliver the last rites to a 14-year-old patient fighting for her life.
Securing the play, at the Dunstan Playhouse from Feburary 27-March 8, was a late coup for artistic directors Rachel Healy and Neil Armfield.
“We just happened to fit into a perfect schedule where they could do the Adelaide Festival, the New York season, and then the West End transfer,” Ms Healy said.
Lyon Opera Ballet will perform Trois Grandes Fugues, three works by women choreographers, each set to a different recording of Beethoven’s The Great Fugue, at the Festival Theatre on March 6-7.
Breaking the Waves is a new production of US composer Missy Mazzoli’s opera adaptation of Lars von Trier’s 1996 film, created for this year’s Edinburgh International Festival.
Australian singer Miller-Heidke and Netherlands composer Michel van der Aa created Eight, which will be experienced by one person at a time wearing a virtual reality headset at the State Library.
Other highlights include a nine-hour version of The Iliad and the return of 1996 Festival dance work Enter Achilles.
SA WEEKEND ON SATURDAY: SPECIAL FESTIVAL ISSUE
PATRICK'S PROGRAM PICKS 150 PSALMS 12 concerts, various locations, February 29-March 3 Four acclaimed choirs, the Nederlands Kamerkoor, The Tallis Scholars (UK), Norwegian Soloists Choir and Australia’s The Song Company, perform all 150 psalms in settings by 150 composers, representing 1000 years of choral music.
MAD MAX MEETS THE SHAOLIN AFRONAUTS Festival Centre Workshop, February 29 Cult movie meets cult jazz as George Miller’s original 1979 film is screened for one night only to a live, afrobeat/soul/funk/avant-garde score by 10-piece Adelaide collective The Shaolin Afronauts.
A DOLL'S HOUSE Rundle Mall, February 28-March 15 Japanese artist Tatzu Nishi will rebuild his life-size, three-storey doll’s house, which adorned a Paris museum facade, as a freestanding structure.
MOUTHPIECE Odeon Theatre, March 6-14 Scotland’s Traverse Theatre Company hit drama in which Libby, a middle-aged playwright whose despair literally drives her to a cliff edge, finds inspiration in Declan, a socially disadvantaged 17-year-old who possesses a remarkable artistic talent.FULL PROGRAM AND TICKETS AT ADELAIDEFESTIVAL.COM.AU
CREDIT: PATRICK McDONALD CHIEF ARTS WRITER
Word count: 442
