Chat with experts and indulge your holiday fantasies at the World Travel Fest
WHETHER YOU’RE IN SEARCH of untouched natural wonders, planning a unique adventure or luxury escape, or seeking a blissful retreat you’ll find the perfect holiday at the World Travel Fest.
Uncover the best holidays in the world from once-in-a-lifetime travel experiences, budget friendly getaways, family-friendly trips, romantic luxury escapes, cruises to undiscovered destinations, unique packages, and tips and tricks; the World Travel Fest is dedicated to you – the traveller. A world of travel possibilities awaits at the event held at the Adelaide Convention Centre in February.
The day will be filled with information and interaction, taking you into another world where you can experience the travel and planning process of a holiday in a different way. As you wander through the maze of excitement that awaits inside the doors of the Convention Centre you will be amazed by live entertainment showcasing the talents of the world. Be wowed by the technology of Virtual Reality, and take a glimpse into your bucket list destination with Go Before you Go Virtual Reality sessions. Find yourself lost in the streets of Asia or Italy as the smells of the live cooking demonstrations fill the air, transporting you across the globe for your new favourite dish. Then fall further into the tastes of Italy with free coffees for visitors on the day.
Learn in the presence of travel experts with guest speakers and travel professionals hosting a number of information sessions throughout the day.
Gain exclusive access to the Club Lounge and spend the day rubbing shoulders with Phil Hoffmann, and other world travellers, discussing your next adventure and sharing travel tips and tricks, while enjoying delicious food and wine from unexplored places.
The fun doesn’t stop there, while mum and dad are exploring the possibilities of the world, we also have the little ones’ interests at heart with face painting and a bouncy castle to entertain even the littlest of globetrotters.
There is so much to see and do and the world is your oyster. The World Travel Fest is the destination to secure the best deals from seasoned travel professionals.
World Travel Fest features an exciting array of interactive activities including: Expert guest speakers and hosts; Live entertainment; Dedicated kids’ corner with fun activities; Club lounge; Food and wine; Free coffee; World cooking demonstrations; Virtual Reality installation; Hot travel deals and booking centre.
Fuel your wanderlust at the World Travel Fest, let us take you on a journey of the world while booking your next escape. Be entertained and tantalise your tastebuds as you make your next holiday dream a reality. World Travel Fest will be held on Sunday 2 February at the Adelaide Convention Centre from 10am to 4pm. Free entry.For more information go to: worldtravelfest.com.au, or call Phil Hoffmann Travel on 1300 748 748
Word count: 479
