FLINDERS UNIVERSITY
TEACHING boys to become better men is at the forefront of a “novel” Flinders University study.
PhD candidate Stephen Hall is developing a violence prevention program using virtual reality (VR) as a form of “immersive education” to show the consequences of aggression. Mr Hall interviewed a number of males, aged between 18 and 24, to understand their perception of violence, as well as hotspots for poor behaviour.
All the information collated will be used to make a VR program where users can step into a violent situation and work out the best way to react.
“We are pushing the boundaries using VR is this situation – it is quite novel,” Mr Hall says. “In VR, you can choose your own story, so it will be a very interactive experience where the person has decisions to make.
“But then they can also learn the consequences of their decisions. “Using this, people will be aware of the sort of experiences they might come up against and they can safely practise their non-violent strategies.” Through his research, he was able to identify a number of places across Adelaide where violence is prevalent and then create scenes where users can “step in”.
“The scenarios in the virtual reality experiences need to be at locations familiar to people and embedded into local culture,” Mr Hall says.
“They have to be able to recognise the areas and places they might get into trouble, so we are looking at (using) Adelaide landmarks.” Mr Hall could not say where the scenarios are set because he wants it to be a surprise when the study is finished in July. The research is part of the university’s wider Men Violence Change initiative, which works with the Sammy D Foundation.
Mr Hall, who has presented the concept at international conferences, hopes the foundation will be able to use some of his content in its programs.
He wants his research to prevent young men from landing themselves in dangerous situations.
“Maybe it will change their behaviour … so hopefully they don’t get caught up in bad things,” Mr Hall says.“It encourages them to change their perception of men being violent.”
CREDIT: Celeste Villani celeste.villani@news.com.au
Word count: 365
