Concerts, exhibits, markets, films, big productions – this weekend, you’ve got the pick of the crop to choose from, writes TARA NASH
CITY Community Kitchen Demonstration Discover delicious whole plant foods in this vegan cooking demonstration. You’ll learn how to create simple, healthy and flavoursome dishes. Adelaide Central Market, 44-60 Gouger St, city, tonight, 6pm-7pm. Cost: Free. Details: justeatplants.com.au Cultivate Exhibition A fascinating art exhibition showcasing the works of South Australians experiencing mental illness. Their art explores the concept of recovery through nurturing and strengthening one’s identity. The exhibition features multidisciplinary artworks by emerging artists who attend the Neami National Visual Art Programs. Hawke Centre (Kerry Packer Civic Gallery), UniSA City West Campus, 55 North Tce, tonight, Saturday and Sunday, 5.30pm-7pm. Cost: Free. Details: 0439 401 431
Big Family Weekend This family event for children of all ages will take over the North Tce Cultural Boulevard in Adelaide for two fun-filled days. Theatres, galleries, museums, universities, libraries, and gardens will be full to the brim with hundreds of children and families immersed in arts activities. North Tce, city, Saturday and Sunday.Cost: Free. Details: dreambigfestival.com.au 2019 Adelaide Marathon Festival The Adelaide Marathon will be the first large state marathon on the Australian calendar for 2019 and will take on some further course improvements from the 2018 edition. Adelaide Oval, War Memorial Drive, North Adelaide, Sunday, 7am-3pm. Cost: $20 to $120. Details: adelaidemarathon.org.au Government House Open Day His Excellency the Governor of South Australia and Mrs Le invite you to visit the oldest Government House in Australia.
This is a rare opportunity to learn about the public rooms, current workings of the house and explore the gardens, either on a guided tour or at your own leisure. Corner North Tce, and King William Rd, city, Sunday, 10am-4pm. Cost: Free. Details: historyfestival.sa.gov.au
Mitcham Orchestra in Concert Enjoy a concert by Mitcham Orchestra with music director Tully Brookes and soloist Tahlia West on flute. Tahlia was the winner of Mitcham Orchestra/Mitcham Rotary Club Prize 2018. The program includes Mendelssohn’s Hebrides Overture, Schubert’s Unfinished Symphony, Chaminade’s Concertino for fluteand orchestra and Leroy Anderson’s A Trumpeter’s Lullaby.
Community Centre, 390 Goodwood Rd, Cumberland Park, Sunday, 2pm. Cost: Adults $12, children 12 and under free; afternoon tea $2. Details: 8372 8888
David Attenborough’s Great Barrier Reef Dive VR In 360-degree virtual reality, dive deep beneath the surface on the Great Barrier Reef, sitting next to your guide, David Attenborough. SA Museum, North Tce, city, 11am, noon, 1pm and 2pm daily. Until July 14. Cost: $16 (non-members), $12 (museum members). Details: samuseum.sa.gov.au
Phil Cummings: Stories Behind the Books Meet children’s author Phil Cummings and join him on his personal tour of this exhibition with insights and anecdotes. Hear first-hand the process of Phil’s writing as he guides you through the stories behind his books. State Library, North Tce, city, Saturday, 11am-noon. Cost: Free. Details: dreambigfestival.com.au
May I Be Seen Each Friday in May will feature a runway showcasing several Adelaide labels. This week: Revoque – By Danica Ryan, Rachel Matthews 1626 and Kennedy’s Boutique. The Photo Gallery, 262 Pulteney St, city, tonight, 6.30pm. Cost: $25. Details: 8232 7044 SUBURBS Film Screening Tonight’s moving film Pray the Devil Back To Hell portrays the struggle and triumph the African women of Liberia had in their attempt to bring peace to their war-torn country. Supper will be served after the film. Effective Living Centre, 26 King William Rd, Wayville, tonight, 7.30pm. Cost: Donation at the door. Details: 0418 848 846
Biggest Morning Tea Join others for morning tea with baked goods. All proceeds will go to the Cancer Council. Burnside Community Centre, 401 Greenhill Rd, Tusmore, today, 10.30am-noon. Cost: $5. Details: 8366 4200
Round She Goes Adelaide’s largest indoor market is dedicated to women’s pre-loved and vintage fashion.
Shoppers can expect to find preloved brands from high street to high end from 50 different stallholders. Goodwood Community Centre, 32 Rosa St, Goodwood, Saturday, 10am-3pm. Cost: $2. Details: roundshegoes.com.au
Agility Dog Club May Games Double Trials Come along and enjoy 18 events where a team of two dogs and handlers work together to complete a course of jumps and obstacles. Pedigree Park, West Beach Rd, West Beach, Saturday, 9am-5pm. Cost: Free. Details: agilitydogclubsa.com
Opening of Oaklands Estate Reserve Upgrade Families can enjoy a barbecue, orienteering, arts and crafts, kite flying, face painting and coffee to celebrate the upgrade of a favourite park. Oaklands Estate Reserve, Oaklands Rd, Oaklands Park, Saturday, 11am-1pm. Cost: Free. Details: marion.sa.gov.au
Ramadan Carnival Enjoy a Ramadan evening with a night of festivities, feasting and entertainment. Learn about the significance of Ramadan within the Islamic faith, and celebrate unity and diversity within the community. Marion Mosque, 658 Marion Rd, Park Holme, Saturday, 8pm-midnight. Details: facebook.com/Islamic.Society.SA
Jigsaw Challenge Last year, the creative folk of Willunga came up with a quirky idea for a family-friendly fundraiser to support the redevelopment of their community-owned Recreation Park – teams had two hours to complete a 250-piece jigsaw puzzle. This year, the SA championship sets a higher hurdle with a 500-piece puzzle. Recreation Park Festival Hall, 4 Main Rd, Willunga, Sunday, 1pm. Cost: $80 per team of four. Details:trybooking.com REGIONAL Penfield Park Railway Open Day Join this open day to learn about the art of model and experimental engineering, presented by the Penfield Model Engineers Society, including riding a train on a miniature railway. Penfield Model Engineers Society, Woomera Ave, Edinburgh, Sunday, noon-4.30pm. Cost: $8 (families of up to five $30). Details: pmes.org.au
Re FestivalThis focuses on a healthy life and Earth, promoting the message “reuse, re-educate, resilience”. There will be Sea Shepherd talks, stalls and activities. Port Broughton Community Hall, today and Saturday, 9.30am-3pm. Cost: Free. Details: 8635 2854
Word count: 947
