Pop the top off a can of L&P and press play on New Zealand’s stunning landscapes
NEW ZEALAND IS without a doubt one of the most beautiful countries to visit in the world. Like peering over the back fence at next door’s swish entertaining area, it’s hard not to be envious of our neighbour/rival’s stunning alpine scenery, thrilling action-adventures and quaint coffee shops.
The air space between us is closed right now, but you can still go to New Zealand, without actually crossing the Tasman. You could host a themed dinner party with your loved ones or re-watch (or finally watch) every Lord of the Rings movie. Learn how to correctly pronounce the names of the towns you’ll visit one day, or start to physically prepare for that epic week-long hike. Until travel plans can resume, order in “fush and chups”, watch favourite Air New Zealand safety videos over again and start planning the greatest NZ itinerary of all time.
LEARN MAORI As you drive through the country, you’ll find loads of towns and places have Maori names. Before you go, learn to correctly pronounce places such as Whakatāne (pronounced fah-kah-TAH-nay, not wack-ah-tane), and Taupo (Toe-paw, not tow-po) with a YouTube tutorial. There are many available, and if you’re feeling linguistically brave and want a real challenge, consider tackling Taumatawhakatangihangakoauauotamateaturipukakapikimaungahoronukupokaiwhenuakitanatah – a hill in southern Hawke’s Bay that holds the record for world’s longest place name. Turn it into a game, and whoever can pronounce closest to its correct name, wins a Whittaker’s chocolate peanut slab.
GET COOKING Fortunately, you don’t have to book a ticket to NZ to find a can of L&P soft drink or a packet of Griffin’s Choc Thins. You’ll find most supermarkets have a few treats in their international foods section, but the best bet is to Google your nearest NZ grocer. Family-operated outlets such as Kiwi Fine Foods, Sweet Surprises and Sweet As sell all those Kiwi goodies you’re after.
Once you’ve had a sugar fix, head online to order a copy of the Edmonds Cookery Book, an essential to every Kiwi kitchen for the past 100 years. Whip up a homemade bacon and egg pie or indulge with a chocolate pudding. Pop on some Bic Runga, Neil Finn or Dave Dobbyn classics, pour a glass of NZ Marlborough sav blanc and you’ve got yourself a great night in with the whānau (family). Neil Finn has also been performing live sets daily with sons Elroy and Liam.
kiwifinefoods.com.au, sweetsurprises.com.au, sweetas.net.au, neilfinn.com/fangradio
BEST ONLINE EXHIBITION Stepping into Wellington’s Te Papa museum isn’t physically possible right now, but there are ways to visit without leaving the house. Groundbreaking exhibition Gallipoli: The Scale of Our War tells the Gallipoli story through the eyes and words of eight New Zealanders who found themselves in extraordinary circumstances, with giant sculptures brought to life by the world-class creative artistry of the Weta Workshop as its focus. You can see them for yourself thanks to Te Papa’s six-part video series, Building Gallipoli, which takes you through how the exhibition was put together.
tepapa.govt.nz
BEST VIRTUAL SIGHTS Experience the expanse of New Zealand’s natural wonders at home. If you’ve got Google Cardboard or equivalent mobile virtual reality headset, head to YouTube and you’ll find heaps of New Zealand’s great walks and sights including Abel Tasman Coast Track and Milford Sound in virtual reality. For a step further, pop nature sounds on Spotify that will complement your nature experience.
Even if you don’t have a VR device, studies show that just looking at still images of nature is enough to lower stress levels. So keep those nature sounds going and pull up some web images of NZ’s gorgeous landscapes.
BEST SHOPPING New Zealand may have cancelled its Fashion Week, but you can still admire and support the creative industry and designers through your phone. Treat yourself to some online shopping at Lonely, a New Zealand-based house that specialises in lingerie and swimwear (lonelylabel.com). Then head to Karen Walker, Trelise Cooper, and Emilia Wickstead (a favourite of Kate Middleton) for winter wardrobe staples and accessories.
lonelylabel.com, karenwalker.com, trelisecooperonline.com, emiliawickstead.com
BEST MOVIES So that trip to Middle-earth you’ve dreamed of is on hold? Not to worry. Dim the lights, sanitise those hands, make some popcorn and head to Hobbiton. See Peter Jackson’s iconic movie set with a YouTube tour. After that, top up the popcorn and start screening all Hobbit and Lord of the Rings films, from start to finish. That has got to make a decent dent into self-isolation time. Need more drama? Heavenly Creatures, The Piano and Whale Rider never fail to satisfy.
GET TRAVEL FIT Until border restriction rules are removed, start preparing for that six-day trek of Stewart Island in advance. Consider the Wim Hof method, a fascinating online course designed to teach your body to adapt to extreme temperatures through breathing techniques and cold showers. Not only does it make it easier to endure those icy-cold lake baths, but it also lowers stress levels, and builds up your immunity. With the outbreak of COVID-19, there hasn’t been a better time to get on the bandwagon.
Also, you could practise tent-building skills setting up camp in the back yard. Grab a sleeping bag and snacks, and become one with nature until you can do the real thing.
wimhofmethod.comWant a holiday at home? Follow the directions at escape.com.au/armchairtraveller
CREDIT: Sammy Stewart
Word count: 900
