JURIES could be taken to the scene of alleged crimes without leaving the courtroom thanks to virtual reality technology being developed in Adelaide.
UniSA is investigating whether jurors can better understand complicated forensic evidence by experiencing it through VR headsets.
Lead researcher and PhD candidate Carolin Reichherzer said police already generated 3D crime scene recreations for cases including the 2014 Lindt Cafe terror attack. However, those recreations – made using photos, videos and laser scanning – were only for investigators. “This is the next step in what law enforcement is already doing – it takes things one step further so regular people will be able to see, more easily, what actually happened,” Ms Reichherzer said.
“That’s something we can do very easily with virtual reality because it’s very immersive and makes you feel as if you are at the crime scene.” Currently, jurors are taken on tours – called “views” – of crime scenes during trials.
Those views are expensive, sometimes require travel to remote locations and occur months or even years after an alleged offence.
The UniSA study, supervised by Professor Bruce Thomas, is being conducted in conjunction with police, forensic and legal experts, and supported by the Data to Decisions CRC. In its first phase, volunteers were virtually walked through three different “crime scenes” with markers indicating the location of key “evidence”.
Volunteers reported feeling less overwhelmed and frustrated by complicated evidence as they were more “physically present” in the case.
Ms Reichherzer said VR could provide more reliable data than photos, videos or sketches but could not yet compare to a real-life view.
She said the study would try to address that issue in its next phase. Phase two would incorporate high-level forensic matters like blood-splatter patterns and bullet trajectories.
“Sometimes the question is not ‘whodunit?’ but what was their intent,” she said. “A person might claim they fired a warning shot but it might be that they were actually trying to kill a person.
“We’re hoping jurors will be able to better understand where the bullet went and that will help them make sense of which (version) is more likely.”To volunteer for the study, email carolin.reichherzer@unisa.edu.au
CREDIT: SEAN FEWSTER CHIEF COURT REPORTER
Word count: 367
