YOU can almost feel the heat, smell the smoke and taste the fear. Almost. This is no Hollywood blockbuster or action-packed video game, it's a “zero budget” virtual reality fire safety experiment, designed to test your nerve and knowledge as an inferno fast approaches.
Step outside your home and see if you can find the 10 items that most require your attention in a three-minute period; go back inside and find more within two minutes and finally, locate the best place to shelter as the firefront passes.
I quickly realised I was poorly prepared to face an emergency. Despite having grown up in the Adelaide Hills, lived through Ash Wednesday, and housed my parents after they fled the Sampson Flat fire.
My five-minute bushfire survival plan is to leave early.
But I've only ever left once, at the insistence of the CFS, when a fire was threatening homes in my area. I don't go every time there's bushfire weather. One of the main things I learnt from the virtual reality experience is that even if you have a plan, you need a back-up plan, in case circumstances change.
The virtual reality headsets – designed by UniSA with the Country Fire Service – can help inexperienced residents appreciate the need to prepare a bushfire survival plan and put that plan into action before it’s too late.
Associate Professor Delene Weber said the 15-minute scenario went through the types of decisions that need to be made as a fire approaches.
“People said it was very useful because they could experience what a fire was like,” she said. Authorities say people should either leave early or they should stay and defend their property, meaning defend actively right away.
Sometimes the situation changes so rapidly that you miss the opportunity to leave early or you simply can't get out. There’s a daunting list of things to do and barely time to do it all. And in the real word you don't have a steady guiding hand of the CFS voiceover talking you through it and giving you hints. Or Prof Weber looking on, as I did.
Then, another notch, when the CFS message showed the fire was headed right for us.
But much more so when the phone and internet service went down and there were no batteries for the radio. Suddenly I had to face it all alone.
Of course the smoke alarm would go off, yet I felt surprised and hassled by the constant noise when I needed to concentrate.
Everything was happening too quickly. And then it was dark. And smoky. The 400 people who tried the VR experience were followed up three months later. PhD student Safa Molan was disappointed when only 24 per cent of people who didn't have a plan, now had one. But that simple act may save those families from trauma in the future.I know what I'm doing this weekend.
CREDIT: CLARE PEDDIE SCIENCE REPORTER
Word count: 490
