WITH the click of a button and the passing of a tear, they travelled 75 years through time to a place each called Hell.
Ahead of Remembrance Day tomorrow, two of the dwindling number who survived years of horror as prisoners of the Japanese in World War II used virtual reality to revisit the darkest chapters of our nation’s wartime story.
Death Railway survivor James Kerr and Billy Young, the last man alive to have been at notorious Sandakan prison camp, were testing the two new Anzac360 films, launched today.
The films take viewers deep inside the stories of Hellfire Pass in Thailand and the Sandakan Death March in Borneo, episodes that saw thousands of Australians and other prisoners starved, brutalised and murdered by their Japanese captors.
Going back meant confronting emotional personal memories but both men urged other Australians to discover the truth of these extraordinary events, which often get overshadowed by more familiar Anzac history.
“Everybody should see it so they know what actually happened,” said Mr Kerr, a former artilleryman. “If we don’t tell people now, these things will be lost to future generations and these things should never be forgotten.” Prime Minister Scott Morrison said the Anzac360 app, which is free and easily viewed on phones, tablets or headsets, was a cutting-edge educational tool, as virtual reality and 360-degree films were increasingly used in schools.
“The story of Australian soldiers and their suffering in the Sandakan Death March and at Hellfire Pass are among the worst military atrocities in our nation’s history but among the least well-known,” said Mr Morrison, who has trekked the rugged route of the march.
“For younger generations, the sacrifices of Australia’s fallen soldiers can be difficult to understand and visualise.
“By embracing new technologies such as VR, we can now bring that history to life literally right in front of our eyes.” Mr Young and Mr Kerr were both teenagers, having lied about their ages to enlist.
Mr Kerr turned 17 while lost behind enemy lines after Singapore fell in 1942. He was captured and thrown into the Thai-Burma Railway’s army of forced labourers.
About 100,000 civilians and captive soldiers died building the Japanese railroad, leading to the phrase “a life for every sleeper”.
For Australians, the suffering and brutality became epitomised by one place: Hellfire Pass.
“There are still a lot of people that just don’t realise or have no knowledge of what went on with the Japanese,” Mr Kerr said.
“People say ‘do I hate the Japanese?’ I don’t use the word ‘hate’ … (but) I’ll never ever forgive the Japanese for what they did and I’ll never forget as long as I’m alive.” For Mr Young, a long-term Sydneysider who now lives in Tasmania, the Anzac360 film brought emotional memories of long-dead friends.
“Just the sight of it, the beauty gets you,” he said.
“It’s so green, with all the trees and the palms.“But … men died underneath those palms, right along the line.”
CREDIT: JUSTIN LEES; BRAD PETERSEN
Word count: 502
