Renewable energy will be a major focus at the upcoming Irrigation Australia International Conference and Exhibition as electricity prices soar.
The conference, to be held in Adelaide October 5-7, will bring together farmers and industry experts to talk all thing irrigation - including ways to reduce costs through solar, batteries, microgrids and agrivoltaics.
According to the National Irrigator's Council, 93 percent of fruit, nuts and grapes, 83 percent of vegetables, 48 percent of dairy products and 100 percent of rice is produced by irrigated agriculture.
A session on future tech will Queensland University of Technology association professor Neil Thompson talk through the hydrogen economy and how farmers could be well placed to take advantage of these new technologies.
"Recent increases in gas prices on the East Coast of Australia have seen deteriorating margins in the ag sector," he said.
"At the same time, volatility in diesel pricing has seen similar pressure on farms using diesel for vehicles and irrigation pumps.
"Accordingly, green hydrogen made from spare renewable energy and wastewater potentially offers some hope."
RELATED READING:
Skyrocketing input costs eat into margins Battery plan to help Riverland irrigators SA irrigator James Stacey, Strathalbyn, has introduced solar to reduce his pumping costs.
He had expensive power bills of $500 or $6000 a month before installing solar, which have been substantially reduced.
"We're able to export to the grid so that helps generate a small income during the winter months when we don't irrigate much," he said.
"The rough pay back for our solar, was about three years so it stacks up economically for our business.
"It has changed the way we irrigate too as we used to only irrigate in off-peak times, but now we can irrigate when it's best for the crops and for us."
Anne Dansey, AgVic, will be speaking about the combining of solar and farming on the same parcel of land.
AgVic have installed a number of solar panels above a pear orchard to test the impact on the trees, with early results indicating reduced fruit damage by sunburn and improved water use efficiency.
Entry is included with a conference registration which can be bought at icid2022.com.au
CREDIT:
Word count: 361
