The 2020 uneARTh Festival Poster Competition is still open for entries until 5pm on Monday, November 11.
The UneARTh Festival is inviting creatives, artists and graphic designers off all ages and experience from Whyalla to submit their ideas for the 2020 UneARTh Festival poster.
In 2019 the UneARTh team initiated this competition to develop a distinctive brand for Whyalla.
The festival continues to maintain its close ties to the Adelaide Fringe but relished having its own iconic look and so they are again on the hunt for a vivid and exciting image to encapsulate their amazing arts festival.
They're looking for a design that aligns with their values - something that explores their major theme for the 2020 festival - GET CONNECTED.
In 2020 they are emphasising the way that arts connect us; connecting venues and artists, locals and those from elsewhere, new acts and old favourites and with their new date connecting with some of those locals that 'always go camping at Easter' to enjoy the many artistic delights the city will host during UneARTh 2020 on the March 20 weekend.
The producer of the design chosen to represent UneARTh 2020 will receive $500 cash for the use of their image.
SUBMITTING YOUR DESIGN To enter, complete the application form and send with a digital copy of your entry to unearthfestival@whyalla.sa.gov.au or mail your entry to uneARTh Festival Poster Competition, PO Box 126, Whyalla, SA 5600 or deliver in an envelope marked uneARTh Poster Competition to the Whyalla City Council front desk, Darling Terrace, Whyalla.
Your original design may incorporate a range of materials and mediums, but your final entry must be a two-dimensional representation of these ideas.
The winning entry must be able to be made into a layered Photoshop or InDesign version minimum resolution or a scalable vector/EPS file. Please keep this in mind when creating your submission.
Any questions can be directed to unearthfestival@whyalla.sa.gov.au
The uneARTh Festival logo will be added to the winner's artwork, however, if you wish to see how the logo will be incorporated into your design it is available by downloading the image online at https://www.whyalla.com/sites/whyalla/media/images/unearth2020.png
Remember, applications close at 5pm ACST, Monday, November 11, 2019.
Word count: 364
