VITAL STATISTICS If you’ve ever wanted to soar more than half a kilometre into the air at lightning speed without breaking a sweat, Burj Khalifa is your kind of attraction. The world’s tallest building towers a staggering 828m above Downtown Dubai in a mind-blowing display of Emeriti Middle Eastern engineering might.
The 160-storey skyscraper opened in 2010 after a six-year build and features two observation decks, four pools and a mix of office, residential and hotel space. The architect was inspired by the desert spider lily, but the tower’s tapered three-winged design looks more like an urban pyramid.
BRAGOMETER The Burj is the tallest man-made structure on Earth.
FUN FACT About 39,000 tonnes of steel and 330,000 cubic metres of concrete were used in the building’s construction, with 12,000 workers on site at any given time.
BEST TIME TO VISIT Go in winter (October to March) when it’s cooler and there’s less chance of heat haze and sandstorms but it’s the peak season so brace for big crowds. If you don’t mind getting out and about in 40C-plus heat, summer is much quieter and accommodation is cheaper.
EASY DOES IT If you thought you were going all the way to the top, sorry to disappoint. The main observation area is on levels 124 and 125. Rocket up the elevator at 10m-a-second and step out onto the outdoor terrace for 360-degree views. Check out the super-powerful telescopes with big digital screens, then try the virtual reality experience (an extra cost).
Entry will set you back AED141 (about $54) for adults and AED106 for kids aged four to 12. It costs more for fast-track entry and visits during peak times, 3pm to 6.30pm. Book tickets and your timeslot online (tickets.atthetop.ae). The Burj is open 5.30am to midnight Sunday to Wednesday, and 8.30am to midnight Thursday to Saturday.
SPLASH MORE CASH Upgrade yourself to a SKY pass and enjoy views from the world’s highest observation deck at level 148 – a lofty 555m above the ground. The pass gets you a personalised tour with a guest ambassador, refreshment at SKY lounge, an interactive motion-sensor experience and access to levels 124 and 125. Entry is AED370 for adults and children, more during the peak times.
For a shindig fit for a sheik, get yourself to The Lounge on levels 152 to 154. For AED600-plus you can enjoy afternoon tea, sundowners or cocktails under the stars during one of five allocated timeslots. The price includes sweet treats or canapes as well as a terrace tour.
EXPERT HACK You can’t leave Dubai without visiting the Burj, which can be seen from 95km away, says the attraction’s senior marketing manager Kiran Kor. “Something that you must do while you’re here is try our new virtual reality experience, Mission 828. You’ll get to parachute down the Burj Khalifa to the Dubai Fountain in four minutes flat. It’s exhilarating to say the least!”
SELFIE MOMENT Perched on the world’s highest public windowsill with Dubai sprawling like a Meccano city beneath you.
COMFORT ZONE This is the United Arab Emirates, so prepare for a little culture shock. That said, Dubai is a modern, clean, glitzy metropolis and visiting the Burj is safe and easy.
GET ME THERE Emirates flies direct to Dubai from Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth. A night or two in the UAE is the perfect stopover en route to Europe.
SEE NEXTThere are no prizes for runner-up but if you want to see the building that previously held the mantle of the world’s tallest, visit China’s Shanghai Tower (632m).
CREDIT: CATHERINE BEST
Word count: 597
