The state-wide launch of this year's South Australian Living Artists Festival (SALA) Festival is set to take place next week, and islanders will be able to tune in to the first ever streamed event on Friday, July 31 at around 4.15pm.
Sixteen artists from Kangaroo Island have registered an exhibition "KI: A Curious Time" and are excited to have provided digital footage which is expected to be aired when the Premier of South Australia opens the Festival via Channel 44 and on SALA's Facebook page.
SALA is committed to the vision of creating and sustaining an environment in which South Australian visual artists are supported, valued, and celebrated.
This year's Festival will run from August 1-31 with the SALA program in digital form only via the SALA website and app.
Artists of all skill levels are encouraged to exhibit in new and unique ways to reflect the current climate of restricted movement for all South Australians. Registrations will remain open throughout August and artists can continue to register until the last day of the Festival.
"In these changing and challenging times connection to our community is so important and so we encourage everyone to tap into their creativity to find inspiration to navigate the current situation," CEO of SALA Kate Moskwa said.
"While we do not know what restrictions will be in place in August, we are excited by the opportunity to present SALA in new and innovative ways in 2020.
"Whether you are creating digital content or work that can be accessed while observing physical distancing protocols we want artists to feel emboldened to try something new.
This is a time to experiment with your arts practice and take creative risks. The world is looking to engage in different ways and art plays a critical role in how we connect with one another. There are no limitations on creativity and imagination."
Audiences will be able to attend physical events such as the exhibition KI: A Curious Time at Fine Art Kangaroo Island, but also access a range of online exhibitions, virtual studio tours, artist talks, DIY workshops and collaborative offerings.
For more information, visit salafestival.com
Word count: 356
