Stargazers can join a virtual reality party with astronomers Upper Lachlan Shire stargazers can join in a virtual reality tour of the universe for National Science Week.
This August, astronomers Professor Alan Duffy and Doctor Rebecca Allen will guide participants through the universe using virtual reality app, SciVR.
Professor Duffy said, "[The event is like] having access to a personal guide to the universe as you fly past planets, collide with black holes and [you] get to ask questions along the way."
Two events, hosted by the ARC Centre of Excellence in Gravitational Wave Discovery, will be live-streamed during August. A tour for adults will be held on August 21 at 7.45pm and a kid-friendly tour will be held on August 22 at 11.15am.
Free mini virtual reality headsets can be collected at the Crookwell or Gunning Libraries. The free app can be downloaded from scivr.com.au.
The presentation may still be live-streamed without a smartphone.
Virtual reality agriculture transforms the AAC Step into a world of virtual agriculture with a digital program offered by the Australian Agricultural Centre for National Science Week.
This year, National Science Week, which runs from August 15-23, is a little different and virtual reality and webcasts are making events COVID-19 safe. The Australian Agricultural Centre (AAC) is no different. Jo Marshall, project manager, and Think Digital, a virtual and augmented reality production studio, created an online virtual experience for participants.
The program can be downloaded from the AAC website and used to explore the world of agriculture.
"This week was meant to be a two-day hands-on experience at the AAC," Ms Marshall said.
"In times like this, we can still have that experience."
An avatar is created and used to explore a virtual world, which includes interactive agriculture exhibitions, videos, and quests to complete.
Ms Marshall added, "I will never walk away from what I believe the AAC will be, the touch, feel and smell of an agriculture existence... Its immersive education and we can continue to update it.
"I aim that our online presence will only be our virtual reality world."
In the future, the virtual reality world will be accessible to school children who cannot reach the site or for others to complete pre- and post-visit study, she said.
"Immersive education is where we are heading," Ms Marshall said.
The AAC is working with the University of South Australia and the University of Technology Sydney to assess the educational sites accessibility, and interaction of immersive technology.
For more information or to download the program visit australianagriculturalcentre.com/stemconnect2020.
Farming and climate change on the Sydney Science Trail Third-generation Crookwell farmer and deputy-chair of Farmers for Climate Action Charlie Prell features in a new exhibition at the renovated Australian Museum in Sydney.
Mr Prell is among four Australians to share their stories of climate change. His display is about renewable energy, farming, and climate change. The display can be visited online during National Science Week, and until September 15 at the Australian Museum website.
"We have to acknowledge climate change and to acknowledge the seriousness of the threat of climate change, and, only then we are in a position to move on opportunities," Mr Prell said.
These opportunities include renewables, like wind and solar, and regenerative agriculture, he said.
"Wind turbines and solar panels are totally compatible with agriculture."
Mr Prell's farm in the Southern Tablelands is host to Crookwell 2 wind farm: "I ran this farm for nearly two years while they were building this wind farm, now its operating you don't even know its there."
The installation also features Doctor Kim Loo, a Western Sydney General Practitioner and member of Doctors for the Environment of Australia. Dr Loo talks about the impacts of burning fossil fuels and climate change on health. She donated her paediatric stethoscope for the display.
"She has seen the increased effects of pollution and heat on young people, the most vulnerable are the young and old," Dr Jenny Newell, manager of climate change projects at the Australian Museum said.
Also on exhibit is the mask and snorkel of Dr Anne Hoggett, a marine biologist in charge of the Australian Museum Lizard Island Research Station, and the work of urban tree carer, Phillip Julien, senior tree contract coordinator for the City of Sydney.
The Sydney Science Trail, Climate Change exhibit also features videos with Mr Prell alongside scientists and youth activists.
The physical installation will open in late October when the Museum reopens.
CREDIT: Clare McCabe
Word count: 745
