CuttleFest 2019 is set to explode in a blaze of colour and activity with a program to match the magnificent giant cuttlefish that come to Whyalla's waters every year.
Whyalla's annual festival of the cuttlefish continues to grow in popularity. This is reflected in the program with a host of new initiatives to help us experience, enjoy and protect these amazing creatures.
CuttleFest 2019 is three months of snorkel adventures, activities, information sessions, displays and a celebration of everything cuttlefish and Whyalla.
The South Australian Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment, David Ridgway and Mayor McLaughlin will be on hand for the CuttleFest 2019 Opening Ceremony on Saturday, June 1 at the foreshore.
The City of Whyalla has been working with Experiencing Marine Sanctuaries (EMS), Natural Resources Eyre Peninsula (NREP), Department for Environment and Water (DEW) Marine Parks, South Australia Tourism Commission (SATC), local dive operators and the community to present CuttleFest between June and August.
Mayor Clare McLaughlin said CuttleFest 2019 was a great example of Council working with various stakeholders, including the community, to produce an event that is putting Whyalla on the map, creating a sense of pride for city and helping protect the giant cuttlefish.
"It has been amazing see CuttleFest grow so quickly to the point it is now a significant eco tourism event recognised throughout Australia and the world," Mayor McLaughlin said.
"Our Council officers have done a wonderful job working with the likes of EMS, NREP, DEW and SATC to develop this festival with such an extensive and exciting program of events.
"It has become an event that will continue to attract more people to our city and that is good for everyone."
Follow Cuttlefest at www.whyalla.com and on the Whyalla Tourism Facebook site or contact the Whyalla Visitor Information Centre for more information 1800 088 589.
Full Program
CUTTLEFEST OPENING CEREMONY
It's the first ever Opening Ceremony with a FREE family fun event. Watch the Giant Cuttlefish kite take flight, make your own cuttlefish kite in the kids corner, use the interactive touch table displays featuring VR goggles, grab some dive and snorkel information, enjoy some coffee & donuts and dive into the activities for the kids including a jumping castle and giant games. Community radio station Triple Y will also be there to broadcast live.
WHEN: Saturday, June 1 from 11am - 2pm
WHERE: Whyalla foreshore.
CONTACT: Teresa Coles, 8645 7900
GUIDED COMMUNITY AND SCHOOL SNORKELS
A popular safe and supervised event that give your whole family the opportunity to experience the natural colour show of the Australian giant cuttlefish and witness this special breeding part of their life-cycle while swimming literally metres away from them. Hot food and drinks are available for purchase on site (bring your keep cup). Thee's new shelter, seating and toilet facilities funded by the State Government, EPNRM Board, Whyalla City Council and Port Bonython Fuels. All equipment (wetsuits, fins, snorkel and mask) and experienced snorkeling guide included. These snorkels are Hosted by Experiencing Marine Sanctuaries (EMS) and supported by the City of Whyalla, Natural Resources Eyre Peninsula, Department of Environment and Water Marine Parks and the South Australian Tourism Commission (SATC).
WHEN: Community Guided Snorkels June 29-30 and July 7-9. VIP Snorkel Tours June 24-27
WHERE: Stony Point
CONTACT: Book tickets at https://www.emsau.org/
SNORKEL OR DIVE ANY TIME
Suit up and dive in. Join a small group or go out with a buddy at any time throughout the season. Experience this spectacular annual event, only 30 minutes from Whyalla, easy access into the water with the amazing cuttlefish seen about 4 meters from the shoreline.
WHEN: June, July and August
WHERE: Stony Point, Pt Lowly
CONTACT: Bring your own gear or hire and book through Whyalla Dive Shop (08) 8645 8050, 33 Playford Avenue.
MAPS & INFORMATION: Whyalla Visitor Centre 8645 7900
VIRTUAL REALITY 3D GOGGLE EXPERIENCE
Get totally immersed! Put on the VR goggles at the Whyalla Visitor Centre, or the Opening Ceremony, and experience what it is like to swim with Whyalla's Giant Australian cuttlefish. You won't even get your feet wet!
WHEN: June, July and August
WHERE: Whyalla Visitor Centre, Lincoln Highway, 10am - 4pm every day
CONTACT: 8645 7900
CUTTLEFEST CITIZEN SCIENCE AND SCHOOL ACTIVITIES
CuttleFest celebrates the amazing marine life in our oceans and provides a great opportunity for schools, community groups and citizens to learn more about our local coast and marine environment and to get involved in on-ground conservation projects. There are lots of ideas and students learn how Cuttlefest 2019 provides us with an opportunity to find out more about the environment that we live in.
WHEN: Throughout June, July and August
WHERE: Participating schools and community organisations.
CONTACT: Barb Murphy, 0427 188 546
SECRETS OF THE SEA DISPLAY
The Secrets of the Sea Display allows you to discover Whyalla's unique marine life without getting wet. The display includes a touch table with skulls and shells, a microscope to get a closer look at things like sand and coral, discovery sand pits for the little ones as well as information about local marine life such as cuttlefish, samphire and dolphins.School groups welcome. Children visiting outside of school hours can bring their Children's University passbook to be stamped.
WHEN: June 20 to July 21
WHERE: Whyalla Public Library, Ekblom Street, Whyalla Norrie.
CONTACT: (08) 8645 7891
CURIOUS CUTTLES - SCIENCE IN THE PUB NIGHTS
Book in for dinner and enjoy a night to share the wonder and curiosity of the incredible Giant Australian Cuttlefish, Sepia apama of Whyalla, with resident experts, researchers and artists. Audience questions welcome. Children are also welcome with a 'Kids Korner' set up with colouring in competition, virtual reality goggles and games.
WHEN: Saturday June 29 and Saturday July 6
WHERE: Eyre Hotel, 39 Playford Avenue
CONTACT: 8644 4800 for bookings
CUTTLEFISH CAPERS SCHOOL HOLIDAY ACTIVITIES
Cuttlefish Capers is on every day of the school holidays 10am - 4pm, including weekends. With free entry for Children in family groups. Cuttlefish Capers is a fun fact-hunting game where participants can take the challenge and take home a certificate and activity pack. Take a tour of the HMAS Whyalla ship at 11.30am or 1.30, and enjoy a picnic lunch in the gardens while you are there. Don't forget to bring your Children's University passbook to be stamped.
WHEN: July 6 to July 21 10am-4pm
WHERE: Whyalla Visitor Centre & Maritime Museum, Lincoln Highway
CONTACT: (08) 8645 7900
CUTTLEFISH ART PRIZE AND EXHIBITION
The CuttleFest Art Prize is open to create a cuttlefish or other local marine based artwork to be displayed at the Middleback Arts Centre Foyer June 17 to July 22.The winning entry as voted by the public will receive two double snorkel passes provided by EMS. Entry forms must be received by 5pm, Friday June 8, 2019.
WHEN: June 17 to July 22
WHERE: Middleback Arts Centre, Nicolson Avenue, Whyalla Norrie
CONTACT: (08) 8644 7300
ENTRY FORM: https://www.whyalla.com/sites/whyalla/media/images/cuttlefest-art-prize---final.pdf
CUTTLEFISH ART TRAIL
There is a host of cuttlefish artworks surfacing in Whyalla. Here's your chance to grab a map and hit the trail around Whyalla to see some of the great public artworks of our great cuttlefish.
WHEN: June, July and August
WHERE: Various locations.
CONTACT: Deb Hughes 8640 3444.
MAPS & INFORMATION: Whyalla Visitor Centre 8645 7900
CUTTLEFEST QUIZ NIGHT
Test your general, sporting, musical and movie knowledge and learn a thing or two about cuttlefish. Tables of 10 preferred, bookings essential, $10 per person. Bring a plate of supper to share with your table. Fundraiser for the Bay-View Sporting and Social Club Annual Christmas Party, hosting the Whyalla Special Education Students and their carers.
WHEN: Saturday, August 10, 6.30pm
WHERE: Whyalla Left Hand Club, 12 Dick Street Whyalla
CONTACT: Wes 0408 891 753
CUTTLE-ROCK CHAMELEON ROCK GAME
Play hide and seek on land with these chameleons of the Sea. 1. Find a park 2. Find a Cuttle-Rock and share it with SA Rocks and Whyalla Tourism FB pages. 3. Hide them again for someone else to find. See how many different Cuttle-Rocks you can find!
WHEN: June, July and August
WHERE: Parks and playgrounds throughout Whyalla
CONTACT: Whyalla Visitor Centre 8645 7900
UNIQUE CUTTLEFISH PUBLIC TALK
Find out about the unique and spectacular Australian Giant Cuttlefish. Why do they come to Whyalla? What is so special about them? Do they really have 3 hearts? What is the history behind the cuttlefish? This even is available for community groups, aged care homes and can be tailored to suit local school groups of all ages.
WHEN: Wednesday, July 24 at 11am
WHERE: Council Chambers, Darling Tce
CONTACT: Paul Mazourek 8640 3444
TANDERRA CRAFT MARKETS - UNDER THE SEA
Markets, resident craft and hobby groups, machine knitters, spinners and weavers, quilters, native nursery, Whyalla Woodies, The Steelcap Gallery. Entertainment: Under the Sea kids colouring and craft corner, Cascade R/C Cars, Mini golf, Giant chess, Quoits and model railway,
WHEN: June 29 & 30, 10am - 4pm and July 27 & 28, 10am - 4pm
WHERE: Lincoln Highway, Port Augusta Road (100m from the Ship)
CREDIT: Louis Mayfield
Word count: 1511
