Thursday Barossa Vintage Festival Celebrating the community, heritage, arts and food and wine that the region is known for. Various venues, days and times. Until Sunday, April 28. Free and ticketed events. Details: barossavintage festival.com.au Friday Adelaide Busking and Food Truck Festival The inaugural Adelaide Busking Festival will be a huge weekend of music, food and family, featuring pony rides, games and more than 50 performers. Light Square, city, 5pm-9pm. Also on Saturday, April 27 and Sunday, April 28, noon-9pm. Free. Details: cityofadelaide.com.au Saturday Festival of Flowers The annual Festival of Flowers is set to transform St Paul’s College into a colourful display of the state’s best flowers. Geraniums, cactuses, orchids and even carnivorous plants will be among the huge variety of flowers on display and up for sale. There will also be drinks and a sausage sizzle for purchase and a giant raffle. St Paul’s College, 792 Grand Junction Rd, Gilles Plains, 10am-3pm. Also Sunday, April 28. Tickets $3. Details: Search “Festival of Flowers — Adelaide” on Facebook Time Warp Northern Sound System will be transformed into any gamer’s dream in this gaming extravaganza. From retro arcade games and virtual reality to card and board games, there is something for gamers of any age. There will also be prizes for best cosplay and a Mario Kart and Smash Brothers tournament on the big screen. Northern Sound System, 73 Elizabeth Way, Elizabeth, 3pm- 7pm. Suitable for ages nine and over. Free. Details: playford.sa.gov.au
Dirty Weekend Tackle South Australia’s only 24 hour mountain challenge, with six hour, 12 hour, 24 hour and three hour E-MTB options. Cudlee Creek Forest, 392 Croft Rd, Lenswood, various times until Sunday, April 28. Tickets: $45-$125. Details: bikesa.asn.au/dirty weekend
Especially on Birthdays Part performance, part game, part celebration, this tells the tale of a pair of twins and a sixth birthday one of them doesn’t want to have. The story unfolds in an intimate setting and you can’t help but be caught up in the lyrical imagery, evocative light and sounds. Adelaide Festival Centre, Space Theatre, King William Rd, city, various times. Tickets: adult $25, concession $20. Details: bass.net.au Sunday Spud Fest Come and celebrate all things potato at the Tea Tree Gully Heritage Museum Spud Fest. With all types of potato snacks alongside live music, potato games, potato craft and a treasure mart there is something for any fan of the popular vegetable. Tea Tree Gully Heritage Museum, 3 Perseverance Rd, Tea Tree Gully, 11am-4pm. Tickets: adult $5, concession $4, children free. Details: nationaltrust.org.au Wednesday Projected History Tour: The Hope Valley Cemetery This walking tour will give those who dare to venture into the Hope Valley Cemetery after dark a first hand look into local history. A guide will use a state-of-the-art handheld projector to bring stories of the township’s history to life. Hope Valley Cemetery, Grand Junction Rd, Hope Valley, 7.30pm. Free. Suitable for ages 12 and over. Details: teatreegully.sa.gov.au Bookings may be required for events. Please check all details before attending.
Word count: 499
