Aunty Kiwa, aka Mereana Mokikiwa Hutchen, has spent a lifetime giving to her community. This is her remarkable story. Vicki Anderson reports.
An icy frost is still hard upon the ground but inside the humble suburban Christchurch home lies an incredible warmth. Here a living taonga sits in a chair, a thick woollen blanket stretched across her knees, cheeky grin tugging at her lips.
At 86, Mereana Mokikiwa Hutchen, known as Aunty Kiwa, has a regal presence befitting her noble ariki status.
A member of the Kahui Kaumatua of Te Runaka ki Otautahi o Kai Tahu for the past 20 years, she is a descendant of Kai Tuahuriri and kaumatua of the whole Canterbury area.
Her dark eyes are like polished stones. They flash up and down your face scanning more thoroughly than an X-ray machine.
We meet not long before Matariki, the new year. She waves a bird-like hand towards unseen stars: "Sit there my girl, I'm going to take you back to the start."
Paikea, the "whale rider", was the great ancestor of the East Coast tribes but some ancient descent lines of the tribe Te Whanau-a-Apanui also come down from Motatau-mai-Taiwhiti, an ancestor who came to Cape Runaway on his canoe, Tauira, not long after the Great Migration.
Aunty Kiwa's father knew of this.
After a lightning strike, Eruera Kawhia Whakatane Stirling was born at 3am on March 30, 1899 underneath a big karaka tree planted by his great- grandpeople.
The son of Te Whanau- a-Apanui leader Mihi Kotukutuku, Eruera was chosen as a toddler to learn the ancient knowledge and complex whakapapa of the region from elders.
As a 2-year-old, Eruera went to live with elders Pera Te Kaongahau and Hiria Te Rangihaeta in a toitoi hut.
"Before he was born, the elders knew he was arriving. He was raised by tranga in the deepest forest, until he was 7," explains his granddaughter, Amiria Coe. "He was taught ancient karakia based around the pureness of that environment."
Eruera could "talk to birds".
As a young boy, at a sacred pool near the Wairuru marae, he dived for "sacred stones". As he dove, Pera did karakia - Maori incantations and prayers, used to invoke spiritual guidance and protection - to the moon, stars and water so Eruera could take on the mana of carrying history and would carry it all of his days.
When he was 7, he returned to live with his parents.
"Whenever he bathed, there was a karakia done by these two old people and it was very spiritual," says Coe. "But when he returned home at 7, he was horrified that they were filling this bath for him without a karakia."
In 1907 Eruera started school but he preferred to be outside, talking to seagulls and sparrows in Maori and was "given a hiding" for speaking the language.
"When he was older people would come to him from all around the country to find out who their tribe was linked to. He could whakapapa all the canoes and the ancestors."
"That was my daddy," says Aunty Kiwa wistfully.
DANCING QUEEN
Aunty Kiwa likes to keep busy.
She's 86 now but it's hard to catch her at home. The day before she'd been at the local marae bopping her head to ukulele music. Dancing moves her spirit.
"Just because you're old you don't have to be boring."
Waggling her index finger in the air, she says she grew up in an era where "everywhere you went" there was dancing.
"Today it's so boring," she sighs. "Teenagers don't know how to dance."
Her body has aged but she is still looking for a way to move to her favourite tunes from 50s era rock 'n' roll.
A nephew is working on customising a virtual reality headset so a dancefloor is never far from her mind.
"I'm already on the YouTube," she says. "With my virtual reality I can be having a party in my head."
Her daughter, Amiria Coe, named after her feisty grandmother, nods: "We just want to keep her moving."
Aunty Kiwa was born on February 16, 1933 in the small settlement of Raukokore on the East Coast of the North Island.
"Mereana is Maryann, I was born in the Bay of Plenty."
Smacking her lips together, she moves her hands like fish through the air between us. Moki have greyish-blue bodies with dark bands across their backs and silvery whites on their belly and sides.
"Moki is a beautiful fish for eating. I was born when the Moki fish were running out from sea, our people were like that, but I am Scottish as well, I'm a Stirling."
Through her grandfather, Aunty Kiwa was descended from Scottish whaler William Stirling.
"Whanau up in the east coast decided my father and mother would have an arranged marriage, taumau. I was the result of that," she says.
"We were a farming family. We learned to grow everything in the garden, milked the cows by hand, no machines in those days. You made your own butter and grew all your own vegetables."
With a confessional chuckle she recalls a novel way she kept warm as a young girl: "We'd warm our feet in cow pats on cold mornings."
CHRISTCHURCH BOUND
At 14, Aunty Kiwa was sent down to Christchurch to look after her brother's children.
More than 70 years later, she still seems disgruntled about it but admits Christchurch has been good to her.
"I was sent down here to be a slave for my brother."
She deepens her voice: "'You go down there and look after the four children'. Those were the rules in those days. I thought 'oh my God'... sent to the South Island to help my blimmin' brother."
That brother, Dr Ropata Wahawaha Stirling, QSM, was known as Waha.
He was the upoko rnaka ki Otautahi, the Maori spokesman for Christchurch, for many years.
Active in welfare work with local Maori, he was welfare officer of the 28th Maori Battalion, with which he served in World War II. He was also the chairman of the battalion's Christchurch branch.
A Bible and a "lucky penny" saved Waha's life at the Battle of Monte Cassino.
He was just 16 but altered his age to enlist. As he headed off to war in 1943, his dad, Eruera, gave him a Bible with a copper penny hidden inside.
That Bible and penny stopped a five- inch piece of shrapnel when Waha was shot in the chest while on sentry duty.
The co-ordinator and kaumtua of Matua Whangai for Te Waipounamu, Waha was a member of the Otautahi Tribal Committee, and headed the Otautahi Rnaka of Kai Tahu from the late 1950s.
In 1992 he was awarded a Queen's Service Medal (QSM) for public service.
"Mum was awarded a QSM that year too," explains Amiria Coe. "But she turned it down then because her brother was getting one and she didn't want to take anything away from him."
It wasn't until 2008 that Aunty Kiwa finally accepted a QSM for services to Maori, women, and the community.
"I'm from a big family. All of them became teachers, all of my sisters and brothers."
When she was 21, she met Peter Hutchen, the love of her life.
"I met him at a dance... he wasn't much of a dancer but he was at all the dances," she recalls.
Amiria Coe smiles and says that when her mother first met her father she had no idea he was Samoan.
"His mother had died in childbirth and he was adopted by an aristocratic couple, a supreme court judge, Hutchen. He was raised with a silver spoon in his mouth. He could speak French, English and Samoan. His brothers would see him as he went to a private school, a little British flag flying on the front of the car."
Because, explains Coe, Peter Hutchen had a passport which, in those days were necessary to purchase alcohol, he learnt how to speak Maori in exchange for "giving alcohol to the army boys".
"He'd do that for them and they taught him some Maori words. When dad met mum he spoke to her in Maori and so she assumed he was Maori from the west coast."
Aunty Kiwa lifts her head. "I was horrified when I found out he was Samoan. I knew my mother would not accept him."
When Peter met her mother for the first time, it didn't go well.
"My mother took her shoe off and whacked him across the head," says Aunty Kiwa. "She thought his kaupapa was to come and steal the land. I bolted and left the poor bugger to it. Dad was disgusted and told her off. In the end they were the best of friends. He turned out to be a beautiful father."
Together they had seven children - Amiria, Lelosa, Tania, Vaea, Keriana, Peter and Tahu.
Aunty Kiwa and Uncle Peter were also foster parents to more than 30 children in Canterbury and looked after "probably hundreds" of other children in their home over several decades..
"Mum had seven kids of her own but spent a fair part of the late 80s and 90s collecting and looking after a lot of lost children," says Amiria Coe. "There were 30 who stayed for a while but children would come and go from here all the time."
Even today, decades later, people still knock on the front door.
"They say 'kia ora whaea, remember me?' and they've got their grandchildren with them to see mum, they're still bringing them back now. The effect mum and dad had on these young people... that love connection, feeling safe... mum and dad were caring, teaching them the basics."
When she closes her eyes, Amiria Coe can see her "lovely daddy" telling a child who'd appeared in the house that evening "you're all right, son" as he cooked dinner.
In the early 1980s, Maatua Whangai sought to help Maori children in alternative and institutional care. Driven by traditional concepts, it was about basing the care of Maori children within traditional whanaungatanga relationships.
Helen Leahy, Pouarahi, chief executive of Te Putahitanga o Te Waipounamu, says it reflected the drive to "rejuvenate from within: to take back responsibilities; to equalise the power between the parties of Te Tiriti O Waitangi, and to rewrite the relationships."
She describes Inu Farrar, the first Maori social worker in the Department of Corrections, and Aunty Kiwa as a "formidable team" in connecting and reconnecting whanau. "I first met Aunty Kiwa when I was teaching at Hagley in 1985. At that stage she was our kuia for the class. I got to know her working with a lot of kids in the whanau class who had come from challenging situations, living on the streets or in care. Aunty Kiwa had a very close relationship with them through Maatua Whangai. Later I came to appreciate the way she was one of the key people for promoting care within your kin."
When Dame Tariana Turia was associate minister for Child, Youth and Family in around 2000, Leahy, who worked for Turia, says Aunty Kiwa's advice was sought on child welfare.
"When Turia was invited to speak to a group of Aboriginal women in Adelaide, she wanted a kuia to accompany her," says Leahy.
"To protect the concept of dignity of Maori women she needed to take someone with her... She turned to Aunty Kiwa. It was a lovely time, an older woman caring for a younger woman minister, you don't see ministers giving up leadership but in a cultural context the leadership and the respect of Aunty Kiwa was what was needed."
The international encounter between indigenous leadership was "remarkable"..
Leahy describes Aunty Kiwa as "famous among Maori".
CHILD CARE
"Inu Farrar is a special person in our community," says Aunty Kiwa, sitting upright. "She started the group to take the thinking away from children being removed and taken to CYFS care because there were too many of our children being taken who were never to see their parents again."
When she talks about Farrar, she may well be describing herself: "She was the toiler who changed everything. She worked in social welfare, she worked tirelessly with families, bringing them back together."
Now known as the Oranga Tamariki Act 1989, the act provided for the care and protection of children and was the result of consultation with Maori groups.
It followed the release of a report - Puao-te-Ata-tu (new dawn) - which was a Maori perspective for the Department of Social Welfare.
Aunty Kiwa was involved in its creation.
The Puao-te-Atu-tu report found the Department of Social Welfare and Young Persons Act 1974 reinforced institutional racism which resulted in high numbers of Maori and Pasifika children entering foster care.
When the Oranga Tamariki Act came into force in 1989, it gave whanau, hapu and iwi and natural or adoptive families, preference as primary caregivers for their children.
However, when whanau were unable to provide adequate care, the focus in "stranger placements" was designed, in part, to ensure that, as much as possible, the cultural identity of the child is maintained.
"When things get hijacked by the powers that be they go wrong and look at what is happening with our children now in Oranga Tamariki care," says Aunty Kiwa, shaking her head.
"When you are talking about things that are important for children that go into care, for them it was about making sure if families aren't coping and children have to be removed, it is so important these children stay with families and tribal areas or they become distanced."
If children are disconnected from their families and remain in care, as they grow into teenagers "they don't know who they are".
"I've seen this time and time again, most of the kids I fostered were like this. Non-Maori people adopt a Maori child but when they become teenagers they become too hard work and they end up back in state care. As soon as they hit teenagers and they are back in care, they don't belong anywhere, don't identify with their culture, they go out, get into trouble and end up in jail," says Aunty Kiwa.
"They become fathers and have no idea how to parent because they were raised in care and have no connection with family. To these disconnected people, the state is their parent. If things go wrong the state will write them a cheque and pay for their course... that is the thinking now and it is not their fault they think that way."
She sits upright in her chair. Her face is animated, eyes flashing: "It's sad. Some of these people never knew who their parents were because the state never told them."
Of all the things she has achieved in her life she's most proud of helping children in care to reconnect culturally.
Whanau is often simplified to mean "family" but it holds a more complex meaning including physical, emotional and spiritual dimensions and is based on whakapapa. "Our children were constantly being removed into state care and for me that was not on."
A lot of the children Aunty Kiwa took in herself ended up working in Government departments: "They are making a big difference because they knew what it was like for them."
During the 1990s Aunty Kiwa acted as a cultural advisor to various Government departments.
"We were worried about our children in state care 20 or 30 years ago, what has changed? It's not working... it's getting worse. Drugs are a huge problem everywhere, mental health problems are sky high... it has gotten worse for our kids."
BEHIND THE WIRE
Earlier this month, Aunty Kiwa was the guest of honour at a special ceremony at Christchurch Women's Prison.
As the kuia for the prison for more than 30 years she has been helping women. She has also made a significant contribution to cultural developments within the wider Department of Corrections.
Aunty Kiwa has also provided support to initiatives in the other services. She supported the establishment of the Women's Remaining Offence Free for Community Probation clients under the Bicultural Therapy Model, for Psychological Service.
"Mum would often get the call from the women that they needed her. A lot of the time it was to hold their hand or give them a hug," says Coe.
"Aunty Kiwa's legacy is simply enormous," says Nikki Schwass, manager Maori Services Department of Corrections.
"She has worked tirelessly over many decades and given her time to so many women in need."
Aunty Kiwa sighs and stares out the window into a bleak sky.
Her own parents were "very strict" but it was their way of being careful.
"Once you've fallen in love that's it, you're off, doesn't matter if it's good, bad or ugly," says Aunty Kiwa.
"When I was growing up the church had a lot to do with it too, parents believed in those old fashioned ways. Hello, wahoo, the pill came in and it all went out the window."
FINDING REFUGE
Aunty Kiwa was also instrumental and encouraged her daughters in the birth of Te Whare Hauora - Otautahi Maori Women's Refuge.
Setting it up was "very important".
"At that time in the 1980s we had a lot of concerns about our men and at that time we noticed a lot of our men were going to prison because of their violence," says Aunty Kiwa.
"Our women got together, my daughters... this has got to change. We must meet together, talk about what's happening. If men need help, get them the help they need, but don't just take the children from the mother and whanau."
Aunty Kiwa spent 30 years "helping out" at the refuge. She pulls the blanket, given to her for her work with refuge, up from across her legs and shows me an embroidered emblem which has a kowhai flower and 'Mereana Mokikiwa Hutchen 1986-2015'.
"It was freaky," recalls Coe of the refuge's start. "It was, at that time in the 80s, hugely political. These were staunch women who lobbied for law change around the safety of women. Then, because we sisters started getting more involved, mum came on board too."
Aunty Kiwa acted as a cultural advisor and it was quickly realised that Maori women had needs which weren't being met. "When you get a Maori women in a refuge you're working with cousins, aunties, uncles, everyone in the family, the other way around was one on one and that didn't always work for Maori."
COMMUNITY AROHA
In 2013, Aunty Kiwa and her entire whanau were awarded the inaugural E Tu Whanau Collective Change Award. It marked the way the family lived by putting aroha into action.
"Mum has spent her entire life working in the community," says Coe.
Closing her eyes and resting her head on the back of her chair, Aunty Kiwa returns in her memories to her young life on a farm in Raukokore.
There her feisty mother and spiritual, chiefly, father instilled in her much grace, aroha and belief in community.
"He was calm and peaceful and she was very feisty.
"My mother said 'always remember who you are and where you are from'. She was a 'hold fast, hold tight' lady."
Coe remembers her nana as a "grumpy, wild woman".
As a child, she recalls riding horses bareback down a beach with her cousins.
"My nana, Amiria, was 78 then. She's riding along beside us, she's got bloomers that come to here," Coe gestures to a point on her leg.
"She's hiked her dress up. We are hoofing it down the beach and she goes hooning past us, speaking to us in Maori telling us to hurry up and move. She was speeding down the beach on her grey mare and I thought 'holy moly, that's my grandmother'."
Amiria Stirling was a hard worker, she stayed home and worked the land, fed the children and took care of home base.
"Grandad, Eruera Stirling, was a man of the world. Articulate with Maori language, old and ancient, he was very spiritual and was often away for days, weeks on Maori land court issues."
He devoted his life to saving land and teaching other iwi the best ways to save their whenua.
"He was an amazing man. My grandad would talk to birds, I saw it myself," recalls Amiria Coe.
"He would say 'so and so has passed' and then the messengers would come and he would already know. He heard things we didn't hear. He was beautiful, so interesting. I found him so ... you could stare at him. He had a beautiful way of speaking, really gentle."
Aunty Kiwa watches her daughter speak and knits her hands together on top of the blanket.
"It doesn't matter who you are or where you are from, always respect each other, learn about each other."
Aunty Kiwa says this thoughtfully, then turns her head and grins:
"Wear a rubber. Make love not war."
CAPTION:
Aunty Kiwa, Mereana Mokikiwa Hutchen, 86, is known internationally as a warrior for justice. She has fostered 30 children and helped set up the Maori Women's Refuge.
Picture: JOSEPH JOHNSON/STUFF
Eruera and Amiria Stirling. GRAHAM ORBELL PHOTOGRAPHY
Eruera "Dick" Stirling, 73, pictured on February 28, 1981. AUCKLAND STAR HISTORIC COLLECTION
Eruera and Amiria Stirling under their street sign, December 21, 1981. AUCKLAND STAR HISTORIC COLLECTION.
Amiria Coe, left, daughter of Aunty Kiwa, aka Mereana Mokikiwa Hutchen, right. Aunty has volunteered at Christchurch Women's Prison for 30 years, in addition to fostering children and helping set up the Maori Women's Refuge. JOSEPH JOHNSON/STUFF
Word count: 3605
