At these six hotels, one room is not like the others
THE HOLLYWOOD ROOSEVELT, LA It’s spookily late when I check into The Hollywood Roosevelt, long renowned as a celebrity haunt. Marilyn Monroe stayed for two years and there’s a suite in her name, but I’m here for Room 928 in the historic original tower. Montgomery Clift occupied this room for three months in 1952 while filming From Here to Eternity. Today, many believe his ghost never checked out. It’s near midnight when I take in every detail of the room: the corner aspect with views over Hollywood High (its famous alumni include Judy Garland and Lana Turner); a creepy framed image of a frightened girl hanging above the pillow where I’m about to lay my head; the wooden door that can be rolled into place to separate bedroom and bathroom. I flop on to the bed to text a friend who’s into all things paranormal — and that’s when it happens. The bathroom light clicks on, and off again. I’m the world’s biggest sceptic but suddenly my heart’s pumping at this inexplicable happening. I fight the urge to race down to reception and plead to switch rooms (after all, I just begged to stay in this one). I never capture the bathroom-light shenanigans on video but it happens two more times before I finally roll the door shut so I can snatch a little sleep. Take a bow, Mr Clift. That was quite a spirited performance.
■ thehollywoodroosevelt.com
UNION STATION HOTEL, NASHVILLE A ghost named Abigail is said to haunt Room 711 of Nashville’s 125-room Union Station Hotel. Legend has it that when Abigail went to the train station to greet her soldier beau, she instead learned he’d died on a World War II battlefield and she threw herself in front of an oncoming train. You can see those railway tracks, and hear the lonesome toot of freight trains, from a room where guests have reported her presence. Nothing untoward happens during my stay but others have reported hearing dragging noises above their head in the top-floor room, picking up a ringing phone to find no one on the other end, and lights switching on and off. In homage to Abigail’s enduring spirit, the room is decorated differently to the rest, which channel a contemporary cowboy chic vibe. The nods to a bygone era in Room 711 include a four-poster bed, a three-panel, body-length mirror propped in a corner, a chandelier lamp, old-fashioned chairs and chest of drawers, and slightly eerie artworks. Nashville’s romanesque limestone and marble train station, a fantasia built in 1900, was granted a second life when it became a luxury hotel in 1986. Even if you’re not checking in, swing through to admire the lobby’s extraordinary barrel-vaulted, stained-glass ceiling, from which spectacular chandeliers dangle like grief-stricken lover’s tears.
■ unionstationhotelnashville.com
FAIRMONT THE QUEEN ELIZABETH, MONTREAL Montreal’s Fairmont The Queen Elizabeth resembles a bland office block from the street but one of its rooms is a modern-day pilgrimage site. In 1969, during the height of the Vietnam war, John Lennon and Yoko Ono spent a week in bed in Room 1742. During their Bed-In for Peace, Lennon recorded his antiwar anthem, Give Peace a Chance, with the help of whoever had dropped by, including Timothy Leary, Allen Ginsberg and Petula Clark. The hotel has long made something of the room but recently upped the ante. A clever redesign, unveiled in 2017, shines a light on the much-photographed spot under the windows in the sitting room where the couple dragged a double bed (much to the annoyance of housekeeping). The drinks table and armchair positioned there several years ago have been whipped away, replaced with a shrine-like bed and words scrawled across the windows — “hair peace” and “bed peace” — that re-create the 1969 vibe. Guests can also don virtual-reality goggles to see what it felt like for Lennon and Ono to field questions from journalists while lying in bed. Other hi-tech touches include a wall of “filing cabinets” that open to reveal audio and video that illuminate aspects of the Bed-In.
■ fairmont.com
ADINA APARTMENT HOTEL ADELAIDE TREASURY, SOUTH AUSTRALIA Adelaide’s stately Old Treasury Building has bones dating from 1839, just three years after South Australia’s settlement. An original sandstone wall, one of the state’s oldest remaining colonial structures, emerged during 2002 renovations. Today, the wall is highlighted within the Adina’s reception lounge. Eight major construction projects unfolded on the site over 70 years, which helps explain why there are so many intriguing nooks and crannies to explore. Chief among these is a crooked underground brick tunnel where gold from Victorian fields was smelted and stored during the 1850s gold rush (poke around long enough and you’ll find the tunnel entrances). Climb the staircase to reach the door to the high-ceilinged, moss-green Old Cabinet Room that’s opened for historical tours. On the ground floor are several rooms with period features. The most striking of these is Room 21, the Fireproof Records Room. Originally built as storage space for the neighbouring Registry Office, it features a spot-lit brick high vaulted ceiling, along with a kitchenette and separate bedroom.
■ tfehotels.com
THE BEAUMONT, LONDON There’s a room right out of left-field in London’s moneyed Mayfair. Turner Prize-winning British sculptor Sir Antony Gormley, who installed a village of haunting metal figures on a West Australian salt lake, also drew on the human form for Room, a semi-abstract monumental cuboid sculpture that doubles as a Zen-like retreat within the otherwise classic The Beaumont. From the outside, Room 215 resembles a hunkered-down stainless-steel Lego giant surveying the neighbourhood from an unlikely perch. The interior space’s avant-garde leanings reveal themselves slowly. There’s a sitting room — so far, so normal — but, to retire for the night, you climb nine white marble steps and swish through black velvet curtains to enter the cave-like, oak-lined chamber where a bed swaddled in white linen is the only piece of furniture. Gormley says the bedroom’s “very subliminal levels of light allow me to sculpt darkness itself”.
■ thebeaumont.com
THE BERKELEY RIVER LODGE, WESTERN AUSTRALIA It’s an adventure just to reach The Berkeley River Lodge, a luxury resort that’s an hour by float plane from Kununurra in Western Australia’s east Kimberley region. Once you’ve splashed down, you’ll find 20 villas tracing the ridge of a sand dune wedged between the Berkeley River and the Timor Sea. Paths made from pindan, the iconic red Kimberley dirt, connect the villas to a communal hub where there’s a dining room and swimming pool. The air-conditioned villas, which come with river or ocean views, all appear to be similar but those in the know ask for Villa 20. While the other accommodation features open-air bathrooms wrapped in a brushwood privacy fence, the most far-flung of the villas is so secluded that the “wall” is lowered so there are views from the tub all the way to the horizon. The resort is open from early March to late October.
■ berkeleyriverlodge.com.auKatrina Lobley was a guest of Princess Cruises in Los Angeles, Union Station Hotel, TFE Hotels and the Berkeley River Lodge.
CREDIT: Katrina Lobley
Word count: 1195
