There are a whole lot of left-field subjects happening at our universities these days. From using virtual reality to develop a violence prevention program to gin testing on a sensory and chemical level to exercising via the use of a smartphone. Reporter Celeste Villani checked it all out.
FINDING the motivation to exercise will be as simple as looking at a smartphone thanks to a University of South Australia study.
Researchers, in collaboration with academics at the University of Newcastle and Central Queensland University, have spent the past seven years looking at how social media impacts exercise.
Their findings have culminated in a mobile application called Active Team, which will launch this week.
Associate professor Carol Maher, of Nailsworth, Celine Northcott, a masters student, of Mawson Lakes, and Sarah Edney, a PhD candidate, of Parkside, are among the team that developed the app, which aims to use health science to change user behaviour towards exercise.
“The idea is the app helps people do a physical activity challenge with their friends, where it is sort of friendly rivalry,” Prof Maher says.
“We ran a big randomised controlled trial where we had 445 people, some were using the app and others were not.
“The results we found were that people (using the app) increased their weekly physical activity by three hours.
“The other main findings would be that there were very consistent trends that (using the app) was lifting people’s moods, as well as reducing anxiety, stress and depression.” Prof Maher, who hopes thousands of people download the app, says the application has not been designed to help achieve a “bikini body”, but more about activity and promoting a healthy, active lifestyle.
“In our field, there tends to be a lot of doom and gloom about using technology and how it is making people unhealthy,” Prof Maher says.
“We are more about saying let’s embrace technology and use it to do something good.” Active Team can be downloaded for free at the Apple App Store and Google Play.For more details visit activeteam.org
CREDIT: Celeste Villani
Word count: 344
