Apprentices and graduates alike can forge careers in providing a vital service to the state. Lauren Ahwan reports
AN increased focus on hiring apprentices and graduates has seen South Australia’s electricity distributor double its field crew workforce since being privatised a decade ago.
SA Power Networks workforce planning and talent manager Sara Case says 554 apprentices and graduates have been employed by the distributor, formerly known as ETSA Utilities, since 2003.
“When the State Government sold the distribution arm of ETSA in 1999, there were 449 field crew,’’ Case says.
“Today that number has grown to more than 800 and that growth has been delivered through a massive focus on training a new generation of power workers. We are constantly recruiting and training.
“Almost all of the apprentices who have gone through our program have stayed on with us to carve out a career in electricity distribution.’’ In its February intake, SAPN hired 22 apprentices and 11 graduates, including eight electrical engineering graduates, a civil/structural engineering graduate and two IT graduates.
Another recruitment drive is expected later this year.
Apprentices are trained using virtual reality technology and simulated real-world environments at SAPN’s Angle Park facility, which includes a substation, off-grid control rooms, poles, towers and other infrastructure.
Case says the high retention rate for apprentices and graduates, combined with low staff turnover, shows employees enjoy their work, the development opportunities and the supportive culture offered at SAPN.
“We need students to be thinking about their subject selections to prepare them for applying for a role with us,” she says.
“Maths and science subjects will translate to successful testing in our application process.’’ Janine Hurley, who manages the graduate program, says SAPN is committed to attracting more women to its ranks.
“The hardest challenge we have had in recent years is being able to recruit female engineers – there have been limited numbers attending universities,’’ she says.
“However, over time we have recruited female engineers and it is great to see them, and their male colleagues, progressing rapidly into more senior positions and getting involved in some incredible projects.’’ SAPN this year ranks 10th in the Australian Association of Graduate Employers Top 75 Graduate Employers list, up from 24th place last year.
Engineering graduate Li Yen Sen and IT graduate Karley Donnelly are among those recruited in February and say they are looking forward to progressing their careers within the energy industry.“For a while now, I’ve thought that the electricity industry would be an interesting environment to grow a career in, due to the changing energy resources,’’ Sen says.
CREDIT: Lauren Ahwan
Word count: 432
