A $20 million overhaul of a tourist trail between Port Pirie and Broken Hill would create up to 245 jobs and provide a much-needed boost to some of South Australia’s most disadvantaged towns.
The project, being canvassed by 14 towns, indigenous communities and the National Trust, would involve a range of projects along the Silver 2 Sea Way, which follows a heritage railway line.
They include a virtual reality app celebrating the regions’ history, a new indigenous cultural centre in Port Pirie, upgrades to major landmarks and new sculptures and paintings.
Port Pirie corporate and community director James Holyman said project partners had applied for $19.7 million in Federal Government funding and were hopeful of securing money in the lead-up to this year’s election.
“It’s about improving community wellness by creating jobs and trying to keep young people in these towns,” Mr Holyman said.
“It’s also about slowing people down and bringing them to the Australian Outback.
“The Silver 2 Sea Way regional economic revitalisation project will be a game changer to a region of South Australia and western New South Wales that has been largely forgotten. Both are on their economic knees.” The app is a key component of the project and would allow people to use their phones or tablets at a range of places to see vision depicting each area’s history.
“For example, Port Pirie used to have a train line in its main street,” Mr Holyman said.
“You could hold your phone up and have a train coming at you down the street. “It gives you an experience of what it was like at the time.” The project has the backing of five regional councils, several universities, the SA and NSW governments and other bodies.
The partners want to secure an “iconic” Australian to create a CD that could be played along the journey, sharing the history and culture of various areas.
Mr Holyman said the work would involve celebrating the Aboriginal rock paintings and carvings along the route, as well as commissioning new artwork at each of the towns.
Proposals include silo paintings, artwork on cast iron water tanks and upgrades to historic buildings such as Peterborough’s heritage-listed ‘roundhouse’, where trains were maintained.
The partners hope the project will provide a significant economic boost to towns along the trail, including some that face big challenges with social disadvantage, such as Port Pirie and Peterborough.
The railway line was once the busiest route in the world, carting iron ore from Broken Hill to smelters in Port Pirie.
Peterborough Mayor Ruth Whittle said upgrading the trail was an important way to share the region’s story and support its future.
“The fact that we’ve got a designated way means people will spend extra time here, whether that’s extra hours or extra days and nights,” Ms Whittle said.
“They’ll stop, spend money and advertise our area.”A spokesman for Deputy Prime Minister Michael McCormack said successful applications to the Building Better Regions Fund would be announced within a week.
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE
Word count: 503
