August is a great time to see southern rights and other whales migrating off the coast of Adelaide. To celebrate this annual wonder, Park of the Month is shining the spotlight on Encounter Marine Park.
Some great activities have been organised to enjoy and discover more about whales and the Park, with both indoor and outdoor events throughout August.
For the first time, local rangers will be at pop-up stalls at Basham Beach and the Bluff to answer questions about whales and marine life. Borrow a pair of binoculars to look for whales or try the Virtual Reality goggles to immerse yourself in the Great Southern Reef without getting your feet wet.
Encounter Marine Park stretches from the base of the Fleurieu Peninsula to the north-eastern coast of Kangaroo Island and the Coorong, with seals, leafy sea dragons and a diversity of marine life among its many attractions.
Park of the Month will feature 'Plover Lover' days at Aldinga Beach and Victor Harbor to highlight two of our iconic shorebirds, the Hooded Plover and Red-Capped Plover. Learn about the tough life these birds have, how the community is monitoring them and how you can join in.
There are also great prizes to be won during Park of the Month - enter via the Facebook page for National Parks and Wildlife Service South Australia.
Other events for Park of the Month include:
Beachcombing bingo at Aldinga Beach, Aug 11
Cosmic Whale song - projected graphic art show every evening
Discounted Coorong Discovery Cruises
Friends of Granite Island Planting Day, Aug 11
Dragon Boat trip on Pelican Lagoon, KI, Aug 11
Life of a Little Penguin talk, Aug 14
The science behind southern right whales, Aug 15
Rapid Bay sea kayak, Aug 18
Beach clean-up with Sea Shepherd at Port Noarlunga, Aug 25
Victor Harbor beach clean-up, Aug 25
The Whale Centre is open 7 days from 10.30am-5.30pm and is the best starting point to learn about these giants of the deep.
Visit the National Parks and Wildlife Service website for all events, dates and bookings.
CREDIT: Dani Brown
Word count: 347
