The State Liberal Government has launched more than $3 million of wine tourism campaigns designed to attract international visitors to the state's famous wine regions.
At Coriole Vineyards in McLaren Vale today, Premier Steven Marshall, Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development Tim Whetstone and Minister for Trade, Tourism and Investment, David Ridgway announced the beginning of the 'International Visitation Campaigns' in the Barossa, Clare Valley, Limestone Coast, Adelaide Hills, the Riverland and McLaren Vale.
The State Government has committed $750,000 towards the initiative with funding contributions also from Wine Australia, through the Commonwealth Government's $50 million Export and Regional Wine Support Package, local government, wine associations and communities.
Premier Steven Marshall said the campaigns are a key pillar in attracting more visitation to South Australia's wine regions and cellar doors.
"Today's launch of the International Visitation Campaigns across six wine regions will build on the fantastic work this government is already doing to attract visitors to South Australia," said Premier Marshall.
"Our world-famous wine regions are an important part of the state's economy and this campaign will allow them to continue to grow and create jobs for the state."
Minister Whetstone said the visitation campaigns are a collaborative effort to attract international visitors to South Australia's wonderful wine regions, with a focus on China and the United States.
"Almost 40 per cent of international tourists visit a winery during their stay in South Australia and visitor expenditure supports growth in our regions," said Minister Whetstone.
"South Australia's number one wine export destination is China and Hong Kong, with $813 million worth of wine exported in 2017-18, which shows where we can continue to add value to any activities targeted to these consumers.
"Six wine regions across South Australia are utilising the campaign in a number of innovative ways to attract international visitors, including a sommelier exchange, multi-lingual website, wine trail, virtual reality and online marketing.
"Our wine regions are continuing to be innovative and adapt to changing consumer needs targeting consumers looking for premium products."
Word count: 336
