Dark Mofo festival explores strong themes, writes Hannah Francis.
The title of Jordan Wolfson's virtual reality work Real Violence is arguably misleading, but the feeling you get when you watch it is real enough.
The graphic work, showing at Hobart's Dark Mofo in its Australian premiere, sees the artist carry out an act of extreme violence against another man, apparently beating him to a death on a New York sidewalk.
The horrific event is over in less than two-and-a-half minutes but, thanks to the immersive format, audiences emerge variously stunned and sickened as they attempt to grapple with what they've just witnessed.
Wolfson's aggression was actually unleashed on a lifelike dummy, the film digitally enhanced to make it more realistic. However, he has argued his own violence, as the perpetrator, is "real", and the impact on audiences is palpable.
Is that art, or something else? And is it safe?
Dr Zachary Steel, chair of Trauma and Mental Health at the University of NSW, said exposure to depictions of violence was "largely benign, particularly within the context of an art installation". However, he warned individuals with a personal history of trauma could be triggered by viewing such works; children and "other vulnerable persons" may also be adversely affected.
"It is appropriate therefore that information and notifications regarding the explicit nature of the material is provided," he said.
Real Violence comes with an 18-plus recommendation - not a restriction - and a warning of graphic violence. Another VR installation at the festival, by Paul McCarthy, warns viewers of sexual violence.
But Professor Alexander McFarlane, director of The University of Adelaide's Centre for Traumatic Stress Studies, argues nobody can really give informed consent when they say yes to strapping on that headset.
"I base that on my experience of having dealt with people who've killed people in the line of duty in their role as a police officer or a military person," he said. "Until they've carried out that act, they have no idea what that's going to do to them. I think we are completely underestimating people's desensitisation to killing through what we see on the media and in video games."
Canadian-born LA artist Cassils, who has two works showing at Dark Mofo, has thought deeply about these issues. Four years ago, Cassils (who identifies as trans-masculine and uses the pronouns they/them) set themselves on fire in front of a live audience in London. The 14-second full-body burn was filmed at a high frame rate and slowed down to 14 minutes to create a lasting cinematic work that toys with perceptions of violence.
The artist's intention with Inextinguishable Fire, named after Harun Farocki's 1969 film about napalm victims in the Vietnam war, is to highlight the very concerns McFarlane raises.
"I want people to become less numbed out to the barrage of violence that we experience in the day-to-day, which numbs us and makes us apathetic," they said. Cassils employed Hollywood stunt techniques and a rigorous training regimen to ensure they did not harm themselves.
When they were on fire, it was "pure presence - the pure present moment", they said.
"You're not thinking about trauma, you're not thinking about the pain in the world; you're thinking about 'is that flame going to lick my face? Must I move my nose very subtly out of the way?'
"[But] in terms of trauma, this is a work that speaks to the construction of images of violence."
The film begins with a tight shot that looks like a blank canvas. As the camera slowly zooms out, flames appear in the frame, then the shape of Cassils' body.
Any terror the viewer might feel at that moment of recognition is fleeting: before long, a backdrop is revealed, then a fan, positioned to keep the flames off the artist's face.
"By the end you realise that we're in a studio and that the image that you initially thought was a traumatised body is an image that has been constructed to manipulate you into thinking that you're looking at a traumatised body," Cassils said.
Dark Mofo curator Jarrod Rawlins said the festival had always been interested in exploring "strong themes". "There's a lot of trauma in the world [already] and when I'm thinking about a program I'm not shy … I'm not going to hide in a bubble," he said.
What gives these works artistic value, he argues, is that they reference and reframe the violence seen every day in mass culture.
"They're not accidental references, they're derivative.
"There's nothing happening in here that you wouldn't find in a collection of great 20th-century cinema but when we turn it into an art experience people's expectations change."
McFarlane agrees there is a chasm between reactions to violence in mass culture and in art.
"Dark Mofo is not the first to depict violence in this way," he said, "[but] I think it's right for people to be concerned."
Hannah Francis travelled to Dark Mofo as a guest of the festival and Tourism Tasmania. Dark Mofo runs until Sunday.
CREDIT: Hannah Francis
Word count: 842
