The title of Jordan Wolfson's virtual reality work, Real Violence, is arguably misleading, but the feeling you get when you watch it is real enough.
The graphic work, currently showing at Hobart's Dark Mofo in its Australian premiere, sees the artist carry out an act of extreme violence against another man, apparently beating him to a death on a New York footpath.
The horrific event is over in less than 2½ minutes but, thanks to the immersive nature of the format, audiences emerge variously stunned and sickened as they attempt to grapple with what they've just witnessed.
Wolfson's aggression was actually unleashed on a life-like dummy, the film digitally enhanced in post-production to make it more realistic. However, he has argued his own violence is "real", and the impact on audiences is palpable.
Is that art, or something else? And is it safe?
Dr Zachary Steel, chair of Trauma and Mental Health at the University of NSW, said exposure to depictions of violence was "largely benign, particularly within the context of an art installation". However, he warned that individuals with a personal history of trauma could be triggered by viewing such works; children and "other vulnerable persons" may also be adversely affected.
"It is appropriate, therefore, that information and notifications regarding the explicit nature of the material is provided," he said.
Real Violence comes with an 18-plus recommendation - not a restriction - and a warning of graphic violence. Another VR installation, by Paul McCarthy, warns viewers of sexual violence.
But Professor Alexander McFarlane, director of the University of Adelaide's Centre for Traumatic Stress Studies, argues that nobody can really give informed consent when they say yes to strapping on that headset.
"I base that on my experience of having dealt with people who've killed people in the line of duty in their role as a police officer or a military person," he said.
"Until they've carried out that act, they have no idea what that's going to do to them. I think we are completely underestimating people's desensitisation to killing, through what we see on the media and in video games."
Canadian-born, LA-based artist Cassils, who has two works showing at Dark Mofo, has thought deeply about these issues. Four years ago, Cassils (who identifies as trans masculine and uses the pronouns they/them) set themselves on fire in front of a live audience in London. The 14-second full-body burn was filmed at a high frame rate and slowed down to 14 minutes to create a lasting cinematic work that toys with perceptions of violence.
The artist's intention with Inextinguishable Fire, named after Harun Farocki's 1969 film about napalm victims in the Vietnam War, is to highlight the very concerns Professor McFarlane raises.
"I want people to become less numbed out to the barrage of violence that we experience in the day-to-day, which numbs us and makes us apathetic," they said. (The result of that live performance? "The audience wants to puke.")
Cassils employed Hollywood stunt techniques and a rigorous training regime to ensure they did not harm themselves in the making of the work. When they were on fire, it was "pure presence - the pure present moment", they said.
"You're not thinking about trauma, you're not thinking about the pain in the world; you're thinking about, is that flame going to lick my face? Must I move my nose very subtly out of the way?
"[But] in terms of trauma, this is a work that speaks to the construction of images of violence."
The film begins with a tight shot that looks like a blank canvas. As the camera slowly zooms out, flames appear in the frame, then the shape of Cassils' body.
Any terror the viewer might feel at that moment of recognition is fleeting: before long, a backdrop is revealed, then a fan, positioned to keep the flames off the artist's face.
"By the end you realise that we're in a studio and that the image that you initially thought was a traumatised body is an image that has been constructed to manipulate you into thinking that you're looking at a traumatised body," Cassils said.
Dark Mofo curator Jarrod Rawlins said the festival had always been interested in exploring "strong themes".
"There's a lot of trauma in the world [already] and when I'm thinking about a program I'm not shy … I'm not going to hide in a bubble," he said. "Everything in those works [that depict trauma] you could say is coming from trauma as well. It's not accidental - the artist has not just fictionalised something for the sake of it."
What gives them artistic value, he argues, is that they reference and reframe the violence seen every day in mass culture.
"They're not accidental references, they're derivative. There's nothing happening in here that you wouldn't find in a collection of great 20th-century cinema but when we turn it into an art experience people's expectations change."
Professor McFarlane agrees there is a chasm between reactions to violence in mass culture and in art.
"Dark Mofo is not the first to depict violence in this way," he said, "[but] I think it's right for people to be concerned."
He said there would always be a tiny percentage of people who were "profoundly perverted", though they might not know it until they see something that triggers them.
"It can create an awareness and an attraction and a fantasy - a bit like someone who's never tasted chocolate," he said. "Once they've tasted it … I think it is critical to acknowledge the costs. Particularly with the use of amphetamines in our community, violence, in some ways, with the presence of the drug ice, is becoming more normalised. I think there is a great risk to us."
Art was meant to test boundaries and provoke discussion, he said.
"But if you put [Real Violence] to a medical ethics committee as a way of studying trauma, I bet you they wouldn't let you do it."
Dark Mofo is on at various venues in Hobart until next Sunday.
Hannah Francis travelled as a guest of Dark Mofo and Tourism Tasmania.
CREDIT: Hannah Francis
Word count: 1024
