THIS is nuts. Completely nuts. It is also going to blow up big time at some time — and cause our national electricity grid to implode and hurt, badly hurt, both consumers and businesses.
Just after 3pm yesterday afternoon the wholesale price of electricity in Tasmania was minus $67.87 a megawatt hour.
In South Australia, on the other side of the eastern states grid — everybody but WA and the NT — have a guess what the price was out of that state’s, for want of a better word, “generators”?
I doubt that a single person outside the market itself would guess even remotely right; indeed, could guess right. You would have to embrace utter stupidity and irrationality to get even remotely close. The answer is that it was $14,700 a MWh.
In the other three, bigger, states — New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland — the price was a more “normal” $70 a MWh or so, in all of them.
Just let those extreme numbers, though, sink in.
In Tasmania, they weren’t just giving electricity away for nothing, they were paying distributors to take it. Everybody who took Tasmanian power at that time got a virtual reality check in the (e)mail.
Yet at exactly the same time, anybody taking SA electricity had to pay $14,700 — and it would have been even higher but for the rules which set that as the maximum price.
Now, I’m not going to explain why this happened; apart from anything else, that would put a dab of lipstick on a big fat pig. I’m certainly not going to give it the slightest shred of credibility by implying that it actually has some “functionality”.
The NEM is a farce, brought to you by very stupid people who have very effectively crippled real power stations and force-fed useless wind and solar down our throats — and wrapped it all up in a so-called “market”.But anyone who hasn’t taken complete leave of their senses would have at least a twinge of concern that a so-called market which could throw up prices of minus $67 and a (very much) plus $14,700 at the same time is announcing the mother-of-all implosions approaches.
CREDIT: TERRY McCRANN
Word count: 368
