Blue Economy CRC, Media Release, 19 August 2022
Offshore wind turbines are getting bigger every year, a trend that already helps offshore wind reduce costs all over the world. Whilst recent research suggests that costs will continue to dip as wind turbines get bigger and are deployed further offshore, the challenges to the design of the floating platform that supports the wind turbine increase.
You and your team are invited to this exciting and innovative webinar that aims to facilitate the community’s awareness and understanding of the general trends, challenges, and future perspectives for floating offshore wind turbine development.
The webinar will start with an overview of the history of floating wind turbines and current design developments in Europe. This will be followed by a review and analysis of scaling laws applied to the design of floating wind turbines.
The webinar finishes with a presentation about recent R&D work that tackles the design and optimisation challenges for 10MW to 25MW floating wind turbines.
Presentation 1: Dr Erin Bachynski-Polić, Professor at the Norwegian University of Science and Technology. Erin will provide an overview of the history of floating wind turbines and current design developments in Europe as well as the Design and optimisation of 10MW to 25MW floating wind turbines, plus Q&A.
Presentation 2: Dr Nataliia Sergiienko, Lecturer at the University of Adelaide. Nataliia will provide a review and analysis of scaling laws applied to the design of floating wind turbines, plus Q&A.
Facilitated by Dr Boyin Ding, Associate Professor at the University of Adelaide, and Deputy Director at the Australia-China Joint Research Centre of Offshore Wind and Wave Energy Harnessing.
Register now.
Presenters
Dr Erin Bachynski-Polić
Affiliation: Professor @Norwegian University of Science and Technology
Dr Erin Bachynski-Polić is a professor of marine structures in the Department of Marine Technology, Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU). She holds bachelor and master’s degrees in naval architecture and marine engineering from the University of Michigan, and a PhD from NTNU, and has two years’ experience as a researcher at SINTEF Ocean.
Dr Nataliia Sergiienko
Affiliation: Lecturer @University of Adelaide
Dr Nataliia Sergiienko is a lecturer in aerospace engineering in the School of Mechanical Engineering, the University of Adelaide. She received the bachelor’s and master’s degrees in aerospace engineering from the National Technical University of Ukraine, Kyiv, Ukraine, and the PhD degree in mechanical engineering from the University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
Facilitator
Dr Boyin Ding
Affiliation: Associate Professor & Deputy Director @University of Adelaide & Australia-China Joint Research Centre of Offshore Wind and Wave Energy Harnessing
Dr Boyin Ding is an associate professor in the Faculty of Sciences, Engineering and Technology, the University of Adelaide, and the deputy/executive director at the Australia-China Joint Research Centre of Offshore Wind and Wave Energy Harnessing.
Find out more.
Word count: 463
