Saturday was all about the Great Australian Cuttlefish as the Whyalla community came together for the opening of CuttleFest 2019.
It was the first event of a packed program that features cuttlefish dives, activities, information sessions and displays over a three-month period.
Whyalla's pride in the cuttlefish was on display on the day, with cuttlefish kites flying in the sky, cuttlefish beanies available for purchase, and Virtual Reality goggles on offer to give people a first hand look at the beautiful critters.
D'faces of Youth Arts provided fun activities for children, while the Mt Laura Lions Club and the Mobile Coffee Van kept people fed and hydrated.
Tourism Minister David Ridgway attended the opening, which was held at the Whyalla Foreshore, and had high praise for how the steel city has embraced the cuttlefish.
"It's great to see the community supporting the wonderful, natural event that is the cuttlefish aggregation by having a festival like CuttleFest," he said.
"I love to see a regional community saying 'hey, we've got something unique, let's put a festival on and make something happen', I really applaud that."
Minister Ridgway said events like CuttleFest are a big boost to the visitor economy of regional towns, and he'd like to see more of them in rural South Australia.
"It puts money into the pockets of people who own bakeries, coffee shops, hotels - everybody benefits from events like this," he said.
Unfortunately the conditions weren't ideal for Minister Ridgway to go snorkeling with the cuttlefish, but he plans to return later in the season to get in the water.
"I really want to enjoy what tourists are seeing when they come here and look at the aggregation," he said.
Whyalla Visitor Centre Team Leader Teresa Coles said around 200,000 cuttlefish were expected to aggregate to the shores of Whyalla this season.
"We love to talk about the cuttlefish, it's so unique to our little space that we can't help but share it," she said.
Whyalla City Council CEO Chris Cowley said a high number of international and national tourists came to Whyalla to experience the cuttlefish first hand.
"It's a bit of an undiscovered gem we have here in Whyalla, but once you have seen how amazing these cuttlefish are it's something you will remember for the rest of your life," he said.
CuttleFest has been organised by Council in conjunction with Experiencing Marine Sanctuaries, Natural Resources Eyre Peninsula, Department for Environment and Water Marine Parks and the South Australia Tourism Commission.
CREDIT: Louis Mayfield
Word count: 420
