March is fast approaching, and that means only one thing - the return of the iconic Mundulla Show.
Despite hot conditions contributing to last year's lean event, committee members have been working around the clock to provide the crowd with high-class country entertainment.
The event experienced close to a 50 per cent drop in attendance last year, but is expected to push past the 2500 barrier at this year's edition of the show.
Show president Suzie Coventry said there will be a raft of returning events at the show which will be held on Saturday, March 7.
She confirmed that the Stockman's Challenge will return for this year, along with the highly successful Prime Lamb competition.
"The Prime Lamb competition is going to be huge once again - for the Innovative Livestock Expo we've got close to 35-40 sites coming for that," Mundulla Show livestock coordinator Francis Andrews said.
The committee has put a lot of effort into making sure there is something for everyone, with Mrs Coventry stating there is no chance of anyone getting bored during the day.
One of the most exciting additions to the show is securing the services of Think Digital, which will provide attendees with an agricultural virtual reality experience.
Mr Andrews said the show's yard dogs event is set to draw a big crowd, with close to 120 dogs expected to take part in the event.
"That's come about because Willalooka usually have a yard dog event a fortnight before, but they didn't have it this year," Mr Andrews said.
"They are trialing all of their dogs hear before they go to the Lucindale Field Days."
He also claimed that the show's indoor section is one of the best in South Australia, due to it being the right time of the year for flowers and vegetables.
Speaking of food, attendees will also have the opportunity to watch former Masterchef winner Callum Hann conduct two cooking demonstrations.
Mrs Coventry said although there is still some things to work through, the ingredients that he uses will all be locally sourced.
Continued on page 5
CREDIT: Taylor Harvey
Word count: 352
