Both visitors and locals are encouraged to dive into the South Australian Park of the Month, Encounter Marine Park, this August.
With southern rights and humpbacks frolicking in Fleurieu Peninsula waters, August is a great time to celebrate the annual wonder.
Encounter Marine Park covers from the base of the Fleurieu to the north-eastern coast of Kangaroo Island and the Coorong.
Along with the whales, other animals which can be found in the park include leafy sea dragons, seals, and a diverse marine ecosystem.
National Parks and Wildlife Service SA ranger Nikki Zanardo said Encounter Marine Park was full of special sites, from the small but fun Second Valley beach to the whale viewing platform at Basham Beach.
"Encounter Marine Park has many great snorkelling and diving sites catering for snorkelers and divers of any age or experience," she said.
As part of the celebrations, both outdoor and indoor activities have been scheduled.
The 'Cosmic Whale Song' digital artwork will be projected onto the exterior of Victa Cinema nightly, and Birdlife Australia is hosting a Plover Lover session at Kent Reserve in Victor Harbor from 10am to 11.30am
Ranger pop-up sessions will be held at Basham Beach on August 20 and at The Bluff on August 22 so people can ask local rangers about whales and marine life. They will also have binoculars to spot whales in the area, and virtual reality goggles which allow the user to explore the Great Southern Reef without getting wet.
There is a sea kayaking session around Rapid Bay from 10am to 4pm on Sunday, August 18, and includes a healthy lunch on an isolated beach, only accessible by small boat.
Other activities to get involved with are discounted Coorong Discovery Cruises, various workshops at the SA Whale Centre, and a beach clean-up around Victor Harbor on August 25. The SA Whale Centre is open every day from 10.30am to 5.30pm.
Prizes are up for grabs during Encounter Marine Park's month in the spotlight. To enter, visit the National Parks and Wildlife Service South Australia's Facebook page.
For more information, visit www.parks.sa.gov.au/get-inspired/park-of-the-month/august-park-of-the-month-encounter
CREDIT: Dani Brown
Word count: 351
