SOUTH Australia’s low cost of doing business, access to the national space agency and a cash incentive from the state government has attracted a Japanese remote robotics software start-up to Lot Fourteen.
SE4 joins the innovation precinct alongside the Australian Space Agency, Inovor Technologies and Neumann Space, and the recently announced Mission Control Centre and Australian Space Discovery Centre.
SE4 has developed a command and control platform named JAK for use with assets operating in high latency and low bandwidth environments – such as space, underground or underwater.
SE4 is working with Japan-based industrial robots maker Nachi-Fujikoshi to test JAK’s remote operation across vast distances.
It will receive $40,000 from the State Government’s Landing Pad program to set up its Australian base in Adelaide, where it expects to employ three people in its first year.
Currently it employs 14 staff in Japan working across semi-autonomous excavation, undersea asset observation and maintenance, construction-site automation, satellite retrieval and low volume logistics material handling. SE4 chief operations officer Jeremy Webb said having funding support to cover costs of running a business, along with the attraction of being closely located to the Australian Space Agency, were all factors in choosing South Australia to grow their business.
“We chose Adelaide for its cost of doing business, topology, proximity to the Australian Space Agency, the government’s efforts to make us feel at home, showcasing the benefits on offer from the state to an organisation like us,” Mr Webb said.
“Being part of a new neighbourhood with all the big players moving in enables us to be part of the first and original cohort … this was too good an opportunity to pass up.” The state government said SE4 was revolutionising remote robotics and their work within virtual reality and artificial intelligence would benefit not only SA’s budding space sector, but also other hi-tech and creative industries.
“It will create an ecosystem of like-minded talent and companies,” it said. The South Australian Landing Pad (SALP) program provides funding for access to Lot Fourteen’s innovation and co-working hubs, or alternative accommodation and funding for access to professional support and advice. Energy tech company CVX Semiconductors, seaweed supplement business CH4 and space balloons provider Lux have each received an SALP grant of $80,000, while nanosatellites systems builder Tyvak, Squad CyberSecurity and SE4 have received $40,000 each.
CREDIT: VALERINA CHANGARATHIL
Word count: 391
