FROM pole to pole, the Adelaide Festival has brought together art that drives the debate on global issues for its 60th-anniversary celebrations, which begin today.
Among its opening shows is Belgian production Dimanche (Sunday), which is at the Space Theatre until March 7 and examines how people carry on with their daily routines despite the impact of climate change.
The family show combines physical theatre, miniature objects and live filmmaking with life-size polar bear puppets.
Sandrine Heyraud, who plays one of three reporters making a documentary in the Arctic, said Dimanche mixed comedy and drama to show how global warming would affect everyday life, as the recent bushfires had done here.
“It’s not only Australia … there are countries that will be more directly and more quickly impacted, but it’s a universal problem,” she said.
“It’s about people trying to maintain their everyday life and everyday habits but experiencing extreme climate situations … until it gets physically absurd.” Also opening tonight are the Festival’s opera centrepiece, Mozart’s Requiem, dance productions Between Tiny Cities and Black Velvet, interactive virtual-reality work Eight, and Finnish-Egyptian filmmaker Samira Elagoz’s confronting theatre piece, Cock Cock … Who’s There?.
Festival artistic directors Neil Armfield and Rachel Healy said their program, which runs until March 15, featured 74 “unforgettable events” spanning theatre, music, opera, dance, film and visual arts.
“We’ve been like a child who counts down the days until their birthday – and today is the day,” they said.
“This weekend is packed full of incredible experiences, including free events and a vast program of family shows.
“We hope Adelaide will join us over the next 17 days in celebrating 60 years of the mighty Adelaide Festival.” Its major exhibition, the 2020 Adelaide Biennial of Australia Art:Monster Theatres, features live performances, interactive elements and artist talks this weekend at the Art Gallery of SA, Botanic Garden and Freemason’s Lodge.
Other visual art events include the Adelaide // International at Samstag Museum and Japanese artist Tatzu Nishi’s three-storey installation, A Doll’s House, in Rundle Mall.
More than 63,000 tickets worth $4.4 million have already been sold for this year’s Festival, $100,000 more than the same time last year and represents 93 per cent of its 2020 box-office target.
The Festival’s free 60th Birthday Concert, featuring Tim Minchin, will be held tomorrow in Elder Park at 8pm.
PAGE 24: EDITORIAL FULL PROGRAM AND TICKETS AT ADELAIDEFESTIVAL.COM.AU
SWEET SHOWS The Doctor, Dunstan Playhouse, until March 8. SOLD OUT.
British stage and screen icon Juliet Stevenson, of Truly, Madly, Deeply fame, plays the title character who refuses to let a priest deliver the last rites to a 14-year-old patient fighting for her life in this exclusive Festival season, before the production goes to Broadway and London’s West End.
150 Psalms, 12 concerts at various locations, tomorrow until March 3. Four of the world’s most acclaimed choirs, the Nederlands Kamerkoor, The Tallis Scholars (UK), Norwegian Soloists Choir and Australia’s The Song Company, perform all 150 Psalms in settings by 150 different composers, representing 1000 years of choral music.
Black Velvet, Odeon Theatre, until March 2.
American dancer Shamel Pitts and Brazil’s Mirelle Martins’ shaved heads and near-naked torsos glow as if made of liquid metal as they explore each other’s contours in the darkness through a dance that shifts from formalised patterns to uncontrolled corporeal explosions.
Bunggul, Thebarton Theatre, March 2-3.
This remarkable staging of the late singer Gurrumul Yunupingu’s final album Djarrimirri (Child of the Rainbow) melds paintings and live performances by Yolngu dancers and songmen with the Adelaide Festival Orchestra, directed by Nigel Jamieson and senior Yolngu man Wininba Ganambarr.
Between Tiny Cities, Lion Arts Factory, until March 4.
Australian choreographer Nick Power’s work is the culmination of a four-year project between Cambodian dance group Tiny Toones and Darwin’s own hip-hop crew D City Rockers. Each crew is represented by one dancer, andthe pair encounter each in a circle, surrounded by the audience.
CREDIT: PATRICK McDONALD CHIEF ARTS WRITER
Word count: 661
