TACKLING DOWNTURN THE re-imagining of key components of university courses – including practical placements and laboratory classes – in the wake of COVID-19 could permanently change how some are rolled out in the future, university leaders say.
South Australia’s academic sector has shown extraordinary creativity and technical skill to create solutions to ensure students remained engaged and able to learn during the global pandemic.
Adelaide’s three major universities each shared with The Advertiser many examples of people coming together, working collaboratively and thinking outside the square to devise ways to make the seemingly impossible, possible.
Physics students have been given access to online versions of laboratory equipment that simulate real-world equivalent experiments, allowing them to generate experimental data.
Music students have been treated via Zoom to guest lectures from some of the world’s most-acclaimed performers and conductors.
Virtual expectant mothers have been used to allow midwifery students to learn the real-life scenarios, complexities and emergencies that can happen during pregnancy.
Adelaide University deputy vice-chancellor Jennie Shaw said the response from staff and students had been remarkable.
“If you had told us in January this is what we would have to be doing, no one would have believed it,” she said.
“People just picked themselves up and got on with it. I am immensely proud. “Teaching staff across all faculties reacted quickly to the need for different modes of teaching due to COVID-19, delivering a range of innovative, dynamic and creative solutions to domestic and international students that covered lectures, tutorials, workshops, practicals, mentoring, and exams.” Professor Shaw said there were elements in the new approaches that would be carried through post COVID-19.
“One of our politics lecturers has pushed her online lectures out to an hour and a half – from the standard one-hour – simply because students are asking more questions when they have the chat function option, where they can feel comfortable and don’t have to feel everyone’s eyes on them,” Prof Shaw said.
“We have learnt so much and will now look at what elements to keep, what worked really well for when we go back to face-to-face.” At UniSA, virtual reality Google Earth-style geological tours are being used to bring landscapes to life for geology students, allowing them to fly over, zoom in and immerse themselves in the details of geological sites such as Hallett Cove, Sellicks Beach and Mount Gambier.
Plans are now underway to extend these experiences for the community. But not all approaches were hi-tech.
At Flinders University, associate professor Kirstin Ross simply flipped on its side how she taught her Zombie Apocalypse: Microbes and Toxins course.
In the introduction to environmental microbiology and toxicology class, her students directed her on how to carry out experiments for them in the lab.
Usually students would be sent to collect water from the university’s lake and be required to devise, in the laboratory, a way to remove all toxins to make it drinkable.
“The students remained really engaged which was the best part,” Prof Ross said. “It is a really hands-on topic but we needed to do it with students sitting at home in front of their computers.”
CREDIT: REBECCA BAKER
Word count: 527
