This is my pick Willunga Christmas Tree Festival A showcase of beautiful Christmas trees, music, stalls and kids’ activities. Bethany Hall, 33 St Andrews Tce, Willunga, 10am-4pm. Cost: adults $3, kids free.
Details: Search ‘Willunga Christmas Tree Festival 2019’ on Facebook FESTIVE FUN Mostly Music @ Malvern The Australian Army Band – Adelaide will lead an afternoon of Christmas carols and popular songs along with guest soloist Second Chances SA Ambassador, ex-Zimbabwean cricketer and star of The Voice – Henry Olonga. Malvern Uniting Church, corner of Marlborough St and Cambridge Tce, Malvern, 2pm, $20 adult, $15 seniors/concession and $5 child. Afternoon tea is included. Details: malvernuc.com
Tyndale Community Carols An event for the whole family that will include a concert band, choirs, jumping castles, face painting, food vendors and fireworks. This year features guest performers David Hobson and Sean W Smith. Tyndale Christian School, 50 Fern Grove Blvd, East Salisbury, pre-show entertainment from 5pm, main program from 7pm. Free entry. Details: Search ‘2019 Tyndale Community Carols’ on Facebook
Carols in the Park Burnisde Lions Club hosts a night of singing, picnics and a visit from Santa in stunning Hazelwood Park. The annual event will feature The Raymond Sisters, The Cantabile Singers, Marryatville High School Girls’ Choir and the Tanunda Town Band. There’ll be food vans, a face painter and a visit from Santa. Hazelwood Park, Greenhill Rd, Hazelwood Park, 4.30-8pm. Free. Details: burnside.sa.lions.org.au
CHRISTMAS TREE FESTIVAL More than 60 beautiful trees will be on display plus a variety of highly creative and themed displays. Athelstone Uniting Church, 33 Fox Ave, Athelstone, 11am-4pm. Entry: adults - donation, children - free. Details: athelstonechurch.org.au
Belair Christmas Market Come along for a market showcasing local businesses, craftspeople and designers. A great opportunity to pick up some Christmas pressies. Belair Community Centre, 1 Sheoak Rd, Belair, 10am-3pm. Free entry. Details: Search ‘Belair Christmas Market’ on Facebook
Salisbury Community Hub Opening Family activities, food and entertainment will mark the opening. Today there will be the Salisbury Christmas Markets, carols, virtual reality, and a coding and robotics session. Salisbury Community Hub, 34 Church St, Salisbury, 10am-3pm. Free entry. Details: salisbury.sa.gov.au Gilles at the Grounds: The Gift Bazaar Now in its seventh year, The Gift Bazaar is your ultimate Christmas shopping destination for all things local and creative. It will house more than 150 traders in fashion, food, home and children’s gifts. Goodwood Rd (entrance via Leader St), Wayville, 10am-4pm. Free entry. Details: gillesatthegrounds.com.au
Christmas Tree Festival About 40 decorated Christmas trees - decorated by primary schools, day care centres and special needs centres all with different themes - will be on display plus entertainment. St Paul’s Anglican Church Hall, Church Pl, Port Adelaide, 5pm-9pm. Also next Friday, Saturday and Sunday. Details: stpaulsportadelaide.com/christmas-tree-festival
Manton Makers Market Celebrating quality, locally handmade crafts coupled with live music, a printmaking demonstration and delicious food and coffee. 6 Manton St, Hindmarsh, 10am-3pm. Free entry. Details: Search ‘Manton Makers Market’ on Facebook
MUSIC People’s Messiah Come and sing the Handel Choruses with Corinthian Singers, together with organist Stephen van der Hoek and trumpeter Carly Cameron. Bring your own score or borrow one at the door. The concert will help raise funds for St John’s Community outreach and youth services. St John’s Church, 379 Halifax St, city, 6.30pm. Tickets: $25. Details: trybooking.com Adelaide Botanic Gardens ConcertA delightful free concert by the Adelaide Youth Strings with a mix of world music, well known classics, some Bluegrass Fiddle Frenzy and even the hit Final Countdown. Bring the family, a rug and a picnic, and enjoy music al fresco. Adelaide Botanic Gardens, Plane Tree Lawn, adjacent to Wisteria Arbor, noon. Details adyo.com.au
CREDIT: Natalie de Nadai
Word count: 610
