AFTER spending last school holidays bunkered down in isolation, class is out again – and there is much more to do this time around.
Playgrounds, libraries and amusement centres have reopened, and it is business (almost) as usual for family favourites such as the South Australian Museum and Art Gallery of SA these school holidays.
Premier Steven Marshall has encouraged youngsters to enjoy themselves but not put themselves or others at risk of illness.
“After a tough few months for many South Australians, I really urge families to have fun this school holidays while keeping safe in our new COVID world,” Mr Marshall says.
“South Australians have worked incredibly hard to stop the coronavirus spread so it’s critically important we don’t undo all the good and continue to socially-distance, wash our hands and stay home if we’re sick.” SA Museum director Brian Oldman is encouraging youngsters and adults alike to visit the North Tce venue. “We’re really looking forward to welcoming back our visitors these school holidays,” Mr Oldman says.
Meanwhile, for those more adventurous and willing to brave the wet weather, there are playgrounds and parks to explore.
Walking SA executive director Helen Donovan says there are great trails across greater Adelaide for little and older legs alike.
WEST The Beachouse: Glenelg’s beachside centre reopens Kon Saturday. Try out the new mini golf or play on the dodgem cars and carousel. thebeachouse.com.au Cirkidz: Have a go at the tight rope or trampoline at Bowden’s circus centre, which has a jam-packed school holiday program. cirkidz.org.au Fishing: Head along to any of the great jetties in the western suburbs to throw a line – you may even catch dinner.
Bounce: An indoor adventure park with dodge ball, trampolines and slum-dunk games, there’s fun for everyone at Marleston. bounceinc.com.au AFL Max: Test your kicking and fitness in the virtual reality zone or tackle the climbing walls at the Adelaide Airport centre. aflmax.com.au
SOUTH Hallett Cove Boardwalk: Take in the views of this 5.1km (one-way) boardwalk. walkingsa.org.au Willunga Farmers Market: Taste some local treats at this popular market, every Saturday from 8am. willungafarmersmarket.com.au Jubilee Park Playground: With forts, slides and swings, let imaginations run wild at Port Noarlunga’s mega park. playandgo.com.au Plaster Fun House: Get creative and paint different types of plaster moulds at Brighton’s popular centre. plasterfunhouse.com.au Inflatable World Morphett Vale: Reopening in time for school holidays. With endless inflatable activities, it’s fun for the whole family. inflatableworldoz.com.au/stadiums/morphettvale/
EAST Cleland Wildlife Park: Check out the park’s wallabies, wombats, dingoes and snakes. clelandwildlifepark.sa.gov.au Morialta Conservation Park: While away hours hiking to beautiful waterfalls on an extensive trail network. parks.sa.gov.au Dunstan Adventure Playground: Known for its supersized slide, there’s also a flying fox and wobble bridge at this St Peter’s playground. playandgo.com.au Wizbang Family Fun Centre: Play laser tag and mini-golf at this St Agnes centre, which has reopened for holidays. wizbang.net.au Drage Reserve: With a wheelchair-friendly trampoline and rubber base, this Felixstow playground is safe for all. npsp.sa.gov.au
NORTH St Kilda playground: Discover why this adventure playground is consistently named one of SA’s best, with a flying fox, pirate ships and slides. playandgo.com.au Para Wirra Conservation Park: Immerse yourself in nature and look out for native wildlife. parks.sa.gov.au TunzaFun: Video games and a 9D theatre at Modbury. tunza.fun Bowland Salisbury: Take the whole family and test your skills on one of the many lanes. bowland.com.au/salisbury Flipout: Fly like a ninja on trampolines, test the parkour course or jump in the foam pit at this Munno Para centre. flipoutsa.com.au
CITY Adelaide Zoo: See what Wang Wang and Funi have been up to in lockdown. The other animals are also keen to see humans. adelaidezoo.com.au Escape Hunt: Star in your own escape movie. Work with friends to solve puzzles and find clues to escape from a locked room. escapehunt.com/au/adelaide Tree Climb: Eight tree-top courses to navigate, including zip lines. treeclimb.com.au/ The Popeye: Sight-see along the River Torrens or choose a Devonshire tea cruise. thepopeye.com.au Adelaide Museum: There’s a busy program at this city favourite. Check out the exhibition on dogs. samuseum.sa.gov.au
REGIONS Naracoorte Caves: Beautiful natural formations and megafauna fossils feature at the Naracoorte Caves National Park. naracoortecaves.sa.gov.au/Home Swim with cuttlefish: The Australian giant cuttlefish flock in huge numbers to waters around Point Lowly, outside Whyalla, for their annual breeding aggregation. whyalladivingservices.com.au Coffin Bay National Park: Keep an eye out for emus, kangaroos and other animals during a hike through the beautiful park. parks.sa.gov.au Monash Adventure Park: One of the most popular attractions in the Riverland, the park features crazy leaning towers, a rope bridge, flying fox, slippery dips and a huge maze. southaustralia.com/products/riverland/ attraction/monash-adventure-park Urimbirra wildlife park: Visit the park’s Australian native animals during a day trip to Victor Harbor. urimbirra.com.au/
CREDIT: CELESTE VILLANI ERIN JONES
Word count: 793
