An ordinary brick home decked to the eaves in colour & light as part of a cutting-edge art installation has been torn down, but collectors can still buy a digital piece of it online.
Adelaide artist Dave Court is the first creative to hold a physical Non-Fungible Token (NFT) exhibition in South Australia, & one of the first in the southern hemisphere.
At the centre of his 'House Party' exhibition is an aging home at Ironbank in the Adelaide Hills that was transformed with a kaleidoscope of colours over a month in 2020, before it was immediately bulldozed last year.
"It's something I've wanted to do for a long time & then the opportunity came up to paint a house last year & then I combined that with other things I was working on in the studio & it came to fruition in this exhibition," Mr Court said.
While the real-world artwork is no more, it lives on through physical & digital studio works.
The digital works feature augmented & virtual reality which recreate the original home.
Included with some physical works is an NFT artwork, that can be purchased online using cryptocurrency.
"[An NFT] is a way to verify & authenticate unique digital assets & what a lot of people are using them for is as digital artwork," he said.
NFTs are making waves in the art world internationally, with people content to buy & sell the online-only works.
It uses blockchain technology to authenticate digital artworks which are then purchased & sold using cryptocurrency.
Not only is it providing a new form of art, digital creative concept curator GT Sewell it is also giving artists a new way of making money.
"It's a digital renaissance in regards to art & what's happening there. It's giving flexibility & it's opening up the doors for those digital native artists," Mr Sewell said.
Praxis Artspace director Patty Chehade said the exhibition was covering new ground both locally & internationally.
"What people are wanting more of is an experience & I think what's the digital art world is offering now," Ms Chehade said.
"Galleries have opportunities to display the works, I don't think that will ever disappear — people always want to have that experience & not only on a screen.
"As gallerists, we have to challenge ourselves & rethink the ways in which we can present the works."
The exhibition is on show until July 23.
Word count: 405
