The WA film industry has everything in its corner — except a studio precinct From the remote Kimberley in the north to the clear waters of the Great Australian Bight in the south, Western Australia’s dazzling landscapes dominate the film adaptation of Tim Winton’s award-winning novel Dirt Music, one of the most expensive films made in the state. This is the backdrop for the story of Georgie Jutland — the nurse who finds herself stranded in a remote fishing town on the WA coast with a man she doesn’t love.
Anticipation of the film, directed by acclaimed storyteller Gregor Jordan and starring critical darling Kelly McDonald, has remained high even after a mixed reception at its Toronto International Film Festival premiere last year — a powerful symbol of the future potential of WA-based productions.
Australian distributor Universal has yet to announce if Dirt Music will go into cinemas or straight to the videostreaming model that locked-down home viewers have embraced in droves.
But at last, Dirt Music will have a local screening later this month at CinefestOZ, WA’s annual film festival, which will host sessions for audiences across six days from August 25 to 30 even as cinemas remain shut elsewhere.
And oddly, the film’s themes resonate more than ever, although its dreamy locations are out of reach. “Dirt Music is really topical; it’s about loneliness, finding yourself, and isolation, and it’s set in locations that nobody can really get to right now,” the film’s WA-based associate producer Kate Separovich says.
As Dirt Music’s fate hangs in the balance, a curious combination of factors gives the state’s film industry some hope that it will emerge stronger and more attractive to global film companies in a post-COVID era. Separovich, a former graphic designer, says pursuing a career in film is now possible in her home town and believe’s the film’s profile will inspire more local produc­tion: “There is a real oppor­tunity right now for Australian films to have their time in the spotlight.” There’s even a hint that momentum is gathering towards achieving something that has eluded the state: a film studio precinct. A state where coronavirus is under control and community outbreaks almost non-existent, WA is uniquely placed to accommodate foreign productions, says Willie Rowe, chief executive of film funding body Screenwest. “We’re coming out of the shutdown and are looking to a couple of productions starting up in the next few months,” he says.
“The producers are doing significant COVID-19 safe planning, which comes on top of other production costs. People say: ‘This is a place we can come and make films safely.’ And lots of our crews want to come back and raise families here.” Perth film couple Alison James and Zak Hilditch have headed home from Los Angeles after their respective films, which were about to go into production, were shelved as COVID-19 hit.
“We realised that recovery was going to take much longer than anyone first thought, so we’ve come back to make films here,” says James.
Others are strangers who have found refuge in Perth, such as American actress Kate Walsh, who played Addison Montgomery in the hit television series Grey’s Anatomy.
Walsh found herself in Perth as pandemic lockdowns began across the world in March; for now, her New York apartment has been swapped for a mask-free, COVID-free life in Perth’s seaside suburb of Cottesloe. WA’s screen industry effectively has doubled in size in the past three financial years, from about $48m in 2015-16 to more than $89m in 2018-19 of contracted production budgets. Rowe says the calibre of WA crews — albeit relatively small in number — is becoming known and the breadth of locations better understood, from wide empty beaches to rugged desert and southwest karri forest. He says in the next year, pandemic permitting, “there is a solid schedule of local productions including a television series, two scripted feature films and several documentary projects. It’s a real opportunity for growth. We’re ready to fly but one challenge is that we don’t have a film studio. If we had a built studio, people (heading west) wouldn’t stop at Adelaide, where the last one is located.” Despite starring two foreign actors — Scottish actress Macdonald and American actor Garrett Hedlund as Lu Fox, an enigmatic musician and sometime poacher who exiles himself in the Kimberley wilderness — Dirt Music gave a boost to the local industry, Separovich says. Up to 120 WA crew members plus location scouts and peripheral industries benefited from Dirt Music shoots in the Kimberley and in Esperance on the Great Australian Bight.
“We filmed the story in reverse because we had to get up north to the Kimberley before the wet season set in,” Separovich says. “We filmed on Sunday Island and smaller islands, which was a challenge because we had to have all equipment with us.” Cast and crew were dispersed to stay at a local pearl farm and Kooljaman wilderness camp at remote Cape Leveque. The art department lived in tents in an indigenous-owned bush camp called Gumbanan.
That was followed by a 2000km trip back south and east to the coastal town of Esperance, where a local “shark whisperer” helped film underwater scenes in azure waters off the town’s dazzling white beaches. Another location was the wine region of the Swan Valley, east of Perth, where scenes from hero Luther Fox’s melon farm were shot.
The exposure of such diverse natural landscapes is great for WA, Screenwest’s Rowe says, helped by a $2m state government contribution to host the big budget film. But now the time is right for a film studio to complement filming in stunning outdoor settings, he says.
Cinematographer Michael McDermott agrees, saying Western Australia cannot afford to miss out on a slice of the federal government’s recently announced $400m film fund, aimed at attracting film and TV productions to Australia. “We need to act now to capitalise on that opportunity,” says McDermott, whose credits include films such as Hounds of Love, The Furnace and Below.
“Perth’s well overdue for some decent film infrastructure and we’ve been lobbying for it for some time. Our state can’t just be driven by mining and agriculture.” McDermott points to the example of Vancouver, where substantial studio facilities have lured Hollywood directors across the border to Canada to make films. “Perth doesn’t have to compete massively with Fox Studios on the Gold Coast, but if we don’t build something it would be very shortsighted,” he says.
A WA screen industry campaign has enlisted dozens of supporters, including high-profile backers such as Hugh Jackman, who trained at Perth’s Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts; novelist Winton; Aaron Pedersen, star of the ABC’s Mystery Road, which is shot on location in Kununurra; and TV writer Ben Elton.
Jackman says a high-quality studio “is a key factor in the attractiveness of a market for screen production”. Elton writes that WA is “way ahead of the curve” in relaxing COVID-19 restrictions. “All they’d need to do was fly in a star or two, we’d lock ’em up in luxury for a fortnight, then take them to our fabulous new studio (or location) to make their movie or miniseries.” Industry insiders say several proposals are being mooted for locations around Fremantle port, the Perth inner-city precinct and even a wildlife park.
Rowe says he’s aware of a couple of parties taking unsolicited bids to the West Australian government about building a studio. State Arts Minister David Templeman, who has visited film studios in Sydney, Melbourne, Bris­bane, the Gold Coast and Adelaide, says the government “is looking at the model that might best suit WA to meet demand”.
“Having a film production studio would be a game changer that would take the industry to the next level,” says Templeman. “Graduates from the Western Australian Academy of Performing Arts and production crews would no longer have to travel interstate and internationally to get work; we would be able to retain our talent and skills right here in WA. It would also create jobs in the gaming and virtual reality space, which we know is a significant growth area.” Local filmmakers are less sure about a studio as a panacea for a still stubbornly small industry. They say the rise of new technologies calls into question the wisdom of investing in a major film complex when major series such as Disney’s Star Wars: The Mandalorian are relying heavily on the use of LED screens simulating various locations.
“It uses gaming technology and you can’t tell the difference between real and virtual,” one Perth filmmaker tells The Australian. “We’d be better off building on our game engine technology while pushing our big open spaces.” Andrew Ogilvie, chief executive of Perth-based Electric Pictures, which co-produced Australian film Hotel Mumbai, also is sceptical that substantial investment in a studio would increase film production in the state.
“What we need is a bigger pot of money to support local production and tax subsidies and incentives of the kind offered by South Australia, where Hotel Mumbai was made … There are other factors limiting our industry; we have smaller crews and a tyranny of distance from the rest of Australia,” he says. “That hasn’t changed in the 30 years since I started making documentaries here.”
CREDIT: Victoria Laurie
Word count: 1549
