Causes of crime THERE is no evidence in the academic literature to back up the claim of Mark Carroll that raising the age of criminal responsibility causes more criminal behaviour (“Protect kids from bikies”, The Advertiser, Monday).
In fact, the more attention a young person at any age receives from the criminal justice system, the more likely it is they will head down the path of career criminal.
Professor RICK SARRE, SA Council for Civil Liberties president Shaky start PHIL Saunders’ congratulatory letter to Prime Minister Anthony Albanese is somewhat perplexing to me (“PM performing”, The Advertiser, Monday).
From my perspective, rapidly increasing interest rates, higher power bills and mounting cost-of-living pressures are hardly a promising start to Mr Albanese’s tenure.
TONY TAGNI, Craigburn Farm Keep the card THE decision to dump the cashless welfare card in remote communities is to me a good example of misplaced ideology trumping common sense and pragmatism.
This program has allowed families to be fed and clothed rather than welfare payments being spent on drugs, alcohol and gambling. Proponents of dumping the card talk of rights and civil liberties, and quote surveys and studies to support their arguments. But to my mind, benefits are self-evident.
RANDAL WILLIAMS, Burnside Pension changes THOSE advocating for an increase in the pension, or allowing pensioners to work more, should be careful what they wish for.
It is not beyond the realms of possibility that the federal government could increase payments and relax hours of working, but then remove pensioner concessions.
NOEL CARTHEW, Adelaide Bills no cheaper RICHARD Bentley says he reads about renewable energy being a cheaper alternative (“Cheaper power”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
I also read. Especially my energy bills, which have only increased since renewables started to transition into the grid.
B. HINTON, Torrensville Voice details THERE is much more to be explained following details Prime Minister Anthony Albanese provided to The Advertiser regarding the proposed Indigenous voice to parliament (“PM’s vow on voice”, Saturday).
Mr Albanese said it would be an advisory body, would not involve reparation, and would have no power to pass laws. With such little change in these areas I ask: Why the enormous push in the first place for something that is as serious as changing our country’s Constitution?
There surely must be more to it which is not being explained and it is therefore a long way off from getting my vote.
BRUCE BURFORD, Adelaide Look into nuclear SINCE Opposition Leader Peter Dutton mentioned it, there has been a surge of people bagging nuclear power.
Many say it will be unaffordable or it will take too long to get it up and running.
Australia has several coal-fired power stations reaching the end of their lives. If we are looking for carbon-free base-load power, nuclear may be an option. Here in South Australia we mine its key ingredient and don’t get hit by many earthquakes and tidal waves like Fukushima, Japan, did.
The nuclear power option has never been seriously investigated for Australia so, to me, everyone’s claims about it are simply speculation. I don’t know whether nuclear power is viable for us – it may not be – but I believe we should diligently investigate to find out.
KYM SIMONS, Hallett Cove Check the facts I KNEW someone who was a big fan of conspiracy theorist Alex Jones. He insisted Jones knew the “real truth” about the world. But I saw a man shouting about gay frogs and a prison colony on Mars.
Another popular “truth teller,” David Icke, says the Queen is a shapeshifting alien reptile who eats babies.
How have these people gained so many loyal followers who believe their nonsense? NICK HASKELL, Athelstone
Word count: 615
