CLUSTER-BUSTERS SA HEALTH has much to be proud of in its magnificent response to the COVID-19 pandemic, from testing to contact tracing to rejigging the hospital system to, in some cases, simply turning up to jobs that carry risks. So you can forgive them a little swagger in their tweet announcing they were sending a team to help our struggling neighbours. “Our cluster-busting, curve-crushing, virus-vanquishing team of contact-tracing experts are heading to Victoria to help prevent a potential second wave,” they announced. Vic Premier DANIEL ANDREWS might want take time out from bagging to SA to watch the old Ghostbusters movie and be reminded of the line “Who ya gonna call?”
1 P-TA!
DEANNE sent in this snap of the road sign to “Nurioopta” and wonders if anyone knows how long it has been there with this spelling of the name. The correct name of Nuriootpa is believed to originate from an Aboriginal word meaning “neck country”, a reference to the area being part of the neck of a giant called Wano by the Kaurna people.
2 PERFECT TIMING IN a beautiful example of good timing, this new artwork of an older person helping a young girl walking along a low brick wall while holding her teddy bear has appeared as part of works on the fence line of the Resthaven aged care community at Leabrook. It appeared just days before government officials announced a further easing of restrictions, which now allow children under 16 to once again be able to visit their loved ones in aged-care homes. You might say it was life imitating art.
3 TOP HAT THE SANFL is back and today there should be plenty of brand new hats at Adelaide Oval sporting Norwood’s motto Fortis in Procella — Strength in Adversity. As with many sporting clubs, the Redlegs had to draw on strength in tough times as restrictions hit their finances, but this fundraising cap modelled by canine fan CHUCKIE proved a popular fundraiser with loyal fans and will become a collectors’ item. Decades down the track, great-grandparents will be able to pull it off the hat rack and tell junior Legs’ fans about the great 2020 lockdown.
4 KOALA HUGGER A TWIST on our “faces in the woodwork” photos — and there are more to come — with this offering from ANNE KIRK of Colonel Light Gardens. She was walking in Belair National Park and watched as a koala walked up to a tree, gave it a hug then climbed to the top. Anne showed this photo to a friend, who pointed out what looks like a koala’s face in the tree trunk by the koala’s left paw. Quite eerie but cute.
CLASS IS IN “THAT half-century went quickly” will probably be the line of the day when old school friends gather in November. STUART INNES tells us matriculation students of 1970 from Adelaide Technical High School are having a 50-year reunion on Friday, November 27. A school tour and lunch are planned. The ATHS students can email athsclassof1970@gmail.com for more information and to register their interest.
5 IN VINO VERITAS STORY in The Advertiser this week about how the 3D virtual-reality technology developed by video games makers is being used by everyone from defence and aviation industries to construction and carmakers. It mentioned an app developed by games giant Unity Technologies for Australian winemaker Treasury Wine Estate’s 19 Crimes label. It is very cool — you wave your smartphone, or device, with the app, in front of the bottle and the label appears to come to life on your screen, as the featured convict moves and starts telling his/her tale of transport. A talking label may make some think they have had one too many tipples. Unity is one of the biggest developers of games software but also counts firms such as Boeing, Airbus, Audi and Toyota as clients.
6 GIANT AMONG US IT was back in 1969 that JEFF HART was packing up from a skindiving session off Cape Schanck in Victoria when he heard cries from two fellow divers who had been thrown on to rocks then swept out to sea with cuts and cramp when conditions suddenly changed. A report in Melbourne’s The Sun relates how the 203cm “gentle giant” clambered down the cliffs, dived in with his flippers, and in an epic three-hour rescue in rough seas, managed to drag both exhausted men, BILL DAVIES and GORDON RYAN, to safety in a protected bay. Teenage surfer PETER MORET then paddled out to help bring them to shore. Jeff, of Moana South, turned 80 yesterday, and proud daughter KIMBERLEY KURMIS reminds us that genuine heroics are timeless.
7 EYE OF BEHOLDER COUPLE in the Firle Medical Centre were discussing this artwork. The woman saw a couple about to kiss, the man saw two trees and a wine glass...
TALE OF THE TAIL SOME good rural intel from JAN and COLIN EDWARDS, who work a dairy farm in the Adelaide Hills.
After a recent item about a kookaburra’s laugh being a sign of rain, they agree and add this intriguing meteorological phenomenon – apparently the hairs on the tails of their dairy cattle stand out as a sure sign of rain.
will.king@news.com.au PO Box 339, Adelaide, 5001
CREDIT: Will King
Word count: 880
