DEFENCE giant BAE Systems welcomed the move to expand the local games industry as it has potential to help its own hi-tech work at its facilities including at Osborne and Tonsley.
BAE Systems’ ASC Shipbuilding managing director Craig Lockhart noted gaming developers are finding new career paths as diverse industries seek their skills.
“Virtual reality and 3D visualisation and simulation is increasingly being used by shipbuilders as part of the Hunter Class Frigate Program to gain an understanding of the new facility at Osborne, test-build processes and develop digital work orders to improve shipyard efficiency and effectiveness,” Mr Lockhart said.
“Investment in South Australia’s games industry will have far-reaching benefits to the shipbuilding sector as we can apply these techniques in our build and sustainment programs.
“It also provides business opportunities for the state’s gaming sector and alternative career pathways for gaming developers.” It is now nearly half a century since the launch of Pong, one of the first video arcade games, which heralded the decline of the pinball machine and the rise of video gaming.
The Atari table tennis game developed as a training exercise in 1972 and was the forerunner of a gaming revolution as Space Invaders, Pac Man and Super Mario, Game Boy, Wii, Xbox and PlayStation became part of popular culture.
As this technology grew, other industries saw the potential for real time 3D, along with virtual, augmented and extended reality.
A prime example of a gaming technology firm now serving diverse clients is San Francisco-based Unity Technologies.
Unity started out making video games but has since become a world-leading real-time 3D development platform with offices in 44 countries. Fifty per cent of games worldwide are made using Unity.
Clients using its software include Audi, BMW, Skanska, Toyota, Ford, Airbus and Boeing. Closer to home, marketing agency Tactic has been bringing product packages, like those of Treasury Wine Estates, to life using augmented reality and the Unity engine.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH
Word count: 326
