Madeleine West, the long way home from Melbourne to Byron
As a kid I wanted to be Princess Leia. Still do. Which explains why my first experience of ‘travel’ during isolation captured my imagination. When coronavirus first crashed down upon Australia’s capitals, I was filming two states away from my little ones. Wheeling out my rubbish one bin night, I was greeted by the sight of a neighbour tamping down her green waste in a full Wookie costume. Hubby sorted recyclables rocking Hans Solo regalia, and their two young Jedis performed a light-sabre battle with a duster and a paper-towel inner tube. Ingenious.
This was my first experience of the “drag out your dumpsters in drag” phenomenon, and I wanted to see more. I resolved then and there to transform my return home into a holiday – an Australia-in-lockdown roadtrip. An all-Aussie adventure into our own backyard.
Once on the road, regimented schedules went out the window. Days and hours merged with little resistance, as they should on holiday. I drove strictly at night, partly because the most interesting things played out after dark, but mostly because following empty roads at midnight felt much more normal than the increasingly empty roads I encountered at midday.
In isolation, even service-station stopovers feel weird. Seeing tables and chairs wrapped in hazard tape makes one ponder whether you’re stumbling into the scene of a homicide or just Covid precautions. High stakes for the sake of a toilet break and a packet of Doritos.
At one campsite, I was woken by a midnight birthday gathering next door. Though “socially distant”, their guarded laughter was powerful medicine for the mind, body and soul. Cruising through sleepy country towns regularly revealed more people out enjoying the balmy evening than there was during the day. At one stopover, I spied a clutch of pyjama-clad friends gathered outside a souvlaki bar open for business past 2am, faces alight with joy and garlic sauce. The next night, several towns later, the manager of a convenience store greeted me with “That’s Covid”, his take on the classic That’s Amore, and directed me to the hand sanitiser.
I witnessed homes alive with activity, shifting moving boxes between garages and vehicles. Why? Perhaps moving house while the roads were clear. Perhaps hiding their shame at being evicted under cover of darkness. Regardless of the reason, it fascinated me to see folks out and about at the witching hour, revolutionised by these revolutionary circumstances. And the very act of challenging what you know is the primary purpose of travel.
Passing through our dazzling outback, the company of silence and stillness not mandated by pandemic was deeply soothing. Ochre earth with overlaying blistering blue skies as far as the eye could see. Just the easy grace of Mother Nature going about her business. Having traced a respectful wide berth around South Australia, I have to say my fave holiday moment came courtesy of a tiny border town where I decided to rest.
The receptionist at the solitary hotel asked, “Aren’t you on Neighbours?” Oh dear.
“So what’s it like kissing Toadie?” Usually bound by schedules, this time, with that most precious of commodities, Time, suddenly in abundance, I decided to pause and… chat.
“Just quietly,” she leaned in conspiratorily, ‘We do crack open a couple of pokies later, if you’re keen. Just for a few of the older locals who get lonely.” Was I keen? Was I ever! This had echoes of Prohibition all over it and I wanted in. Fingers crossed, we’d played two-up. At 9.30pm in the adjoining RSL I joined a handful of local vets and their partners gathered for a little rebellious socially distant socialising. After much chatter and a few rounds on the one-armed bandits, a few of us adjourned to one fellow’s backyard where he had a virtual reality play area set up.
If asked, many years from now, “Where were you during the pandemic of 2020?” I’ll take great pleasure in recalling hanging out with a bunch of returned servicemen playing Call of Duty at 1am on the Victorian border. Because in that floodlit backyard the Anzac spirit paid us a visit and demonstrated what it means to be a proud Australian.
If travel means to go from one destination to another, the distance should be irrelevant if the journey has the power to change you. Now, while it feels like the world is closing in, perhaps all we need is to be more open.
CREDIT: Madeleine West
Word count: 752
