Since 1984, Trinity College has established itself as a flourishing, well-respected college.
Community engagement, talented staff, high ATAR attainment, a variety of co-curricular options and an excellent base in literacy and numeracy are all components of a Trinity education.
The Evanston South college is a genuine leader in education because the school embraces change. “We look to serve our community in increasingly relevant ways by regularly re-engineering and refocusing our college,” Trinity College head Nick Hately says.
“We are committed to delivering and improving traditional aspects of schooling while implementing new directions.” Its new Innovation and Creativity School is the most significant leap forward in boosting the skills of Trinity students and enhancing their employability for years to come.
With a 360-degree projection room, industry-standard 3D printing capacity, virtual-reality capability, design and animation areas, sound studio and university-standard teaching spaces, the new facility is state-of-the-art.
“Our collective teaching and learning capability has grown significantly by delivering this new facility,” Mr Hately says.
“The $10m investment is providing some tremendous opportunities for students from all year levels and 21st-century education is being driven by stronger movement to learning through inquiry, exploration and collaboration.” To partner with the new facility, Trinity has rewritten significant parts of its curriculum. Students from particular year levels are provided week-long experiences where they are taught skills relating to artificial intelligence, virtual reality, 3D printing and animation.
Additional courses, with a more significant focus on entrepreneurship and innovation, are also available.
Trinity has embraced a path to clearly establish the qualities and capabilities they want their graduates to possess in order to flourish in society beyond school.
“We will embrace a teaching program and provide school experiences which will deliver ethical values and capabilities for all,” Mr Hately says. Trinity College, Alexander Ave, Evanston South, 8522 0666, trinity.sa.edu.au
Word count: 302
