Unley trees drop away I AM pleased Caleb Bond attended our recent Unley Council meeting to hear about projects that we’re investigating (“Urban forest – or pay more”, The Advertiser, August 2).
I’m delighted he has helped expose and open up this discussion about the vital issue of trees on private property.
In Unley, we have a problem. It has been recognised globally as a cool, green, leafy place – one of the Tree Cities of the World – but our crown is slipping. We are failing and soon we may not deserve this accolade.
A total of 36 per cent of trees on private property have gone and we are losing more than 1000 every year. The council is planting more trees as fast as we practically can on our own land, about 500 extra every year on verges and in reserves. But in another six years, all available locations for new plantings will be exhausted.
We admit we’re failing, which is why we are considering financial incentives for private landowners to place a value on tree canopy. As part of the process, we will consult with our community.
It’s worth noting that if we do introduce new costs they won’t be retrospective. Existing residents won’t pay more. One concept under investigation would only apply to new developments, which we feel should have a minimum tree canopy in the 15 per cent range for relevant zoning areas, to encourage planting of new trees.
As a council, we’re determined to achieve the State Government’s target for tree cover, which we were above two decades ago but are now falling well below.
MICHAEL HEWITSON, AM, Unley Council Mayor
Isolation blues COVidleness has raised its ugly head to me.With time to spare I find it hard to fill.With anything resembling ingenuity.I make a plan but fail to gain the will.It’s like a form of virtual reality, inertia, or the French will say ennui.The smallest task exceeds my brain’s capacity.Its cells, synapses mere ratatouille.So shiftless, sluggish, indolent and vague I be.Yet must not fail the standards I’ve been set.The impetus I need to fuel my energy will be the end of COVID-19. That’s not yet.
MAUREEN MITSON Modbury North
Green education DAVID Penberthy was making sense in his discussion of people’s behaviour in the pandemic until he decided to bag the Greens (“ ‘Freedom’ fighters put us all in danger”, Sunday Mail, August 9).
Using terms such as “even members of the Greens” recognise anti-vaccination to be an issue, he tries to insinuate it is a Greens problem.
In fact, most of these deluded people come from the rabid Right, with a few la-la-land hippies thrown in. Most Green voters are highly educated and, as such, believers in vaccination.
GILLIAN UNICOMB Clifton Hill, Victoria
Are fines being paid?
I THINK it is about time we got a heads-up from the various levels of government outlining how much the recalcitrant COVID-19 offenders have actually paid for their unsecured fines, and a guide as to the proportion of debts being paid on time.
DAVID MACKLIN Ashbourne
Nursing-home struggle FAMILIES with parents or friends in care have been telling governments for years that nursing-home staff are poorly trained and, without staff ratios, are struggling to care for residents when they are well.
With the virus, they may be expected to look after both the sick and the well who are locked in the same centre. All sick residents should be in hospital with a ventilator.
Some hospitals have apparently refused to take residents. This is deplorable, as these are the people who have worked to provide the lifestyle that employs them.
They have kept the hospitals going, the businesses alive and the country operating since before the virus.
We are told that “we’re all in this together” and “all lives matter”. Well, not if you are elderly. It is obvious that you are not treated equally (and maybe not treated at all).
A country is judged by how it treats the most vulnerable in its community. We are failing.
B. O’HALLORAN Adelaide
Give me a refund IS anyone having the same problem I’m having?
I had a cruise booked for last April, flying to Brisbane with Virgin and back with Qantas. Then, of course, it all got cancelled. I have had every cent of my cruise money returned, but the airlines insist I have a credit for the flights.
I don’t want a credit. I want a cash refund as, at my age, I won’t be flying anywhere in the foreseeable future. I have approached both airlines but they say the request must come from my travel agent. She has approached them both. Virgin has turned her down flat, saying I must have a credit.
Qantas can take three months to answer and I still have another month to go on that. If anyone has had the same problem I would love to hear if they managed to overcome it.
EVE MILLS Elizabeth North
Baring the soul PETER Goers never fails to provoke – in the best sense of the word. Most times he strikes the right chord with me, whether it be his political/social comments, his support for the arts and South Australian culture, his defence of local icons (people and/or our heritage) and his lambasting of pomposity and those with their innate sense of privilege.
It is always laced with sardonic humour. His latest article was one of his best (“Isolation’s been tough but it can’t last forever”, Sunday Mail, August 9). It was a totally honest baring of his soul, describing the anguish of his virtual self-isolation during the pandemic.
I’m sure he – like many of us – will rejoice and recover our mojos when we are able to mingle freely with others in theatre foyers and the vestibules of our cinemas. Peter, be patient. Fairly soon, life will return to normal. Whatever that may mean.
VINCENT BURKE Adelaide
Clarification LAST week we published a story titled “Social life, social death” about people’s online presence after death.
We have since learnt the premise of this story wasn’t true. The article was partly based on a press release from Adelaide marketing and communications company Mihell & Lycos, which referred to a project led by a Scandinavian-based Karl-Axel Mattiasson. While programs using artificial intelligence to mimic the living online after they’ve passed are in development, in this case the press release was actually a publicity stunt designed to promote an online game. Our normal fact checking processes were not followed. We regret publishing the story and apologise to our readers.
Word count: 1097
