Thanks to movies like The Hangover, there’s a perception that Las Vegas is one big MTV video – a hedonistic cocktail of high rollers, pool parties and late-night shenanigans. And while you can definitely find all those things, the city has much more to offer.
Whether a sports fan, gourmand, culture vulture or adrenaline addict, there’s a slice of Vegas just for you.
FOR THE SPORTS FAN Professional sports teams are a new gamble for Vegas, but the city is betting big on their appeal.
It started with the Vegas Golden Knights hockey team, which made its debut at the T-Mobile Arena in October 2017 and went on to have a stunning inaugural season, winning eight out of the first nine games and reaching the Stanley Cup Finals. Catch the team at T-Mobile Arena until April.
Professional women’s basketball came to Vegas last year. The Las Vegas Aces can be seen at the Mandalay Bay Events Center during the WNBA season from May through August.
Completing the trifecta is Las Vegas Lights FC, a soccer team that made its debut in the USL Championship in 2018. The team plays at Cashman Field between March and October.
Capitalising on electronic sports’ popularity, MGM Resorts opened the HyperX Esports Arena in the Luxor last year. In addition to watching pro gamers compete on a 15m-high LED video wall, players can use PC and gaming consoles plus indulge in retro favourites such as Pac-Man and Street Fighter.
There’s a gaming-inspired menu by Jose Andres.
The MGM Grand is a magnet for sports fans thanks to a hi-tech, multi-level driving range by Top Golf plus indoor laser golf, beer pong and billiards at Level Up.
STAY: The recently rebranded Park MGM is walking distance from the T-Mobile arena.
parkmgm.com
FOR THE GOURMAND No longer a sea of all-you-can-eat-buffets, Vegas now boasts one of the most sophisticated dining scenes in the country. You can find everything from casual neighbourhood eateries such as 7th & Carson in the casino-free Fremont East District to three Michelin-star restaurants by culinary superstars like Joel Robuchon.
The last decade has seen the unprecedented rise of the celebrity chef. And there’s no one more high-profile than Gordon Ramsay. Last year he launched Hell’s Kitchen, a restaurant inspired by his fiery reality TV series. Enjoying an enviable Strip-side location at Caesars Palace, the venue mimics the studio atmosphere with two “competing” teams of chefs. Thankfully, the cooking lives up to the theatrics, with faithful reproductions of Ramsay classics, such as beef Wellington and an appropriately sinful sticky toffee pudding.
Other notable openings include Korean chef Roy Choi’s Best Friend, in the Park MGM, and a Vegas outpost of the wildly successful Eataly concept which combines a vibrant Italian market with cafes and restaurants.
Can’t decide where to try first? Then take a Lip Smacking Foodie Tour and sample signature dishes at up to five different establishments. The Strip-based walking tour is the most popular but more adventurous diners should check out the Downtown itinerary which showcases the flourishing food scene around Fremont East. Heading there soon? Vegas Uncork’d is a food and wine festival from May 9-12.
STAY: The boutique NoMad Hotel has a restaurant overseen by celebrated chef Daniel Humm, who earned three Michelin stars at New York’s Eleven Madison Park, and a chic new rooftop pool.
thenomadhotel.com
FOR ENTERTAINMENT LOVERS This year sees two of the world’s biggest pop stars descend on Vegas and both are appearing in the relatively intimate surrounds of the 5300-seat Park Theater.
Lady Gaga started her two-year residency in December with two separate shows – a greatest-hits extravaganza and a stripped-down version with American jazz classics. Who could possibly compete with that? Britney, of course. Britney Spears is back with an aptly named new show, Domination, at Park Theater on select dates until August.
Last year saw septuagenarian pop goddess Cher take Vegas by storm with her career-spanning showcase and she’s back with more dates during 2019.
Also coming to town this year are rock’n’roll legends Aerosmith, lip-curling bad boy Billy Idol and ’90s boyband sensation Backstreet Boys.
Cirque du Soleil still has an impressive range of Vegas shows, from musical tributes such as Michael Jackson One to aquatic spectaculars like O at the Bellagio.
For a bawdier alternative, check out Absinthe, a colourful recreation of an old-school European circus at Caesars Palace, and Opium, an equally outrageous space-themed successor in The Cosmopolitan.
STAY: Home to the Chelsea Theater and upscale supper club Rose. Rabbit. Lie., The Cosmopolitan is a show-lover’s dream.
cosmopolitanlasvegas.com
FOR THE ADRENALINE ADDICT Vegas has no shortage of ways to raise your heart rate. Last year, MGM’s New York-New York Hotel added virtual reality headsets to its Big Apple roller coaster, making it the longest virtual-reality coaster in the world. The 1.5km ride tops out at 107km/h and is the first to feature a terrifying-sounding 180-degree heartline twist and dive.
Ever fancied ziplining 12 storeys above the Las Vegas Strip? Well, you’re in luck because November saw the launch of Fly LINQ, a 330m zipline that soars over the LINQ Promenade. If that sounds a little too intrepid, try the nearby High Roller instead. At 167m high, it’s the world’s tallest observation wheel and offers unparalleled views of the Strip and surrounding desert from its 28 cabins.
You’ll see plenty of supercars on the Strip but if you’d like to put one through its paces on a track, head to Speed Vegas’s purpose-built facility south of the city. Choose a vehicle from a wallet-bruising array of Porsches, Ferraris and Lamborghinis, then take one for a spin with an instructor on the 2.4km circuit.
If there’s one experience worth splashing out on in Vegas, it’s a helicopter ride to the Grand Canyon. Sundance Helicopters has exclusive access to a plateau on the West Rim where you’ll enjoy a champagne picnic with a side serving of stunning canyon views.
STAY: MGM Grand’s Stay Well Suites are the perfect place to unwind after an adrenaline-charged day.
mgmgrand.com FOR THE PARTY ANIMAL Vegas might have broadened its appeal but it’s still the planet’s premier party spot.
In fact, the sheer number of nightclubs, bars and pool parties can make it difficult to know where to start. The pool party scene is particularly fickle but Drai’s at The Cromwell has been a perennial favourite since it launched in 2014. Located 11 storeys above the Strip, it features a palm tree-lined pool deck, two levels of private cabanas and a roster of top DJs. After dark the action shifts inside with performances from hot hip-hop and R&B acts.
For a more intimate setting, check out Jewel at ARIA Resort, a bedazzling space lined with LED ribbons that pulse and change colour with the music.
Last year’s most anticipated opening was On The Record, a sprawling indoor/outdoor club by LA speakeasy specialists Jonnie and Mark Houston. The twin brothers are renowned for creating hidden entrances so finding it inside Park MGM might be trickier than you think.
Vegas has a dizzying array of bars but for sheer spectacle and posh vibe it’s hard to beat the Chandelier Lounge in The Cosmopolitan. Resembling a giant crystal chandelier, the shimmering three-level complex housing three unique bar experiences is encased by glowing strands of more than two million crystals.
Worried about running out of Moet? No such concerns at Rosina, an intimate new Art Deco-themed cocktail bar inside The Palazzo that has dedicated champagne call buttons.
STAY: Stay at Wynn or Encore and you’ll have access to some of Vegas’s best nightlife, including XS, Intrigue and Encore Beach Club.
wynnlasvegas.com THE WRITER WAS A GUEST OF LAS VEGAS CONVENTION AND VISITORS AUTHORITY AND BRAND USA
ESCAPE ROUTE LAS VEGAS GETTING THERE Virgin Australia and Delta Air Lines fly daily to Las Vegas via Los Angeles. virginaustralia.com MORE visitlasvegas.com; visittheusa.com.auSHARE YOUR AMERICAN HOLIDAY TIPS WITH US. EMAIL ESCAPE@NEWS.COM.AU
CREDIT: ROB MCFARLAND
Word count: 1320
