CLINICIANS at an Adelaide psychology practice are using virtual-reality technology to help kids overcome crippling fears and anxiety sparked by everything from flying to stormy weather, public speaking and even sitting tests and exams.
ThinkWise clinical psychologist Angelique Foran said the technique was proving successful, helping young people with a range of phobias.
“There are a lot of children who haven’t previously been able to go on a family holiday due to their fear of flying,” the director of the Cumberland Park clinic said. “We’ve also had success helping kids overcome their fear of storms who’ve previously been stuck inside whenever there is stormy weather.
“I’ve also worked with young people who experience test anxiety, both at high school and university levels.
“(We get them to) sit down in a virtual classroom, look around as if they were doing a test ... and they start to learn to manage those overwhelming feelings they get before a test.” The main reason for young people seeking help was for public speaking, she said. Wearing virtual-reality goggles, young participants are immersed in an experience to help prepare them to face real-life situations.
“(If it is public speaking), they can look around to different sides of the room, see people coughing, walking out while they are talking,” Ms Foran said. “You can have them talking to a small group, a class or a full auditorium.
“We can control not only the number of people they are speaking in front of but the questions they are asked.” Ms Foran said while most people experienced some level of anxiety at some point, issues arose when it began to significantly affect a person’s life and stopped them from doing certain things.
She said avoiding uncomfortable situations simply strengthened an anxiety. “Don’t allow kids to avoid (the situation) as that just increases their anxiety,” Ms Foran said.“As a parent, that is one of the hardest things to do, to keep encouraging kids when they are really distressed but it is actually really important.”
CREDIT: Rebecca Baker
Word count: 338
