The SA Sheep Expo continues to go from strength to strength with a record 140 entrants converging on the Adelaide Showground last week.
This year's program had a strong focus on technology with lectures including virtual fencing, a virtual reality farming experience and the use of electronic identification tags in sheep flocks.
Other popular sessions included butchering, mating ewe lambs and a careers panel.
Several new awards were introduced in the event's fourth year, including the Flinders Merino Learners Scholarship, awarded to Codee Lieblich, Norwood.
As part of her prize, she will spend one to two weeks at Bendleby Station in the Flinders Ranges.
Merino SA also offered a week's work experience on a stud.
This was won by Ella Jones, Naracoorte.
Expo chairman Brenton Lush was thrilled the Expo had attracted an extra 50 participants this year, from SA, Vic and NSW.
Mr Lush said it was great to expose interested youth to the wide range of careers on offer in the sheep and wool industry, as well as teaching them how to handle sheep.
"When the expo was set up, the sheep industry was very positive but the big question mark was who were the people that were going to take the industry forward," he said.
"We have an older workforce and it is much easier to sit on a tractor than handle sheep so the thought process was that we have to come up with a way to encourage young people to stay in the sheep industry.
"I keep looking at this group and thinking in 10 to 20 years' time, these are the people that will be running the industry, we are just helping to build a good foundation for them."
A new initiative which Mr Lush said was well received was an off-site visit for the senior entrants to Michell Wool's Salisbury mill.
"It is very encouraging to see so much enthusiasm from people in the industry that just want to be involved," he said.
"Companies such as Elders and Michells have really got behind it and see it as a way to guarantee their own futures."
The 2020 SA Sheep Expo will be held from April 20 to 22.
CREDIT: CATHERINE MILLER
Word count: 368
