Vale king Kerls RIP Neil Kerley, for a passion well done.
PETER JOHN DOROCH, Moonta Bay Dummy spit EVEN Nick Kyrgios has outdone himself this time with his disgusting behaviour at Wimbledon (“Kyrgios’ (dummy) spit at spectators’’, The Advertiser, Thursday).
Leaving Kyrgios to one side, the problem started many years ago when tennis officialdom failed to crack down on disrespectful tennis players and their misplaced aggression.
Kyrgios and his ilk should have been kicked out of the sport long ago. Australians should feel ashamed of him rather than entertained. GEOFF FORBES, Kensington Gardens Single rooms READING daily accounts of ramping and the lack of beds in the RAH makes me think: Who on earth decided to make all the rooms in this new hospital for one person?
Is there a way some of the single rooms could be made double? We had share rooms before, even wards. Why not now?
It would make sense, and would solve many of the problems with incoming patients from the emergency department.
And perhaps it could even solve the ramping problem.
MARGARET DORTON, Aldinga Beach Reduce ramping I WAS pleased to read Premier Peter Malinauskas is going to add 36 new ambulances to the fleet.
However, while that should cut response time to call-outs, I fail to see how it will reduce ramping at hospitals.
The RAH’s emergency department has hit a record of patients unable to leave the ED because there are no available beds.
What we need is another public hospital. We need one that is much larger than the RAH.
And the right remuneration will attract the appropriate staff. DIANNE GLATZ, Port Elliot Hospital beds IN my view, ordering 36 new ambulances at this time is akin to putting the cart before the horse.
Without first fixing the capacity of hospitals and number of medical staff, the government may have to build more ramps to accommodate the extra ambulances.
DAVID MANNING, Adelaide Health red tape SEVERAL contributors have pointed out the evils of selling off government assets to the private sector.
They have warned that some things should always be controlled by the state. But sometimes government control can go too far.
The classic example is the removal of boards from public hospitals to be replaced by central control.
Well, hasn’t that turned out well with Big Brother running things? Back in the day there was no need for a premier to ride shotgun in an ambulance to see how bad things were; hospital board members would meet in the hospital.
It’s difficult to ignore bodies lining the corridors when attending a meeting; Johnny on the spot just fixes the problem.
MARK THOMPSON, Newton Capping rents IT was interesting to read the letter “Rent control” by Domenica Cavuoto (The Advertiser, Thursday).
Perhaps Domenica is not aware but I remember when we had rent control here in South Australia during wartime and after it.
So it can work in times of a housing crisis.
Perhaps even including a tax on some short-stay accommodation. These appear to be one of the new problems.
MARJORIE BROWN, Glenunga Frequent flying I FIND it incredible that two of the most senior politicians have spent so much time outside of Australia since the last federal election.
It seems to me Foreign Minister Penny Wong has covered more kilometres than astronaut Neil Armstrong did. And Armstrong went to the moon and back.
Prime Minister Anthony Albanese will start to lose his Australian accent if he continues to stay out of the country so much.
I cannot understand why these politicians think it is more important to address the problems of other countries when there are so many Australians experiencing hunger, homelessness, depression, domestic violence, etc.
If the pollies formed a committee to look into it, the meeting would probably be in London, Paris or New York.
PHILIP MATTHEWS, Hallett Cove Well travelled IS becoming a new federal government a cue to travel the world? I’m not sure our travelling politicians have made any progress on the international stage.
JOHN K. PRIOR, Manningham Energy Luddites SOME recent letters about renewable energy remind me of arguments being put forward in the late 1800s.
Such as: These newfangled motor vehicles will never replace the horses on my farm. All the blacksmiths who make horseshoes will be out of work.
Horses can eat grass on the side of the road but cars will need refuelling stations every few miles and the fuel will need to be transported. Who’s going to pay for that?
More people will be killed by vehicles travelling at higher speeds than are killed by riding horses. NOEL CARTHEW, Adelaide
Word count: 771
