THIS week I fell in love. Her name is Sarah, then again it might be Sophie, or maybe it’s Olivia?
To be honest, I can’t remember but she won me over instantly: Calm, reassuring, helpful and oh, so patient.
You see Sarah, let’s call her Sarah, is an actual real-life person – one of those things that are so rare to find to help you these days, remember them?
But she was there, on the other end of the phone, when on Monday I realised I’d stupidly forgotten to book my 11-year-old’s flight back to Adelaide from Western Australia. I needed him to fly as an unaccompanied minor, preferably on a particular flying kangaroo flight, to coincide with my country-dwelling family travelling to the big smoke to take another visitor to the airport.
I’d checked online to see if there were seats available on the flight I wanted and then called to book (the last time I’d booked for a child to fly solo you couldn’t do it online).
Unfortunately, I’d chosen a “high demand” time and was offered a call-back service, in which I was promised someone would call me when I reached the front of the queue but it wouldn’t be in the next hour. So I waited, vowing I’d never again leave booking a flight to the last minute.
Sarah was wonderful. She didn’t tut-tut me being a total parenting nitwit but set about, well, simply helping me.
Turned out, I couldn’t book the flight I wanted, well not through her anyway, due to recent changes that meant it had be done online but she patiently stepped me through what I needed to do, giving me a few tips to make it easier next time.
I know it sounds ridiculous but I was seriously so appreciative – and not just of the fact I’d gotten my cherub on the preferred flight and been assured he’d be well looked after.
It struck me how unusual it has become to get person-to-person assistance at all, let alone that’s good and not in a call centre 10,000km away.
It’s a bit like listening to your favourite cassette on your Walkman, wearing shoulder pads and bauble socks. You can forget there was a time it was so run-of-the-mill ordinary.
Next week, ANZ will close branches in Kurralta Park and at Hutt St – the latest in a series of branch closures by the major banks.
Of course, they claim in highfalutin PR speak it reflects a shift in what consumers want.
I may be among a dying breed but I’ll take a real-life person to virtual reality or online help when I can, recently switching to a bank that still offers shopfront service.And I remain a firm fan of those bricks-and-mortar stores where real people, such as the lovely James at Adelaide’s Cricket Warehouse, are on hand to help even the most clueless of mums select the perfect gear for their kids.
CREDIT: REBECCA BAKER
Word count: 495
