MEET THE FIRST-TIMERS Ships making their Australian debut this summer
You know the feeling you get when you walk into a brand-new hotel or sit in a new car? Everything is immaculate, the design is state-of-the art, oh and let’s not forget that new carpet smell! It’s a similar feeling with ships.
Australia’s summer cruise season has officially begun and while there are some vessels that have been rejuvenated in dry dock, there are also ships making their debut into our ports. What could be more fun than heading to sea and discovering all the nooks and crannies, restaurants and entertainment on a vessel making her maiden voyage to this continent?
Here’s a run-down of ships debuting at our ports this season.
CARNIVAL SPLENDOR December will bring the Australian debut of the 3012-guest Carnival Splendor when she sails into her new year-round homeport of Sydney. On-board is the first Cloud 9 spa and accommodation in Australia. Spanning two decks, The Cloud 9 Spa has thermal suites, a Thalassotherapy pool as well as a fitness centre.
Before sailing in, the ship will have undergone the full “Aussiefication” with barista-style coffee, fresh menus for Australian tastes and a new water theme park, done out in green and gold. Thrillseekers can catapult down Green Lightning, an 11.3m free-fall followed by a slingshot curve, which slides guests into a giant green swirling bowl.
Next to Green Lightning is sister slide, the yellow 104m-long Twister Waterslide. The waterpark is just one of the fun family attractions on-board – there are also two pools, two spas, a sports deck with mini golf, a running track and sports courts. The ship is the length of three football fields and an impressive 14 decks high.
CARNIVAL.COM.AU
EXPLORER DREAM Come next month, a whole new cruise line will homeport in Sydney. Dream Cruises’ 1870-passenger Explorer Dream will embark on a variety of seven-night itineraries exploring the coastlines of Queensland, Tasmania and New Zealand. The ship has had an extensive transformation and includes a private enclave (The Palace), a virtual reality ESC Experience Lab and Zodiac Theatre.
Expect to lounge in Italian-designed and themed spaces while enjoying world-class entertainment and cuisine including a dedicated Matcha Ice stand and The Seafood Grill by award-winning Australian chef Mark Best.
dreamcruiseline.com.au Vasco da Gama Named after the great Portuguese explorer, the 1220-passenger Vasco da Gama joins Cruise & Maritime Voyages fleet, with homeports in Adelaide and Fremantle.
The ship offers cruisers a chance to sail to parts of Australia they may not have considered before, with itineraries that include Geelong, Port Arthur and Esperance.
On-board you’ll find contemporary decor including the nautically themed pool area. There are interesting itinerary concepts including a world-first Boutique Gin and Culinary Cruise, sailing from Adelaide to Fremantle for seven nights from January 6, 2020.
cmvaustralia.com
Ruby Princess The 3080-guest Ruby Princess will make her maiden arrival in Australia in late October. On-board is an array of restaurants with highlights including Crown Grill, Salty Dog Gastropub and Share by Aussie celebrity chef Curtis Stone.
The ship will be the first in the region to have Princess Cruises’ new wearable device, the OceanMedallion. No more wondering where your keycard is, the OceanMedallion enables keyless stateroom access. You can also use it to pay for items on-board and find others on the vessel with the Family and Friends Locator.
Ruby Princess will offer itineraries from Sydney to New Zealand, the Pacific Islands, Queensland and Tasmania. This season, Princess Cruises has a fleet of five ships sailing from five different homeports.princess.com
CREDIT: ANDREA BLACK
Word count: 594
