Who'd be a cricket umpire?
Australia has about 3000 at club level alone, but it's an ongoing battle to maintain numbers on either side of the Tasman.
Standing in the middle for an entire weekend for petrol money and potentially copping some heated 'feedback' from club players may not be everyone's cup of tea. But it can be a legitimate career path, too, as former Otago opener Chris Gaffaney and others have shown.
New Zealander Mark Sinclair, whose older brother Mathew played 33 tests, is helping recruit and upskill umpires with his new Virtual Umpire technology, which was recently picked up by Cricket Australia.
Melbourne-based Sinclair's company Sports Technology Solutions developed Pitch Scan, which was used by Channel Nine in its television coverage.
Now, having partnered with Cricket Australia, Sinclair is shopping Virtual Umpire to national boards around the world, including New Zealand Cricket.
It takes the form of a smartphone app which, with a virtual reality headset, can take the user into the middle of a stadium like Adelaide Oval to replicate a top-level Twenty20 match and practice his or her ability to make correct decisions under pressure.
"There's many a player from about age 12 onwards, once you've finished your batting, next thing you know you're out there at square leg or the standing umpire. It can be an environment that some people don't feel comfortable with," Sinclair said.
"[Cricket Australia] has umpire managers in each state, and they will go around to club fields and hold umpire recruitment sessions. It's more a fun and engaging way of saying 'hey, become an umpire, it's a lot of fun'.
"The next step will be 'put on this VR headset and have a go, it's a safe environment and don't be afraid to make a mistake because it doesn't really matter'."
After each delivery users give their verdict on an lbw decision or wides, and they are marked immediately.
Sinclair said the technology had been in development for the past year as they waited for new phone hardware to be of good enough quality.
CA helped in extensive testing with its umpires panel and provided feedback on suggested improvements. They agreed to focus on lbw decisions and bouncers or full tosses - such as calling no-balls and wides from square leg.
"They've got 3000 club umpires that can and do make some fairly basic errors. That can be as simple as the ball pitching outside leg stump [for lbw].
"The other one that is troublesome is the waist-high full toss, there's a lot of indecision at club level as to where the waist-high full toss comes in and what is the actual decision."
Sinclair said discussions were progressing with the England and Wales Cricket Board. He has made initial contact with NZC's match officials manager Sheldon Eden-Whaitiri and they have agreed to talk further.
Sinclair moved to Australia in 2004 and joined CA's commercial department. He was part of the project team for the Big Bash League, developing team names, logos and colours.
With a mate he formed Sports Technology Solutions and Pitch Scan - which charts moisture levels of a pitch and how it might play as a test match progresses - was an early success story.
Sinclair hopes Virtual Umpire can also be picked up by associate nations to recruit and help raise the standard of their top match officials too.
"You can use your smart device and you're in the middle of Adelaide Oval and you're making decisions based on real balls bowled in international cricket at an international venue, which very few people get the chance to do.
"Keeping in mind you have a ball travelling at 145-150kmh, people don't really appreciate how fast that is when you're out there in the middle."
CAPTION:
India's Virat Kohli with umpires Marais Erasmus and Ian Gould in Melbourne.
CREDIT: Mark Geenty
Word count: 643
