London’s Flabbergast Theatre combines dandies and deception for its immersive Victorian-era show at this year’s Cabaret Festival
Smoke, sweat and shadows create the impression of a bustling taproom, complete with its own working bar and a sinister assortment of taxedermied animals. Bare-knuckled boxers size each other up inside a makeshift ring as you are handed a drawstring bag that contains a few quid and urged to place your bets – or try your luck at cards. An evangelical waif cries out that gambling is a sin, while eager ne’er-do-wells try to bend your ear this way and that.
Inside this Victorian-era den of temptation and iniquity, The Swell Mob will work their scams at this year’s Adelaide Cabaret Festival.
As you make your way along a hallway of nooks and crannies, tawdry music hall acts strut their stuff, psychic mediums offer to tell your fortune and an assortment of tricksters and scoundrels regale and attempt to wrong-foot you.
Deals are being wheeled, lies are being spun and secrets are being shared … but the creepy puppet who keeps all these characters in fear remains an enigma while you try to unravel the ensuing mystery.
Like the secret entrance at the Leaky Cauldron inn through which Harry Potter and his friends travel to the wizarding world of Diagon Alley, so the Artspace above the Dunstan Playhouse will become a portal back in time to the underworld of the mid-1800s.
The Swell Mob and its immersive world are the creation of Flabbergast Theatre, which was set up in 2010 to “make uncompromising and exciting physical theatre in a belief that all theatre should be engaging and sweaty”.
Appropriately, the steampunk-meets-gothic company is housed at an Old Button Factory in the Harringay Warehouse District in the north of London.
“The Swell Mob itself was a group of people that operated during the middle of the 19th century, who would dress in the height of fashion at the time, in order to gain access to places like the races,” says Flabbergast artistic director Henry Maynard.
These smartly attired thieves, pickpockets and swindlers infiltrated places where the upper classes would go in order to gain access to their money and possessions.
“They would do all kinds of little scams, from ‘long cons’ to people stealing handkerchiefs,” says Maynard. “I’ve always been fascinated by that era and time, and the things that people wore and the aesthetic, but also this idea that you had these characters who were conning people to believe that they were very fashionable young men and women … when what they were doing was stealing.
“That’s where the impulse came from – and the further we went into it, the more we discovered this nice supernatural element which was layered on top of that. As you discover more about the show, it becomes more and more evident that all is not as it seems.” The supernatural aspect comes through in the mythology and fortune telling of the times, as well as Victorian society’s fascination with death and the afterlife.
“You had Arthur Conan Doyle (author of the Sherlock Holmes stories, who was also a member of the British Society for Psychical Research and gave talks and wrote about his paranormal beliefs) and, for a lot people at the time, spiritualism was quite big,” Maynard says.
“So you had seances and fortune telling, there were a lot of things about faeries and all this weirdness – people were fascinated with contacting the dead. They had all these incredible devices by which they would try to trick people into believing they had supernatural powers.” The Swell Mob also had a “gang element” to it, Maynard says, likening it to the Crips and Bloods of modern Los Angeles.
Flabbergast’s design aesthetic, meanwhile, tied in neatly with the rise of the Hipster movement, which revived a lot of the looks of the Victorians, particularly with regard to men’s elaborate facial hair.
The usually rather sterile Artspace – which was originally intended to be the Playhouse complex’s entrance foyer – will be transformed into a more seamy, intimate environment through which audience members must find their way.
Instead of hosting different shows each night, and regularly changing acts over its two-and-a-half weeks, this year the Artspace will be occupied by The Swell Mob throughout the entire Cabaret Festival, with multiple 75-minute sessions each day.
“We hope to transport people from what they’re expecting – which is something clean and pristine – into something which is a lot more dirty and dingy. We’re going to walk through a little tunnel and transport them into a different world,” Maynard says.
The experience is not just immersive but also interactive, as audience members need to engage with the performers to get the most out of The Swell Mob.
“The whole thing is completely free-form – there’s no shepherding or being pushed from one space to another. There are a couple of different breakout spaces, different rooms, but generally speaking the more you put into it the more you’re going to get out of it. You can enjoy it as a sort of voyeur, but the more you’re prepared to involve yourself, the more you are going to find out.” Maynard adds that the interaction is not of the embarrassing or performing variety.
“You are never really the centre of attention, so it never feels like that kind of audience participation where everyone is looking at you … you are very much within your own world, walking around having your own private experience.
“That’s one of the really lovely things about the show, that everybody comes out with a completely different experience, and you can come back the next night.” Along the way, audience members can find out more about each character’s backstories, and how they link into this world.
As part of the Cabaret Festival, it also incorporates elements of song, music and vaudeville.
“Flabbergast has always had a very cabaret-influenced style. I worked as a cabaret artist for a number of years after I trained as an actor, in order to makes ends meet in between acting jobs, and I fell in love with the form,” Maynard says.
“The Swell Mob has a cabaret stage within it, and we have some singing and some dancing and a freak show … we have a guy who’s a knife-thrower and glass-walker, and we’ve got an opera singer. There’s folk song, we have a piano – and there’ll be puppetry in there as well.” Maynard likens it to entering a physical incarnation of a virtual reality world. “What’s that TV show … Westworld? It’s got a feeling like that, of entering into the world, but what you do does have an effect and can change how things play out and progress. We have several different endings to the show, so depending what happens throughout the process, it can affect which ending we play.” Adelaide audiences will be most familiar with Flabbergast Theatre through its frequent five-star Fringe shows featuring the “Balkan bad boys of puppetry” Boris & Sergey – two faceless leather figures whose antics are adults-only. “That’s our flagship, really, Boris & Sergey’s Vaudevillian Adventure, where our basis in puppetry came from. Then we started playing with clown and mask and physical theatre, and then the immersive stuff,” Maynard says.
Boris & Sergey were dark and subversive. “I don’t know if that’s just the way that I am,” Maynard laughs, “but I like things quite grungy and a bit twisted. I like to hopefully subvert expectation … it’s always fascinated me, that idea of trying to pull the carpet from underneath the audience.” From that original puppet show, which could almost be packed into a suitcase, Flabbergast has more recently pushed the other extremes of scale, devising a series of pirate adventure experiences which took place on several islands in the Caribbean. “I ended up working for a very wealthy private client and his family. For five years in a row, we went out and did a kind of immersive show based around pirates. We would do one scene on one day, then we would travel to another island and do another scene the next day. So the narrative was played out over about seven days, with a big climax at the end … pirate ships and lost treasure, all of that.” Guests took part in what was essentially like a giant version of a murder mystery dinner, but spread out over a number of physical locations and sessions.
“It was really lovely going from Boris & Sergey, which is very much shoestring theatre – and I love the challenge of trying to great something grand and brilliant but on a tiny little scale – to something where, if you can justify it, they will spend the money. It was interesting.
“It has definitely bled over to some of the stuff that we do in The Swell Mob. The luxury of being able to play with that kind of budget in that kind of situation has led to us being able to take the idea of that and adapt it.”The Swell Mob by Flabbergast Theatre is at the Artspace from June 8-22. Book at adelaidecabaretfestival.com.au
CREDIT: WORDS PATRICK McDONALD PHOTOGRAPH MARK DAWSON
Word count: 1542
