End of pizza era CLOSURE of the final Pizza Hut dine-in restaurant reminds me (as a previous patron) of some old song lyrics from Joni Mitchell.
“They paved paradise and put up a parking lot”, followed by “you don’t know what you got ’til it’s gone”.
As Marion franchisee and store manager Bill Lianos said, they haven’t been beating down the doors, have they (“Rush for last slice of the action at franchise”, The Advertiser, Tuesday)?
But Westfield might.
PAUL BUXTON, Westbourne Park Exports vital AS an exporter of southern bluefin tuna, China is more than important to me. I’m buoyed by the fact we now have a sensible government understanding the hurdles we need to overcome to open up the largest market in the world of more than 1.4 billion people.
Trade Minister Don Farrell seems to be grasping the bull by the horns, trying to overcome the diplomatic freeze our industry has been burdened with.
The self-centred former Coalition government just didn’t understand how much South Australia, and especially Eyre Peninsula, needs an even playing field to export our wares.
Business and politics ought to be kept well apart.
Unfortunately, the former government thought it had the answer, costing primary industry in SA millions of dollars in lost revenue, development opportunities, jobs and goodwill with our overseas partners.
The next three years is going to be tough for business, with financial insecurities and spiralling inflation. Working together is the only way forward.
To Minister Farrell, congratulations.
You have taken the first step forward in restoring our market. Industry will not forget.
Dr HAGEN STEHR, AO, Port Lincoln Future energy THANK you, Michael McGuire, for your insights into gas pricing in Australia (“Battle for better gas deal”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
With most companies here being foreign-owned and profits going offshore, clearly consumers are not the winners.
A temporary windfall tax may be a good short-term solution. But gas is a pollutant and not a viable energy source in the long term.
In states where renewable energy programs have been implemented, household electricity bills have dropped.
An example is the ACT, where consumers pay considerably less for power than their NSW neighbours.
This is also happening in SA, which has some of the cheapest wholesale energy prices in Australia.
As McGuire himself states, it is essential we plan for Australia’s inevitable transition away from fossil fuels. The sooner the better.
ANNE O’HARA, Wanniassa, ACT MP hard at work I ADMIRE Hugh Taeuber’s enthusiasm for keeping his newly minted Labor MP accountable (“MP gone quiet”, the Advertiser, Tuesday).
A quick Google search would not only remind Mr Taeuber her name is Nadia Clancy but, through her social media accounts, show how busy she has been working for and with constituents.
This includes campaign promises appearing in the state budget papers. It is not unusual for constituents to only receive three or six monthly newsletters from their local member. I recommend becoming a social media follower to keep up to date more regularly.
PHIL SAUNDERS, Belair No quotas WOMEN should be supported and encouraged to follow the career of their choice. However, I believe to introduce quotas to favour women is an insult to women and also men.
A level playing field gives an opportunity for the most talented of either gender to be rewarded and excel.
To give women an artificial and unfair advantage because of their gender is demeaning, undemocratic and discriminatory.
Let the best person win.
MARY-ANNE HIGGINS, Rose Park Homes for rent THE free market has failed people like Meagan, who has been camping at a caravan park since May (“Mum, son separated by rental squeeze”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
Right now there are more than 1000 houses available for rent on Airbnb in Adelaide. Short-term rentals have distorted the market to make them too expensive for the most vulnerable.
It’s time to prioritise homes before holiday houses. Tax short rentals to move more stock back to providing a home for families like Meagan’s.
Dr JASPER LEE, Norwood Public home need HAVING disability pensioners and families in tents this week in wet and cold Adelaide and elsewhere reflects more than 30 years of under-investment in social housing in Australia.
In SA alone, about a third of the social housing stock has been sold off since the 1990s.
I want a bipartisan commitment to a housing policy for safe, secure, affordable housing for all.
I would be delighted to see a return to borrowing for large-scale housing provision – something proudly supported across the political divide after World War II.
Nationally, bipartisan leadership is also needed. For a start, forgo the high-end tax cuts and end tax forgone on negative gearing.
Fund social housing in recognition of about 166,000 households waiting for social housing nationally and the projected need for about 430,000 new social dwellings by 2036. JULIE CONWAY, Birkenhead
Word count: 810
