VIDEO games are no longer just for kids. They have become a massive international industry on a competitive scale with the movies, and grown up to offer some works of art just as mature.
The State Government has announced SA is bidding for a slice of the booming international 3D virtual reality games industry, and putting taxpayer dollars behind the push with a 10 per cent rebate for businesses in the rapidly growing sector.
Premier Steven Marshall is putting a lot of effort into future-proofing the state economy. Deals on defence and space, as well as the investments in Lot Fourteen and cyber security are all focused on trying to ensure SA is not so heavily-reliant on old faithfuls like agriculture and manufacturing, which have done so much economic heavy lifting.
The skills and innovation economies have the extra advantage that they are not as at risk from bad weather or being moved offshore to countries that are willing to cut wages and conditions.
Former premier Jay Weatherill saw a similar opportunity, with substantial cash shelled out in his final years in an attempt to lure international creative companies to work in SA.
But despite all of the optimism and glamour around the commercial arts sector, including flashy media opportunities around the video game turned SA-shot film Mortal Kombat, it is essential that every taxpayer investment is critically examined.
There is a degree to which governments have to gamble on building future industries.
Despite whatever projections are made about the scale of expected investment and jobs, it can’t be assumed that reality will materialise.
One of the good aspects of a rebate scheme is that it’s an effective cash back on investment, rather than just a handout given in hope.
The intent is good but the success needs to be reviewed in the way that any other real businesses investment would be, away from the distractions of celebrity and drama that are increasingly attached to modern gaming.
Old industries in SA are also hurting. A job is a job, no matter where you find it.
Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Matt Deighton, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 364
