STATE-of-the-art technology, including 360-degree video projection, is being incorporated into everyday learning at a northern Adelaide school to equip students with employability skills for the future.
Trinity College’s new innovation and creativity school also features virtual and augmented reality and interactive technologies, advanced robotics and specialised laboratories for art, design, ICT, film making and animation.
Innovation and creativity director Steve Grant says the new facility, at Trinity’s Evanston South campus, is unrivalled in terms of the technology it offers to students.
“The facility we have got represents the avant-garde of teaching and learning,” he says.
“The only other comparable facility that I have seen in an education space is the University of Technology in Sydney but, even then, that’s something used by high-end data scientists.
“This new space has been embedded with technology that really is future focused, with a mind to developing 21st Century skills in our students.’’ Grant says the building, which has been used by students since the start of the school year, caters to all ages and allows for student and staff collaboration across Trinity’s four campuses.
Already, junior primary students have held Lego Masters-style tournaments in the sunken gallery, while senior students have developed prototypes for gaming design within the 360-degree projection room.
“Having a facility like this is putting our students ahead of the game in terms of digital technology skills and creativity skills that we know are going to be important to future workplaces,’’ Grant says.
Grant says collaboration is a key theme of the building, with a series of flexible learning spaces and inclusions such as whiteboard tables to increase the sharing of ideas.
Year 12 student Lachlan Hayford, who has already completed a Certificate III in Information, Digital Media and Technology as part of his SACE, expects the new facility will dramatically improve his ability to undertake a major digital technology project later this year. “There’s new virtual reality systems and highly specialised rooms that we can use to investigate particular problems and work towards finding the solutions,’’ says Hayford, who is looking towards a career in cyber security or game development.
CREDIT: LAUREN AHWAN
Word count: 355
