CAREERS IN MINING: SPECIAL FEATURE
ROBOTICS and drones have overtaken pick axes and yellow canaries in a cage as daily tools used by many miners, and soon the Earth may not even be the only place where mining occurs.
The present already is highly technological for mining workers but with space mining on the horizon, the future of the sector is set to offer the most cutting-edge careers yet.
Minerals Council of Australia chief executive Tania Constable says job titles such as virtual reality researcher, artificial intelligence developer, robotics technician and drone operator are some of those already available in the sector.
She says technology is transforming the way the minerals industry works and it is leading the world across its mining exploration, operations, processing, transport and trading sectors.
“Research, development and innovation are the bedrock of Australian mining, where you can find amazing technology and some of the brightest minds on the planet making life better,” she says.
“The Australian minerals industry is rapidly adopting new technology such as robotics, drones, data science and virtual and augmented reality, creating a different skills mix for our future workforce.” Research conducted for MCA by consulting firm EY reveals 77 per cent of jobs in the Australian mining sector will be enhanced or redesigned because of technology in the next five years alone.
“In some industries, that would mean losing jobs to robots and automation – but in mining, technology means safer and more productive jobs,” Constable says.
“Most jobs in mining will be enhanced by technological innovation. “Traditional jobs are also increasingly being augmented with new technology – for example, a shot-firer working on a drilling team will have the opportunity in the future to use drone technology to monitor automated rigs.” Surveyors, field geologists and drill operators will still be in demand but the jobs will be revolutionised by artificial intelligence, drones, driverless vehicles and remote-controlled systems. Data scientists and mechatronic engineers are new roles that are being created.
Meanwhile, the industry already is looking beyond planet Earth as a source for minerals and other resources.
University of New South Wales’ Professor Serkan Saydam, an offEarth mining specialist, says space mining will occur in the next 10-20 years.
Saydam’s work is backed by NASA and he has 12 PhD students modelling the use of resources on the Moon as well as Mars. “Water will be the first thing mined,” he says. “It has hydrogen and oxygen, which can be used as rocket propellant.” Asteroids also could be mined for gold, platinum, diamonds and rare earth materials. “In the future, either astronauts will have mining skills or mining engineers will have astronaut skills,” Saydam says.
Word count: 445
