TRAVEL NEWS FLORAL TASTES A central Sydney hotel has unveiled its new look. Vibe Hotel Sydney, located in Goulburn St in the heart of the city, has refurbished its rooms and, on the back of launching the Storehouse restaurant at its Rushcutters Bay hotel, added a second Storehouse at the city location. Australian floral murals are a decor highlight of the new eating space. The renovation has also extended to refreshing the hotel’s relaxing rooftop pool.
vibehotels.com.au
CAPITAL KIWI IDEA Who needs a trans-Tasman flight? The Kiwi capital has embraced virtual reality to let potential visitors dive into the city without leaving home. Virtual Wellington comes in two parts: interactive game WellTown, available for free download in the Steam and Oculus VR stores; and the second part, Explore More, a series of 360 video tours of attractions such as a Maori village at Te Papa national museum, Weta Studios and Westpac Stadium as the All Blacks sing the New Zealand national anthem.
WellingtonNZ.com
BANGKOK RIVER RETREAT Capella Ubud, the Bill Bensley-designed luxury tent retreat, was hailed as one of the resort openings of 2018. Now the hotel group is on the cusp of opening its first Thai urban retreat, on Chao Phraya River in Bangkok. Capella says the riverfront is enjoying a resurgence – with a booming arts and culinary scene – without losing its community identity. Opening before mid-year, Capella Bangkok will have 101 suites and riverfront villas with great river views.
capellabangkok.com
NEW IN THE AIR DIRECT TO VANUATU A tropical island escape will be more accessible for Victorians when a new direct service to Vanuatu starts in June. Air Vanuatu will fly from Melbourne to Port Vila, on Efate Island, three times a week from June 18.
The four-hour flights will leave on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. airvanuatu.com
VEGAN DIET SOARS Veganuary, a charity asking people to try a vegan diet in January, has had its effect in the air. Emirates served more than 20,000 plant-based meals last month, a 40 per cent rise in demand.
west link to lombok Perth is set to get a direct link to the Indonesian island of Lombok. AirAsia has flagged its intention to introduce a service to Perth later this year after it has set up a new hub to help rebuild visitor numbers to the earthquake-affected island.
airasia.com
IN THE CALMING BUSINESS Premium flyers on Cathay Pacific can rest and re-set in a new wellbeing space in the business-class lounge at The Pier in Hong Kong. The Sanctuary by Pure Yoga has a zone dedicated to yoga and another where travellers can meditate to focus and calm the mind.cathaypacific.com.au
Word count: 441
