Demand for chefs puts new cooks in good stead, finds Melanie Burgess
NOT enough Australians are becoming chefs, with huge shortages across the country.
A contributing factor is the high number of people dropping out of their training, often having signed up without knowing what to expect.
Job Outlook data from the Federal Government shows an extra 16,800 chefs are forecast to be needed in the five years to 2023, representing 17 per cent growth, yet National Centre for Vocational Education Research reveals apprentice food trade workers have the lowest completion rate of all apprentices and trainees.
Just a third (35 per cent) of those who commenced an apprenticeship in 2013 had completed it by 2018.
Paul Miles, managing director of not-for-profit training and employment service BUSY At Work, says people do not always know exactly what they are signing up for.
He says the most surprising aspect is the expectation they will work split shifts and varied hours. “(They are also surprised by) how organised you have to be to work in the environment and people don’t necessarily see how busy (chefs) are,” he says.
“You have to work hard and the expectations to perform are quite high.” On the flip side, he says people may not realise that chefs can progress into speciality areas and use their skills to travel the world.
To give aspiring chefs a taste of the job before they sign up for an apprenticeship, BUSY At Work has created a virtual reality (VR) tool that allows them to look around a commercial kitchen and at the equipment.
They can play a game that demonstrates what might be expected in the first years of an apprenticeship.
“We might see restaurants every day but don’t often see what’s out the back,” Miles says.
“People have really enjoyed it.” PayScale reports the average kitchen chef in Australia earns $49,700, but a top executive chef can earn $106,000 or more.
A typical apprenticeship takes three years and requires the completion of Year 10 schooling.
Good Universities Guide reports although chefs are initially required to complete a certificate III qualification as part of their apprenticeship – such as a Certificate III in Commercial Cookery – many go on to further training with a certificate IV or diploma.Apart from formal training, the guide also suggests chefs have a high level of personal cleanliness, enjoy cooking, are able to organise efficient work schedules, are punctual, and are able to work under pressure and stay calm in difficult situations.
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 421
