PRIVATE training organisations will operate from TAFE campuses, as new TAFE SA boss David Coltman signals a shift in its approach to the vocational education system.
Mr Coltman, who took up the chief executive role in April, says TAFE SA is already working with two private trainers to run IT courses from the Adelaide CBD campus.
“There’s lot of time we’re not using facilities and buildings,” he said, adding libraries and cafes would be better used with co-location.
Private trainers could lease space for exclusive use or share it with TAFE SA, he said.
Campuses are also likely to host more businesses in emerging industries, as well as incubation spaces, to make it easier for industry to influence course content and for TAFE to directly provide the talent pool for its needs.
Mr Coltman flagged more augmented and virtual reality training for TAFE students, as well as more partnerships with universities. This would involve not just on pathways from one to the other but “co-enrolment” – university engineering students also doing TAFE project management diplomas, for example.
The Marshall Government came to power with the promise of a “fully contestable” training system, to make TAFE SA compete fairly with the private sector for subsidies, with certain exceptions.
Mr Coltman said TAFE SA, the Government and industry was working on a new funding model that should be in place by the end of the year.
He said he would be more focused on the state’s overall training outcomes – getting students into the jobs industry needed – than protecting TAFE SA’s market share, which in some areas had been a near-monopoly. He likened his objectives to the commercialisation work of universities.
“There are some things that only a public provider can do, where a private provider might be able to do things better in different areas,” he said. “We’ve got this fantastic floristry program. If that was to become a private RTO delivering that but it was still that fantastic, that seems OK to me. I don’t need to own, as the chief executive, that.” Mr Coltman said the new funding system would strengthen TAFE’s commitment to regional areas – where the “tyranny of distance doesn’t allow the market-based model to exist” – and to foundation skills courses.
Treasurer Rob Lucas has labelled TAFE SA as one of the drags on the State Budget.
Mr Coltman said one of TAFE SA ’s previous problems was setting unrealistic revenue targets. He was not interested in increasing student numbers “for growth’s sake”, saying a focus on “low-volume but strategic” course areas was more valuable than “high-volume, easy to-deliver” programs that could be run just as well by the private sector. But TAFE SA would “not necessarily” become smaller.Mr Coltman was previously deputy vice-chancellor at Melbourne’s Swinburne University.
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 470
