CHILDREN as young as two are showing signs of obsessive compulsive disorder, with Adelaide researchers seeking to learn more about the brains of those who suffer the debilitating condition.
OCD affects two per cent of the population, or about 34,000 South Australians, but treatment remains difficult to access.
Clinical psychologist Professor Mike Kyrios is leading a research institute at Flinders University focused on mental health and has flagged a greater focus on OCD, particularly in young people. He told the Sunday Mail he wants to examine how the brains and “overall bodily biology” of those with the condition differ to develop more treatment options.
Flinders’ Orama Institute is developing an app for online treatment while Prof Kyrios has noted video games, virtual reality and wearable technologies as other methods which could supplement therapy or medication. He also wants to raise awareness among parents to recognise signs earlier in children.
“I’ve seen children as young as two or three (exhibit symptoms),” he said. “A lot of the symptoms, particularly at (a young) age, might mimic ADHD or neurological problems.
“Sometimes it’s very difficult for parents to know the difference.” People with OCD develop obsessions, such as around hygiene, safety or a certain fear.
To manage these obsessions they develop compulsions, such as repetitive checking, counting, tapping or handwashing, perfectionist tendencies or regimented thought patterns.
In children, Prof Kyrios said fears may develop around the dark or “mum and dad leaving”, and behaviours could include “crying so mum won’t leave the room”, meticulously arranging toys by colour or size, becoming overly upset by change or constantly seeking reassurance.
He said it was important to seek treatment before behaviours “are really embedded”.
Earlier onset is more common in boys but more women seek help as adults. Dr Jodie Harris, based at the SA Health-run Centre for Treatment of Anxiety and Depression, said initial signs could be hidden “for months or years, especially if a child … is embarrassed or ashamed about their irrational worries and behaviours”.
Dr Harris said parents should avoid “shaming and blaming” and, instead, emphasise “that the OCD is the ‘bad guy’ and not the child”.
Centacare’s PACE service runs support groups and one-on-one counselling for OCD sufferers. Team leader Shane Strikwerda said people as young as 18 attended and most were in their 20s, but “for most people it comes on around 11, 12, 13 years of age”.
“It’s really hard to find people who specialise in OCD so people do struggle on their own a bit,” he said.
WHERE TO SEEK HELP: SA MENTAL HEALTH COMMISSION (1300 293 220); CENTACARE PACE SERVICE (8159 1400) CASE STUDY: JOHN, 17*
JOHN showed OCD tendencies from a young age and,to this day, fears he will make a mistake that will have terrible consequences.
It led him to develop time-consuming habits, including checking doors and windows are locked 17 times before he leaves the house. He also does this before bed to manage a fear that someone will break into the house and kill his family.
John also checks 14 times that appliances and light switches are turned off before going out because he fears the house will burn down. These checking rituals can take more than an hour. * Name changedSource: Centacare Catholic Family Services PACE service
CREDIT: LAUREN NOVAK SOCIAL POLICY EDITOR
Word count: 553
