EDUCATION
Jobs in the not-too-distant future will look quite different to those of today given technology’s rapid rise, says education expert Sean Tierney.
Students leaving school in 2030 will find themselves contemplating professions that are currently thought bubbles. What can society do to prepare them?
One thing we know, says Mr Tierney – a South Australian working in education for Microsoft – is that most of these jobs will harness technology.
“As we move more and more into a digital world, disruption is going to happen faster, so students will need to learn faster,” he says.
“And students who have the right technical skills, and understand how technology can support humanity, will be in a much better position to adapt to change.” STEM is education’s current catchphrase but what does it mean beyond the acronym – science, technology, engineering and maths – and why is it important?
Mr Tierney says whether students intend pursuing science, engineering or the arts as a career, they will have to remain technologically nimble. The implications are enormous, which is where schools come in.
“We need to teach kids computational thinking,” Mr Tierney says. “We need to help them understand – a lot more than they do – the role of technology, the potential of technology, and how to create with technology rather than just be passive users of technology.” Immanuel College principal Kevin Richardson agrees.
A former Microsoft and Apple employee, Mr Richardson says he knew early in his teaching career that technology would be a game-changer. He joined Immanuel 17 years ago and committed to transforming the school into a technology hub, a process he says is ongoing.
Screens with internet access in every classroom, virtual reality suites, online learning, international video conferencing, and parents staying in touch with their children’s education via online systems, make the place feel more like a tech centre than a school.
“As a school there is a temptation to jump on the STEM idea but it is very important to integrate technology – like we do at Immanuel – in every aspect of a student’s education,” Mr Richardson says. “You really have to do more than just bolt it on.” Like Mr Tierney, he believes harnessing the potential of technology means more than simply using it.
In a project devised by Adelaide-based AusOcean, a not-for-profit organisation working to increase ocean knowledge, its staff collaborated with Immanuel students to build a rig to gather oceanic data along SA’s coastline.
“So as a school we’re moving more towards the idea of how technology can be used to solve real world problems,” Mr Richardson says.
Mr Tierney says that in 10 years time more and more people will be applying for jobs in sharing industries like Uber and Airbnb, data sovereignty and security, and smart cities design.
“What should schools be doing to help fill those jobs?” Mr Tierney asks. “Yes, they need to be teaching students computational thinking but as well as employing school principals, they also need to be employing business managers aligned with technology industries.“But – most of all – we need to better understand the creative potential of the teaching profession, and its ability to transform students’ lives.”
Word count: 533
