In need of home inspiration but haven’t got the time to head out to the display villages? Well, check out Rossdale Homes’ new Display Gallery at Fullarton
It’s not often you can find a house within a building, but in the case of Rossdale Homes’ new Display Gallery, that’s exactly what you will find. And you won’t have to go far out of the city to take in all the inspiration this sparkling new display centre has to offer.
Taking its display and home selections centre to the next level, Rossdale Homes has created an extensive showroom at its Glen Osmond Rd headquarters at Fullarton, and inside the centre is an entire full-size display home of its Marden 2550 design. The Marden 2550 is a three-bedroom, two bathroom home which is ideal for villa blocks, downsizers and the first-home buyer market.
Before you get to the display home though, you’ll be able to see and touch a range of interior selections, from Caesarstone benchtops through to cupboard door finishes to door handles to tapware and showerheads.
But what else sets this display centre apart is the dedicated display of Assisted Living products specifically catering for the elderly and also those living with disabilities. One wing of the Display Gallery showcases Rossdale’s HomeLife Assisted Living range, and shows how it can be integrated into new homes with ease — and also with style.
As more elderly people live in their homes for longer, Rossdale Homes’ managing director Giles French says they have recognised the need for an Assisted Living range that can be designed and integrated into new homes from the outset, to cater for the years ahead.
Among the choices are stovetops and cupboards which can be lowered to cater for wheelchairs, voice activation to make life easier, from lights to blinds to security, and kitchens and bathrooms can be modified for ease of use.
Giles says the Display Gallery showroom has been designed for both clients and the public to come and seek inspiration, and clarify their home selections, for both internal and external areas.
“You can touch and feel our individual displays of bathrooms, kitchens, laundries and walk-in robes, each built to our unique specifications: Select, Sovereign and Prestige,” he says.
“We also have virtual reality rooms that you can view our display homes on large touch screen TVs or though VR headsets, and walk through all our displays in one place.”
The Rossdale Display Gallery is open to the public and clients seven days, Sat-Sun, 1pm-5pm, Mon-Fri, 8.30am-5pmRossdale Homes head office, ground level, 300 Glen Osmond Rd, Fullarton8433 2000, rossdalehomes.com.au
Word count: 434
