hibernation  KIWI STAR TAKES US ON GAMING-INSPIRED   VIRTUAL TOUR OF HIS HOMELAND TO ENTICE   AUSSIE MILLENNIALS TO NEW ZEALAND  TRAVEL BUBBLE THE star of a new virtual tourism campaign aimed at luring Australians to New Zealand — once travel is allowed again — is urging Aussies to “be safe” amid COVID-19.
Launching on social media platform Twitch, Tourism New Zealand’s gaming-inspired “PLAY NZ” comes as the possibility of a trans-Tasman travel bubble between Australia and New Zealand is still being touted.
The virtual tour is voiced by Kiwi actor Julian Dennison, of Deadpool 2 and Hunt For The Wilderpeople fame, who guides viewers through the North Island’s Rotorua, the Redwoods Forest and whitewater rafting at Okere Falls, with an avatar named “Skip Hogan”.
Dennison says he is “seeing a lot of what’s happening over in Australia” and offers a message to Aussies dealing with lockdown 2.0: “I just want to let all the Australians know that … we’re here praying for you, supporting you guys.” The high school student, 17, says the “game-ified walk through New Zealand” is “cool for people who have the travel bug, but can’t travel at the moment”.
“I feel like the message behind it is supporting each other — Australians and New Zealanders … through this time,” says Wellington-raised Dennison. “My voice basically guides Australians … through this PLAY NZ walk-through, a journey through New Zealand, to some cool really places.” They include tourist attractions like Wildwire Wanaka, EcoZip Adventures and Queenstown’s AJ Hackett Bungy.
Prior to his PLAY NZ role, Dennison shot a part in the upcoming Godzilla vs. Kongwith Alexander Skarsgard and Millie Bobby Brown.
“It’s a big industry … really kind people, it’s been cool, it’s been fun discovering this whole world of film and acting. It has been like a joy ride — I’ve enjoyed every minute of it,” he says, of his Hollywood experiences.
Tourism New Zealand general manager Andrew Waddel describes PLAY NZ as “storytelling using a gaming construct”, aimed at Millennials.
“We think Millennials will be one of the first to fly — they’ll be relatively resilient, they’ll want to fly, they have hopefully the means to be able to do that,” Waddel says.
“I think both countries are hopeful for borders to open sooner rather than later, once it’s safe to travel.” Amazon-owned Twitch has had a 57 per cent increase in hours spent on the live streaming service since the COVID-19 pandemic.
“Twitch is very strong between 24- and 39-year-olds, which is our core target audience,” Waddel says. Twitch AUNZ head of sales Ricky Chanana says PLAY NZ uses “interaction to create an experience for people to see what travel can look like in the streaming space”.
PLAY NZ launches via Twitch and online on July 28 with a virtual event hosted by Australian Twitch star Loserfruit (real name Kathleen Belsten), who has 1.7 million followers on the social platform.
Pay a virtual visit to NZ ● PLAY NZ is Tourism New Zealand’s new virtual campaign aimed at attracting Aussies to New Zealand, once travel is allowed.
The gaming-inspired initiative is launching on Twitch.It shows viewers through popular New Zealand tourist attractions via an avatar named “Skip Hogan”.
●“Skip” fronts a series of adventure challenges from mountain biking through the Redwoods Forest to white-water rafting down Okere Falls, before encountering music artist, William Waiirua.
● The immersive content hub features 18 virtual reality experiences. ● Tourism New Zealand believes Millennials will be the first to travel once flying is permitted between Australian and New Zealand in a proposed trans-Tasman “travel bubble” ● See an exclusive video sneak peek online on News Corp sites before it is live on Twitch today ● For more information go to www.playnz.com.au
CREDIT: Nadia Salemme
Word count: 625
