Animated images and haunting  narratives tell the story of our fight   against Japan, writes JUSTIN LEES
THE voices of now-dead veterans will come back to life and ring out on social media over the next two weeks, in a unique salute ahead of the 75th anniversary of victory in World War II.
Today, we reveal the first look at the One In A Million project, which singles out defining moments of Australian men and women who served, and reimagines their actions in captivating animations.
Some names are well-known; others hardly at all. But their varied experiences are equally compelling and serve as a focal point for the campaign’s broader aim – encouraging recognition of all the one million Australians who enlisted for the war.
The clips, mainly portraying vignettes from the war in the Pacific, were created by TV animator Andrew Fyfe, known for his work on Hey Hey It’s Saturday and The Footy Show.
As archive recordings recount each story, Fyfe’s pen sketches it out in time-lapse.
In some cases, such as South Australian Vivian Bullwinkel’s account of the Bangka Island massacre, Fyfe had the responsibility of representing a scene never recorded in visual form – a job that required copious research and sensitivity.
He also worked to portray these stories of great scale and emotion in bite-sized chunks.
“They are small but capture the enormity of the tale,” he said. One In A Million is being launched by the Department of Veterans’ Affairs (DVA) this weekend ahead of the end of the war in the Pacific, on Aug­ust 15.
Australians are encouraged to share the films from the DVA social media channels with the hashtag #OneInAMillion, and to post selfies holding a photo of their own World War II relatives or any veteran they admire.
The Sunday Mail, along with the DVA, is this weekend also launching the latest innovation from the Anzac360 project – a virtual reality account of the fall of Singapore.
RODEN CUTLER Scenes of jubilation — and a novel use for Schweppes drink bottles — as crowds celebrated VP Day on the streets of Melbourne in 1945 are recalled by a chuckling Roden Cutler, the famous artilleryman Victoria Cross recipient who later became Governor of NSW.
KEITH ROBERTS A kamikaze attack on the HMAS Australia in 1944 left scores of men dead or wounded, among them naval gunloader Keith Roberts’ mate, Frank — whose dying wish was to write a farewell to his mother. As a choked-up Keith explains, it was never finished.
VIVIAN BULLWINKEL South Australian Vivian Bullwinkel, sole survivor of the hideous Bangka Island massacre in 1942, tells how 21 captured Australian nurses were executed on a beach by Japanese soldiers — and how she escaped by playing dead. The murderers also slaughtered the nurses’ patients.
HARRY NESBITT Among 13,000 Aussies forced to labour on the Thai-Burma Death Railway, Harry Nesbitt tells how the Japanese expected even crippled men to work — and made the other POWs stand on parade until the unfit and lame dragged themselves back to camp each night.
WILLIAM KEYS As a young soldier in New Guinea, the future RSL president William Keys saw a fun-loving cobber joking around — then moments later that same man was killed. He reveals that seeing “your first dead friend” is the one of most devastating experiences a soldier can have.
SMOKY DAWSON Legendary entertainer Smoky Dawson remembers saying goodbye to his beloved wife as he went off to war. A glance through his troop train window to see her still waving made “this tough soldier” break down in tears, convinced he would never see Dot again.
EDITH EDWARDS Edith Edwards’ Big Brother, Jimmy, was reported missing after the fall of Singapore in 1942. Only their dad held out hope he was alive — but died before that was confirmed. Jimmy was terribly affected by the PoW experience in mind and body. “It was a sad homecoming.” JOHN ROGERS Stopped months after the war by a woman seeking news of her two brothers, Father John Brendan Rogers was horrified to realise the family still hadn’t been told the awful truth — that their sons, who he had known as a PoW, had perished on the infamous Sandakan Death March.
ONLINE TODAY WATCH ALL THE ANIMATIONS ADVERTISER.COM.AU
CREDIT: JUSTIN LEES
Word count: 718
