On your tod? Try your virtual luck in the land of the leprechauns
ONE OF THE FRIENDLIEST and greenest places you could ever visit, Ireland is a land of beautiful castles, convivial pubs and real good craic. Watching the countryside change from soft rolling hills to dramatic seaside cliffs and wandering the streets of pretty towns and villages are among the joys of an Irish road trip.
While we can’t load up the car right now, we can get a taste for Ireland’s 40 shades of green from the comfort of home. So power up the devices, pour a cup of Irish Breakfast tea and get ready to be transported to an island we love.
Language Irish may be its own Celtic language but, according to the 2016 census, only 1.7 million out of 4.7 million Irish people claim to speak it, with less than 74,000 using it daily. You may not have much use for it, but if you’d still like to learn for the love of it, Irish Language School Sydney holds classes when we’re not social distancing, or you can learn at home using the Duolingo website and app. Even though most people speak English, accents range from charming to somewhat difficult to understand, depending on the county. Get your ear around some accents while having a laugh watching Derry Girls and Father Ted.
irishlanguageschoolsydney.org.au, duolingo.com Food and drink The Irish know how to do comfort food and thanks to Donal Skehan’s YouTube channel, you can learn how to whip up dishes at home. The Irish chef is fun to follow as you learn how to make potato pancakes, Guinness onion soup with soda bread, an apple crumble cake and more. He also shares his family recipe for an Irish stew on Jamie Oliver’s channel.
And while you may not be able to taste a freshly poured Guinness at Gravity Bar at the end, you can still take a look inside Ireland’s most popular tourist attraction, the Guinness Storehouse, thanks to its YouTube tour.
youtube.com/watch?v=IVzkvNr0vHg Museums and Galleries A visit to Trinity College to see the Book of Kells is a must in Dublin, and lets you gaze at two open pages of the illuminated manuscript. Online you can see not just two, but all of the pages, and you can also zoom in on the details.
Get out the virtual reality headsets for a stroll past paintings and statues in National Gallery of Ireland’s collection, and take a look inside four levels of Natural History Museum in Dublin. But don’t worry if you don’t have the right toys, they can all be seen on computer and device screens as well. And enjoy a virtual visit to Belfast’s Titanic Museum, where 360-degree photos share what it was like in a first-class and third-class cabin on the ill-fated ship.
digitalcollections.tcd.ie/home, nationalgallery.ie/virtual-tour, titanicexperiencecobh.ie historical Architecture Now is not the time to kiss the Blarney stone but you can take in the beauty of Blarney Castle and its gardens, including the Poison and Fern gardens, online.
Imagine wearing something royal as you take a virtual tour around other great castles with the Antrim, Johnstown and Kinbane castles also on the virtual list. And dream of the day you can take a seat in one of the snugs, or private booths, at one of the world’s most beautiful pubs, Crown Liquor Saloon, Belfast.
virtualvisittours.com/blarney-castle, virtualvisittours.com/antrim-castle-gardens, virtualvisittours.com/johnstown-castle-gardens, virtualvisittours.com/kinbane-castle, virtualvisittours.com/the-crown-bar-belfast Family time Get the kids wondering why there are Vikings in Ireland as you show them the fun of Dublin’s Viking Splash tour on their YouTube channel before a history lesson is sneaked in at the end. Then get them up off the couch to get their Riverdance on with some Irish step dancing lessons.
Littlies will love Puffin Rock, an animated Irish cartoon set on a small Atlantic coast island. Narrated by Chris O’Dowd, it has a natural history focus.
youtube.com/watch?v=i5eyIP49ZSM, youtube.com/watch?v=ubS6EXrGVzM Game Night Just because we can’t make it to an Irish pub doesn’t mean we can’t enjoy a good quiz with friends. Pick a time to meet on Zoom or Google Hangouts, and play some of the quizzes on Ireland.com. They’re relatively short but with more than a dozen topics to choose from, including Ireland on Screen, Ireland’s music, myths and legends, and Game of Thrones, you can put a few together and have a good craic.
Drinking Guinness, Irish coffees or Baileys Irish Cream could add an extra local flavour to the night, with no need to decide on a designated driver to get home.
bewildering Nature Use the power of 360-degree photos to look down where your feet would be standing on the interlocking columns of the Giant’s Causeway before taking in the scene all around you. Then, with a tap of your finger, be transported to the drama of the Cliffs of Moher and look out over the sea cliffs from the main viewing area and the top of O’Brien’s Tower.
Head underground into the Aillwee Cave and learn all about Ireland’s night sky, including how to find the Big Dipper with the Daily Astro Challenges, a selection of short videos from Blackrock Castle Observatory.
virtualvisittours.com/giants-causeway, cliffsofmoher.ie/virtual-visit-tour, virtualvisittours.com/aillwee-cave, bco.ie/events/daily-astro-challenge-with-esero-ireland best Books and podcasts It may sound like fiction but Round Irelandwith a Fridge by Tony Hawks is the true story of when a man’s drunken bet led him to a month of madness hitchhiking around Ireland with a domestic appliance.
Alice Taylor’s memoir, To School Through the Fields, shares childhood tales in rural Ireland, while Frank McCourt’s Pulitzer Prize-winning autobiography, Angela’s Ashes, remembers the Great Depression.
For fiction, James Joyce’s Dubliners is a short story collection sharing Irish life through the eyes of 15 Dubliners.
Sally Rooney’s awkward, tense, lump-in-the-throat love story, Normal People (now a TV series), traverses from the rural County Sligo to the halls of Trinity College.
Pop the kettle on before enjoying a book or three by Marian Keyes. Her tales are funny and moving, making her one of Ireland’s best-selling and loved authors.
And learn about Irish folklore with one of Ireland’s best-known storytellers, Eddie Lenihan, in his Tell Me a Story podcast series.
shows.acast.com/tell-me-a-story-with-eddie-lenihan/episodesWant a holiday at home? Follow the directions at escape.com.au/armchairtraveller
CREDIT: Amanda Woods
Word count: 1036
