DOC HOLIDAY I am travelling from Sydney to Dubai and have a nine-hour layover (1pm to 10pm) before flying from Dubai to Kilimanjaro. Any suggestions to fill in the time? Am I able to leave the airport?
DOC Australian citizens are eligible for a free visa on arrival, so you could definitely leave the airport. Jump on the metro and take the red line to Dubai Mall. Eat lunch at a restaurant there – try Al Hallab for great Lebanese food with a view of the Dubai Fountain and the Burj Khalifa – and then visit the Burj.
Book tickets to the observation deck and attractions at levels 124 and 125 online before you go ($60) because walk-up tickets are more expensive. If you’re there in peak period (October to March) or at peak time (3.30pm to 6pm) you will likely have to queue for a while, so make sure you leave yourself enough time. Try the virtual reality experience, Mission 828, which allows you to “skydive” down in four minutes.
Another option would be to catch a cab to Dubai Marina and buy a ticket to a beach club for a meal and a few hours in the sun and the water ($40 to $200), although I wouldn’t recommend any sun exposure if you’re there in summer, when temperatures can get scorching.
Or you could blow off some steam at the Aquaventure Waterpark. Grab an inflatable tyre, jump into one of the park’s canals and let it deliver you via a ramp to the various waterslides on offer. There are restaurants within the park, and cabanas and lockers to rent. You should also book tickets for this attraction online for cheaper prices, and you’ll need to catch a cab there from the airport (30-40 minutes).
If you decide to stay at the airport, you could buy a pass to the Marhaba Lounge (about $70 pre-booked online, depending on your date). You could have a swim in the pool at the Dubai International Hotel (it’s open to all travellers, not just guests), or have a massage or treatment at one of the airport’s spas. Or you could catch up on some sleep. The Sleep N Fly lounge at Terminal 3 has igloo-style pods or bigger cabins with pull-out beds for families, while Terminal 1 has Snoozecube, offering a bed, TV and luggage storage area.
TIPS FOR CRUISE NEWBIES As first-time cruisers with Royal Caribbean to NZ, we hope you can help with a few queries. Should we book shore trips before departure or wait until we’re on-board? Where will we get the better price? Should we buy the alcoholic beverage package prior to departure or on-board? Do we need to tip, who do we tip, and what is expected? While room service is available, it’s unclear if there are charges for cups of tea late at night or early morning.
DOC Kim Greeland, a senior consultant for Clean Cruising, a member of Helloworld Travel, has answered this question in excellent detail on my behalf. Kim says pre-booking your shore excursions is always the best policy. The price won’t vary either way, but getting in early guarantees you won’t miss out. She also advises her clients to use Royal Caribbean’s own shore excursions rather than independent versions.
“They have an expansive variety and you get priority boarding on and off the ship at port. By booking with the cruise line, it is also guaranteed you will actually get what you paid for and the tour will be there when you hop off the ship.
“Cruise lines work closely with their operators to ensure you have a great experience. They also have the ability to contact the ship if they are going to be delayed getting back, and the ship will wait. If you book a shore tour independently and are late returning, the cruise line is under no obligation to wait for you,” she says.
The question of whether to buy a drinks package has a number of variables. “Always look at the days at sea and the days you have at port. You often drink more on sea days than you would on port days,” Kim says.
She suggests weighing up how much you like to drink and doing some basic calculations.
“On Royal Caribbean, the premium drinks package offers virtually all the premium drinks for a fixed price – including premium coffees, juices, teas, beers and cocktails. To break even you would need to have about five mixed drinks a day and two premium coffees, or seven to eight beers a day. Room service and minibar items aren’t included in the beverage package. The only other restriction is you can only order one drink at a time.” Kim says you should also consider the fact that with the package you’ll have the peace of mind of not copping a hefty bar bill at the end, and you will also save on the service charge for each drink because that’s already built into the price.
You can further save money by pre-purchasing the package, rather than deciding a few days into the cruise.
As for tips, Kim says all bookings made by Australian citizens in Australia, whether through an agent or directly, will have tips built into their fare. You will only have to pay tips if you buy individual drinks (not on the drinks package), or if you want to reward exceptional service.
And finally, filtered coffee and tea is always available free of charge in the buffet area, but any specialty tea and coffee will generally incur an extra charge.
CHRISTMAS LUNCH SERVED We will be in Tallinn, Estonia, from December 23-27. We have booked an apartment in the Old Town for the duration but we are at a loss as to where we can go for lunch on Christmas Day as I believe most restaurants will be closed. Can you help?
DOC In Estonia, the traditional Christmas meal is had either on Christmas Eve or Christmas night. I can’t vouch for it personally, but the Restaurant MEKK – which serves modern Estonian cuisine – is consistently named one of Tallinn’s best.
It’s located within the Savoy Boutique Hotel, which makes it more likely to be doing something special for Christmas Day. It’s also in the Old Town, so you won’t have far to walk. You can book online (tallinnhotels.ee/mekk), but I would be getting on to it quick smart.
DOC’S TIP OF THE WEEK Remove old stickers from your luggage before flying. They can confuse barcode readers.
ASK THE EXPERT NEED HELP?
DOC HOLIDAY WORKS CLOSELY WITH HELLOWORLD TRAVEL TO ENSURE YOU GET THE MOST RELEVANT, ACCURATE TRAVEL ADVICEEMAIL DOCHOLIDAY@NEWS.COM.AU PERSONAL REPLIES ARE UNFORTUNATELY NOT POSSIBLE
CREDIT: Claire Sutherland
Word count: 1123
