Pack your imagination for a virtual journey into the exotic world of Istanbul’s marketplaces and palaces
CLOSE YOUR EYES AND IMAGINE a heady scent of cinnamon wafting over from the nearby bazaar. Now listen to the sound of taxi drivers swerving around you, street vendors vying for your attention and ferries sounding their horns as they pull away from their port while seagulls dive for the Turkish simit being pulled apart in your hands.
You might not be able to observe Istanbul’s silver minaret-capped skyline (and its host of majestic landmarks) in person at the moment, but happily, there are plenty of ways to transport yourself to this land of exotic sights, sounds and flavours.
LEARN LOCAL PHRASES More than 80 million people worldwide speak Turkish and what better way to master age-old local expressions such as “You’re too thin. Why you don’t you grab yourself another plate?” and “If you wait any longer, nobody will want you” than by putting aside five minutes a day and taking on Duolingo’s free, “Learn Turkish in bite-sized pieces” lessons. Those who’ve already mastered the basics can find comprehensive lessons on Audible, covering every level from introductory to advanced.
The good news? Turkish is phonetic, easy to learn, and features many words borrowed from the French language. The bad news? Word order, which in Turkish is subject-object-verb, can trip up even the most talented of linguists. Persevere; less than 20 per cent of the country’s nationals speak English so you’ll be in good stead for a future holiday.
duolingo.com, audible.com.au
TICKLE YOUR TASTEBUDS You may be familiar with the humble doner kebab, but it’s not a dish Turks readily eat. Most prefer something from their rich catalogue of recipes infused with more than 600 years of Ottoman history.
Familiarise yourself with Turkish cuisine by purchasing a copy of Anatolia by Somer Sivrioğlu, the chef and restaurateur behind Sydney establishments Anason and Efendy. This will ready you to host an authentic dinner party, for immediate members of your family that is, at home. Or a social-distance dining experience via video conferencing.
Many Turkish food products, such as vine leaves to make stuffed vine leaves or dolma, and cherry or vişne juice can be purchased online at Harris Farm.
murdochbooks.com.au, harrisfarm.com.au
WORK OF ART From opulent Ottoman palaces and museums full of ancient relics to mosques with silver-tipped minarets reaching towards the clouds, Istanbul is home to an impressive roll call of cultural touchstones. Fortunately, although all of these have closed temporarily, many of the major players can be experienced online.
Everybody’s favourite church-turned-mosque-turned museum, Hagia Sophia, can be enjoyed via a virtual tour on ktb.gov.tr, as can Topkapı Palace, home to entire sections dedicated to harems and eunuchs. Dolmabahçe Palace can be enjoyed at 360tr.com, while Pera Museum and Istanbul Research Institute offer both their collection exhibitions and periodical exhibitions online through Google Arts & Culture.
artsandculture.google.com
POINT OF VIEW Keen to check out the view from some of Istanbul’s spectacular architectural landmarks? Pour yourself a cup of tea (Turks wouldn’t dream of adding milk) and check out the live webcams dotted around the city. Some are located around the Grand Bazaar, Maiden’s Tower, Pierre Loti Hill, Istiklal Caddesi and Taksim.
Istanbuluseyret.com/turistikkameralar, ibb.istanbul/en
OFF TO MARKET Admittedly, there’s little that can match the sights, sounds and smells of meandering through Istanbul’s fabled Grand Bazaar, one of the world’s largest and oldest covered markets. While we’ll all have to hold off on perusing the 4000-plus stores in person for some time, youvisit.com offers a virtual reality experience of the bazaar. It helps if you ask a mate to call and try to sell you rugs/leather jackets/gold jewellery while you’re online, to give you the complete experience. For those who prefer high fashion, many of the country’s top retailers are online (and happily, in the middle of a generous sale). Check out Ipekyol, Vakko, Mudo Collection and Beymen.
ipekyol.com.tr, vakko.com, mudo.com.tr, beymen.com
HIT THE BOOKS If there’s one name synonymous with Istanbul, it’s author Orhan Pamuk who has made it his life’s work to write novel after novel about the city in which he was born (he has sold more than 15 million copies of his books and is also a Nobel Prize in Literature recipient). His largely autobiographical Istanbul: Memories and the City, followed by The Museum of Innocence and A Strangeness in My Mind will transport you to an exotic world filled with street vendors, quirky museums and so much passion you’ll wonder if you even knew how to love until now.
Prefer to enjoy the above with striking visuals? Check out Istanbul Kirmizisi (or Red Istanbul) on Netflix.
FAMILY FAVOURITES Some of Istanbul’s more redeeming features often get overlooked by its overwhelming beauty. Few tourists know, perhaps, that the city is nirvana for little ones with theme parks, attractions such as KidZania and toy museums. Isfanbul rules among the city’s theme parks and, happily, many of its top thrill rides can be experienced from your couch, courtesy of YouTube, and many rounds of Turkish Delight that won’t be working their way back up as you enjoy the ride.
While you’re on YouTube, be sure to check out the walking tour videos of Miniaturk Museum, a curious outdoor space filled with more than 120 1:25 scale models of Istanbul’s top landmarks. It’s mini Istanbul for mini people, on the screen.
youtube.com
CALM THE CHAOS With its non-stop traffic, 16 million residents and gargantuan sprawl crammed with apartment blocks and yellow taxis, this bustling city can get a bit much for those who are ill-equipped to deal with big city life. Prep yourself now by downloading meditation apps such as Headspace or Calm. You’ll need a dose of zen, particularly when dealing with the city’s taxi drivers.headspace.com, calm.com
CREDIT: Dilvin Yasa
Word count: 967
