hibernations - YOUR CORONAVIRUS GUIDE TO DAILY LIFE AUSTRALIANS MAY BE IN ISOLATION THIS APRIL 25 BUT IT DOESN’T HAVE TO BE A LONELY EXPERIENCE, IF YOU FOLLOW OUR GUIDE TO DOING ANZAC DAY AT HOME
TOMORROW we’ll spend Anzac Day at home, where we have spent every day for the past few weeks.
But it won’t be just another day – April 25 never is.
In fact this year, as we face a new challenge, Aussies seem set on demonstrating that we are very much a community; a force to be reckoned with; and a nation that will not be beaten by adversity.
It’s in no way a stretch to say that is precisely the Anzac Spirit. But stirring words aside, how do we mark Anzac Day with no public Dawn Services, no marches, no gatherings at memorials or RSLs? No games of two-up at the local, family visits or barbecues at a mate’s house?
And certainly no journeys of a lifetime to those traditional spots that will always be, in part, Australia: Gallipoli, Villers-Bretonneux, Hellfire Pass and other overseas war graves sites.
It’s OK. We’ve got you covered with this handy guide to doing Anzac Day at home. And we’ll be with you every step of the way at AnzacLive.
Admittedly none of us have done this before and we’re all in it together, so if you have some cracking ideas to share please do so – contact details at the end.
REVEILLE AND GUNFIRE If you’re planning to Light Up The Dawn from home, you’ll need to be up in good time. We suggest 5am AEST or even a bit earlier so you can be ready to face your neighbours (at a safe distance). Experience an echo of the pre-dawn Gallipoli routine with Gunfire: a warming mug of hot tea or coffee, perhaps with a dash of rum for the daring adults; and maybe cocoa for the kids. If you want to be hardcore, no fresh milk – condensed in a tin if you must!
SET THE SCENE We’ll be tuning in to Sky News’ Anzac Day Live coverage from 5am, ahead of the special closed National Commemorative Service being beamed from the Australian War Memorial at 5.30am. The ABC is providing similar coverage on TV and radio.
LIGHT UP THE DAWN Instead of going to Dawn Services, Australians are being urged by the RSL to gather safely in their driveways, at their balconies, in their doorways or windows while listening to that Commemorative Service. At 6am we will Light Up The Dawn with our virtual candles or other illuminations in a show of national solidarity. Some of those with musical skills will be playing The Last Post outside, on traditional brass instruments or even strings, like Victoria Jacono-Gilmovich and children Hugo, 6, and Estelle, 8, (pictured above) who will be playing at their home in Five Dock, Sydney.
YOUR VIRTUAL CANDLE We’ve been thrilled to produce an innovative, free experience specifically to make this easier for any Australians: a Virtual Candle, with The Ode and The Last Post and an image gallery saluting our military veterans from the Boer War to today. It is very simple to use on any device – phone, tablet or computer – and you can find it at this newspaper’s app or at www.anzaclive.com.au. Please use it at dawn or for any moments of quiet reflection later in the day.
PRIOR PREPARATION Stepping back momentarily, some Aussies will be decorating the outside of their homes respectfully beforehand with flags, the poppy poster in yesterday’s paper and other tributes. We advise doing that this afternoon to avoid flapping about in the morning – same with preparing any clothes, medals, photos and memorabilia.
DISH UP THE RATIONS After the service it’s time to eat. The Gunfire Breakfast tradition has evolved over the years and we’ll be enjoying a bit of a fry-up – fortunately for Aussies today, it’s significantly better than the original Gallipoli standard tucker. Check out some Anzac Day food and drink ideas over the page at Feeding Time. Later in the day we’re fancying corned beef hash and may try delicious. magazine’s 2020 spin on Gunfire. And yes, Anzac biscuits of course (no “cookies”, thank you).
KIDS LOVE IT We’re always stunned at how much children respond to Anzac Day – even the solemn parts – and we reckon they will be super-excited by Light Up The Dawn and the virtual candle. Later in the day, if you have kids at home plan some activities: make Anzac food, draw a slouch hat or a military scene, make a poppy, listen to music or just have a chat about why we do this and what happened in Australia’s wartime history. Better still, think about researching a family member who has served. You’ll find lots of ideas and appropriate explainers at KidsNews.com.au. Top tip: don’t overload them – just enjoy that they are interested to whatever degree.
GO THERE YOURSELF We can’t travel overseas – but we can go there in virtual reality. The Anzac360 app lets you explore key World War I locations on the Western Front, including Villers-Bretonneux where such important events happened exactly 102 years ago today and tomorrow and the Australian War Memorial there, which would usually be the site of a moving Anzac Day service. You can also immerse yourself next to fellow Aussies in a 360-degree commemoration at the awe-inspiring Menin Gate memorial at Ypres. And for the first time, at 2pm on AnzacLive’s Facebook page we will share our Anzac360 film of Hellfire Pass – another traditional Anzac Day location – and the nearby Kanchanaburi cemetery, where many fallen rest.
PLAY TWO-UP It’s an Anzac Day tradition. And tomorrow in Hibernation we’ll teach you how to do it at home.
TAKE IT ALL IN In our house the TV will be on quite a lot of the day. Sky’s coverage from 9am will feature anchor Jaynie Seal with reporters across the country and in New Zealand showcasing the ways communities are honouring Anzac Day. At 11.30am the ABC will host a short reflection featuring The Ode and The Last Post followed by a minute’s silence; and at 6.55pm will broadcast the Governor-General’s Anzac Day message. Between those we want to check out The History Channel’s cracking line-up of shows featuring interviews with the last diggers of WWI; watch at least some of Peter Jackson’s They Shall Not Grow Old and finish the evening with The Water Diviner. Please share your viewing tips! On Saturday we’ll give a full rundown on Anzac and war-related films, shows to stream and recommended reading.
REACH FOR A MATE Amidst it all, do remember to reach out to those who may be alone or who could do with a helping hand from a cobber. While we always reflect on our veterans on April 25, this year the RSL is urging Australians to help any mates – military or not – who are in need. We fully endorse that – again, that is surely the real Anzac Spirit made real in deeds, not just words.
Have a truly special day tomorrow. We’ll be working the keyboard at Facebook.com/AnzacLive/ if you’d like to get in touch. And if you have an AnzacAtHome idea, share it there or email justin.lees@news.com.au
A DAY TO REMEMBER ALL YOUR ANZACINSPIRED MOVIES, TV, BOOKS AND MOREHERE TOMORROW
CREDIT: JUSTIN LEES; AnzacLive Editor
Word count: 1236
