US, Japan and China vied for attention at Detroit — Europe was virtually missing The Detroit motor show is losing its mojo as car makers steer away from static displays of new products.
Volkswagen is the only European brand at Detroit this year, while Mazda and Mitsubishi have also opted not to attend what has historically been the biggest motoring event in the US.
The problem for makers is that customers want to see the latest bells and whistles working — and that isn’t possible in a conventional motor show format. Interactive displays and outdoor driving demonstrations are the latest trends, which is why car companies increasingly are turning up at events such as the Consumer Electronics Show that finished in Las Vegas last week.
There was still plenty of shiny new metal to see in Detroit, and these are the highlights.
TOYOTA Long awaited, Toyota’s newest sports car didn’t disappoint. Officially known as the A90 GR Supra (GR is for Gazoo Racing), the two-seater is a joint venture with BMW, which explains why much of the interior looks like one from the European brand.
Its 3.0-litre six-cylinder cranks out 250kW/500Nm and turns the rear wheels via an eight-speed automatic. Toyota claims the Supra’s chassis is stiffer than that of the Lexus LFA supercar, has a lower centre of gravity than the 86, a perfect 50:50 front-to-rear weight split and can hit 100km/h in 4.3 seconds.
A four-cylinder turbo has also been developed but the six is likely to dominate sales. Local deliveries start in the second half of this year, with an initial allocation of 300 cars. Australia-bound cars will also be fitted with an active differential, which uses a dedicated computer chip to adjust the level of diff locking based on the car’s stance and driver inputs.
NISSAN Nissan stepped up with an “elevated sports sedan” concept that highlights the extra interior space afforded by battery propulsion.
The front seats swivel to face the back, which can be configured as a conventional three-pew bench seat or set up as a luxurious captain’s seat with the folded outer seats acting as armrests.
The IMs show car uses a 115kWh battery and a pair of electric motors good for 380kW/ 800Nm to drive all four wheels. Nissan says the range is about 600km. The software matches the futuristic exterior. Augmented reality cameras “see” around corners and a virtual reality avatar appears in the passenger seat should the driver want some artificial company.
Nissan design guru Alfonso Albaisa says the high-riding sedan effectively creates a new segment. “Advances in electric vehicle technology and autonomous driving have allowed our designers to break free of the platform and packaging rules that constrain traditional passenger vehicles, to create a completely new type of car,” he says.
INFINITI A “technical problem” grounded Infiniti’s first electric SUV concept before it made the Detroit stage. Despite the non-appearance, there is still plenty of interest in the QX Inspiration, largely because previous Infiniti concepts have evolved into production vehicles.
The mid-size SUV, a rival to the likes of the Mercedes-Benz EQC and Jaguar I-Pace, will use electric motors to power each axle, though the Japanese luxury marque hasn’t specified outputs for the motors or the capacity of the lithium-ion battery.
Stylistically the QX Inspiration is meant to preview the shape of future models. As global head Christina Meunier noted, it is “the embodiment of our future”, when all Infinitis will use some form of electric drive by 2021.
HYUNDAI The N performance sub-brand keeps evolving with the launch of a dedicated Veloster race car. The car meets global touring car specifications and these versions will compete in the US in the International Motor Sports Association Michelin Pilot Challenge.
It’s all part of a push to raise the profile of the N brand, which is already enjoying huge success in sales and races. Mechanically identical to the i30N TCR shown last year, the Veloster version is more relevant for the US market, where it is on sale — the i30 N isn’t.
FORD The “most powerful road-legal” Mustang was unleashed on an appreciative audience in Detroit. The Shelby GT500 uses a 5.2-litre supercharged V8 to fry the rear tyres with 522kW/880Nm.
Purists may bemoan the fact a seven-speed dual-clutch auto is the only transmission, though they can’t complain about a 3.5-second sprint to 100km/h.
Keeping the engine cool mandated a huge front grille and air intakes, along with massive bonnet louvres, to pump an extra 50 per cent of air through the radiators.
Ford also showed off a sporty ST version of its big Explorer SUV, using a 300kW/560Nm 3.0-litre six-cylinder turbo. The Australian arm has already dismissed the prospect of the Explorer joining the local line-up.
KIA The eight-seat Telluride is being built in the US and no one’s saying whether it will come in right-hand drive. If it is, Kia Australia is keen to add the big SUV to its model mix.
Powered by a naturally aspirated 3.8-litre V6 (217kW/355Nm), the Telluride comes in front and all-wheel-drive guises. Advanced safety software is expected — innovative touches such as using inbuilt microphones to help the driver chat with people in the second and third row are likely to resonate with family owners.
VOLKSWAGEN Sedans aren’t the in thing in Australia and it’s a similar story in the US, where more than 50 per cent of sales are SUVs. That said, the sedan market is still relatively huge, as VW America boss Scott Keogh told reporters during the unveiling of the updated Passat.
“About 4.25 million sedans were sold in the US last year,” Keogh says. “That’s 800,000 more than the entire German market. There’s still a market there.” The US-built car is the only model in the VW range to not use the maker’s MQB common platform. The update adds a fastback style roofline but engines carry over.
GAC GAC has made no secret of its intent to sell cars globally and the seven-seat Entranze electric SUV/minivan is the first fruit of the Chinese company’s California design studio. The concept, designed to be the “ultimate road trip vehicle”, adopts glass doors to improve the view — they won’t make it into production.
In keeping with the environmentally friendly approach, GAC says about 90 per cent of the interior is made of cork. Given the scarcity of details on the Entranze, it may be too early to start popping the bubbly.
LEXUS LC CONVERTIBLE Lexus added some spice to proceedings at Detroit with a track version of its V8-powered RC-F coupe, boosting performance, adding carbon fibre and titanium elements and introducing a launch control feature.
The maker also revealed a convertible concept based on its flagship LC coupe, which launched at Detroit two years ago. The convertible is expected to remain true to the concept when it enters production and should keep the V8 engine from the coupe version.
CADILLAC WITH AN AUSTRALIAN FLAVOUR Could this be the car to spearhead the launch of Cadillac in Australia? The staple American luxury brand chose its home show to take the covers off its family-sized eight-seater SUV, the XT6.
Designed to sit in between the make’s mammoth Escalade and the smaller XT4, the XT6 will spearhead an assault on the German dominance of the luxury SUV market.
Cadillac is keen to expand its presence in Europe with its new product line-up and that may be good news for Australia, as it would require engineering right-hand drive versions for the UK market. Holden boss Dave Buttner says the brand is looking at every part of the General Motors portfolio as it looks to recover from the loss of the Commodore.
There’s already an Australian connection to the XT6 as Holden proving ground engineers have been involved in fine-tuning the SUV’s engine and transmission.Cadillac originally planned to launch in Australia a decade ago but pulled the pin amid the economic gloom at the time. Holden had already imported roughly 90 cars and signed 16 dealers to sell the brand.
CREDIT: CRAIG DUFF
Word count: 1340
