A tour of Darwin reveals the little-known wartime history of our northernmost capital and charts the coming of age of a nation As the sun came up on February 19, 1942, the residents of Darwin prepared themselves for another sweltering summer’s day. The world was once again at war, and for Australia’s northernmost capital there was a heightened sense of danger.
Only 2000 people remained in Darwin following the mass evacuations of late 1941, prompted by the attack on Pearl Harbour by the Empire of Japan. Japanese aggression had become an issue throughout the Asia-Pacific region during the 1930s, and in response, Darwin was on alert.
It’s airfields, ordnance storage sites, communications infrastructure and safe harbour for naval fleets all made the Darwin of 1942 a site of tremendous strategic importance for the Allies. But they also made it a prime target for the enemy. It wasn’t a question of if there would be an attack, but when.
The Darwin of today is bigger, but it’s just as quiet as the sun rises on February 19, 2020. The skies are clear as I meet my “platoon” in the lobby of the Vibe Adina Hotel in Darwin’s spectacular Waterfront Precinct. We’re part of the Mat McLachlan Bombing of Darwin Anniversary Tour, a three-day exploration of the city’s wartime history.
Our local guide, John, is on great form. “Just so you know, 78 years ago we’d have been underwater right now,” he says as we head out. The Waterfront Precinct is built on land reclaimed from Kitchener Bay. “We might have been safer for it.” Darwin has changed significantly since World War II, particularly after it was devastated by Cyclone Tracy in 1974, but the city is still full of relics and sites of wartime significance – if you know where to look.
The Darwin experience is unique among the Mat McLachlan Battlefield Tours catalogue because it’s one of the few battlefield tours it’s possible to have in Australia, a nation largely spared from direct combat. In fact, some of the group were surprised to learn that Darwin was attacked at all.
“I had no idea,” says Vicky, who’s here with her mum, Judith. “We weren’t taught about this at school.” Judith has a personal connection to the Darwin bombing; her father was stationed here during the war. “Back then, they didn’t talk about what had happened to them,” she says. “Our family only knew that he was here, and whatever he went through affected him severely.” After the war, her father moved to country New South Wales, where Judith still lives today.
“It was a different time – they were a different generation,” she says. “They kept it to themselves. But finally coming here means I can be that much closer to him.” Much of the tour’s impact comes from realising just how little we all know about Darwin’s plight. John kicks off the tour with a bombshell, so to speak: “Not many people know that more bombs were dropped on Darwin than on Pearl Harbour.” Equally revelatory is the news that Darwin was bombed twice that first day, and that sites around northern Australia were hit no less than 77 times from 1942 to late 1943.
Enveloped by the Top End’s signature heat, we wander along the foreshore of Darwin Harbour, which is eight times the size of Sydney’s. Its size is why 65 Allied vessels were anchored here in early 1942. In addition to the battleships, a few anti-aircraft guns of varying vintage were dotted around the foreshore “just in case”.
“Now, imagine 188 Japanese Zero planes suddenly filling the sky without warning,” John says.
They reached Darwin just before 10am on February 19, having been mistaken for US planes. Due to the confusion, no air-raid siren was sounded. That morning, 21-year-old postmaster’s daughter Iris Bald was visiting her parents in Darwin’s post office, not far from the waterfront. The full staff of nine were on duty.
Our group is standing inside Darwin’s Parliament House, affectionately known by locals as “the Wedding Cake”, huddled in a corner of the vast ground floor around a tiny plaque on the ground. “At this site a bomb fell on the post office during the first attack on Darwin on February 19, 1942, killing nine people and fatally injuring another.” The staff had sought shelter in a slit trench out the back. It was built to withstand anything but a direct hit. That’s exactly what happened.
The raid lasted just half an hour, but left 236 dead and the city in ruins. Many of the intended targets – ammo and fuel dumps, airfields and mounted guns – survived and make up much of our tour’s itinerary.
Darwin’s robust line-up of museums also make the list, and contain some astonishing relics. The remains of a Japanese Zero shot down during the first raid lies at the Darwin Aviation Museum (formerly the Australian Aviation Heritage Centre), while the Royal Flying Doctor Service Tourist Facility uses holograms and virtual reality to bring the war to life.
For some, it never died. At the annual memorial service at Bicentennial Park, civilians and military personnel gather to commemorate the bombing. WWII-era planes fly overhead while the deafening reports of cannons and machine guns recreate the desperate defensive situation on the ground.
It’s an emotional affair, particularly for Judith. “I feel closer to my father for having come here and done this tour,” she says. “I’ll never fully understand what he went through, but it’s as close as I can get.” It’s said that Gallipoli was where Australia lost its innocence, but in Darwin, faced with another long, bloody war and the threat of invasion, the young nation found its resolve.
The writer was a guest of Mat McLachlan Battlefield Tours and NT Tourism.
BOMBSHELL “Not many people know that more bombs were dropped on Darwin than on Pearl Harbour.” Freelance writer Michael Wayne counts his trip to Darwin as a personal achievement, succeeding where both Tojo and Santa failed.
5 MORE THINGS TO SEE 1 MAGNT Surrounded by a tropical garden on Darwin Harbour, the Museum and Art Gallery of the Northern Territory (MAGNT) houses everything from Aboriginal art to maritime archaeology.
2 The Wave Pool When they need to escape the humidity, this patrolled and crocodile-free lagoon in the heart of Darwin provides Territorians and tourists a chance to swim and surf safely.
3 Parap Village Markets Home to arguably the best laksas in Australia, the Parap markets offer a range of local and Asian-inspired dishes as well as fresh tropical fruits and vegies every Saturday.
4 Fish feeding at Doctors Gully At high tide, schools of hungry fish swim to the shoreline of Darwin’s Doctors Gully, ready to be fed by hand.
5 Waterfront Beach club Spend the day lounging by the picturesque Darwin waterfront as you order food and drinks and soak up the good vibes.
northernterritory.com
ESCAPE ROUTE The Mat McLachlan Bombing of Darwin Tour returns in February 2021 (February 16-20; $1699 for the five-day tour) and takes in historic sites and the Sea Darwin Bombing of Darwin Cruise. The company also offers private and custom group tours of Darwin on any day. battlefields.com.au For 20 more things to do in the NT capital, head to escape.com.au/visitdarwin
CREDIT: Michael Wayne
Word count: 1217
