Alexander Calder: Radical Inventor includes around 100 sculptural and pictorial works drawn from private and museum collections in North America, including several lent by the Calder Foundation in New York. Calder, who died in 1976, was hugely influential and this overview canvases the breadth of his inventiveness through a range of works, including two-dimensional, three-dimensional wire portraits and circus figures, as well as his famously innovative mobiles. National Gallery of Victoria, Melbourne, until August 4
A View from the Bridge, Arthur Miller’s exploration of family and honour in 1950s Brooklyn, grapples with personal and cultural conflict through the story of one Italian-American family.
In a plot imbued with Miller’s tragic sensibility and nuanced grasp of human failings, the play’s depiction of flawed human passions still packs a punch. A mid-20th century classic from one of the greatest of western playwrights, starring Brett Archer, Bill Allert and Elena Carapetis.
Adelaide, July 12–August 3
AN APPETITE FOR REVENGE WA Opera’s production of Sweeney Todd: The Demon Barber of Fleet Street brings to gruesome life Stephen Sondheim’s musical thriller telling the tragic tale of Benjamin Barker and his unhinged response to loss and injustice. A dark story of despair with universal resonance, it stars Ben Mingay in the title role and Antoinette Halloran (pictured) as his accomplice in revenge, Mrs Lovett. Perth, July 13-20
Nordic Spirit: Eivind Aadland conducts the Tasmanian Symphony Orchestra in Sibelius’s Fifth Symphony. Spanish pianist Javier Perianes (pictured) plays Beethoven’s Third Piano Concerto, Hobart, August 9
MOVING EXPERIENCEIn Pacific Undertow, the Museum of Contemporary Art surveys the work of Australian artist Shaun Gladwell, best known for his videos showing the body in motion (left). From early paintings to drawings and works using augmented and virtual reality, the exhibition covers two decades of Gladwell’s work in different media, exploring the technological possibilities of 21st-century art. MCA, Sydney, July 19 to Octobers 7
CREDIT: Deirdre Blayney; Arts
Word count: 317
