Editor's choice YOU CAN’T ASK THAT WEDNESDAY, 9PM, ABC ANONYMITY in our national debate has, for the most part, been poisonous of late. Trolls allowed to spew their hatefulness at anyone, at any time, without the courage to put a face or even a name to their questioning or condemnation. But this series is based on questions many fear to ask, using the cover of anonymity to get truthful and at times, confronting answers. Tonight’s topic is on the issue of domestic and family violence, a fraught subject with complexities and sensitivities. Hearing from its victims — away from political rhetoric around the issue — is profoundly moving and impactful. The questions are familiar: “what did you do to provoke it?”, “Why didn’t you leave?” The answers are delivered with a range of emotion: good humour, courage, and in the case of one woman who really affected me, a timidity and fear you know is the lasting legacy of her having her self-esteem crushed and her personality pulverised by an abusive partner. She speaks in a whisper, her body folded into itself. Sitting beside a gay man, who was victimised in his first homosexual relationship, she still seems scared. His empathy for her, attempts to lighten the mood and reassure her she’s not alone are just beautiful to watch. When you hear these brave souls catalogue their physical injuries, not to mention the obvious psychological damage done to them, it makes for devastatingly powerful TV. -HB
SUNDAY SUNDAY NIGHT TAKEAWAY VARIETY, 7.30pm, Ten Having just watched a live taping of this show, I’m a convert. The set’s amazing, the concept’s great, the guest stars are fun, Beau Ryan’s hilarious, bringing joy to the general public. And the happiest minute of the week — where the divine Dr Chris dashes about the studio giving out free holidays to deserving audience members — never fails to bring a tear to my eye. Chris said in the lead up to the first episode he expected the show to be a slow burn, rather than an overnight success. He’s certainly been proven correct. Here’s hoping it takes off soon. -LW RESTORATION AUSTRALIA LIFESTYLE, 7.40pm, ABC After growing tired of their cramped apartment in Melbourne’s inner suburbs, high school teacher Laura and her husband, uni administration officer Reece, have bought a four-bedroom 1960s modernist house in Frankston South with plans to turn it into their dream family home. It’s a mammoth task – they want to retain its period features: sunken lounge room and ceiling-to-floor glass windows; but somehow, quite literally, raise the roof. Plus Sarah wants to keep a Palm Springs vibe with a pool to splash around in. Meanwhile, Reece is worried about the cost. You know what they say: Happy wife, happy life. Hosted by affable architect Stuart Harrison. -LW OUTBACK GOURMET food, 7.30pm, SBS FOOD MasterChef and Everyday Gourmet favourite Justine Schofield explores the wonders of the Australian outback on this adventurous series showcasing bush tucker and native ingredients. In a double-episode debut, she travels from Darwin to Kakadu, Katherine and Edith Falls, where she whips up a sweet trifle treat and sources some native herbs and fruits to try. –HB MONDAY BLUEY KIDS, 8am, ABC ME That noise you hear is the collective exhale of pre-schooler parents rejoicing at the return of this little Aussie battler of a kids’ cartoon. Sure, that brash little porcine star Peppa Pig gets more of the attention – despite her bad manners. But this series, launched last year, is a beautiful mix of junior morality tales and a great way for our young viewers to hear local stories and voices. For those who haven’t seen it, Bluey, below, is a sassy female blue heeler with a sister called Bingo. The two siblings adore each other and get up to great adventures, whether that’s pretending to be pirates or discovering the magic of music together. Mr Heeler, or Bandit to his mates, is voiced by Dave Cormack (the frontman for 90s band Custard), while Mrs Heeler, Chilli, is given voice by Melanie Zanetti, who has had roles in Tidelands and The Family Law. This is a very modern family, with mum recently returning to the work force part-time in airport security, while juggling care of her kids. Dad is an archaeologist (of course he is … most dogs love digging up bones) but is just as busy at home, sharing in the household chores. The show is from the creators of other animated favourites Charlie & Lola and Shaun the Sheep, its mission statement is to just encourage and inspire kids to play but more especially the joy of dogs. Besides the blue heelers, there are daschunds and beagles, border collies and kelpies, Labradors and Afghan hounds. -HB TUESDAY NUTS AND BOLTS DOCO, 7.30pm, NITV Tyler, The Creator feels the need for speed. The acclaimed rapper explores some of his great loves in this unexpected series and reduces them to their … you guessed it, nuts and bolts. His love of cars and racing inspires a desire to create a fast and green electric Go Kart. Anyone who has almost passed out from the fuel fumes while karting around a course would welcome this innovation which is seriously nuts and involves a lot more than just switching up the power source. In tonight’s second episode, the musician puts his love of floating to use, analysing gravity and its potential applications in virtual reality. -KM 2019 BUDGET factual, 7.30pm, ABC For the Morrison Government, this could be the last throw of the dice before an election is expected to follow in May. The Coalition is promising a surplus, which always reads well on the campaign trail – but will it be enough to distract from the disunity and division that has marked our Federal landscape in recent times. –HB
WEDNESDAY HARD QUIZ Quiz, 8pm, ABC Tom Gleeson makes this show what it is with his hilarious exchanges and teasing of contestants, whose specialty subjects are some of the strangest things you’ve never heard of. His taunts are delivered with the right tone, like a jester rather than a troll and the best thing about it is how much the challengers love been mocked so mercilessly. If you want serious quizzing, stay tuned for the more sophisticated return of Mastermind, which I’m happy to tell you will be hosted by Jennifer Byrne. –HB LAW & ORDER: SVU DRAMA, 8.30pm, Ten My TV addict buddy Steve and I have adopted the mantra of many SVU fans when it comes to navigating life: “what would Olivia Benson do?” For those not watching along at home, trust me, that question leaves plenty of scope, given Olivia is the central detective in this 20 season-long series, who sets the benchmark impossibly high for every other cop on TV and women everywhere. Played by the mesmerising Mariska Hargitay, Benson, inset, has been through the wringer herself, while supporting other victims of sexual abuse. In tonight’s episode, the team face one of the most challenging and emotional cases they’ve come across and threatens to trigger some. –HB
THURSDAY GOGGLEBOX AUSTRALIA LIFESTYLE, 8.30pm, Ten As we gear up to a Federal election, Gogglebox gives voice to some of the best political feedback our parties could ask for … if only they’d watch, listen and learn. The mix of demographics represent some of the key groups our pollies will be hoping to win over; so it should be on the watch list of anyone wanting your vote. Away from the serious stuff, River the Boston terrier, belonging to new couch critic Tim, should be nominated for a best new talent Logie, based simply on her cute factor. People have won gongs for less. -HB DREAMGIRLS MOVIE, 9.35pm, NITV Come for the story (a little disappointing rendering of the rise of the sixties girl group The Supremes) but stay for the ballads belted out by Beyonce, top left, and Jennifer Hudson, in her Academy Award-winning supporting role. The songs are insanely catchy, but the story jammed between is anything but. And that’s a shame, because a cracking good tale — the plot is a thinly-veiled take on the tumultuous career of Diana Ross and the Supremes — goes largely untold here. Co-stars Jamie Foxx. –LP FRIDAY THE HEIGHTS drama, 8.30pm, ABC There’s romance brewing on this Australian drama, and it just happens to be between two industry stalwarts – Marcus Graham as Pav and Roz Hammond as Claudia. He’s a former cop, she’s a single mum and a doctor. They’re determined to keep whatever’s going on a secret — possibly because it seems everyone lives in the apartment block in which this series is set. Poor old Pav can’t even buy protection at the local store, without the shopkeeper Iris trying to work out what’s going on. Pav rocks up for the date, and Claudia’s teenage daughter Sabine is shocked when the cookies he’s making are both medicinal and herbal. Pav’s also helping out ex-wife Leonie (Shari Sebbens), who is having a long overdue moment with her father, making him finally tell her why he tried to hide her indigenous history from her all her life. -CA CLEANING UP Drama, 8.30pm, 7TWO This British drama sees Sheridan Smith (Mrs Biggs) play Sam, an office cleaner who makes a bold life choice. With her finances out of control thanks to an addiction to online gambling, and an ex-husband trying to get custody of their kids, she resorts to insider trading. When Sam is busted hiding a microphone in an air-conditioning vent, she discovers she’s not the only bent employee at the company. -CA
SATURDAY CALL THE MIDWIFE drama, 8.15pm, ABC The good women, nuns and midwives, of Nonnatus House return for season seven and make for wonderful company on a Saturday night in. Lucille and Trixie work together on a difficult breech birth. Nadine is a single mother and an exotic dancer, but even in these judgmental times it’s her health they’re more worried about. –HB ONE BORN EVERY MINUTE reality, 7.30pm TEN This UK series opens the curtain on what really goes on in a labour ward. This episode introduces Amy, 23 and Ben, 29, who fell pregnant three months into their relationship.Thankfully, Ben’s there to support his partner … that is until he’s collapsed, vomiting into a bucket, while Amy is going through labour. -AS
CREDIT: OUR REVIEWERS LEIGH PAATSCH COLIN VICKERY HOLLY BYRNES CAMERON ADAMS AMELIA SAW KATHY McCABE
Word count: 1746
