TASMANIAN music and food will come together in Launceston’s Prince’s Square this year, as the creative director of the city’s Junction Arts Festival promises to “up the ante” for the event’s ninth instalment.
Chef Matt Adams, from Tamar Valley eatery Timbre, will use local produce to create unique dishes each night at the festival hub, where outdoor bars and fire pits will refresh those enjoying the four-day calendar of performances.
Billed by its creative director Greg Clarke as “a festival in which you don’t have to line up for anything”, Junction is as much a celebration of Launceston’s 19th century architecture as it is of the state’s best up-and-comers.
“The whole festival is held in unusual spaces, most of the works are world premiere and the majority of the work is all by Tasmanian artists,” he said.
“What you find is, from creating things in these spaces, it puts a spotlight on those spaces.” The festival is proud of its close relationship with many artists who perform year in, year out, and while most are Launceston-based, that’s slowly changing.
Clarke said there had been a concerted effort to identify more artists from the state’s South.
He spent five years directing the Adelaide Fringe and also produced several shows at the Sydney Opera House, including one with renowned cabaret performer Paul Capsis, who he’s bringing to Launceston this year to lead a triple bill of cabaret in That Little Devil.
Capsis will be joined by award-winning comedian Jude Perl and Tasmanian country music artist Ange Boxall.
Melbourne street artist Rone, meanwhile, will bring a city art installation across Bass Strait.
“[Rone] is quite well-known for doing these huge paintings of women’s faces,” Clarke said “He recently did a thing in Melbourne where he took over an old building and created art installations in each of the rooms.
“They’ve now turned that into a [virtual reality] experience, so you’ll be able to come along and wear the VR glasses and be able to experience being in that house and seeing that beautiful artwork.”Junction Arts Festival runs from September 4-8 in Launceston.
CREDIT: CHRISTOPHER TESTA
Word count: 353
