SUNDAY MRS WILSON DRAMA, 9.40PM, ABC Sometimes real life is stranger than fiction. This three-part drama is personal for Ruth Wilson, the award-winning star of The Affair, because it is based on the memoir of her grandmother Alison (played by Wilson), whose world was turned upside down when her husband Alec (Iain Glen) dies suddenly. The pair met two decades earlier when they were working for the secret service. A woman turns up on Alison’s doorstep claiming to be Alec’s first wife, Gladys. That is just the start of the shocks that await Alison as she tries to unravel Alec’s apparent double life. –CV PASSENGERS MOVIE, 8.30PM, GO!
In a far-off future, a luxury-liner spaceship is en route to an Earth-like planet in another galaxy. Every person on the craft has been snap-frozen to survive the 120-year journey. But passengers Jim (Chris Pratt) and Aurora (Jennifer Lawrence) wake early to discover they will die before reaching their destination and their spacecraft is far from the Garden of Eden. –LP
MONDAY MURPHY BROWN COMEDY, 9PM, TEN You could say Murphy Brown has gone to the dogs … and I am so here for it. If you’ve not been keeping up with this TV reboot, the veteran broadcaster has adopted a dog after doing a live broadcast from an animal shelter for her top-rating breakfast show. And little Benny Brown, a disabled French and Boston terrier mix, has pretty much stolen the show, as well as Murphy’s heart. He keeps her company in the absence of journalist son, Avery, who is chasing a lead and new career opportunity as a foreign correspondent in war-torn Afghanistan. –HB AVATAR MOVIE, 8.30PM, 7MATE A spectacular, trailblazing sci-fi epic from James Cameron, the director of Titanic. The action takes place on a faraway planet in the year 2154, where a paraplegic marine (Sam Worthington) infiltrates the native population with the aid of a virtual-reality program. Boasting highly sophisticated special-effects and great performances. –LP
TUESDAY MY KITCHEN RULES TUESDAY, 7PM, SEVEN It’s episode 10 of season 10 and that number will feature heavily in the scoring tonight. Moving on to the second group of instant restaurants, mother-and-son team of Lisa and John, below, from WA’s Margaret River set their sights high with their menu of retro classics: seafood cocktail, braised lamb shanks and raspberry cheesecake. Their rivals read that as easy beats, but that would be their first mistake, with this dynamic family duo determined to deliver. When the doorbell rings unexpectedly — not once, but twice — all teams are on edge as the mystery pairing of mild-mannered Milly and Serbian-born stylist Karolina — as teased endlessly in the promos — finally arrive. The latter lacks nothing in confidence, telling viewers in this anniversary season, “I am the gift to everyone”. Her competitors aren’t so sure, with one summing up the partnership as “a Disney Princess with the Wicked Witch”. But what would MKR be without a bit of manufactured drama, eh? It hasn’t come this far on nice folks cooking simple food really well. That said, back in the kitchen, the nice folks are cooking their simple food really well and judges Pete and Manu can’t get enough. There’s sauce, there’s crunch, there’s plenty of paleo protein — what’s not to love? –HB CATALYST: ALLERGY CLINIC FACTUAL, 8.30PM, ABC There isn’t a family in Australia not touched by the scourge of allergies – whether it be seeing a loved one suffer terribly or noting the impact it is having on our diet and lifestyle around the country. In fact, the statistics show more than four million Aussies suffer from an allergy, with diagnoses on the increase. In this special investigation, Dr Caroline West and Dr Shalin Naik set up an allergy clinic and bring along two leading immunologists to explore some of the more common complaints; as well as the exotic, including a toddler who suffers shocking welts if exposed to the cold. –HB
WEDNESDAY ROSEHAVEN COMEDY, 8.30PM, ABC It’s difficult to make real estate agents interesting or funny, but Celia Pacquola and Luke McGregor manage it in this comedy set in a small town in Tasmania. Tonight they’re going for a long drive to visit a new property they want to get on their books. However, it’s so far off the grid that their phones go out of reception. It means the satellite navigation (or “map lady”) doesn’t work and, shock horror, they have to resort to old-fashioned paper maps. “How does it know where we are,” Emma (Pacquola) asks of the paper map. Soon they’re flat lost. -CA GET KRACKIN’ COMEDY, 9PM, ABC Just when you thought this parody of breakfast TV could not get more awkward, Kate McLennan and Kate McCartney have got a studio audience. They’d rather be anywhere else but watching a frankly awful breakfast TV show, especially one where the hosts try to do an Ellen and dance with them … and then on top of them. The guests in this episode include an organic cleaning expert who at least seems to excite the audience, but once she goes there’s a lot of very awkward silence. Merrick Watts plays a rogue audience member called Mark who doesn’t take too kindly to audience interaction, and heckles throughout the entire program. One of the new guest hosts is a former contestant from a faux reality show called Divorced and Horny, which is a concept that will probably have commercial TV networks spewing they didn’t think of it first. There’s also music from Paul Kelly – yes, the actual living legend Paul Kelly, who doesn’t get quite the level of respect you’d expect. -CA
THURSDAY ESCAPE FROM THE CITY LIFESTYLE, 8PM, ABC Jane Hall, below, is underused on Australian TV and her personality is well suited to this seachange show. Tonight, she’s in WA and the Margaret River region. It’s a foodies’ paradise, full of historical sites and monuments including the Cape Leeuwin Lighthouse, which bring in more than a million tourists a year. Depending on which part of the area you want to live, you can pay between $400,000 to $900,000 for a house. Hall meets recently retired couple Deb and Milo who are leaving Canberra, finding there’s too many apartments being built and trees and parks being knocked down. But don’t paint them as oldies, they’re actually motorbike riders who don’t intend to sit back and grow old – they want to use their retirement as a chance to be adventurous. “If you don’t take risks then you’re not alive,” Deb says. “A challenge like this in another stage of our life is a good thing for the soul,” Milo notes. Living somewhere less cold is also enticing. Hall takes them around a series of houses to see if they can picture themselves living there and she makes sure she finds them some quirky options as they’re open to properties “a bit outside the norm”. Hall has to make sure she finds a house with enough room to accommodate their motorbikes. – CA
FRIDAY NEIGHBOURS DRAMA, 6.30PM, 10PEACH Only on a soap opera could a screenwriter get away with a storyline about an alcoholic single mother Terese (Rebekah Elmaloglou) in a back-and-forth love triangle with a father Paul (Stefan Dennis) and his son Leo (David Tanaka). After previously engaging in romances with both, Terese now decides she’s hot for Paul, her former boss at Lassiter’s Hotel, but wants to break the news gently to her former lover and Paul’s son. Surely there’s a law against this? According to the soap rules, her master plan to manage the situation goes off the rails after Leo sees the pair, above, in passionate embrace and now he’s reeling. –AS 12 YEARS A SLAVE MOVIE, 8.30PM, SBS The true story of Solomon Northup (masterfully played by Chiwetel Ejiofor), a successful African-American musician who was abducted as a free man in 1841 and then sold into slavery. A film as complex, compelling and confronting as 12 Years a Slave reignites outrage about a shameful past and promotes a fresh understanding of that terrible time. –LP
SATURDAY NCIS: NEW ORLEANS DRAMA, 10.15PM, TEN Who knew that NCIS: New Orleans would turn out to be the best of the famed military crime franchise? Maybe it is because the spin-off is merely in its fifth season but there is a freshness missing from the Mark Harmon original now in season 16 and running on fumes after the departure of Michael Weatherly and Pauley Perrette; while NCIS: Los Angeles is coasting in season 10. Tonight, LeVar Burton (best known as Kunta Kinte in the original Roots) plays Nero, a Naval Intelligence officer who teams up with Special Agent Dwayne Pride (Scott Bakula) and the crew to investigate the disappearance of an entomologist. Their mission is to track down a deadly virus that has also gone missing. –CV
Editor’s choice DOCO MAGICAL LAND OF OZ SUNDAY, 7.40PM, ABCWe’re all so used to David Attenborough narrating nature documentaries that it comes as a bit of a shock to hear Barry Humphries’ voice on Magical Land of Oz. The title of this three-part natural history series is a bit of a giveaway that it will take a more storybook view of the wildlife in and around Australia . Early on, Humphries says “magic has no rules” and you would swear he is reading a children’s fairytale as he talks of oceans in episode one – the Southern (cold), Pacific (calm with reefs) and Indian (warm). The journey begins off West Australia’s Red Bluff where massive schools of sardines – baitballs – are the perfect feast for hungry dusky sharks. Moving on to Pearson Island, off the SA coast, it’s home to the endangered Australian sea-lion. We see cuttlefish flash their rainbow colours in the Spencer Gulf; Southern right whales with their newborn and spider crabs in Port Phillip Bay; Migaloos migrating past Cabbage Tree Island; Raine Island turtles, above, on Queensland’s Great Barrier Reef; Whale Sharks at Ningaloo in WA; Tiger Sharks at Coral Bay and birdlife, including the Brown Booby on the Lacepede Islands of north Western Australia. The footage captured by cinematographers, including underwater specialist Jon Shaw, is nothing short of spectacular. It took producers Northern Pictures (Kakadu, Saltwater Heroes) 14 months to film this series and by the time you have finished watching you will believe the natural world in and around Australia truly is magical. A spellbinding treat. –CV
CREDIT: OUR REVIEWERS LEIGH PAATSCH COLIN VICKERY HOLLY BYRNESCAMERON ADAMS AMELIA SAW KATHY McCABE
Word count: 1756
