If 2020 has taught us anything, it is the folly  of predicting the future — but it seems safe  to presume that normality will not return any   time soon. We look ahead to what Australia   2021 will look like. David Mills , Melanie Burgess Sophie Elsworth, Kathy McCabe,  Robert Craddock and Nadia Salemme report.
THE 2021 employment landscape is expected to be tough for many, as demand for work outgrows supply, But it is not all doom and gloom.
Experts predict pockets of job growth in a range of sectors, an increasing ability to work from home and a more even playing field for regional jobseekers.
Hays regional director Eliza Kirkby said although some sectors had taken a significant hit during the coronavirus pandemic, there would “definitely be opportunities for people now and continuing into the new year”.
“The active spaces at the moment are healthcare for nurses and support workers, procurement and logistics for transport and delivery drivers, and banking and insurance for call centre and processing staff,” she said.
“Within the public sector we have seen demand for transport planners, policy professionals, and IT and digital candidates. We have seen cyber and data security become a busy area … and we expect that to continue across 2021.” She said construction workers – including project managers, engineers and tradespeople – would be in demand next year as the government funded more infrastructure projects.
Lisa Bourke hopes to give more regional talent a chance when hiring for her new, 100 per cent remote business, Content Hive.
She quit her city office job in the middle of the pandemic to start the digital marketing business and has already hired two remote workers and is about to hire another.
Exclusive analysis from job site SEEK revealed full-time work made up just 65 per cent of job ads in the first half of 2020, down from 80 per cent in 2007.
RETAIL The retail industry has felt the full impact of COVID-19 and now, many stores are in the fight of their lives to come out the other end.
Many have been forced to close their doors either temporarily or permanently and others have had to overhaul the way they operate.
Australian Retailers Association chief executive officer Paul Zahra said the huge transformation of the retail industry had “sped up change”.
“The shifts to digital and contactless shopping has now been accelerated by about a decade and it’s demonstrated retailers are resilient people,” he said.
“Shoppers will be using more of the mobile or shopping instore to navigate information; it’s all about convenience and contactless.” Latest Australian Bureau of Statistics data shows online sales climbed 13.6 per cent in May, year on year. Mr Zahra said as a result of COVID-19, “we’ve now got people who are shopping online that have never shopped online before”.
But retail magnate Gerry Harvey said there would always be a place for bricks and mortar stores and this won’t change.
“When people go and buy something – you buy a new dress you feel quite good and a bit of euphoria comes over you,” he said.
“Online is growing but it’s not going to take the place of bricks and mortar.” The surge in card payments was expected to continue as people moved away from handling notes and coins, fearing spread of disease.
Woolworths chief customer transformation officer Von Ingram said digital receipts would be another shift for shoppers.
TECHNOLOGY Clothes you can try on with your phone, online shopping delivered by drone, unprecedented internet speeds, and the return of smart glasses: futurists expect transformative technology to emerge in 2021 to meet very different times.
Australians can expect less focus on smartphones next year and more on laptops, gadgets to make homes smarter or more secure, and greater online shopping.
And, yes, experts say video conferences are here to stay.
Global futurist Anders Sorman-Nilsson said new tech trends in 2021 would be designed to keep us safe and connected, responding to challenges posed by the pandemic.
He said online shopping would rise “to a new level” in 2021 as consumers striven to stay socially distant, making drone deliveries a practical option.
Augmented reality and virtual reality technology would step up to entertain people at home and deliver new, safe experiences, Mr Sorman-Nilsson said.
The technology was recently demonstrated by Optus, which used its 5G network to show how consumers could virtually try on clothes while standing outside the shops that sold them.
Optus 5G head Harvey Wright said the AR application, which could show how a shirt, hat or even shoes looked on potential buyers, need not be theoretical when 5G coverage reached more Australians in 2021.
“The potential for augmented reality is a lot more obvious to consumers now, having been almost forced to look at these technologies through lockdowns,” Mr Wright said.
“We know these technologies will be a key use case for 5G.” Telsyte managing director Foad Fadaghi said Apple could help the reality-bending technology “come of age in the next 12 months” as it was strongly tipped to launch smart glasses as soon as May.
The futuristic spectacles could show wearers messages, alerts, street navigation and games without tipping off bystanders.
Mr Fadaghi said Australians should expect supercharged download speeds over 5G next year with the introduction of millimetre wave (mmWave) technology. It could deliver download speeds as fast as 1.8 gigabits per second — faster than the fastest of NBN connections.
NBN connections will get a speed boost in 2021 too. NBN Co has promised to upgrade speeds to millions of HFC homes to 250 megabits per second by June.
And futurist Steve Sammartino said the additional speed would come in handy for home offices or – as we’ll see more of in 2021 – home studios.
“Going to cubicle farms and working in an office; those days are gone,” he said. “The genie is out of the bottle now and it’s not going to go back in.”
BEAUTY The beauty industry is undergoing a makeover in the wake of COVID-19, as virtual consultations, DIY facials, and medical-grade sanitisation become the norm well into 2021, experts say.
Mecca head of services Georgie Gilbert said virtual consultations would continue indefinitely and there would be a rise in demand for professional makeup and skin advice done via video call, instead of in person.
“Customers can click on the red icon on our website to chat or video call an instore host who can assist with any beauty related question,” Ms Gilbert said.
She said virtual services which were fast-tracked due to COVID-19 restrictions would continue for “health reasons or simply convenience”.
For 2021, she said there would be a trend towards do-it-yourself treatments which were reflected in lockdown sales trends.
Growing categories were “new skin trends and devices … including LED masks and facial massage”, she said.
In 2021 at beauty retailers nationwide, staff would wear facial shields, customers undertake temperature checks on entry, social distancing would be enforced and there was a “no-touch” policy for product testers.
LIVE SPORT AND MUSIC For most of this year the sports world felt the COVID-19 crisis would be very much a one season wipe-out – not any more.
As the months grind on and the second wave hits, many sports are already facing the grim realisation that, until a vaccine is found, capped crowds, team hubs and stifling COVID restrictions will be an unfortunate fact of life. The Olympic Games in Tokyo have been postponed from 2020 to 2021, but Olympic officials cannot guarantee they will go ahead.
Cricket is in a complete mess because the game has so many competitions and international threads.
The Boxing Day Test against India this year is in extreme doubt for the MCG and likely to be moved interstate.
The Big Bash schedule announced last month is certain to be revised. Victorian games are in doubt and more matches are certain to be played in Queensland. And doubt hangs over Australia’s February tour of South Africa.
Rugby Australia is working hard with New Zealand to have a new Trans-Tasman Super Rugby series but both nations are having trouble leaving their egos at the door to thrash out details, while Rugby League may start later next year due to this year’s late finish.
Meanwhile, music fans may have to buy tickets to their own private platform or pen on the grass at festivals, once mass gatherings are given the green light if “the virus burns itself out”, according to a crowd emergency healthcare expert.
Dr Jamie Ranse, who has been advising the Queensland Government on guidelines for mass gatherings from concerts to fireworks and Christmas carols, said COVID-19 heralded the end of the moshpit and physical distancing was the new normal for gigs for at least the next few years.
Fans may have to wear masks to minimise the spread of droplets while singing or dancing.
Seated gigs or drive-in concerts will become the accepted practice and the live-performance industry will drive creative solutions to make them financially viable and safe.
HEALTH Patients and doctors will have to become tech-savvy as telehealth, electronic prescriptions and monitoring vital health signs on mobile phones becomes a necessity in the post COVID-19 world.
Instead of visiting a chemist, more Australians are likely to consult their GP by phone, get the doctor to send ane-script to their preferred chemist and have their medicines home delivered.
Doctors will practise medicine remotely using digital stethoscopes, portable ECG monitors, digital thermometers, blood pressure monitors and digital otoscopes (a device to see into the ear canal) which can be used by patients at home and the results sent to the doctor via a mobile phone.
Many hospital and even ICU patients will be treated from home. Patients are already being hooked up to machines that measure blood pressure, pulse and other vital signs, and the data fed back to a centralised medical unit in a big city from where doctors monitor the patient.
Test results will be delivered on the spot in a doctor’s surgery using new point-of-care technology. From a small finger prick or urine sample, machines like the Abbott Afinion Analyzer can provide instant results on blood sugar, cholesterol and creatine levels.
Many medical practices are on the brink of bankruptcy after patients, scared of catching COVID-19, stayed away – and this could accelerate large medical companies buying out local GP and pathology practices.
Major medical supply shortages during COVID-19 may drive more local production of medicines and equipment. Australia’s largest generic medicine company, Arrotex Pharmaceuticals, has offered to set up a local drug manufacturing plant.
TRAVEL AND TOURISM Qantas’s international fleet will stay grounded until next July, and although the Federal Government initially believed the world would reopen to Australia all at once (with the early exception of New Zealand), it is now likely international borders will open in a more piecemeal way. “The situation for international travel is looking pretty bleak for 2021,” University of Queensland tourism expert Associate Professor Pierre Benckendorff said.
“The head of the international air transport association made a prediction a couple of months ago that international aviation was unlikely to recover back to 2019 levels until 2023 and I think that seems like a pretty accurate prediction.” It was reasonable to assume borders with New Zealand, Fiji, Vanuatu and Samoa would be open in the first half of 2021, Assoc Prof Benckendorff said.
Some countries in Asia with good virus controls such as Singapore, Vietnam and Japan might open up in the second half of the year.
Domestic tourism would benefit in the interim. Industry reports and University of Western Australia research suggest car travel will become more popular. The man nicknamed the “Points Whisperer”, frequent flyer program expert Steve Hui, said airlines “will push out more ways to earn points” in 2021.
“They’ll also make more land-based offers,” he said. “Qantas, for example, will give you more options to redeem your points for things like wine or hotels.” Mr Hui predicted that the rules preventing Australians from travelling overseas without a government exemption would probably be relaxed in the first half of 2021 and more freedom would come in the second half of the year if a COVID-19 vaccine became likely.
Experts also expected a wide variation in airfares in 2021.
“Initially we will see some very cheap airfares to entice people to travel again,” Assoc Prof Benckendorff said. “But then I would expect the airfares to go up once the tourists are flowing again, just because these airlines are in a fairly precarious financial position.” Travel insurers would likely have to adapt when borders reopen, as demand for policies that reimburse for sudden itinerary changes would be strong.
CREDIT: David Mills; Melanie Burgess Sophie Elsworth; Kathy McCabe;   Robert Craddock; Nadia Salemme
Word count: 2134
