Critics pick the best arts and cultural events.
Film
By Garry Maddox
Palm Beach, Sydney Film Festival June 5, 10, 13; opens August 8
Resentments and secrets emerge as a group of long-time friends, centring on the members of a former one-hit-wonder band called the Pacific Sideburns and their partners, celebrate a birthday on Sydney's northern beaches. A comedy directed by Rachel Ward (Beautiful Kate), Palm Beach was inspired by a Christmas that she and husband Bryan Brown spent with friends in Wales. "He walked away going, 'I really see something universal taking place there'," Ward says. With Ward co-writing and directing, Brown produces and stars alongside Sam Neill, Richard E. Grant, Greta Scacchi, Jacqueline McKenzie, Heather Mitchell and Matilda Brown.
Blinded by the Light, Sydney Film Festival June 8, 9, 15; opens August 22
Way back in 2002, British director Gurinder Chadha had a hit with Bend It Like Beckham. While her output has been variable since, she roars back to form with the comic story of a British Muslim teenager whose life takes on new meaning when he discovers the music of Bruce Springsteen in 1987. Based on a memoir by journalist Sarfraz Manzoor, who co-wrote the script with Chadha and her writer-producer husband, Paul Mayeda Berges, it features a stand-out performance by little-known Viveik Kalra and 16 of the Boss' soul-stirring songs.
Toy Story 4, opens June 20
So much has changed in entertainment since the first Toy Story became a much-loved animated hit in 1995. But as Pixar rolled out the first sequel in 1999 then another in 2010, the studio happily retained the heart, comedy and all-round entertainment value. Nine years is a long time to wait for a fourth instalment and John Lasseter, who directed the first two, is long gone from Pixar. But fans of Woody, Buzz and the rest of the toys will be hoping director Josh Cooley, one of the writers of Inside Out, can bring the same charm to Toy Story 4.
Yesterday, opens June 27
A likeably hapless singer-songwriter, played by Himesh Patel, wakes up after a road accident during a global blackout to realise he's the only person in the world who has ever heard of the Beatles. When he plays their songs, everyone - including his childhood best friend played by Lily James - thinks he's a genius. Director Danny Boyle, whose long list of high-energy films includes Trainspotting, The Beach and Slumdog Millionaire, has this charming sci-fi-meets-fairytale premise for a warm-hearted comedy written by Richard "Love Actually" Curtis. Ed Sheeran and James Corden have cameos as themselves.
Danger Close: The Battle of Long Tan, Sydney Film Festival June 15 and 16; opens August 8
Australia's greatest film, Gallipoli, created an enduring myth about the heroism of Australian troops in the First World War. Producer Martin Walsh has a similar ambition for Vietnam veterans in a war drama that has taken many years to get made. He calls Long Tan a coming-of-age battle for Australian and New Zealand troops - just over 100 against an enemy numbering 2500. The prolific Kriv Stenders (Red Dog, Red Dog: True Blue, Australia Day) directs a cast that includes Travis Fimmel, Luke Bracey, Alexander England, Richard Roxburgh and Anthony Hayes.
Once Upon A Time... In Hollywood, opens August 15
A new Quentin Tarantino movie is always an event. His first since The Hateful Eight four years ago has a strong Australian connection, with Damon Herriman playing Charles Manson and Margot Robbie as Sharon Tate. It's a black comedy set in Los Angeles in 1969 with Leonardo DiCaprio playing an actor who is struggling to move from television to movies, Brad Pitt as his stunt double and Al Pacino as his agent. And it is rooted in real life with Damian Lewis playing Steve McQueen, Rafal Zawierucha as Roman Polanski, Mike Moh as Bruce Lee and Dakota Fanning as "Squeaky" Fromme.
Theatre
By Joyce Morgan
Things I know to be True, Belvoir Street Theatre, June 12-July 21
Belvoir's former artistic director Neil Armfield returns after nearly a decade to direct Andrew Bovell's 2016 family drama. Centred around retrenched car worker Bob Price and wife Fran, a nurse, the pair have raised their family in the Adelaide suburbs. They have worked hard to give their four grown-up children the chances and choices they didn't have. But as Bob and Fran enter their autumn years, each of their offspring faces a crisis that threatens to shatter the suburban quiet. This new production reunites Armfield and Bovell, who previously worked together on the acclaimed The Secret River.
Glittery Clittery: A Consensual Party, Griffin Theatre, July 8-20
Meet the Cliterati. This musical threesome wraps their feminist message in sequins and sparkles. This is glamour meets activism - glamtivism as they like to call it. The Fringe Wives Club dance, sing and put a new spin on power ballads as they belt out tunes about female empowerment. With vulva shoulder pads and sketches about female anatomy, the show is more loud and proud than subtle. This high-energy celebration of irrepressible womanhood, which has toured Edinburgh and Adelaide's fringe festivals and Melbourne's Comedy Festival, stars Rowena Hutson, Laura Frew and Tessa Waters.
Cripple of Inishmaan, Old Fitz Theatre, July 12-August 3
Known more recently for such films as Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri and In Bruges, Anglo-Irish playwright Martin McDonagh was the wunderkind of the British stage when The Cripple of Inishmaan was first produced in 1997. It was among two trilogies of plays set in Ireland. McDonagh honed his playwriting craft after binge-watching Australian soap operas while unemployed in London. In Inishmaan, crippled teenager Billy is determined to escape the boredom of the bleak Aran Islands off Ireland's west coast. So when a Hollywood director arrives to make a movie, Billy schemes to get a role. Claudia Barrie directs this cruel, compassionate and dark comedy with William Rees as Billy.
Banging Denmark, Sydney Theatre Company, Studio, Sydney Opera House, July 31-August 24
He is a sleazy pick-up artist who reckons he understands the female mind. Don't they all? She is a feminist academic, an internet junkie and she's broke. He wants her help to get a date with a Danish librarian who has resisted his overtures. He's willing to pay. Should she take his much-needed dosh and forget her principles? The result is a contemporary take on the romantic comedy as playwright and social commentator Van Badham probes the divide between current feminism and the online backlash to it. Jessica Arthur directs Patrick Jhanur, Amber McMahon, Megan Wilding and Michelle Lim Davidson.
Life of Galileo, Belvoir Street Theatre, August 7-September 15
Consider the evidence not the orthodoxies, scientist Galileo Galilei argued. The 17th-century astronomer looked through his telescope and what he saw challenged popular belief and the powerful religious authorities. But when the Inquisition comes after you, do you betray what you know or find a new way of speaking the truth? Bertolt Brecht was writing as much about the present as the past in his classic work. Colin Friels stars as the determined and wily scientist aware the political and religious system is based on lies. Adapted by Tom Wright and directed by Eamon Flack it is a play with renewed currency in a Trumpian, post-truth era.
Caroline, or Change, Hayes Theatre, August 28-September 21
After a fine production of Angels in America at the Old Fitz earlier this year, Tony Kushner's work is again in the Sydney spotlight. This lesser-known work, a musical written around the same time as his landmark Angels, is partly based on his life growing up in the South and is set in early 1960s Louisiana. Caroline - the black maid of the affluent Gellmans - shares a special bond with eight-year-old Noah. Set against a backdrop of social change and the death of a president, the music is influenced by Motown, spirituals and Jewish klezmer. Mitchell Butel directs with Zahra Newman as Caroline.
Contemporary music
By George Palathingal
Underworld, Concert Hall, Sydney Opera House, June 1-3
The more celebrated album anniversary at Vivid Live may have been the 30th of The Cure's Disintegration but Underworld's Dubnobasswithmyheadman, 25 this year, was arguably even better, not to mention more influential. The Brit duo's debut not only inspired countless producers to explore the possibilities of EDM (back when it was still called "electronica"), they made people who don't even like the genre, if you'll pardon the pun, rave about their heady, thumping, blissful tunes. Live, they're something else, with charismatic singer Karl Hyde leading from the front and spectacular use of lighting and lasers adding to the effect.
FKA Twigs, Carriageworks, June 9
FKA Twigs, the musical project of English enigma Tahliah Barnett, can be divisive. So artful is her approach to performance, with her almost otherworldly and sometimes provocative dancing and costumes, that for some the style eclipses the substance. That this isn't the case speaks volumes of her music: a mesmerising combination of futurist R&B and experimental electronic pop that doesn't really sound like anyone else. At this one-off Sydney show for Vivid she will be performing her first new sounds in three years (including the breathtaking recent Cellophane) and it could well prove to be the festival's highlight.
Alpine, The Lansdowne, July 11
It seems ridiculous to say we've missed Melbourne collective Alpine when some of their deliciously icy pop (think bangers Hands, Foolish and Damn Baby) has been consistently turning up on ads and the like throughout their recent hiatus. We're still glad they're back, albeit without the lovable chemistry of their two lead singers now Lou James has left - but thankfully Phoebe Baker sounds up to the task of fronting the band on her own on current single Dumb. Alpine are taking things slowly just in case, with this reintroductory tour of pub-sized venues, so are well worth a look before they're back playing bigger rooms.
Fleetwood Mac, Qudos Bank Arena, August 15, 17, 27, 29
Age has apparently not wearied Fleetwood Mac - which is quite the miracle given the (inter-band) sex, drugs and rock'n'roll of the Anglo-American legends' tumultuous '70s peak. But there has been a key change to the line-up. Out went Lindsey Buckingham last year to be replaced by, of all people, Neil Finn: a terrific musician and celebrated songwriter in his own right, but a hired gun in someone else's iconic band? It'll be fascinating to watch - but it always was going to be anyway, what with Stevie Nicks, a Fleetwood (Mick) and two Macs (John and Christine McVie) to lead the way through some of pop-rock's greatest hits.
Childish Gambino, Qudos Bank Arena, July 24
Hip-hop is in a pretty terrible place these days, what with so few artists having much that's meaningful, exciting or, frankly, listenable to offer. Thank your preferred deity, then, for Donald Glover, the man who can do it all. When he's not writing and starring in one of the best shows on TV (Atlanta) or stealing the show in Star Wars movies, Glover is making game-changing hip-hop as Childish Gambino. You'll know This Is America, which dominated this year's Grammys (winning four including Record of the Year and Song of the Year), but that's just the tip of a very cool iceberg.
Kian, Oxford Art Factory, July 27
After writing and singing the hook on Indigenous MC Baker Boy's Cloud 9, Castlemaine singer-songwriter Kian Brownfield's own, gorgeous debut single Waiting had him crowned the winner of Triple J Unearthed (the broadcaster's competition to find new local talent) last August. He has since released an EP, Bliss, and played on the main stage at the St Jerome's Laneway Festival. This show, meanwhile, follows his debut appearance at Splendour in the Grass, alongside the likes of the aforementioned Childish Gambino. Oh, and he's still only 16.
Jazz/R&B/World/Cabaret
By John Shand
Sydney Con Jazz Festival, Sydney Conservatorium, June 2
The Sydney Conservatorium of Music makes an ideal site for a festival, having five venues under one roof. Its all-day jazz event comprises top-shelf local acts and two international headliners. One is the quartet of brilliant pianist Billy Childs, whom Sydney audiences have heard before with singer Dianne Reeves and trumpeter Chris Botti. The other is the Bill Frisell Trio, the doyen of electric guitarists being joined by bassist Thomas Morgan and drummer Rudy Royston, who are both major artists in their own right. You can also hear this trio amid better acoustics at Blue Mountains Theatre on June 6.
Lisa Fischer and Grand Baton, The Concourse, Chatswood, June 4
You might have encountered her during the 26 years she spent as the main backing singer for the Rolling Stones, or heard her steal the show with jazz trumpeter Chris Botti, or seen her in the documentary 20 Feet from Stardom. Lisa Fischer may well be the finest singer in popular music not to be a household name. Having spent the past few years concentrating on working with her own three-piece band, Grand Baton, she comes to town to show the full range of what she can do with her spearing voice: from jazz to rock and beyond.
Herbie Hancock, Concert Hall, Sydney Opera House, June 10
Most musical revolutionaries participate in just one upheaval. Herbie Hancock became one of the rare ones to do it about four times. The pianist's artistry exudes an effortlessness that is another hallmark of the greats - and, alongside his unflappable optimism, probably contributes to his seeming absurdly young at 79. For his sixth Australian tour he brings slinky guitarist Lionel Loueke, bassist James Genus and drummer Vinnie Colaiuta - all long-term associates who have the ability to revisit any aspect of Hancock's huge back-catalogue, which includes some of the most covered songs in jazz.
Music of the Oud - Joseph Tawadros/Sydney Symphony, Concert Hall, Sydney Opera House, June 20-22
The scale of his musical gift was never in doubt, and now comes a project with a comparable scale of ambition. Joseph Tawadros remains better known for his virtuosity on the oud than for his remarkable output as a composer. That may be redressed with the world premiere of his Concerto for Oud and Orchestra, performed by Tawadros, his brother James (percussion) and the Sydney Symphony Orchestra under Benjamin Northey. Tawadros's previous collaborations with the Australian Chamber Orchestra provide a form guide. Meanwhile, his artistic horizons as a player, composer and improviser have all expanded.
Coltrane Project - Ascension, Foundry 616, July 6
John Coltrane's Ascension (1965) was to jazz what Picasso's Les Demoiselles d'Avignon was to art: not just a shake-up but a shock. About four decades later Wynton Marsalis was still claiming Coltrane's late-period output was not even jazz, proving the shock didn't dissipate with time. Saxophonist Paul Cutlan's Coltrane Project has been revisiting the master's music for years, and this is their second shot at chiselling into Ascension's granite density. To give a snapshot of the quality of Cutlan's 10-piece band, the other saxophonists are Sandy Evans, Andrew Robson and Peter Farrar. Not for the faint-hearted.
Jennifer Holliday, Sydney Town Hall, July 6 and 7
What harsher spotlight could fall upon a vocalist than to sing at the funeral of the Queen of Soul, Aretha Franklin? But then Jennifer Holliday already knew a bit about pressure. She landed her first Broadway role at 19 and then went on to be the original Effie Melody White in the musical Dreamgirls, which earned her both a Tony Award and the first of her two Grammy Awards, allowing her to establish a recording career outside of musical theatre. In headlining the Sydney Cabaret Festival, Holliday will let her repertoire wander from Broadway to jazz and R&B.
Visual art
By John McDonald
Alexander Calder: Radical Inventor, National Gallery of Victoria, until August 4
Terracotta Warriors and Cai Guo-Qiang is an inspired combination, but Alexander Calder: Radical Inventor is sheer delight. Calder's most notable addition to art history was the mobile - those delicately balanced abstract sculptures that hang from the ceiling, slowly revolving. This first-ever exhibition of the great American sculptor's work in Australia brings together a range of mobiles, stabiles, wire portraits and other pieces. One quickly realises what a massive influence Calder (1898-1976) exerted on modern art and design. Read our review on page 8.
Hot Blood, White Rabbit Gallery, until August 4
Judith Neilson has amassed the world's largest private collection of contemporary Chinese art, displayed in changing exhibitions of six months' duration. The latest instalment, Hot Blood, explores sexual and social taboos in the People's Republic. The irony is that such a show would be increasingly unlikely within China itself because a tightening climate of censorship is making artists think twice about the kind of work they produce. To see the most radical, cutting-edge new work from China, Sydney is becoming an obligatory destination.
Monet: Impression Sunrise, National Gallery of Australia, Canberra, June 7-September 1
The National Gallery of Australia is hoping that Monet: Impression Sunrise will draw audiences to chilly Canberra to see the painting that gave a name to the world's favourite art movement. The critic, Louis Leroy, made fun of Monet and his peers by calling them "impressionists" but the label soon became a badge of honour. This show brings Monet's seminal painting, Impression Sunrise (1872) to Australia for the very first time, along with a range of other works by the French master, and by contemporaries such as Boudin, Whistler and Sisley. Australians have never been able to get enough of Monet and this show should be extremely popular.
Caught Stealing, National Art School Gallery, June 14-August 10
"Good artists borrow, great artists steal," is a maxim attributed to Pablo Picasso. Caught Stealing at the National Art School Gallery is an exhibition that looks at Australian artists who borrow imagery from other artists, usually with critical or satirical intent. Whether it's called "stealing" or "appropriation", this is such a commonplace tactic it must have been hard to know who to leave out of the show. Fiona Hall headlines a selection of 20 artists, or groups of artists, that includes Hany Armanious, Daniel Boyd, Peter Burgess, Sean Cordeiro and Claire Healy.
Michael Armitage: The Promised Land, Museum of Contemporary Art, June 28-September 22
Michael Armitage is one of the most acclaimed young painters in the world today. Born in Kenya but educated in London, he inhabits both worlds. All of his pictures deal with African themes, which often involve provocative investigations of politics and sexuality. What sets him apart from other politically motivated artists is the painterly nature of his works, which have been compared to Gauguin, Bonnard and Manet. One truly unique feature is the material he uses as a canvas - a rough bark cloth made in Uganda. In an age increasingly dominated by audio-visual works, Armitage is an artist to restore one's faith in painting.
Shaun Gladwell: Pacific Undertow, Museum of Contemporary Art, July 19-October 7
Shaun Gladwell has become one of Australia's most successful international artists. He represented his country at the 2009 Venice Biennale and has been included in group shows around the world. This survey looks at mainly audio-visual works made over the past 20 years, starting with Storm Sequence (2000), a lyrical skateboard piece, and progressing to new experiments in virtual reality. Gladwell's constant theme is the body in motion - on skateboard, planes, trains, motorbikes and automobiles.
Wirrimanu: Art from Balgo, Art Gallery of NSW, July 27-November 17
As the shows of autumn drag on into winter at the Art Gallery of NSW, it seems the only new exhibitions are drawn from the permanent collection. These include displays of Asian art and new acquisitions, but the most promising may be Wirrimanu: Art from Balgo. This community in the remote north-west has produced some of our most original and dynamic Indigenous painters such as Eubena Nampitjin, Elizabeth Nyumi, Boxer Milner and Helicopter Tjungurrayi. When it first began to appear in the 1980s, Balgo art was distinguished by its bold, vibrant colour. Those works have lost none of their power.
Portia Geach Memorial Award, S.H. Ervin Gallery, August 2-September 15
Australia's enthusiasm for portraiture is a peculiar trait. If you're still hungry for more after the Archibald Prize, the Doug Moran National Portrait Prize and the Salon des Refuses, the S.H. Ervin Gallery is hosting the annual Portia Geach Memorial Award. The point of difference is this prize is reserved for women artists. The field may be narrower and controversies less heated, but the exhibition has become a much anticipated part of the gallery's program. Although women artists don't suffer the same discrimination they did during the lifetime of Portia Geach (1873-1959), there's still a statement to be made in having a show of one's own.
Classical and opera
By Harriet Cunningham
Concertos on Fire, Sonja Schebeck/Freestyle Orchestra, City Recital Hall, June 7
In its ongoing quest to be hip, cool and relevant, classical music has tried pyrotechnics and acrobatics, movies and masquerades. Now it's setting the stage on fire. Is this a gimmick or a brave new frontier for concert presentation? One thing I know is that violinist Sonja Schebeck is the real deal, an award-winning classical violinist who, among other distinctions, leads Nigel Kennedy's Orchestra for Life and fronts her own interdisciplinary acrobatic ensemble, the Freestyle Orchestra. Schebeck performs Ross Edwards' violin concerto Maninyas, along with a new work from co-conspirator Chloe Charmody called Tale of the Firebird. She also breathes fire.
Whiteley, Sydney Opera House, Opera Australia, Joan Sutherland Theatre, July 15-30
It's not every day we see a world premiere of a new opera, but in July 2019 there are two. The first of them, Whiteley , is a commission from Opera Australia featuring the music of Elena Kats-Chernin, the words of Justin Fleming and the life of Brett Whiteley. The digital scenery which brought us dancing cobras and desert canyons for last year's Aida returns for Whiteley, using the electric blues and lush curves of his pictures as a backdrop to the action. I'm keen to hear how Kats-Chernin and Fleming bring this wild imagination to life.
Handel's Anthems and Fireworks, Australian Brandenburg Orchestra, City Recital Hall, July 24-August 2
No naked flames here, no acrobatics, but vocal fireworks aplenty. The Australian Brandenburg Orchestra is celebrating 30 years of historically informed music-making this year and in a busy year of celebratory performances comes this gem, an evening of music by Georg Frideric Handel. Artistic director Paul Dyer is a natural choral director and the choristers of the Brandenburg Choir always sing their hearts out for him. Also on the bill, Emma Black, oboist with the Vienna Academy, plays Handel's sublime Oboe Concerto No. 3 in G minor.
Oscar and Lucinda, Sydney Chamber Opera, Carriageworks, July 27-August 3
The second world premiere this month is Elliott Gyger's take on Peter Carey's grand and nutty novel Oscar and Lucinda. It's a co-production and commission from Sydney Chamber Opera, Opera Queensland and Victorian Opera, with a libretto by Pierce Wilcox. After Gyger and Wilcox's spectacular first crack, their 2015 adaptation of David Malouf's Fly Away Peter, I can't wait for this next tilt at the great Australian opera. And with Anna Tregloan (The Ghost Project, The Long Pigs) as set and costume designer, I'm looking forward to much more than wall-to-wall digital wizardry from this agile and inventive team.
Lang Lang Gala Performance, Sydney Symphony Orchestra, Concert Hall, Sydney Opera House, June 27 and 29
Winter 2019 sees several classical megastars pass through Sydney. First up, the man whom The New York Times calls "the hottest artist on the classical music planet", the concert pianist and all-round global phenomenon Lang Lang, appearing with the Sydney Symphony Orchestra. Yes, he has explosive charisma and the backing of the world's biggest recording company, but Lang Lang is popular for a reason: he has seriously good chops. And he's playing Mozart with Sydney Symphony's outgoing artistic director David Robertson conducting.
Andrea Chenier in Concert, Opera Australia, Concert Hall, Sydney Opera House, August 8 and 11
Finally, another New York Times recommendation: "the most important, versatile tenor of his generation." It's hard to top the star power of Lang Lang, but Jonas Kaufmann is right up there. After his Sydney debut last year he's back for two performances of Andrea Chenier, Giordano's verismo potboiler whose main claim to fame is launching the career of Enrico Caruso. The performance is in concert, not staged, but that shouldn't matter: this night is all about the singing and Opera Australia have put together a luscious cast including not just the "world's greatest tenor" but another two international opera stars, the soprano Eva-Maria Westbroeck and baritone Ludovic Tezier.
Dance
By Valerie Lawson
Spartacus and Jewels, Bolshoi Ballet, Lyric Theatre, Queensland Performing Arts Centre, June 26-July 7
There's more than one Spartacus in the ballet world but Yuri's Grigorovich's 1968 production is considered the benchmark. Danced to Khachaturian's score, it's been a calling card for the Bolshoi Ballet for decades. In June it returns to Australia as one of two ballets at this year's international ballet season at Brisbane's Queensland Performing Arts Centre. The second is George Balanchine's much loved Jewels. The ballet in three movements, Emeralds, Rubies and Diamonds, depicts the three different styles of ballet Balanchine knew so well from his early years in St Petersburg to his decade in Paris and then New York, where he choreographed for Broadway shows and founded the New York City Ballet.
Bangarra: 30 years of 65,000, Drama Theatre, Sydney Opera House, June 13-July 13
Bangarra Dance Theatre is celebrating its 30th year with a triple bill titled Bangarra: 30 years of 65,000. Curated by artistic director Stephen Page, the program will tour to eight cities in Australia, beginning in Sydney in June and ending in Hobart in October. The three works are Unaipon, a portrait of David Unaipon, the Aboriginal inventor, philosopher, writer and storyteller, choreographed by Frances Rings; to make fire, highlighting memorable moments from the company's repertoire and choreographed by Page; and Stamping Ground, choreographed by the acclaimed Czech choreographer, Jiri Kylian and inspired by his visit to Groote Eylandt in 1980, where he watched a tribal gathering.
The White Crow, June 5, 8, 10, Sydney Film Festival
The Australian premieres of three dance films, The White Crow, Yuli and The Heart Dances, will be screened at this year's Sydney Film Festival. Directed by Ralph Fiennes and scripted by the playwright David Hare, The White Crow tells the story of Rudolf Nureyev from his student days in St Petersburg to his defection from the Soviet Union in 1961 when the company was touring in Paris, to his arrival in the West, where he was acclaimed as a superstar and adored by both men and women as he toured the world with his dance partner, Margot Fonteyn. And why The White Crow? Because it's Russian slang for someone who is unusual, not like the others.
Yuli, June 8, 9, 12, Sydney Film Festival
Yuli is the true story of a remarkable dancer, Carlos Acosta, who grew up in an impoverished family in Havana. His father, who nicknamed him Yuli, was abusive and angry yet eventually proud of his son's talent as a ballet dancer. Acosta left his homeland, danced at the Houston Ballet, then spent many years at as principal dancer at the Royal Ballet in London. Yuli includes archive film of Acosta's performances, among them as Romeo in the Royal Ballet's production of Romeo and Juliet.
The Heart Dances, June 14 and 16, Sydney Film Festival
The Heart Dances is a documentary based on the ballet adaptation of Jane Campion's classic film The Piano and how that played out when the Czech choreographer Jiri Bubenicek and his twin brother, production designer Otto Bubenicek, came to New Zealand to stage it for the Royal New Zealand Ballet. They had never been to New Zealand and had just one month to complete the choreography. Complications and cultural clashes followed, but the result was a great success.
The Dinner Party, Parramatta, Riverside Theatre, June 13-15
The Dinner Party, a contemporary dance work choreographed for Expressions Dance Company by Natalie Weir, was a hit when it was first staged in Brisbane in 2015. Now it's on tour in NSW with a new cast, including Bernhard Knauer, formerly a member of the Sydney Dance Company. Everything that can go wrong does go wrong at this party, where the host has plans to both entertain and manipulate his guests, but they have very different ideas.
Flight Pattern, Sydney Event Cinemas, June 30 and July 3
Canadian choreographer Crystal Pite is one of the finest dance-makers in the world. In demand in Europe and Canada, she's created more than 50 ballets, among them commissions by the Paris Opera Ballet and Royal Ballet. Flight Pattern tells a story of our time, the humanitarian crisis of refugees in limbo around the world. There are no principal dancers, just 36 dancers clustered together, sometimes resembling birds about to take flight and escape. Pite's ballets have not been performed in Australia but we can see Flight Pattern in Sydney cinemas in a brief season of the Royal Ballet's showcase of contemporary works, including Christopher Wheeldon's Within the Golden Hour and Sidi Larbi Cherkaoui's new work Medusa.
And don't forget:
● Star Wars Identities: The Exhibition, Powerhouse Museum, until June 10
● Vivid Sydney, Sydney, until June 15
● Capturing Nature, Australian Museum, until July 29
● Jukebox Jewkbox! A Century on Shellac and Vinyl, Sydney Jewish Museum, until February 2020
● Sydney Film Festival, June 5-16
● Dark Mofo, Hobart, June 5-23
● Indies and Idols, Australian Chamber Orchestra, City Recital Hall, June 25-June 29
● Byron Bay Writers' Festival, Byron, August 2-4
Word count: 4955
