Try to imagine this – running on a treadmill all the way to London, or sipping fresh cafe coffee made by a barista while zipping to Los Angeles, or working through your inbox of emails at a work station while jetting to Dubai.
None of this is in the distant future. In fact, it’s on drawing boards right now as airlines get set to unleash a revolution that will change the way we fly. The old days of buying a ticket, turning up to the airport check-in counter and hoping for the best in terms of your seat and menu are on their way out, along with getting off at the other end twisted like a pretzel.
Personalised travel to suit each individual passenger is looming – airlines want to keep customers by making a connection with them.
THE HOLY GRAIL Airlines will pretty soon have such a rich database of passengers’ likes and dislikes on file that they’ll know when you like to fly, what cabin you prefer, what meal you want and your favourite destinations.
From all that, special deals will then be offered.
Jason Nooning, Flight Centre general manager of global air distribution, explains this way of selling a flight package is only a matter of years away.
“The technical capacity is on the horizon and it’s something the airlines are looking at now,” Jason adds. “It will come down to if there is a shift on how willing people are to share their information, especially if they know they might get a better deal as a result.” He predicts this will make the world of difference in terms of what choices travellers will make in the future. “This could be the holy grail in travel,” he says.
PROJECT SUNRISE It’s something Qantas is determined to take a lead on, with the announcement of its Project Sunrise program, to be rolled out over the coming years. Based on research taken last year, the top five customer suggestions included passengers being able to achieve a “sense of separation” through virtual reality relaxation zones and audio mindfulness experiences, spaces to do exercises and stretches, new designs for both seat and non-seat spaces, and an in-flight cafe. Nothing, it seems, is out of the question, says Qantas head of product strategy and development Phil Capps.
“We’re looking at the entire cabin to see if there are new ways we can use this space,” he says. “We are looking early to mid-2020s for when Project Sunrise will come to fruition.” A SIGN OF THE TIMES It won’t be a long wait to see that Qantas actually means business – and premium and economy – as the first of the refurbished A380 fleet will be in service in August. Gone will be 30 economy seats, and in their place will be six extra business seats and an extra 25 premium seats. This suggests Qantas is getting ready for longer routes already on the drawing board – such as from Sydney and Melbourne to London and New York – with far more comfortable journeys.
“We’re seeing increased demand for premium economy and business class on the long-haul routes that the A380 operates,” Qantas CEO Alan Joyce said recently. “When more travellers experience these new seats, we expect demand will keep rising.” THE LONG JUMP Just over 12 months ago, spending 17 hours on a direct flight between Perth and London was predicted as being “hell in the skies”, with many in the travel game certain such an ultra-long-haul flight was doomed to fail. Not so, it turned out, with Qantas having recently announced almost every flight is full and the route turned a profit almost immediately.
It has taken a change of thinking, but it now seems ultra-long-haul flights are the way to go.
“Remember how when low-cost carriers commenced and everyone complained about having to pay for meals and bags, but eventually passengers got used to it?” Jason Nooning says. “Well, it’s exactly the same with these ultra-long-haul flights. As people realise they can do the entire journey in one go and not waste any time in transit, suddenly this has become a much more attractive way to travel.” ON THE MAP Other European destinations are also under serious consideration, with Perth to Paris, Rome and Amsterdam said to be top of the Qantas list.
From the east coast, there’s also talk of a Brisbane to Chicago direct route, to compete with the recent launch of Air New Zealand’s Auckland to Chicago direct link.
“If we can continue to demonstrate the strength of the Perth-London offering, then it makes the potential of other destinations in Europe possible,” Qantas’s Phil Capps says.
And Flight Centre’s Jason Nooning adds: “There is a new trend, with passengers being time-poor and wanting to go direct wherever they can. They now prefer to do it all in the one journey, no matter how long the flight is.” TOP OF THE CLASS First might be fabulous and business brilliant, but it’s premium that’s more popular than ever. Etihad introduces premium later this year, Emirates offers it next year, and American, Delta and Singapore have all got in on the act in recent years.
Taking some of what works up the front of the plane and extending it to the other cabins is another trend, as Cathay Pacific premium proved during a recent renovation that now includes extra on-board storage spaces and even a cocktail table.
“These features set a new standard, allowing some of the perks from business class to now be accessible to premium economy travellers,” a Cathay Pacific spokesperson stated. On Cathay’s new A350-900 craft, the premium 28cm personal TV screen is now also available in economy.
STRETCHING OUT Also expect more clever use of space in economy. Take Air New Zealand’s Skycouch, in which three economy seats with wide leg rests are turned into a bed. It’s been so successful, China Airlines now offers the similar Family Couch and British carrier Thomas Cook Airlines has Sleeper Seats. On Air New Zealand, the cost of the comfy couch is about half what a business-class bed costs.
ON THE MENU Tempting the tastebuds with finer fare is high on the agenda, but pre-ordering meals before the flight, once reserved only for passengers up the front, is now working its way through the other cabins. Qantas allows all passengers to pre-order meals, while on Singapore Airlines, the Book the Cook pre-order service, previously only available to first-class and business-class passengers, has been extended to premium and can be ordered three weeks in advance.
And if you’re not crazy about what’s on the menu, maybe bring your own, with the Fly by Mike service at Sydney Airport, which offers fresh carry-on tray-packs. Just be sure to check the fine print on your ticket, as low-cost carrier Scoot bans outside food being consumed on-board, and it’s a rule they police strictly.
TAKE A SEAT One thing no airline will ever hear is, “that seat is so comfortable, I must get one just like it for home”. Sitting in an airline seat all the way to Europe is never much fun, neither is it particularly good for the spine.
So it’s little surprise ergonomics is now on the airline frontline, with Cathay Pacific recently redesigning seats on many in its fleet to include flexible headrests and neck support. And as part of Project Sunrise, all Qantas seats are under review.
“That is anything from the seat structure to the cushion, and also the physical space,” Phil Capps says.
PUSHING BACK You know those times when the seat in front is reclined, so suddenly the TV screen you were watching is wedged onto your chest? On some airlines, that will become a thing of the past.
British Airways has fitted non-reclining seats on certain craft, so on flights up to four hours, BA’s economy passengers sit in a position described by the airline as “pre-reclined at a gentle angle”.
Joining in is Delta Air Lines, which will reduce seat recline by roughly half on about 10 per cent of its fleet on routes shorter than two hours. It will be interesting to see if this catches on with other airlines.
BACK OF THE SEAT Given a choice, would you rather watch your favourite movie on a seat-back screen or on your own device? That question is on the agenda for many major carriers.
“In-flight entertainment functionality is going in two different directions,” says Bryan Saltzburg, TripAdvisor flights, cruise and car division president. “Carriers are investing in improved seat-back entertainment, and others recognise the ubiquity of tablets and phones and are removing the screen in favour of passengers downloading the airline’s app to watch TV shows or movies.” American and United Airlines are already phasing out screens on new short-haul aircraft, while Hawaiian Airlines is going without on its new A321neo planes.
GOING ONLINE Some like their time in the sky to be offline but for many others, online connectivity is now an expectation rather than a bonus. Most Qantas and Virgin Australia domestic craft allow passengers to go online with free Wi-Fi, yet there’s still a restriction on voice calls on services such as Skype.
Wi-Fi is available at a cost on certain aircraft on carriers such as Thai, Cathay Pacific, and United, but it’s free on Air New Zealand. As for Qantas’s international flights, Wi-Fi is not yet available.
“We’re also going to wait internationally until we can also provide consistent global coverage,” Phil Capps explains.
DEAL OR NO DEAL Knowing exactly what’s on offer before handing over the dollars is paramount and, as a result, videos showing off features of the various seats and virtual cabin tours have become vital tools in the decision-making process.
“We are seeing more customers pull out their smartphones and check out the seat from all the angles and ask about the pitch and recline before they decide on an airline,” says Flight Centre’s Jason Nooning. “Today’s passenger is prepared to ask, ‘what does that carrier offer that the others don’t?’ and they ask about the best fare, but not the cheapest fare – and that question is a big difference. They weren’t doing that five years ago.” ABOUT FACE Those old days of fumbling for passports and boarding passes while juggling various bags as you approach customs could soon be a thing of the past. Earlier this year, Perth Airport became Australia’s second international airport to install new facial recognition smart gates, following an initial trial at Canberra.
The Federal Government plans to automate 90 per cent of air travel processing by 2020, replacing passports with biometric capabilities.
“Facial recognition processing promises to make our customers’ journeys smoother and easier than ever, using game-changing technology,” says Geoff Cuthbert, Sydney Airport CEO.
BREATHE IN, BREATHE OUT Singapore’s new Jewel complex, which connects terminals one, two and three at Changi Airport, boasts the world’s tallest indoor waterfall and rainforest gardens to reconnect with nature in between flights.
And with flights generally getting longer and the possibility of even worse muscle tightness part of the package, yoga classes are now offered between flights at the Qantas terminal in Perth and the Cathay Pacific terminal in Hong Kong. The only thing is, you need to be flying upfront or be a member who has access to the lounge. If you’re in economy, meditation apps, relaxation recordings and exercise suggestions are available on the IFE systems. Look, it’s better than nothing!
TOP TIPS BOOK FOR COMFORT
Seat 10A on both Qantas and Virgin domestic flights are windowless, which is ideal if you prefer to lean or don’t like too much sunlight.
Every Qatar Airways A380 has a section in the upper deck with seven rows of economy seats reserved for the airline’s exclusive frequent flyers. But even if you are not a sapphire or above with Qatar Airways you can still pre-book those seats if available if you are a ONEWORLD Ruby status member, which is the lowest membership tier. Seating configuration is 2-4-2 whereas economy in the lower deck is a 3-4-3 configuration.
Ask your travel agent to tell you what type of aircraft you might be flying. Sometimes a slightly longer flight on a better, newer or more luxurious aircraft will be better. Two international legs may be preferable to an international and a domestic in some instances.
Check the seat configuration. Ask your agent or check out a website like seatguru.com for layouts of each aircraft specific to each airline.
Tips from Helloworld, helloworld.com.au
CREDIT: JOHN BURFITT
Word count: 2092
