Pirie icon to get a high-tech upgrade
One of Port Pirie's key icons, Shakka the shark has had a new tech-savvy upgrade.
Based on a discovery almost 21 years ago by local fisherman Craig Fletcher, the 5.5-metre shark replica is the longest Great White Pointer ever found in South Australia.
Tourism and events manager Glen Christie says the project was well overdue since the exhibition first opened in the Tourism and Arts Centre more than 15 years ago.
"We actually decided due to the volume of people coming through the visitor information centre and the time our volunteers spent guiding people through the exhibit that it was probably time to give her an upgrade," he said.
The exhibition now includes a new self-guided tour, redeveloped powerpoint and new lighting and audio effects. Mr Christie says the main highlight of the upgrades is a five-minute factual presentation guided by the voice of none other than Rodney Fox.
"We have been fortunate to secure the vocal backing of Rodney who is a shark-attack survivor, one of the key instigators of shark-cage diving and a second-unit director on the movie Jaws," he said.
"Visitors can learn about the background of Shakka and the development and building of the model by Jo Bain at the South Australian Museum."
But while Shakka herself has not received a facelift, Mr Christie says the upgrades will not disappoint.
"The upgrades allow people to guide themselves through and it has been a positive change in terms of attracting both previous visitors and offering something new to those people who are experiencing it for the first time", he said.
If that is not enough, the Port Pirie Visitor Information Centre also offers a Shark Cage Virtual Reality experience. But it's not for the faint-hearted. "We have had people scream, we have had people shadow-box, try to escape the virtual shark cage trying to avoid being eaten. I can honestly say we have had some of the weirdest and wonderful reactions to the shark cage dive experience," Mr Christie said.
He encourages anyone who is interested to stop by and be "enhanced by the experience".
"I would definitely say, as Rodney himself says, sharks are one of the most feared creatures of the sea and even though Rodney was quite badly savaged by a shark, he said the best way to over come your fear is to face that fear and learn as much as you can about it," he said.
CREDIT: Katrina Muhsin
Word count: 414
