Karoonda may be situated in the heart of South Australian farming country, but the local school is showing its technology programs can rival those in the big city.
At the heart of the programs are two Mallee teachers now being recognised for their contribution & commitment to their students' education.
Tanya Roberts & Lea Brodie are representing the school as finalists in the University of South Australia Team Teaching Award.
The award celebrates groups of teachers that have gone above & beyond to elevate the educational standards at their respective schools.
Karoonda Area School was not a school that previously offered a strong focus in technology education.
But it has now advanced its digital & design technology programs & the school has been accepted into the Andy Thomas Space Foundation school initiative.
Principal Mike Clark said it began with the school's involvement in a robotics competition & it sparked an interest in a group of girls who went on to be part of Lego League.
Ms Brodie & Ms Roberts responded to their students' enthusiasm & got thoroughly involved, "boots & all".
"This has all spun out of Tanya [Roberts] and Lea [Brodie] … they've just been magnificent," Mr Clark said.
Mr Clark says that the results of the program have led to the school acquiring a wide range of technology you would not find in a typical regional classroom.
"It's just gone absolutely ballistic," he said.
"Now we've got drones, robots & sensors. You name it, we've got it. Virtual reality kits. The kids are coding.
"For a small country school both teachers are superb & we're very lucky to have them."
Born problem solvers
Not all the students who attend Karoonda Area School are farm children but Mr Clark attributes their experience with farm life to some of the aptitude & passion for technological innovation displayed by his students.
"Farm kids are problem solvers, & they look to solve issues & … make their lives easier wherever they can as has been modelled to them by their parents," he said.
"You only have to have an imagination & within five years it is being created.
"When you've got passionate teachers — in any area — if you run with the passion you get learning outcomes."
Word count: 377
