Looking for something to keep your mind off COVID-19 or simply something to do now you're back in lockdown? It's time to escape into a good book.
Over summer we asked Border bookworms to recommend a book that touched them, enthralled them or simply was a pleasure to read.
Now regional Victoria has once again entered lockdown and the border has closed, it seems like the perfect time to relive those recommendations.
Dystopia rules, but let's hope not for real Imagine Willy Wonka meets The Matrix and there is Ready Player One.
Set in the 2040s, the science fiction novel describes a world gripped by environmental, economic and social problems where people retreat into virtual reality to escape.
And Wodonga Wise Owls book club secretary Melissa Kane "couldn't put it down".
Ready Player One belongs firmly in Mrs Kane's favourite genre of dystopia which also includes titles like 1984, Brave New World and A Handmaid's Tale.
Find out more about escaping into dystopian fiction with Mrs Kane here.
IN OTHER NEWS:
Canberrans in limbo as NSW 'drags its feet' Border virtual singing group returns now restrictions are back Victoria's COVID-19 death toll continues to rise with another 19 deaths
Medicine and culture a good mix for Wodonga mayor Anna Speedie Wodonga mayor Anna Speedie admits she'll "pretty much read anything".
"I love interesting tales and interesting novels, things that kind of step you outside of, I guess, your normal life," she told Janet Howie earlier this year.
She found that, and more, in Cutting for Stone, written by Ethiopian-born Indian-American doctor and author Abraham Verghese.
Published in 2009, Cutting for Stone details the lives of twin brothers Marion and Shiva Stone born at a mission hospital in Addis Ababa.
Abandoned by their British surgeon father, the boys grow up amid changing politics, countries and a shared fascination with medicine.
Detailed descriptions of medical procedures are a feature of the book.
Find out more about Cr Speedie's summer pick Cutting for Stone here.
Albury youth councillor Jack Jorgensen makes an event of stories that appeal Albury's Jack Jorgensen was so enamoured after reading The Book Thief he went out and bought his own copy.
Written by Australian author Markus Zusak, The Book Thief is a coming of age story set in Nazi Germany.
Narrated by Death, the main character Liesel learns to read and discovers the power of writing and sharing the written word amid the horrors of war.
"It had a unique perspective on that time," Jack said.
Find out more about The Book Thief and why it was Jack's 2019 pick.
Book of hope offers ideas to help our world Climate change messages can produce paralysing anxiety, but Wodonga Alison Veld said Drawdown: The most comprehensive plan ever proposed to reverse global warming was both practical and timely.
Edited by environmentalist and entrepreneur Paul Hawken, it consists of easy-to-read essays about the 100 most effective actions to reduce global warming, both costed and ranked.
Divided into categories such as energy, food, women and girls, buildings and cities, land use and transport and materials, the solutions include options for individuals as well as governments or companies.
Plant-rich diets, reducing food waste, rooftop solar, family planning, insulation, forest protection, ride sharing, household recycling and water saving all feature in the research.
There's also a section, Coming Attractions, about emerging ideas.
Find out more about Drawdown: The most comprehensive plan ever proposed to reverse global warming here.
Lauriston Muirhead learnt independence from childhood books Environmental health officer Lauriston Muirhead grew up with the works of Canadian author and scouting pioneer Ernest Thompson Seton.
"They were very much Boy's Own, they told you how to live in the wild, how to track animals," he said.
"It's so well-written that when they learn how to make fire, I could copy it and make fire."
Find out more about the adventure books and how they shaped Mr Muirhead here.
Audio books help mayor switch off from everyday concerns A tale of clashing cultures in 19th century Australia proved a page turner for Indigo mayor Jenny O'Connor.
Salt Creek, the 2015 debut novel by Australian writer Lucy Treloar, describes the struggles of the Finch family when they move from Adelaide to an isolated farm in the Coorong in the 1850s.
Eldest daughter Hester finds herself taking on extra responsibility as her mother flounders in the unfamiliar environment thrust on them all by their husband and father, a failed entrepreneur.
Find out more about Salt Creek and why it was Cr O'Connor's pick of 2019 here.
The Subtle Art of Not Giving A F---'s not-so-subtle message proves a valuable one For former Border Mail editor Xavier Mardling The Subtle Art of Not Giving A F--- by Mark Manson made such an impression that he couldn't look past it for the best book he read in 2019.
"What this book really helped put into focus for me was that we have to prioritise the things we worry about in life - or in Manson's terms, give an eff about - or we'll go mad," Mr Mardling said.
"If you can look past the bad language, there's a really great message there, I think, for everyone."
In writing the book, Manson says he came to the conclusion that strong relationships with close friends and family and committing to people, places and career are what matter.
Find out more about The Subtle Art of Not Giving A F--- here.
Word count: 909
