Australia’s pioneering past is brought to life at tourism venues around the nation, with Swan Hill, Moe and Korumburra among the standouts, writes SARAH HUDSON IT was in the 1960s and 1970s that the boom in historic, pioneer tourist attractions took off.
In 1966 came Swan Hill’s Pioneer Settlement, followed by Ballarat’s Sovereign Hill in 1970, and Coal Creek in Korumburra four years later.
But 50 years on, in an age where technology — the ipad and virtual reality — dominate children’s entertainment, what do these attractions offer a modern audience?
Janelle Earle, general manager of the Swan Hill Pioneer Settlement — which covers the past century of Mallee history — says it’s exactly because of the disconnect between modern life and our colonial origins that it’s more important than ever to celebrate the past.
“The settlement was first privately owned, and is now run by the city council, and about a decade ago the community was asked whether they wanted it to stay open and it was a resounding yes,” Janelle says.
“We show children how fire is made, laundry was done in copper pots, how to make butter, lamingtons and peg dolls. The children comment, ‘I can’t believe they used to live like this’.
“For the older generation it’s about nostalgia. They can spend hours with the harvesters and tractors and show their grandkids that’s how they used to plant crops.
“So it’s about keeping our stories alive.” While almost every child knows Sovereign Hill, here is a list of the less-celebrated attractions that recreate our pioneering past.
PIONEER SETTLEMENT, SWAN HILL WHEN irrigation was introduced to Swan Hill in 1887, small farm settlements developed through the Mallee — towns that inspire the Pioneer Settlement.
There’s a strong agricultural emphasis, featuring some of the earliest and more unusual examples of Australian strippers, headers, tractors and ploughs, many of them being the only examples left anywhere in the world.
There are 22 historic tractors, including an internationally recognised collection of steel wheel tractors.
A 1913 wood-fired steam boiler and steam engine is still operational and used to provide power for engineering equipment, while an enormous steam engine, affectionately known as Black Bess, lumbers around the Settlement.
Built in 1920 in the UK, and weighing 28 tonnes, Black Bess was used to pull up large Mallee roots to make way for farming.
Aside from agriculture, the Pioneer Settlement has original Cobb and Co coaches, working print shop, lolly store, blacksmith (circa 1896), photo parlour (dress up costume a must) and wood-turners.
A quirky addition is the Kaiser Stereoscopic Theatre. Built in Germany in 1895, the still-working theatre is one of only two in the world and the only one accessible to the public.
The Settlement has a paddle steamer on permanent display, the Gem, built in 1876, as well as a working paddle boat, the Pyap (1896).
And if technology is a must, then opt for Heartbeat of the Murray, a multimillion-dollar development opened in 2015 that is a water, light, laser and sound show that tells the story of the Murray River.
● pioneersettlement.com.au
OLD GIPPSTOWN, MOE FOCUSING on the history of Gippsland, this historic town is a collection of 27 original, relocated buildings dating from the 1840s to the 1930s.
The site covers 3ha and features several National Trust classified buildings and “one of the best collections of horse-drawn vehicles and farm equipment in Australia”.
● gippslandheritagepark.com.au
COAL CREEK COMMUNITY PARK & MUSEUM, KORUMBURRA WHEN a new home for the old Korumburra Courthouse was needed, Coal Creek was established in 1974.
From this single building the historic village was born, these days recreating a coal-mining village from the 1870s to the 1920s.
The park and museum are home to about 30,000 objects, from trains to thimbles, each piece telling the story of life in South Gippsland during pioneer times.
● coalcreekcommunityparkand museum.com
WIMMERA-MALLEE PIONEER MUSEUM, JEPARIT ON 4HA next to the Wimmera River, the museum houses antiques, agricultural equipment and furnishings of the first Europeans in the district in 16 historic buildings, such as a school, church, homesteads, public halls and shops.
The museum is run by volunteers.
● Ph: (03) 5397 2101
THE VILLAGE — HISTORIC LOXTON, SOUTH AUSTRALIA “SEE how pioneers transformed the dry Mallee plains into lush citrus orchards and how farmers combated floods, drought, heat, rabbit plagues and devastating winds to produce some of the best cereal grain crops in the country.” That’s how The Village — Historic Loxton sums up its pioneering experience. The Village, situated on the Murray River and operated by about 50 volunteers, was established in 1970 and preserves memorabilia, photographs, books, artefacts, machinery as well as 45 buildings that replicate original constructions from Loxton’s pioneering years.
● thevillageloxton.com.au
THE AUSTRALIANA PIONEER VILLAGE, WILBERFORCE, NSW THIS village has one of the most impressive collections of heritage-registered buildings in Australia.
The land on which the village is situated was first farmed in 1797, but by 1809 part of it was owned by the Rose family.
Rose Cottage is now the oldest timber dwelling in Australia on its original site, built in 1811.
Other historic buildings include wagon sheds that house antique equipment, and horse and engine powered vehicles, a blacksmiths, school, damper shed, pottery, lolly store, and shearing shed (circa 1880s) with hand-operated wool press and Cooper’s hand shearing equipment.
Cartwright Cottage dates from 1870 and is a classic example of early slab construction, with a fireplace lined in iron.
Meanwhile the stable of the Blackhorse Inn dates to 1874 and — because of a shortage of nails — was built using mortar and tenon joints with wooden dowels.
● theapv.org.au/village/
THE HISTORIC VILLAGE HERBERTON, QLD LOCATED in the Atherton Tablelands of North Queensland, this is an outdoor museum that focuses on Herberton, a town established in 1880 following a tin-mining boom.
The buildings and thousands of original items focus on turn-of-the- century machinery and small engines, transport, fashion and pharmaceuticals as well as motor vehicles and war memorabilia.
Collections of grocery items and tobacco to treasured dolls and toys also feature.
Set on 6ha, the village opened in 1973 after a collector saw relics were being sold off for scrap metal.● historicvillageherberton. com.au
CREDIT: SARAH HUDSON
Word count: 1037
