Hitting that holiday sweet spot is different for every traveller.
Whether it’s hiking a jurassic trail or diving the wonders of the reef, whatever your style, we’ve collated (in no particular order) Townsville North Queensland’s best of the best experiences in this holiday hot list.
1 Get the lay of the land from atop Mount Stuart, with panoramic views across Townsville.
2 Even if you’ve only got one day to spare, jump on SeaLink or Magnetic Island Ferries to Magnetic Island – it’s only 20 minutes offshore!
3 Prost! Otto’s Fresh Food Market brings a German-inspired atmosphere and a colourful plate, lovingly prepared by the in-store chef.
4 Fancy a pub with no beer….
outrageous! That was once the case for The Pub with No Beer at Lees Hotel in Ingham, made famous by Slim Dusty.
Thankfully, this predicament is no longer, so head on over and grab a cold one.
5 If it’s a night on the town you’re after, put on your dancing shoes and head to Flinders Street East.
6 Feed a freshwater croc and cuddle up to a dingo at Billabong Sanctuary.
7 Enjoy two-for-one pizzas at Donna Bionda, $2 tacos at The Courtyard, or fill a table, and your tummy, with Korean, dumplings, gyros, or tapas on City Lane’s Tasty Tuesday. #nomnom 8 Tick off an Australian wonder when you road trip two hours north-west of Townsville to Wallaman Falls – the highest permanent single-drop waterfall in the country.
9 Discover the flourishing bommies and historical wreck relics that lie beneath the waters off Magnetic Island on a self-guided snorkel trail.
10 You can always rely on Townsville’s Beachfront, The Strand, for delivering hours of family fun. Spend a day to-ing and fro-ing between the rock pool and water park before cooking up a feast on the free BBQs.
11 Catch a sorbet sunset from the best spot in Charters Towers, Towers Hill.
12 The Burdekin is home to Australia’s most successful professional female golfer, Karrie Webb. If you’re stopping by Ayr, enjoy a round at her local golf club.
13 Make like a local and get your caffeine fix from the funky Hoi Polloi Espresso Bar down Denham Lane.
14 Have a hands-on encounter with creatures of the Great Barrier Reef at the world’s largest living coral aquarium, Reef HQ Great Barrier Reef Aquarium.
15 Hop on a trike tour with Crikey Trikey Joy Rides, because as well as seeing the sights in style, it’ll be the only time you have a good excuse to wear a leather jacket in North Queensland.
16 Get your superfood kick-start with an acai bowl from The Beet Bar or Squeeze Me.
17 Take your camera on a landscape adventure through the farmlands and lush green canefields of The Burdekin.
18 Strike out (in the best way) at Kingpin Bowling or the Townsville Tenpin & Fun Centre.
19 Eat all the Peking Duck you can handle at Miss Song’s, accompanied by some tasty cocktails before trying your luck at the casino.
20 Go old-school on date night at one of the region’s drive-in movie theatres – Tors Drive-in Cinema in Charters Towers or Stardust Drive-in in Ayr.
21 From navigating the high seas aboard the HMS Pandora, to uncovering stories behind Indigenous artefacts, get hands-on amongst the collections at the Museum of Tropical Queensland.
22 Slide into Sunday morning at Cotters Markets. Grab a coffee or fresh juice, and browse locals’ stalls, food vans, and stores. Tip: All friendly, leashed pups are welcome.
23 Grab a scoop of creamy deliciousness at Juliette’s Gelateria on The Strand.
24 Don your cowboy boots on a horse-drawn wagon ride with Texas Longhorn Wagon Tours & Safaris to meet JR, the bull with the longest horn spread in the world according to 2013 Guinness World Records.
27 Don’t forget your camera as you stalk the alleys and laneways of Townsville uncovering the city’s secrets through street art.
26 For a short and sweet cardio fix, hit up the Goat Track on Castle Hill.
25 Tuck into the best breakfast in Australia (as crowned by the Savour Australia Restaurant & Catering Awards for Excellence) at JAM on Palmer Street.
28 Bid in a cane toad race at the Arcadia Village Hotel on Magnetic Island.
It’s all in good fun and proceeds are donated to the Surf Life Saving Club.
29 Let art fill your heart, with exhibitions at Perc Tucker Regional Gallery, Pinnacles Gallery, Umbrella Studio of Contemporary Arts and Aluminium Art.
30 Head to the rooftop bar at glampackers resort, Rambutan, to feast poolside on tacos, fried chicken, and lazy cocktails.
31 The SS Yongala is a total bucket-list shipwreck, but if you haven’t got a dive certification yet, you can start from scratch and tick off all the certifications in one trip with either Adrenalin Snorkel and Dive or Yongala Dive.
32 After just 1.5 hours on the Charters Towers Historical Walking Tour, you’ll have a trivia master’s knowledge of the town’s golden days and a new appreciation for 1800s architecture.
33 Spend four days hiking through changing landscapes from rainforest to paperbark country on Hinchinbrook Island’s Thorsborne Trail.
34 Fish off the jetty at Picnic Bay on Magnetic Island. If you’re lucky, you might even spot a turtle or a dugong!
35 Become a master of the waves and winds when you learn to kitesurf with Intheloop.
36 Uncover the spooky past of Charters Towers on a ghost tour through the old city centre after dark.
37 Ahoy nautical buffs, you’ll get a kick out of the Townsville Maritime Museum. It even has its own model boat building room and lighthouse.
38 Knock back a bottle of Whitbread’s fizzy goodness. The Charters Towers company is one of the oldest surviving small-town manufacturers of soft drinks – serving for the past 120 years.
39 Go topless (by car, that is) when you hire a Topless Car and drive around Magnetic Island.
40 Vroom vroom your way to victory on the track at Pitstop Karting.
41 It’s not often one seeks out a giant carpet snake, but you’ll want to take a look at the 60-metre artwork of Gubulla Munda, the Aboriginal totem and protective spirit for the Birri Gubba people in The Burdekin.
42 Take your fishing adventures to new heights when you scout the most untouched locations via helicopter with Hinchinbrook Adventures.
43 Learn to sail at the Townsville Yacht Club on their social Wednesday Twilight Sails.
44 Whether you’re a lap enthusiast or err towards lazy lounging, head to the Riverway Lagoons to cool down.
45 Pour your own brew at The TapHouse craft beer bar in City Lane.
46 Feel the nostalgia with vintage pinball, retro console games and themed cocktails at Empire Alternacade and Events.
47 Mountain bike through the open woodland and rocky shores of Cape Pallarenda on the ‘Under the Radar’ trail.
48 Go back in time to the gold rush era of Charters Towers on a tour at the Venus Gold Battery.
49 Celebrate the rich history of Townsville on a self-guided walking heritage tour of the city.
50 Make an entrance worth bragging about when you jump from 14,000 ft and land on the beach at The Strand or Magnetic Island with Skydive Townsville.
51 During the crushing season, watch a cane fire burn in The Burdekin, the sugar cane capital of Australia.
52 Cross your fingers and hope to find a nugget when you pan for gold at The Miner’s Cottage in Charters Towers.
53 Bay hop to local snorkel and fishing hotspots around Maggie on a half-day tour, or bring shipwreck stories to life on a two hour Sunset and Shipwreck Tour with Aquascene Charters.
54 Rise for a morning paddle with Magnetic Island Sea Kayaks. Starting at Horseshoe Bay, you’ll drift over coral gardens before stopping at a secluded bay for a tropical brekkie.
55 Explore Jezzine Barracks’ scenic coastal boardwalk, ethnobotanical trail, and over 30 specially commissioned art installations commemorating the military and Aboriginal heritage.
56 Treat your better half to a night of fine dining in Townsville City’s premier foodie strip, Palmer Street.
57 Hop aboard Pilgrim or Big Mama Sailing for a sunset cruise off Magnetic Island.
58 Embrace your inner mozart and head to Radical Bay to enjoy stunning views while you play your favourite melody on the beachside piano.
59 Take adventure to the next level with Townsville Helicopters, and witness the reef from above – you can even land on the sand cay at Wheeler Reef to feel like the only people in the world.
60 Ride bareback through the ocean on a horse riding tour at the Horseshoe Bay Ranch on Magnetic Island.
61 Taste test the award-winning cold ones brewed around the clock at The Brewery.
62 The platypus safari at Hidden Valley Cabins has a 98% success rate of spotting these duck-billed cuties, earning them the title of one of the top six places in the country to spot them.
63 Discover the stories of Townsville on a military, city lights or scenic tour with Tour Townsville.
64 Pop into the Army Museum on the military history trail at Jezzine Barracks.
65 Head to the TYTO Wetlands observation deck at dusk to spot the resident birds which the wetlands were named after – the endangered Eastern Grass Owl (Tyto Capensis).
66 Treat your pooch to a day of sun and sand at the off-leash Pallarenda Beach.
67 Tempt your taste buds at City Lane, where you’ll find everything from a Mexican cantina and sushi bar to Italiano and paleo delights.
68 Spot wild koalas when you hike through military history on Magnetic Island’s Forts Walk.
69 Try ice-cream and sorbet flavours made from almost every fruit you could think of at the Frosty Mango.
70 Rest assured you won’t find snappy reptiles at Alligator Creek, just crystal-clear swimming holes and hikes through the landscapes of Mount Elliot.
71 Drink the infamous Kopi Luwak coffee at Hervey’s Range Heritage Tea Rooms. One of the most expensive coffees in the world, it’s produced from coffee beans digested by an Asian civet cat – yes, it’s cat poop coffee!
72 Have brekkie with the koalas at Bungalow Bay Village on Magnetic Island. As well as having a morning snuggle from these cuties, you can stuff your faces with an Aussie-style breakfast of jaffles and toad-in-a-hole.
73 Birdwatchers will be in paradise at the Town Common Conservation Park – up to 280 species have been recorded here.
74 Spend two days trekking through ancient palm-filled gullies and open forests on the Wet Tropics Great Walk.
75 The Ross River is the perfect backdrop for a weekend stroll or cycle.
76 Meet the rock wallabies on Magnetic Island when you take to the National Park walking tracks.
77 From palms and pandanus to cacti and succulents, plant lovers will be in heaven exploring the city’s botanic gardens – Anderson Park, Queens Gardens, Dan Gleeson Memorial Gardens and The Palmetum.
78 No boat? No worries! You can reel in a Barra and learn how to wakeboard all in a day with Crackajack Sportfishing Adventure in the Burdekin region.
79 If you’re in need of a nature escape, head to the misty mountain village of Paluma, where freshwater crystal creeks and Wet Tropics Heritage-listed Rainforest walks await.
80 Jump on a jetski with Townsville Watersports to discover beautiful bays and coves, or even Cape Cleveland Lighthouse. You may be lucky enough to encounter sea turtles, dugongs, dolphins, or even whales.
81 Mosey along Mercer Lane’s Mosaic Artwork in Ingham. Over 2,000 locals and visitors placed the tiny tiles as a tribute to the town’s cane cutting history.
82 Head to the Magnetic Island Stage Door Theatre for a night out complete with dinner and a show!
With live singing, hilarious comedy and tongue-in-cheek impersonations, this is a dazzling live performance you’ll be talking about for years to come!
83 Hire a boat from the kind folks at Townsville Boat Hire and take the family out for a day of mud crabbing and fishing in the local creek systems.
84 Did you know it’s estimated over half the population of Ingham is of Italian descent? Stock up on Italian delicatessen continental delights at Lou’s Food Emporium or JK’s Deli.
85 Be cool. Real cool. Go ice skating at Warrina Ice Skating Rink – yes, you read that right, an icy escape from North Queensland’s tropical temps.
86 Pitch a tent and enjoy a night under a million stars at one of the region’s camping spots. Paluma, Bivouac Junction, Broadwater and Burdekin Falls Dam are a few local favourites.
87 What do you get when you mix talented local designers with a crafty shopping space? Renegade Handmade Gift Shop, that’s what.
It’s a haven for lovers of handmade jewellery, homewares, and fashion.
88 Take pleasure in the amazingness of the Great Barrier Reef, with guided easy access shore dives tailored to any experience level, with Magnetic Island’s longest running dive operators, Pleasure Divers.
89 Rock climbing enthusiasts will love Hot Rocks, Townsville’s premier indoor rock climbing centre, or touch base with the Rock Climbers Association of North Queensland to tag along to an outdoor rock climbing adventure.
90 On the hunt for some new threads and homewares? Hit up Townsville’s Gregory, Palmer, and Flinders Streets; or Ayr’s main street for boutique shopping ‘til you drop.
91 Stretch your legs on the Mount Inkerman Nature Trail. At just 2.2km return, the natural terrain track winds its way through bushland to the summit, with breathtaking views once you reach the top.
92 Fill your day with water sports fun at Magnetic Island. Tube rides, catamarans and jetskis are all available along Horseshoe Bay.
93 Experience the ultimate mix of old and new, exploring heritage buildings through virtual reality technology with Charters Towers Historical Tours.
94 Cozy up at Hooch and Fellow and let a cocktail guru pour you the perfect drink mixed with care and precision.
95 Hear of tales from another era and how life was in the times of the Outback’s Gold Rush with Raven Tours.
96 Embrace the great outdoors, and take journey through rainforest terrain, thick woodlands, gorgeous waterfalls and swimming holes at Paluma Range National Park.
97 Try the award-winning Fairy Floss Windmill, at Shaw & Co. It’s a zesty mix of vanilla vodka, elderflower liqueur, cranberry and apple juice, topped with strawberry fairy floss.
98 Enjoy a romantic island hideaway at the all inclusive (and very exclusive) Orpheus Island Resort.
99 Lounge in luxury on a cabana at The Ville’s Splash Bar.
100 See the Insta-famous SS Adelaide, Australia.com’s most liked post of 2018. 186,502 (and counting) likes can’t be wrong! This shipwreck offMagnetic Island is a sight to behold.
Word count: 2465
