While the Flinders Ranges in South Australia's outback are hundreds of millions of years old, the region's rugged landscapes are getting a more contemporary treatment as part of a move to secure lasting global recognition.
Researchers at the University of South Australia are currently developing a virtual interactive tour of the region to support a bid for World Heritage status.
Several sites within the Flinders Ranges, including Nilpena Station, were placed on Australia's Tentative List for World Heritage in April.
The SA government is currently preparing a full nomination to be submitted to UNESCO over the next two years, with a final decision expected in 2024.
That process is now being complemented by the virtual reality project led by geologist Tom Raimondo, who is developing a 3D interactive tour of some of the region's most visually striking & geologically important locations.
"We want to teleport people back in time to witness these events that were the building blocks for what the Flinders are today," Associate Professor Raimondo said.
Using 3D cameras attached to drones & four-wheel drives, a team of researchers & students has collected videos & images of sites including Ikara-Wilpena Pound, the Warraweena Conservation Park, & the Blinman Heritage Mine.
The end result, they hope, will allow participants to put on VR headsets to undergo a "journey through deep geological time".
While Associate Professor Raimondo said the VR tour was not formally a part of the World Heritage bid, he hopes that, when complete, it will be rolled out in schools and museums around Australia & the world.
"This project was really borne out of the desire to really engage people with the World Heritage nomination," Associate Professor Raimondo said.
"We thought what better way to do it than to create a virtual tour where people can learn about all the fantastic geology, all the fantastic palaeontology, all the stories that really give us an insight into a critical period of Earth's history."
He said while the virtual tour would offer a bird's-eye view of some of the region's most popular spots, participants would also be given the opportunity to witness renditions of prehistoric events — such as the creation of the Acraman crater by a giant asteroid strike 580 million years ago.
"For the Ediacaran theme — which is all about the earliest forms of life on Earth — what we will do is transport people to that original ocean bed that existed over 500 million years ago," he said.
"You will be able to effectively swim around with these critters that represent the first life forms to appear on planet Earth."
By making the Tentative List for World Heritage, the Flinders Ranges sites are a step closer to joining an illustrious club across the world, which includes places such as Machu Picchu, Yosemite National Park & the Galapagos Islands.
The successful nomination follows years of effort by palaeontologists who have been excavating rare Ediacaran fossils believed to be 550 million years old.
Word count: 496
