Scientists are "anti-politicians" who look for evidence to break theories rather than data to support their ideals, a particle physicist has said ahead of a conference in Adelaide involving the world's top scientists.
Dr Steven Goldfarb is visiting from the world's largest atom smasher at the European Organisation for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva, which earlier this decade detected the Higgs boson, known as the "God particle".
"There is a lot of politics in the news these days, but I like to think of scientists as being anti-politicians," Dr Goldfarb told .
"To be clear, it's not that we don't like them, but a politician will look for data that supports their theory, or their politic, whereas us scientists are trying to find evidence that will break theories."
Physicists at CERN reported they found the Higgs boson in 2012 by using the Large Hadron Collider, a 27-kilometre subterranean circuit that smashes particles together & detects the behaviour of sub-atomic debris.
Predicted in a 1964 paper by British physicist Peter Higgs, the particle is thought to have existed since shortly after the Big Bang & is considered responsible for giving mass to elementary particles, the building blocks of the universe.
"It was a big achievement to find this thing that had been predicted about 50 years beforehand, & since then we've spent a lot of time measuring the properties of that, to see if it behaves as predicted, but also searching for other phenomena & trying to test our models," Dr Goldfarb said.
This also includes trying to prove themselves wrong, such as investigating whether there were any facts that contradicted their findings— regardless of whether a physicist likes those facts or not.
"We often argue about our results, to try & find out what is true & what's not true," Dr Goldfarb said.
"We discuss, discuss, discuss, so when a finding comes out from CERN from any of these experiments, we know that it's true.
"That's something you can count on in the world these days. Scientists are working out the truth."
An atom-smashing tour
Dr Goldfarb said people attending the "Universal Science" evening at the University of Adelaide's Braggs Building on Sunday night would be able to talk with physicists about the LHC & participate in a virtual reality display of its detectors.
"We have a 360-degree view of different detectors, because we have enormous detectors that we use to look at particle collisions & we like to show them off," he said.
"There will also be people there who are specialists in open data & open science, & they're going to show off how to actually use real data from the LHC, to try & learn how to do analysis like we do."
The cocktail evening is part of the five-day Conference on Computing in High Energy & Nuclear Physics (CHEP) at the Adelaide Convention Centre.
Particles smashed to find dark matter
A guest speaker at the conference will be the University of Adelaide's Associate Professor Paul Jackson, who, like Dr Goldfarb, is involved in ongoing experiments at CERN.
This includes researching the make-up of dark matter — an invisible substance believed to account for 85 per cent of matter in the universe.
Professor Jackson & his team is utilising the Large Hadron Collider in the hope of detecting & better understanding what dark matter is.
"That's the great thing about CERN because people from around the world come here & it was founded on that principle in 1954," Dr Goldfarb said.
"You give scientists impossible problems to try & solve, tools to try & solve them, & they will get together & work.
"And we're already thinking about the next generation of colliders & different ways that we can find new particles.
"It's tremendous fun."
The CHEP conference runs from November 4-8.
Word count: 635
