A world-first virtual reality project is being developed in Adelaide, showing the effects of climate change and Sir Ernest Shackleton historical polar journey.
A world-first virtual reality project, sharing a historic story of survival and the impact of climate change in Antarctica, is being developed in Adelaide.
Users of the Thin Ice VR experience will see the journey and survival of Sir Ernest Shackleton from more than 100 years ago.
The impacts of climate change in Antarctica will also have a strong focus.
Thin Ice VR is the first virtual reality project in South Georgia.
It will also be the first to apply photogrammetry and volumetric motion capture in the Antarctic.
Thin Ice VR's environmental scientist and presenter Tim Jarvis said he wanted to create meaningful awareness.
"I knew from Shackleton's account what it was like and 100 years on it's changed drastically due to climate change," Mr Jarvis said.
"I thought that showing the melting glaciers of South Georgia were a good way of showing people climate change is more tangible."
Mr Jarvis was the first man to successfully retrace the steps of polar explorer Sir Ernest Shackleton in Antarctica.
He documented his voyage in a Discovery Channel series Shackleton Death or Glory in 2013 and wrote a book titled Shackleton's Epic: Recreating the World's Greatest Journey of Survival.
In 2018, a team led by Mr Jarvis travelled to Antarctica to capture photogrammetry and 360-degree video footage for the project.
Mr Jarvis said schools, museums and science galleries were major target audiences for the product.
Producer Justin Wight said $1 million in capital investment would ensure the product is produced to the highest technical standards.
"(It) will allow us to use photorealistic 3D actors to go along with the user," he said.
"We want to create a deeper level of immersion (so) the user would move around a location, even pick up objects, and have Tim Jarvis and Ernest Shackleton talk to them as if they're there."
Thin Ice VR is expected to be launched in late 2020.
CREDIT: Emily Cosenza
Word count: 342
