The Hon. Clare Scriven, Minister for Primary Industries and Regional Development (SA), Media Release, 30 August 2022
World leading augmented reality (AR) technology developed in South Australia is being used to assist producers to recognise emergency animal diseases, such as foot and mouth disease in sheep.
Funded through the State Government’s Red Meat and Wool Growth program and Animal Health Australia, the Sheep Emergency Animal Disease (EAD) AR tool has been developed by South Australian innovative immersive technology studio Think Digital in collaboration with Animal Health Australia and the Department of Primary Industries and Regions (PIRSA).
The tool generates a flock of augmented reality sheep, providing an opportunity for the user to identify the sick animal by looking for signs and symptoms of exotic EAD diseases such as:
foot and mouth disease (FMD)
bluetongue
scrapie
sheep pox
The tool is now available on both the App Store and Google Play and can be downloaded by searching for Sheep EAD AR.
For further information on the Sheep EAD AR Tool visit: www.pir.sa.gov.au/sheep-ead
Quotes attributable to Clare Scriven
With the heightened risk of emergency animal disease, the launch of this world-first cutting-edge tool could not be more timely. This tech will be an extra tool in the preparedness work being done to fight against these diseases.
The diseases being featured in this augmented reality experience have not been seen in Australia previously, so most primary producers and agents are not equipped to recognise them. Tools like this will help to educate and increase awareness, helping producers to be more vigilant with their on-farm biosecurity practices.
It is exciting that this technology was developed here in South Australia. It is well timed for our primary industries, but is also generating interest internationally, particularly in Europe.
Quotes attributable to Dr Rob Barwell, Head of Program, Biosecurity at Animal Health Australia
It is imperative that workers across the agriculture sector can spot suspicious signs and animal behaviour and be aware and comfortable with how to report so we can remain vigilant against emergency animal diseases.
We believe that this exciting simulation tool along with an associated information package will result in higher levels of engagement and ultimately improve awareness.
Feedback from user testing has been that the tool is easy to navigate and engaging to use, leading to better awareness of these diseases and the action required if suspected.
Word count: 391
