As every Australian knows, rainfall falls into one of two camps - far too little or a great deal too much.
It is essential for the survival of a farming business to collect and store water for the times when there is a drought or dryer times, especially for those operations with livestock.
Bushman Tanks is an Australian-owned and operated business which was founded in 1989 and has its roots in rural Australia.
The company has been a leading expert in providing quality tanks, pumps and accessories for rural, residential and industrial applications since the start of the business.
Most farmers are familiar with the Bushman brand and its long-lasting range of poly rainwater, fertiliser and molasses tanks that stand the test of time with Bushman's own Sunsmart technology.
They may be less familiar with the new Aqualine range of premium steel liner tanks that have been designed for maximum strength and larger water storage capacity.
Aqualine steel tanks range from 20,000 litres to the massive 360,000 litres.
For residential, commercial, industrial and resource sector projects, architects, engineers and builders, Bushman Tanks offers a wide range of poly water tanks for any situation.
Also, Bushman manufactures commercial tanks to solve liquid storage problems.
Built for easy installation, Bushman's tanks can be connected quickly, and a range of pumps and tank packages are offered to suit most residential and commercial purposes.
Bushman Tanks are committed to providing excellent customer service and quality products.
Bushman Tanks has its own delivery fleet and offers an installation and fit out service ensuring that customers are receiving reliable and dependable customer service.
The company recently launched a new tech initiative.
Bushman Tanks has generated some of its most popular water tanks in 3D and augmented reality (AR).
AR is when a computer or phone creates an interactive experience in a real-world environment. It is usually a visual and auditory experience.
Essentially, most AR experiences use your phone's camera to generate a digital object in the real world that can be seen through your phone camera.
It makes it possible to view Bushman Tanks in 3D on your phone and desktop computer.
You can use your mouse or finger to look at every angle of the tank, by spinning and turning it.
If you are not sure what size water tank you need, or what size will fit your situation, the new AR feature will be able to help.
The tanks are to scale in AR, which means you will be able to see how big the tank is in relation to your space and requirements.
Plus, purchase any Bushman or Aqualine tank this spring and go into the draw to win one of five $1000 BBQ Galore gift cards (T&C's apply)
CREDIT:
Word count: 457
