MOUTHING OFF (1) Laughter is the best medicine: What happened to the wooden car with wooden wheels and a wooden engine? It wooden go.
(2) Old-timer: Old espionage agents never die, they are just despised. (3) Wordplay: Did you hear about the book Quick Money for Dummies written by Robin Banks.
(4) Just asking: Why is it we have the weight of the world on our shoulders but have to get it off our chests?
(5) Caught in the fact: At the World’s Columbian Exposition in Chicago in 1893, the California pavilion featured a huge statue of a knight on horseback made entirely of prunes.
INSIGHT “You know that little voice inside your head that keeps you from saying things you shouldn’t? Yeah, I don’t have that” – T-shirt message.
QUOTE, UNQUOTE “We’re alive! As long as we’re alive, we have to keep moving” – blind US dance teacher Marion Sheppard.
KEEPING COUNT 9248 – the number of confirmed deaths from Covid-19 in The Philippines to January 2, 2021. (On the same day the number of confirmed deaths in Italy reached 74,621 and worldwide 1,825,810.) JUST A THOUGHT Some people can add years to their lives simply by telling the truth about their age.
REMEMBER WHEN Today is June 3, Love Conquers All Day and the 154th day of the year. There are 211 days remaining until the end of the year. On this day: 1925: Actor Tony Curtis, who once said, “I wouldn’t be caught dead marrying a woman old enough to be my wife,” was born in New York City.
1926: Beat poet Allen Ginsberg, who cooked meals for impoverished friends, was born in Newark, New Jersey.
1937: The Duke of Windsor and divorced US socialite Wallis Simpson were married at a chateau in France.
1961: From the cookery section by Jane Farrell in the Sunday Mail: “Having trouble cutting fresh bread? Try dipping a knife in boiling water. The bread will cut without difficulty.” 1966: Radio station 5KA listed Substitute, by English rock band The Who, as Adelaide’s No.1 hit single.
1972: From the South Australian magazine TV Guide: “5AD’s Barry Ion, up to his old tricks each morning in the breakfast session, is sending someone from the station to ring up from a suburban telephone box. Listeners have to guess the whereabouts of this person from the clues given to Barry over the air.” 1985: Adelaide newsreader Kevin Crease wore glasses for the first time on television.
1985: Canadian singer-songwriter Leonard Cohen performed at the Festival Theatre in Adelaide.
1986: Tennis champion Rafael Nadal was born in Spain.
1999: Australian cricketer Cameron Green was born in Perth.
2018: From the website LeFunny.net: “The most romantic love story isn’t Romeo and Juliet who died together … but Grandpa and Grandma who grew old together.” 2021: The augmented reality mobile game Pokemon GO was released in Turkey, five years after it was available in Australia.
CREDIT: WITH MARTY SMITH
Word count: 491
