TOO much data, lack of connectivity and geolocation technology were key themes during last week's SA Agritech Meetup in the South East, which saw farmers and techies join forces to get a better understanding of what tech is currently available in agriculture versus what producers would like to see in the future.
Participants toured various farms in the region and spoke with industry leaders such as Peter Butler, Ben Farmer, Penny Schulz, Hans Loder, Jack England, and the Heinrich and Clothier families.
Think Digital founder Tim Gentle was one of the participants on the day and said a major drawcard for him was the ability to network with other agtech founders within the state.
"There was a bit of a personal quest for me on this particular tour as well," he said.
"I want to put the farmer first, listen to the problems they face, get a really good understanding of what it's like on the front line, and then try to marry up our technology to help solve those problems.
"One of the criticisms a lot of agtech companies get is we really get caught up with the technology first, rather than the problem, so the meetup allowed me to have ears to the ground on this to listen firsthand to the farmer first rather than putting my agtech first."
Even facilitator Emma Leonard said the event provided an opportunity for those involved in developing technologies to get an understanding of what might be required in agriculture and how they might be able to service agriculture.
"Some of them are already working in agriculture and horticulture, but some in completely other industries," she said.
"For example, we had some people who had much more experience in the mining and gas and oil industries there then others like Tim (Gentle) that have come very much up through agriculture.
"There was a whole cross-section of people with a wealth of knowledge working together to understand what each other was after."
Known for its work in the virtual reality sphere, tech company Think Digital has now moved into augmented reality, something Mr Gentle focused on during the tour.
"I do think AR wearables are pretty amazing, but are they going to solve on farm problems today or is it something they're going to use in the future," he said.
"It'll certainly make them more accessible - but is it practical? I didn't know.
"So part of the tour for me was to really get first hand knowledge of whether I'm too far ahead of the curve or whether or not I'm on the money."
READ MORE:
Struan demo farm field day intrigues industry
Struan, Kybybolite agtech innovations go on show
Connectivity continues to be a major hurdle in regional areas, which hinders the use of some agtech, such as AR wearables according to Mr Gentle.
He said the problem was one of the major issues highlighted during the tour.
"Another thing I definitely felt when I was visiting and listening was farmers have got too much data and they're at a stage where they're trying to consolidate and aggregate that data and that doesn't have to exist in glasses," Mr Gentle said.
"It really needs to be simplified into a desktop or into an application.
"Where they're really at the moment is bringing the data in and trying to understand before even thinking about wearing AR glasses and walking around like Iron Man on the farm."
Mr Gentle said tech inventors could sometimes get caught up in what they thought was a practical idea, but the trip helped narrow down what was really necessary instead.
"It wasn't, 'hi, we're from agtech, have you heard of agtech before?' it was more on the lines of, 'I can see you've adopted some agtech and you understand the benefits, tell us a little bit more about some of your challenges and let's see if we can work together to solve those problems'," he said.
"In particular one farmer wanted to sort of somehow find a way to retain the knowledge in their head and provide that to future generations.
"Where my ears pricked up for that was we can geolocate that information, so based on where you're standing - if we can retain that information - future generations can stand on that spot in the farm and access that data for years to come.
"Where I might be going from here is somehow working with farmers to geolocate their knowledge and then in the future we can access that in wearables when we're standing in that location."
The SA AgriTech Meetup group is supported through AgriFutures Australia and PIRSA.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: Katie Jackson
Word count: 797
