MOONSHOT: A JOURNEY HOME $7.99/m, Apple Arcade The newest game to hit Apple’s Arcade combines geometry with astronomy in a unique way. Players are in charge of Moon Pi, a small moon that has been separated from mother Earth and must be flung back towards it, using other planets’ gravity fields, bouncing off asteroids, and avoiding black holes. The game offers 126 levels across seven worlds and fresh weekly challenges.
HOW SAFE IS MY PLACE Free, Apple iOS/Google Android This app puts you in the shoes of a virtual cat burglar, but with good intentions. Created by RACV and Neighbourhood Watch Victoria, it uses augmented reality to let you take a tour of someone else’s home to think more about your home security and gives surprisingly useful tips, like the size of screws needed to secure your front door’s hinge from a blunt force attack.
GOPRO PLAYER + REELSTEADY $160, Mac/PC This pro-level editing package offers useful features for anyone looking to turn GoPro footage into a serious action movie. GoPro Player’s ReelSteady Stabilisation Tool can take out a lot of the bumps out of raw footage, Lens Correction can remove obvious curvature from videos, and Reframe can be used to edit 360-degree footage so viewers know what parts of the scene they should be watching.
HELLOSAURUS: LEARN AND PLAY $15.49/m, Apple iOS/Google Android This app will give you unrealistically high expectations for all other children’s entertainment. Hellosaurus delivers interactive playtime for kids aged four and over by delivering lessons in numbers, cooking, astronomy and singing from well-known entertainers, including The Wiggles, Luna Muna, and Cosmic Kids Yoga. You try the app free of charge for 14 days before subscribing for $15.49 a month.
AUSTRALIA DPD Free, Apple iOS/Google Android With international borders open, you may need to familiarise yourself with this app from the Department of Home Affairs, along with other travel changes. Before you return to Australia, you’ll need to fill out and submit a digital declaration in this app so the government can contact you if you’re exposed to Covid-19 or organise appropriate quarantine arrangements when you arrive.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 355
