GROCERY Free, Apple iOS With the price of groceries rising, it could be a good time to invest in an app to plan your supermarket shopping. Grocery – Smart Shopping List is designed to help you create lists you can use in store, ticking items off your list as you encounter them. It also features recipes, with ingredients added to your list automatically, and can work with Apple’s Reminders app in case you forget an item. Users can also track prices, share lists with others, and hide ads for $15.49/year.
TO-DO LIST Free, Google Android This freshly updated app can help you keep your appointments, projects, social commitments, and goals in check. It lets users record important tasks in a visual way, customising them with reminders and organising them by priority. The app also plots them on a calendar, syncs them with Google Drive, and can show them off in widgets. A premium subscription unlocks extra features and eliminates ads for $25/year.
GEOGEEK AR Free, Apple iOS One of the best examples of augmented reality is this app that lets you place a globe in front of your device and asks you to identify where countries are located. Entertaining quizzes within the app highlight different nations and also ask users to find nations by spinning and zooming into different continents. Four quizzes are free to try each day, and users can also buy extension packs to answer questions about individual areas.
EXPERT RAW Free, Samsung If you have a recent Samsung phone, it’s worth checking the Galaxy Store for this addition. The Expert RAW app is designed to make more of the camera in your phone, capturing more information in the RAW file format, and giving users access to photographic tweaks like ISO, shutter speed, exposure, and white balance. The app is available for the Galaxy S21 Ultra, S22 phones, and now the Z Fold3, but it’s due to arrive with S20 models shortly.
TIKTOK Free, iOS/Android TikTok has just launched a new way for users to appear in videos, potentially hiding bad hair days. The video service launched Avatars worldwide that will let users create their likeness and customise it with everything from piercings to make-up and accessories. The virtual creations can be used to mimic their owners during a video, a little like Apple’s Memojis.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 390
