GOOGLE WALLET Free, Google Android If you pay for goods with a Google phone, you’ll probably notice a change when you’re next at the checkout. The internet giant has swapped Google Pay for the new Google Wallet app that works in a similar way but features a fresh design with larger graphics, quick access to loyalty cards and other passes, and greater options like the ability to review purchases, add passes from Gmail, or manage the way you pay across apps on your phone.
DRACARYS Free, Apple iOS/Google Android Like Tamagotchi, Westeros edition, this advanced augmented reality app asks players to steal a dragon egg and raise it into a winged, scaly, fire-breathing but obedient offspring. House of the Dragon: DracARys players can feed their dragons, teach them to respond to Valyrian commands, and snap photos of them seemingly appearing in front of real world landmarks (or just on their couch watching the new show).
B2022 GAMES Free, Apple iOS/Google Android The Commonwealth Games kicks off in Birmingham this week and this app will tell you what’s going on, where it’s happening and who is claiming medals. The B2022 app asks who you’re supporting and which sports you’re following to send you up-to-date notifications, and features a full schedule of sporting events, photos and videos from the Games, an up-to-date medal tally and news from all sports on offer.
HEROISH $7.99/m, Apple iOS Who doesn’t want to be a hero and defend their castle? This newly launched Apple Arcade game asks the question as players choose to stand in the shoes of one of six heroes and use spells and smartly position troops to take over an enemy castle and win a head-to-head battle. The title is the first release from Sunblink, created by a team of gaming industry veterans, and also offers three single-player campaigns and custom decks.
NOTEIT WIDGET Free, iOS/Android This is a drawing app with an adorable twist. Noteit Widget is designed to digitally pass messages between two people, letting them watch as the other person sketches or writes out a message by hand. Users choose and connect with the person they want to contact and can then choose from a variety of pens and colours to communicate love notes or important reminders.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 381
