Sure, theme parks, slides, games and junk food are all fun, but cruise lines also offer the chance for children to get creative and learn through immersive experiences on board.
Dr Seuss fans should sail with Carnival where activities featuring all their favourites characters abound. Expect an onboard parade, interactive storytime, themed arts and crafts , and breakfasts featuring characters from books and movies. Meanwhile, Carnival’s Camp Ocean offers kids ocean-themed activities such as making sea-salt art and even designing their own aquarium. Those aged nine to 11 can take part in creating a giant ocean mural and playing marine-life trivia. Carnival Splendor will return to our shores this September.
For a more intense exploration into wildlife and the ocean, Princess Cruises has partnered with Discovery and Animal Planet to offer special programs like Shark Week and MythBusters, where kids uncover the truth behind popular shark myths and legends using scientific methods. Children aged three to seven can create art projects such as Animal Planet puppets and masks, and those aged eight to 12 can learn with science programs like rocket building, or explore outer space by stargazing.
Royal Caribbean ships offer “edu-tainment” programs in their kids’ clubs like science, art, theatre and storytime activities. Think hands-on science experiments and crafts such as making cultural masks and pottery, while learning about the art, history and culture of the regions visited. Mini theatre-lovers will adore the Adventure Theatre activities where trained instructors guide groups through an exploration of theatre arts. Royal Caribbean’s Adventure Ocean youth club is a complimentary program. All staff members working there hold a degree in education, recreation, or other related field.
Disney “imagineers” have conjured up next-level entertainment for fans of the likes of Moana, Tiana, Peter Pan and Nemo on their new vessel, Disney Wish. Guests can enter a new realm with the augmented-reality Disney Uncharted Adventure, a game where you become part of the story. And the interactive role has moved to the family dining experience in an Avengers mission at Worlds of Marvel. Kids can also train with the likes of Spider-Man and Black Panther at the Marvel Super Hero Academy. Frozen lovers will want to take a seat for Arendelle: A Frozen Dining Adventure to celebrate the engagement of Queen Anna and Kristoff in a theatrical dining experience that picks up where Frozen 2 left off.
Add to this, Fairytale Hall where kids can engage with Pixar, Marvel and Star Wars characters at Belle’s Library, Anna and Elsa’s summer house and Rapunzel’s art class. And the Walt Disney Imagineering Lab will be a first-of-its-kind opportunity for kids to discover the secrets of Disney Imagineers with hands-on activities. Kids can also take part in imagineering classes where they learn how to design their own rollercoaster. Disney Wish sets sail next month in the Caribbean. carnival.com.au; disneycruise.com; princess.com; royalcaribbean.com Andrea Black loves that these cruise activities for kids often centre on the surrounding ocean and destinations visited, making for a truly immersive experience that they will remember for life.
CREDIT: Andrea Black
Word count: 507
