MOTORING HERE ARE THE BEST NEW FEATURES THAT MAY BE AVAILABLE IN YOUR NEXT SET OF WHEELS Technology in cars evolves at an outrageous pace. Manufacturers launch new models every week with features unheard of in years gone by. Here are some of the features you should watch for in your next set of wheels.
Safety first Cars are safer than ever. Increasingly strict test procedures have pushed manufacturers to look beyond airbags and crumple zones to sophisticated electronic features that can prevent tragedy.
Don’t buy a new car without autonomous emergency braking, tech that will use a camera or radar to recognise hazards and automatically apply the brakes to reduce the severity of an impact.
Rear cross traffic alert is also a winner, preventing you from backing into the path of a moving vehicle. SOS buttons in the roof of some models dispatch an ambulance following a crash, while Ford’s MyKey lets you set speed limits and other controls for people borrowing the car.
Safe exit assist features offered by several manufacturers prevents children from opening a rear door and stepping into the path of moving vehicles, while Mitsubishi’s ultrasonic miss-acceleration system stops absent-minded drivers from mixing up the pedals and ramming into objects at low speed.
On the road Traffic sign recognition systems watch for speed signs and display them on the dashboard, helping you stay under the limit.
Digital dashboards in some models have clever cameras that play a live video feed of your blind spot when you want to change lanes, and many cars now use 360-degree cameras to offer a birds’ eye view to aid parking precision.
Some models combine active cruise control (which uses a radar to maintain a safe gap to the car in front) with lane-keeping assistance attached to the steering, providing a form of traffic jam assistance to take the hassle out of peak hour commuting.
We’re also fans of multi-mode driving systems that cater to different moods, allowing drivers to choose whether they want lightning-fast reactions or loose-limbed suppleness from their ride.
Comfort and convenience Automation can make driving more comfortable. Kia’s latest cars automatically close windows and set the climate control to recirculate cabin air when approaching a tunnel, while Subaru uses facial recognition to remember who is getting behind the wheel, adopting their preferred posture and entertainment settings.
Powered tailgates in wagons are a winner – particularly with hands-free activation triggered by a sensor under the bumper – and doubly so if you can set the maximum opening height to account for your garage space.
On the inside, heated seats and steering wheels are hard to live without once you’ve tried them, and cooled seats put an end to clammy backs in summer.
Simply clever features Some cars have features that should be more widespread.
Skoda’s Kodiaq family SUV has flip-out plastic protectors on rear door edges that stop kids from damaging other vehicles when getting out of the car.
The Kodiaq also comes with a rechargeable torch and door-mounted umbrella. Wireless phone charging is increasingly common in new vehicles. It couples nicely with Apple CarPlay and Android Auto wireless smartphone mirroring – the capability to manage calls, music, mapping, podcasts and more through the car’s touchscreen, without needing to touch your phone.
If you do need to plug in, newer USB-C outlets provide a faster charge than traditional USB-A points.
Folks who like to do everything on their phone will appreciate new apps such as Hyundai’s BlueLink that help you find parked cars, unlock vehicles remotely, check fuel levels or preset climate controls so that it will be the right temperature when you start to drive.
Waiting to charge electric cars can be painful. But Tesla makes it easier with YouTube, Netflix and video games loaded into its central touchscreen. Some electric cars and hybrids have a “vehicle to load” function that lets you plug household appliances into their batteries.
The luxury car wish list Regular cars are full of great stuff but some of the best features are reserved for the top end of town.
● Head-up displays have migrated from luxury models to regular cars, which is why Mercedes has invested in “augmented reality” sat nav that can project street names, arrows, and guidance into your field of view.
● High-end performance cars have dashboard apps that can sharpen your driving, combining racecar-like data feeds with video footage to allow for careful analysis of your performance.
● Thermal cameras in machines such as the Porsche Taycan warn drivers of animals and other roadside hazards, pairing well with matrix headlights to carefully illuminate the world around you.
● Voice-activated features are more advanced in prestige cars – you can adjust the temperature in some cars simply by saying “hey BMW, I’m feeling cold”. ●Seats with in-built massagers feature in some of the most luxurious cars on the road. Audi’s A8L might have the most impressive chair, with a flip-down footrest that provides heated massages to the toes of folks in the back.
CREDIT: David McCowen
Word count: 839
