MY LIFE IN TRAVEL Adam Cheshire
A life built on combining work and travel has stood this entrepreneurial dad in great stead to revive a Sunshine Coast tourism classic My passion is turning around businesses and I’m lucky that I’ve had the opportunity to work in some of the most popular tourist destinations in the world. I grew up with parents who own and run a small business, which saw us hitting the road around Australia on sales trips, so it’s always been in my blood, really.
When I was 17, I joined them on an international buying trip to Arizona, US. It was my first time overseas and, especially as it was coupled with snowboarding at Lake Tahoe, it really ignited my love of travel.
I kind of fell into tourism management. After doing a couple of ski seasons in New Zealand, I started working for Australia Zoo. Not long afterwards, I met my now wife, Robyn, and after working there together for a few years we moved to Hamilton Island.
It was an idyllic life. Robyn was working the tour desk, then moved into the corporate team while I started out managing a photography business. I had 20-odd staff taking photos all around the Whitsundays, then I got asked to manage all the retail and activities businesses. The Oatley family bought the island just before we got there, and said, “We’re willing to invest hundreds of millions of dollars. What would you like to do?” It was an amazing opportunity. I started up a day spa, quad-bike business, jet-ski business, jewellery store, clothing store, an art gallery – even a pistol shooting range and golf driving range.
After five years, it was time for a break. We had friends moving to Canada who said, “You should come with us.” So we all went and did a ski season in Fernie. It wasn’t about the money; we worked because it gave you access to all the staff parties and lift passes. When the season finished, we went travelling through America and Southeast Asia until we had just enough money left to buy flights home. Robyn got offered a job managing a hotel back in her hometown in the Pilbara, WA, so we moved there.
Coming back broke from our travels, it was nice to be able to find a spot to get back on our feet. But we were a bit stir crazy. After three months we took a holiday back to Canada and got engaged. Then after a year in WA, I had an opportunity to work for a global conglomerate in Brisbane so we packed up and moved again.
Over the years, we’ve had businesses on the side – we sold crystals at the markets in the Pilbara and had an online costume shop – but never anything of the scale we now find ourselves in. I’d been looking for years, hoping to find a rural property and a business we could sink our teeth into. When the old Bellingham Maze on the Sunshine Coast popped up, it had both. I grew up on the Sunshine Coast – and Robyn had lived here since she was 17 – but neither of us had ever been here before. We saw so much potential. It’s a tourism icon that’s been here for 29 years, and over the past four years we’ve put so much work into reviving it and rebranding it to Amaze World. I went from working in an office to wearing King Gees and being a full-time gardener, construction manager and labourer. We needed to keep costs as low as possible because we went all in. We literally emptied piggy banks and maxed out every credit card to buy the place.
Robyn is a real people person. Every time she comes home she says, “I met the best people today.” I love the people, too, but my bigger passion is creating the product that people enjoy. Coming up with the ideas of how we can better the experience for our customers. I’m so emotionally invested in our Google reviews, it’s ridiculous. Every time I get a three star, I’m like, “Oh my God, what the hell just happened?” I want everything to be five stars.
It’s so nice to be here and soak up the energy. I love everyone having fun and the family connections we create. Our kids (Blake, eight, and Zara, seven) love being able to say they live in a maze, and bringing their friends here. It gets to the point we’ll have one of their friends over and they’ll say, “Can we go to the maze?” And we’re like, “Really? You want to go to the maze again?” Anywhere we go now, we go to any mazes nearby. We just got back from a Tassie holiday and while we were there, we couldn’t help but go to all the tourist attractions and mazes for inspiration. It’s nice to see how people do things from a customer relations perspective, as well as how they interact.
Like Robyn says, it feels like our whole life has led us to owning this park. All the little things that we’ve done in our life have all contributed to being able to run this place as we do.
Amaze World on the Sunshine Coast recently underwent a $1 million upgrade, adding a new augmented-reality experience that brings the maze to life with enchanting characters and challenges. A new interactive nature playground, and a new observation deck complement the existing hedge, rope, and timber mazes, and mini-golf course, with more attractions to come. amazeworld.com.au See 26 top theme parks at escape.com.au/themeparks
CREDIT: As told to Celeste Mitchell
Word count: 948
