The Graduate Nashville Nashville, Tennessee, USA
A hotel like this could only exist in Music City. Antoanela Safca checks in to fill her Dolly cup It’s impossible to step into the Graduate Nashville’s lobby and not feel your face involuntarily expand into a beaming smile. The place simply seems designed to spark joy.
The first thing I lay eyes on is the bubblegum-pink latch hook rug (massive at 2.4m x 4.5m). Depicting comedienne Minnie Pearl, a Nashville local who regularly performed at the Grand Ole Opry, Nashville’s signature concert hall, and on Hee Haw, the long-running country-loving TV variety show, the shaggy rug sits right behind the reception desk. Custom-designed and crafted by local artist Margaret Timbrell, it anchors me in this one-of-a-kind place of music and colour from the first moment.
The Graduate Nashville may have opened in January 2020 (arguably the worst time in recent history to open a hotel), but after having to shut doors for a few months and reopening in July 2020, it has stayed open (and quite busy) since. International tourists are still a newish thing here, but I have a feeling that when global travel is fully back on track, they’ll have to compete with the locals. The 205 rooms have been mostly occupied by Tennesseans who relish the flamboyant experience it offered.
And that experience is not at all accidental. The design tells a story centred on a female aspiring musician. The stadium seating in the lobby is symbolic of the many friends’ couches where she might crash on her way to making her music dreams come true. The hotel was built from the ground up near Vanderbilt University campus (all Graduate hotels are close to university campuses). The site previously housed a Taco Bell and a Checkers restaurant (paid tribute to in the Warhol-style paintings behind the display of couches). It’s about 2.5km from Downtown attractions such as the Johnny Cash Museum and the famous Ryman Auditorium.
The design team spent two years scouring local vintage shops, getting a good feel of the area, and all along building their design approach. And it shows. It’s a real thrill to discover stories in every detail: from the “Studying – do not disturb” door signs, to the sharpened pencils cladding the coffee bar, to the custom-made hallway rugs that tie the music and university themes together.
And speaking of stories, the hotel also has an app you can download once you receive your confirmation email, so you don’t miss any of the stories. It even has an augmented reality (AR) portion, which allows you to scan and learn, as if you were in a regular museum.
The downstairs high-ceilinged lobby also has plenty of sitting and charging stations, where you can prop your laptop and type away under the voile, candy floss-coloured chandeliers. Just another day at the office.
And all this before I even get to my room, where the story continues seamlessly. The country-chic flower print bed canopies gathered around a portrait of Dolly Parton, matched by ample curtains, are decidedly grandma-chic. I even get a set of letter-writing paper, because what else do you do when you’re in a place like this? Write home about it, that is what.
Each room has its own framed recipe from the southern classic, Recipes from Miss Daisy’s – mine is lemon meringue. And the oh-so-seriously-comfy beds remind me that my rest, like everything else in this hotel, is taken to heart.
I was rather tempted to spend my day marvelling at every single quirky design detail, but there was plenty more to do at the Graduate. For one, there is the rooftop bar. Nashville is full of them, but none quite like White Limozeen – named after one of Dolly’s albums. Pink and lush, with a heated outdoor pool, this place is gloriously fun and kitsch; you could people-watch all night and not get bored.
The Cross-Eyed Critters bar downstairs is the hotel’s music venue, complete with an animatronic band for back-up accompaniment. When I was there, the Tin Pan South Songwriters Festival was on, so I could enjoy some fresh talent without leaving the hotel, which I was inclined to do anyway.
On most days, there’s also a local maker, artist or purveyor of local goods set up in the lobby, bringing another piece of Nashville straight to you.
The Midtown location meant I could escape the noise and bustle of touristy Downtown, yet still be close enough to get there in a few minutes by cab, while still having access to plenty of excellent dining options within a short stroll.
This hotel was pure delight to immerse myself in. I loved the abundance of story, of thought, of clever connections in unexpected places. And I couldn’t find fault with all that unapologetic colour and energy that stamped the atmosphere in this hotel. A bit like the other unapologetic star it holds so dear.
Room rates are from $US269 ($385) plus taxes.
graduatehotels.com/nashville
Rooms 9/10 I loved the balance in the room between style – the details are endless – and comfort – the beds are heavenly. And I appreciated my handwritten welcome note.
Ambience 10/10 I don’t think there is a more personality-filled true-Nashville location to stay. The storytelling, the colour, the nods to local culture and the thoughtful chic design make it a joyous place to visit.
Entertainment 9/10 Between the downstairs space, White Limozeen, the Cross-Eyed Critters music venue, and the local artisans in the lobby, I almost didn’t have to leave the hotel to get a sense of the city.
Verdict 9/10 It’s hard to fault this place. If you’re heading to Nashville, there is no better location to soak up Music City. And if you’re not, I’d consider it if only to squeeze in a stay here.
CREDIT: Antoanela Safca
Word count: 973
