There are Easter markets, outdoor movies, a Lego exhibition and a host of live music. Or escape the city to enjoy the activities at the Kalbar Sunflower Festival or a new nature playground at Bellingham Maze on the Sunshine Coast. Whatever you choose there is lots of fun for the whole family.
FRIDAY
Country Flicks Treat the kids with Ron’s Gone Wrong (PG) and Encanto (PG) on the big screen these school holidays.
Details: $5, 10am & 1pm, Boonah Cultural Centre, High St, and The Centre Beaudesert, 82 Brisbane St.liveatthecentre.com.au
Moonlight Movie Bring picnic blankets and snacks, and sit under the stars to watch Peter Rabbit 2.
Details: free, 6.30pm-8.30pm, Minka Place Lawn, 20 Main Street, Ripley. ripleytowncentre.com.au
Music in the Arena Brass Roots Live will play hits from the 30s to the 80s. Bar and food trucks. Details: free, 6.30pm-8.30pm, Nissan Arena, 590 Mains Rd, Nathan. brisbane.qld.gov.au
SATURDAY
Discovery Walk Join a guided walk through the forest, learning about local plants and wildlife. Details: free, bookings via eventbrite, 10am-11.30am, Karawatha Forest Park and Discovery Centre, 149 Acacia Rd. brisbane.qld.gov.au Mega Easter Markets Join in the fun with handmade craft stalls, live music, food trucks, picnic areas, face painting, live music and much more.
Details: free, 9am-noon, Nicholas St Precinct, Ipswich. thehandmadeexpo.com.au Heritage Quarter open day Celebrate the precinct’s grand opening with beer tastings, BBQs, gelato, DJs, live music and more.
Details: free, 11am-10pm, Rivermakers Brisbane, 82 Colmslie Rd, Morningside. rivermakers.com.au Shout Out Fest An action-packed line-up of live music, skatepark jams, BMX displays, rock climbing, art activities, workshops, food trucks and more.
Details: free, 2pm-6pm, Tugun Skate Park, Boyd St. shoutoutfest.com.au Twilight Markets
Shop fashion, art, vintage, homewares, plants and more, while enjoying live music and great food. Pet friendly.
Details: free, 4pm-8pm, Gasworks Plaza, 76 Skyring Tce, Newstead. gasworksplaza.com.au SUNDAY
Easter crafts & games Celebrate with songs, games and storytelling at this interactive workshop. Details: $5, bookings 0411 246 487, 10am-noon, Dorrington Park, 5 Mirrabooka Rd, Ashgrove. brisbane.qld.gov.au
Easter Bunny Boogie South Brisbane Federal Band and the Rivercity Steel Band provide the soundtrack to an afternoon of fun, chocolate and food trucks.
Details: free, noon-3pm, New Farm Park, Brunswick St. brisbane.qld.gov.au
ALL WEEKEND
Bricktionary Based on Ryan McNaught’s book, this exhibition features more than 150 models, millions of Lego bricks and brand-new interactive challenges.
Details: from $16, until August 7, HOTA, 135 Bundall Rd, Surfers Paradise. hota.com.au
Supanova Gold Coast Fandom comes to life with a weekend of celebrities, cosplay, fan clubs, masterclasses, and competitions.
Details: from $37.50, 10am-5pm Saturday and Sunday, Gold Coast Convention & Exhibition Centre, 2960 Gold Coast Highway. supanova.com.au
Kalbar Sunflower Festival Features sunrise yoga in the sunflowers, children’s art classes, sunflower cooking classes and in the evening, a spectacular sunset dinner in the sunflowers.
Details: Fri-Mon, Kalbar. kalbarsunflowers.com.au
Brisbane Cycling Festival A festival and weekend of entertainment and events including Spokes n’ Jokes with gold medallist BMX rider Logan Martin, food trucks, and thousands will pedal through the city for the Tour De Brisbane.
Details: free, Fri-Sun, Brisbane Showgrounds, Gregory Tce, Bowen Hills. brisbanecyclingfestival.com
Meatstock Lee Kernaghan, Brad Cox, The Wolffe Brothers and Shane Nicholson headline this event, featuring bullriding, car shows, BBQs and more.
Details: from $58.60, April 8-9, Toowoomba Showgrounds, Glenvale Rd. meatstock.com.au
MoB holiday fun A host of creative activities for kids, as well as the new exhibition, Making Place: 100 Views of Brisbane.
Details: free, 10am-5pm, until April 18, Museum of Brisbane, Adelaide St. museumofbrisbane.com.au
Amaze World The revamped Bellingham Maze now includes an interactive nature playground, including water play, ropes and climbs, a new maze, a new augmented reality experience hedge, and 18-hole minigolf course.
Details: $27/$23, 10am-4pm daily, 274 Tanawha Tourist Drive, Sunshine Coast. amazeworld.com.au
Rattler’s Eggstravaganza Steam Man will join the Easter services and host egg hunts at Amamoor, with all children riding for half price all weekend.
Details: $65/17.50, bookings essential 5482 2750, until April 18, Tozer St, Gympie. maryvalleyrattler.com.au
Brisbane Ice-Cream Festival Indulge with sweet treats and creations from celebrity chefs. Details: free and ticketed, 10am-late, West Village, 97 Boundary St, West End. brisbaneicecreamfestival.com.au
Word count: 680
