South Australia's livestock industry is strengthening its biosecurity capacity with a new app & a new state-based plan.
The augmented reality app Sheep EAD AR is an educational tool for people in the livestock industry about disease signs, but it is not a diagnostic tool.
The technology was developed by South Australian company Think Digital.
SA Primary Industries Minister Clare Scriven said the app would teach people what symptoms looked like for varying diseases including foot-and-mouth disease (FMD) specifically for sheep.
"This tool enables them to actually have a bit of fun but also find out what sorts of symptoms to be looking for," Ms Scriven said.
"Biosecurity is a particular focus of this country at the moment with the concerns overseas about foot-and-mouth disease & lumpy skin disease."
SA's biosecurity plan
South Australia's first state-based industry-led biosecurity blueprint waslaunched at the Growing SA conference along with the new app.
Livestock SA president Joe Keynes said the plan had five priority areas: enhancing biosecurity culture, taking a unified approach, building capacity across the supply chain, preparedness & prevention, & strong & effective traceability.
"As we go about our duties [biosecurity] should be just part of the way of doing business," he said.
"We need to include & make sure that we have a unified approach to biosecurity practice across the whole supply chain.
"We need to understand that we've got to have people, we've got to have resources to support farmers doing their best biosecurity practices."
The biosecurity blueprint was developed following the inaugural Livestock Biosecurity Summit earlier this year.
Industry representatives from across the state's supply chain contributed.
Its aim is to make biosecurity more streamlined & to determine where resources & investment are most needed.
Finding ways to reduce risk
With the increased risk of foot-and-mouth disease & lumpy skin disease following outbreaks in Indonesia, Mr Keynes said the industry was focusing primarily on prevention & preparedness.
He said they had been testing different scenarios with the primary industries department & Biosecurity SA.
"All of the pillars are equally important if we're going to have really good biosecurity practice & keep our market access," he said.
Livestock SA is aiming to hire a second biosecurity officer to implement the biosecurity blueprint.
Biosecurity Act under review
The South Australian government is currently updating the Biosecurity Act.
Work had started under the previous Liberal Marshall government, but it is being reviewed.
Ms Scriven said the government aimed to release the draft bill by the end of the year for public consultation.
"It's important that if we have a new Biosecurity Act that it is usable & effective for everyone," she said.
Word count: 441
