Tumby Bay's streets will come alive with light and digital art as Illuminate Adelaide will display its installations and projections across the town from Friday evening.
Illuminate Adelaide has worked with the Tumby Bay Progress Association and Tumby Bay District Council, with support from the South Australian Tourism Commission, to bring 'Big Picture Series x Colour Tumby' to the town between August 13 and 21.
Displays will include augmented reality sculptures by artists Dave Court, Tom Borgas and Zoe Kirkwood which can be viewed through your phone, Vans the Omega's piece 'Light Beyond the Window Breaks' and Carla O'Brien's neon displays 'Neon Dog Park' and 'I Am Here'.
Several of murals from the Colour Tumby Street Art Festival will also be illuminated, encouraging people to walk through the streets of Tumby Bay and view them again in a new light.
Illuminate Adelaide creative director Lee Cumberlidge said this event was about lighting up Tumby Bay in the winter and providing a chance for people to explore the town at night time.
He said the program was tailored for each region and complimented what had been done previously with Colour Tumby.
"We're really excited to come to Tumby Bay, it's a great town and expand the Big Picture series," he said.
"We were really blown away when we visited Tumby Bay, there's a level of energy and work that goes into Colour Tumby from members of the community who had been driving that," he said.
Music, food and entertainment will be provided at two hubs set up within the town, the Illuminate Hub will be behind the Tumby Bay Hotel with bar facilities and fire pits on August 14 and 21 while adjacent to the council office on West Terrace/Mortlock Street is 'Family Fun @ The Square', open on August 21 with music, face painting, food and bouncy castle.
Progress association president Dion Lebrun said the Illuminate Adelaide event coming to Tumby Bay was a "huge win" not just for Tumby Bay, but for all Eyre Peninsula.
"It's another free family event run over 10 nights that anyone across Eyre Peninsula can come and check out something so cutting edge," he said.
Tumby Bay mayor Sam Telfer said he was excited to see this new event come to the Tumby Bay community.
"It's exciting to be able to have Illuminate Adelaide for a week and a half and have a level of exposure that's not normally available in regional areas, bringing people from all over to take time and enjoy the spectacle," he said.
Installations are best seen between 6-9pm. Further information, a map of all installations and the app to view the augmented reality sculptures is available on the Illuminate Adelaide website.
Want to have the biggest headlines sent your way each week? Sign up today for the weekly Port Lincoln Times newsletter here.
CREDIT: Jarrad Delaney
Word count: 477
