ADELAIDE creative and media agency Impressive ­Advertising has been creating lasting impressions for almost a quarter of a century.
The business has been telling clients’ stories across a range of formats – from newspapers and magazines to television, radio and online – since it was established in 1997.
Presently making substantial developments in its ­Impressive Video Production division, including the establishment of a new creative space, the Halifax St-based business is well placed to take its visual arm to new heights.
“There has never been more demand for content and ­Impressive Video Production are pushing the boundaries and taking things to the next level,” managing director ­Trevor Worley says.
“We identified the need many years ago and have been developing video creations and products to make every video an informative, engaging ­experience. We are out there telling the stories of a wide range of businesses to assist in their growth.” Mr Worley says Impressive Video Production aims to ­explore and tell the “real story” behind a business – looking at aspects such as how it started, what it stands for, services provided, products it represents and so on.
“Impressive Video Production is all about telling everyone’s story and sharing that with as many people as possible in an informative and engaging way,” he says.
“A lot of time sales people will tell some of the story, but a well produced video about the business will tell the whole story and cover all of the ser­vices on offer.” Videos are formatted in a way so they can be ready to share on all platforms – from television and the web to YouTube and LinkedIn. Impressive Video Production has the tools necessary to “make the videos pop” – including 360 degree cameras, drone and Livestream technology.
“Editing is also a vital element in all of this as we can always capture great video but the magic happens when we bring it all together in the edit suite to create a unique and individual experience for every client,” Mr Worley says.
OODLS OF POTENTIAL The Impressive Video Production team also decided to go further than simply creating “one dimensional video content” – and subsequently ­established its augmented ­reality experience, oodl.
“We wanted to push further areas to view the video content, so we started creating augmented reality experiences for our videos – building them into the hard copy world, business cards, brochures, publications, artwork and so on,” Mr Worley says.
The AR platform was cre­ated in Adelaide and developed in the Silicon Valley, Barcelona and Melbourne over a six-year period.
“Using oodl, brands can share a more interactive user experience with their audiences,” Mr Worley says.
“When people hold their smartphone or tablet over an oodl-enabled image, it triggers off a video, audio or animated experience and then directs people through a button to a selected URL to find out more about the business or artist.” Oodl offers potential to ­unlock and enhance experiences in everyday life, he says.
“We have been building oodl experiences into street art around the world so that we can tell the artist’s story by pulling video content from the art mural,” he says. “So now we can tell the story of the anonymous artists who should be celebrated for their brilliant pieces of art.” And he’d be keen to see the technology embraced locally.
“I would love Adelaide to be the first in the world to bring every wall mural in the city to life,” Mr Worley says.
“Can you imagine how great it would be to see a video of the artist creating their work and hearing their story and the inspiration behind the painting as you walk around the city? “It would fit Adelaide’s goal of becoming the vibrant, smart city that we are all aiming for as proud South Aussies.”
CREDIT: DAVID GOLDSMITH
Word count: 640
