Gabrielle Duykers, Naracoorte Community News
A unique piece of artwork showcasing the natural features of Kingston has been crowned the best mural in the nation.
Commissioned by Kingston District Council in the wake of the Keilira Bushfire, ‘Wind Dance’ received the Gold Award for the Best External Mural at the 2021 Australian Street Art Awards announced last week. 
In a collective statement, the judges said the mural was vibrant, creative and would entice visitors to explore more of the region. 
“The fact that this mural captures the personality of Kingston with themes that acknowledge nature, Aboriginal culture and coastal lifestyle is a winning combination,” the judges said.
The mural, painted by artist Sarah Boese, is also South Australia’s first augmented reality public artwork.
Using a QR code, visitors can download a free app called EyeJack on their device and see the mural transformed into an animation, with sound effects and a digital layer projected onto the real artwork.
The judges said they were captivated by the “imaginative” technological element which brought marine creatures and “fun of the beach” to life.
“As the first mural to be painted in Kingston our minds boggle as to how the town can possibly trump this fantastic blend of innovative technology and stunning visual artistry,” they said.
“We can hardly wait to see what this community creates next.”
The Australian Street Art Awards are judged by tourism leaders across the country and aim to encourage people to explore the public art on offer.  
Wind Dance nudged out Silver Award winner ‘2 Kool 4 Skool’ – a mural in Lightning Ridge, NSW – of six emus painted by renowned artist John Murray with the help of the opal mining town’s children.
Kingston District Council CEO Nat Traeger said the mural was commissioned in an effort to develop the area’s experiences, and arts and culture brand.
“The project capitalises on the growth of both art tourism and the world of augmented reality,” Ms Traeger said.
“The static mural is fantastic, but the added dimension of movement and sound is immersive and quite spectacular.”
Ms Traeger said council creating digital experiences like the interactive mural would bring more tourists to Kingston, in turn providing some much-needed support for local businesses.
“As the community continues to recover from bushfires and impacts of COVID-19, significant projects like ‘Wind Dance’ encourage community pride, generate conversation, support participation and wellbeing through new art pieces,” she said.
This article appeared in Naracoorte Community News.
Word count: 412
