Kingston District Council have received the 2021 Local Government Annual Leadership Excellence Award's Excellence in Disaster Recovery/Emergency Response Management award.
The gala dinner was held at the Adelaide Convention Centre last Saturday, with council's Keilira Local Recovery Team recognised for its response following the disastrous bushfire in the area in late 2019.
Council's submission, titled 'Keilira: The Forgotten Fire', touched on the devastation that hit the area during what was a dark and emotional time for many property owners.
"The Keilira bushfire, which ravaged 25,000Ha of pasture in the Kingston District Council in late 2019, was the largest natural disaster in the Limestone Coast since Ash Wednesday in 1983," council said.
While the event wasn't the only major disaster during South Australia's 2019/20 fire season, it was the only major blaze not to be afforded a state recovery officer.
Despite not receiving the resources seen at other state fires during that time, council took it upon themselves to galvanise its own tiny action team.
Council flexed its political muscle and campaigned long and hard to ensure the many devastated property owners were afforded the same level of recognition and funding support as those in other impacted areas.
After significant lobbying, Keilira was declared a 'disaster area' by the State Government, becoming eligible for bushfire recovery grants.
Funding that was since been secured by council have helped the people directly affected by the blaze, along with going towards projects to help revitalise the area.
"Council secured $400,000 of funding for individual property owners along with innovative well-being, community, and tourism initiatives," council said.
"Just 12 months after the fire, using tourism bushfire recovery funds, ashes have been turned into art with the delivery of SA's first augmented reality public artwork."
Council said the tourism project has not only a lasting and poignant recognition of the forgotten fire, it has created incredible economic reward.
The public artwork has increased visitation, which has generated tourism dollars for a community which so warmly wrapped its arms around its own to support the council's highly recognised local led recovery.
Following the announcement of last Saturday's success at the Adelaide-based gala dinner, council said it was so proud to represent the community on the big stage.
The award is described as one of the highest accolades for the local government sector in South Australia.
CREDIT: Taylor Harvey
Word count: 391
