Welcome to your local library. This is not some utopia of the future, this is happening right now in cities around the world. Libraries have been reborn as beacons of progressive architecture and new experiences due to the evolution in the way we work, learn and live and a desire by communities to make their mark. They are the new cathedrals, new museums, new place-makers.
“Twenty years ago, museums were the centrepieces of cities, with these huge buildings like the Guggenheim Bilbao in Spain,” says Dirk Nijdam, director of the Forum Groningen, an extraordinary example of one of these new libraries in the northern part of the Netherlands. “Now there is a second wave, and it is not museums anymore – the library is now the focal point of the city. The library is the living heart of the city, so we open 365 days a year and every day from 9am until midnight. We also hold parties that often go to 4am, so we actually open all the time.”
So when did libraries go from places stuffed with dusty books where silence was the norm and you didn’t dare talk, eat or drink for being told off, to places where you want to spend all day and even nights? A place that not only attracts locals but people from around the world?
WISH tracked down library experts and architects from all over – including Francine Houben, known as the “library whisperer”, who has designed stunning new-age libraries in New York, Washington, England, the Netherlands and Taiwan – to find out what has driven this phenomenon.
But let’s start closer to home, at the new Marrickville Library and Pavilion in Sydney’s inner west. The building, designed by BVN, took 10 years to complete, has won all the major architecture awards, and even made the shortlist for the best new public library in the world. It has turned the traditional library experience on its head and my visits there are what sparked the idea for this story.
There is a café in one corner, so you can eat and drink to your heart’s content while in the library AND reading books (this alone makes my head explode in a very good way). The building is centred around a huge space and staircase/seating area that is full of hip freelancers on their laptops working or conducting Zoom calls or presentations, and the lucky few just sitting and reading.
At the other end of the library, there is a dedicated children’s wing that extends out into a playground where kids run freely around, making too much noise, while parents seek a few minutes of respite, coffee and adult conversation in the sun. In an adjacent wing, there are retirees discussing books and reading the paper over pots of tea, and students chat on the floor above.
It is so far removed from my experience of a library while growing up (which involved repeatedly being told off for talking), and it also manages to attract far more people from every demographic of the community to the same space, albeit all doing different things: working, playing, studying, or just being.
“That whole thing about how you weren’t allowed to eat or drink or bring in a post-it note to the library made sense in the beginning – you’re talking the 1920s, when a book cost the equivalent of a week’s wages, so they were very precious items,” explains Sue McKerracher, CEO of the Australian Library and Information Association. “But now – and librarians will hate me for saying this – books are a fairly disposable item, at $30 a book. So now it is not the book you are worried about, it is the people’s experience, whether they are having a good time and will come back.”
McKerracher, who is based in Canberra, says this shift from libraries being about books to being a service for the community was accelerated by the advent of computers and the internet.
“The evolution of libraries really did start because of the digital transformation,” she explains to WISH. “In about 1995, prior to that, the printed book was the major thing and the way we measured success was how many books were borrowed from the library. When we started having computers coming into the library in the late 1990s, a different audience was coming in. We were getting people who were interested in this technology and wanted to learn about it.
“So suddenly the library was a place for tech as well as books, and then we saw people pulling bits of furniture together so they could meet and we thought: why don’t we actually provide that?”
At about the same time, on the other side of the world, architect Francine Houben had just been hired to design a new library for Delft University of Technology. Delft is a small town sandwiched between The Hague and Rotterdam in the Netherlands, and it is where Houben studied and co-founded the architecture firm Mecanoo. “Our client, the chief librarian, told us he wanted something that could accommodate change because he believed there would be big changes in libraries coming,” Houben recalls. This change was based around the introduction of computers, technology and the internet, and he also wanted to create a building that was welcoming for all.
“It’s about people, knowledge, and learning and development,” she explains. “But also because our economy is changing and we have a big population of workers who are freelance. They work in a completely different way than they did a few decades ago going to an office. At the Delft library, you can not only work there, you could put the address of the library on your business card.
“This is also inspirational, because you meet other people at the library who can be your colleagues, or you can collaborate with or even become a client. It is much better if people go out into society rather than working alone at home.”
Houben and her team designed an extraordinary glass and steel structure with a cone at its heart. There is an underground book archive at this 15,000sq m library, and scores of desks and space for computers to work at. They put a café in the library (one of the first in the world to do so), and made the display of books into something akin to art. It opened in 1998, took out several awards and set Houben on a path of designing libraries across the world.
“There has been a long tradition of making libraries very proud buildings, but they are intimidating buildings a result,” she says. “They used to believe libraries were just for the intellectuals but now libraries are for all, and I think that was a very important change in the way we design them.”
This new ethos – described by experts as “from collection to connection” – was also picking up pace in England, with Tony Blair declaring that libraries should be transformed into a “People’s Network” where members of the community could learn to navigate new technology like the internet.
“Just as in the past books were a chance for ordinary people to better themselves, in the future online education will be a route to better prospects,” Blair said in 1996. “But just as books are available from public libraries, the benefits of the superhighway must be there for everyone.”
This led to more libraries being built on high streets amid retail environments so they could be more accessible – and attractive – to all members of the community, not just those who were studying. In 2006, the City of Birmingham decided to make a new library the centrepiece of its revitalisation plan and after an international design competition, Houben and Mecanoo won the project.
It took six years and £188.8 million to complete and it became the biggest library in Europe. Houben designed the building with a sunken amphitheatre, rooftop gardens, and a shimmering façade with interlocking rings inspired by the city’s nearby jewellery quarter. It was opened in 2013 (by none other than activist Malala Yousafzai) and in 2014 attracted more than 2.4 million visitors.
“I remember being in Birmingham just after the opening of the library and seeing everyone sitting there, reading or studying, working or talking,” Houben tells WISH. “Birmingham is a very multicultural city and just to see all these people sitting together at the library very harmoniously, for me it was a very emotional moment; it made me very happy that it had actually worked. I had always said the library should be a people’s palace and it really became a people’s palace.”
When Houben and her team were still deep into the design process of the Birmingham library, Australian architect Bill Dowzer was a few hundred miles south in London attending an architecture conference on workplaces held at The British Library. With the firm BVN, he had been designing the next generation of big corporate offices that went beyond traditional cubicles and meeting rooms.
“The head of The British Library was talking about how 2000 people come here to work every day,” Dowzer recalls of the conference 20 years ago. “That was the first time I had heard a library was becoming a place for people to work, and it stuck with me. We had been doing a lot of design work around empowering people to move around and work in a place in the office that suits them best. Looking back, that was almost the stem of the idea behind Marrickville Library. That idea of co-working, that bringing cafés and coffee into the workplace, and doing all the things that enable people to come together, share space, form relationships and collaborate.”
Dowzer and his colleagues did their first public library for Woollahra Council in Double Bay in 2016; they relocated the existing unloved library from a historic building in Redleaf to the middle of a retail strip to make it more accessible to the community. They created a building with a series of voids in the middle that showcased lush hanging gardens. It was a hit among locals and especially young people, who ditched the nearby Bondi Junction shopping centre to hang out there with their friends.
“It was the first building that we had ever done where we were getting all these Instagram posts,” laughs Dowzer. “The kids doing it didn’t care about who designed it, they were just writing about the experience of it, and it showed they were getting a real joy out of the place. It made us realise the importance of place-making for councils and community hubs that bring people together.”
At the same time as finishing this project, BVN had also successfully won the design competition to build a new library for Marrickville on an old hospital site that was being turned into apartments by developer Mirvac. Their plans for the site was inspired by places where people liked to spend time.
“We thought, what if the library became a marketplace for people?” Dozer explains. “The zig-zag of the roof was inspired by the markets in Barcelona. We looked at a few of the big market halls where people like being, even like South Melbourne markets and Queen Victoria markets. And they all have a big roof that links everything together and creates an open environment that you can reconfigure.”
That open space is surrounded by other floors and balconies where individuals can work, read, chat, or even people watch. “The idea of the balconies is you can sit in the space and watch out over everyone else, whether it be outside or in the middle of the building, and there is life,” he adds. “You have the feeling that you belong, it’s yours and you can do whatever you want in there.”
That feeling of belonging is also key to the extraordinary new library, theatre and cultural centre in the tiny town of Groningen in the Netherlands. Despite only having a population of just over 230,000 people, the city built a €100 million new library smack bang in the historical centre. It took decades and overcame significant opposition, but the town is reaping the rewards. In the first three months after it opened in 2019, there were 1.5 million visitors. Now, despite Covid-19 restrictions on density remaining, the Forum Groningen attracts 55,000 people a week. That’s almost a quarter of the town.
“People come from abroad – we see their backpacks – as well as the locals,” Nijdam tells WISH over Zoom. “But the borrowing of books has also increased and we also see a lot of young people coming to the library. I think it is because we don’t have a lot of rules like the old libraries.”
Forum Groningen not only has a library, it has a museum, theatres, virtual reality studios, 3D printing laboratories, co-working spaces, a café, bars, a rooftop with spectacular city views, and event spaces.
“We said that the main focus should be pleasure, not education. Education is very important, but if you make the building about education then half the population is not interested,” Nijdam explains, laughing. “So this is all about pleasure and it is about stealth learning. You come in and you can have a coffee, you can play games, you can have a drink, you can go to the rooftop and enjoy the view. And that is all free. And while you are here, we try and inspire you to do something extra.”
Nijdam says the Forum came about as a way to revitalise the city, but they wanted more than just a beautiful architectural icon, they wanted to create a new concept of what a library was.
“We wanted to make it a human place, where you feel comfortable and warm and you feel part of it,” he explains. “We wanted to make it more like a third space, a place for people that is not their home or their office. I think that is the future of the library. You still have books in the library – we have 100,000 – but it is not really the backbone of the institution anymore.
“With the digitisation of society, we help people with augmented reality and virtual reality and other skills for business. We are not just a governmental educational building anymore. That has changed in a lot of countries in the western world and that is the way that new libraries should be.”
According to McKerracher, Australia is one of those places that has successfully transformed its libraries. “We are one of the world leaders, along with the Scandinavian countries,” she tells WISH. “We are really up there with the best.” Examples can be seen in every state, from the City of Perth library to the Geelong Regional Library and Heritage Centre in Victoria to incredible local libraries in towns such as Ipswich in Queensland and the Salisbury Community Hub Library in South Australia.
“Local councils have really picked up on the library as being a symbol for the ambition of their town and city, so it becomes this really strong physical icon,” McKerracher adds.
The City of Sydney also has some spectacular examples, with an underground library at Green Square and a Kengo Kuma-designed library at Darling Square that has been likened to a birds nest. Lord Mayor Clover Moore has spent millions creating these libraries of the future. “Libraries are no longer simply quiet spaces to house and read books,” she says. “They are inspirational places, and are increasingly being recognised for their role as community anchors that can act as a focal point within emerging communities, bringing new and existing residents together.”
Houben, who has just finished a $US200 million renovation of two branches of the famed New York Public Library as well as the Martin Luther King Jnr Memorial Library in Washington DC, believes libraries are vital. “There are no other public buildings that are more important than libraries,” she says. “Ten years ago I said that libraries are the new cathedrals of this time because people come together and they are for all people. I still believe that. Libraries are an important icon of the city.”
Back where we started at Marrickville Library and Pavilion, I couldn’t agree more. It is a rare place where every person of any age or demographic is welcome to do what they want (children play, people work, friends chat, teenagers hang out), all in the same spot and all free of charge. You also want to visit week after week because of the stunning building and the great atmosphere.
“Libraries have become place-makers for an area,” explains Dowzer. “They have to be architecturally interesting and bring you joy. They have to be evocative. You come back because you feel comfortable there, but also because it gives you pleasure and you go ‘oh wow’, this is amazing.”
Word count: 2775
