ILLUMINATE ADELAIDE Adelaide is poised to welcome a unique new winter festival next month, and its creative directors can’t wait to shine a torch on all the city has to offer, writes Patrick McDonald Illumination meets innovation in the latest addition to South Australia’s ever-growing festival roster – but switching on the state’s biggest light show is just the start.
Technology, music, art, live performance and bold new ideas will all help to activate the city’s streets, squares, parks and venues as part of Illuminate Adelaide from July 16 to August 1.
Co-founders and creative directors Lee Cumberlidge and Rachael Azzopardi (pictured below) conceived Illuminate to bring artists and innovators from around the world together with technical teams and cultural partners in Adelaide – pandemics notwithstanding.
“It’s a really different experience for South Australians at a different time of the year, coming out and embracing the cold,” Azzopardi says.
The Illuminate program will feature 150 installations, performances and events – including 41 world premieres – at various CBD sites.
It will also envelop a reinvigorated Festival of Ideas, in partnership with the University of Adelaide, as well as the new KINARA line-up of Indigenous artists at Tandanya, and include MAAD – a program of Music & Art After Dark.
“It’s not just about a light festival in winter – it’s about focusing on how technology generally intersects with various art forms,” Cumberlidge says.
Illuminate will also enable people to go behind the scenes of Adelaide’s creative industries, including internationally acclaimed animation and visual effects companies.
“We’re working with Monkeystack, we’re working with Rising Sun Pictures. It’s been really exciting for them, too, working in a slightly different mode to normal,” Cumberlidge says.
“It’s also about exploring the city as you do that – we’re working with all of the cultural institutions, various galleries and all kinds of other public spaces to transform the city.” Azzopardi says many of the festival’s works are “experiential” rather than simply visual. “A lot of the installations or big productions in the gardens or the zoo, or the Van Gogh Alive show, are really about immersing yourself in the work and experiencing it,” she says.
In Light Cycles at the Botanic Garden, Canadian multimedia studio Moment Factory – which has created stage shows for acts from Madonna to Ed Sheeran and Billie Eilish – will use light, sound and special effects to amplify the voice of the natural world along a 2km trail.
Dance music duo The Avalanches – alias Robbie Chater and Tony Di Blasi – will be the inaugural Luminary Artists in Residence, marking the 20th anniversary of their debut album Since I Left You by performing new arrangements of its songs live with the Adelaide Symphony Orchestra, as well as curating a talk, exhibition and DJ set.
The life and legacy of one of history’s most recognised artists, Vincent van Gogh, will come leaping off the canvas in Van Gogh Alive – The Experience, a multi-sensory, multi-screen tribute created by Australian company Grande Experiences that has toured around the world.
Artists and studios will also create more than 40 site-specific works including kaleidoscopic projections, immersive inflatable installations, augmented reality and interactive exhibits for City Lights, which will transform three city precincts into nocturnal playgrounds.
“It’s very different to the other events and festivals on the South Australian calendar and, we think, nationally as well,” Cumberlidge says. Full program details and tickets at illuminateadelaide.com
CREDIT: Patrick McDonald
Word count: 575
