MOUTHING OFF (1) Laughter is the best medicine: A mechanic noticed his workmate drinking brake fluid at lunch. “What are you doing, man? You can’t drink that stuff!” His workmate replied: “Relax, this stuff tastes pretty good and I don’t drink it all the time.” The mechanic exclaimed: “Seriously, brake fluid is poison!” His workmate yelled: “Hey, man, back off! I can stop any time I want.” (2) From the Alternative Laws of Golf: “Your best round will be followed almost immediately by your worst round ever. The probability of the latter increases with the number of people you tell about the former.” (3) Practical wisdom: Always keep several “get well” cards displayed on a shelf. If unexpected guests arrive, they’ll think you’ve been sick and unable to clean.
(4) Caught in the fact: Cats can’t taste sugar.
(5) Back in the day: Christmas displays in Rundle St department store windows. INSIGHT “I wish I wanted abs as much as I want fries.” – T-shirt message. QUOTE, UNQUOTE “Life consists not in holding good cards but in playing those you hold well.” – US humorist Josh Billings.
KEEPING COUNT 8985 – the number of confirmed cases of Covid-19 in Senegal to July 22, 2020. (On the same day, confirmed cases in Australia reached 12,444 and worldwide, 14,898,145.) JUST A THOUGHT Love: two vowels, two consonants, two fools.
REMEMBER WHEN Today is July 22, Pi Approximation Day and the 203rd day of the year. There are 162 days remaining until the end of the year. On this day: 1938: Actor Terence Stamp, who thought he could have played James Bond, was born in London.
1949: From the Handy to Know column in The Whyalla News: “Next time you are making pastry, try adding a few drops of lemon juice and about the same amount of olive oil to the cold mixing water. It makes the pastry delightfully light.” 1954: Forty homing pigeons were found dead in and near a pigeon loft in Cooper Place, Hazelwood Park. Mr M. Marchant, owner of the birds, said he believed they had been attacked by a dog.
1956: The Reverend J. Doehler, president of the United Evangelical Lutheran Church, dedicated a new church hall at Myponga.
1959: The Australian Women’s Weekly published a pin-up picture of Elvis Presley: “Elvis is expected to have a dazzling comeback when he completes his army service in Germany next March and returns to show business. The question is – with so many new stars at the top, will Elvis be able to hold his crown as King of Rock?” 1966: Radio station 5AD listed Tar And Cement, by US singer Verdelle Smith, as Adelaide’s No.1 hit single.
1994: Adelaide-born singer-songwriter Paul Kelly performed at Norwood Concert Hall.
1996: Sir Eric Neal was sworn in as South Australia’s 32nd governor. 1996: Keith Martyn presented the weather on Channel 9 in Adelaide for the first time.
2013: Prince George of Cambridge, third in the line of succession to the British throne, was born at St Mary’s Hospital in London.
2016: Augmented reality mobile game Pokemon Go was released in Japan. 2019: Australian comedian Scott Dooley tweeted: “Financial advice from newspapers: Well, first off you’re going to need very rich parents.”
CREDIT: WITH MARTY SMITH
Word count: 544
