Whether you’re visiting or taking a staycation, our cities have plenty to make them sizzle again, writes Melinda Browning The Covid clear-out saw city centres become ghost towns as commuters switched to working from home. But Australia’s biggest metropolises are bouncing back to life. Bands are touring, festivals are firing up and bars are back in business. Add to that a revitalised hotel scene with new openings and enticing deals, and summer in the city is looking hotter than ever.
1 BEACH ZONES Exclusive beach clubs are the hottest ticket in town. In Adelaide, The Moseley Beach Club’s latest incarnation at Glenelg Foreshore takes inspiration from the Amalfi Coast, while Port Melbourne’s Exchange Beach Club welcomes humans and dogs alike. In Sydney, Watsons Bay Boutique Hotel features a beach club takeover by Don Julio Tequila, while Pier One Sydney Harbour has launched The Pier Club, a private pontoon with water views and beach-club vibes minus the sand. Its balcony suites are also being transformed into Luxe Picnic Suites for an unforgettable outdoor picnic experience.
If you can’t decide between the beach and the tennis, the Australian Open brings sand, water and beach tennis to Melbourne Park’s new Beach House precinct. Fans can pull up a deckchair to watch the action, book a cabana and sip on summery cocktails, or join meditation and yoga sessions.
2 FLOAT YOUR BOAT Where better to cool off than on the water? Electric picnic boat hire company GoBoat – already operating in Canberra, Melbourne and Brisbane – has launched at Cabarita Point in Sydney. This summer it also launches GoBoat Luxe in Canberra – an upsized, skippered boat that delivers guests to waterfront pop-up Armada Bar.
On Sydney Harbour, meanwhile, the summer program for bar-on-a-boat Glass Island features Sneaky Sound System’s Sneaky Sundays.
In Brisbane, the world’s first superyacht entertainment venue, Yot Club, welcomes partygoers as it plies the Brisbane River in February.
Prefer fast to fancy? Try jet-boating across Darwin Harbour with Outback Wrangler Matt Wright’s new Darwin Adventure Boats tour.
3 TWILIGHT TUNES Whether spent at the zoo, a park or a landmark building, long summer evenings make the perfect setting for inspiring performances. The Live at the Bowl series returns to Melbourne’s Sidney Myer Music Bowl, with a line-up that includes international artists London Grammar.
In Sydney, the Twilight at Taronga series’ all-Aussie line-up includes Daryl Braithwaite and indie pop band San Cisco.
Candlelight concerts are taking over grand locations in Brisbane, Sydney, Adelaide, Perth and Melbourne. Highlights include classical tributes to Coldplay, Queen, Daft Punk and Taylor Swift at venues such as Brisbane’s St John’s Cathedral and Melbourne’s Athenaeum Theatre.
4 FESTIVAL FLAIR The new year starts with a flurry of art and culture festivals. Sydney’s new Elevate Sydney transforms the Cahill Expressway into a huge stage overlooking the harbour, featuring Aussie artists daily until January 6. The rest of the month is filled with Sydney Festival’s performances, installations and exhibitions in theatres, parks, streets – even under water at the harbourside Andrew (Boy) Charlton Pool.
The southern hemisphere’s biggest festival, Adelaide Fringe, has a thousand events over 31 days from February 18, including the world premiere of Sky Song when hundreds of drones will fly in formation, narrated by Archie Roach.
In Hobart, Mona Foma (January 28-31) promises music, art and “probable sunshine”, while this year’s ocean-themed Perth Festival launches on February 11 with a two-night spectacular transforming Fremantle quays, warehouses and the beachfront with music, light installations, performances, food and dance.
5 CRICKET CRAZY The Ashes is settled after only three tests, but the colour and excitement of the Big Bash League make it a family favourite, with matches in all capitals. For the ultimate cricket high, consider the new Rooftop Hot Seats at Optus Stadium in Perth or Adelaide Oval’s Roofclimb Match Experience, where you can watch the action from 50m above. If too much cricket is never enough, there’s Batters Cricket Club – a pop-up bar with cricket simulator coming to Melbourne and Sydney this month.
6 SCREEN TIME Outdoor films have long been a favourite summer pastime, but this summer, cinema gets even splashier as Australia’s first surf park, Urbnsurf Melbourne, launches its first outdoor movie series. For spectacular screen settings, it’s hard to go past Westpac OpenAir cinema on Sydney Harbour. Billed as the world’s most beautiful cinema, it’s surrounded by scenery as compelling as the film itself.
Other options include Barefoot Cinema around Melbourne; Moonlight Cinema in Melbourne, Sydney, Brisbane, Adelaide and Perth parks, and open-air rooftop cinemas at Hobart’s State Cinema and Melbourne’s Lido Cinemas.
7 ROOFTOP DRINKS Nothing says summer in the city like rooftop refreshments, and this season a slew of openings makes venturing upstairs even more enticing. For cocktails with a side of culture, Perth’s new AGWA Rooftop features a bar, local DJs, an open-air sculpture park and spectacular city views.
In Melbourne, newly opened Fable, perched 13 storeys above Lonsdale Street, claims the title of the city’s highest rooftop bar, while Runner Up has opened at Collingwood Yards. Adelaide’s highest rooftop bar, Merrymaker, is celebrating its first summer, as is Brisbane’s Iris, billed as the city’s most luxurious rooftop bar.
Sydney’s post-lockdown rooftop openings include the sleek open-air Sky Bar at the Shell House Clocktower, Marrickville Springs above the inner west’s Philter Brewing, and Lady Banks at Bankstown, with views to the Blue Mountains.
8 PARK POWER Social distancing has seen the popularity of city green spaces skyrocket – and this summer brings even more reasons to party in the park. This month, Nature Illuminated lights up Sydney’s Chinese Garden of Friendship, where live music and themed cocktails complement an augmented-reality treasure hunt, while Erth’s Prehistoric Picnic brings ultra-realistic dinosaurs to Sydney’s Royal Botanic Garden (January 15-30).
Melbourne’s Royal Botanic Gardens is hosting forest-therapy wellness sessions, while the summer sessions at Adelaide Botanic Garden’s Schomburgk Pavilion feature botanically inspired cocktails and live music.
Music festivals include the King Street Carnival in Sydney’s Newtown (January 14-16), SummerSalt at Hobart’s Royal Botanic Gardens on February 6 and Canberra’s Commonwealth Park on February 26, and the St Kilda Festival on the foreshore (February 5-13).
9 GET YOUR PRIDE ON It’s a huge season for LGBTQIA+ festivities, with Australia’s first touring pride festival, Summer Camp, welcoming international headliners (British electropop artist Years & Years and US rapper Big Freedia) to Darwin, Sydney, Melbourne and Perth in February and March.
Melbourne’s Midsumma Festival kicks off on January 23 and culminates in Melbourne Pride, a free street party on February 13 in Fitzroy/Collingwood. Sydney’s Mardi Gras launches in February ahead of the parade at the SCG on March 5.
10 FAMILY FUN Selfie-tastic activities are taking over city venues, attracting the young and young at heart.
In Melbourne, Happy Place, a massive pop-up experience offering colourful installations such as ball pits and giant confetti, is on now at Crown, Jurassic World by Brickman is on at the Melbourne Convention and Exhibition Centre, and Pond(er) is an artificial pink lake at the NGV.
In Adelaide, the recently opened Shanx at Regency Park offers a new spin on mini-golf – it’s an actual golf course, but on a smaller scale.
Wonderdome, a pop-up cinema at Sydney’s Entertainment Quarter, features immersive 360-degree films at a scale never before seen in Australia, while Imaginaria – billed as an immersive play experience from the future – is on at Brisbane’s South Bank and Melbourne’s Docklands.
Scan the code to find more great places to eat and stay in our cities.
CREDIT: Melinda Browning
Word count: 1254
