Our cities have been hit hard right where it hurts - in their CBDs. But as this guide shows, our capital centres still have much to offer a traveller. By Max Anderson, Andrew Bain, Andrea Black, Anthony Dennis, Ben Groundwater, Jane Richards and Craig Tansley
It's time to put the must-see back into our CBDs. Of all of the pandemic's tourism casualties, it's our city centres that have suffered the most.
As lockdowns took hold and we all hunkered down in the burbs, our cities shed their bustle. Footpaths emptied, cafes quietened, and worse, major attractions mostly shut their doors.
But in between ongoing outbreaks, some of us have detected signs of life. Flash hotels have opened in their dozens, albeit without the expected flood of foreign tourists they were hoping to serve; brilliant bars and restaurants have popped up, and world-class attractions are pulling in crowds again after using the health-induced hiatus to refine their offerings.
Happily, our city centres are invariably set in captivating locations, hugging rivers or lining harbours, surrounded by parklands and gardens. Now's the time to be capital intensive and make our CBDs your business with the help of this guide to cities across the land compiled by Traveller correspondents.
MELBOURNETHE CBD
Much pandemic-induced gloom and doom surrounds Melbourne's expansive CBD but it remains, by a city mile, the most complete and rewarding of any Australian capital. It needs our love, sure, but what other city centre allows you to safely plan an entire weekend away without having to stray much, if at all, beyond its broad CBD limits?
SEE + DO Despite the best efforts of other Australian capitals to replicate them (with Adelaide's bar district providing the most pervasive impersonation), Melbourne's famed laneways remain a compelling feature of the CBD. Food is at the forefront of these alimentari alleys. It's on the corner of Flinders Lane and Russell Street that you'll find the glamorous Gimlet at Cavendish House (gimlet.melbourne), the latest quintessential Melbourne eatery from the genius Andrew McConnell empire, set inside a graceful 1920s building. The architecture has echoes of Chicago but inside you could be in Paris or London with Gimlet as close as you'll get these days. Elsewhere Chancery Lane (chancerylane.com.au), a sophisticated Gallic-tinged bistro that's the newest outing by star chef Scott Pickett, is tucked away at the other end of the CBD, just off Little Collins Street, in what was once the premises of Ikijime, one of the Vue de Monde Group's restaurants.
DON'T MISS The once somewhat esoteric Australian Centre for the Moving Image (acmi.net.au), the national museum of screen culture, at Federation Square on Flinders Street has been revamped, rendering it a far more accessible attraction, particularly for families. Disney: the magic of animation, featuring original sketches and artworks from 1928 to the present day, runs until October 17. A real bonus of any visit to ACMI is Hero, the museum's in-house canteen (heroacmi.com.au), featuring a no-fuss menu by Karen Martini, the well-known Melbourne chef. Make an authentic Melbourne cultural day of it at the Ian Potter Centre within Federation Square and take in She-Oak and Sunlight, the National Gallery of Victoria's (ngv.vic.gov.au) stellar Australian impressionism exhibition, running there until August 21.
COMING UP Head to 80 Collins Street (80collins.com.au), Melbourne's new premier dining and retail precinct with the centrepiece tenant, the hugely-hyped Society (societyrestaurant.com), eagerly, if not a little impatiently, awaited. It will be fronted by Martin Benn and Vicki Wild, the team behind Sydney's acclaimed Sepia modern Japanese restaurant.
WHERE TO STAY Where to begin? Melbourne has witnessed a wave of new hotel openings this year with some of the best of them located in the CBD. Among the most prominent is the Hilton Melbourne (hilton.com) and the W Melbourne (marriott.com) and, really, they couldn't be more different. The Hilton is built inside the stunning and historic Equity Chambers Building from the 1930s and features a Manhattan-style atrium that sensitively unites the heritage wing with a modern tower. The W Melbourne, by contrast, puts the fun back into funky with Curious, a cave-like bar with a sculptural lattice ceiling, among its highlights.
ESSENTIALS visitvictoria.com
SYDNEY THE CBD
This is one of Australia's most historic post-colonial sites, an expansive area home to the world-famous likes of Circular Quay and Darling Harbour, plus Mrs Macquaries Chair and the Botanic Gardens, Hyde Park and Tumbalong Park. Even now, it's a high-energy zone with an architectural mix of historic and modern, a great place to walk, to eat, to gaze and to experience, particularly with the highly-successful pedestrianisation of the now tram-filled George Street.
SEE + DO Immerse yourself in foreign cultures, all within the CBD at "Thai-natown" on Campbell Street; Koreatown on Pitt Street and Chinatown on the albeit a little tired Dixon Street. Take the guided tour of the Sydney Opera House (sydneyoperahouse.com) that you've always planned to do and check out some seriously good CBD bars and restaurants such as the acclaimed Quay (quay.com.au) at the dormant Overseas Passenger Terminal and Bennelong (bennelong.com.au) inside the cavernous smallest shell of the Opera House with stellar chef Peter Gilmore overseeing the kitchens in the hatted restaurants. Further into the CBD, discerning Sydneysiders can't get enough of eateries such as Hubert (restauranthubert.com), Mr Wong (merivale.com), Ragazzi (ragazziwineandpasta.com), Jimmy's Falafel (merivale.com) and PS40 (ps40bar.com) in the wonderfully-named Skittle Lane.
DON'T MISS One of the most successful new developments in the Sydney CBD is Darling Square (darlingsq.com), chock full of excellent restaurants with a mostly Asian bent. Try Kuon Omakase for high-end sushi, Boque by Tapavino for tapas, Shortstop for coffee and donuts, and Marrickville Pork Roll for, well, you know.
COMING UP Vivid (vividsydney.com), the hugely popular light show that takes over the CBD and harbourside fringes is due to return in August, as is the City2Surf (city2surf.com.au) fun run which starts in the CBD on its way to Bondi Beach.
WHERE TO STAY A By Adina (abyadina.com), offering "high-end apartment living" on Hunter Street in the CBD, is Sydney's newest hotel. Choose from one of almost 200 studio to two-bedder designer apartments and check out "Sky Lobby" set 100 metres above the street.
ESSENTIALS sydney.com
BRISBANE THE CBD
Once dubbed "Bris-Vegas", a reference to its dearth of excitement, there's now a buzz to Brisbane that you can sense in its new rooftop bars, entertainment precincts and five-star hotels as the Queensland capital awaits confirmation of its 2032 Olympic Games hosting rights.
SEE + DO Taste Queensland's best food at innovative new restaurants opening across the city's hidden laneways, riverside bistros and rooftops like Cielo Rooftop (cielorooftop.com.au) where diners feast on ceviche and cocktails on a chic, sun-soaked terrace. Nowhere epitomises the new Brisbane like its cultural precinct in Southbank (arts.qld.gov.au), home to the Queensland Museum & Science Centre, the Queensland Performing Arts Centre and the Queensland Art Gallery and Gallery of Modern Art, while you can still soak up Queensland's famous salt water and sand at Australia's only inner-city, man-made beach amongst 17 hectares of parklands at Southbank (southbankcorporation.com.au).
DON'T MISS A once neglected heritage-listed site on the Brisbane River was overhauled to form the CBD's most scenic dining and lifestyle precinct, Howard Smith Wharves (howardsmithwharves.com). Located beneath the Story Bridge, you'll find restaurants, bars, hotels and event spaces right on the river.
COMING UP Some of Australia's best-known comics will give Brisbane something to laugh about at venues across the CBD in the Brisbane Comedy Festival (brisbanecomedyfestival.com) from July 16 to August 8. The Brisbane Festival (brisbanefestival.com.au), one of Australia's biggest arts celebrations, follows from September 3-25.
WHERE TO STAY There's been one luxury hotel opening after another in Brisbane's CBD in the past five years or so The latest, greatest offering is Hotel X (hotelx.com.au) in Fortitude Valley, featuring a Mediterranean-influenced rooftop restaurant and bar with sunset views.
ESSENTIALS visitbrisbane.com.au
HOBART THE CBD
Hobart's city centre has changed dramatically over the last decade, with new bars and cafes appearing alongside clothing boutiques and outdoor stores. With the University of Tasmania relocating into the CBD, eateries have become more varied and while the city remains small enough to be personable, it's large enough to hide a few local secrets.
SEE + DO The next stop south from Hobart is Antarctica, so get a taste of ice life at the Mawson's Hut Replica Museum (mawsons-huts.org.au). After 18 years in North Hobart, Bett Gallery (bettgallery.com.au), a long-time supporter of local art, is now in the CBD. When it comes to the art of food, don't miss the home-style Templo (templo.com.au), the open-space, In the Hanging Garden (inthehanginggarden.com.au), and Pigeon Whole Bakers (pigeonwholebakers.com.au) near the new Vibe Hotel (vibehotels.com). For lesser-known, local foodie treasures try Leslie Black's Chutney Food Cafe (no website) in Melville Street and Johnston and Miller (johnstonandmiller.com.au), a wine bar, cafe and providore all in one in the Icon Complex on Murray Street.
DON'T MISS The Tasmanian Museum and Art Gallery (tmag.tas.gov.au) is a museum piece in itself. Australia's second-oldest museum contains Tasmania's oldest surviving public building, the 1810 Commissariat Store, while exhibition highlights include the convict-built Bond Store and a permanent display on Antarctica and the Southern Ocean.
COMING UP The Tasmanian capital hits the high notes at the Festival of Voices (festivalofvoices.com), a celebration of crooning and connection, which runs from June 30-July 11.
WHERE TO STAY A trio of new hotels - the Crowne Plaza, Mövenpick and the aforementioned Vibe - has transformed CBD offerings in the last 12 months, but it's still hard to go past the waterfront MACq01 (macq01.com.au). The Tasman, a member of the Marriott Hotels luxury collection, is due to open later this year.
ESSENTIALS
hobartandbeyond.com.au
ADELAIDE THE CBD
Laidback, low-rise and locavore, Adelaide is the world's only CBD encircled by parklands - though technically it's a green figure-of-eight embracing the square-mile CBD and millionaire burb, North Adelaide. (Nonetheless, the city council is exploring a World Heritage-listing for the green belt and Colonel William Light's grid-like 19th century city plan). The figurative and literal heart of the city of the churches is the imposing, cathedral-like 53,500-capacity Adelaide Oval.
SEE + DO Look over the city's trees, towers and spires while scaling the semilunar roof of the Adelaide Oval (roofclimb.com.au) - or better still, do it while a game is in play. You'll also get to view all the light and colour from rooftop bars like new Sol (skycityadelaide.com.au), Hennessy (www.mayfairhotel.com.au/hennessy) and (2kwbar.com.au). Nearby North Terrace features the city's sprawling botanic gardens and museums while the food scene is best explored along RundleE Street where you'll find nearby the still hot-ticket Africola (africola.com.au). Take a tour of the 1869 Adelaide Central Market (adelaidecentralmarket.com.au) or try a vodka, wasabi, yuzu, mandarin and pickled ginger cocktail at new seafood sensation, Fishbank (fishbankadel.com.au) on King William Street.
DON'T MISS Laneways run hither and thither off big, bad Hindley Street with these nooks and crannies these days hosting 50-plus restaurants, cafés and bars. Try Shobosho (shobosho.com.au) for awesome Japanese, good-natured Hains & Co (hainsco.com.au) for drinking buddies you haven't met yet and the Suzie Wong (no website) speakeasy Suzie Wong for subterranean supping.
COMING UP In December, Australia and England meet at Adelaide Oval for the second Ashes Test. Spend a day at the Ashes at one of the world's best grounds for cricket-watching and after stumps head off for the nightlife in the nearby laneways.
WHERE TO STAY The $750-plus a night suites of the new Eos by Sky City hotel is a scene-stealer but the new and boutique Hotel Indigo (adelaide.hotelindigo.com), near the markets, offers more for less: check out its arts festival graphics, curvy lobby and diner with candy-pink banquettes and a rooftop bar called Merrymaker.
ESSENTIALS
southaustralia.com
PERTH THE CBD
Not so long ago there was little reason to venture into Perth's CBD after business hours, but in the past five years the opening of new hotels including the Ritz-Carlton at Elizabeth Quay (ritzcarlton.com), The Westin at Hibernian Place (www.hibernianplace.com.au) and COMO the Treasury in the State Buildings dining precinct (statebuildings.com) has injected the far-flung capital with new vibrancy.
SEE + DO By day explore the CBD on a walking tour. Begin with the Goomup (Elizabeth Quay) Aboriginal walking tour with Noongar elder, Walter McGuire from Go Aboriginal Tours (goculturalaboriginaltours.rezdy.com) to learn about the Noongar Peoples' spiritual connection to the Swan River and surrounds. Then head off for a quick lunch of homemade noodles at Nao Ramen (naojapaneserestaurant.com.au) before embarking on the Oh Hey WA two-hour street art tour (ohheywa.com.au).
DON'T MISS Set within a rooftop area of the State Buildings with sweeping views across the Swan, the two-hat winning Wildflower (wildflowerperth.com.au) is a must-book. Head chef, Matthew Sartori bases the menu around the six Noongar seasons using only local produce (be sure to order the roasted Manjimup marron if it's on the menu).
COMING UP During summer Perth Festival (perthfestival.com.au) modernist buildings are lit up in vivid colours, concerts are held at Government House Gardens, and there's a literature weekend held at the refurbished His Majesty's Theatre (ptt.wa.gov.au) in Hay Street in the CBD.
WHERE TO STAY There are a multitude of good reasons why the 48-suite Kerry Hill-designed COMO the Treasury (comohotels.com), a key part of the State Buildings complex, is still attracting the "best hotel in Australia" accolades more than five years after opening.
ESSENTIALS westernaustralia.com
CANBERRA THE CBD
You could be forgiven for thinking that Canberra's CBD would be rather ordinary but this is the only CBD with its own name, Civic. Nowadays, it can pay to be Civic-minded. Believe it or not, Bunda Street, is one of the liveliest dining precincts in the country. Canberrans are cashed-up and love eating out, and the extended, pedestrianised city mall, complete with its famous antique merry-go-around, is one of the few that actually succeeds.
SEE + DO Okay. We admit it. Unlike other Australian capitals you will want to wander further afield to Canberra's myriad museums and other attractions, and for that matter to nearby restaurant and cafe-filled Lonsdale Street, Braddon, one of the few places in Canberra where a degree of grunge is allowed to exist. But you'll also be content on and around Bunda Street, especially if you book at Raku (rakudining.com.au), an elegant modern Japanese restaurant inside the restored David Jones building dating from the 1960s. Elsewhere, over on Northbourne Avenue, don't miss Bar Rochford (barrochford.com) inside the historic Melbourne Building (and you'll really feel like you could be in Melbourne).
DON'T MISS On the Lake Burley Griffin-edge of the CBD is Canberra's newest eat street, part of the bold new multi-million dollar Constitution Place (constitutionplace.com.au) development. Here you'll find Arc (arccoffee.place), one of the capital's coolest new cafes, as well the new Canberra branch of the Meat & Wine Co (themeatandwineco.com) with more restaurants, including the Japanese ramen house Tenkomori an off-shoot of the Sydney Regent Place diner, set to open in coming weeks and months.
COMING UP Canberra, God love it, provides a lot of laughs for the rest of the country, so it seems only fair that it should have its own Canberra Comedy Festival (canberracomedyfestival.com.au) this year running from September 18 to October 13.
WHERE TO STAY Canberra isn't short on boutique-style, mostly apartment hotels with the swish A by Adina, the latest addition. It's built inside Constitution Place, next door to the Canberra Theatre Centre (canberratheatrecentre.com.au), home to the comedy festival.
ESSENTIALS visitcanberra.com.au
DARWIN THE CBD
Darwin's reputation as a quirky frontier outpost has evolved over the years thanks to a growing recognition and appreciation of its mix of Indigenous and south-east Asian cultures set in an ancient tropical landscape. Think hauntingly beautiful Indigenous art, fragrant laksas at the markets and green-ant G&Ts down at the Waterfront. The city's wide streets, outdoor eateries and mature trees are a backdrop for a modern city with soul, albeit one that has ancient crocs snapping at its heels.
SEE + DO Bicentennial Park (darwin.nt.gov.au) has walking and cycling trails and great spots to capture Darwin's extraordinary sunsets. It stretches from Parliament House to Doctors Gully, where you can walk from your city hotel to feed visiting fish each day (aquascene.com.au) But if a date with more ferocious wildlife calls, Crocosaurus Cove offers close-ups of saltwater crocs (crocosauruscove.com) smack bang in the city centre. After this a stiff drink at Darwin Waterfront (waterfront.nt.gov.au) may be in order. On the way, check out CBD street art (darwinstreetartfestival.com.au) in Austin Lane. Tip: download the app to watch works come alive via augmented reality, and don't miss the portrait of singer Dr G Yunupingu. Once at the Waterfront, take your pick from dozens of restaurants and bars, with harbour views and a wave pool. You can also settle back and watch new and classic films under the stars at the Deckchair Cinema (deckchaircinema.com) in Jervois Road in the Wharf Precinct. City landmarks include the Tree of Knowledge, an ancient banyan tree out the front of the Civic Centre and the 1887 Chinese Temple on Litchfield Street.
DON'T MISS Get your bearings and meet fellow foodies on a two or three-hour Darwin Gourmet Tour (darwingourmettours.com) for lunch or dinner. Sample fare from places like Phat Mango (phatmango.com.au) in Smith Street, where Martin the chef specialises in punchy local flavours - make sure you try his Rum Jungle buffalo carpaccio with river mint salsa verde. For dessert, indulge in the deep-fried green-tea ice-cream at Chow (chowdarwin.com.au) down on the Waterfront.
COMING UP The Darwin Festival (darwinfestival.org.au) from August 5-22 includes Bungul, a celebration of the music and culture of Gurrumul with the Darwin Symphony Orchestra. Art lovers can also buy works directly from more than 70 Indigenous-owned community arts centres during the Aboriginal Art Fair (daaf.com.au) August 6-8. The event will also feature film, workshops, dance, music and fashion.
WHERE TO STAY The Oaks Darwin Elan (oakshotels.com) is a 10-minute walk (or quick e-scooter ride) to the Waterfront, or a short stroll to the Smith Street Mall food hub. It has an outdoor pool, balconies with harbour views where you can watch incoming storms, and a restaurant. Rooms or apartments with kitchens and laundries available. From $135 a night.
ESSENTIALS northernterritory.com w
CREDIT:
Word count: 3023
