WEAVING through Tokyo streets with no driver, screeching around race tracks with no one inside, and replacing seats with beds and dashboards with screens – self-driving cars are promising a transport revolution.
And that is in addition to augmented reality windscreens, virtual in-car concierges, and options to add autonomous driving to existing cars with cameras and a subscription.
While the technology might seem ripped from science fiction, experts say self-driving cars are becoming more practical, with options coming to market this year.
And they argue Australian roads and regulations will not only be ready for these futuristic vehicles, but Australian innovation will power many of their features.
News Corp investigated this emerging technology as part of six-part series, The Future of Everything, which will look at innovations from flying cars to business meetings using holograms.
Autonomous vehicles first captured the attention of Australians a decade ago, iMove Cooperative Research Centre managing director Ian Christensen said, and inspired self-driving experiments across Australia.
Autonomous and connected cars have since driven through every state and territory, in trials including a 3000km journey through regional Victoria, a trial of 350 connected cars in Queensland, and self-driving shuttle buses in NSW, South Australia, Tasmania and WA.
“The community is now pushing for better performance, which is a good mindset to bring to the introduction of autonomous vehicles,” Mr Christensen said.
Despite huge investments, no company has mastered level five autonomy, in which human drivers are no longer required to touch the steering wheel. Efforts to test the technology in the US have shown huge potential, but one by Uber also resulted in the death of a pedestrian. Companies are making further breakthroughs. Intel’s automated driving firm MobileEye revealed that its technology allowed self-driving cars to navigate busy Tokyo streets and drive on German roads with no lane markings.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 307
