Warm up your winter outing with a little BYO comfort In the last biting weeks of winter and early spring, is there anything more fortifying than a steaming hot soup or drink? Plan ahead and you won’t need to worry about tracking down a cafe or coffee stand to find one, either. Just pack your own, ready to pull from your backpack during a day out.
Whether you’re laying down a picnic rug at a sporting or cultural event, tackling a hike worthy of a tea and bickies intermission, or wandering among spring blooms, an insulated reusable bottle is your best BYO friend. Especially when it’s triple-walled and vacuum-insulated like this one to retain heat for hours.
Warm up your winter adventure with these four events and activities worthy of packing your flask for. We bet your grandmother would be proud!
Walk and picnic on Maria Island, Tas Combining a ferry ride, spectacular scenery and encounters with wombats, what could be better than a day out on Maria Island? Start with a short walk to explore the buildings and ruins of Darlington or take the The Reservoir Circuit for guaranteed wildlife spotting. You can also hike your way to the island’s twin peaks, Bishop and Clerk – allow three to five hours to complete the return trek. discovertasmania.com.au
Bledisloe Cup: Wallabies vs All Blacks, WA On August 21, the Wallabies will look to uphold their winning streak as they battle the All Blacks for the 2021 Bledisloe Cup at Perth’s Optus Stadium. Wrap yourself in green and gold and perhaps pack a flask full of pumpkin soup to keep up your strength for the match. It’s the first Aussie test for the Wallabies after their Bledisloe kickstarter in Auckland on August 7. optusstadium.com.au
Tesselaar Tulip Festival, Vic After the bleakness of multiple lockdowns, take the opportunity to escape to the rainbow fields of the Tesselaar Tulip Festival. Almost one million bulbs will be on display between September 11 and October 10 at this flower farm, one hour from Melbourne. Plonk down for a picnic among the riot of colour and catch live entertainment while the kids (under 16s are free) enjoy a tractor ride. tulipfestival.com.au
Illuminate, SA Those in regional South Australia during the next few weeks can get a free art fix at one of the Illuminate Adelaide events – a new winter art festival lighting up the state. Street art meets augmented reality in Tumby Bay with the Big Picture Series (August 13-21) and up in Renmark the banks of the Murray will be transformed after dark from September 17 to October 9 with artist Craig Walsh’s large-scale multimedia project, In Depth (above). illuminateadelaide.com
HOT STUFF Frank Green ceramic heat-retaining cups (large), $45.95 each. frankgreen.com.au Discover 10 cosy places to stay in cooler weather at escape.com.au/winterstays
CREDIT: Words; Celeste Mitchell
Word count: 473
