A LEADING Adelaide architect has floated a bold idea to breathe new life into the state’s under-utilised heritage-listed properties.
Gerald Matthews, who heads up Matthews Architects, says the heritage regime has become politicised in recent years, while the onerous costs associated with restoring heritage properties inhibit investment.
Part of the solution, he says, could be to introduce expiry dates on heritage-listed properties, to spark regular public debate about the merits of ongoing protection.
There are no precedents for this approach, as far as Mr Matthews is aware, but together with targeted public funding, he says it could play a part in the revival of the state’s heritage buildings.
“The idea of expiry is not to say you cannot infinitely renew it,” he said. “But if it was every five years or so we, or a branch of government, publishes the listing and says this is up for a renewal, does anyone want to mount a case as to why it should not be listed again or why it should be listed again, and then essentially it gets into a public debate.
“The point is to force conversation at regular intervals about something we protect.
“At least if there’s a conversation we’ve got some chance of building our maturity in how we look at these things.” Mr Matthews says by casting the net of heritage so wide, there is a chance we are preserving buildings that aren’t worthy of protection and therefore spreading our conservation efforts too thinly.
He says an increased amount of government funding should be made available for properties deemed worthy of ongoing protection, to remove some of the burden currently placed on property owners.
“Over my career I’ve noticed a lot of professional property developers who would be very intimidated by the idea of buying or investing in a heritage-listed property – only because there are so many unknowns and there are so many extra costs,” he said.
“If we got into a pattern of saying, ‘OK, we’re going to renew a heritage listing for a property’, it would make sense to actually say by that nature we are actually restricting what can be done with that property, and therefore we as a society should be willing to invest in it.
“With the spending that we as a society will provide to that property as a grant, we want the following work done to it – we want the facade cleaned, we want these gutters replaced, we want these windows repaired, and here is the grant to do it and it must be done over the next five years.” Mr Matthews is currently working on two heritage projects in Adelaide – the conversion of the former Primitive Methodist Church in North Adelaide and the former Salvation Army Women’s Hostel on Angas St in the CBD into residences.
While arguing many historic buildings should be retained in their built form, he says technology could also offer a new way to showcase the state’s heritage value.
“I think there’s a chance here for us to really lead,” Mr Matthews said. “Maybe we decide that a building is worthy of protection but not necessarily in its physical form. Through either augmented reality, standing right where that building used to stand, or through VR, you could literally walk through and experience that building just as it was, which means you could also preserve different versions of it.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 570
