THE influence of COVID-19 could result in positive changes when it comes to training regional health workers, according to education experts from across Australia.
In a series of articles, representatives from Flinders University, University of Southern Queensland, Central Queensland University and Newcastle University, NSW, have considered some of the options available for those teaching in this field.
Co-author and Flinders University lecturer Amy Seymour-Walsh, whose own background is as a paramedic, said as in a number of workplaces, recent months have seen a shift to training and meetings online.
But she said the lessons learnt through COVID-19, could have benefits in training regionally-based health workers.
Riverland-based Dr Seymour-Walsh says there is substantial time lost by, being on the road and away from families or even having to maintain two houses.
"COVID reminded us we can do a lot of things without those hidden costs," she said.
"We can't fully replace all aspects of face-to-face interaction but can get damn close."
Dr Seymour-Walsh said in recent months there had been a tendency to delay face-to-face interactions or skills training, but that could create a situation where there is little time to consolidate learning once intensive training has happened.
She said one example was looking at the way other industries had embraced virtual and augmented reality technologies, with potential in health training also.
Dr Seymour-Walsh said the early days of the pandemic had been stressful for both teachers and those learning - "and it's hard to be creative when under stress" - but when the nation eventually moved into a post-vaccine phase, there were opportunities to look at new approaches.
"It could open up educational opportunities so far beyond just COVID or even regional access but for regional and remote staff, it could save in days of travel," she said.
"The way we teach is the way we've done things but this is a unique opportunity to throw off the same old way of doing things."
It comes as the state government looks to encourage health workers and volunteer ambulance officers to upgrade their skills under a new recruitment drive.
RELATED: Telehealth plan to protect at-risk patients welcomed by rural docs
Health a key consideration in rebuilding regional economies
Health and Wellbeing Minister Stephern Wade said the $755,000 investment would create new pathways into paramedicine under a Graduated Paramedic Pathway role through the SA Ambulance Service.
He said candidates would train to diploma level through CQU while getting practical experience through the SAAS, and potentially even go on to gain a Bachelor of Paramedical Science.
"These ambulance officers will hit the ground early next year, and will be complemented with the annual recruitment of intern paramedics," he said.
"Communities throughout SA will benefit from these resources - particularly communities in regional areas where it can be difficult to recruit qualified paramedics."
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: Elizabeth Anderson
Word count: 492
