OYSTER reefs will be created along the southern Adelaide coastline and Kangaroo Island, as part of a $61m boost to Australia’s environment and heritage tourism destinations.
A raft of funding measures for conservation work and infrastructure improvements will be unveiled by Environment Minister Sussan Ley today ahead of the federal budget.
At least $20m will go towards restoring native shellfish reefs, including two 5ha reefs in the Onkaparinga region and at KI which will cost $1-2m each.
Ms Ley, pictured, said the practical upgrades would have a lasting benefit for the environment while also creating jobs, particularly in regional areas.
“Working with the Nature Conservancy, we will restore native shellfish reefs lost decades ago through overfishing and dredging, creating spectacular dive hot spots, a paradise for recreational fishers and helping to protect local coastlines from erosion,” she said.
“At the same time, we will be embarking on a major program to support national and world heritage sites that will help preserve and enhance these areas while making them more accessible to Australians wanting to appreciate their unique qualities.” Included in the heritage sites is the historic Moonta Mine which will receive $4.9m towards an upgrade and interpretation materials.
The Nilpena Ediacara fossil site, 600km north of Adelaide, will also receive $490,000 to build a new access track, boardwalk and viewing platforms.
At the Burra Mine Site, a mine office built in 1849 will be repaired and a “digital augmented reality experience of remaining non-existent structures” will be developed thanks to $295,000. Tourism Minister Simon Birmingham said the funding would restore and conserve some of Australia’s most iconic natural wonders and heritage sites, providing a vital boost to tourism operators who have been doing it tough as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic. “These sites are some of Australia’s most incredible and treasured tourism drawcards, and enhancing visitor experiences will help attract more visitors and support thousands of local businesses and jobs,” he said.
CREDIT: ELIZABETH HENSON MATTHEW KILLORAN
Word count: 329
