IT’S time for an honest and mature debate about nuclear energy in our country. This week I announced the Coalition’s plan to examine the potential for new and emerging nuclear technologies to reduce power prices, emissions and, importantly, contribute to Australia’s energy security.
The nuclear-propelled submarines Australia has committed to acquiring under AUKUS utilise the latest nuclear power technology.
We’re not talking about giant plants and reactors out of some 1990s kids’ cartoon. The reactor on board the submarine will run a sub for 32 years without needing to be refuelled. It can literally circumnavigate the globe for three decades and doesn’t produce carbon emissions.
It demonstrates just how far this technology has come.
The latest generation small modular nuclear power plants have the potential to power a city of 100,000 people while producing zero emissions.
If you strip back the emotion and stick to the facts, the reality is we are currently on a dangerous path to sky rocketing power and gas prices mixed with unreliability which will see energy rationing, brownouts and even blackouts.
Germany has already been forced to implement rationing measures in recent weeks. The PM says it costs nothing to use the sun or wind to generate electricity. That would be true if the sun never set and those pesky westerly winds blew around the clock 365 days of the year.
But the reality is we need to firm that renewable energy for when the sun isn’t shining, or the wind isn’t blowing.
I would love to tell you that comes for free, but as you can see in your power bills, it’s quite the opposite.
To “firm” renewables so we can have electricity at night we currently use a mixture of coal and gas. There is some hydro and battery storage.
South Australia’s big battery, built in 2017 with Tesla batteries utilising the latest technology, has only 75 minutes of storage. The owners of coal-fired power stations are planning on closing a number of them over the next decade or so.
There will be a heavier reliance on gas but, as you know, the prices are going through the roof because of the shortages in Europe and the reluctance by NSW and Victoria to explore let alone extract gas from new fields.
In many countries, including Canada, UK, China, South Korea and France, they have latest technology, emissions-free nuclear technology to firm up their renewable energy.
It is a mix which means they can reduce carbon emissions credibly without bankrupting families or small businesses who just can’t afford power prices that continue to go up exponentially.
France’s 56 nuclear power plants, for example, provide about 70 per cent of its electricity.
Due to the low cost of energy generation, France is the world’s largest net exporter of electricity from which it earns about â‚¬3bn ($4.4bn) per year.
It also means the power supply isn’t rationed or disrupted – a key requirement for families who don’t want to sit in the dark at night and business owners who can’t operate their manufacturing equipment when the power is going on and off without warning.
A sensible debate about latest generation nuclear power is well overdue. Small modular reactor technology is cutting edge and, given the uranium deposits in our country, we would be adding value to a mineral instead of digging it up, putting it on a boat and sending the money-making potential of such a resource overseas.
We already safely store nuclear waste in our country. The facilities already exist and we have one of the most geologically stable locations in the world to store waste.
The Prime Minister refuses to consider nuclear energy. Bob Hawke was strongly in favour of nuclear power generation, but could never get past the extreme left in his party – a faction led by Anthony Albanese for two decades. It is time this Prime Minister put his 1980s thinking behind him and gave serious consideration to a 21st century technology which can help us credibly reduce emissions and firm up renewable energy without risking our manufacturing jobs and crippling household budgets.
CREDIT: PETER DUTTON
Word count: 685
