LAMCHAT Free, iOS/Android Changes are coming to messaging on Facebook-owned WhatsApp in May and a Brisbane-based company has seized the opportunity to offer users something more private. The LamChat app is a straightforward messaging app offered on both Apple and Google-based phones, messages are encrypted, metadata is stored on Australian servers and developers Laminar Communications pledge not to sell or use it for advertising purposes.
WWF FORESTS Free, Apple iOS You can visit the forest, and meet a monkey, without leaving your house using this app from the World Wildlife Fund. Using augmented reality (and the camera on your phone or tablet) this app can help virtually plant full-sized trees from temperate rainforests into your lounge room and let you see some of the wildlife that typically lives in them. It also features plenty of facts to impress in the classroom or pub trivia nights.
COSTCO WHOLESALE Free, Apple iOS/Google Android Fans of bulk-buys may want to hit up app stores now because Costco has finally released a virtual window into its Aussie warehouses. In addition to regular food and office supplies, clothing, furniture and electrical goods, the app features last-chance deals and special discounts. You can even preorder cakes. You’ll need to be a member to buy things through the app, of course, but you can manage membership in its walls too.
24ME Free, iOS/Android This scheduling app is much, much more comprehensive than most and promises to bring together reminders, your to-do list, notes, appointments, home and work commitments into one central calendar. The app, which can be synched across devices, will connect to multiple calendars, including those from Google, Microsoft, Yahoo and Apple, can automatically turn emails into tasks, and sends notifications to keep you up to date.
ON THE RUN Free, iOS/Android Gaming’s most famous bandicoot is back for a new mobile adventure in Crash Bandicoot: On The Run, which sees him teamed with his sister Coco. The pair must race through forests and ruins, collect power gems, and evade traps set by Dr Neo Cortex and his fellow villains. Plus, you can unlock new skins for both the game’s protagonists as you progress and play with your friends in teams.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 370
