POKEMON UNITE Free, Android/iOS Remember when Pokemon Go players took over the streets? The latest app release from Nintendo’s famous pocket monsters will let players stay indoors but is likely to be seriously popular with fans of the series. Transferred to the small screen from the Switch console, Unite asks players to customise their trainer and roam Aeos Island with their Pokemon, battling other characters for energy balls and unlocking new points and powers.
APPLE FITNESS+ $14.99/m, Apple iOS Apple’s fitness app has been adding new workouts every week since its December launch and it’s now adding three new kinds of exercise. From this week, users will be able to try Pilates with trainers Marimba Gold-Watts and Darryl Whiting, bust out a guided meditation session with Christian Howard or JoAnna Hardy, or try a ski season workout, though the first two might be more handy at this time of year.
LITTLE RED CODING $1.49/m, Google Android/Apple iOS This is the kind of computer code training no child will recognise as educational. Twinkl’s Little Red Coding Club asks players to guide Little Red and the Woodcutter to safety by programming their path with the right arrows to reach Grandma’s house and avoid the Big Bad Wolf. Players can also build their own levels and play the game in 3D mode or in augmented reality so the board appears to live on a tablet before them
AFTERSHIP Free, Android/iOS Getting just about anything delivered at the moment is challenging, making apps like AfterShip Package Tracker all the more important. This app can be asked to track incoming deliveries from more than 800 carriers worldwide, and will also show users updates as soon as they become available. Keen users can also ask the app to scrape details from a Gmail or Outlook inbox to identify and track packages automatically.
PIXEL ART Free, Android/iOS If you’re looking for something relaxing to play, Pixel Art: Color By Numbers could suit. The app offers deliberately pixelated artworks that, when you zoom in, reveal themselves to be made of tiny numbered boxes. A colour palate below the art features numbers matching those on the digital canvas, and one tap will highlight them. Users have a choice of a monthly subscription or ads.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 380
