SMARTfun ROADTRIPPERS Free, Apple iOS/Android If your Easter road trip still lies ahead — or if you’re planning a great Australian journey for later this year — this app could be a handy investment. This planner lets you enter your destination and search for sights and stops along the way, whether that’s a place to eat, a short hike, photo opportunity, or local museum. There are plenty of spots be discovered inside this app, and you can add five notable stops to your road trip before investing in its $42.99 yearly subscription.
CALM $89.99/yr, Apple iOS/Google Android Between snap lockdowns and border closures, 2021 still has a lot to throw at us. An app like Calm can help more than you might expect. This premium app features sleep stories read by the likes of Kate Winslet and Matthew McConaughey, coaching on a wide variety of topics from LeBron James and Fran Drescher, as well as guided meditation, sleepscapes, sleepy remixes of charting songs, and relaxing songs for kids.
LEGO VIDIYO Free, Apple iOS/Google Android LEGO’s new app uses augmented reality to bring minifigures to life, alongside flying cat animations and 1980s-style guitar solos. The Vidiyo app is a platform for creating music videos and users can add a pre-made character or scan a real-life LEGO Vidiyo minifig to put them into the clip. Music is available from artists including Ne-Yo and Mabel, and kids can appear behind their animated LEGO piece, busting moves alongside their plastic pals.
DRAFTS Free, Apple iOS The Drafts app is like Apple’s Notes app if it lost the default yellow background and grew up. Drafts lets anyone jot down their thoughts, tweets-to-be or work ideas in easy-to-read formats, allows them to be tagged into categories, and features a comprehensive sharing menu so these ideas can be sent in messages, emails, added to a calendar, made into a reminder, published through WordPress or saved to a file.
NBA 2K21 $7.99/m, Apple iOS The lifelike graphics in this basketball title don’t look like they belong on a smartphone screen and can momentarily be confused for the real thing. The new NBA 2K21 Apple Arcade edition also features the latest players, like Kevin Durant and Steph Curry, and will let players take on MyCareer mode, play a quick game or take on two friends with online multiplayer.
CREDIT: with Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 394
