SMARTfun BRAIN APP Free, Google Android This brain-teasing app, normally $13.99 but free right now, is full of mini-games to make you go “hmm”, “huh” and “oh”. There are maths quizzes to fill out, colours to identify, words to unscramble, numbers to order and even rock, paper and scissors matches to adjudicate. You can enter the app’s “lab” for a daily mix of games to be scored at the end, or simply choose the games you want to play to sharpen your thinking.
DSLR CAMERA 99c, Apple iOS The iPhone’s camera has come a long way, now capturing RAW images with greater detail, but it lacks fine controls. That’s what this app attempts to deliver. DSLR Camera will let users choose between Manual, Program and Auto modes, and hand them control of shutter speed, ISO settings, white balance and focus. The app also features augmented reality guides, artificial intelligence filters, and can track a subject in the frame.
TAIKO $7.99/m, Apple iOS The classic Japanese drum game is now an app and fans should prepare themselves for a serious challenge. Taiko No Tatsujin’s latest outing asks players to hit different parts of an on-screen drum in time with the music, Guitar Hero-style, tapping the side when blue notes appear and even going for a drum roll when yellow notes show up. Bandai Namco’s latest adventure can be played on easy or challenging mode and with the sound up!
PAC-MANIA Free, Google Android Geriatric Millennials and even Gen X players may appreciate the eight-bit nostalgia delivered in Pac-Mania Original that recreates one of the biggest games of the ‘80s. Pac-Man returns to hide from ghosts in app game that arrives with a virtual D-Pad for inexact control and A and B buttons. Even the sounds have been nabbed from the original game, and this app is available for free for a limited time.
PUSH FOR BETTER Free, iOS/Android The Push-Up Challenge begins this month, asking teams and individuals to raise funds for mental health. This app will help participants to log push-up progress towards their goals, with the ultimate aim 3,318 push-ups over 25 days, representing the number of people who lost their lives to suicide in 2019. Users can register to achieve part of that number. Funds raised go to mental health charities and the app also delivers facts about mental health.
CREDIT: with Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 397
