MUSEUM ALIVE $4.49, Apple iOS It’s National Science Week and downloading this app, featuring David Attenborough, could be an appropriate way to celebrate it. The augmented reality creation delves into the lives of four extinct animals, from a fishlike creature with five eyes to one of the first flying dinosaurs. Users can hunt for artefacts and then put them, virtually, inside their own homes using the device’s camera while Attenborough delivers interesting facts about the animals’ lives.
PARAMOUNT+ $8.99/m, Apple iOS/Google Android Yes, there’s another new streaming service in town and this one is promising some Aussie shows such as Five Bedrooms along with older favourites including Dexter, plus feature films, and exclusives such as iCarly and Two Weeks to Live. New users can unlock seven days of streaming free of charge before an $8.99 subscription begins, and shows can also be downloaded for viewing offline and viewed on up to three devices.
GOODNOTES 5 $12.99, Apple iOS There are plenty of benefits to recording notes on a digital device over a scrap of paper. It makes finding your thoughts easier, for example, lets you search for particular terms, convert your handwritten scrawl into text, and illustrate text with photos you can drop into documents. This particular app will also let users create and save digital notebooks by subject, save them to Apple’s iCloud, and tag and mark-up PDF documents.
DAILY YOGA $34/m, Apple iOS/Google Android Exercising at home is growing in popularity this year for many reasons and this app promises to deliver personalised yoga routines based on your goals, experience and how often and how long you plan to get stretching. Daily Yoga features more than 500 yoga, meditation and pilates sessions for users from beginner to advanced, and the app will track your progress towards a monthly goal.
ASTRO CAT $5.99, Apple iOS This app solves questions you might not have asked like if Earth was the size of a cherry tomato, what fruit would Jupiter resemble? (Answer: it’s a watermelon.) Young players are encouraged to discover these facts and many more on an intergalactic mission with Professor Astro Cat and offsider Astro Mouse that includes jet pack games and rocket parts to be won and used.
CREDIT: with Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 375
