PIKMIN BLOOM Free, Android/iOS Remember the hype around Pokemon Go? This app from the same developer has less buzz but is even more cute. Pikmin Bloom is designed to get you moving and will create a trail of flowers that grow behind your path on a map. After you take enough steps, it will let you pluck wee Pikmin creatures from the bounty. You can play with them in augmented reality, and get them to harvest virtual fruit and seeds or collect postcards that you can send to friends.
BEDTIME STORIES $7.99, Google Android/Apple iOS Everyone has trouble sleeping at some stage and, for kids, it can be especially unsettling. This app could help them overcome those moments with 15 bedtime stories designed by professionals to lull them to sleep, with a calm voice and relaxing music. Tales include The Cat Does Not Sleep and The Tree House, and each are between 15 and 21 minutes in length. One story is free and the rest can be unlocked for a one-time fee.
GOOGLE LENS Free, Google Android If it’s been a while since you asked Google to be your eyes, it could be time to give this app a second look. The artificially intelligent app uses your phone’s camera and, after you snap a photo, will compare it to visually similar images to recognise a plant, tree or flower, identify an animal, or tell you about the location of the photo if it recognises a landmark or business. If you’re lucky enough to travel, it can also translate signs in other languages.
FLEXCIL Free, iOS/Android If you’re facing tough exams at the moment, this app could be well worth the download. Flexcil Note and PDF Reader lets users save and write over documents with highlighters, drag and drop important text into their own notes, look up words with a tap and scribble down their own notes using a stylus. The app can also be used to edit two documents at once, and users can unlock more features with in-app purchases.
TINY ISLAND Free, iOS/Android This island survival game looks and plays like a game from a different era, but is easy to pick up and put down when you want a distraction. In Tiny Island Survival, players land on what looks like an uninhabited island and go about setting up camp, only to discover some of its secrets and go on a quest to find out what’s behind the smoke appearing from trees at the other end.
CREDIT: WITH JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 422
