SMARTfun CHRISTMAS PLANNER Free, Apple iOS It is just 73 days until Christmas and you might need many of those for online purchases to arrive. Mercifully, the Christmas Planner Pro app can help you get started. It lets users create profiles for gift recipients, track ideas and purchases, plot progress in pie graphs, and will show you how much money you’ve spent on it all. The app also comes with a countdown to the big day and, for an extra $4.49, will remove its ads and let you export lists.
BETTRE Free, Google Android There are plenty of books about creating healthy habits and this app was created to put them into action. Bettre lets users record weekly habits they’d like to create (like flossing or going to bed before midnight), setting how often they’d like to achieve them, and ticking them off the list as they go. Users level up within the app when they successfully tick off their goals and can compete with friends for consistency and progress.
TUNED Free, Google Android/Apple iOS If you’re not into over-the-top declarations of love, this app might suit. Tuned is designed to be a social network of just two people – a couple – and lets them update their status, share photos and send messages between each other without anyone else butting in (except Facebook, the surprise creator of the app). There are also couples quizzes inside the app and you can listen to music together, even when apart.
DC: BATMAN Free, iOS/Android Even for Batman, this app is pretty advanced. The Bat-Tech Edition game lets players choose a spot in their own home on to which virtual characters can appear using their phone’s camera and play out one of 10 augmented reality missions involving Batman and his Knightwatch. The app also comes with 10 mini games, including a drive in the Batmobile, eight Batman face filters, 10 sticker packs and five digital comics.
NOIR $4.49, Apple iOS The arrival of ‘dark mode’ was a revelation for some phone users who didn’t like bright lights or draining batteries. This app will complete the look on iPhones, turning all websites in its Safari web browser dark whether they’ve been made ready for it or not. Built for iOS 15, this extension also collects no data from users and will let them customise it in case they prefer some websites brighter.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 402
