FUSING the creative arts with sciences and other fields of academic and industrial research can lead to advancements which benefit the broader South Australian community and economy, says the head of Flinders University’s new Assemblage centre.
Professor Garry Stewart is now building connective tissue between the university’s many diverse schools of study, as he brings his 22 years as artistic director of Australian Dance Theatre to a close.
“The initial aim of Assemblage was to set up a centre within the university that brings together the already very sophisticated and formidable creative arts research that was happening,” he said.
“At Flinders, there’s creative writing, there’s film, there’s a very long history in drama, Indigenous studies, etc.” Under Stewart’s guidance, Assemblage now aims to not only bring those together but also seek applications for, and input from, the university’s other diverse fields of research and associated industries.
“We live in a complex world with complex problems, and often those problems or issues can’t be looked at from (just) one discipline or one perspective. Interdisciplinarity permits this mindset, or thinking, in order to reach across from one art form to another, or across to sciences and engineering, or health sciences and medicine.
“It’s really shifting the practice of the creative arts academics.” Assemblage has already established an arts and health alliance with the colleges of humanities, social sciences and nursing, among others.
“Out of that, we are spawning a lot of projects where arts is intervening in health in a variety of ways: through community work, through stroke rehabilitation using virtual reality and augmented reality, (or) verbatim theatre and the processes of ageing .
“We have creative writers working with artificial intelligence over at engineering. I am starting a project using cobotics (collaborative robots) – that are used in manufacturing – and dance . It’s really incredibly broad-reaching.” Stewart incorporated similar advancements in his work with ADT, but said it was never about the technology itself.
“ It’s about ‘What can it do for us?’. Technology is interesting because it provides a new canvas. At the very fundamental level of art-making practice, it’s about agency in the world and exploring the world and reframing the world in ways that we haven’t seen it before.” By artists taking technology and using it for purposes other than it was originally intended for, further discoveries and applications can be made, which could have benefits for other industries and the wider public.
“Those kind of interventions into other fields has a disruptive nature. I don’t think, for example, the programmers at the engineering department ever thought they’d be working with dance.” Artists can also make news, information, science and technology more relatable for a wider audience, Stewart said. “ We can hear data on what’s happening in the world, but artists take that data and those stories and those facts and turn them into these kind of emblems that have affect and emotion embedded in them, and are quite transformative.”
CREDIT: PATRICK McDONALD
Word count: 498
