A new TV series for children is about exactly that. CHILL chatted to one of the actors of The Gamers 2037
Do you love video games? Ever wondered what it would be like to play for real? A new TV series for children is about exactly that. CHILL chatted to one of the stars of The Gamers 2037.
The Gamers 2037 is set in a future where gaming is banned, and three former friends have to overcome their differences and beat an unbeatable AI puzzle – or risk being trapped in the game forever.
Ashleigh Maree Ross plays Xeon, a noob who joins Galahad (Marvin Rowland) to find Kite (Miah Madden) in an abandoned warehouse.
CHILL: Tell us about the world of The Gamers 2037.
Ashleigh Maree Ross: The Gamers is set a little into the future. A worldwide game is banned, when the participants who started to fail the game,disappear (they’re called “the absorbed”). Three friends who have a complicated past must work together to save everyone and themselves from staying trapped in the game forever!
What’s it like in the future?
It’s a little scary in The Gamers’ future! The world has lost people to this game virus with no hope of getting them back – so anything relating to the VAARG (Virtual and Augmented Reality Gaming) is a little worrisome. How long have you been acting? My mum would say I’ve been acting ever since I was born. She put me into acting classes when I was five because I wouldn’t stop re-enacting scenes on TV!
So 16 years now. Is this your first TV series?
I’ve actually been lucky enough to appear in a few TV series in the past! However, The Gamers is my first series in a principal role and where I appear in the whole season – which is very exciting!
How long did it take to film?
We shot the series over six weeks – it was super fast paced but a really incredible experience. Were the special effects hard for the actors?
It was actually my first time working with special effects – it was super fun! A lot of the time, we were just looking at a green screen cube or a little dot on the wall! So it was super funny, too. What was the best moment of making the series? (or the worst?!) Best part was definitely meeting all the cast and crew. The cast clicked really well and it made coming to set such a blast. There definitely weren’t any “worst” moments – but we did shoot in a forest on a 40C day, which was extremely hot in our gaming outfits to say the least … Have you seen many episodes yet? I’ve seen one episode so far.
What’s it like seeing yourself on screen?
For me personally, it’s both super strange but also incredibly exciting. I’m my own biggest critic so I’m always looking at my acting to see how I did, but I always feel super grateful to have the opportunity to act on screen.
In real life, are you a gamer? (which games?) Little bit! I have a Nintendo Switch which I love. I’m a fan of all the original classics like Mario Kart, Super Marios Bros and Zelda. Now, are you looking forward to the future or not? I’m definitely looking forward to the future – hopefully without scary A.I. though.
The Gamers 2037 is on Saturdays at 7.30am on 9GO! (or catch up on 9now.com.au)
Word count: 585
