ROADSIDE ASSIST There’s plenty of electric vehicle advertising, but here’s a potential customer’s experience. Tesla said if I wanted to test a Model 3 to make a booking on its website. There were no Hyundai Ioniq 5s or Polestar 2s for me to view. I was told to go to their websites to view and order. Who is going to pay over $85,000 on the internet for a car you can’t see or test drive, and won’t arrive for a year? My excitement has quickly faded.
Taki Eleftheriou, email Buying these cars is not like popping down to the Holden or Ford showrooms of yesteryear. Hyundai offers an “Augmented Reality Experience” for its sold out Ioniq 5; you can soon visit urban “Polestar Spaces” to experience its 2, while an online booking form is how to get a 15-minute Tesla test drive. If you dislike the traditional car showroom experience (many do) it’s a godsend and you’d be amazed how many people today are prepared to buy a car they haven’t tested. But for people who like to kick the tyres, it’s frustrating. These EVs are in short supply, so a waiting list – even for a car you’ve never seen – has become the norm.
ELECTRIC FUTURE I want to replace my one-tonne ute with something electric but there’s nothing available. Is anything coming in the next 12 months? I’d even consider a van.
Dave Gumm, email No electric one-tonners will be with us anytime soon, but in mid-2022 Ford releases its pure-electric E-Transit van in Australia. It will have 317km range, 198kW/430Nm, 12.4 cubic metres cargo capacity and a payload of 1616kg. Ford hasn’t revealed pricing, but about $70,000 looks likely.
DODGY REPAIRS?
At its last service our local Subaru dealer told my friend her 34,000km Impreza, just out of warranty, needed new CV joints and quoted $3500 for repair. Apparently it was urgent and the car was dangerous to drive. Instead, she took it to a trusted mechanic friend specialising in Subarus and he could find nothing wrong, save it needing a wheel alignment. Moral of the story? Don’t feel you have to take your car to the dealer you bought from. I’d previously purchased three cars from that Subaru dealer and they won’t be seeing me again.
Stephen Vecchiet, email There are honourable workshops and mechanics, and less than honourable ones. If your friend has a written quote from said Subaru dealer listing the “dangerous” CV joints and the independent mechanic states this is clearly false, report the dealer to Subaru head office for investigation. I’m sure Subaru Australia would act upon it. It always pays to seek a second independent opinion when presented with substantial quotes for repair.
FRUGAL CAT Re: “fit for purpose” my 2014 Jaguar XF with 2.2-litre diesel engine achieves 4.1L/100km on the highway and not much more around the city. With 290,000km on the clock I think that’s more than acceptable.
John Vardill, email That four-cylinder turbo-diesel may not be a performance or refinement high point in the pantheon of Jaguar engines, but good grief it’s frugal. You’re besting Jaguar’s official economy: 4.8L/100km (highway) and 5.4L/100km (combined) are its quotes for the XF 2.2D. Seems yours is only improving with age.
SIGNS ARE THERE Re: Audi’s lack of speed-limit recognition, if they want to know what Australian standard traffic signs look like, they need only look in Schedule 2 of the Australian Road Rules. Poor excuse Audi!
Ross F, email As a follow-up to Audi Australia not activating speed-sign recognition in its cars, spokesman Shaun Cleary said it would continue to be evaluated. He made a good point that there are limitations to such technology, including school-zone speed limits varying at different times of day and speed limit signs on the back of buses being confused with proper road signs.
CLOSER THAN THEY APPEAR I’ve just bought a 2014 Toyota Corolla and find its outside mirrors to be a nuisance by making cars look further away than they are. Can I get normal mirrors to cover them?
Coral Berry, email You can. There are companies (just do a Google search) providing flat mirrors to replace your Corolla’s convex mirrors, cut to size and with silicone to install. They’re about $70 each and claim to be ADR compliant. Instead, I’d compel you to try getting used to convex mirrors. They offer a much wider field of vision for better safety.
HEAT ESCAPE My workplace doesn’t have shaded parking for my black BMW with black leather interior. When I leave to collect my kids from school the interior is like a furnace on sunny days. I’ve tried a sunshade and dropping the windows a bit, but the leather still brands me when I get in and the aircon takes forever to cool the car. Any suggestions?
Ryan McManus, email Park somewhere undercover further away from your workplace. Your car’s interior and paint will thank you, and if it’s sunny, think how lovely that walk to work will be. If that’s not possible, here’s what I do when beach parking in summer. A towel over each seat and one over the steering wheel – that stops the melting skin part. When you return to your hot car, open one door (or window) then open and close the opposite door numerous times. The hot air is forced out while cool air is drawn back in. It works surprisingly well.
IAIN CURRY GETS ANSWERS WRITE TO MOTORING AT CARS@NEWS.COM.AU OR PO BOX 2808, GPO SYDNEY, 2001
CREDIT: IAIN CURRY
Word count: 924
