The new Djaara Lights display in Bendigo's city centre is now on show.
The display features digital projections and neon artworks sharing the stories of the six seasons across Djandak (Country) from Dja Dja Wurrung People, the Traditional Owners of Bendigo.
Funded by Creative Victoria, Djaara Lights is a collaboration between DJAARA (Dja Dja Wurrung Clans Aboriginal Corporation) and the City of Greater Bendigo.
Djaara chief executive Rodney Carter said Djaara Lights placed Traditional Owner knowledge at the forefront of an artistic practice to showcase the Six Seasons in an innovative way not shared before.
"Djaara Lights will provide a heightened platform to showcase Dja Dja Wurrung culture, language and art," he said. "It showcases the imagination and artistry of two talented Djaara artists."
First Nations artists Drew Berick and Troy Firebrace are leading this culturally significant art project and have worked closely with 20 local Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students.
In a statement released by the City of Greater Bendigo earlier this year, Mr Berick and Mr Firebrace said being part of the project gave both an overwhelming feeling of pride and privilege.
"Working with the younger artists to guide them and lead them has been rewarding," Mr Berick said.
"I have been incredibly fortunate with the successes I have had through creating art, but this project in particular is very exciting and humbling."
Mr Firebrace said said: "Being a part of Djaara Lights strengthens the voice of Djaara culture in the community".
Beginning at the Bendigo and Adelaide Bank forecourt on Pall Mall, locals can wander along Oscar's Walk towards the Telstra Exchange Building on Short Street and enjoy the neon artworks and street art between 7pm and 11pm.
The display includes a 9.6m large-scale illuminated mural 'I am Djaara'.
An augmented reality app will enable people using a mobile to also enjoy artworks along Oscar's Walk boardwalk leading to the illuminated mural.
City of Greater Bendigo's creative communities coordinator and joint project manager Maree Tonkin said Djaara Lights was an important cultural step forward for the region.
The artworks are expected to be on display for at least the next three years.
CREDIT: Allanah Sciberras and Maddy Fogarty
Word count: 362
