SPECIAL CRUISING REPORT What’s on the horizon for Australians who want to restart their holidays on the water? Andrea Black finds out
It’s been two years since Australian cruisers have been able to sail away to far-off destinations from home-shore ports and enjoy panoramic ocean views plus all the culinary pleasure and entertainment a cruise holiday has to offer.
Joel Katz, Cruise Lines International Association managing director Australasia, says the past two years have involved an incredible amount of work in response to the pandemic and changes have been made in almost every area of cruising.
“We now have the most stringent health measures to be found anywhere in tourism, beginning with testing and vaccination requirements before boarding and continuing right throughout the entire journey,” Joel says.
And while the green light hasn’t been given yet by the Australian government, National Cabinet recently announced that eastern states and the federal government will jointly develop plans for cruising’s revival.
And we’re keen to get out on the water.
“Importantly, the essential experiences that make cruising so special are still there, and we’re seeing cruise fans heading back to sea as soon as they’re able,” Joel says.
“Most cruise lines have cancelled sailings through to the end of May and it will take several months to prepare ships for their return, so we need governments to sign off on industry protocols as soon as possible so we can begin a careful and responsible revival of cruise tourism in Australia.” Whether you’re choosing to cruise internationally or opting to wait for cruising to restart in Australian waters, there’s a lot to get excited about.
Here’s what we have to look forward when we get back on board.
FOR THE WHOLE FAMILY On family-friendly cruise ships, there’s an endless array of activities on offer, from ice-skating, simulated surfing and zip-lining to dedicated kids’ clubs.
Family fun just entered a new realm on the new Disney Wish ship, which sets sail in the Caribbean in June and looks to be a game-changer at sea. Its augmented-reality Disney Uncharted Adventure is a multiplayer interactive quest via an app where Disney characters such as Moana, Tiana, Peter Pan and Nemo come to life and the cruiser becomes part of the story. The adventure culminates in an interactive grand finale hosted in one of the ship’s entertainment venues.
Meanwhile, thrillseekers young and old take note: when Carnival Splendor sails in Australian waters later this year after a stint in the US, there will be the opportunity to alternate between catapulting down the freefall waterslide Green Lightning and circling down sister slide Twister Waterslide, part of the green and gold Waterworks attraction.
Prefer not to get wet? When Royal Caribbean’s Quantum of the Seas arrives in Australia later this year, cruisers can expect family fun with laser tag and skydiving at the RipCord by iFLY attraction.
Not to be outdone, Norwegian Cruise Line’s new vessels, Norwegian Prima and Norwegian Viva, set to launch overseas, will have the fastest freefall-drop dry slides at sea and the largest racetrack on the ocean. With more than 420m of track, drivers will be able to reach speeds over 50km per hour. disneycruise.disney.go.com; carnival.com.au; ncl.com; royalcaribbean.com
FOR MUSIC LOVERS Those pining for a great rock festival can experience one at sea come November. Rock the Boat and Cruisin’ Country is a two-for-one known as The Super Cruise, featuring rockers such as Suzi Quatro as well as 20 other renowned acts. There will also be a country music extravaganza with Lee and Tania Kernaghan, Troy Cassar-Daley and Adam Harvey performing. The cruise, on board Royal Caribbean’s Ovation of the Seas, sets sail for the South Pacific from Sydney.
Meanwhile, P&O Cruises is hosting a number of country music festivals at sea, set to sail from October 2022 and featuring country-rock duo The Wolfe Brothers and other renowned musicians, playing new hits as well as all the classics.
Prefer to hear classic rock hits? Head to Holland America Line’s new classic rock club, Rolling Stone Rock Room on Koningsdam and Nieuw Statendam. Norwegian Cruise Lines also caters to rock fans with live performances in Syd Norman’s Pour House.hollandamerica.com; ncl.com; pocruises.com.au; thesupercruise.com.au
FOR THEATRE BUFFS Productions at sea have stepped up another level with news Cunard has signed a three-year agreement with the renowned Royal Shakespeare Company for performances and workshops on board Queen Mary 2. Those lucky enough to be on a transatlantic crossing can enjoy scenes from such plays as Romeo and Juliet, as well as intimate “Shakespeare Tales” events where actors perform their favourite sonnets and speeches. When P&O Cruises sets sail again in Australian waters, entertainment lovers can experience some of the nation’s best comedy. The cruise line is renowned for being a major supporter of live Aussie comedy, with cruises dedicated to the genre. cunard.com; pocruises.com.au
THE ULTIMATE IN LUXURY We all deserve a pampered break, and when only the finest will do, consider booking one of the best suites at sea. Set to debut on the west coast of the US and Mexico this year, Princess Cruises’ Discovery Princess features beautifully designed interiors including their top-of-the-range Sky Suites. There’s room for up to five guests to enjoy the cruise line’s largest balcony at sea, with 270-degree views. Each balcony has a dining table for four, a large day bed, loungers and an outside bar with mini fridge and TV.
Meanwhile, Regent Seven Seas will be debuting the “most exclusive address at sea” come November 2023 with the 413 sqm Regent Suite on board Seven Seas Grandeur. Luxuriate in your condo at sea featuring a giant living room with personalised bar set-up and dining room. There’s also a wraparound veranda with its own minipool, but the definite highlight is the master bathroom. Featuring nine different types of marble, there’s a personal sauna, steam room and spa treatment area. The ship will be cruising the Caribbean and the Mediterranean. princess.com; rssc.com
FOR SERIOUS ADVENTURERS Already discovered Antarctica, and ventured north to Alaska? Ticked off marvelling at the wildlife in the Galápagos? Expedition cruisers keen to get off the beaten track might want to add the Bissagos Islands to the list. Expedition cruise line Hurtigruten is offering the chance to discover the isles off the coast of West Africa, declared a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve.
Expect to spy a plethora of birdlife, sea turtles, crocodiles, sharks, dolphins and the West African manatee on Hurtigruten’s 13-day West African Archipelago Expedition:Cape Verde & Bissagos Island Cruise departing in November.
Viking Expeditions’ new expedition ship, the Viking Octantis, will sail Niagara and the Great Lakes of North America. Highlights include kayaking Mackinac Island in Michigan and hiking the dense boreal forests that line the shores of Lake Superior.
Meanwhile, Ponant is hosting an exclusive 11-night voyage through French Polynesia on board Le Paul Gauguin for the annual chairman cruise with Ponant head Sarina Bratton. Highlights include snorkelling the lagoons of Bora Bora and Moorea and a visit to the private islet of Motu Mahana.
The 2022 Chairman’s Cruise: The Society Islands & the Tuamotus departs June 4, 2022. hurtigruten.com.au; au.ponant.com; vikingcruises.com.au
SAILING IN AUSTRALIAN WATERS NOW Keen to sail right now, and stay close to home? Australian-flagged small ship adventure brands Coral Expeditions and True North are sailing off the coast of Australia now. Since Coral Expeditions’ restart in late 2020, the cruise line has operated more than 100 voyages in the Kimberley, Great Barrier Reef, Tasmania, Cape York and Arnhem Land. And luxury adventure brand True North has been successfully sailing off the coast of Western Australia.
Meanwhile, APT’s foreign-flagged MS Caledonian Sky, which can sail under the proviso it employs Australians to take on service and hospitality roles, has its renowned Kimberley Coastal Encounter itinerary sailing across dates in March and April. coralexpeditions.com; truenorth.com.au; aptouring.com.au
HEALTH AND SAFETY Cruise lines are implementing proactive measures to ensure the health and safety of all those on board, and in ports. Royal Caribbean Cruises chairman Richard Fain has said that cruising could well be the safest form of travel.
“The ship environment is no longer a disadvantage, it’s an advantage because, unlike anywhere else, we are able to control our environment, which eliminates the risks of a big outbreak,” he said.
While no setting can be immune from Covid, cruising provides one of the highest levels of demonstrated mitigation against the virus. In response to the Omicron variant, cruise lines have strengthened testing, mask-wearing and other requirements, and encourage booster vaccine doses for those eligible. Some cruise lines are requiring an additional test at embarkation, on top of the test that all guests need to take within 48 hours of embarkation.
Added to this are multilayered ways to safeguard the health and safety of all, including enhanced ventilation, enhanced cleaning and sanitisation, social distancing and reduced occupancy.
Scan the code for 22 tips first-time cruisers should know about.
CREDIT: Andrea Black
Word count: 1483
