EDUCATION Mikaela Jade – INDIGITAL Cabrogal woman Mikaela Jade founded InDigital in 2014 to provide training pathways for Indigenous people into the digital economy. The InDigital School program combines Indigenous cultural knowledge with digital skills, including coding, augmented reality and animation. This year, the InDigital Minecraft Education Challenge asked students to build a representation of their own local area now and in the future, using the NAIDOC Week theme of protecting country. InDigital also provides training workshops for Indigenous women and consultancy services and Jade has won several national awards, including the Veuve Clicquot New Generation award.
Andrew Barnes, Chris Eigeland, Chris Hood, Vu Tran – GO1 Born in a Brisbane garage in 2015, Go1’s training software helps businesses provide onboarding, compliance and professional development training to their staff. Aiming to be the “Spotify or Netflix of training”, Go1 was founded by Chris Eigeland, Andrew Barnes, Chris Hood and Vu Tran, who have grown their baby into a truly global business that is now operating in six markets and has landed more than $100m in investment. Go1 is now valued at more than $1bn – giving it “unicorn” status – and more than 70 per cent of its sales now come from international markets including the US and the UK.
Professor Genevieve Bell – 3A INSTITUTE “Who is building, managing and decommissioning our AI-enabled future?” This is the focus of the 3A Institute, founded in 2017 within the School of Cybernetics at the Australian National University by Distinguished Professor Genevieve Bell. After studying anthropology, Bell spent many years at Intel Corporation, much of it focusing on user experience, the junction of social science and tech, before taking up her role at ANU, where she seeks to develop a new branch of engineering around the use of AI and data. According to ANU Chancellor Julie Bishop, the program has achieved a remarkable level of gender equity, with women making up 50 per cent of staff, students and graduates.
Ben Tze, Jeremy Cox, Duncan Anderson – EDROLO The three founders of Edrolo left corporate jobs before winning a place in the Startmate Accelerator for their ed-tech business, which was founded around the idea that all students should have access to great teachers and the conviction that using old-school textbooks was no longer the best way to teach. Since then, they have developed partnerships with more than 800 high schools in Australia, providing studentfriendly resources that include videos that can be watched on mobile phones and practice questions, and – in an ironic twist – Edrolo-specific textbooks that complement the offering along with analytics to support teachers.
Pieter Danhieux, Matias Madou, Fatemah Beydoun – SECURE CODE WARRIOR Cyber security education is one of Australia’s most pressing issues, with the nation needing more security awareness to keep its infrastructure safe. Founded in Australia in 2015 by global cyber security experts Pieter Danhieux, Matias Madou and Fatemah Beydoun, Secure Code Warrior is an innovative secure coding platform that helps developers think and act with a security mindset. It includes support for nearly 46 programming languages and frameworks, and delivers more than 4500 training modules covering more than 150 different software weaknesses. In 2019 the startup landed $70m in funding led by Goldman Sachs, ForgePoint Capital and Cisco, along with existing investors from AirTree Ventures and Paladin Group. Local customers include Telstra, Woolworths, Xero and ING Bank.
Professor Katrina Falkner – CSER Falkner leads the Computer Science Education Research Group (CSER) at the University of Adelaide and has extensive experience in industry consultation, including with DST Group, NICTA, Google US, Google Australia & New Zealand, the Commonwealth Department of Education and Training, and Telstra Foundation, spanning both Computer Science Education and Distributed Systems and Modelling. She led the development of the CSER MOOCs – open online courses to help prepare Australian teachers for the Digital Technologies Curriculum. She also leads the national CSER Digital Technologies Education Program, designed to support teachers teaching Computer Science, with an emphasis on supporting young women, low-SES and Indigenous populations.
Word count: 670
