Queensland is home to several major acquisition and sustainment programs and significant opportunities for local industry exist, from shipbuilding sustainment in the north, to aerospace and armoured vehicle manufacturing in the southeast of the state.
Rheinmetall Defence Australia has established its Military Vehicle Centre of Excellence (MILVEHCOE) at Redbank, which is currently building the vast majority of more than 200 Boxer Combat Reconnaissance Vehicles under Defence’s $5.2bn Land 400 Phase 2 program. Rheinmetall is also one of two companies in the running to win more work under the $10-15bn Phase 3 of Land 400, which seeks to acquire up to 450 Infantry Fighting Vehicles.
Boeing Australia announced in September it will build its Loyal Wingman airpower teaming system at Wellcamp Airport near Toowoomba, Boeing’s only aircraft assembly facility outside the US.
In the maritime sector, Austal is supporting the Guardian-class patrol boats of the Pacific Nations in Cairns, and TAFE Queensland is training their crews. Cairns has also been selected for the RAN’s first Regional Maintenance Centre (RMC) and an industry partner is expected to be in place by early 2022.
But while the federal government’s focus on building sovereign industry capability means further opportunities, a gap in available skills often means smaller companies find it difficult to attract appropriately qualified staff.
The further growth of companies such as Acacia Ridge-based fabrication and engineering company Rockpress, which performs work for Army’s Land 121 Phase 3 (Medium Heavy Vehicle Capability) and for RDA on the Land 400 program, has been restricted by the lack of a pool of appropriately qualified personnel.
“We have about 115 people on-site at the moment and we deal with the primes rather than as a supplier to Defence directly,” explains Rockpress marketing and assistant manager Allan Mortensen. “We make products for Rheinmetall and Haulmark Trailers but from our perspective boilermakers, sheet metal workers and machine operators are in short supply at the moment.” The Queensland government recognises the defence industry as a priority sector and has had a team to assist growth in the sector since 2013. The Department of State Development, Infrastructure, Local Government and Planning (DSDILGP) has also recently released its Queensland Defence, Maritime, Aerospace and Space Industry Skills Plan, which aims to address the skilling needs specific to the sector.
The government has also partnered with organisations such as TAFE Queensland, DMTC and the Naval Shipbuilding College (NSC) to address the gaps.
One example of a specific gap is the qualification of welders to the international ISO9606 standard – a qualification critical to several Defence programs, including the multibillion-dollar Land 400.
In support of skills growth in this area, DMTC delivered workshops in five regional centres across Queensland in 2018 under its Industry Capability Development (ICD) program, aimed at the welding of high-strength steel, such as that used in armoured vehicles.
More recently it has worked with the Queensland government in a pilot project known as the Smart Enough Factory, which uses digital tools to produce a map of a company’s end-to-end processes to assist decision making and ensure it is “Defence ready”.
“Larger companies are obviously better equipped to take these learnings on board and equipped to look after themselves in terms of quality systems, security, business process maturity etc,” explains DMTC Industry Capability Program leader Charlotte Morris.
“For small businesses though, and particularly those new to Defence, this can be a steep learning curve and that’s why this kind of practical and expert assistance is so valuable.” TAFE Queensland is the state’s largest and most experienced training partner and is partnered with the state government to develop the critical skills needed, including the important ISO9606 accreditation. As part of this, TAFE Queensland has acquired 15 Soldamatic augmented reality welding simulators with state government funding and has trained a core of 135 welders to the international standard since 2019. “The simulators produce qualified welders up to 4 per cent faster than traditional methods of training someone who is already a welder, with good skills, to the ISO9606 standard,” explains TAFE Queensland’s Defence Solutions manager Garry Hargreaves. “It’s been hugely successful. We also work closely with the NSC and we are the first training organisation outside South Australia to be endorsed by them.”
CREDIT: NIGEL PITTAWAY
Word count: 704
