THERE’S NOTHING MORE AUSSIE THAN WORKING IN THESE JOBS THE Aussie stereotype of a hard day’s work on the farm, a building site, in the mines or a car factory has evolved.
Agriculture, trades, mining and manufacturing still offer workers opportunities for hard yakka – but with a modern twist.
AGRICULTURE Total employment in agriculture, forestry and fishing grew 9.5 per cent – adding about 30,000 jobs – in the five years to November, 2020.
Although Australian Government figures show the most common occupations were livestock farmer and crop farmer, agtech is also creating roles in areas from automation to artificial intelligence and data science.
An Australian Council of Learned Academies report predicts a future that leverages technologies such as sensors, the internet of things (IoT), robotics, machine learning, large scale optimisation and data fusion, biotechnology, nanotechnology, and distributed ledger technology.
Farm management software company AgriWebb co-founder and chief executive Kevin Baum says it can be an “uphill battle” attracting talent into agtech as people assume they need to have grown up on a farm but this is not the case. AgriWebb is currently hiring engineering, marketing and management staff, and all roles are based in the city.
“Most of our company doesn’t necessarily come from an agriculture background, you just have to be fired up about solving big problems,” he says. “A lot of our engineering team come from big tech companies – Google, IBM, Adobe – or from start-ups, but they have been with us for years because what we are doing is challenging, interesting and exciting.” Co-founder and chief revenue officer John Fargher agrees there are opportunities in agtech for workers “from all walks of life”.
He grew up on a fifth-generation livestock farm in South Australia before becoming a lawyer.
“Agriculture is a growing industry and really impactful and it brings a lot of meaning into someone’s life outside of a salary,” he says.
“The best part of my job is when you stand on a customer’s farm and they explain how we have managed to set them up to hand on their business to the next generation or grow their production to feed the world.”
TRADES For many trades roles, physical strength is not essential and hands-on skills are no longer enough.
Motor mechanics, for example, plug in computers to cars to diagnose and fix many issues.
Employers across the trades are increasingly looking for apprentices with technical and digital skills, favouring those who have studied IT and engineering subjects while at school.
TAFE NSW commercial general manager Peter Buttenshaw says employers often want candidates who are not just certificate III level-qualified but have a certificate IV, diploma or advanced diploma.
Buttenshaw, who will supervise the engineering competition at the WorldSkills Australia National Championships & Skills Show in Perth in August, says employers also look for first-year apprentices who have done engineering, robotics or digital subjects at school.
“Any kids with high-level maths and aptitude for applied engineering definitely have highly desirable skills,” he says.
MINING Mining jobs increased by 21 per cent over the past five years, and Australian Government forecasters expect growth to continue.
Technologies such as augmented reality and IoT have already changed the way people work in the sector, but their adoption has become even more widespread since COVID-19.
BHP, for example, uses Microsoft HoloLens 2 – a head-mounted computer with a transparent display – to allow experts to remotely coach on-site workers through physical tasks and inspections. The mining company has also installed IoT sensors so data can be remotely collected from trucks, excavators, drills and bulldozers without the potential risks associated with manual readings.
Such changes mean tech-savvy workers are needed in the mining sector to install systems, develop digital tools, drive remote operated vehicles and pilot drones.
MANUFACTURING While employment declines occurred last decade in such things as car and furniture manufacturing, it rose in food and beverage manufacturing.
Overall employment in the sector dropped by 1.7 per cent in the past five years but there are growing opportunities for tech-focused workers.
A 2019 Genpact report reveals manufacturing is a leader in the adoption of robotics, with 95 per cent of senior executives believing employees would be comfortable working alongside robots by 2021, and 71 per cent of workers agreed.
Job site Indeed career insights head Jay Munro recommends workers keep career options open by filling technological knowledge gaps.
“It’s highly possible that jobs that are lost (due to automation) will be replaced by new positions which require different skills,” he says. “For example ... there will be a need for skilled people who know how to program and fix machines.” A CSIRO report on advanced manufacturing implores the sector to embrace sensors and data analytics, advanced materials, smart robotics and automation, additive manufacturing (3D printing), and augmented and virtual reality. “Digital literacy needs to go beyond strong computer, coding, mechatronics and data management skills to include expertise in smart data systems, communications and data interpretation,” it states.
CREDIT: MELANIE BURGESS
Word count: 834
