Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews suffered a serious vertebrae injury that could lead to an extended period away from the state’s top job as he faces potential surgery, The Australian understands.
Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton will fill in for Christian Porter as Leader of the House when federal parliament returns on Monday.
Energy Minister Angus Taylor said the early closure of Victoria’s Yallourn coal power station raises reliability and price concerns while placing added pressure on the market to deliver new supplies.
Richard Ferguson 10.15pm:No surgery for Andrews
Daniel Andrews suffered serious injuries but is not facing immediate surgery, his doctors say.
The Alfred’s Director of ICU, Associate Professor Steve McGloughlin, confirmed that the Victorian Premier was in a stable condition.
“Mr Andrews is comfortable and his pain is well-controlled,” Professor McGloughlin said.
“A multidisciplinary team including intensive care, trauma and orthopaedic specialists has developed a treatment plan, together with the Andrews family.
“Mr Andrews has sustained some serious injuries, and his condition is being monitored closely. At this stage there is no immediate plan for surgery.
A spokeswoman for Mr Andrews said: “On the advice of clinicians at The Alfred, there are no immediate plans for surgery.”
Read more:Daniel Andrews in trauma care after fall
Stephen Lunn 9.55pm:Fear of getting lost on way to new energy
When Ashley Schoer was told the Yallourn power station would be closing in 2028, four years earlier than scheduled, his employer ­EnergyAustralia offered him no pathway from his job in old ­energy to the company’s new ­energy future.
“We were given FAQs that talked about support during the transition, but it was pretty wishy-washy,” said Mr Schoer, a 34-year veteran of the brown-coal-fired power plant.
“There were no guarantees they would take any of us along with them into this renewable ­energy future they talked about.”
Mr Schoer, a unit controller at the plant, said the company’s commitment to have a 350MW battery — larger than any currently operating — up and running at the plant by 2026 offered no comfort to him or his ­colleagues.
“Their timetable has the battery up and running by 2026, but also they have the plant fully ­operational until 2028, so this doesn’t seem to allow for workers like myself to make any transition, because it would need new people to construct and run it,” he said. “My understanding is most of the jobs are in the construction phase anyway.”
EnergyAustralia’s promises of carbon neutrality by 2050, and its commitment to cleaner energy, threaten to leave behind workers like Mr Schoer, 52, despite the company’s commitments to support the workforce through its transition to cleaner energy.
FULL STORY
Richard Ferguson9.25pm:Plan needed for foreign students
Universities Australia chair­woman Deborah Terry is calling on the Morrison government to devise a plan to bring foreign ­students back to Australia, as Canberra says the $40bn inter­national education sector’s ­revival depends on the states.
Trade Minister Dan Tehan said the return of international students into Australia could not proceed until the states gave the commonwealth detailed plans on how they would quarantine foreign students.
The closure of Australia’s international borders has threatened the $10bn stream of revenue universities get from foreign students, and enrolments from overseas plunged by 5 per cent last year.
FULL STORY
Rebecca Urban8.40pm:Goal to make our schools best in class by 2030
Federal Education Minister Alan Tudge has flagged an impending review of the teacher education sector, arguing further reform is necessary to reverse declining academic outcomes and return the nation to the top of the global rankings by 2030.
He has also hinted at the ­creation of new pathways into teaching, including bringing back one-year diplomas to attract talented mid-career professionals from other fields, such as engineering and accountancy.
In a speech to be delivered at the Menzies Research Centre on Thursday, Mr Tudge points to a 20-year decline in Australian student achievement, as evidence by the OECD PISA test, as justification for reform focused on boosting teacher quality, creating a more rigorous school curriculum and safeguarding NAPLAN from “those who call for less accountability”.
“Australian students are now, on average, about 1½ years behind Singaporean students when it comes to reading and science, and three years behind on maths,” he says. “The next evolution of ­reforms is needed (and) I will soon be launching a review to help shape such reforms.
“This review will investigate where there is still further work to do to ensure that all (initial teacher education) courses are high-quality and adequately prepare our teachers to be effective from day one. The quality of teaching is the most important factor in student outcomes. It is my most ­important priority when it comes to schooling.”
FULL STORY
Ewin Hannan8pm:IR bill in doubt as senator calls for major change
Senate crossbencher Stirling Griff has called for significant changes to the Coalition’s industrial relations bill before he would consider supporting it, casting fresh doubt on the ability of the government to get the proposed laws passed next week.
Fellow crossbencher Rex Patrick, who along with Jacqui Lambie wants a Senate vote on the bill delayed until May, said it would be “impossible” for the government to get agreement on the complex legislation while Christian Porter was on leave.
Senator Patrick told ABC television that he could almost guarantee that the bill would not be dealt with during next week’s sitting.
Senator Griff told The Australian on Wednesday that the government would need to support changes recommended by the Law Council of Australia before he would entertain supporting the bill, including greatly enhanced arbitration powers for the Fair Work Commission.
In its submission to a Senate inquiry, the Law Council proposes a raft of changes, including giving casual workers access to arbitration by the commission where an employer denied a request to convert to permanent employment.
The proposal, backed by the union movement, is not currently supported by the government but the Law Council said the change would prevent employers unreasonably denying a request from a casual.
FULL STORY
Anglie Raphael7.20pm: Kirkup to quit politics if he loses WA seat
West Australian Liberal leader Zak Kirkup says he will not “continue in the political arena” if he loses his seat at the state election this weekend.
The concession comes after the Opposition Leader’s other bombshell a few weeks ago when he admitted his party could not defeat Labor and its hugely popular leader Mark McGowan.
Mr Kirkup, who is a first-term MP and became the youngest ever WA Liberal leader in November, holds his seat of Dawesville by a razor thin margin of just 0.8 per cent.
“If I am not returned to Dawesville, I don’t think that I would return to politics,” Mr Kirkup told the ABC’s 7.30.
“This is my home, and this is the community that I love and have a privilege of representing.
“If I’m not returned here … I’m not going to continue in the political arena. I think that’s my time.”
Mr McGowan has become wildly popular in WA thanks to his handling of the COVID-19 pandemic and he has repeatedly argued MrKirkup lacks experience to lead the state.
After conceding defeat was inevitable, Mr Kirkup shifted his focus to suggest voters should not allow Labor to gain “totalcontrol” in parliament.
The election will be held on Saturday.
READ MORE:China threatens Canberra over HK legislator
Jimmy Vielkind7.10pm:Cuomo accused by fourth adviser
New York Governor Andrew Cuomo’s office has received a complaint from another female employee alleging inappropriate behaviour and referred it to investigators conducting a review of sexual-harassment accu­sations against him, according to sources.
The Albany Times-Union first reported the new complaint. The complainant, who wasn’t named by the paper and still works in the governor’s office, accused Mr Cuomo of touching her inappropriately late last year at the Executive Mansion in Albany, according to the Times-Union. The person familiar with the matter confirmed that was the allegation in the complaint.
Mr Cuomo, a Democrat, told reporters during a Tuesday conference call that he was unaware of the claim.
He said he never touched anybody inappropriately or made any inappropriate advances. Nobody ever told him at the time that his actions made them feel uncomfortable, he said.
The latest accuser is the fourth woman who worked for the governor to accuse him of inappropriate behaviour or sexual harassment.
FULL STORY
John Ferguson6.20pm:Stability of Andrews government in doctor’s hands
The stability of the Victorian government is in the hands of Daniel Andrews’ doctors.
The fall is self-evidently painful and unwelcome news for the Victorian Premier and his family, but the implications of the misstep may be wide.
The immediate challenge for the cabinet is to effectively dismantle, at least over the short term, the Andrews system of him being the administration’s north, south, east and west. His deputy, James Merlino, will not have the same authority as Andrews and will be required to function in a more inclusive manner.
Read the full story here.
Agencies5.40pm:Myanmar security forces target striking workers
Hundreds of soldiers and police swooped on a railway station in Yangon on Wednesday seeking to arrest workers on strike to protest against the military coup in Myanmar, AFP reports.
The country has been in turmoil since the military ousted and detained civilian leader Aung San Suu Kyi last month, triggering daily protests around the country to demand the return of democracy.
Security forces have responded with an increasingly brutal crackdown involving tear gas, water cannon and rubber bullets, as well as isolated incidents of live rounds.
Close to 2000 people have been arrested and the death toll has climbed to more than 60.
— AFP
Staff Reporters5.15pm:Australia lifts Auckland ‘hotspot’ designation
Nicola Berkovic5.05pm:Law firm CEO stands down over Porter email
Annette Kimmitt will depart MinterEllison after emailing staff saying the firm’s representation of Attorney-General Christian Porter had ‘triggered hurt’ for her. Read more here
Will Glasgow4.55pm:Xi Jinping tells military ‘be prepared to respond’
President Xi Jinping has told China’s military to “be prepared to respond” and focus on “combat readiness” days before a leaders’ meeting of the Quad.
China’s leader was speaking days before leaders of the Quadrilateral Security Dialogue — America’s President Joe Biden, Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi, Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga and Australian Prime Minister Scott Morrison — meet at a virtual summit on ­Saturday morning AEDT.
Patrick Commins4.35pm:Tensions in housing market over affordability
Consumer confidence has lifted back to near December’s 10-year highs, buoyed by the strong economy and national vaccine rollout, but the good news in Westpac’s latest sentiment survey was tempered by “evidence of tensions emerging in the housing market” and warnings of declining affordability. Read more here
Ben Packham4.05pm:China fumes as wanted HK politician lands in Australia
China has accused Australia of “meddling” in its internal affairs by allowing Hong Kong pro-democracy leader Ted Hui Chi-fung into the country.
Australian authorities relaxed travel restrictions for non-citizens to allow the former Hong Kong opposition MP – who is wanted by Beijing – to fly from London to Darwin on Tuesday.
He is the first of Hong Kong pro-democracy leaders to relocate to Australia, prompting an angry response from the Chinese Embassy in Canberra.
“China’s position on Hong Kong-related issues is consistent and clear,” an embassy spokesman said.
“Hong Kong is China’s Hong Kong, and every bit of Hong Kong affairs belongs to China’s internal affairs, in which no other country has the right to interfere.
“The Chinese side urges the Australian side to stop meddling in Hong Kong‘s affairs and China’s internal affairs in any way. Otherwise the China-Australia relations will only sustain further damage.”
READ MORE:Pro-democracy leader lands in Australia
Anthony Piovesan3.45pm:Anti-vaxx medics cop warning over dodgy advice
Doctors, nurses and pharmacists could be stripped of their ability to practise if they are found by the medical watchdog to be spreading COVID anti-vaccination claims.
Western Australia Premier Mark McGowan has responded to criticism from NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian - who called internal borders a "national embarrassment" - labelling her statement as "silly".
The punishment is part of a string of harsh penalties health practitioners face after the national medical boards and the Australian Health Practitioner Regulatory Agency (AHPRA) released a joint directive warning on Tuesday.
The alert said practitioners risked regulatory action if they spouted false or deceptive misinformation to patients or on social media which could undermine Australia’s vaccination program.
“There is no place for anti-vaccination messages in professional health practice, and any promotion of anti-vaccination claims including on social media, and advertising may be subject to regulatory action,” spokesman for the medical boards and Pharmacy Board chairman Brett Simmonds said.
AHPRA chief executive Martin Fletcher urged all of Australia’s 800,000 registered practitioners and 193,800 students to follow the guidelines.
— NCA NewsWire
READ MORE:Australia’s Covid response wins praise
Staff Reporters3.25pm:ACT reports one new Covid-19 case
The case, in hotel quarantine, brings the ACT’s coronavirus total to 123. The new case is a male under 20 who is a close contact of a previously infected person.
The territory has five active cases, all in hotel quarantine.
Health authorities say the male arrived with his family on a flight on March 1. He is a family member of a woman and another male under the age of 20 who tested positive last week.
Lachlan Moffet Gray 2.59pm:Leisure flight bookings eclipse pre-pandemic levels
Jetstar CEO Gareth Evans says leisure flight bookings are 10 per cent to 20 per cent higher than they were pre-pandemic, according to Bloomberg.
Speaking at a Centre for Aviation conference on Wednesday, Mr Evans said Qantas’s low-cost airline would be flying 90 per cent of its pre-COVID-19 schedule this month.
“Right now, with all the borders open pretty much, it’s looking pretty positive,” he said.
Qantas is trading at $5.175 per share, up 0.68 per cent, and above its five year average of $4.99.
Earlier today analysts at JP Morgan raised their recommendation for the stock to buy, saying the national carrier is well positioned to expand market share post-pandemic.
FOLLOW live ASX updates at Trading Day
Perry Williams2.53pm: Origin weighs closure of NSW coal station
Origin Energy boss Frank Calabria said an accelerated move to renewables sparked EnergyAustralia’s decision to close Victoria’s Yallourn coal plant four years early in 2028 as it weighs a range of scenarios for when to close its own Eraring coal station in NSW.
The energy transition “is reaching a tipping point,” Mr Calabria told a business conference on Wednesday. “Our future system is going to be powered by wind and solar, it’s going to be firmed up by pumped hydro and batteries and probably the need for gas fired generation for those extended outages that may occur.”
“We’re getting to the point where it’s accelerated over the last year and so today’s announcement I think is a sign of the times that this energy transition is really accelerating right now.”
Origin’s Eraring plant, the biggest in Australia, is also due to close by 2032 and Mr Calabria said it will consider a range of scenarios for the facility as the market keeps changing.
“We’ve said we would close by 2032 but I did say previously that you’ve got a market now really shifting rapidly and like all generators in the market we’re running that plant differently today than we were six months ago,” Mr Calabria said. “Therefore, there would be a range of scenarios we plan for. I can’t predict a particular scenario but you’d have to say the acceleration over recent times does not surprise me with EnergyAustralia’s announcement.”
READ MORE: Royals the new frontline in culture wars
Rhiannon Tuffield 2.39pm:Travel company ordered to refund more to thousands
The Australian consumer watchdog has directed a travel company to hand out additional refunds to thousands of customers who had their travel cancelled due to COVID-19.
Australian Pacific Touring, trading as APT and Travelmarvel, agreed to stop deducting marketing and overhead costs from refunds and to reimburse customers who had previously had those costs deducted.
APT is Australia’s largest family-owned tour and cruise company offering Australian and international tours and cruises.
The ACCC said it was concerned about the fees the company had been charging customers who had their travel cancelled, and it had accepted a commitment from APT to address the issue.
“The costs that APT deducted for marketing and overheads amounted to 15 per cent of the booking price and, with many holidays costing over $20,000, this meant a significant amount was withheld from the refunds given to consumers,” ACCC commissioner Sarah Court said.
“APT was not entitled to deduct these marketing and overhead costs as they were incurred before the booking was made and they would have been incurred regardless of whether a booking was made.”
Affected customers have either already been contacted by APT or will shortly be contacted about their revised refund. — NCA Newswire
READ MORE: Direct flights to ski fields
JOHN FERGUSON 1.52pm: Andrews prognosis worse than expected
Victorian Premier Daniel Andrews suffered a serious vertebrae injury that could lead to an extended period away from the state’s top job.
Mr Andrews suffered a fracture in his middle back, the T7 vertebrae, and faces potential surgery, The Australian understands.
Doctors will today decide how to support the fractured vertebrae. There is no suggestion he has suffered a neck injury. But the prognosis is believed to be worse than the government was expecting.
The initial medical assessment was focused on his broken ribs, and concerns that he might have a punctured lung. But the focus has now switched to his fractured back.
The T7 vertebrae is part of the thoracic spine, which is known as the upper back.
Fractures in this area can take months to heal.
“It’s clear he’s got a massive road ahead of him,” a friend said.
The fracture occurred when he fell heavily on his back, without time to break the fall, friends said.
It could lead to surgery to support the vertebrae, possibly with pins, but no definitive treatment pathway is known.
READ MORE: Hunt diagnosed with cellulitis in his leg
Ellie Dudley 1.46pm: NSW team injects leadership on vaccine rollout
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian has received her AstraZeneca vaccine, alongside Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant and Health Minister Brad Hazzard.
The state’s rollout of the new jab began today from two Sydney hospitals in St George and Hornsby.
When asked whether she was nervous for the vaccination in a press conference prior to her jab, Ms Berejiklian laughed.
“I don’t mind injections,” she said.
Cleaning services supervisor Hailey Sharif was the first staff member at the hospital to receive the vaccine.
I feel so fortunate to receive the vaccine, it gives extra assurance that I’m going to be protected,” she said.
“I want to protect my kids and my grandkids. I’ve got five children, 14 grandchildren and one great grandchild. It’s so important that we all receive our vaccine to keep each other safe.”
READ MORE: China threat tops historic Quad summit agenda
DAVID SWAN 1.37pm: Aussie Facebook rival breaks crowd-funding record
A new Australian equity crowd-funding record was set yesterday with local Facebook rival LITT raising $500,000 in just 40 minutes.
The company, which is offering $1.5m worth of shares, became the second fastest to raise $1m, hitting that number in 11 hours.
LITT co-founder Brent Thompson says he’s recommending any investors who were considering participating in the offer do so before it’s too late.
The site spiked in popularity after Facebook blocked Australian news from its platform last month, with more than 15,000 users signing up to LITT since Thursday, a membership surge of 50 per cent.
LITT co-founder Peter Salom described his platform as an app that combines social media with digital payments and augmented reality advertising, and he’s calling on more businesses and media companies to sign up.
FOLLOWlive tech news updates at The Download
Geoff Chambers 12.50pm: Dutton to take on Porter’s parliamentary duties
Home Affairs Minister Peter Dutton will fill in for Christian Porter as Leader of the House when federal parliament returns on Monday.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison is standing firm in his support for Attorney-General Christian Porter – reiterating there is no basis under Australian law to take action against him.
Mr Dutton is expected to run the government’s business on the floor of the lower house over the next sitting period, while Mr Porter takes medical leave to address his mental health after identifying himself as the Cabinet minister accused of an historical rape dating back to 1988.
Mr Porter, who has not made clear when he will return from leave, has strenuously denied the allegation.
The parliamentary sitting fortnight, which includes Senate estimates hearings, will be the last time federal MPs travel to Canberra before the May 11 budget.
The government’s industrial relations legislation, which was being led by Mr Porter as Industrial Relations Minister, will be a legislative priority overseen by acting Attorney-General and Industrial Relations Minister Michaelia Cash.
READ MORE: 100,000 jobs in peril as JobKeeper concludes
Ellie Dudley12.30pm: States lagging on overseas travellers ‘frustrating’
Gladys Berejiklian has criticised other states for accepting low levels of overseas Australians, saying they’re “certainly” not accepting as many as NSW.
“It causes frustrations for us,” she said.
“The other states certainly aren’t doing the same rates as NSW.”
Her comments come amid growing tensions between the state leaders after NSW sent Queensland and WA hotel quarantine bills for processing their residents.
Ms Berejiklian said NSW had taken a “compassionate” approach to handling stranded Australians, and said the other states should “do their bit”.
“I don’t think any Australians abroad would be blaming NSW … they’re very grateful for what we’ve been doing “
READ MORE: America wakes up to the China threat
Ellie Dudley 12.21pm: NSW ‘happy to help nation with vaccine rollout’
NSW Premier Gladys Berejiklian has again repeated her plea to the federal government to let the state assist in the national rollout of the vaccines.
At the end of Stage 1B of the rollout, the responsibility of the states to administer the vaccines ends and the federal government will turn to the national GP network to do so.
However, Ms Berejiklian has called on the government to let NSW help with the nation’s rollout.
RACGP President Karen Price says she is “not particularly” concerned the nation’s vaccine rollout is well behind the government’s original schedule since it is important not to rush the process.
“We’re happy to do more if we can,” she said.
“If I can be so bold as to say if NSW is poised to move more quickly than other states then I’d like to do that.”
Ms Berejiklian would like to see the state “complement” the GP network when it is functioning.
Perry Williams12.13pm:Yallourn closure adds price, reliability pressures
Energy Minister Angus Taylor said the early closure of Victoria’s Yallourn coal power station raises reliability and price concerns while placing added pressure on the market to deliver new supplies.
The 1480 megawatt Yallourn plant in the Latrobe Valley supplies 22 per cent of Victoria’s electricity and 8 per cent of the national market and will close in mid-2028, four years earlier than expected.
“While the commonwealth government understands this is a commercial decision, the exit of 1480 MW of reliable energy generation brings with it reliability and affordability concerns,” Mr Taylor said in a statement.
“As an essential service, the commonwealth government expects the market to step up to deliver enough dispatchable generation to keep the lights on and prices low once Yallourn closes.”
The Morrison government has previously raised fears the closure in 2022 of AGL Energy’s Liddell coal plant did not repeat the market chaos that ensued after the closure at short notice of Engie’s Hazelwood plant in 2017.
It will model the impact of Yallourn’s early closure amid concerns over high bills.
“While coal exits impact reliability and system security, the major impact for consumers will be the significant increase in prices if not adequately replaced with dispatchable capacity. We have already seen this happen with the closures of Northern in South Australia and most recently Hazelwood in Victoria, where wholesale prices skyrocketed by 85 per cent,” Mr Taylor said.
“The commonwealth government will model the impact of the closure to hold industry to account on the dispatchable capacity needed to ensure affordable, reliable power for consumers. This will deliver needed transparency around the impact of Yallourn’s closure.”
READ MORE: RBA’s Lowe ‘carefully watching’ house price surge
Ellie Dudley12.03pm: NSW on track to vaccinate 35,000
Gladys Berejiklian has announced 27,000 people in NSW have now received the COVID-19 vaccine, with “many more” to come as the St George and Hornsby hospitals open their vaccination hubs today.
By the end of the week the figure should reach 35,000. The numbers exclude those in aged care.
National Vaccine Rollout
Speaking at St George hospital where she was due to have the AstraZeneca vaccine today, the NSW Premier said the state was “very pleased” to be “open and transparent” in regards to how many people had been vaccinated, criticising some states who she said wanted that information to remain private.
“Can I make it very clear that New South Wales was not one of those states that objected to figures being provided,” she said.
“We’ve also always believed during the pandemic it’s best to be up-front with our public and at any time the federal government or anybody else wants access to those figures, we’re happy to provide them.”
Ms Berejiklian also announced the state has given out 74 per cent of the doses given to them by the federal government, due to syringes which could only administer five out of six doses in the vial.
NSW has now received new syringes which allows the full six doses to be given.
NSW Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant has confirmed the state is on track to meet its target of 35,000 people vaccinated by the end of the week.
READ MORE: Libs row on emergency powers
Perry Williams 11.24am: ‘No secret that future of coal has been questioned’
EnergyAustralia said challenges for coal from the fast-paced move to renewables had taken place faster than anticipated.
“I think it’s fair to say it’s happened faster than most people forecast,” EnergyAustralia managing director Catherine Tanna told media after its decision to bring forward the closure of the Yallourn coal-fired power station by four years to mid-2028 from 2032.
“It’s no secret that the future of all coal fired power stations has been questioned a lot and what this announcement does is give clarity to the workforce at Yallourn around what the plan is and also ensures the storage capacity comes in well before Yallourn retires. It gives everybody an opportunity to plan for whatever else might be needed for the market.”
EnergyAustralia said it would consider adding gas-fired generation in Victoria as it considers how to fill the gap between a proposed 350 megawatt battery and the 1480MW capacity of the Yallourn power station.
The closure of Hazelwood in 2017, Victoria’s last coal plant to close, caused chaos in the national electricity market after owners Engie shut down the facility with just four months notice.
EnergyAustralia said it had committed to run Yallourn until 2028 under a pact with the Victorian government amid questions over whether the accelerating move to renewables and low wholesale power prices could even require the utility to bring forward a closure date again.
“Our belief is the system needs something like Yallourn out to 2028. There is as part of the agreement with the Victorian state government a safety net to ensure that’s what happens.”
READ the full story here
Ellie Dudley 11.08am:NSW, Queensland both record zero local virus cases
New South Wales has recorded no new cases of locally transmitted COVID-19 and five in overseas arrivals.
A total of 15,534 tests were conducted over the past 24 hours to 8pm last night.
The state is treating 59 active cases of the virus, with one in ICU.
Meanwhile, Queensland has recorded no new cases of locally transmitted COVID-19, along with five positive results from overseas travellers.
A total of 7717 tests were conducted for the state over the past 24 hours, leaving Queensland with 37 active cases.
Queensland will set up five more AstraZeneca vaccine hubs to assist with the state’s escalating rollout, on top of the four that were launched earlier in the week.
The new hubs will be in the Royal Brisbane and Women’s Hospital, Redcliffe, Rockhampton, Mackay and Ipswich Raising hands, Premier Annastacia Palaszczuk wrote on Twitter today.
The current locations are in Logan, Bundaberg, QEII Jubilee Hospital and Toowoomba Hospital.
READ MORE: Personal email none of your business, Palaszczuk says
Perry Williams 10.51am: Yallourn coal-fired power station to close early
EnergyAustralia has confirmed the early closure of its Yallourn coal power plant in Victoria’s Latrobe Valley by mid-2028.
“While the announcement may have surprised some of our people, its context did not,” EnergyAustralia chief executive Catherine Tanna told media on Wednesday.
A multi-million dollar support package will be offered to the plant’s 500 workers and the company will build a utility scale battery facility by the end of 2026.
The new 350 megawatt battery will ease some of the stress on the power grid, although will only be a fraction of the 1480MW capacity of the coal plant.
The coal plant was due to operate until 2032 but is under immense earnings pressure amid a rapid fire fall in wholesale energy prices.
EnergyAustralia is due to make an announcement at 10.30am at the Yallourn Golf Club.
It is expected to bring forward the closure date of Yallourn by several years, possibly to close by 2028.
The 1480 megawatt Yallourn station in the Latrobe Valley supplies 22 per cent of Victoria’s electricity and 8 per cent of the national market.
Modelling by the Australian Energy Market Operator says if Victoria does meet a 50 per cent renewable target by 2030, at least one unit of the Yallourn station faces challenging economics due to additional renewable generation.
While coal still provides about 70 per cent of Australia’s power generation mix, there’s concern that plants may be forced out of the grid earlier than expected.
Yallourn has been nominated as one plant at risk by AEMO which cited lower demand, a higher renewables component in the generation mix, cuts to wind, solar and battery costs and higher maintenance costs for the nation’s ageing coal fleet.
FOLLOW Live ASX updates at Trading Day
Adeshola Ore 10.25am: Hunt diagnosed with bacterial infection in his leg
Health Minister Greg Hunt has been diagnosed with cellulitis, a bacterial infection in his leg, after he was admitted to hospital yesterday.
The office for Minister Hunt said he would be discharged in the “coming days” and would be back at work next week when parliament resumes.
Scott Morrison is acting Health Minister while Mr Hunt recovers.
READ the full story here
Adeshola Ore 10.01am:Ill Hunt will be ‘fine by next week’
Scott Morrison says Health Minister Greg Hunt will “be fine by next week” when parliament resumes after he was admitted to hospital yesterday with a suspected infection.
On Tuesday, the office of Mr Hunt said he was being kept overnight for observation and would be administered antibiotics and fluid. It said Mr Hunt’s condition was not related to the AstraZeneca COVID vaccine he received on Sunday.
The Prime Minister said he would fill the health and aged-care portfolios while Mr Hunt recovers.
Health Minister Greg Hunt has been admitted to hospital where he is being treated for an infection with IV fluids and antibiotics.
The Morrison government now has three ministers on medical leave, ahead of parliament resuming on Monday.
On Sunday, Defence Minister Lynda Reynolds extended her sick leave amid ongoing controversy over her handling of a rape claim by a former Liberal Party staffer.
Attorney-General Christian Porter has also taken medical leave to improve his mental health after he was identified himself as the cabinet minister at the centre of a historic rape allegation.
READ MORE: Hunt joins sick list, Reynolds ‘serious’
Ellie Dudley 9.55am: ‘Role model’ Chant named NSW Woman of the Year
Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant has been awarded the highest honour at the NSW Women of the Year ceremony today, being named the NSW Premier’s Woman of the Year.
Premier Gladys Berejiklian congratulated Dr Chant on the accolade after winning her category and the Woman of Excellence Award.
“Dr Chant is a role model, especially for women, and has absolutely excelled in her chosen field to effect lasting change,” she said.
Dr Chant received the award for her work in overseeing the handling of the COVID-19 pandemic in Australia’s most populous state.
It was presented to her at a breakfast at the International Convention Centre this morning.
READ MORE: Premier no mate of ours, says union
Adeshola Ore 9.40am:Australia a long way off April vaccination target
Department of Health secretary Brendan Murphy has signalled that Australia will not reach its target to vaccinate four million people by early April.
Australia has now surpassed 100,000 COVID vaccinations since the national rollout began more than two weeks ago. The federal government said it aimed to initially begin vaccinating 80,000 people a week.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison has praised the efforts of the Therapeutic Goods Administration throughout the COVID-19 pandemic following a doorstop at the Canberra facility.
Last month, Health Minister Greg Hunt said Australia was still aiming to inoculate four million people by early April. But today Professor Murphy said Australia’s “major” target was to have every Australian vaccinated by the end of October.
“That is what we are working to and particularly to get the vulnerable people in phase 1 and 1B vaccinated as quickly as possible by the middle of this year,” he said.
“It is a dynamic program, that is what we are targeting.”
Professor Murphy said Australia’s national vaccine rollout was “not a race.”
“We have no burning platform in Australia. We are taking it as quickly and carefully and safely as we can,” he said.
“We are not like the US or the UK or any, or most other countries in the world where they have got people in hospital dying. We can take our time, set up our systems and do it safely.”
Mr Morrison said more than 1.3 million doses of the Pfizer and AstraZeneca vaccine have now arrived in Australia.
He said this meant Australia now had enough imported vaccines to tide the country over until the locally-produced vaccines were rolled out from March 22.
READ MORE: Tourism eyes voucher lifeline to supercharge travel
Ellie Dudley9.34am:ACT rolls out AstraZeneca jabs
The ACT has begun their rollout of the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine in Canberra this morning.
New South Wales and the ACT will today begin the rollout of AstraZeneca’s COVID-19 vaccine.
The COVID-19 Surge Centre on Garran Oval will offer both vaccines currently available, until supplies of Pfizer are phased out, and AstraZeneca becomes the country’s primary jab.
The centre can currently administer 6000 vaccines a week.
ACT health authorities today confirmed there are plans to expand the rollout to other sites if necessary.
READ MORE: Pokie cards a ‘bad deal for gamblers’
Adeshola Ore 9.29am:Porter an innocent man under law, Morrison says
Scott Morrison says Attorney-General Christian Porter is an “innocent man under our law”, as he plays down political pressure to hold an independent inquiry into the historic rape allegation against him.
The ABC has reported that former Solicitor-General of Australia Justin Gleeson has urged the Prime Minister to enlist the current solicitor-general to assess whether Mr Porter should maintain the nation’s top law officer job.
Mr Morrison said his office had not received this advice.
“I have dealt with that issue. He is entitled to his view,” he said.
Mr Morrison said Mr Porter was a “fine” Attorney-General and Industrial Relations Minister.
“He is an innocent man under our law,” he said.
“To suggest there should be some different treatment applied to him, based on what had been allegations that the police have closed the matter on, I think it would be grossly inappropriate.”
Mr Porter has denied the allegation he raped a 16-year-old in 1988.
READ MORE: Albrechtsen — Woke v the law: Three critical questions on Porter
Adeshola Ore9.21am: Morrison pleased at Anzac Day march increases
Scott Morrison says he’s “pleased’ that Anzac Day parades around the country have increased their capacity to allow more veterans to march.
Anzac Day marches will be held in every capital city this year after a push by Prime Minister Scott Morrison.
Anzac Day marches will be held in every capital city after the Prime Minister yesterday said he wanted the national day to proceed, arguing that if people were free to “protest” and “party” then they should be free to honour the nation’s war veterans. The NSW government increased the number of veterans allowed to march on April 25 from 500 to 5000 following the Prime Minister’s intervention and an outcry from veterans.
“I’m pleased that Anzac Day is on. I’m very pleased that we’re seeing changes being made to facilitate that happening across Australia,” Mr Morrison said on Wednesday.
“This is a sacred day for Australia”
On Tuesday, the Victorian government was considering plans to declare this year’s Anzac Day march in Melbourne a “major event’’ which would allow up to 5000 people to participate.
READ MORE: Lowe: No rate hike anytime soon
Adeshola Ore9.15am: Quad meeting sends strong message to region: PM
Scott Morrison says the first leaders summit of the Quad framework on Friday is “another key step forward’ for strengthening Australia’s regional ties in the Indo-Pacific.
The Prime Minister will meet virtually with his international counterparts from the coalition – US President Joe Biden, Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga, and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi. The meeting will focus on maintaining a free and open Indo-Pacific region, climate change and the economic effect of COVID.
US President Joe Biden will meet virtually with Prime Minster Scott Morrison on Saturday morning Australian time to discuss commitments in the Indo-Pacific.
The strategic framework was formalised in 2007, but Friday’s meeting will be the first time the leaders of the participating countries meet.
“It was the first thing I discussed with President Biden and I was so pleased that other leaders are so enthusiastic about the program and President Biden is taking this to another level,” Mr Morrison said.
“The Indo-Pacific is our world. This is where Australia lives and our security, our peace and stability that all Australians rely on for their freedom.”
“I couldn’t be more pleased. The meeting may be in the wee small hours of Sunday. Prime Minister Suga will also be up late that night, but it’s certainly worth staying up late.”
Mr Morrsion said the Quad meeting would “send a strong message” to the Indo-Pacific about Australia’s support for a stable and independent region.
“It will be in a historic moment in our region,” he said.
READ MORE: Paul Kelly — Quad stepped up to leader level in response to China
Erin Lyons9.12am:Quarantine-free travel bubble with NZ reinstated
The quarantine-free travel bubble between Australia and New Zealand has been reinstated after Auckland’s hot-spot status was removed.
More than 1.7 million Kiwis emerged from a strict week-long lockdown in the nation’s biggest city on Sunday as health authorities rushed to contain a COVID cluster that broke out at an Auckland high school.
Later a case of the highly contagious UK variant was detected.
Updated advice received on Tuesday from New Zealand officials suggested the hot-spot status be lifted and “green flights” should resume from 11.59pm on March 11.
Australia’s chief medical officer Paul Kelly has been monitoring the situation and said it had “improved greatly”, with “minimal risk” remaining from the Auckland cluster.
A statement from the Department of Health and Professor Kelly outlined that states or territories were welcome to introduce their own conditions that might differ to the national advice.
“All travellers are advised to check the arrangements in both their place of arrival and place of final destination before they travel,” Professor Kelly said in the statement.
Australian health authorities applauded New Zealand’s contact tracing efforts.
“New Zealand’s contact tracing efforts showed the recent case identified, unrelated to the Auckland cluster, posed a low risk of COVID-19 spreading in Australia,” Professor Kelly said.
“The Australian government will continue to work closely with colleagues in the New Zealand Ministry of Health to monitor and assess the public health risk posed by COVID-19.”
Australian residents are still not allowed to fly to New Zealand under the current international travel ban, and any Kiwis who do travel to Australia will also have to complete 14 days quarantine on return.
The Prime Minister’s office has been contacted for comment.
Australia started taking green flights earlier in the year. They were halted when cases of the South African variant were detected in hotel quarantine in Auckland.
They were reinstated at the beginning of February, just a couple of weeks before the high school cluster in Auckland become known.
The bubble was swiftly halted again.
Three Air New Zealand flights are scheduled to touch down in Sydney on Thursday hours before the bubble ban is lifted.
There are no flights scheduled to arrive on Friday at this stage. — NCA Newswire
READ MORE: Fauci praises Australia’s pandemic response
Adeshola Ore9.03am: Australia passes 100,000 vaccine doses
Scott Morrison says more than 100,000 COVID vaccinations have now been administered in Australia.
“I’m pleased to say a quarter of those vaccines have been administered to the most vulnerable of Australians, in aged care facilities and those with disabilities,” the Prime Minister said on Wednesday.
“The vaccination program is under way.”
Mr Morrison said an additional 149,000 Pfizer vaccines arrived in Australia yesterday.
This morning Mr Morrison visited the Therapeutic Goods Administration in Canberra.
READ MORE: Business told to lift green game, or else
Ellie Dudley8.47am: Qantas to resume ultra-long haul flights
Qantas has announced it will look at resuming plans for ultra long-haul flights before the end of this year.
The scheme known as “Project Sunrise” will see non-stop flights from Melbourne and Sydney to key international destinations including London, New York, and Paris.
Speaking at a business summit this morning, Qantas CEO Alan Joyce revealed the airline was two weeks away from ordering the aircraft needed for the flights, when the pandemic struck.
Mr Joyce there was a “huge business case” for the flights, adding that in a post-COVID world the need for non-stop flights “may be even stronger.”
READ the full story here
Ellie Dudley8.38am:Victoria reaches 12 days with no local transmission
Victoria has recorded no new cases of COVID-19 in either the community or hotel quarantine.
Today marks 12 days since the state has seen a locally acquired case of the virus.
A total of 16,614 tests were conducted over the 24 hours to midnight yesterday.
Victoria has six active cases.
READ MORE:Editorial — Anzac Day to be a healthy sign of post-Covid recovery
Adeshola Ore8.32am: Hunt confident of hospital release ‘soon’
Trade Minister Dan Tehan says his frontbench colleague Greg Hunt is confident he’ll be out of hospital “soon” after he was admitted yesterday for a suspected infection.
On Tuesday, the office for the Health Minister said he was being kept in hospital overnight for observation and would be administered antibiotics and fluid. It said his condition was not related to the AstraZeneca COVID vaccine he received on Sunday.
Mr Tehan said Mr Hunt was hoping to be back at work “as soon as he possibly can.”
“I don’t think there is a fitter or more active member than Greg. He will bounce back but yesterday he was going well,” he said.
READ MORE: Andrews transferred to trauma care
Natasha Robinson8.27am: Fauci praises Australia’s response to pandemic
America’s chief medical adviser Anthony Fauci has praised Australia’s response to the coronavirus pandemic as he pledged to closely co-operate with Australia to stamp out the virus in the Pacific.
In an online conversation with Australia’s chief medical officer Paul Kelly hosted by the US Center for Strategic and International Studies, Dr Fauci said America had never managed to lock down as effectively as Australia had, and so had lost control of the virus.
“If you look at the monitoring of how well we locked down, we never really locked down completely,” Dr Fauci said. “We had a terrible economic impact, but we never really locked down as well or as completely as Australia did.
“And I think a combination of the other things that Australia did effectively really led to the fact that they’ve done really quite well when you compare Australia to other countries in the world.”
Professor Kelly said during the conversation that as Australia’s vaccination program continues and the country starts to open up, people will need to adjust to the fact that there will be rising numbers of cases.
“In many ways we can only go one way with this which is to have more cases, and as we start to open up that will be an issue,” Professor Kelly said. “We will have to have a conversation with the Australian public about tolerance of outbreaks because they will be inevitable.”
Professor Kelly revealed that Australia has recorded 140 cases of the UK strain and 25 of the SA strain, mostly in hotel quarantine. “It’s starting to become the largest proportion of the few cases that we’ve had but mostly they’ve remained in hotel quarantine,” he said.
The two chief health advisers also discussed vaccine hesitancy, with Dr Fauci saying that the desire to avoid further constraints on day to day life would be a major factor in driving people to get the vaccine and combating vaccine hesitancy.
Dr Fauci said that Australia was one of the US’s strongest research partners and the two countries were expecting to work together to stamp our COVID-19 in the Pacific.
READ MORE: Vaccine overdoses, wastage ‘merely noise’
Ellie Dudley7.48am: NSW weighs lifting march numbers for Anzac Day
NSW authorities will consider raising the number of attendees at the ANZAC Parade this year from 5000 to 10,000.
Sydney received a march boost overnight, with the number of people permitted to participate going up from 500 to 5000.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison says he wants to see Anzac Day events return this year to the fullest extent that is safe after 30,000 people were allowed to gather at Mardi Gras at the weekend.
However, NSW Police Minister David Elliot said this morning that if 5000 people register for the event “we will do another COVID plan and increase it to 10,000.”
“I want to make sure the veterans are honoured and their loved ones are there to cheer them on during the sacred march,” he told Today.
He said ANZAC Day is the “most sacred” of this year’s national events and said authorities must “make sure our honoured veterans are given the opportunity to get together.”
Mr Elliot urged all veterans to register for the event to enable a COVID-Safe march.
“I’m concerned veterans are saying, “We won’t register, we will turn up,”” he said. “This is not about control. It is making sure we can trace you.”
READ MORE: This year ‘we’ll march to remember them’
Adeshola Ore7.39am: Quad to hold first summit on Indo-Pacific region
Scott Morrison will participate in the first leaders meeting of the Quad framework on Friday.
The Prime Minister will meet virtually with his international counterparts from the coalition — US President Joe Biden, Japanese Prime Minister Yoshihide Suga, and Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi.
The strategic framework was first formed was formalised in 2007, but Friday’s meeting will be the first time the leaders of the participating countries meet.
The leaders of India, Australia, Japan and the United States will meet to address “regional and global issues of shared interest, and exchange views on practical areas of co-operation towards maintaining a free, open and inclusive Indo-Pacific region,” a statement by India’s foreign ministry said.
The summit will also cover supply chains, emerging and critical technologies, maritime security, and climate change.
White House press secretary Jen Psaki said the meeting would discuss a range of issues such as the threat of COVID to the economy and the climate crisis.
“That President Biden has made this one of his earliest multilateral engagements speaks to the importance we place on close co-operation with our allies and partners in the Indo-Pacific,” she said.
Trade Minister Dan Tehan said the quad’s elevation to leadership level was “historic.”
“The fact that Joe Biden has put this at the head of his multilateral agenda I think is incredibly significant.,” he told ABC Radio.
“The fact that Australia has a seat at the table at such an important meeting, I think, we cannot underestimate the importance of this.”
Mr Tehan said Australia was committed to ensuring that all countries in the Indo-Pacific would benefit from a free and open region.
“What this will be is very good, fruitful, open discussions on key issues for the Indo-Pacific, starting with COVID-19, measures to address climate change and also the issues around the supply of critical technologies,” he told Sky News.
Yesterday, the UK and the US issued a joint statement in London declaring a commitment to achieving net zero greenhouse gas emissions no later than 2050.
Mr Tehan said Australia was committed to a path to carbon neutrality through technology, despite not adopting a 2050 target.
“Through our technology roadmap, we’ve got very strong interest from the new Biden administration and from lots of other countries around the world about how we can work cooperatively to get the technology in place that will actually lead to emission reduction,” he said.
“We’re working with the rest of the world to say these are the technologies that will get you there and if we work cooperatively and collaboratively together we’ll all be able to meet the targets that we want to beat.”
Mr Tehan said the meeting will discuss “positive issues” and focus on “our agenda for a free and open Indo-Pacific.”
“This will be an absolutely historic meeting,” he told the ABC.
“Bringing together the leaders … to discuss the Indo-Pacific and, in particular, our agenda for a free and open Indo-Pacific … really shows that President Biden puts the Indo-Pacific at the top of the agenda.”
The United States will use the meeting to strengthen ties with key allies as China takes an increasingly assertive foreign policy approach in the Indo-Pacific region.
READ MORE: OECD upgrades Australia’s ‘faster than expected’ rebound
Jared Lynch7.28am:How high-flying billionaire came crashing down
Late on Monday evening, UK-time, Lex Greensill — the Bundaberg farmer turned global financier — hosted a call with his global staff of more than 1000, at the end of which, his message was clear: “Goodbye”.
With that one simple word, Mr Greensill farewelled his global empire — worth an estimated $7bn before it collapsed, entering voluntary administration on Tuesday morning.
Before the call, Mr Greensill had filed for administration stating it was in “severe financial distress” and unable to repay a $140m loan to Credit Suisse, following “defaults” from its key customer Sanjeev Gupta’s GFG Alliance.
READ the full story on Lex Greensill here
Ellie Dudley7.15am:AstraZeneca jabs all round for Berejiklian health team
The New South Wales rollout of the AstraZeneca vaccine is set to kick off today, with state health leaders the first among those to receive the jab.
Premier Gladys Berejiklian, Health Minister Brad Hazzard and NSW Chief Health Officer Kerry Chant will all receive the AstraZeneca vaccine today at St George Hospital in Sydney’s southwest.
St George is one of two hospitals set up to deliver the state’s newly delivered vaccine. The other in Hornsby Hospital, in Sydney’s north.
Ellie Dudley 7.02am:‘Not much sympathy’ for Meghan, Harry
Queensland Senator Matt Canavan has said he “didn’t think there was a lot of substance” to the claims made by Harry and Meghan during their tell-all interview with Oprah Winfrey.
The Duke and Duchess of Sussex revealed in the interview questionable behaviours of the royal family, which the pair attributed their departure last year from the Palace to.
The pair alleged a failure from within to support mental health, especially Meghan’s suicidal thoughts and spurious claims that their son Archie was prejudiced against being titled as a ‘’Prince’’ because he was of mixed race.
Mr Canavan said that while “even rich people” have burdens to carry, the public will struggle to empathise with the pair.
“I wish them all the best, but, really, I didn’t think there was a lot of substance to the claims from both Harry and Meghan,” he told Today.
“I think the public has a hard task feeling all that sorry for two people living in a massive mansion in California doing very well.
“Everybody has their cross to bear in life, even rich people, I get that, but trying to say they deserve some kind of special attention or have a special burden, that seems a bit hard to swallow.”
Mr Canavan added: “They have done this interview while [Prince Phillip] is in hospital on potentially his deathbed. They’re asking for sympathy from others, but it’s not necessarily reciprocal here and that needs to be pointed out.”
READ MORE: Queen breaks silence on Harry and Meghan interview
Angelica Snowden6am:Andrews in trauma care after holiday home fall
A seriously injured Daniel Andrews was transferred to Victoria’s leading trauma centre on Tuesday night after damaging his vertebrae and breaking several ribs in a heavy fall that required hospitalisation in intensive care.
Colleagues are concerned the Victorian Premier could face a lengthy period away from work after falling on the stairs of a holiday house, smashing his back and ribs, but will not know how long until further tests are taken.
Mr Andrews was moved from a private intensive care unit on the Mornington Peninsula late on Tuesday amid concerns about the severity of his ¬injuries. Sources said Mr Andrews fell on his back while negotiating a wet step, prompting him to be rushed to hospital. “This is a precautionary measure to ensure he has the most appropriate care available, given the nature of his injuries,” a spokeswoman said.
Mr Andrews was being moved to the trauma centre after doctors examined MRI scans.
He will likely be in intensive care for several days, where further tests will be conducted and painkillers administered after the mishap on Mornington Peninsula, south of Melbourne.
The government is unsure when he will return, but ribs can take weeks to heal and are notoriously painful. Back injuries can have longer term implications.
Daniel Andrews statement
Read the full story here.
Ben Packham5.45am:Hunt hospitalised, Reynolds ‘serious’, Porter on leave
Health Minister Greg Hunt has been admitted to hospital with a suspected infection, making him the third cabinet minister to have fallen sick, after Defence Minister Linda Reynolds and ­Attorney-General Christian Porter took time off for health reasons.
Mr Hunt’s office said he was being kept in hospital overnight “for observation and is being ­administered antibiotics and fluid. The minister is expected to make a full recovery. His con­dition is not considered to be ­related to the (COVID-19) vaccine,” which he received on ­Sunday.
On Tuesday, Scott Morrison described Senator Reynolds’ heart problem as “quite serious”, amid speculation she may not ­return to her position as Defence Minister.
The Prime Minister said he was not concerned about having two members of cabinet’s ­national security committee on leave — Senator Reynolds and Mr Porter — “because I have highly competent ministers that are taking over their duties”.
Health Minister Greg Hunt has been admitted to hospital with a suspected infection.
Read the full story here.
Richard Ferguson5.30am:Urgent warning on Chinese-backed email hack
Cyber-security officials are urging Australians to immediately secure their digital networks after a major Chinese infiltration of Microsoft’s email systems, warning too many of the nation’s businesses are exposed to attacks.
US President Joe Biden is setting up an emergency task force after the tech giant revealed a Chinese state-backed hacker group, known as HAFNIUM, had exploited vulnerabilities in its ­Exchange systems, which allow businesses and governments to store emails.
Amid fears 7000 servers in Australia and more than 30,000 in the US are affected by the threat, the Australian Cyber ­Security Centre on Tuesday urged the Morrison government and the states to urgently “patch” their email networks and protect them from state actors who sought to make use of the Microsoft vulnerabilities.
Read the full story here.
Word count: 9005
