South Australia’s long close association with the arts is set to be extended
Last October, South Australian Premier Steven Marshall accompanied the state’s symphony orchestra on part of its tour to China and South Korea. At Shanghai Symphony Hall he heard the ­Adelaide Symphony Orchestra in a performance of Mozart’s fifth ­violin concerto, with Pinchas Zukerman doing double duty as conductor and violin soloist.
The Shanghai venue has an ­admirable acoustic and may have inspired a dose of musical envy in the orchestra, which for many years has wanted a made-for-purpose concert hall in Adelaide. The sighing violins have not fallen on deaf ears.
“We were inspired by the wonderful concert hall in Shanghai, which was absolutely superb,” Marshall recalls. “We have a wonderful music sector here in South Australia but we are missing a critical piece of infrastructure, which is a concert hall.” South Australia, once known as the Festival State for its arts-loving citizenry, may be on the brink of a new cultural building boom. Upgrades at the Adelaide Festival Centre continue and a ­refresh of Her Majesty’s Theatre is nearing completion. The nation’s first dedicated institution for indigenous art, the $150m Aboriginal Art and Culture Gallery, is promised to open in 2023. And proposals for much-needed new venues in Adelaide — the concert hall and a black-box theatre — have the government’s attention.
Marshall’s interest in the arts is personal and political. He is Premier and Arts Minister. The former arts ministry, Arts SA, now sits within his own department. In his whole-of-government cabinet — all ministers are cabinet ministers — the arts share the seat at the head of the table. One seasoned arts figure says Marshall is the state’s most engaged and active arts minister since Don Dunstan: a serial attendee at performances, and a generous host of events at his home.
In an interview to coincide with the 60th anniversary of the Adelaide Fringe and the Adelaide Festival, Marshall is keen to talk up his state’s cultural credentials. The heady days of Mad March, when festival and Fringe rub shoulders, and bump against WOMAdelaide and Writers Week, are but the busiest in a year-long calendar of events noted for their quality and diversity, he says.
But while those headline events capture attention and visitor dollars, elsewhere parts of the arts sector are struggling. Investment in venues has not kept pace with demand, and the state’s Arts Plan, which the government largely supports in principle, has no significant funding attached.
The Arts Industry Council of SA says arts organisations are being asked to find savings totalling $18.5m across four years, a hang­over of cuts to forward estimates by the former Weatherill government. Particularly vulnerable are small theatre companies such as Brink and Slingsby, which have been running without multi-year funding from the Australia Council since 2016. Some in the sector say Marshall — a friend of one of the state’s great benefactors, Diana Ramsay, whose foundation last year gave $38m to the Art Gallery of South Australia — may be nudging arts companies to seek greater funding support from private sources.
A leading arts figure says the buzz of Adelaide’s festival month can create an impression that the arts in South Australia are booming but local arts companies are doing it tough. “The view within the arts community is that we have fantastic festivals but the producing side of what goes on in the city has really been suffering death by a thousand cuts.” With the removal of Arts SA to the Department of Premier and Cabinet, the AICSA says there has been a cut in resourcing and staff, including its executive director, that has an impact on artists and companies receiving support. The agency was an important conduit between the arts sector and government. The departmental revamp also saw the transfer from the arts portfolio of Carclew Youth Arts and Windmill Theatre, which now sit within education. The SA Film Corporation, Music Development Office and Jam Factory were moved to Industry and Skills.
Marshall believes the changes to Arts SA generally have been well received by the sector: they have brought the arts portfolio closer to the centre of government and on occasion this has allowed for quick-response funding. He says he is not aware of companies having to absorb funding cuts.
“In fact, we put significantly more money back into the arts budget since coming to government,” he says. “We feel very strongly that arts are such a fundamental part of South Australia and always have been.” The government has increased funding to the Adelaide Festival by $1.25m for three years and topped up funding for artists by $1m a year. Other initiatives include $250,000 each to the ASO and AGSA to support tours, more than $1m for capital works at historic Carrick Hill, and $500,000 for the Adelaide Fringe’s conference about augmented reality, Electric Dreams. A $3.5m reduction in this year’s arts budget was due to one-off expenses the year before, the government says.
The Arts and Culture Plan, promised at the 2018 election, is the first arts blueprint for the state since 2000. Its 45 recommendations broadly have government’s stamp of approval but the mood in the sector, says one observer, is disappointment at the lack of significant financial commitment.
Its proposals include support for arts infrastructure, a review of grant programs and governance structures, affirmation of arts to the regions and via digital channels, and to promote Aboriginal arts, education and international engagement.
The government has agreed to order a business case for the concert hall and is undertaking a review of available venues that will also consider the need for a black box theatre.
The Aboriginal art centre also was an election promise. The plan for Lot Fourteen on the site of the former Royal Adelaide Hospital originally had been earmarked for a modern art gallery, called Adelaide Contemporary. It was the pipe dream of Nick Mitzevich when he was director of the AGSA but the idea was dumped when Labor lost the 2018 election.
The Marshall plan for an indigenous art centre makes more sense, given the state’s large collections of indigenous material, than a generic contemporary art gallery, the Premier says.
Many details about the AACC remain to be determined: not least the building’s design and its gov­ern­ance structure.
While it will draw on the collections of the South Australian Museum and the AGSA, it is proposed the AACC will have a separate board comprising mostly indigenous directors. The hugely significant collection at the SA Museum has more than 30,000 objects including hundreds of paintings, spears, boomerangs, coolamons and baskets. Most of the collection is not on display but in storage.
“We’ve got these wonderful collections in the South Australian Museum and the art gallery — all of those things suggest that we have something the rest of the world hasn’t seen,” Marshall says.“We formed the opinion that we had an obligation to share our wonderful collections of indigenous art and culture with the rest of the world.”
CREDIT: Matthew Westwood
Word count: 1175
