MAWSON LAKES University of South Australia Associate Prof Drew Evans works on the development of special plastics, which could lead to the development of bendable mobile phones and contact lenses that can measure your blood sugar. Prof Evans, who works from the Mawson Lakes campus, shares a little about his research.
WHAT made you decide to work in the research field?
I work in the area of materials engineering. I love working in this space because I not only get to make new scientific discoveries, but I also work closely with manufacturing companies to engineer new, world-first products.
What is your current research about?
Polymers (plastics) that conduct electricity, so conducting polymers. My team and I explore how these materials work on the atomic scale, and how we can mass produce them for commercial use. We are very interested in how the conducting polymers interact with different salts. These salts change the colour of the polymers and how well they conduct electricity.
How will it benefit the wider community?
The team is passionate about taking our scientific discoveries outside of the lab.We are working with a range of companies across Adelaide, Australia and the world. Our conducting polymers are being developed into products from new sensors for our farmers, adaptive camouflage for our military, to new tech for augmented reality headsets. Not only will these products help the people that buy them, but companies that manufacture them will be in a position to keep operating, ensuring more jobs locally.
What has been your proudest moment as a researcher?
One of our industry partners commercialising a product that used our science. They were able to build a new state-of-the-art manufacturing facility in Adelaide and employ new staff. To date they have exported millions of this product to the United States.
What has been your biggest challenge as a researcher?
Balancing priorities. As a researcher, we need to study and investigate to learn new things. Anyone who has experienced this knows there is something addictive about it. But, nowadays, this is balanced with writing grants and proposals for money to do the research. Much like a consulting firm writes proposals to bid for work – no money, no job.
What does a normal day look for you?
My normal day looks very much like many other senior managers roles. I spend a decent period of time project managing. Meeting with industry partners to talk finances and intellectual property, meeting with students to talk about their projects, meeting with colleagues to plan activities. As is common with these roles and projects, there is unavoidable admin and paperwork.
If there is one piece of advice you could give future researchers and university students, what would it be?Do not feel anxious that you need to know exactly what you want to do for the rest of your life. As I tell people, I still do not know what I want to be when I grow up. I chose to study science because I did not know what I really wanted to do, but I knew a science degree could give me options. I was not top of my class, but managed to qualify for a PhD project. Science gives you choices, well beyond working in a university lab.
Word count: 544
