Friday Port Noarlunga Fringe - Aspects of Me: De Greer-Yindimincarlie The works in this exhibition by De Greer-Yindimincarlie, illustrate the vast array of mediums she uses to make her art, and the diverse nature of styles ranging from paint, digital media including augmented reality, textile design, film, music and print. Arts Centre, 22 Gawler St, Port Noarlunga, 6pm. Until Monday, March 18. Details: onkaparingacity.com.au
Saturday Port Noarlunga Fringe - Mindfully Walking on Country In this exhibition, artists have been invited to interpret Walking Mindfully on Country. With this idea in mind, invited artists create works using a mindfulness practice; as one small way to create a meaningful relationship with the earth we stand on. Sauerbier House, 21 Wearing St, Port Noarlunga, Wednesday to Friday, 10am-4pm and Saturday, noon-4pm. Until Saturday, March 16. Details: onkaparingacity.com Beach Polo Watch the players in the glamorous sport beach polo while in a lounge enjoying beverages and cuisine. This luxurious event has hospitality packages to choose from, offering everything from DJs, gourmet food, cocktails, drinks, a chance to meet the players and more. Glenelg Beach. Cost: hospitality packages from $85. Details: beachpolo.com.au
Sunday Channel 7 Brighton Jetty Classic For a full day of street and water activities, the 14th annual Brighton Jetty Classic – presented by Channel 7 Adelaide – will have plenty of activities and entertainment including the Brighton Jetty sculptures, appearances from Home and Away stars, Cancer Council SA Marilyn Jetty Swim and more. Brighton Jetty, The Esplanade, Brighton, 8am-5pm. Details: brightonjettyclassic.com
Lollipop Markets Browse the largest market for babies and kids in South Australia, with quality, handmade and boutique stalls. There will be a range of items available for gifts, children’s bedrooms, nurseries, clothing, birthday parties and more. Morphettville Racecourse, 79 Morphett Rd, Morphettville, 10am-3pm. Cost: gold coin donation entry. Details: lollipopmarkets.com.au
World Travel Fest Discover iconic destinations, unique adventures, family friendly getaways, romantic luxury escapes and the best of cruising plus get great deals, exclusive travel bargains, insider tips and advice. Adelaide Convention Centre, North Tce, city, 10am-4pm. Free entry. Details: worldtravelfest.com.au KFC Big Bash League Don’t miss the Adelaide Strikers take on the Brisbane Heat. Adelaide Oval, War Memorial Dr, North Adelaide, 6pm-10pm. Tickets: adults from $20 and children from $5. Details: bigbash.com.au
Adelaide Zoo 2019 Bridal Expo There will be a huge variety of wedding suppliers on offer including photographers and florists to chat with to sort out your perfect day.Adelaide Zoo, Frome Rd, city, 5.30pm-7.30pm. Free. Details: adelaidezoo.com.auBookings may be required for events. Please check all details before attending.
Word count: 422
