Every Australian woolgrower has been offered a free Woolmark licence to use and a bale stencil to put Australian-grown Merino wool on their bales.
The incentive from Australian Wool Innovation stems from a drop in the number of Woolmark licensees.
The Woolmark brand is the world's best-known textile quality fibre brand and Woolmark certification allows licensees to use the Woolmark logo.
Chief executive Stuart McCullough said the Woolmark brand had previously solely been a quality assurance scheme ­for manufacturers and consumers.
He said about 12 months ago, the AWI board asked to consider an alternative to just having the Woolmark brand as a quality assurance for garments.
"We (AWI) will now start to convert the Woolmark brand from a quality assurance mark for garments, but also a supply chain integrity mark," Mr McCullough said.
"We have a number of retailers, weavers and knitters already accredited with the Woolmark licence."
Mr McCullough said offering woolgrowers a free Woolmark licence and bale stencil was an important path for the future of Australian wool.
"We know that Gen Y and Gen Z want to know where wool is coming from, how it was treated in the supply chain and how it's going to end up when they throw it out," he said.
"This is a trend that is going to become more profound and we felt that we had the basis with the Woolmark licensing program to form up a supply chain integrity program."
WoolQ, an online platform where woolgrowers, classers, brokers and buyers can access digital tools to support all stages of the woolgrowing and selling cycle, will be the storage unit for this information. AWI has commissioned a blockchain project with IBN to help with the process.
Eligible Australian woolgrowers can receive a free bale stencil from The Woolmark Company.
With eCommerce advancing rapidly, swing tags on garments may soon be something of the past.
As their replacement, technology will be built into garments with near-field chips.
An NFC chip on the cuff of a Woolmark Optim WR jacket enables smartphone app users to discover the production process of the jacket, an augmented reality experience and other information about the garment.
Using a smartphone, consumers can swipe over the near-field tag, which will then provide them with the relevant information.
Mr McCullough said developments such as NFC communication and augmented reality would be the customers' key to information or means of understanding the garment.
"AWI had been working hard in-house developing apps to allow customers find out all they need to know about a garment," Mr McCullough said.
"As soon as you wave the NFC on a particular garment it will go through a scanning process.
"We also have a number of code writers in-house that help retailers sell their product.
"We want to be able to hold an iPhone or an iPad over a garment and demonstrate the technology that is in that garment or shoe."
Information will include an analysis of the wool fibre and what each component does.
The Optim WR Care app can be downloaded from the Apple App Store and the Google Play Store.
CREDIT: Kristen Frost
Word count: 521
