ROBOTIC concierges and the use of augmented reality to improve remote sensing on-farm were some of the innovations on show at the Telstra Vantage conference held in Adelaide this week.
Keynote speaker, Telstra chief customer officer John Ieraci said SA was well-placed to take advantage of developing technologies.
“Adelaide is moving from a centre of manufacturing excellence to an innovation hub,” he said.
“We’re moving into what many are calling the fourth industrial revolution – with fundamental changes to the way we work.
“We’re not far from seeing fully autonomous systems running across the transport sector. We’re also getting real-time data in agriculture, so farmers can use the information on weather patterns to make the most of their crops.” Mr Ieraci said there would be huge opportunities open to businesses from the 5G network.
“Analysts are saying that by 2035 the 5G network will underpin a $12 trillion economy and support 22 million jobs,” he said. “The faster speeds that 5G offers will give people the ability to download huge amounts of data.” Mr Ieraci said it was estimated that the 5G network would be supporting 40 billion mobile devices next year.
But Mr Ieraci said there was still a lot of room for growth in the technology field, with a survey of Australian organisations finding only 15 per cent of business considered themselves fully digitally mature.
Another concerning figure was that 37 per cent of Australian organisations had not started to digitise their business.
“There’s a great opportunity in the Australian market to accelerate the rate of digitisation,” he said.
Mr Ieraci said a good example of this was the Queensland Police Service, who had moved to logging incidents digitally rather than having to go back to the station to write up reports. Another example was real-time monitoring being used by home nursing services, to save daily visits.
Mr Ieraci said another exciting area was greater aggregation of data. “A lot of technologies are being used in isolation at the moment,” he said. “But imagine the advantages for farmers if you can bring all the data from a region together – you can see trends, predict behaviour and see what’s happening across an entire region. It’s the same for the transport industry, going to automated vehicles, not only can you manage a certain car, you can look for the best routes or see what conditions are like on the road.” On display at the conference was Cruzr – a service robot – that could be used in a range of sectors, to direct people to their appropriate areas during conferences or to cut down lines in big hotels by showing visitors to their room.Also on display was the use of augmented reality. Farmers are already using technology to turn water pumps on and off, the next frontier is using augmented reality to play out different scenarios, such as upping the water pressure, so producers can see the outcome before going ahead, helping prevent water overflow.
CREDIT: PAULA THOMPSON REGIONAL EDITOR
Word count: 502
