Kingston District Council will be continuing the development of its arts and culture projects after receiving funding from the Australian Government.
The funding was through the Regional Tourism Bushfire Recovery Program, an Australian Government bushfire recovery initiative.
Following the Keilira Bushfire, council applied for the maximum amount of $30,000 to deliver a tourism economic stimulus project, in the form of an innovative public artwork.
Council will be looking to develop an "eye-catching, augmented reality public artwork" in Agnes Street, Kingston.
Council first saw the concept whilst developing its new Public Art Framework, and began planning around the idea.
The project will look to capitalise on the growth of both art tourism as well as the world of augmented reality.
CEO Nat Traeger has had a lot of experience in delivering high-profile public artworks during her previous roles at Coorong District Council, with the CEO mentioning that the project will be an "ambitious" project, however, council are keen to continue to develop its plans.
"We've engaged Adelaide company JumpGate Virtual Reality to guide the augmented reality component of the project; they share our desire for innovation and are committed to partnering with Council to deliver an outcome that will be an absolute game-changer," Ms Traeger said.
JumpGate's Managing Director Mr Anton Andreacchio mentioned that council has a "fantastic" vision, with the director adding that JumpGate has expressed interest in supporting the project.
"Augmented reality is still a very new space and to be able to work with an arts project such as this, to explore the potential of this new technology is really exciting," Mr Andreacchio said.
Ms Traeger explained that council is in its early stages of project planning, mentioning that the project has the potential to offer "a point of difference" in Kingston.
"With Kingston already having Larry the Lobster as a draw card, something else to bring people to our main streets will be a welcome addition to our tourism offerings," she said.
Continued below
Word count: 327
