Hello loyal subscriber and welcome to your weekly What's On subscriber-only email.
Ballarat has a bumper weekend ahead with Sovereign Hill's hugely successful Winter Wonderlights kicking off.
There is truly something for everyone this weekend - Ballarat's Winter Festival, cooking classes, music, beer, haircuts for motor neurone disease funding, Beauty and the Beast, retro gaming, workshops, a swap meet and even a tribute to The Simpsons.
Enjoy your weekend and thank you for staying loyal to us.
FRIDAY
New-Zealand's Kerryn Fields
Palais Hepburn, 111 Main Road, Hepburn Springs, from 8.30pm.
Kerryn grew up surfing her parents vinyl collection, addicted to the radio, and trying to make light of the dark with her irrepressible humour. Hailing from farmland in the heart of New Zealand, Fields grew up amongst the story tellers in sheds a talent she now brings to the stage, along with her unique style of alt-country song writing.
SATURDAY
Charity chop
East Point clubrooms between 11am and 4pm. Pay what you think your haircut is worth.
A charity cut day with East Point football and netball club and Ballarat Hair and Beauty on Dana for Motor Neurone Disease.
READ THE FULL STORY HERE.
Sovereign Hill Christmas in July: Winter Wonderlights
Sovereign Hill from 10am daily until July 21. Cost $62 adults, $27.80 children (5-15), $49.70 concession, $157 family and $112 single family.
All your Christmases will come at once with the return of Sovereign Hill's Christmas in July: Winter Wonderlights, from Saturday 29 June until Sunday 21 July, 2019.
During the day visitors can enjoy fun-filled pantomimes and theatre performances, join in Christmas-themed arts and crafts, stock up on traditional Christmas decorations, sample our delicious, limited edition Winter Wonderlights lemon meringue drops, and try to catch the cheeky Gingerbread man.
Faux snow will fall at regular intervals over the Victorian-style buildings and the smell of Christmas treats will fill the air as visitors are swept up in the excitement of a special European-style Christmas.
By night, listen to live music, dance in the faux snowfalls and watch on as Sovereign Hill is transformed with an incredible new light projection show.
READ MORE: WINTER WONDERLIGHTS RETURNS TO LIGHT UP SOVEREIGN HILL
Ballarat Winter Festival - Winteractive Arcade
Saturday and Sunday, and July 13-14 at the Mining Exchange between 11am and 5pm. Cost $10 adults, $5 child 6-16, free under 6. Buy tickets here or on the door.
Get your game on! We're bringing Drone Legion, a massive multiplayer game of Snake and not to mention retro gaming and old-school arcade machines.
For the tech lovers, you can immerse yourself in our AR (augmented reality) exhibition - join Nixi Killick, through a Skype video and find out about her inspiring approach to design, creativity and her fashion featuring augmented reality.
Ballarat Winter Festival - pop-up ice rink
Until July 21. Armstrong Street South. Open 9am to 8.30pm Sunday to Wednesday and 9am to 10pm Thursday to Saturday.
The popular pop-up ice skating will return as part of the Ballarat Winter Festival and is guaranteed fun for the whole family.
Looking to try something new this year, then Neon Disco is for you. New for 2019, these themed one hour sessions include a short professional performance, general skate, themed music and lights. Get into the rhythm, dress up and skate the night away.
Also available this year is exclusive rink hire. Have you ever considered a work-related get together on the ice? Whether it be an end-of-financial year gathering, VIP event or simply an excuse to embrace the cold and have some fun, the pop-up ice rink has options to suit everyone.
Beauty and the Beast
Until July 7, with matinees each Saturday and Sunday. Wendouree Centre for the Performing Arts, 1220 Howitt Street from 7.30pm. Cost $45 adult, $39 concession, $34 child (under 16), $120 family (2 x 2) and extra children $24. Buy tickets here.
Beauty and the Beast is a musical with music by Alan Menken, lyrics by Howard Ashman and Tim Rice, and book by Linda Woolverton. Adapted from Walt Disney Pictures' Academy Award-winning 1991 animated musical film of the same name - which in turn had been based on the classic French fairy tale by Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont, Beauty and the Beast tells the story of a cold-blooded prince who has been magically transformed into an unsightly creature as punishment for his selfish ways.
To revert into his true human form, the Beast must first learn to love a bright, beautiful young woman whom he has imprisoned in his enchanted castle before it is too late.
See who's working on it here.
Songs in the key of Springfield
Karova Lounge from 8.30pm. Cost $15.30. Buy tickets here.
A live music event celebrating the iconic soundtrack to classic animated sitcom The Simpsons performed by Australian singer and guitarist Boadz.
Kids' pizza class
Carboni's Italian Kitchen, 152 Eureka Street between 11am and 4pm. Cost $39. Buy tickets here.
Now that school is over for another term, get your kids down to Carboni's for a fun pizza-making class! From dough making to stratching, from topping to eating!
Ticket includes pizza class, lunch with pizza and chips, soft drink, a nice little present and lots of fun.
Parents will enjoy a complimentary glass of wine (or alternative) while their kids are having fun learning new skills.
Knights of Fire - The Festival of Flames
Until July 14. Kryal Castle between 11am and 4pm.
Journey through the chambers of the Dragon Labyrinth; get lost in the maze; be enchanted by pantomimes; visit our wizard in his workshop; join in a potion-making workshop; or learn the ancient art of archery. Attend a puppet-making workshop, or test your skills of combat at Knights Training - where you could learn to be Kryals new hero against the darkest depths of winter's powerful forces.
The highlight of the program will be the spectacular Joust of a fiery clash of flaming lances and swords on Kryal Castle's main arena daily including World Jousting Champion Phillip Leitch.
Four Lions (solo) and Nathan Seeckts
Lost Ones Basement Bar, 14 Camp Street, between 3pm and 5pm. Cost $15, which includes a drink. Buy tickets here.
Geelong-based troubadour Nathan Seeckts is a singer-songwriter who fuses Americana, folk, country and blues in a voice that is equal parts gravel and passion.
Seeckts has been writing, recording and performing as a solo artist since 2010, self-producing and releasing three EPs during this time. His new album, The Heart Of The City, came out in March.
Shann Lions, who fronts Bendigo-based band Four Lions, writes songs that conjure up a cocktail of roots, rock and alt-country blended with the spirit of the bush.
Four Lions, who formed in 2015, released their fourth album, Hard Days, in May on their own label Verse Chorus Verse.
La Boheme
The Minerva Space, Ballaarat Mechanics Institute, Sturt Street at 7.30pm. Cost $35. More information here.
Produced in collaboration between The Savoy Opera Company, Opera van Diemensland, Cordelia's Potted Operas, Ballarat Centre of Music & the Arts and The Melbourne Chamber Choir, La Boheme will feature international artist and Opera Australia Tenor Martin Thomas Buckingham and a host of young singers.
READ MORE: ITALIAN OPERA POSES LANGUAGE CHALLENGE FOR YOUNG CHOIR
Recover from drug addiction workshop
375 Humffray Street North between 1pm and 5.15pm. Cost $150. More information here.
Glenn Munso has helped thousands of people all around Australia recover from a drug addiction through his Youth YOU Program.
The Recover From Drug Addiction Workshop will be a four-hour interactive workshop where the participants will learn Glenn's fundamentals on how to overcome and recover from addiction.
Each participant will go through mindset exercises so that they can apply the tools learnt to their own lives straight away. Many tools and strategies will be learnt on the day giving participants a clear vision and direction for true happiness.
Whether you are wanting to get off drugs or have been off drugs, this workshop is for you as it will be very beneficial and will help you reconnect back to yourself and values.
This workshop is available for 20 people only as we want to work very closely with each participant.
There is no age limit as these principles apply to all.
Granny Square workshops
The Lost Ones, 14 Camp Street between 2pm and 5pm. Cost $30.
Learn the basics of one of the most on-trend classics: crocheting. Be a part of the resurgence of granny square fashion with Ballarat's own Granny Square Lady, Pauline O'Shannessy-Dowling, and get up there with famous couture houses like Yves Saint Laurent, Miu Miu or Valentino. Book in for a one-off beginners class or further your skills with the Next Steps.
Join us for complimentary cups of tea and good chat. Beginners will learn basic stitches, what the required materials are, some crocheting language, and receive a starter gift pack. The Next Step classes will continue the granny square technique and learn how to join squares to make a scarf or blanket.
All materials provided.
SUNDAY
Ballarat Road Rodders Swap Meet
Central Square Shopping Centre car park, 18 Armstrong Street, between 6am and noon. Public entry $5; $20 per stall. No bookings - just show up, line up, and rug up.
The Ballarat Road Rodders' 44th annual swap meet is on again. Better known as the Fridge Swap Meet (due to the multi-story car park and Ballarat's winter temperatures).
Since June 1975 people have flocked to the coldest swap meet in Australia.
Two-metre height restrictions on vehicles entering. No food vendors admitted. Roof top parking available for chrome bumper vehicles.
Winter masterclass
Lake House, 4 King Street, Daylesford between 11am and 4pm. Cost $295. Book here.
Enjoy a day of demonstrations and foodie discussion with some of Australia's top chefs including: Shane Delia - Maha Restaurant and Biggie Smalls, Melbourne, Duncan Welgemoed - Africola, Adelaide, Alessandro Pavoni - Ormeggio at The Spit and Via Alta and Chiosco by Ormeggio, Mosman.
Hosted by Lake House Culinary Director Alla Wolf-Tasker AM in The Cooking School at Lake House. The day includes all three demonstrations, recipes, tastings, baguette lunch, wine and refreshments.
The Melbourne Bach Choir
Ballarat Central Uniting Church, 103 Lydiard Street South, at 2.30pm. Cost $50 adult, $40 concession, $20 student. More information here. Buy tickets here.
Featuring Emilia Bertolini and James Emerson. Featuring Faure's Requim, Ravel, Debussy.
Ballarat's biggest Sunday session
Munster Arms Hotel, 10 Victoria Street between 2.30pm and 5.30pm.
Get your dancing shoes on because Dan and Cacia Lund are sure to get you up tapping your feet. The extremely talented locals always create a great atmosphere so come down and enjoy a pint with your friends while listening to what these guys do best.
Geoffrey Williams
Palais Hepburn, 111 Main Road, Hepburn Springs from 7pm
Geoffrey Williams, a world-renowned performer. One man, a loop pedal and a whole lot of soul. He can create a beautiful melody and a killer groove out of thin air! He has written for the likes of Michael Jackson and Dusty Springfield and runs 3 choirs.
La Boheme
The Minerva Space, Ballaarat Mechanics Institute, Sturt Street at 7.30pm. Cost $35. More information here.
Produced in collaboration between The Savoy Opera Company, Opera van Diemensland, Cordelia's Potted Operas, Ballarat Centre of Music & the Arts and The Melbourne Chamber Choir, La Boheme will feature international artist and Opera Australia Tenor Martin Thomas Buckingham and a host of young singers.
READ MORE: ITALIAN OPERA POSES LANGUAGE CHALLENGE FOR YOUNG CHOIR
Sovereign Hill Christmas in July: Winter Wonderlights
Sovereign Hill from 10am daily until July 21. Cost $62 adults, $27.80 children (5-15), $49.70 concession, $157 family and $112 single family.
All your Christmases will come at once with the return of Sovereign Hill's Christmas in July: Winter Wonderlights, from Saturday 29 June until Sunday 21 July, 2019. During the day visitors can enjoy fun-filled pantomimes and theatre performances, join in Christmas-themed arts and crafts, stock up on traditional Christmas decorations, sample our delicious, limited edition Winter Wonderlights lemon meringue drops, and try to catch the cheeky Gingerbread man. Faux snow will fall at regular intervals over the Victorian-style buildings and the smell of Christmas treats will fill the air as visitors are swept up in the excitement of a special European-style Christmas.
By night, listen to live music, dance in the faux snowfalls and watch on as Sovereign Hill is transformed with an incredible new light projection show.
READ MORE: WINTER WONDERLIGHTS RETURNS TO LIGHT UP SOVEREIGN HILL
Beauty and the Beast
Until July 7, with matinees each Saturday and Sunday. Wendouree Centre for the Performing Arts, 1220 Howitt Street from 7.30pm. Cost $45 adult, $39 concession, $34 child (under 16), $120 family (2 x 2) and extra children $24. Buy tickets here.
Beauty and the Beast is a musical with music by Alan Menken, lyrics by Howard Ashman and Tim Rice, and book by Linda Woolverton. Adapted from Walt Disney Pictures' Academy Award-winning 1991 animated musical film of the same name - which in turn had been based on the classic French fairy tale by Jeanne-Marie Leprince de Beaumont, Beauty and the Beast tells the story of a cold-blooded prince who has been magically transformed into an unsightly creature as punishment for his selfish ways. To revert into his true human form, the Beast must first learn to love a bright, beautiful young woman whom he has imprisoned in his enchanted castle before it is too late.
See who's working on it here.
READ MORE: STARS OF THE FUTURE SHOW THEIR TALENT IN BCMA MID-YEAR FESTIVAL
Ballarat Winter Festival - Winteractive Arcade
Saturday and Sunday, and July 13-14 at the Mining Exchange between 11am and 5pm. Cost $10 adults, $5 child 6-16, free under 6. Buy tickets here or on the door.
Get your game on! We're bringing Drone Legion, a massive multiplayer game of Snake and not to mention retro gaming and old-school arcade machines.
For the tech lovers, you can immerse yourself in our AR (augmented reality) exhibition - join Nixi Killick, through a Skype video and find out about her inspiring approach to design, creativity and her fashion featuring augmented reality.
Knights of Fire - The Festival of Flames
Until July 14. Kryal Castle between 11am and 4pm.
Journey through the chambers of the Dragon Labyrinth; get lost in the maze; be enchanted by pantomimes; visit our wizard in his workshop; join in a potion-making workshop; or learn the ancient art of archery. Attend a puppet-making workshop, or test your skills of combat at Knights Training - where you could learn to be Kryals new hero against the darkest depths of winter's powerful forces.
The highlight of the program will be the spectacular Joust of a fiery clash of flaming lances and swords on Kryal Castle's main arena daily including World Jousting Champion Phillip Leitch.
Word count: 2470
