THE Advertiser’s business editor Cameron England yesterday spoke with South Australia’s chief entrepreneur, Jim Whalley, Teamgage co-founder Noelle Smit, and South Australian Venture Capital Fund portfolio manager David Rohrsheim about the effect of COVID-19 on the sector, what’s going on at Lot Fourteen, and what’s on offer for start-ups and scale-ups in SA CE: Jim, maybe let’s start with a chat about FIXE and Lot Fourteen. I think FIXE, the strategy, was launched almost exactly a year ago. What is FIXE and how has Lot Fourteen developed since it first opened?
JW: FIXE is I guess, our catch-all and our brand for entrepreneurship in the state. FIXE, F-i-x-e, stands for Future Industries Exchange for Entrepreneurs. And there’s four pillars to the strategy. That’s to inspire, equip, enable, and celebrate. A lot has happened in the last year. Obviously, we’ve got Lot Fourteen well and truly up and running. It was the old Royal Adelaide Hospital site and about two, two and a half years ago ... Now, have lots of different things happen there. We’ve got a great team of companies who are in there. There’s been some fantastic stuff, particularly in the last 12 months, with the Australian Space Agency moving in. We’ve got the SmartsSat CRC, some great companies in space, like Fleet, Myriota, a whole lot of others. Noelle from Teamgage of course, is down there. We’ve got Stone and Chalk who are running the start-up hub. So lots going on and it’s a very, very exciting place to be.
CE: Noelle, you just let me know that Teamgage is actually down at Lot Fourteen, what does your company do and what’s the atmosphere like down there?
NS: Firstly, so Teamgage is software that helps organisations improve the way they work together, from team-based perspectives. So we collect feedback from teams and then we give that feedback to the teams themselves and guide them through conversations about what’s working, what isn’t, and prompt them to come up with actions to put that into the system. And then, they just continuously repeat the process. So it’s really about looking at what is working in terms of how we work together and how we communicate. In terms of being here at Lot Fourteen, we’re up on level three, we share a floor with Makers Empire, which is another great SA start-up. And I think what it’s really done for us is brought us into the centre of the community. You’ll be going downstairs to grab a coffee and you bump into someone from an interstate investment VC firm or you hear about what the government’s doing and their initiatives. Meeting other founders and just sharing stories about what you’re going through, maybe what they’ve done in that situation before, really creating that hub of a community which is quite powerful.
CE: David, I understand that you are also there?
DR: That’s right. The SA Venture Capital Fund has been around for a few years. It was an invention around 2016/17, the SA Government realised that there wasn’t enough venture capital in South Australia in particular. So the government went and set aside $50 Million dedicated to local start-ups. So it makes a lot of sense that we’re up in level two, at Stone and Chalk, most days of the week. But at this time in life, we’re doing a bit more work from home.
CE: How important is it for you to be in a space like that?
DR: There’s no doubt, it is the centre of attention for Entrepreneurship in South Australia, that’s clearly very deliberate and it’s wonderful to have that sort of a building available to be reinvented, right in the centre of the city.
CE: And Jim, back on to the FIXE strategy, you mentioned briefly, the four pillars there. One of the things that you’re passionate about is, celebrating the achievements. Can you run us through the pillars and why they’re important?
JW: The four pillars for FIXE are to inspire, equip, enable, and celebrate. The inspire is literally to get people thinking about entrepreneurship as a potential career. And that’s literally everyone from kids in primary school to, maybe, someone who’s retired. The next part of it is, do I equip them with the skills they need to become entrepreneurs, to start up businesses? That might be understanding what a business plan is. It might be understanding how to create a logistics trail, so you can get your product or your service to your customers. It’s enabling them to create ventures as well. And that’s all about creating the environment. It’s making sure we’ve got a good, positive, political environment. It’s making sure we’ve got a good economic environment and David and SAVCF are very much part of that. It’s making sure the people are talking. It’s places like Lot Fourteen, it’s places like Tonsley and what’s going on down south. It’s what’s going on up at Osborne, it’s what’s going on up at Edinburgh, Mawson Lakes. It’s what’s going on in Whyalla, it’s what’s going on in Mount Gambier. So it’s getting everyone connected and talking and trying to take advantage of all that entrepreneurial spirit we’ve got in South Australia. It’s making sure we create a narrative of entre-preneurs as heroes. There’s a lot of people doing work in social entrepreneurship in particular. I’m really pleased that we’ve just appointed Moira Were AM to the Entrepreneurship Advisory Board, who’s going to really be taking a key role in making sure that we’re tying social entrepreneurship into all the entrepreneurial activities. And then, as you mentioned, it’s all about celebrating. So we want to make sure that there’s some really good stories out there.
CE: David you’re the local lead for the SA Venture Capital Fund, looking for companies to invest in. Is there a set of criteria that you’re looking for?
DR: Yes. So the Venture Capital Fund is ideally ready for businesses that have built their invention or made at least a prototype and they’ve validated that with a few customers and that there’s a real need for it and there’s people willing to pay. And it’s time to scale up and potentially take that product to the whole world. And so that investment from the SA Venture Capital Fund might look like $1 or $2 million, together with another venture capital fund, when a business is really ready to go. If you’re just at the idea stage, happy to meet and share the feedback and any ideas that we’ve got. But that’s not what the Venture Capital Fund is there for. It’s really businesses that are ready to go, ready to go global.
CE: Noelle, how did you approach that as a co-founder? Did you seek grant funding? Were you self-funded?
NS: So from day one, we boot-strapped. So I guess the nature of our product, it’s not hugely capital-intensive at the start. We can use some code and develop our first MVP, our minimal viable product. So we took that to market and got our first paying customers and then, really used that revenue to keep reinvesting in growth. There was a small amount through the Techstars program we went through. I think it was $25,000, an investment we had back in 2017, when we were really just getting started. And apart from that, we’ve just been funded from revenue. Until this year, we actually applied for one of the state government grants under the RCSF and were successful and we’ve obtained $350,000 funding from the government and that also has a matched funding component as well, from an investor.
CE: And we should point out, the s second stream of the Research. Commercialisation and Start-up Fund through the State Government is now open. David, we’re a few months on from the start of the COVID crisis, but has it impacted the start-up sector?
DR: I started with Artesian, managing the SA Fund four days we were sent to start working from home and my prior stint with a Silicon Valley-based VC fund was in 2008, just before that GFC landed. So I’ve got some sense for how things might play out. For venture capital in particular, the funds – they don’t necessarily go away. They tend to be locked up and planned for a long period of time. But it’s fair to say that for any venture capital manager, their attention is turning to their existing investees. That’s their first point of call. So that’s not great news for a new company looking to get time and attention and potentially capital from a venture fund. On the other hand though, any investor that’s been through a few cycles knows that when the world changes, that’s when new opportunities open up. The opportunities to launch businesses, deliver a product that no one else has ever bothered to build, as opposed to in a busier, frothier time, you might be just trying to do something a little bit better than everybody else, which is not as big an opportunity typically. So all the venture capital funds are going to be thinking, how has the world changed? What are the other opportunities? There’s stories to be told about the companies that were founded in the last downturn, 2008, 9, 10. Brands like an Airbnb or a WhatsApp, Instagram, Uber all happened to be invented in that period.
CE: Noelle, how has it affected your business?
NS: Operationally, it was a fairly smooth transition to us, to work from home. Everything we do, all our tools, our workflow processes can all be done online. So for us, it was more a decision of not how but when we would move to working from home. And we were able to move on that really quickly, without really interrupting our operations. From a customer point of view, it’s been really interesting. I guess we typically sell to enterprise and people really high up in the organisation. So directors of people and culture, often we’ll even get to present to executive teams, which requires lots of travel and in-person meetings. And when the lockdown hit, we were able to still do all those meetings, but via video call. everyone was in the same boat. People were much more accepting of doing business over video calls. So I think for us, it actually had a really positive impact. We were able to fit a lot more customer meetings in our days.
CE: And, Jim, at Lot Fourteen, are people coming back on site? JW: As David mentioned before, the building’s about half full at the moment. A couple of weeks ago, it was getting – starting to get pretty packed out. But I think people are coming back in dribs and drabs. And maybe just spending a couple of days a week in the office to reconnect. So my expectation is within the next month or so I think we’re going to be close to back to capacity in Lot Fourteen and hopefully, in all the other entrepreneurial hubs like Tonsley and others.
CE: And, David, do crises like these offer an opportunity, I guess, for companies to prove themselves or launch new product? There are certain things which are much more important to us these days. So things like remote working and collaboration.
DR: Yeah, no doubt. I think in many ways, the experiment that we’ve just run for the last two months is fast-forwarding to a future that the tech industry have been building for some time and believed in, but it’s sort of been thrust on a lot of people faster than they might have personally chosen to. Some established products like e-commerce or getting your food delivered to your house, those existed and were used to some extent, but they just took a big leap forward. I think the industries that have seen more dramatic change was maybe education being delivered online. Healthcare even being delivered online. Those are big steps forward for those industries and probably a lot of things that haven’t been figured out yet. So there are opportunities for start-ups. Likewise in logistics, there’s a few cracks emerged in that industry and some questions around national supply chains. And of course, a different way of working.
CE: And Jim, tell us about the new mentoring program launched recently. JW: We did some work very early on in the piece about what support did people need? One of the things that came out loud and clear was just a bit of guidance and someone to talk to about some of the issues. There’s a breadth of business experience in South Australia. Some people are retired, some people in the later stages and so the mentoring program has always been on the agenda, but it really was the impetus to get it up and going. And the OSACE, Office of the South Australian Chief Entrepreneur people really got things moving quickly. We are up to, I think, more than 70 mentor/mentee relationships now. Stone and Chalk have been heavily involved in it as well. And all the feedback we’ve got has been really, really positive. And I hope what it’s going to do is also create some relationships that will go way beyond COVID. Because it’s been an opportunity to accelerate it, but I think there’s been a lot of business people out there that have accumulated a whole lot of knowledge. You don’t realise how much knowledge you’ve accumulated, because you just take it for granted. So I think they’ve really enjoyed it and they’ve enjoyed the interactions with the young start-ups. And I think the start-ups have said hey, there’s a whole lot of knowledge out there I didn’t know about and I think it’s been really positive.
CE: And how can people get involved?
JW: Please go to the FIXE website - you’ll see some links on there. We’ll probably run out of mentors more than mentees. If there’s some people that think they can help, please put your hand up.
CE: And, Noelle and David, how important is mentoring, in terms of going on this journey?
NS: I think mentors are tremendously important. We talked about the Techstars program, so that’s very heavily mentor-focused. They talk about mentor madness weeks at the start of that program, where you meet with 50 to 60 mentors in a two-week period, who just drill you about your company and your model and although it’s gruelling, it’s the biggest learning I’ve had to date. I think you don’t know what you don’t know. As founders, we are generally self-motivated and inspired people, but to be successful, you have to learn how to scale a company and a business. And there’s a huge amount of skillsets required and knowledge to learn. And mentors can just help accelerate that. They can see you headed for those problems before you can. I’ve sat on both sides as a mentee and a mentor. To be honest, the first time I mentored, I felt ill-equipped, but I sat down with a much earlier stage founder and realised that I have learnt quite a bit along the journey and there were things I could add value to. So I think if for people out there who have business experience or who have founded a company before, definitely put your hand up to be a mentor.
CE: And David how does that translate to your industry?
DR: We do try to be as helpful as we can. The venture fund at the end of the day is a for-profit venture capital fund. And so, we’re trying to find the best of the best start-ups and hopefully make a return for the SA Government, which means that we – most of the companies we meet, we don’t invest in. But you want that one hour or two hours you spend together to be valuable for the other company, even if it doesn’t result in some money. So I echo everything Noelle has said about the benefits of mentors. To me, you get a few of them for the same reason you get a board. Folks that don’t spend all day every day thinking about what you think about. Potentially, they spend time with other companies and can see some trends. And also folks at a different stage. If your start-up is successful, it’s going to go through some very different chapters.
CE: And also you’ve got to have a customer. In terms of areas such as defence, space, health and agriculture in SA, how important are those big sectors with a lot of impetus behind them?
JW: South Australia basically gets about a quarter of the nation’s defence spend and we’ve got about 8 per cent of the population. So way, way above our weight in terms of defence. And that brings with it a whole lot of other technologies and advantages too, in terms of our education sector. In terms of complex and advanced manufacturing systems, engineering, all those sorts of things. Same as space. A real, real coup for us to get the Space Agency here. It has made South Australia the unequivocal head – or centre of space in Australia. In the creative industry stuff, we’ve had things like Mortal Kombat, which has really put a spotlight on it. But we’ve got some great organisations doing stuff in all sorts of areas of creative industries, whether it’s theatre, dance, augmented reality, virtual reality. Certainly down at Lot Fourteen, we’ve got a real emphasis on those digital creative industries and augmented reality and virtual reality are two that I regularly call up as examples. And one of the reasons for that is they have a direct carry-over into many of the other sectors. So things like defence and space simulation and training, for example, are heavy users of augmented reality and virtual realities and that will only increase.
CE: Jim, we had a question submitted – what’s the State Government doing to engage and purchase from local early-stage companies?
JW: We’ve been working, to make government a smarter, more agile buyer. I am very, very optimistic that some time in the next two or three weeks, we will be rolling out a government as a smart buyer initiative, which has got a not-insignificant amount of funding, which will have a committee - start-ups will be able to come to us and say hey, we’ve got a great idea that we think could be applied to a government problem and similar government departments could say hey, we’ve got an issue out there, can we throw that out into the entrepreneurial ecosystem?
CE: And what are, in general, some good resources to go to?
JW: There’s certainly the FIXE website – fixe.org.au. and then SA Government websites are really good as well. And worst case, write an email to chief.entrepreneur@sa.gov.au and it’ll come straight across my desk and we’ll get you in contact with the people you need to be in contact with.
WATCH THE FULL Q&A NOW advertiser.com.au
CREDIT: Cameron England
Word count: 3185
