Face facts: renewables cannot power the world 24/7 The Australian’s letters page (13/6) demonstrates that we are a divided nation – between those who believe we should transition to renewable power as quickly as possible despite the energy crisis and those who believe we should exploit our fossil-fuel energy sources to the maximum to reduce the impact of the energy price hikes and shortages.
I believe we should plan for the future, not succumb to kneejerk reactions to short-term crises. We must insulate our most vulnerable citizens from hardship resulting from cost-of-living rises.
Perhaps people on both sides of the argument can meet in the middle for some constructive debate and problem solving.
Graeme Lechte, Brunswick West, Vic Chris Mitchell is just saying what sensible people are thinking (“Left media keep public in dark on renewables”, 13/6). The problems with renewables are immutable. And so far the Albanese government is showing no signs of understanding that fact, relying on the old failed solutions of just throwing more money at more renewables. The last time I looked, gas was a fossil fuel. And building more east coast terminals at vast expense to handle it is a definition of madness when there is another fossil fuel, coal, that can generate all the energy we need.
The ultra-expensive renewables of solar, wind and battery storage will fail us and all the world. Prime Minister, another solution is required.
Alexander Haege, Tamarama, NSW
Few want to live near a sewage plant, airport or prison, but many adapt, and I would happily live with a nuclear power plant where the annual radiation uptake for nearby residents is less than incurred on a single flight to Perth. Australia’s energy market is a system of open bid and tender, where electricity providers are only required to guarantee supply for the next few minutes – less than it takes to heat a bowl of soup – because it is not commercially viable for wind and solar providers to commit for extended periods.
Our power and energy grid has been reconfigured to optimise output for just a few minutes at a time when major capital infrastructure is supposed to deliver consistent supply in perpetuity. To experience the true cost and convenience of renewable energy, every carbon alarmist should demonstrate their woke sincerity by disconnecting from the grid whenever the wind doesn’t blow and the sun doesn’t shine (instead of hypocritically drawing on fossil-fuel energy) while those who voted for coal and gas enjoy reliable supply without the excess demand of true believers who wrecked the power grid.
A referendum on (i) a power grid that cannot deliver electricity on demand or (ii) nuclear energy, would be enlightening.
Greg Jones, Kogarah, NSW
W. McColl (Letters, 11-12/6) writes, “Renewable energy enthusiasts have had decades to prove so-called energy storage is able to provide such redundancy at the scale required, for the duration required and economically. They’ve been unable to do so.” Too right. As an example, South Australia would need 80 of the “world’s largest lithium battery farms”, as installed by Tesla in 2018, to “keep SA, with its current population of 2.5 million, lit for one half-day of no wind”.
I expect most SA residents would be hoping their power would be available for a bit longer than 12 hours and without having to rely on power, including the ugly fossil-fuel generated variety, via interconnectors, should it be available.
And how many more wind turbine farms would SA need to provide not only that amount of power continuously when the wind is blowing plus enough additional power generation to maintain a full charge for those 80 battery farms?
Are there any climate catastrophe advocates out there spending any time considering what will be needed in this “renewables only” utopia to achieve a reliable 24/7 world supply of energy for currently eight billion and by 2050 more than 10 billion people?
Denis Meredith, Norwest, NSW
Three cheers to W. McColl. In one fell swoop the absurdity, so loved by the renewable brigade, of averaging power demand has been exposed for the fraud that it is. Of course we need to account for extremes, and renewable energy is not able to deliver this. John Pohlman, Leopold, Vic
Word count: 705
