The new Port Adelaide Plaza is in full swing as new stores continue to open throughout May.
The fresh new look Australia Post store is now open bringing customers a range of everyday services including bill payments, mobile recharge, postage/packaging services, licence renewals and applications, post box services and a wide selection of gifts.
Come and visit the new play area, The Play Pod, located just outside of Smokemart and Phone Planet. This new play space features interactive games, a light reactive slide, hopscotch and much more fun for the kids.
Safe, interactive, playful, the touchscreen unit can engage up to 20 kids in active play, with a mix of augmented reality, touch and motion functionality included. The launch game selected will be ‘Tiny Town’ giving kids a glimpse into the magical possibilities of the secret life of bugs, as they are transported to the village of Tiny Town, giving them four games to choose from. From shape and character matching, to speed reaction gaming, to puzzles that put kids in the picture; there’s no shortage of adventures to be had.
New Star Nails is now open in the new Port Adelaide Plaza and continue to offer their personalised service to customers along with acrylic nails, SNS nails, spa treatments and waxing.
The store is offering opening offers to treat their customers and it is also a perfect time for customers to buy mum a gift card for Mother’s Day.
H Barber is set to open later this week alongside New Star Nails and will offer specialised men’s and children’s hairdressing services.
Funk Coffee+Food is due to open later this month. Yiros Central is due to open later in June, the cafe will introduce a new breakfast menu to complement the traditional Turkish and Greek menu to their lunch and dinner options. Prepped on site daily there will be a selection of mouth-watering yiros and wraps, falafel, AB’s served with salad and flavour packed homemade sauces. Also opening in June is Terry White Chemmart - one of Australia’s largest pharmacy brands committed to providing easier access to pharmacists, expert health advice and better value for every Australian. Port Adelaide Plaza is the perfect place for all your everyday needs and Mother’s Day gifts.
Kmart has a range of gifts for mum from active wear to cosy sleep wear and accessories that every mum dreams of. Or you may like to pamper mum with a gift voucher from The Beauty & The Brow Parlour, a new phone case from Phone Planet or why not add that personal touch and give mum her own unique special gift from Smokemart and have it engraved with a special message from Shoe Express.
To top things off don’t forget to visit Coles or Aldi for all the delicious ingredients you will need to cook up a scrumptious breakfast in bed.
Port Adelaide Plaza is giving customers the chance to win one of eight $250 gift cards, after spending $30 or more at Coles, Kmart or Aldi, or $15 at any specialty retailer, but hurry promotion ends Mother’s Day.For more visit portadelaideplaza.com.au
Word count: 517
