Sky cars and robots helping around the house were some of the wilder ideas when we asked experts and identities at the turn of the millennium for their visions of life in the year 2050. Among them was sci-fi author SEAN WILLIAMS , who looks back on his predictions
GUESSING the future is a mug’s game, albeit one I enjoy as much as any science fiction writer.
In 2000, I was asked to write an article describing a day in the life of an average Adelaidean in the year 2050. Now’s a good time to check on our progress.
Are we on track for the “Adventures in Paradise” I predicted, or does an entirely different fate lie in store?
Some of my guesses have already come true. For instance, I foresaw the popularity of MOOCs (massive open online courses) that allow millions to study via the internet, a more flexible working week, and that opera would never go out of fashion.
Other predications are well on track.
The Kindle was seven years away when I wrote that paper books would be regarded as “novelties” in 2050.
Today, it’s not so great a stretch to see paperbacks and magazines going the way of vinyl records – beloved still, but not the way most people consume the written word.
I also wrote about automated taxis powered by electricity. They definitely don’t seem as fantastical in 2019 as they did in 2000.
Electric cars are more commonplace than they’ve ever been and only going up in numbers.
Taking the human driver out of the equation could come as soon as next year. People of the future, I predicted, would be connected via mobile devices “with the electronic web of media encircling the planet … alone, but never lonely”.
That sounds very much like our present-day mobile phones, except for a detail I added about these devices being inside our bodies.
Smartphones have already eroded our privacy to an unprecedented degree. Would we give them access to absolutely everything about us?
Maybe, in exchange for the incredible convenience doing so would offer. Maybe not. Some of my predictions for 2050 now seem very wide of the mark: THE TORRENS will never be a clean, flowing river.
THE OZONE hole won’t be healed by 2050.
AN AGE of plenty brought about by the widespread uptake of nanotechnology is looking about as likely as that half-hour Very Fast Train journey to Melbourne.
WE ARE, alas, not even close to getting the greenhouse effect under control. NEITHER, however, does a complete collapse of SA’s agricultural industries seem imminent.
ADELAIDE’S population isn’t likely to crash to just 100,000 people. EITHER way, they’ll be just as addicted to caffeine as ever. Since we are not even halfway to 2050, there are some as-yet-realised visions I stand by.
The possibility of “therapeutic foods” is one. These are ingredients that will make you healthy while you eat – not just from increased fibre and vitamins, but from drugs added by genetic engineering.
With Apple speculated to launch augmented-reality glasses next year, the future looks bright (pardon the pun) for seeing the world with computer-enhanced vision.
Like the mobile phone, this will affect our lives in ways very difficult to predict, but likely to be significant.
I am also convinced that the price of energy will drop dramatically. While that may not seem terribly likely today, the ever-increasing affordability of renewables such as wind and solar practically guarantees an abandonment of fossil fuels, which will benefit everyone (except those heavily invested in fossil fuels, of course).
To my original predictions, I would add (optimistically) the inevitability of a migration to four-day working weeks and the provision of a living wage for all.
The latter especially would do much to combat the arts funding apocalypse that is already hurting SA’s many independent artists, driving them to seek sustainable lives elsewhere.
I foresee a steep uptake of lab-grown or vegetable-based meats, with unpredictable effects on health thanks to these products being heavily processed.
Vegan Magnum ice-creams will become the standard and not today’s hard-to-find luxury.
The big unknown for how life in Adelaide will change by 2050 is climate change. In 31 years, if no action is taken, the city could be a drought-stricken, fire-ravaged wasteland where summer highs regularly reach 50C, bordered by acidified oceans that are empty of fish.
Adelaide could, on the other hand, reap the benefits of global geoengineering efforts to suck carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere. This will see us return to the more viable temperatures of last century and allow our immediate environment to prosper.
My bet is that 2050 will find us somewhere in the middle.
Higher temperatures outside our homes will be mitigated by cheap power for air conditioners inside, while hardy crops grow in the shade of solar panels.
Genetic engineering might also keep our city gardens green, but what will save the birds and the bees from complete population collapse? It may already be too late for them.
If SA continues to invest in outdated resources and practices, it’s difficult to imagine a thriving economy under these conditions.
Policy can, however, turn in an instant, when people demand it. A crisis or two could drive rapid change, hopefully not at too great a cost.
In 2019, I’m older and hopefully wiser than I was at the turn of this century. My utopian vision for Adelaide in the 2050s has been tempered somewhat by the harsh reality of humanity’s mistakes since then.
Still, it’s never too late to turn the ship around.
While the techno-paradise I dreamt of appears to be retreating into the distant epoch of 2100 rather than 2050, nothing would delight me more than being proved wrong.
I look forward to checking my scorecard in another 19 years by direct-brain interface from Australia’s first frontier outpost on the moon.Read Sean’s original 2000 column at bit.ly/Adelaide2000
CREDIT: SEAN WILLIAMS
Word count: 988
