Methane DAVID Littleproud demonstrates yet again that the Nationals no longer represent farming interests with his opposition to a “methane pledge” (The Advertiser, Friday).
If he had taken the time to investigate the remedy (seaweed supplements) developed in Australia to reduce methane emissions from ruminants, he would know that it comes with an important side benefit: higher productivity by animals.
Of course it will not be the first time the Nationals have chosen to block measures that would benefit producers.
They continue to raise issues about renewable energy and promote coal and gas developments. Meanwhile the regions are getting on with the job of hosting our new energy infrastructure: wind and solar, storage and transmission.
RICHARD BENTLEY, Mile End
Backing heritage THE heritage issue will not go away. To quote Keith Conlon: “State heritage protection legislation was introduced in 1978 … to stop this kind of tragic loss of our heritage and history.” It is distressing that the basic principle underlying the legislation is being ignored. It is not a matter of binary choice but a matter of coherent and visionary planning, encouraging development that recognises that maintaining our heritage has immense value both economically and environmentally.
Heritage is not some piece of tokenism that can be expediently demolished or become a page in the next edition of Lost Adelaide.
I want development that recognises the importance and value of heritage in the unique quality of our city.
BARBARA FERGUSSON, Kent Town
Thank you ON October 3, my letter was published in the Advertiser about a five-month struggle to get a landline connected at a property south of Adelaide, due to poor mobile coverage.
By the following Monday the job was done, after a quick intervention from the office of Jack Batty, MP.
We are very grateful for their help, but wonder why it should have been necessary and why Telstra needed that kind of action to do such a simple job.
CHRISTINE ALLEN, Toorak Gardens
Top drafts CONGRATULATIONS to the Adelaide Crows for recruiting Izac Rankine so soon after landing Jordan Dawson from Sydney.
Rankine has shown at Gold Coast glimpses of special skills and he is going to be a fabulous player for the Crows for a long time to come.
Port Adelaide also recruited well with the acquisition of the very talented Junior Rioli but Jason Horne-Francis, I feel, is a wait-and-see situation.
For a player touted as the best in a decade when taken by North Melbourne as No. 1 draft pick, he failed to impress on the field and off it.
How could anyone have been impressed seeing an 18-year-old with a dozen games up arguing with 297-game veteran Todd Goldstein, as they left the field in one game this past season. The lad has plenty to prove and it’s not just about his ability on the field. Good luck Port.
IAN COLBEY, Mt Gambier
Ramping promise DAVID Penberthy (Opinion, The Advertiser, Friday) reminded us that ramping was promised to be fixed by the new state government.
Also, in election mode, the new federal government promised cheaper power prices and sold their story to all the voters. The voters trusted them to do both.
If a salesman in private enterprise promised a product would do certain things and that didn’t happen, they would probably end up facing consumer affairs for whatever statements on the product were not correct. They may be fined or lose their job.
What’s the difference?
The pollies are a protected species for three or four years. They set the laws we the public have to abide by, but are there two sets of rules, one for them and one for us.
JOHN FLANIGAN, Ramco
No retention THIS year, Brett Ratten and Ben Rutten have both been sacked as AFL coaches. They must be feeling rotten. JOHN SHEPPARD, Woodville
Word count: 637
