International links with South Australia’s innovation hub, Lot Fourteen, are rapidly growing stronger and deeper as leading researchers and corporates become part of a world of collaborative advancement.
A new crop of tech companies has taken up residence with existing tenants, adding to the momentum of the site.
The University of Adelaide’s Australian Institute for Machine Learning (AIML) – part educator, part researcher, part start-up incubator – has also moved in with exciting collaborations on the horizon. AIML will work with Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) – already established at Lot Fourteen – on student exchanges, joint research and joint funding applications.
AIML is one of Australia’s largest university-based research groups in its sector and director Professor Anton van den Hengel says the initiative with the Connection Science Research Group at MIT is “a unique opportunity” for learning.
“Students fortunate enough to participate will gain invaluable new skills and have the opportunity to develop international networks,” he says.
“The collaboration also brings together more than 300 world-class researchers in AI and data analytics. This represents an opportunity that is without equal in Australia.” MIT is also a partner in a Living Lab at Lot Fourteen, working with principal sponsor BankSA, the SA Government, Optus Business and DSpark. MIT Connection Science executive director Stephen Buckley says a local team from BankSA successfully tested the Living Lab site in late December. It used leading-edge IBM Watson, ECM’s Datacap and Blue Prism to develop demonstrations of how existing AI and robotics capabilities within the bank could interact and develop capability for future project use.
BankSA chief executive Nick Reade says the bank and technology partner DSpark are working with MIT to develop a deeper understanding of the dynamics of tourism and associated commerce.
“It’s really exciting to get this work underway, utilising the best and brightest of our local talent alongside expertise from the world’s leading university,” he says. “The power in the Living Lab lies in using this knowledge and big data to unlock economic benefit for SA.”Meanwhile, UniSA has signed a Memorandum of Understanding with MIT to work on research into data visualisation and augmented reality and to support student exchange.
CREDIT: words chris russell
Word count: 365
