TEENAGERS and their parents concerned about what jobs will be available in future can use their downtime at home to explore the options provided by South Australia’s shipbuilding industry.
The Naval Shipbuilding College has partnered with the Work-Ready program, an online careers education platform founded in SA, to provide free access to activities and guidance about the industry and the variety of roles available now and in coming years.
The platform is predominantly designed for teachers, who also can register for free access to create online lesson plans for Term 2 and beyond, and includes augmented reality and 3D animations among its suite of learning materials to get young people informed and excited about their shipbuilding options.
Naval Shipbuilding College chief executive Ian Irving says there already is great interest in shipbuilding careers but it really wants to educate younger Australians about the opportunities and encourages parents and students to use it themselves too.
“We’ve got thousands of jobs, it’s one of those areas where it’s quite clear these jobs will exist on the other side of this medical (COVID-19) emergency,” he says.
“It’s so important to us that we start to talk to young Australians of that age, about what kinds of careers might be suitable for them.” He says the program will also clarify what shipbuilding roles really are, as many people are under the misconception the workforce is “a bunch of guys in singlets working in the hot sun”.
“It’s very sophisticated robotic technology, automation, digital interaction – it’s very different to what people might think,” he says.
“We need production workers right through to those with PhDs; workers in welding, engineering, designing.” Work-Ready program publisher Tracy Marsh says content is geared towards Year 10 students, as they complete their Personal Learning Plan for SACE and are making senior school subject decisions.
However, it is also suitable for older students, or anyone who wants to learn more about the industry’s careers options.
“The ones that are at school now are going to be doing these jobs,” she says. “With students, their main influencers are their teachers and parents, so it’s important for them to understand what jobs will be available in future.” Mount Carmel College teacher and Transitions Pathways co-ordinator Kelly Peucker says it was great to be able to access the Work-Ready platform at no cost to schools or students.
“It works perfectly with my Year 10 students as it links with their vocational learning, as they undertake a Certificate II in Engineering,” she says.
“We are all changing and being flexible with schooling students from home and the Work-Ready platform is ideal for that.
“I send students the links to the modules they need to be working on and we can work through them one-on-one, or as a class.”VISIT WORK-READY.COM.AU
CREDIT: CARA JENKIN
Word count: 469
