WHYALLA and Mt Gambier businesses will be able to access high-speed internet by the end of the year, under a plan to extend the GigCity network.
Community leaders have welcomed the move, which they say will provide a significant boost for companies which currently use slow or unreliable connections.
Adelaide-based company MIMP Connecting Solutions is rolling out the new network, which is already available in Gawler and various parts of Adelaide, including Lot Fourteen on North Tce, Technology Park in Mawson Lakes, Tonsley Innovation District and the Prospect Innovation Precinct.
The company expects more than 220 businesses in Mt Gambier and about 70 in Whyalla to take up the service.
The State Government has allocated $1 million towards connecting Whyalla and Mt Gambier to the system, which will cost about $1.6 million.
Whyalla Council chief exe­cutive Chris Cowley said the internet project’s rollout was an “essential element” in the town’s transformation. It is expecting a population boom due to plans for major steelworks upgrades and other investments in horticulture, renewable energy and accommodation.
David Penfold, the economic development manager for Regional Development Australia’s Whyalla and Eyre Peninsula group, said internet speeds were slow, and some businesses had resorted to using a 4G connection.
“It means they’re struggling to do online activities related to what they have to do, whether that’s transferring files or video calls,” he said.
“It ranges from an average speed to slow to non-existent for most businesses.” The new system will allow businesses to access broadband speeds of one gigabit per second.
Mt Gambier Mayor Lynette Martin said the network would help boost the town’s economy.
“GigCity will provide existing and new businesses with opportunities for innovation and development through high-speed connectivity that will further enhance the attractiveness of Mt Gambier as a place to invest and do business,” she said.
Brett Pittard, managing director of IT support business TDRS, in Mt Gambier, said the Limestone Coast experienced similar problems with internet reliability. “Most of the time we’re seeing more issues with people on NBN connections than we used to see with ADSL connections,” he said.
Project proponents say that in Adelaide’s innovation precincts and co-working spaces GigCity is giving businesses the capability for large-scale image processing and simulation, augmented reality, data analytics, cloud computing and film and media production. MIMP Connecting Solutions general manager Stephen Fitzgerald said GigCity would offer faster upload speeds than the NBN.We’re seeing more issues with people on NBN
CREDIT: MICHELLE ETHERIDGE
Word count: 411
