ADELAIDE IN a tale of two captains, Virat Kohli delivered another Adelaide century masterpiece while Aaron Finch’s technical frailty cast a shadow over Australia’s World Cup defence.
Kohli’s 39th one-day ton (104, 112 balls) and second at his favourite ground to back up three in Tests here contrasted with Finch’s woes in a six-wicket win by the tourists.
MS Dhoni (55 off 54) iced the 299-run chase with a 57-run, fifth-wicket stand with ­Dinesh Karthik (25).
Australian skipper Finch was bowled for the fifth time in eight one-day innings and is averaging just 13.8 from his past five.
“I thought we hung in there well, but when the old pro Dhoni is there it is tough,” Finch told Fox Sports.
“The powerplays, we have to get them right and I am responsible for that, not getting enough runs. I’ve not been coming off.” Finch could at least reflect positively on Shaun Marsh’s knock, who he said had “played a hell of an innings in brutal conditions”.
Marsh (131 off 123 balls) ignited, but couldn’t prevent India levelling the three-match series and delaying Australia’s quest to end a six-series losing sequence stretching back to its last triumph against Pakistan in January 2017.
The impressive Marcus ­Stoinis curtailed Rohit Sharma (43) — the key to India’s 11 century opening stands since January 2017 (Australia has just two in the same period).
But ice-cool captains past and present, Kohli and Dhoni, put on a crucial 82 in 78 balls.
India needed to accelerate with 144 required from the last 20 overs, which caused Ambati Rayudu (24) to launch Glenn Maxwell to Stoinis at ­mid-wicket.
Jhye Richardson (1/59) claimed Kohli at deep mid-wicket, leaving India needing 57 from 38 balls for victory.
Dhoni hadn’t hit a boundary before hitting Nathan Lyon (0/59) for six in the 45th over, but led the tourists to victory in trademark fashion.
India needed 25 from 18 balls with Karthik proving a solid ally for Dhoni. Dhoni has a one-day average of 50 for a reason and ran the clock down to perfection despite the best efforts of Australia’s attack.
India required 16 from two overs when 37-year-old Dhoni — without a game since ­November — collapsed with cramp.
However, the legend ­secured the win by smacking a six over long-off from Jason ­Behrendorff’s bowling.
Earlier, Australian No.7 Glenn Maxwell (48 off 37) had 13.2 overs to showcase cricket’s second-highest ODI strike-rate.
“The Big Show” didn’t disappoint in a 94-run, sixth-wicket stand with Marsh off 65 balls as Australia posted 9-298.
Left-hander Marsh remains Justin Langer’s go-to World Cup batsman with a career ­average of 42 — and 45 in the Old Dart — but needs more top-six support.
Australian selectors will ponder whether Finch was ­ruined by a controversial Test call-up.
Having axed Finch after he averaged 16 in his maiden home Test series against India, selectors now have an opener exhibiting diminished belief in his white ball prowess.
He is a shadow of the batsman who averaged 91 against England last summer. richard.earle@news.com.au
BATTING KOHLI 104 (112) Kohli’s ton takes him to within 10 of Sachin Tendulkar’s tally. The Indian skipper (pictured) has 246 games to pass him in fewer games.
SEE THE PICTURES COME ALIVE The Herald Sun’s new augmented reality feature brings our cricket images to life HOW IT WORKS 1 Open the Herald Sun APP on your phone 2 Tap the ALL SECTIONS icon 3 Select NEWS ALIVE4 Scan this image to activate video on your phone
CREDIT: Richard Earle
Word count: 587
