Celebrate the start of the Brisbane to Gladstone yacht race, see a French movie and watch a big band parade through the city this long weekend
GOOD FRIDAY North Brisbane Easter Festival Hosted by Mitchelton Youth With A Mission, there will be an Easter egg hunt, inflatables, food trucks, sports, games, prizes, photo booth, chai tent, graffiti wall, petting zoo and live music.
Details: Wests Mitchelton Rugby League Football Club, 20 Prospect Rd, Mitchelton, Friday and Saturday, 10am-7pm facebook.com/northbrisbaneeasterfestival
Festival of Sails Enjoy the best waterfront views of the Brisbane to Gladstone Yacht Race. There is a whole day of Easter-themed free entertainment and activities including an Easter egg hunt, rides and the skydiving Easter bunny at 10am. There will also be more than 35 food vendors including a pop-up ice-cream fair and amusement rides.
Details: Suttons Beach, 9am-4pm, free redcliffefestivalofsails.com.au
Bluewater Festival This annual festival marks the start of the Brisbane to Gladstone Yacht Race. There will be food stalls, an animal farm, pony rides, market and information stalls, rides and sideshow games, free kids’ workshops and entertainment. Starts at 8am with fireworks at 7.30pm.
Details: Lower Moora Park and Shorncliffe Pier, from 8am, fireworks at 7.30pm, free bluewaterfestival.org.au
Fantastic Mr Fox Last chance to see this fantastic combination of video and live action, which makes Roald Dahl’s much-loved favourite leap off the page in a spectacular new production from the team behind the award-winning, sold-out national tours of George’s Marvellous Medicine and Revolting Rhymes & Dirty Beasts.
Details: Playhouse, QPAC, $39-$49, also on Saturday.
qpac.com.au
Peter Rabbit See an outdoor screening of Peter Rabbit (G) starring Rose Byrne and voices by James Corden and Margot Robbie. BYO blankets and pillows to relax on the grassy amphitheatre, or take advantage of the seating at Riverside Cafe. Dogs welcome but must remain on a lead at all times. Movie screens at 6pm.
Details: Lone Pine Sanctuary, 708 Jesmond Rd, Fig Tree Pocket, free koala.net
Kidz Carnival Head to the Caboolture Showgrounds for carnival rides, food and market stalls, a free colouring-in station and free animal farm. There will also be a monster fireworks display.
Details: Caboolture Showgrounds, Beerburrum Rd, Caboolture, from 10am, free entry facebook.com/Good-Friday-Kidz-Carnival-332791593985082/
SATURDAY Parade of Bands Brisbane awakes to the Easter weekend with the sounds of hundreds of musicians from across the country and overseas for the Australian National Band Championships. Watch more than 50 brass bands competing in the championships march from Reddacliff Place to Brisbane City Hall.
Details: George and Adelaide streets, Brisbane City, from 8.30am, free brisbane.qld.gov.au
The BFG (Big Friendly Giant) Brisbane Arts Theatre’s latest production is The BFG from Roald Dahl’s classic book about the 7m high Big Friendly Giant and a little orphan called Sophie.
Details: Brisbane Arts Theatre, 210 Petrie Tce, $16-$20, until June 1 artstheatre.com.au
Kids Collective Take the kids to Roma Street Parkland for some Easter themed arts and crafts on the children’s lawn. Participants can make a bunny finger puppet or decorate Easter eggs with colourful designs. In addition, in the children’s garden, young park-goers can play dress-ups and build cubbies. There will also be a scavenger hunt to collect items for jewellery.
Details: Roma Street Parkland, 1 Parkland Blvd, Brisbane City, 9am-1pm, free. Bookings are not required and classes are re-set at regular intervals, so you can come and go as you please.
brisbane.qld.gov.au Parkrun Join in a free 5km timed park run. A free one-off registration is necessary to get a timed result. Your barcode can then be used at Parkrun events anywhere in the world. Each time a person runs, the barcode is scanned so their run can be logged and timed. It is suitable for all levels of fitness and abilities. About 30 per cent of participants usually either walk or jog and walk, rather than just run.
Details: There are more than 80 locations in Queensland. Saturdays from 7am, free.
parkrun.com.au
SUNDAY National Band Championship Enjoy a concert by St Patrick’s College, Strathfield (Sydney), which is competing in the National Band Championships. The annual free Easter afternoon concert gives the students a great opportunity to showcase their talents to the community and to enjoy performing in a fun, relaxed environment. The band will play a repertoire of marches, popular classics and jazz music.
Details: Brisbane City Hall, 64 Adelaide St, Brisbane City, 1.30-3.30pm, free brisbane.qld.gov.au
APT9 Kids As part of the 9th Asia Pacific Triennial of Contemporary Art (APT9), APT9 Kids features eight interactive artworks, hands-on and multimedia activities created by exhibiting artists especially for children and families. The exhibition closes on April 28.
Details: Gallery of Modern Art, also on Sunday and Monday, 10am-5pm, free qagoma.qld.gov.au
EASTER MONDAY Redlands Easter Family Festival The annual festival has free food, entertainment including the Quandamooka Dancers, free rides and kids’ programs. The Redlands Museum also opens its doors with no entry fee.
Details: Redland Showgrounds, 10am-3pm, free redlandschurches.org
ALL WEEKEND Xpress Fun Train Ride the Xpress Train, which travels around South Bank. The trackless train will run from the main station located on Clem Jones Promenade, around the corner from the Wheel of Brisbane. The train will operate daily, 10am to 5pm, but may operate later on some days. South Bank Parklands, $5.
visitbrisbane.com.au
The Gruffalo Trail In an Australian first, the characters from the book The Gruffalo will come to life in an “augmented reality experience”. Visitors who download an app will see the Gruffalo – a monster-like cross between a grizzly bear and a buffalo – and other animals in the book come to life in 3D animation along the trail.
Details: Currumbin Wildlife Sanctuary, free with entry currumbinsanctuary.com.au/The-Gruffalo-Trail
Australian Street Entertainment Carnival See jugglers and fire eaters, magicians and musicians as part of the annual carnival. Acts include acrobatic and dance group Floor Legendz and comedian Bboy Illwill.
Details: Cavill Mall. 12.30-9pm, free surfersparadise.com
Enduro Warrior Course Just in time for Easter, Sky Zone has opened its warrior course where families and fitness fanatics can bounce across staggered steps, test their balance on the beam, fly on the trapeze and ziplines, and climb across monkey bars in ninja style.
Details: Skyzone. 544 Kessels Rd, McGregor, Friday and Saturday 9am-10pm, and Sunday and Monday, 10am-8pm skyzone.com.au
French Film Festival Encore screenings of some of the festival’s most popular films including the drama Who You Think I Am and western The Sisters Brothers.
Details: Palace Barracks and Palace James Street, from $13.50affrenchfilmfestival.org/brisbane
Word count: 1070
