TRAVEL NEWS New Zealand In Depth has launched a new “high-altitude” itinerary – combining the country’s highest scenic locations with its highest hotels and experiences. The travel company’s itinerary includes a helicopter flight over New Zealand’s highest peak, Mt Cook, and a stay at the highest altitude hotel with the highest altitude bar, Kamana Lakehouse, in Queenstown, overlooking Lake Wakatipu.
newzealand-indepth.co.uk
GREAT OCEAN ROAD TURNS 100 This September marks 100 years since construction began on Victoria’s iconic Great Ocean Road. To celebrate, Great Ocean Road Tourism is hosting a series of curated events including pop-up cinemas, public art installations, augmented reality experiences and gala screenings of the new documentary The Story of the Road.
visitgreatoceanroad.org.au/iam100
INFLUENCERS CAPTURE BEAUTY Tourism Australia teamed with GoPro to host more than 30 influencers from 18 countries as part of the second annual GoPro Creator Summit, with the event inspiring stunning images and video from Western Australia shared with more than 28 million followers across the globe.
The creators were each given the latest GoPro equipment to capture the stunning scenery of Australia’s North West from every angle and, at the end of the event, the best videos and photo collections were awarded prizes.
gopro.com/en/us/awards
AUSSIE SPOTS STEP IN TIME Time magazine has released its World’s Greatest Places list for 2019 – the publication’s annual “100 new and newly noteworthy destinations to experience right now”.
Australia made it into the list three times: BARN by Biota kitchen in the NSW Southern Highlands (Eat and Drink category), Discovery Rottnest Island (Stay category), and Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park (Visit category).
MEGA YACHT SETS SAIL Luxury mega yacht, Scenic Eclipse, has finally hit the water. Australian-owned cruise company Scenic has been teasing us with details and updates of the ship for years, and now she is finally on her inaugural voyage – a 13-day discovery sailing cruise from Reykjavik, Iceland, via Greenland and Eastern Canada before arriving in Quebec on August 27.
scenic.com.au/eclipse
TRAVEL BY NUMBERS 24 The percentage of Australian pet owners who haven’t holidayed for five years or more because they don’t want to leave their fur babies at home.
Petcloud.com.auSHARE YOUR TRAVEL NEWS WITH US EMAIL ESCAPE@NEWS.COM.AU
CREDIT: CANDICE MARSHALL
Word count: 366
