hibernation remote control Check out these fascinating new apps, which are sure to help provide some added stimulation and improve your wellbeing during the lockdown.
KAHOOT!
Free, Apple iOS/Google Android For those missing pub trivia, this app could keep your quiz skills sharp. Kahoot! started life as a way to keep kids interested and is now available for anyone to create their own trivia contests. The subjects are varied, from dinosaurs to national flags, the questions are multiple choice and you can challenge other players.
DO NOT TOUCH Free, Apple iOS/Google Android Proof that advanced technology can be fun is inside this app that uses augmented reality to place a ‘Do Not Touch’ button on surfaces around your home. There are benefits to touching the button, of course, as characters like SpongeBob SquarePants can spring from it, and there are paintings, animated poo emojis and slime fountains to see.
SNOREGYM Free, Apple iOS/Google Android If you live with a snorer — or if you are one yourself — this could be the most important app you download in isolation. SnoreGym takes users through a series of exercises designed to reduce snoring by strengthening muscles around the jaw, soft palate, tongue and cheeks. The Google version has recently been made free to use.
AUDIBLE $16.45/m, Apple iOS/Google Android Staying at home doesn’t necessarily deliver the book-reading utopia promised and, if so, it could be a good time to trial audiobooks. Audible will give you 30 days and a free tome to test whether you can fit listening to books into your schedule, and membership will deliver a free book credit every month after that. Pro tip: you can artificially speed up slow readers.
NEBO Free/$14.99, Apple iOS/Google AndroidIf you have an instrument to scribble on your tablet’s screen, be it a stylus or an Apple Pencil, this app can make more of those scribbles. Nebo can translate your handwriting into text, combine typing and handwriting in a single document, or create professional diagrams, lists or headings from your drawings that you can share.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON
Word count: 346
