FOX CRICKET
PLAYER opposition to in-game interviews is now a relic of the past. It’s game on this summer, with the Australian Test team embracing Fox Cricket’s technological revolution.
Cricket has come alive on Fox like never before. Here are five things taking match coverage to a new level that you won’t see on free-to-air TV.
■ Interviews between Fox commentators and players “in-play” off the Flying Fox Spider Cam. This is now happening at drinks breaks and at other intervals. It’s a world-first in Test cricket. Recent interviews with David Warner in his record-breaking 300 and Marnus Labuschagne have made for captivating TV.
■ Exclusive use of the Flying Fox Camera for “in-play” aerial views that are taking viewers closer to the players than before.
■ First-choice of all sideline interviews and dressing-room interviews at the end of each series.
■ For the first time at a cricket ground, Fox has introduced augmented reality graphics, with Mr Cricket Mike Hussey in the Lab following the game with deep-dive analysis.
■ Priority access to the pitch and the ground to shoot at all times. ■ Exclusive use of world leader CricViz stats.
■ Ball Speed Variation – gives Fox the ability to measure the ball speed, not just out of the hand but off the pitch and when it reaches the batsmen. Measured from both side-on and front-on. It’s a first in cricket coverage globally.
■ The Comet – side-on and front-on view that plots the movement and bounce of each ball frame by frame.
■ Fox Rover Buggy Cam is providing ground-level shots by remote-control. ■ Why would you watch cricket with ad-breaks? During a 90-over day of Test cricket, free-to-air TV screens 45 minutes of commercials — and that’s before breaks for wickets are factored in. That’s the best part of an hour of the day spent watching advertising.■ Fox Cricket won best sports coverage at the Australian Academy of Cinema and Television Arts Awards, beating 7 Cricket, AFL, Australian Open and State of Origin coverage.
CREDIT: BEN HORNE
Word count: 342
