OBESITY experts want tougher restrictions on advertising junk food to children, after Kellogg’s exploited a loophole to tempt kids into consuming sugary foods via a competition.
Kelloggs designed black and white packs of popular products, including Coco Pops and LCM Split Stix, inviting children to enter a colouring-in competition to win Crayola gift packs of art and craft materials.
To make the competition more attractive to kids, they could bring the picture they coloured to life using augmented reality on an app or website.
In a decision that has outraged the obesity lobby, the Ads Standards Community Panel, which oversees the food industry’s voluntary advertising code, ruled product packaging was not covered by the advertising code and dismissed the complaint.
While the panel found the website was covered by the code, it ruled: “The overall theme of colouring-in competition may be directed primarily to children … the theme, visuals and languages combined created an impression of a site designed to be used by a parent or caregiver and their child, not a child alone”.
The Obesity Policy Coalition’s executive manager Jane Martin said it was time for the Government to step in and stop allowing the food industry to set their own rules through self-regulated codes.
“For too long we have left it up to junk food companies to police themselves. We’ve seen no reduction in unhealthy marketing to children since these sham rules were introduced,” she said. Ms Martin said it was time junk food advertising was regulated by “a code implemented by the Government like that for alcohol and tobacco advertising”.
Kellogg’s argued the purpose of the promotion was to appeal to families, including parents who were the main grocery buyer and always looking for fun activities to keep their kids occupied.
A Kellogg’s spokesperson said the Crayola promotion ran across a wide range of products including Sultana Bran, Corn Flakes and K-Time.
“The entry mechanic itself was restricted to adults 18+ and required multiple steps including submitting a ‘25 words or less’ answer to a question to go in the draw,” they said.
“The nostalgic feel of the packs, the deliberate lack of brand colours (black & white being the dominant colour scheme) and the main call-out as ‘fun for you and your family’ was targeting the parents.”Mum-of-two Reka Soultanidis said it was a battle to overcome food company marketing and feed her kids a healthy diet.
CREDIT: SUE DUNLEVY
Word count: 404
