TECHNOLOGIES and business models to help the property sector will be put under the microscope at a start-up series event in Norwood later this month.
South Australian innovation specialist LeapSheep, which is based on Pirie St, city, is putting on the workshop to help property industry employers and staff harness opportunities from changes taking place in what can be a fast-moving sector.
LeapSheep chief executive officer Kirk Drage said that, to-date, the Australian construction and property industry had not been synonymous with innovation, relying on ideas developed overseas to support the growth of the domestic construction sector.
“Just as the sharing economy has disrupted old business to consumer models, PropTech (the use of information technology to help individuals and companies research, buy, sell and manage real estate) and ConstructionTech innovations are transforming a highly regulated and conservative industry,” Mr Drage said.
“Like all change, some will thrive but others will struggle to find their place. Our goal with this new workshop is to provide insights into the opportunities to fuel business growth and build careers.” Mr Drage, who last year was appointed by UniSA as inaugural entrepreneur-in-residence of its Innovation and Collaboration Centre until next month, will present a keynote address before moderating a panel of PropTech innovators. They include: ■ JiaMing Kok – founder of Home 3D which uses augmented-reality technology to solve the sales and marketing challenges with visualising off the plan developments.
■ Rachel Kidwell - founder and chief executive officer of TCPinpoint, a property centric, cloud-based software platform developed by property people who have a full understanding of the challenges experienced in the delivery life cycle of the built environment.
■ Marco Salinas - co-founder of Hubble, a Construction-Tech company keen to transform the building journey into a more sustainable experience.
The Eastside Startup Series event on June 25 will be hosted by the City of Norwood, Payneham and St Peters at Brick+Mortar Creative.
Market trends and the companies and investors leading them will be under discussion.
“Some of the issues facing the construction industry are not businesses looking to disrupt, but rather looking to provide new business models that leverage technology to deliver improved safety, quality and better customer experiences,” Mr Drage said.
LeapSheep is looking to help employers and employees in the sector develop a deeper understanding of where disruption-fuelled growth is going to drive business and jobs.
“The property and construction sector presents higher barriers to entry for technology adoption due to the challenging physical environments and diversity of activities,” Mr Drage said.
“These barriers are increasingly being breached by maturing technologies and we’re seeing a growing sense of momentum from both established companies and start-ups looking to innovate in this space both locally and globally.”Tickets can be booked through eventbrite.com.au
CREDIT: RICHARD EVANS
Word count: 462
