GREAT THINGS, SMALL PACKAGES Keen to live in a teeny-tiny designer space but can’t afford the rent in Sydney’s Potts Point? Tiny Away offers travellers scenic holiday options in mini-sized, tastefully decorated homes around the country, be it farm experience or romantic riverside stay for two.
tinyaway.com RIGHT ON TREK Space might have dibs on the term “final frontier” but an Everest trek is darn close. To celebrate 45 years of pioneering adventure, World Expeditions is launching four Everest treks in late November 2020, designed to suit all fitness levels from a 13-day Everest 45th Anniversary Trek, $3490 a person (the perfect introduction to high altitude trekking) to a 22-day Everest Circuit and the Cho La 45th Anniversary Trek, $4950 a person.
worldexpeditions.com TECH ON ME Travel advice from locals? Meh. A new study by Hilton Honors reveals one in two travellers would use virtual reality or augmented reality tours of their destination to get inspiration, outstripping other traditional sources such as local recommendations (44 per cent) and word of mouth (37 per cent).
MATTERS OF THE ART Fans of Pablo Picasso and Henri Matisse are in for a treat: Matisse & Picasso at the National Gallery of Australia kicks off on December 13, and Canberra’s family-friendly East Hotel has packages for the duration of the exhibition (until April 13, 2020) with a package for all.
● Matisse & Picasso, includes upgrade to a Luxe Studio, two tickets to the exhibition, breakfast for two, bottle of wine, parking and Wi-Fi for $289.
● Art Summer Canberra includes the above and two nights’ accommodation for $499. ● Masterpieces for the Family includes an East One-Bedroom Apartment with sofa or rollaway bed, family pass to the exhibition, bottle of local wine, parking and Wi-Fi with a family of four priced at $599.
easthotel.com.au HAPPY CAMPERS Pitch a tent and cue those love endorphins; according to the Caravan Industry Association of Australia’s Real Richness report, 75 per cent of campers feel close to their children compared to 63 per cent of non-campers, while 85 per cent of campers felt close to their spouse compared to 65 per cent of non-campers.
HEY BIG SPENDER One in two Aussies spends at least $2000 a year on domestic travel and three in 10 have spent more than $10,000 a year on overseas travel, reveals Luxury Escapes’ Travel 2020: Forecasting the new decade of travel.
luxuryescapes.com WHAT TYPE OF TRAVELLER ARE YOU?
Gone are the days of nabbing family pics to pop by your hotel bed; today it’s about experiential offerings based on your personality type. At West Hotel Sydney, Australia’s first Curio Collection by Hilton, a program identifies what type of traveller you are, and personalises experiences for you including a virtual book club, crystal ritual and fitness mentoring.westhotel.com.au/weekends
Word count: 464
