UNI VILLAGE
PLANS for a $250 million health and medical research building are being pitched to government as the key to unlocking private investment for the $1.5 billion Flinders Village development.
Flinders University vice-chancellor Colin Stirling said the uni was “literally on the brink of signing a contract to begin building” when COVID-19 struck.
“Then all this uncertainty hit, so we have put it on hold,” he said. “If we can secure funds to restart ... we can light that project up at the drop of a hat.” The university is lobbying the state and federal governments for loans or funds for the health building, which would be shovel-ready within weeks of securing finance.
Prof Stirling said such a large project would deliver a significant post-pandemic stimulus for the local economy, providing jobs for countless tradies.
It was also vital to boosting numbers of health researchers and attracting the very best talent.
He said the uni would be happy with loans because “we’re big enough that even in these difficult times we are willing to take on a bit of debt”.
“We know that we have to pay our way,” Prof Stirling said. “If we were able to trigger this (health) development, that would be the stimulus to begin those discussions again with potential developers (for other village projects).” Before coronavirus hit, the uni was “making very rapid progress” towards the village’s first three buildings, the others being a second health building – to be largely privately funded and leased to the uni – and a student accommodation one.
They’re now on hold as Prof Stirling said uncertainty, particularly over international students, meant “we’re going to be very prudent about what we spend”.
Updated concept images show how the village will spring up around the new train station at the end of the new Flinders Link rail extension, in the lower part of the Bedford Park campus. The first trains are expected to arrive in time for the start of first semester next year.
To start with, the uni is working on a “pop-up community plaza” with “food trucks, shady plants and seating” to welcome commuters.
Eventually, the village will house 3000 student beds across a dozen or more buildings.
Its heart will be known as Flinders Square, surrounded by the station, research buildings and a boutique shopping centre with a hotel behind it.
Last year, the uni said it would sustain 1000 construction jobs for a decade. Prof Stirling said even without big new builds, Flinders usually spent about $50 million a year on job-creating capital works, such as its new augmented reality centre, but it was having to pause $15 million worth this year.
State Treasurer Rob Lucas said he would wait for a formal proposal to consider but noted taxpayers could not “support every funding submission that we receive”.
Federal Education Minister Dan Tehan said unis should approach banks, which the Government had worked with “to provide liquidity to the market”.
IN PARTNERSHIP WITH Flinders UNIVERSITY
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS
Word count: 503
