AN Adelaide school is taking entrepreneurial learning to a new level by inviting companies to base themselves on campus and inspire students.
Virtual-reality specialist Lateral Vision is the first to take up residence in Pembroke School’s new $25 million science, technology and art building for Years 7-10, which students will use for the first time today.
The three-storey building, likely to soon have a helicopter suspended in its vast central atrium, has an “enterprise space” on each level so could potentially host three businesses at a time.
Siblings and former Pembroke boarders Laura and Alex Tolson co-founded Lateral Vision in 2014. It creates virtual and augmented reality tours and training tools, and uses drones to make 360-degree videos.
“It’s a new model for everyone,” Ms Tolson, 31, said of the open-ended arrangement with the Kensington Park school.
“The intention is for the majority of the time we’ll be working on our projects for our clients. One of the main things is to open the school up to enterprise, bring the outside in and show students what the future of work is looking like.” The Tolsons will also train teachers in the technology they use so that students can embark on projects such as making VR tours of the school.
And students will be enlisted to test the company’s products and see if they can “break what we’re building”.
“There’s something exciting about being around young people,” Ms Tolson said. “They grab ideas and are always thinking about the future and what comes next.” The business will retain its office in the Tonsley Innovation District, where it has up to six other staff, depending on its project load.
“The next Lateral Vision employee could be in Year 10 at Pembroke (now),” Ms Tolson said.
The next business to move in next year will be a “big data” specialist. Public, independent and Catholic school sector representatives were not aware of any other schools taking Pembroke’s approach.
Principal Luke Thomson said it was about “bringing the world into the school rather than chasing it”, and built on a longstanding tradition of welcoming artists in residence, who will now have exhibition space in the new building.
“We thought ‘wouldn’t it be brilliant to have businesses allied to the area that’s being taught on that floor (science, technology or art)?’. What the students get to see is a functioning business,” he said.
For the first time this morning, hundreds of students will walk across the new glass-walled footbridge over Shipsters Rd leading directly into the triangular building.
It has 40 learning areas including colour-themed science labs and a “maker space”. The top level affords sweeping views of the city and hills to inspire art students. Year 10 student Tim Naylor, 16, said having businesses onsite “has to be really helpful (because) it shows what you can do with different skills in different subjects”.
The school community contributed $6 million to the building through a voluntary building fund and other donations. It is on the former Kensington Centre special school site which Pembroke bought for $4 million in 2015.PAGE 14: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 521
