The fun factor of virtual art fixes is ramped up as curators race to the bottom
During the strictures of Covid, what we each miss about travelling has been brought into sharper focus. For some, it’s the crispness of hotel sheets you can never quite replicate at home; for others it’s pointing at a menu in a foreign language, rolling the culinary dice and saying “one of those, please”. For me, it’s the pleasure of a new gallery or museum to explore.
Being an unashamed nerd in this respect, lockdown and its attendant hindrances has forced me to find my fix elsewhere. Fortunately, the free Arts & Culture portal on Google has collated a veritable treasure trove spanning permanent exhibits, temporary installations, virtual reality, augmented reality and the kind of up-close access you previously had to elbow strangers at the Louvre to secure. There are 84 Australian collections alone – though the Essl Museum of Contemporary Art in Klosterneuburg, Austria, might have snuck in on a typo.
Point is, I’ve spent countless hours over the past few months “wandering” through space that’s challenging, charming and chic. Right now, check out the Nonggirrnga Marawili work at the Biennale of Sydney for an explosively beautiful reminder of just how lucky we are to have our Indigenous art tradition.
Problem is, these noble endeavours can be taken a little seriously at times. It’s all hushed reverence, shushing attendants and horn-rimmed intellectuals discussing the internalised patriarchy of colonialism.
Where’s the fun, I often ask. In an appropriately subdued way, of course. It turns out I’m not alone. Forever obliterating their once-staid and foreboding stereotype, curators around the world are bringing new audiences to their treasures through a combination of irreverence and hashtags.
Back in April, #curatorbattle pitted institutions around the world in a contest to see which had the creepiest items in their collections. Among the submissions were an eyeball made into a lampshade from the Shetland Museum and the Yorkshire Museum’s Roman hair bun complete with jet pins. But for our money, Mona took the chockies with a table of taxidermied kittens having a tea party by Walter Potter.
To quote one of the classic lines in Australian television history, it was then a case of “game on, moles”. Currently raging is the #bestmuseumbum debate. Whether in marble or on canvas, there are some seriously impressive derrières on display here. Everyone from the Design Museum in Gent (with a surreptitiously sexy kettle) to Rome’s Palazzo Massimo alle Terme have had a, um, crack. If we had to choose a winner it would be the Aphrodite Kallipygos at the Archaeological Museum in Naples – a work in which even the subject seems to be gazing over her own shoulder thinking, “Damn, those reformer classes really paid off.” Better still, this challenge featured butts in all shapes, sizes, colours and gravitational situations – which only goes to prove how ephemeral and recent the tiny, trim and taut notion of beauty is.
Since we’re temporarily unable to visit these destinations, they should not just be virtually explored, but also followed on social media for an experience that melds entertainment and enrichment. Perhaps we could even suggest some properly Australian hashtags to liven things up a notch – how about #bushrangerorbarista?
David Smiedt is a Sydney-based comedian and writer. Up until recently he thought Degas was the current Spanish goalkeeper.
CREDIT: David Smiedt
Word count: 567
