SATURDAY, JANUARY 30, AND SUNDAY, JANUARY 31
Rubbish rates
CHARGING for hard rubbish collection in the Adelaide Hills sounds good – user pays (“Pay us to pick up your rubbish”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
My concern is that people may be tempted to burn their rubbish to save a few pennies.
Only one such fire getting out of control could be yet another disaster.
JOHN SHEPPARD, Woodville
Planning facts
THE article by Renato Castello on the climate-change deficiencies in the new planning and design code was a factual report on an authoritative submission to the parliamentary Legislative Review Committee (“Climate change ‘not a planning priority’”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
It was surprising, therefore, to read the irrational over-reaction from State Planning Commission chairman Michael Lennon (“Climate code”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
In the immortal words of the bard William Shakespeare, he “doth protest too much, methinks”.
Inadequate references to the environment and climate change have been a feature of the code since its inception in October 2019.
Little has been done to alter this commonly held perception.
The crowded infill and suburban high-rise development promoted and encouraged in the code, along with the accompanying erosion of green space and tree-canopy cover, are anathema to our aspirations to mitigate climate change.
WARREN JONES, Protect our Heritage Alliance convener
Lip service
IT seems State Planning Commission chairman Michael Lennon is only giving lip serving to climate change.
The review by environmental law experts found that climate change is men­tioned only nine times in the 7500-page planning and design code. And there are no general development policies addressing climate change.
When looking at present planning approvals by Charles Sturt Council, it is obvious the minimum tree-planting requirement, the water-sensitive urban design, the fire-and-flood-risk mapping and the renewable-energy policies have well and truly flown out of the window in the code, which is replacing all 72 council and regional development plans.
The irony of this farce is that Mr Lennon said the commission would evaluate more climate-change policies in future iterations of the code.
So what is stopping it doing it now?
A. BOWERS, Glenelg North
High-rise imprint
IF the Adelaide City Council is serious about reducing the carbon footprint of development in its area, it will ensure towers proposed to be built on the former Le Cornu site in North Adelaide are built to the current restricted level of eight storeys rather than 15 storeys.
The well-known Australian builder of skyscrapers worldwide, Arup, has concluded the typical skyscraper has at least double the carbon footprint of a 10-storey building of the same floor area.
It has found one of the main reasons high-rise buildings have such a massive carbon footprint is that they require a lot more steel and concrete to stop them swaying and to provide a strong building foundation.
Arup also claims that the energy needed for airconditioning and to run lifts is 20 per cent more for tall, rather than medium-sized buildings.
The construction, operation and maintenance of buildings accounts for almost a quarter of greenhouse gas emissions in Australia.
Unfortunately, this is not a matter which has been addressed in South Australia’s disastrous new planning code.
KEVIN O’LEARY, Crafers
Tennis heroes
THE tennis players are lucky that Australia allowed them to play here.
I know they bring money in and boost tourism but they also are playing for titles, not to mention the money they earn for themselves.
To demand special privileges astounds me.
Reading how Serena Williams and Rafael Nadal have shown so much respect for our quarantine rules makes me love them even more.
And I certainly know who I will be cheering for when they play. Good luck, Serena and Rafael.
CHERYL STOJAKOVIC, Craigmore
Home support
“COME back to office, urge landlords” is a somewhat disappointing call (The Advertiser, Wednesday). Corporate Australia is not the property industry. And the Property Council does not seem to realise that the world of big, medium and small business has moved on.
COVID-19 has fast-tracked what was inevitable, thanks to technology and the promises of optical fibre and big data being realised.
The notion that people working together in physical workplaces makes successful businesses is 19th and 20th century thinking.
Recent international and national studies have shown that people working from home are more efficient, more effective, more innovative and have significantly improved lifestyles.
The fact household savings have increased is indicative of the indirect pay rise workers have received not having to fork out significant sums of money commuting to and from the CBD.
And there’s also the savings being made in childcare costs.
I suggest landlords need to start working with the Property Council, governments and investors to rethink the future of CBDs. There has been a paradigm shift.
Corporate Australia has recognised this as they continue to downsize their CBD office spaces. The workers, managers, executives and board members are not coming back.
STEVE HARRISON, Clare Valley
Care for kids
I (READ with curiosity the articles “Childcare costs on rise” and “200 kids abused in the care of state” (The Advertiser, yesterday).
It beggars belief that state and federal government departments, whose major responsibilities are to look after and care for our children, cannot stop the abuse and neglect of them, and are increasing childcare fees to place additional financial hardships on the parents who rely on these services.
Surely these two most important areas of caring for children can research systems and programs around the world to significantly reduce childcare costs while at the same time eliminating child abuse and neglect.
Not good enough.
DES KEMP, St Agnes
Individual action
ALL around the world there are demands on governments to do something about climate change.
Everyone seems to be throwing all the responsibility for implementing change on to the governments.
Now, while it should be a key focus for governments, it should also be a responsibility owned by every individual.
When I look around and see the mad fascination people have with great gas-guzzling SUVs, the reluctance to give up on plastic, the enormous use of power and energy to fuel all the toys people keep accumulating, and so on, I see there are indeed two sets of standards at play.
How hypocritical. I say to everyone to look at your own climate-change behaviours before demanding that someone else fix the problem.
If people were as passionate about changing their own behaviour as much as their demands on government to solve the problem I think we would be a long way towards making a real difference.
MICHAEL TAJNIKAR, Surrey Downs
War death
I WISH to respond to the article referring to the erection of a memorial plaque by the Holdfast Bay Council in honour of a Battle of Britain ace, the late Squadron Leader Robert Bungey DFC (Tribute to hero with dark past”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
His short, but significant, meritorious and heroic life ended in tragedy at his own hand and his young son was injured in the same action. That son, Richard, miraculously survived and is proud his father will be honoured.
Opponents questioning the plaque suggested that this final act of Squadron Leader Bungey constituted a “history of domestic violence”.
That is a grotesque distortion of the usually accepted meaning of the term “domestic violence”. This was a single act, made in the agony of grief after losing his wife, in the expectation of joining her with their little boy. I see it as an act of compassion to take them to a better place than was the hell on Earth in a world at war.
Bungey’s death on a local beach was a war-caused death, as much so as if it had been on a beach in Kent or Sussex in a blazing aircraft.
Lest we forget.
ROBERT BLACK, AM RFD, president, Air Force Association SA
Crows leadership
WITH the departure of Andrew Fagan as Adelaide Crows chief executive, one hopes the board will appoint a South Australian to replace him.
Such a person would be sensitive to local interests and concerns, such as the need to protect our unique and valuable Adelaide parklands from inappropriate commercial development.
IAN MILROY, Norwood
Trial by video
ADELAIDE Crows footballer Ebony Marinoff has had her three-match suspension quashed on appeal.
To many lay observers who saw the video, this outcome was expected.
Maybe it is time to remove from the umpires the power to report players. Given the pace of the game, its hectic and congested nature, and the difficulty to achieve clear uninterrupted vision, it must be hard for umpires to make instant decisions to report.
On some occasions, a report is withdrawn following the game after a video review. At other times, reports are added on review.
This would not help an umpire’s confidence.
Having a qualified observer making all the reporting decisions, who can observe the video from several angles, would be better for everyone.
BRIAN BURFORD, Tranmere
Brain-trauma risk from too many cricket bouncers
THE state of late Richmond and West Adelaide footballer Shane Tuck’s brain was described by the Australian brain bank as the “worst case” so far of CTE- chronic traumatic encephalopathy (“Shocking brain damage”, Sunday Mail, January 24). This was linked to repeated head knocks and concussions.
“It was actually quite shocking, the degree of disease he had,’” neuropathologist Professor Michael Buckland said.
It is time for the International Cricket Council to take note and instruct umpires to act on Law 41.6 concerning the intentional fast bowling of short-pitched balls designed to hit and/or intimidate batters.
Anecdotally, more batters are being struck on the head since the introduction of helmets, which seemingly has led to a false sense of security and poor techniques in playing intimidatory, short-pitched bowling.
The wearing of helmets may not prevent concussion. Evidence supporting this claim arises out of research conducted by American NFL footballers-related brain-trauma expert Professor Bennet Omalu.
Any increase in concussion-related incidents in cricket should be of real concern. It’s time for the ICC to act.
After all, cricket is only a game that we are playing, not a possible early death sentence.
RICK DREWER, Gawler East
Give postie a medal
IN the small seaside township of Port Germein, an estimated population of 250 rely on the services of an extraordinary postmaster.
This man runs his business, obviously to make a profit, but I can assure readers there are few business owners as humble as this man.
The only time he’s closed is Saturday and Sunday afternoon.
It was unfortunate Peter Goers visited on a Sunday afternoon (“So friendly – just need more town doors open”, Sunday Mail, January 17). He would have been very impressed.
The owner has been nominated for an Australia Day award nearly every year, sometimes with more than 20 nominations, for his service-before-profit mentally. The locals (I haven’t met that criteria yet) would like to know how paid, quality recipients, in sport and politics, can be approved, but not our honourable postmaster.
JOHN O’SHEA, Port Germein
Quiet Australian critic
LAINIE Anderson and many others are critical of Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s lack of condemnation towards former US president Donald Trump.
It’s odd that I have heard him condemn the actions of Mr Trump, but perhaps not with the strong language associated with uncontrolled anger.
I gather that Mr Morrison is aware that social media and Trump supporters do exist in Australia, and the potential to ignite unnecessary mayhem and protests is very real.
Unlike Mr Trump, Mr Morrison’s goal is to keep Australia peaceful and united. He avoids trouble, and I’m very glad that he listens to the wisdom of King Solomon’s proverbs, which teach us to keep our mouths shut as much as possible. Mr Trump’s big mouth will cook his goose.
We need to get on with our own affairs, and learn from the US what not to do.
TONY TAGLIAFERRO, Ardrossan
Give us freedom
THANK you, Matthew Abraham, for your incisive opinion article which echoes the thoughts of thousands of South Australians (“State of emergency dragging on too long”, Sunday Mail, January 24).
It is clear that there is no longer a major emergency, so why the continuing QR codes, marshals and privacy-invading check-in sheets?
Who is seriously going to police the numbers of people at a private party in a private home? Give us a break.
I value my civil liberties, human rights and living in a democracy. At least, I think Australia still is one.
I am thankful that, many years ago, I decided never to own a mobile phone. Their use is becoming more and more sinister.
ALEX HODGES, Birdwood
Award reward
CONGRATULATIONS News Corp executive chairman Rupert Murdoch on the Lifetime Achievement Award at the Australia Day Foundation in the UK gala evening (“Sam Kerr, Rupert Murdoch get UK Australia Day Awards”, Sunday Mail, January 24).
As advertising manager on former afternoon newspaper The News, my father, the late Arthur Searcy, reported to Rupert in the late 1940s.
At that time, I had the pleasure of lunching in Melbourne with Rupert’s father Sir Keith Murdoch.
In 1969 my aunt Muriel McKay, thought to have been mistaken for Rupert’s then wife, was kidnapped and never found.
The two women were close friends. Two men were convicted of Muriel’s murder.
PETER SEARCY, Mile End
Causes of violence
ALTHOUGH domestic violence should have no place in civilised society, it has unfortunately become an everyday occurrence (“Brutal reality”, Sunday Mail, January 24).
It is a complex issue as it is the product of many factors influencing human behaviour.
The first and foremost is a lack of self-control. But underlying that are many other reasons. Dominance, jealousy, competition, need to punish, feelings of inadequacy, lack of respect, childhood upbringing, and seeing the other party as an inferior being are just a few.
But there is also the influence of alcohol and drugs. Legal sanctions are important. But gathering solid evidence to convict is obviously difficult.
Great emphasis and funds must be given to education and awareness-raising at both state and the national level. Based on what we know by now, there should be some urgency attached to that.
MICHAEL SCHILLING, Millswood
You were lucky
MATTHEW Abraham is absolutely correct in “Waving goodbye to cheap family holidays” (Sunday Mail, January 17).
Councils should concentrate on the basics instead of the trendy and up-market, which drive prices out of reach for average-and-low-income families.
Matthew’s reminiscence of the Wallaroo holiday was interesting, although he didn’t want it to sound like The Four Yorkshiremen sketch.
Well, Matthew was lucky.
We used to dream of having a Wolseley 6/80 with a canvas to string between the trees. We walked 60 miles over broken glass to our holiday spot in the sun.
We had to carry all of our camping gear (eg, a large cardboard tent) on our backs – and if we were good, our dad would buy us one ice-cream cone to share between nine kids.
We were poor, but we were happy.
ALLEN MORRIS, Ingle Farm
Lunch for parents
SO, not only are schools expected to teach manners, morals and values (let’s not forget it’s main purpose, to educate via a set curriculum), but now it’s supposed to provide lunches (“Will parents get their lunch cut?”, Sunday Mail, January 24).
Begs the question, what exactly do parents do these days?
AMY GRAVES, Angle Vale
FRIDAY, JANUARY 29
World poverty
CLIMATE change and the reduction of carbon emissions may well be seen as the greatest challenge of our time – but is it?
What about the plight of the world’s poorest nations? And the hundreds of millions of people who live in abject poverty with little hope that things will ever change.
They are expected to survive on little food, lack of health services or basic education, and too often in a lawless society.
While refugee camps and migration are helpful as temporary measures, they are not the long-term solution to such a crisis. Well-intentioned charities, and nations too, are to be commended for providing desperately needed aid.
But unfortunately, relying on charity alone will not solve this massive challenge.
It is up to nations to unite and address this human catastrophe, and to tackle it with the same enthusiasm and resources as they are devoting to climate change.
Then, and only then, will I accept climate change as being the greatest challenge facing our world.
KEN MADIGAN, Port Pirie
Clean energy
SUPPORT by the National Party for expensive new coal-fired power stations is at odds with a technology-neutral approach, fiscal prudence, and pragmatism (“Nats’ coal-led jobs plan”, The Advertiser, Wednesday).
Keep in mind Australians’ support for renewable energy does not cost the earth in many cases, including solar panels on the roof above their heads.
With clean-energy jobs a more prudent option, available in virtually every region of Australia, it seems to me that the Nationals’ position on energy signifies a special relationship with a particular industry that trumps everything else.
JIM ALLEN, Panorama
Church and state
TO the increasing numbers of people using their religious doctrines to make a point about how we all need to behave, you immediately lose the debate.
Not surprisingly, it is the noisy Christians who invariably break out the Bible to make their point.
I agree that Australia is a lucky country.
But the main reason for this is that many years ago, we decided on a (supposedly) clear delineation between powers of our legislators, the judiciary, religion, and (for fun let’s include) the fourth estate – the media.
Most countries that use their “bible of choice” to govern the masses are the ones in the most turmoil. Just look at the apparently God-blessed US.
Using your religious beliefs based on a book written about 1300 years ago or more as a rationale for what our current laws should be is quite frankly preposterous.
Believe it or not, a few things have changed since these books were written.
By all means, worship whatever deity floats your boat. But do not use it a rationale for legislation. Or to tell us all what we have to think.
Keep it in your church where it belongs.
JULIAN TREGENZA, Birkenhead
Robust politics
IN answer to J.A. Stevens’s letter, it is in the best interest of Australian politics if there is a strong and robust opposition, whether Labor or conservative (“Pollie carping”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
This will ensure that Australia will not descend into the debacle of the recent conservative administration in US. Or, alternatively, into the aggression of the Chinese Communist Party.
It should be remembered that ultra conservatism, as well as ultra socialism, will bring undesirable political outcomes.
The recent article by Christopher Pyne is well worth reading (“We had our very own Capital chaos”, The Advertiser, Monday).
K.R. SALTMARSH, Port Germein
Robodebt debate
MY local Federal Government member is Nicolle Flint, whose parliamentary duties include being the government whip.
So I asked her a couple of times why the government gagged any debate about the $1.2bn robodebt settlement.
Two months later, I have heard nothing back.
The Dutch Government resigned over less.
TERRENCE FINLAY, Urrbrae
Oz Day bells
IN response to Nick Haskell’s letter, my husband and I chose to get married on January 27 – which was Australia Day in 1963 (“Born in 1994”, The Advertiser, yesterday). Twenty-five years after our marriage, The Advertiser published “silver anniversaries” in a double-page spread for people who were married on the same Australia Day as us.
We are fortunate to have again celebrated our wedding anniversary on the Australia Day holiday in 2021.
That is what some people do on Australia Day, Nick.
DELORES WELLS, Melrose Park
Which date?
CHANGE the date?
Is there a date or day which is inoffensive and acceptable to all Australians?
WILLIAM G. SIMS, Walkley Heights
Class struggle
IT was great to see so many aspects of Australian society and identity being represented in the honours, events, celebrations and performances associated with January 26.
Well, almost every aspect, but not every reality.
Missing was any recognition of the decisive role, influence and impact of class on everybody working and living in Australia.
Where were the awards and recognition for those who work, struggle and volunteer to overcome the injustices and inequalities of class that pervade every aspect of life?
STEWART SWEENEY, North Adelaide
China threat
WITH China tax-crushing Australian wine sales, and all the other nonsense that has been going on with them recently, it is simply mind-boggling that President Xi Jinping would tell the US they shouldn’t use their power to bully smaller nations.
If they tried, then it could lead to some ugly and dangerous confrontations, he said in a speech he made earlier this week. Yet, he has done just that.
This should send a clear message to the rest of the world that China intends to behave like its Western rivals have done.
That is, it will become an imperialistic power and the western Pacific nations will be tributary states within a few decades.
Hopefully, the new Biden administration will stand up to China – and China will learn that there is a limit to how far they can bully others.
The real problem for President Joe Biden is how the US can regain the ground it lost in the Pacific under the indifferent and negligent administration of Donald Trump.
DAVID JANNSEN, Adelaide
Fire spotting
THE State Government provides a shark-spotter service.
In the wake of yet another horrible bushfire, what would it take to persuade the government to provide a bushfire-spotting service to run for, say, two days before a heatwave and all through periods of high fire danger.
Ideally, the planes would be fire tractors already carrying loads and dumping them immediately upon spotting a fire.
Bushfires are radically more trouble to humans than sharks. And they cause far more havoc, misery, loss of homes and deaths.
How are we able to lobby for this?
I think the time is ripe for Premier Steven Marshall to announce this no-brainer service, starting as of the next heatwave.
Alternatively, the police helicopter could do the job, with its hi-tech camera.
It could track anyone leaving the scene of a fire to good effect, too. The technology exists.
Please make some major new bushfire-strategy announcements.
CAROLINE JOHNSON, Aldgate
Too many awards
UNFORTUNATELY, Tory Shepherd, there are so many worldwide awards, many of them for political correctness or advertising revenue, that they have been tainted and are mostly irrelevant (Opinion, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Your arguments might be well placed on Facebook or Twitter, but are of no consequence to me.
I am sure your considerable journalistic talents could be put to many other uses.
I am pretty sure people can get an award any time for just doing their job well.
I have thought about asking for an award for doing retirement well.
JOHN ALLEN, Brighton
Climate code
THE story “Climate change ‘not a planning priority’ ” is a journalistic beat-up of the laziest kind (The Advertiser, yesterday).
The story bears no relation to the facts, in criticising the State Planning Commission for supposedly lacking a sufficient focus on climate change.
In fact, the new planning system contains a detailed state planning policy on climate change.
In addition, the planning and design code contains a suite of policies that help mitigate climate change, including a nation-leading set of residential infill policies.
The code addresses climate-change impacts, with the goal of reducing our carbon emissions and encouraging new sources of power generation such as solar, battery and hydro, while restricting their development in high value landscapes.
At the street level, there are new requirements for green landscaping and tree-planting, water-sensitive urban design and the protection of water resources and critical natural habitat.
Together, these policies strengthen South Australia’s ability to respond to the impacts of climate change and create a more resilient economy, community and natural environment. These are the indisputable facts.
To target the commission on climate change is wrong and unreasonable.
And are we really suggesting that the University of Adelaide considers a word-search of the code an appropriate form of research into a truly global problem?
The SA public deserves to be better informed about the crucial issue of climate change than it gets from The Advertiser’s shallow coverage.
MICHAEL LENNON,
State Planning Commission chairman

■Editor’s note: The report did not seek to sensationalise or editorialise the issue. It was a factual representation of the University of Adelaide’s review of the code. The Advertiser stands by its story and ongoing coverage of the code.
THURSDAY, JANUARY 28
Promote unity
ALL around us the voices of disruption, division, hatred and offence are getting louder and stronger.
It is up to all of us to resist and promote unity, understanding. civil discussion and respect – even for those we disagree with.
The alternative, if we let them win, does not bear thinking about.
B. SCHROEDER, Warradale
Choose a date
I’M sorry, Stella Burgoyne, but I really don’t think it is up to Prime Minister Scott Morrison to “find another day” that’s deemed “inclusive” (“Find another day: teen’s plea to PM”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
Excuse my cynicism, but I believe any alternative date I, or many others, might suggest may potentially create some further angst and opposition.
Might I suggest that you, and those so vehemently opposed to January 26, get together and come up with an alternative date that will tick all the right boxes, so to speak.
Give some basic reasons to why it holds such importance and perhaps we can all move forward towards an amiable solution.
I’m all ears, as I’m sure many others would be, too.
EDWARD CZERWINSKI, Tennyson
Making a stand
SORT it out now. Why waste another whole year only to continue the same debate and protests this time every year about Australia Day?
The best suggestion I have heard was that it is unlikely that a suitable alternative date can be found, so why don’t we have Australia Day on the last weekend in January each year?
Make it on either a Friday or a Monday to avoid a January 26 clash.
That way we can truly celebrate all the great things about Australia as one nation.
The long weekend idea is part of our current culture, and this time of year many people enjoy the outdoors and the holidays away from work. It would be a fitting end to signify that it is time to be back at work and school for yet another year.
JOHN HARVIE, Murray Bridge
Moving on
IT is perplexing and intriguing as to the different standpoints Australians are expected to adopt when acknowledging and accepting historical events and happenings from our rich and diverse past.
In relation to the atrocities and inhumanity shown towards our soldiers by Japanese guards at Changi internee camp and theatres of war, there is a strong expectation that Australians should forgive, forget and move on.
With the perennial debate about Australia Day and the celebration of it, there seems to be a growing push, by a minority, to pressure Australians to apologise and be ashamed of what occurred.
Changing the date will not alter the past nor redress the injustice of that time. But by ensuring that all Australians today are treated with respect, understanding and inclusivity, it will lead to a stronger and more harmonious future.
IAN MACGOWAN, Ceduna
Tolerant nation
THANK you, Dayle Teakle, of Nailsworth, for a poem about changing Australia Day to January 1 to celebrate Federation (“Aussie poem”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
Our original inhabitants are stronger by the day, as their contribution proves their value to our nation and as the nation respects them as an integral part of our Federation.
Proof of our national capacity, when tested, is the COVID-19 outcome thus far and our stability as a democracy to manage our affairs where, and when, it counts.
Australians can celebrate our tolerant and “fair-go” nation on January 1.
BARRY WAKELIN OAM, Kimba
Love for country
I LOVE Australia. I want to celebrate what a lucky, lovely nation we are.
We are blessed by God. It is the Great Southern Land of the Holy Spirit.
Many, like me, have fought in wars on behalf of Australians. If you do not want to celebrate who we are, and what we stand for, you are welcome to leave.
BRUCE HAMBOUR, North Haven
Secular society
IN an interview last year, Margaret Court said: “I teach what the Bible says about things and you get persecuted for it.”
Well, so what? Are we all really expected to believe in what the Bible says?
It’s only a book written by humans to push a religious barrow. The last time I looked, we were living in a secular society where the religious Right can express all the opinions it likes.
But we should not reward it for things that can never be proven true.
GRAEME DAVIES, Lewiston
Born in 1994
WHAT did all the true-blue, dinky-di Aussies do before 1994 to celebrate the date that the First Fleet arrived?
NICK HASKELL, Athelstone
Racing recognised
WHEN accepting her Officer of the order of Australia (AO) on Tuesday, racehorse trainer Gai Waterhouse stated: “I think it is great that racing gets the recognition it deserves, too.”
Yet in 2019, when trainer Lee Freedman witnessed the expose on ABC’s 7.30 Report of 300 racehorses representing $5m in prizemoney slaughtered in 22 days, he said: “If we don’t make real changes, the court of public opinion will bury racing.”
The breeding of too many horses slaughtered when unprofitable, gambling and the use of whips, tongue-ties and electric prods are some of the reasons for not recognising this industry, Mrs Waterhouse.
DIANE CORNELIUS, Seacliff Park
QR code rules
MOST South Aussies understand their responsibilities and deliver.
For example, when the COVID-19 risks were very real in South Australia, they obeyed the law regarding COVID sign-ins.
But today, I notice most do not obey that direction.
Can they be blamed?
The process in today’s environment is unnecessary.
ROD NANKIVELL, Coromandel Valley
Early testing
COVID-19 problems still arise regularly, with overseas travellers being responsible.
Surely the simple answer is that everyone travelling to Australia from anywhere in the world must prove that they are COVID-free by having checks on the first, fifth and 12th days of the 14-day period before departure.
Proof of being COVID-free from these tests would have to be provided before departure.
GERRY GREENWAY, Netherby
Buying elsewhere
C. ROBERTSON, of Findon, the Adelaide dealers I have come across are not interested (“Missed car sale”, The Advertiser, Monday).
Several years ago I wanted a new four-wheel-drive. Dealers didn’t bother with any follow-up, so we bought in Melbourne. The same happened with a second-hand caravan.
Dealers didn’t show any interest and the stock was filthy. We bought in Melbourne again.
A couple of months ago, we approached the local dealer for a particular second-hand car. All our details were taken.
Two week later, I made contact for any updates. Nothing was available for what we wanted.
With a bit of research I found the vehicle elsewhere and bought for a better deal.
The dealer still hasn’t made any contact.
GEOFFREY SPRINGBETT, North Brighton
Weapons needed
I DO not agree with Maureen Goldie’s criticism of the increased amount our Federal Government intends to spend to defend our country (“Defence spending”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
Protecting its citizens is the main obligation of any government. Billions of dollars have been spent in the fight against COVID-19, along with enormous costs to businesses, the loss of jobs, disruption to our lives, etc.
Most people appear to be supportive of this.
On the other hand, threats to us all exist from potential enemies.
These are not just “some remote possibility”, as Maureen says, but are real.
There is a communist country north of us, remember, that is clearly flexing its muscles and showing increasing aggression.
There is no better insurance policy than having a strong defence force to protect us all.
This, unfortunately, comes at quite a financial cost and our Prime Minister Scott Morrison’s recent commitments in that regard should be fully supported.
BRUCE BURFORD, Adelaide
Google bullies
PRIME Minister Scott Morrison can smirk as much as he likes when he says the Federal Government will not be bullied by Google and other conglomerates threatening to deny access to Australians should new laws regarding media payment be enshrined.
With up to 95 per cent of the Australian population using Google as their primary search engine, Mr Morrison will simply capitulate for no other reason than a decimation in the polls.
These companies pay minimal taxes despite massive income in Australia, so they’re hardly going to pay for news items if they can avoid it.
PETER K. JONES, Glen Osmond
Sporting clash
THERE are people we love to rub shoulders with and people who we look askance at. Take an ordinary Brownlow Medal night: glamorous WAGS, footballers shimmering with raw energy, hype and suspense. Let me in.
Contrast that with a cold Adelaide August day, the temperature barely hitting double figures and COVID-19 fears at their height, when an Adelaide hotel gathers up street people for respite.
Into the same hotel lobby walk the Richmond players, still on edge from recent teammate breaches at the Queensland hub (“Virus fear for Tigers at hotel”, The Advertiser, Monday).
Players Dylan Grimes and Jack Riewoldt said they were concerned that being packed in with the homeless risked them being reported for another COVID-19 protocol breach.
Reading between the lines, a troupe of underfed, vanquished, poorly clad men and women lugging coats, rugs and mugs was outside the experience and attraction of a team of cosseted, handsomely remunerated, talented young AFL footballers.
MARGARET MINNEY, Royston Park
WEDNESDAY, JANUARY 27
Nominate worthy
ONCE again, reading the list of recipients for the Order of Australia Awards, I am struck with the fact that a significant majority are people who are being acknowledged for doing their paid jobs well, as we all should.
I believe that a glaring hole for everyday Aussies is knowing about the criteria and requirements for successfully nominating a recipient.
Why not make an advertising campaign, using multiple media formats, to inform Australians of all ages and experiences about the process?
Having been involved in nominating a candidate, it is a writing-dense process that is easier for well-educated referees. Again, this perhaps marginalises people.
Let’s look at broadening this to acknowledge the wealth of ordinary Australians who give their time, talent and skills unstintingly and without expectation of reward.
JUDE HINES, Dulwich
Forms not easy
HOW many Australians who should receive an Australia Day honour miss out being nominated due to the complexity of the nomination system?
From experience, when one has filled out the online form, it asks to provide private details and material of support, including several referees.
Many who wish to nominate someone do not have access to this information.
One criteria is that the proposed recipient does not know of their nomination. They would have all the answers to fill out the nomination form correctly. This seems to me to be unfair.
CLAUDIA TREGONING, South Plympton
Honour unity
THE controversy regarding Margaret Court’s elevation to the Companion of the Order of Australia is regarded by many commentators as a debate about the right to free speech in Australia.
I suggest this is a simplistic premise that ignores the very foundations and credibility of the Australia Day honours.
Mrs Court’s achievements have been rightly acknowledged in the past.
The Margaret Court Arena in Melbourne is an appropriate recognition of her tennis prowess. Any moves to rename this sporting venue should be vigorously resisted.
However, Australia Day honours should be unifying in their nature. They should celebrate our finest human qualities. Mrs Court’s religious teachings, which discredit the LGBTQI community in Australia, are deeply offensive to many people. To suggest that the panel deciding on these awards has a collective tin ear would be an understatement.
GUY MUDIE, Highgate
Assets sold off
SUZANNE Edwards should realise Labor supports privatisation when it suits it (“Public trains”, The Advertiser, Monday).
Remember the sale of our pine forests, the money wasted on Adelaide Oval, the privatisation of the state’s land titles services and the privatisation of third-party motor insurance. After all, it was Labor that got this state in the mess that it’s in now.
KYM BRAY, Noarlunga Downs
Working classes
YOU’VE got to hand it to the Labor Party. It now wants to reconnect with the working class.
This is the same party that is working on the demise of the coalmining industry through its climate-change policies.
These will ultimately put the final nail in the manufacturing industry’s coffin with the exorbitant price of power.
Funny, I thought coalminers were working class.
We are not permitted to use our uranium and Australian gas is owned by overseas cartels who price local users out of the market.
Where are the Australian statesmen (and women) who will put an end to this nonsense?
And secondly, why does the mining union, the CFMEU, financially support a party that plans to put it out of work and has shown it is well past its use-by date?
PHIL GREEN, Modbury Heights
Goes both ways
J.A. Stevens, in the letter “Pollie carping”, talks about both state and federal Labor politicians’ attitude towards the current Coalition Government (The Advertiser, yesterday).
I believe you have forgotten Tony Abbott and his followers and their continual negative language towards former Labor prime minister Julia Gillard.
Perhaps you are being a little selective in your criticism, regardless of whether we are in a “COVID-19 wilderness” or not.
PATRICIA ROGERS, Aberfoyle Park
Health fatigue
HEAVY-vehicle drivers are subject to legislated fatigue laws that mandate rest stops and limit hours of work.
Why is it that the medical profession, where lives are at stake on judgment calls every day, can be forced to work extended shifts?
Surely fatigue laws are needed.
PAUL DAVIES, Morphett Vale
Swept under rug
SPENDING funds allocated for clean-energy projects on the questionable and expensive technology of carbon-capture and storage is a bit puzzling.
It seems to me we’re capturing the carbon dioxide and storing it underground.
However, it’s not converted to something else.
It’s the same troublesome gas that’s causing the warming of our planet.
What if there’s an earthquake, or some similar geographical disturbance, and many years of stored gas burps to the surface?
Sounds a bit like sweeping the dirt under the rug and hoping nobody lifts the rug.
As Pauline Hanson says, “please explain”.
RICHARD GEYER, Magill
Stop inequality
IT was disappointing to see Christopher Pyne join the “well they did it too” party (“We had our very own Capital chaos”, The Advertiser, Monday).
While politicians and political commentators continue to see things as Right or Left, they are ignoring the common problem.
Both the march on the Capitol Building and the march on Capital Hill involved criminal activity and were the result of long-term inequality and unfairness.
LESLEY BRETAG, Warradale
Council reform
THE article and editorial on the need for a council cull are welcome contributions to the need for long-overdue local government reform in South Australia (“Merge and purge”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
It’s worth noting ICAC Commissioner Ann Vanstone’s comments re amalgamations delivering improvements were qualified by the words “could” and “should”.
Based on the Onkaparinga Council amalgamation experience, you can see why.
It is quite clear it did not deliver.
The editorial was spot on regarding the need for a serious investigation into the problems of mergers.
The problem is not council amalgamations, it is the way they are delivered. It is simply not good enough to provide a legislative framework.
There has to be appropriate checks, balances and oversight that ensure accountability and consequences when required.
Adelaide Lord Mayor Sandy Verschoor’s statement that we need to do things differently and get better returns for our ratepayers is exactly right.
It is time the State Government stopped tinkering at the edges and got serious about local-government reform.
JOHN HOULAHAN, Maslin Beach
Socialist food
IS there to be no end to these self-styled experts telling us what we should, or should not, do with regard to how we feed our children?
The absurd suggestion that schools should supply school lunches, rather the parents, is pure socialist claptrap.
It is the sort of garbage practised in the now-defunct USSR.
They want the state to control everything.
And their biggest lust is that they are the ones appointed to enforce the rules.
ROBERT McCORMICK, Bridgewater
Priority jabs
THE Australian cricket team wants priority vaccine jabs before going to South Africa.
Good idea, but I have a better one. Don’t go and be disappointed.
It is inevitable that there will be squabbles and scrambles as a vaccine nears readiness. I am a person with equal rights so I deserve the first shot.
Even before Prime Minister Scott Morrison. Who will decide privilege? If it is based on merit, I reckon Port Adelaide players and supporters should have the first jabs.
KEN PURNELL, Seacliff
Golf surfing
DURING the massive downpour on Monday, I saw two young chaps surfing on their boards down the fairway at the Tea Tree Gully golf course.
GRAHAM WARNER, Fairview Park
Wide bowling
THE Big Bash League was started to give us some quick entertainment in the game for those unfortunate enough not to be enthralled by Test cricket.
It was to display some great batting, bowling and fielding in a condensed and exciting game to lure more fans to cricket.
The beginning was promising but it has quickly turned into not being real cricket.
Under what criteria is it real cricket when players are bowling wide enough of the wicket so that the batsman can’t reach it or needs to play a non-cricket shot to get some connection?
This has been called great bowling by conflicted former players commentating. It’s absolute rubbish and, for a cricket lover like myself, all I get is embarrassment and anger. I would like to see Dennis Lillee asked to bowl the ball where the batsman can’t reach it.
I can fix the game before it vanishes but Cricket Australia doesn’t listen to the public.
Finally, just one example. There is a young spinner learning his trade but his bowling instructions are to start wide of the crease, land the ball on a short length and aim for more than one foot outside the leg stump. What’s his Test future? None.
ROCCO ESPOSITO, Ethelton
TUESDAY, JANUARY 26
Eloquent player
CONGRATULATIONS to Ash Barty on being the most eloquent and professional tennis representative Australia has had in years.
SUE PEARCE OAM, Fullarton
Different day
THERE seems to be a simple solution that would satisfy the furore that is created each year by Australia Day.
If it is absolutely necessary to have a public holiday, make Australian Citizenship Day, which falls on September 17, the day we all celebrate being Australians.
This could also be the only day in the year the citizenship ceremonies are held to welcome new Australians.
DOMENICA CAVUOTO, Klemzig
Listen to people
AFTER two years of research, I am convinced that what the descendants of our First Nations people really want is the history to be correctly written.
What is needed is, going back thousands of years, how the Dreamtime is so important and what it means to them.
How they looked after our land and kept it sustainable so there was always food for the next visitor/tribe.
And the responsibility that each person had to ensure that a location or site was always left in better condition than how it was found when they arrived.
If we do not recognise this now, the stories of the Dreamtime will be lost forever – a history that appears to be much older than the Aztecs, the Egyptians and the Asians.
And certainly much older than the history of us, the descendants of European settlement. Let’s celebrate Australia Day as one.
BRIAN D. TEAKLE, Lockleys
Moving date
NOTHING would make more sense than to change Australia Day to the last Friday in January.
This was a suggestion made about three years ago by none other than Roy Ah-See, proud descendant of the Wiradjuri people. He is a nationally respected former chairman of the NSW Aboriginal Land Council and international speaker on behalf of all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples, and Australia as a whole.
Changing Australia Day to the last Friday in January ticks all the boxes.
In becoming a day and not a date – a “movable feast” like other celebrations on our calendar such as Labour Day, the Queen’s Birthday and Easter – all Australians can then go about enjoying it as one.
January 26 would be gone as an event, to only occur as a number once every seven or so years like other dates.
The last Friday, as a national public holiday, also provides the cherished Australian long weekend.
It would be at the end of the hurly burly of a Christmas and New Year holiday season, when we can all celebrate together as we prepare ourselves for another year of work and effort.
JOHN ARTHUR, Paradise
Name-calling
IF name-calling is the only rationale in a debate, you don’t have a rational debate.
Yes, Fred Fairhead, Australian citizenship came into force on January 26, 1949 (“Modern Australia”, The Advertiser yesterday). This was introduced, by the way, by a Labor prime minister in Ben Chifley – a fair dinkum political “lefty” if ever there was one.
Maybe January 26 should be called Ben Chifley Day.
Needless to say, if it were up to the conservatives of the day – especially Bob Menzies – we, including the Aboriginal people, would still have British subject status.
Let’s have a rational debate on Australia Day.
No one has a franchise on nationalism.
BOB RUWOLDT, Seacombe Heights
Aussie poem
AUSTRALIA Day be gone.
It’s NSW day at best.
Cos that’s where Phillip landed
And history tells us the rest
So let’s rid ourselves of this date.
That divides our multination.
And celebrate the day.
We became a Federation.
1901 is the year it happened.
January 1 when we decided to unite.
Then let’s Waltzing Matilda on Federation Day.
And stop these internal fights.
DAYLE TEAKLE, Nailsworth
Award win
CONGRATULATIONS to you, Margaret Court, on your Australia Day award.
Only when my own sporting achievements have equalled yours will I presume to take issue with any of your opinions which have been publicised. Bravo. Well done.
BOB ROBINS, Littlehampton
Making vaccine
NOW there’s a surprise. Our Federal Government has decided that too many supply chains start overseas and is having the COVID-19 vaccine made in Australia.
We learn something new every day.
GARRY TURNER, Port Pirie
Defence spending
I AM rendered almost speechless when I read about the billions to be spent on weapons of war in this country.
We are a relatively wealthy country yet governments quibble about saving money by paying the unemployed and unemployable sufficient to live in some degree of comfort and decency.
Funding is cut to so many essential areas while we pay for politicians to traverse the country doing nothing but self-promotion.
Think of nursing homes, public schools, hospitals, affordable housing and climate change. The list is endless.
How about looking to the future by taking care of all of us instead of looking at some remote possibility of attack from some nameless enemy.
MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood
Big tech power
WHILE SA Law Society president Rebecca Sandford is correct in saying there are limits placed upon free speech in this country, the crucial point is that the debate is now reliant on these platforms (“Speaking too freely can cost great deal”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
The power to determine who receives freedom of speech in the modern world now largely rests with them.
Twitter has 330 million monthly active users and Facebook has more than 2.6 billion users.
These companies are now able to influence governments, elections and business trends at the flip of a boardroom meeting.
Yet nobody is really certain of the formula for these editorial decisions.
In 2021, we live in a world where Twitter tells us that the US President should lose his ability to communicate based on their interpretation of his role in the Capitol Hill protests events.
Yet a month or so earlier, Twitter failed to remove an appalling tweet by the Chinese Foreign Ministry spokesman showing a mocked-up picture of an Australian soldier holding a knife to the throat of an Afghan child.
There is a long overdue need to explore the role of social media and big-tech companies in our society.
It is for this reason that I am advocating for a Senate select committee to be established to explore big tech influence in Australia’s democracy.
SENATOR ALEX ANTIC, Liberal Party
Pollie carping
I WONDER if the Labor Party will ever learn that negativity, carping, criticising and white-anting the Coalition, led by Prime Minister Scott Morrison, will not return them to power.
Recent TV appearances on by the usual suspects – federal Opposition Leader Anthony Albanese, state Opposition Leader Peter Malinauskas, Senator Penny Wong, state Labor MP Tom Koutsantonis and others – all sing from the same sad songbook.
Doom and gloom will befall us if their respective governments are not returned to lead us out of the COVID-19 wilderness.
One can only cringe at the thought of how they would, or could, manage Australia in this time of crisis with their track record.
How tiresome can they get?
J.A. STEVENS, Hyde Park
Toxic air
THE 21st century means we live in a toxic environment. We’re exposed to increased pollutants.
There are bushfires and last Sunday week there was another waste dump fire at Wingfield.
Toxic smoke billowed over Globe Derby Park, Greenfields, Mawson Lakes, and Parafield Gardens.
Environmental health has been considered by politicians secondary to other issues.
Adelaide’s air quality is changing. Trends show it may to worsen. The cost of doing business as usual has increased greenhouse gases.
Toxic pollutants increase risks of chronic diseases and the shortening of life expectancy, especially for our vulnerable people – children, the elderly and those with existing health illnesses.
There is the risk of more bushfires with hotter and sunnier weather.
A philosophical change in how we care for others and our environment needs to be formulated. Let’s move away from regressive policies that harm the most vulnerable to ones that support equality and invigorate sustainable development goals.
Symbolism is no substitute for positive action.
LEN LEAN, Paradise
Voucher issues
WHEN will politicians learn that taxpayer-funded travel vouchers will get abused by many?
Consider all those who have missed out because of those greedy people who did not use them because they cost nothing. With only one in four using them, many businesses have also missed out.
Travel vouchers must be used, or those who renege by not using them should pay a fine.
If this was known, maybe some will think twice before they jump in and grab a freebie.
DAVID BISHOP, South Plympton
Council mergers
ICAC Commissioner Ann Vanstone is barking up the wrong tree by calling for council amalgamations to reduce her complaints load (“Merge and purge”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
That argument lacks any logic. For example, does reducing the number of unions automatically lead to a reduction in labour disputes?
Of course not. Council amalgamations are like circuses. They are good for public consumption.
But they rarely are cost-effective and they inevitably damage the public interest by removing more of the “local” from local government.
A more efficient solution to the perceived behavioural problems by councillors is to tighten the rules regarding such behaviour. Under the current system, bad behaviour requires expensive legal consultations that invariably result in a slap on the wrist with a wet lettuce.
And that’s because the rules are so lax. Three strikes and you’re out for bad behaviour seems fair to me.
PETER AUSTIN, Glynde
MONDAY, JANUARY 25
Modern Australia
JANUARY 26 is nearly upon us and so comes the usual spate of criticism, especially from the political Left.
While it is fair to recognise the 1788 date as an invasion, and the start of the brutality associated with European 18th century colonialism, it is about time that we acknowledge what I believe is the more important significance of the date.
For it was on January 26, 1949, that Australian citizenship came into force under the 1948 Nationality and Citizen Act.
Before that date, Australians only had British-subject status.
But the new Act provided for Australian citizenship by birth and by descent.
Importantly, this also included Aboriginal people.
It is disappointing that ­federal and state authorities are either ignorant of this ­important step in Australian democracy, or choose not to advertise it.
Perhaps they are too busy dealing with less important matters like tinkering with the national anthem?
FRED FAIRHEAD, Erindale
Try new name
STOP the nonsense and change the name of Australia Day to Australians’ Day.
Give us all an opportunity to celebrate the fact that we all live in the best country in the world.
It is a fact that Aboriginals discovered our country, non-Aboriginals developed it, and migrants gave it a wonderful multicultural flavour.
JOHN LANGREHR, Leabrook
Change the date
DEAR Prime Minister Scott Morrison, since we’ve established that none of the original participants would have liked, or celebrated, the anniversary of January 26, perhaps we can all agree to change the date now.
FELICITY SHEPHERD, Dover Gardens
Be a sport
JIMINY Crickets, what does the current board of Cricket Australia think it is?
Sporting bodies need to do what they were established for – administer sport.
Similarly, business executives are answerable to their shareholders. Keep your nose and commentary out of issues that are of no concern to your business operations.
With all sporting bodies, it is the sporting prowess the public is interested in, not your ideological views.
And, right on schedule, Greens Senator Sarah Hanson-Young pops her head up.
It is a pity cricket tragics who do not agree with CA’s stance don’t have the tenacity to keep away from the game on January 26. It would soon change its thinking if the money-go-round stopped.
IAN KENT, Renmark
Cricket cashing in
SO let’s get this clear.
The Australia Day holiday is on January 26. Cricket Australia is happy to cash in on the revenue pouring into its bank account by staging Big Bash League events on this date.
However, it decides that it’s not appropriate to refer to “Australia Day” in its marketing of these events.
So they will take the holiday and the money while expressing their concern for Indigenous Australians. It is appropriate to have a national conversation as to whether or not January 26 is the best day for a national party, but Cricket Australia’s action smacks of hypocrisy.
GUY MUDIE, Highgate
Educate youth
THE editorial is right: We must ensure that our young people acquire a better understanding of our democracy (“Youths must understand democracy”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
Certainly if the delightful socially aware and articulate young baristas I chat with on the Henley seafront are any guide, they would be most receptive to such an education.
There may be a generational factor at play here. The immediate post-World War II generations of youngsters grew up with parents who had been traumatised by their struggle with fascist dictatorships in Europe and Japan.
Without a similar experience, the danger from democratic decline for today’s youngsters seems less real.
So we must encourage them into a strong knowledge and understanding of what it would mean for our daily lives if our democracy were to fail.
Across the Pacific we have the example of a once-leading democracy struggling to put itself back together again.
Perhaps the US can serve as a focus for us all in learning the dire consequences of allowing our democracy to slide into ­serious decline.
TERRY HEWTON, Henley Beach South
Gatehouse statue
WHY can’t a slip road go behind the Waite Gatehouse?
It could branch off and wind around the back of the property. It would render the heritage property useless but it would remain decorative like a statue.
JANET BYRNES, Marion
Biden time
I READ with interest David Penberthy’s article “Can Biden truly make America great again?” (The Advertiser, Friday). Mr Penberthy outlines the chaotic manner in which former president Donald Trump managed the US during the past four years.
True, currently the US is divided, where people have been forgotten in a country that is admired by many as the leading power of the free world. President Joe Biden has a tremendous job in turning this great country around from its political upheaval so that all people matter, and not just some.
Not sure if President Biden has either the endurance, strength or intestinal fortitude to succeed. But at least he will start to make changes, which can only be good for America right now.
DES KEMP, St Agnes
Falling empire
AS one with a history bent, I must wonder whether recent months in the US have a ­similarity to the last period in the rise and fall of the Roman empire.
ED SAGE, Burnside
Staying local
THOSE who are advocating the establishment of one council for the whole of the Adelaide metropolitan area do not appear to understand the concept of “local”, nor the importance of “local government”.
Among other things, a proposed council area, with a population of about 1.3 million, stretching from the Gawler River to the Adelaide Hills would at least create an impression of separation between the council and its constituents. They might just as well take the next step and seek the abolition of all of the metropolitan councils. Why have a council at all?
After all, it could be argued that most of the various services provided by local government could be supplied by state government departments, which are already doing so, albeit on a larger scale.
These include roads, street lighting, stormwater disposal, libraries, recreational areas, waste disposal, etc.
D. G. PITT, Plympton
Public trains
I AM protesting against the proposed privatisation of train services in Adelaide in the near future.
Australians pay taxes so as to be provided with public transport, health services, education, a road system and police services, among other things, at reasonable costs to the consumer.
However, the current Liberal State Government is putting public-transport services at risk.
If trains are privatised it is likely that they will become more expensive, the frequency of train transport will decrease, the train-system staff will have less training, the number of train-system staff will decrease significantly, and destinations may decrease.
This is due to the mere fact that the motivation of a private company will be for profit as opposed to providing a public service. The Labor Party is opposed to the privatisation of the Adelaide train service but it may be one year too late.
Please, let’s halt the privatisation of the Adelaide train system before Adelaide public-transport consumers suffer the effects of a privatised rail system run for profit.
SUZANNE EDWARDS, Edwardstown
Taking stock
YES, Wayne, you are dreaming (“Housing stock”, The Advertiser, Wednesday).
Supermarkets say stocks of dunny paper are low.
Car dealers call the cars they sell stock. Any article and every commodity is referred to as stock.
Ever heard of a stocktake sale? It is used as an annual counting of what is bought and what is sold to determine turnover.
MICHAEL PRUS, Fairview Park
Missed car sale
WHERE has customer service or common decency gone? Right out the window I think.
Last week I arranged with a car dealer for a time early this week to view and test drive a car I was interested in, expecting to buy. This was the second time arranged to see this vehicle but due to an issue with it I wasn’t able to until this week.
I arrived, asked for the ­person I was to see, who ­conveniently wasn’t available, spoke to someone else, who then advised that this particular vehicle had been sold on the weekend.
I was considerably miffed. I said, “A phone call would have been nice,” and all I got was, “Sorry but we have other cars on site that you may be interested in.” No, I was only interested in that one. A simple phone call is all it would have taken. I wouldn’t have been happy but that’s life. Now it’s back to the drawing board.
C. ROBERTSON, Findon
It’s un-Australian
MAY I add a postscript to ­Graham Matthews’ excellent letter (“Vote Aussies”, The ­Advertiser, Friday)?
We do not carry guns and our lunatic fringe is relatively small.
MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood
Anthem tradition
LEAVE girt alone (“Bound for glory”, The Advertiser, Friday).
TOM SCHMIECHEN, Maylands
Use technology
I, LIKE hundreds of thousands of other Big Bash League cricket fans, can forgive one or two bad decisions a season.
But when there’s at least one bad decision almost every game it’s unacceptable.
Enough is enough. Can we please have DRS available.
DAYMAN CREWFEND, Adelaide
Word count: 9578
