AUDIO FLIGHT OF THE CONCHORDS BBC Radio iplayer Before New Zealand comedy duo Flight of the Conchords conquered New York in their wonderful HBO TV series, they had a crack at London for a BBC radio series. If you have seen the TV series, you’ll know all the main characters; musicians Jemaine Clement and Bret McKenzie, and their hapless manager Brian, played by Rhys Darby. Unlike the TV series, the radio version has a narrator in comedian Rob Brydon, best known in Australia as host of Would I Lie to You. But just like the TV series, the six radio episodes are extremely funny as the naive and somewhat innocent duo try to make their mark in England. Many of their most well-known songs – Business Time, Think, Think About it, Robots, Bowies in Space – are aired for the first time. An added treat are Brian’s regular conversations with a befuddled Neil Finn. Even without the moving pictures, this is brilliant.
— MICHAEL MCGUIRE
GADGET GURU NANOLEAF CANVAS $319, jbhifi.com.au This unusual Canadian creation can make the work from home situation a bit brighter. The Nanoleaf Canvas Smarter Kit comes with nine modular light squares (more pictured) that can be installed on a wall and programmed to glow in different colours. Control the lights with voice, touch or from within the app, changing the home office mood, and the look of a video call.
— JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSEN
APPLE MAGIC KEYBOARD $499-$589, apple.com/au There are three types of people: those who already use their iPad as a laptop, those who deny it can be done, and those who are about to use their iPad as a laptop after buying this Magic Keyboard.
This iPad Pro accessory is unlike any that have come before it, even though it looks the same when it’s closed. It features a solid hinge and something Apple calls a “floating cantilevered design”. Essentially, it suspends the tablet above the keyboard and lets users adjust it into the most comfortable position.
The keyboard is also a big step up from the Keyboard Folio that came before it, as the buttons are backlit, feature a rigid construction, and they’re paired with a touchpad that cements the iPad’s laptop credentials.
There are some caveats to this accessory – it’s expensive, its viewing angles are quite limited, and it won’t fold over on to itself – but this could help professional iPad users get even more out of their machines.
— JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSEN
APPLE IPAD PRO 2020 $1329-$2749, apple.com/au The 2020 iPad Pro doesn’t break the mould but it does come with significantly extra grunt and more cameras than before. The newest model is the slightest bit heavier (just 8g) but it packs in additional storage and 6GB RAM even at the cheapest end of the range, and it also gets a speed boost from a new A12Z chip and M12 co-processor. Two cameras and a LIDAR system sit on the back of the iPad for the first time, including a 10-megapixel ultra-wide camera and a 12-megapixel wide-angle camera, which will be handy not just for taking photos but for delivering augmented reality apps too.
— JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSEN
CLASSIC ALBUM EAST COLD CHISEL (1980) Cold Chisel were already bona fide Oz rock stars before their third record East was released, having enjoyed success with their self-titled 1978 debut and its 1979 follow-up Breakfast at Sweethearts.
But it was East that transformed this unlikely bunch of musical outsiders from stars to superstars and ensured that their legacy would endure for decades to come.
The cover – frontman Jimmy Barnes slumped in a bathtub – was based on the French Revolution painting The Death of Marat by Jacques-Louis David and suggested that the band were more than hard-drinking rebel-rousers. There was an intellectual side to Cold Chisel.
East’s opening track Standing On The Outside is the perfect two-fingered salute to a society that wants to keep the working man in his place. “No amount of work’s gonna get me through the door,” Barnes sings, before outlining plans to “buy a 22 and cut the whole thing down”. If you can’t earn the money then why not steal it?
Choirgirl is an R&B-infused ballad about terminating a pregnancy (although not many knew that at the time), and Rising Sun is a flat out rocker about Barnes’s then girlfriend, now wife, Jane moving to Japan.
Side two opens with East’s finest song, the perfectly-crafted Don Walker ode to the age-old bad habit of healing pain with alcohol, Cheap Wine.
East is a genre-defying beast, jumping between genres bringing blues, reggae and even jazz into the mix, but it holds together just fine. Better than fine actually, it’s probably Chisel’s best work. – NATHAN DAVIES
CREDIT: MICHAEL MCGUIRE JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSEN NATHAN DAVIES
Word count: 798
