Western Australia With a little imagination, staring at the night sky has the power to take you to faraway places
Most nights, during the extended home detention that is 2020, I have a small, life-affirming ritual that gets me through each day. I stare out an open window and, clouds willing, gaze at the stars. It’s a simple act to remind me that, despite being stuck in Australia, we’re always connected to the rest of the world.
The evening sky unites us across countries, continents, and time. All it takes to spark the connection is a little imagination.
After name-checking the few constellations I know (the Southern Cross is a constant comfort), I like to close my eyes and remember other times I’ve been starstruck in my travels. The memories are surprisingly vivid.
Try it tonight. Survey the stars wherever you are, then close your eyes and think back to the last time you looked up in wonder.
For me, the exercise always recalls the neon chaos of the Flinders Ranges where I once stayed overnight on a wooden platform furnished with the world’s most comfortable swag. After a lush dinner (Dorper lamb cutlets and fine South Australian wine, from memory), I couldn’t wait to go to bed. But once snuggled under the covers I realised it was too bright to sleep, and way too noisy.
The chorus of insects was bad enough, but the constant braying of bullfrogs in the riverbed made it impossible to drift off. So I lay there under the fluorescent lighting of a South Australian outback sky, awestruck but also slightly peeved that its magnificence meant I wouldn’t get a wink of sleep.
Stargazing also reminds me of my first trip overseas, and a drunken night on a cliff above Anjuna Beach in the Indian resort state of Goa. Sprawled on our backs, a friend and I lay there gaping in amazement as the sky burst into a shower of meteorites. So many of them – it seemed impossible it was real. Perhaps it wasn’t – perhaps it was a happy hallucination triggered by fermented cashew juice. Still, it’s a memory I treasure to this day.
Recently, I had a similar experience on an expedition travelling by boat south between Indonesia and New Guinea, seated with new friends in front of the bridge under a sparkling sky. The Southern Cross lay dead ahead; the Milky Way splintered the inky blackness. Someone had a Spotify list playing. When the classic Oliver song “Good Morning Starshine” came on, we all sang along. Moments later, a star fell from the darkness above in a blazing moment of serendipity.
I also think of Chile’s Atacama Desert, the high-altitude region renowned for having the least-polluted skies on Earth. Hence the many observatories there run by the EU, the US, Japan and others, their mega-telescopes all trained on the heavens.
It’s also home to Frenchman Alain Maury and his wife, Alejandra, who run their own makeshift observatory outside the desert hub of San Pedro de Atacama.
Maury is an astronomer of some repute. He has a comet and an asteroid named after him. Most evenings he and Alejandra welcome tourists to their home to learn about astronomy and then give a practical lesson in their backyard, where a “telescope farm” harvests information from the firmament. Maury uses a laser pointer to identify highlights among the thousands of celestial bodies. Thanks to him, I saw Jupiter for the first time and, aided by a powerful telescope, witnessed the twin marvels of Alpha Centauri and the mysterious, bewildering Swan Nebula (spaceobs.com).
Whenever I look up I try to summon the words of Wardaman elder Bill Yidumduma Harney, whose homelands lie south of Katherine in the Northern Territory.
“If you lay on your back in the middle of the night you can see the stars all blinking,” he once said. “They’re all talking.” I find it fascinating that all ancient cultures developed their own language and mythologies around stars. It’s proof we’ve always been fascinated by what’s up there. Still today, the darkness can tell us so much if we only take the time to look.
Staring at the sky rather than staring at screens (computer, phone, television) can take us away from everyday cares to ponder the Big Issues – like Earth’s creation, our trivial existence, even extraterrestrial life.
If we can see the night sky we’re never really alone. It’s a constant, easily accessible reminder that, even when we’re confined to a suburb, city, state or country, we can recapture a traveller’s sense of unknowable wonder simply by looking up. We are all in – or under – this together.
Look out for...
Stellar apps Amateur astronomy has never been easier. Clever phone apps use augmented reality to decode the heavens above, tracing stars and constellations and tracking planets and satellites. They’re planetariums in your pocket. My favourite apps include Stellar Tour, which digs deep into each star’s story and links to related articles – perfect for aspiring astro-geeks. But my go-to is Skyview, which works without Wi-Fi or GPS so it’s great for outback nights far from civilisation. Whenever a named star or constellations catches your eye, click through for more info. No telescopes needed.
Read more of Kendall’s adventures at escape.com.au/kendall-hill or follow him on Instagram: @misterkendallhill
CREDIT: KENDALL HILL; MY TRAVELS
Word count: 893
