The best wet, fast, hot and muddy stuff at the centre of a North Island holiday Rotorua is known for its hot stuff, literally, as it’s right at the centre of New Zealand’s geothermal activity. But there’s more to the area than boiling mud and belching geysers. It’s also the heartland of Maori culture, the Lakes District of Aotearoa, and a mountainous playground for adventurers. So hire a car and explore the region’s many lakes, forests and mountains.
PADDLE LAKE OKAREKA Meet at dusk and don a wetsuit and head torch for a quick lesson in stand-up paddleboarding before gliding on to inky-black Lake Okareka. Ducks swoosh into land unseen as you paddle towards headlands that are a black smudge in the distance.
The first rock tunnel necessitates sitting or lying on the board. Paddling with hands through the narrow cavern, glow worms loom into view, studding walls and ceiling with fairy lights before you emerge into a ferny grotto. At a second cave, the fungus gnat larvae resemble a galaxy of stars. Weather permitting, real stars illuminate the paddle back to shore. A kayaking tour is also available.
PADDLEBOARDROTORUA.COM
FLY THROUGH THE FOREST Soar through the trees like a bird on a zip-lining eco-adventure, and meet the birds too, with Rotorua Canopy Tours. While traversing swing bridges, a rock-cliff walkway and launching off 50m high platforms you learn about their award-winning predator eradication program and the return of native birds to this old growth forest.
The fun-loving, knowledgeable guides have you zip-lining backwards and upside down, between pointing out delicate fungi, giant 1000-year-old trees, flitting native fantails and the calls of tuis and bellbirds. Experience the thrills of a 400m tandem zip-line, then a tomtit darting on to your hand for a worm.
CANOPYTOURS.CO.NZ
SOAK IT IN Think of Rotorua as New Zealand’s natural spa capital. Choose from free thermal foot baths in Kuirau Park to private lakefront hot pools and massages at Polynesian Spa. For a complete geothermal buff-and-polish head to Hell’s Gate, where Maori have used the healing waters for more than 800 years. Formed about 10,000 years ago from geothermal eruptions, the park is known as Tikitere by Maori.
The name Hell’s Gate was coined by Irish playwright George Bernard Shaw on a visit in 1934. Stroll past spitting mud volcanoes and sulphur pools with temperatures up to 110C, then slather yourself in silky, mineral-rich mud at the outdoor spa, before a restorative soak in the healing geothermal waters known as waiariki – water of the gods.
HELLSGATE.CO.NZ, POLYNESIANSPA.CO.NZ
SEE REDWOODS BY NIGHT Treewalk traverses 28 bridges, suspended up to 20m above ground, between towering California redwood trees. The interspersed circular platforms provide interpretation and seats to breathe in forest ambience. Beautiful by day, it’s captivating by night, with light installations from award-winning environmentalist designer David Trubridge.
Timber lanterns up to 2.5m tall hang elegantly between redwoods and flying saucer-like sculptures encircle tree trunks. Ferns backlit by colour glow ethereally, projected owls appear eerily on tree trunks and confetti-like laser droplets sprinkle the undergrowth. Nocturnal birds offer an alternative soundtrack as you traverse the darkness on bridges strung with rope lights.
TREEWALK.CO.NZ
ENJOY MAORI HOSPITALITY Experience Maoritanga (Maori culture) hospitality at Tamaki village. The nightly interactive experience becomes a fun voyage of discovery – the bus imaginatively becomes a waka (canoe) on migration to a pre-European Maori village and a “chief” is chosen to represent visitors.
Witness the fierce haka challenge, watch traditional carving, weaving and facial tattooing at forest huts, and participate in stick games and poi twirling used for warrior training. At the Wharenui (meeting house) there is time-honoured song and dance. Food baskets are removed from the hangi pit for the buffet feast finale.
TAMAKIMAORIVILLAGE.CO.NZ
FLY DOWNHILL “You can fang it downhill,” urges a guide from MDA Experiences on a tour of 5600ha Whakarewarewa Redwoods Forest, home to one of the oldest mountain bike networks in NZ, with 180km of trails built by mountain bikers. Tracks cater for novice families to world-class competitors. Trail names like Sidewinder, Roller Coaster, No Brains and Frontal Lobotomy might have you quivering in your pedals, but the guys at MDA are rousing confidence builders. After a quick lesson in a paddock and forestry backroads, newbies swerve between towering pines, negotiating small jumps and even fanging it downhill.
MDANZ.COM
GEOTHERMAL COLOURS Waimangu, meaning black water, is the world’s youngest geothermal ecosystem, created in 1886 by the Mount Tarawera eruption, which buried the famous Pink and White Terraces. It’s named after the largest geyser ever recorded, that sent black muddy water spewing up to 450m into the air between 1900-1904, which can be seen on the park’s augmented reality app. Walking tracks take in Frying Pan Lake, one of the world’s largest hot water springs, Inferno Crater, an acidic aquamarine lake, boiling streams marbled with vibrant green algae, russet mineral deposits and delicate silica stalactites.
The boat cruise on Lake Rotomahana, a wildlife refuge for threatened dabchicks, passes steaming cliffs and geysers.
WAIMANGU.CO.NZ
VOLCANO LANDINGS See the devastating power of volcanic eruptions on a helicopter flight with Volcanic Air. Departing Lake Rotorua, flights land first atop Mount Tarawera, then on White Island, 48km off the coastline. The now-dormant, barren Tarawera bears jagged, gaping fissures from its eruption in 1886.
From the summit you can see the extent of the Taupo Volcanic Zone, from Mount Ruapehu to White Island. Also known as Whakaari, White Island is an active marine volcano. Armed with hard hats and gas masks, you can walk across Whakaari’s crater floor beside crystallised sulphur gardens, hissing fumaroles and thermal streams to steaming Crater Lake.
VOLCANICAIR.CO.NZ
DOWNHILL FUN The Luge, part go-kart, part toboggan, was invented in Rotorua and the tracks here are the longest in NZ. Catch the Skyline Gondola up Mount Ngongotaha above roaming deer for great views over Lake Rotorua. Then surrender to gravity, barrelling and bumping down three tracks through redwoods and ferns, negotiating chicanes and tunnels, before catching the chairlift back up to do it all again.
For more adrenaline-pumping adventure, hire a mountain bike to take aboard the reserved gondola cars and hit the world-class downhill trails, host to the international Crankworx mountain bike festival. For a stomach-lurching thrill, swoop up to 150km/h on the Skyswing.
SKYLINELUGE.COM/EN/ROTORUA
LAKES AND RIVERS Known as New Zealand’s Lakes District, there are 18 lakes and three major rivers to explore.
Go trout fishing on Lake Rotorua or wander the lakefront past sculptures, active geothermal features and wildlife refuge to Government Gardens and the Elizabethan-inspired Rotorua Museum and Art Deco Blue Baths.
Take the boardwalk at Lake Okareka to observe waterbirds from a hide; catch a water taxi to Hot Water Beach on Lake Tarawera; admire sacred Lake Rotokakahi (Green Lake); go swimming in bush-fringed Lake Tikitapu (Blue Lake); blast along the mighty Waikato River in a jet boat; or plunge down the world’s highest commercially rafted waterfall, the 7m Tutea Falls on the Kaituna River, which flows from Lake Rotoiti.
THE WRITER TOURED AS A GUEST OF ROTORUA TOURISM AND HERTZ
ESCAPE ROUTE - ROTORUA GETTING THERE Air New Zealand, Qantas, Virgin and Jetstar fly direct to Auckland from most capital cities. Rotorua is less than a three-hour drive from Auckland.
GETTING AROUND Many activities provide pick-ups, but a hire car offers freedom to explore at your own pace, visit less popular attractions and stop at photogenic spots en route. Hertz has airport and city pick-up and drop-off locations in Auckland and Rotorua. hertz.co.nz STAYING THERE Millennium Hotel Rotorua is a favourite with Kiwis, close to the town centre and adjacent to the Polynesian Spa.
millenniumhotels.com/en/rotorua/millennium-hotel-rotorua/ MORE rotoruanz.com, newzealand.com/au @FOR MORE NEW ZEALAND HOLIDAY IDEAS, VISIT ESCAPE.COM.AU
CREDIT: BRIAR JENSEN
Word count: 1285
