Coronavirus restrictions have increased demand for virtual and augmented reality content as alternative methods to sharing agricultural experiences.
Once seemingly simple outings to a property for practical agricultural work have come grinding to a halt as school and university students study from home.
Think Digital production studio owner Tim Gentle has spent the last few years creating content with industry stakeholders including Meat and Livestock Australia, AuctionsPlus and Elders but the technology has never been more crucial. Mr Gentle reported a recent increase in people wanting to use immersive technology to market themselves, train staff or engage with students through virtual farm tours.
"It kind of feels a little bit humbling to know that we envisioned this five or six years ago," he said. "People thought I was a bit crazy to be honest but now we are seeing a new way to communicate and immersive technologies can alleviate that."
The technology has already proven itself at the University of Adelaide where last month students underwent animal handling training without leaving the classroom. Using artificial intelligence and virtual reality, students were placed in a yard full of Droughtmaster cattle and instructed to move and draft animals to understand flight zones. If they stood in the wrong position, they would be kicked.
University lecturer Dr Mandi Carr said about 280 students across four different bachelor degrees would have access to the VR training.
"It never replaces live practical work but it gives an additional element to being able to teach where you can get them to make a fairly significant mistake but teach around that mistake," she said. "You can take longer and be more methodical in the VR environment, you can make that same mistake...and try to develop your learning around why the mistake was made."
The technology could expand to loading a truck or using a crush.
"Whilst we are trying to be proactive we are actually catching up on what society is expecting of us," she said.
"This is the changing face of education and students are...embracing the interactive environment."
CREDIT: Lucy Kinbacher
Word count: 345
