Celebrate central Victoria during the warmer months at these great events.
If you have a community event that you think should be featured in our What's On section, contact us on one of the below:
Email us at: addynews@bendigoadvertiser.com.au Phone us on: 5434 4470 See us at: 67-71 Williamson Street, Bendigo. PERFORMANCES BUSHFIRE RELIEF FUNDRAISER
Enjoy performances by many local talents all while raising money for the Bushfire Relief Action Fund through Bendigo Bank.
Peter Shehan's Walk Up's have been raising money for various foundations for 10 years.
This event will include all kinds of music, poetry, yarns, country, rock and blues with performances from Les Smith, Peter Sheahan, Leigh Bice, Rod Briant, Annette Sharp, Fred Goodwin and Rob Daniels just to name a few.
This event will also include a raffle and afternoon tea.
Tickets $10 per person.
For table bookings, phone Peter on 0400 076 634 or 0407 059 480.
For meal bookings, phone 5443 8166.
This event is proudly supported by Muso's Stuff, Phoenix FM 106.7, Bendigo Country Talent Club and KL FM 96.5.
Where: All Seasons Hotel, McIvor Road, Bendigo.
When: Sunday, January 26, 1pm to 5.30pm.
CHAMBER PHILHARMONIA COLOGNE
The Chamber Philharmonia Cologne (Germany) is back in Australia after their successful European tours.
The ensemble aims to inspire as many people as possible across different generations to enjoy classical music and all it has to offer.
Founded in Cologne, Germany, The Chamber Philharmonia Cologne regularly tours New Zealand, Australia, Spain, Great Britain, Ireland and many other countries, performing a selection of works and showcasing their soloists.
The Chamber Philharmonia Cologne consists primarily of hand-picked pieces, showcasing popular and the unknown works of greats like Mozart, Vivaldi, Prokofieff and Piazzolla.
Adults $40, concession $35, child and students $30.
Tickets are available from the Bendigo Information Centre, Pall Mall or at the door (cash only).
The Bendigo Information Centre can be contacted on 5434 6060 or 1800 813 153.
Where: Sacred Heart Cathredal, 80 Wattle Street, Bendigo.
When: Wednesday, January 29, 8pm to 10pm.
COMMUNITY EVENTS SATURDAY EVENING DANCE
Come along to the Spring Gully Hall and enjoy great music by McNees Dance Band.
The dance event will also include a good program and a delicious home cooked supper.
There will also be a raffle and prizes.
Admission $9. Everyone welcome.
For more information contact Keith on 5444 2953.
Where: Spring Gully Hall, Spring Gully Road, Bendigo.
When: Saturday, January 25, from 8pm.
MORRIS MINOR CLUB BIRTHDAY
Enjoy a day out with fellow Morris Minor Car lovers at the Central Victoria Morris Minor Car Club's 40th birthday.
Meet at the Huntly Pub and display the cars together.
If attending, please contact Les Crichton on 0400 089 153.
Please dress in a theme of something starting with M, with a prize for the best dressed.
Where: The Huntly Pub, 592 Midland Highway.
When: Saturday, January 25, from 11.30am.
AUSTRALIA DAY DANCE
Celebrate Australia Day with a fundraising dance this weekend.
Hosted by Greater Bendigo Danceland Inc., this event will have your toes tapping from start to finish.
Come along dressed in your best Australian theme and join in the fun with Old Time and New Vogue dances.
There will be entertaining music and a delicious homemade supper for all to enjoy.
The event will also include a lucky door and a raffle.
Entry is $8 and proceeds will head to the Bushfire Appeal.
For more information, phone Sharon on 0417 470 774.
Where: St Andrew's Uniting Church Hall, Myers Street, Bendigo.
When: Saturday, January 25, 8pm to 11pm.
PLAY AUDITIONS
After a break of almost 20 years, "The Way of the Cross", Bendigo's own Passion Play, is being resurrected at the behest of the Easter Fair Committee.
The play will be performed on Good Friday, April 10, as part of the 150th Easter Anniversary celebrations in Bendigo.
There is a callout for local actors to participate in this play.
There is no experience required but there will be auditions for both speaking and non-speaking roles, leads and chorus.
The committee is seeking about 50 to 60 people in total.
For more information, click here.
Where: St Peter's Anglican Church, Eaglehawk.
When: Tuesday and Wednesday, January 28 and 29, from 6.30pm.
BOTANICAL GARDENS
Are you wanting to learn more about the Castlemaine Botanical Gardens but didn't know where to start?
Bring along your friends and family, or meet new people at this free guided tour of the gardens.
Members from Mount Alexander Shire Council's Botanical Gardens Team will take the group around the gardens and speak about the various tree collections, significant plantings and much more.
The event will be a gentle stroll for about an hour.
The gardens are heritage listed and feature an ancient oak planted in 1863, commemorating the marriage of the Prince and Princess of Wales.
No bookings are required, for more information contact CHIRP Community Health on 5479 1000.
Please note the walk will be cancelled if there is heavy rain or a Code Red Day.
Please bring a hat and a water bottle.
Where: Meet at Old Tea Rooms, Castlemaine Botanical Gardens, Walker Street.
When: Wednesday, January 29, 10am to 11am.
RIVER GARDENS
The sun is shining and that means it is the perfect weather to visit an open garden this weekend.
River Gardens in Axedale features perfumed roses, salvias, lavender and granny bonnets adorning the terraced gardens.
The gardens overlook the Campaspe river and include water features, seating under trees and much more.
There will also be the chance to mix and match garden plants for compatible planting combinations.
Entry $8, children free to attend. Devonshire tea, coffee and scones available for additional fee.
No dogs allowed.
Where: 91 Brownes Lane, Axedale.
When: Saturday and Sunday, January 25 and 26, 10am to 4pm.
EXHIBITIONS STILL SCAPES
International photographer, Mike Rutherford, will be exhibiting more than 30 images portraying the local area in ways that move beyond usual tourist images into something darker.
Still Scapes is a free photographic exhibition that tackles everything from climate change to the erosion of rural life.
Mike Rutherford's images are from the local region and recent trips to remote India.
Mike is a former advertising photographer who has lived in Trentham for about 15 years.
Last year, Mike travelled to India twice for photography and many of those images are featured in the exhibition.
Mike will be exhibiting his works in Dehli and Mumbai in the coming years.
For more information, click here or phone 5424 1516.
Where: Cosmopolitan Hotel, High Street, Trentham.
When: Until Tuesday, March 31.
POSSUM GULLY FINE ART
Possum Gully Gallery invites all to view their new exhibition of Fine Art.
There will be a new garden of ceramics, metal and stone, which have all been individually designed and crafted by Goldfields Artists.
The gallery also displays paintings and drawings.
For more information, phone 5461 1775.
Where: 428 Possum Gully Road, Adelaide Lead.
When: Saturday, January 25, 11am to 5pm.
THE PAUL GUEST COLLECTION
Former Olympic rower and family court Judge, Paul Guest, has gifted his $2 million collection of artwork to a local gallery.
Featuring more than 200 works, Mr Guest's collection of modern and contemporary Australian paintings and sculptures and focuses on abstraction and conceptualism.
The decision to gift his collection to the Bendigo Art Gallery came from his love of the gallery.
The collection started in the late 1960s after Paul Guest met artist Andrew Sibley.
Where: Bendigo Art Gallery, View Street, Bendigo.
When: Until Sunday, March 1.
JOSH MUIR: WHAT'S ON YOUR MIND?
Experience augmented reality at the Josh Muir: What's on your mind? exhibition.
The exhibition features works with hidden meanings behind them, which is accessible through the use of an iPad.
This is a free exhibition with limited availability.
Phone the art gallery on 5434 6088 and please see gallery reception to organise your experience.
Where: Bendigo Art Gallery, 42 View Street, Bendigo.
When: Until Sunday, March 1.
WONDERLAND
This exhibition will appeal to both adults and children, showcasing a playful atmosphere in a gallery space, with works from local artists.
The exhibition features Bendigo LEGO User Group's iconic landmarks from our region, jewellery, textile animals, needle felting, ceramics, pop art paintings and much more.
Free exhibition. For more information, email: tourism@bendigo.vic.gov.au or phone 1800 813 153.
Where: Living Arts Space, Pall Mall, Bendigo.
When: Until Saturday, February 29, 9am to 5pm.
Have you signed up to the Bendigo Advertiser's daily newsletter and breaking news emails? You can register below and make sure you are up to date with everything that's happening in central Victoria.
CREDIT: Astrid Michael
Word count: 1431
