Four Corners
The Truth About 5G
3 August 2020
PROTESTERS: No 5G! No 5G! No 5G!
NAOMI COOK, AUSTRALIANS FOR SAFE TECHNOLOGY: If you are not currently working to stop 5G, this means you don’t understand it. Nothing else matters anymore!
PROTESTERS: Stop 5G! Stop 5G! Stop 5G!
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Around the world, a new protest movement is stoking fear & anger.
PROTESTERS: No 5G! No 5G!
SEAN NICHOLLS: Their fight is against the next generation of wireless technology -- known as 5G -- that’s predicted to change our lives.
PROFESSOR IAIN COLLINGS: This is going to allow a whole revolution in the way we live and organise ourselves.
CHANNA SENEVIRATNE, NETWORK ENGINEERING EXECUTIVE, TELSTRA: It's going to really change the world because 5G can do things that 4G could never do. It really is going to be a game changer.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Despite its extraordinary promise, the opposition to 5G has in some places turned violent.
ARSONIST: Gonna send the message out.
SEAN NICHOLLS: It’s fuelled wild conspiracy theories that have quickly spilled from online into the real world.
ONLOOKER: 5G burning bro!
SEAN NICHOLLS: And there are much bigger forces at play.
PAUL FLETCHER, MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS & CYBER SAFETY: I think we'd be naive if we did not recognise the possibility that some of these claims are being generated by hostile governments.
SEAN NICHOLLS: While protesters rail against 5G’s spread, a greater threat is looming -- a global technology war.
DONALD TRUMP: The race to 5G is a race America must win. It’s a race that we will win.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Tonight on Four Corners, we investigate what’s behind the growing global backlash against 5G & why the world’s superpowers are vying for 5G dominance. It’s a crisp winter’s morning in the town of Mullumbimby. With its vibrant mix of locals, backpackers and transient hippies, it’s known as the “counter-culture capital” of the NSW North Coast.
MICHAEL LYON, GREENS COUNCILLOR, BYRON SHIRE: Mullumbimby is a very diverse community. There's a very alternative vibe here. A lot of people that have a very deep mistrust of government, very health oriented, so a lot of organic health foods here, anti-GMO, big anti-fracking movement. It's probably the anti-vax capital of Australia, if not the Western world.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Today, they’re gathering for a protest. There’s a grab bag of complaints, but most of the people are here to protest against 5G.
PROTESTER: The first thing I wanted to say was, stop 5G! Stop 5G! Stop 5G! Let’s walk!
SEAN NICHOLLS: They’re heading for Mullumbimby’s lone telecommunications tower.
PROTESTERS: No 5G! No 5G!
SEAN NICHOLLS: For months, protestors have targeted this tower over Telstra’s plans to upgrade it to the 5G network.
PROTESTERS: (singing) We don’t need more radiation. We don’t need more radiation.
SEAN NICHOLLS: The protesters here are worried that radio signals from 5G towers could be damaging to their health.
PROTESTER: I don’t want to be a human lab rat. Because that’s what’s happening. They’re just using us to see if it’s going to be okay. And if we die, well, we’ve got so many of us.
PROTESTER: I’m worried about our kids, the future. It’s not proved yet that 5G is safe enough.
SEAN NICHOLLS: To prevent Telstra’s upgrade, activists have been maintaining a round-the-clock vigil at the tower for more than three months. Guarding the tower tonight is Sherrie Yeomans & her dog Bundy.
SHERRIE YEOMANS: Well basically, we're here protecting the tower to stop Telstra moving in with the cherry picker. We know they need the cherry picker to upgrade to 5G. So, there's quite a team of us, tag teaming, a couple of hours, four hours or overnight to protect the tower from any works occurring.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Activists claimed a victory in March when the local council passed a resolution calling for a halt to the upgrade. For now, Telstra has stopped work on the tower.
MICHAEL LYON, GREENS COUNCILLOR, BYRON SHIRE: I think for Telstra to roll out the installation of 5G during a pandemic in Mullumbimby, I'm sure they thought they were very clever doing that, but I think it was a really bad move, & I think it really played into people's paranoia around this, & into the conspiracy theory, that this is all a move to institute a technology that is potentially harmful.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Telstra’s tower at Mullumbimby is just one of thousands of sites being upgraded to 5G across the country. Australia’s telecommunications companies are spending billions of dollars building networks that they say will transform how we live & work, with no risk to our health. Here on the Gold Coast, Telstra has built an Innovation Centre to show off what 5G can do.
CHANNA SENEVIRATNE, NETWORK ENGINEERING EXECUTIVE, TELSTRA: What we’re looking at here is a 5G device. So with a 4G device we’re talking about downloading an HD movie in minutes. But this is 5G technology.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Channa Seneviratne is driving Telstra’s 5G rollout.
CHANNA SENEVIRATNE: What we can do is download an HD movie in seconds. So, minutes versus seconds. That’s the difference between the two technologies.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Is that absolutely how fast this is ever going to get?
CHANNA SENEVIRATNE: Look, this is only the beginning. It’s going to be twice, three times faster than that in the next few years.
SEAN NICHOLLS: 5G promises a future where everything is high speed & interconnected. From autonomous vehicles to fight bushfires to hyper-efficient agriculture & remote surgery.
CHANNA SENEVIRATNE, NETWORK ENGINEERING EXECUTIVE, TELSTRA: So just imagine with a paramedic with the 5G technology. You could, for example, have the paramedic using a pair of augmented reality glasses. So, what that paramedic sees, you could transmit back to a specialist back in the hospital. That person can then look at the patient as if they were there. They can provide advice. They could even send an instruction, which could be displayed on a heads-up screen. And that's the kind of thing which you can do in real time on 5G, which you can't today do on 4G.
PROFESSOR IAIN COLLINGS, SCHOOL OF ENGINEERING, MACQUARIE UNIVERSITY: 5G's not just about phone calls & ever-increasing resolution of videos, it's going to unlock the Internet of Things. And this is where machines start talking to machines. And this is going to allow a whole revolution in the way we live and organise ourselves. For example, the smart city. We can start coordinating traffic flow, which is going to have safety benefits, is going to have emission benefits. And beyond traffic, it's going to be coordinating air conditioning in buildings, coordinating lighting in buildings, all sorts of things when machines start sensing the environment & actions can be taken.
SEAN NICHOLLS: To deliver the fastest speeds, phone companies need to use higher frequency signals known as millimetre waves. But millimetre wave signals can’t travel as far as existing signals. So, for it to work, there’s a need for many more antennas, installed much closer together.
CHANNA SENEVIRATNE: We would deploy millimetre wave in a CBD, for example, where there is a lot of traffic. What it will probably look like is you will probably see a cell site in most street corners. But because it is at that high frequency, the antennas themselves are very small & almost invisible.
SEAN NICHOLLS: At the heart of the health concerns expressed by 5G activists is what’s called radiofrequency radiation, emitted by everything from radios, TVs & microwave ovens to wi-fi networks & mobile phones. Activists fear that more antennas mean more of this radiation. And that it will cause problems ranging from anxiety to epilepsy & brain cancer.
KIM SPORTON, NORTHERN RIVERS FOR SAFE TECHNOLOGY: Do we want this? Do we want these towers blighting our landscape? Do we need more radiation? Do we want driverless cars? Who's asked for this? There's been no consultation. We are going to be in a radiation soup that we cannot opt out of. So, at the moment we have choices. Once 5G is implemented we no longer have any choice. We are in a soup of radiation that we cannot escape.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Concerns about radiation have been around for more than 100 years. Doctors first wrote about what they called “radiophobia” as early as 1903 to describe people who were afraid of radio speakers. In the 80s, it was the radiation emitted by power lines.
1980S NEWS REPORT: They’re invisible & just about everywhere... Do we play Russian roulette with people’s children? Should you be taking steps to keep your kids away from electromagnetic fields?
PROFESSOR RODNEY CROFT, CHAIR, INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON NON-IONIZING RADIATION PROTECTION: There was a very big community concern when microwave ovens came out. There was concern that food being cooked in it would be poisonous. When mobile phones came out, there was concern in the public. As we moved from first generation to second generation with 2G phones, from 2G to 3G, 3G to 4G, & now 4G to 5G, we tend to get another wave of concern from the public. And that's not linked to important changes to what the actual technology is doing. So, the actual physical agent, the radiation that's being emitted by these devices is essentially the same as it's always been, & essentially the same as we've had around with radio, for instance, AM & FM radio for many years.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Rodney Croft is chairman of the key international body that recommends safe exposure limits for radiofrequency radiation.
PROFESSOR RODNEY CROFT: This is one of the most researched physical agents in the world. There are just thousands & thousands of papers out there that have gone into everything from epidemiology of cancer to simple, does it make you feel bad, agitated, cause you symptoms of any form?
SEAN NICHOLLS: At his lab at Wollongong University, Rodney Croft runs tests on the effects of radiofrequency radiation on humans.
PROFESSOR RODNEY CROFT: Perfect. Ok now what I'm going to do is get you to do the memory task that we were doing before.
SEAN NICHOLLS: This test is simulating the radiation emitted by mobile phones.
PROFESSOR RODNEY CROFT: So, what we're really doing is setting people up, putting electrodes on their head, looking at the brain activity, the electrical activity caused by the brain. And whether it's being influenced by the mobile phones. When we started, we were looking for large changes in the brain, thinking it could be a real problem. But we just don't find those. We don't see any changes in brain cancer, which is something that we often hear activists complain about. And well, there's probably thousands of claims out there & none of them have actually bore any fruit in terms of being able to demonstrate that there is an adverse health effect due to mobile phone usage.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: Some people also say that particularly with 5G millimetre wave technology, there is concern because it will mean more antennas all over the place, & therefore more radiation out in the atmosphere that we will be exposed to. What do you think about that claim?
PROFESSOR RODNEY CROFT: So far, the research suggests that it's just not the case. Generally, what you do is you have more antennas so that you can reduce the actual exposure. The further you are from an antenna, the more the antenna has to work, the more energy it has to pump into the environment. So, tests comparing, for instance, the latest roll out of 5G against 4G finds very similar levels. And I must say, the levels are generally about 100 to 1,000 times lower than are permitted by the guidelines. They're exceedingly small.
SHABBIR AHMED, TECHNICAL DIRECTOR, EMC TECHNOLOGIES: Sean, this is one of our labs, & we’re the only company here in Australia that can do mobile phone testing, radiation testing for manufacturers.
SEAN NICHOLLS: This lab in Melbourne runs tests on how much radiofrequency radiation is emitted by devices like mobile phones, using highly specialised equipment that mimics a human body.
SHABBIR AHMED: This set up here represents or is simulating a human head. We’ve put down a mobile phone at the bottom of the table here that represents the ear, the phone touching the ear. And we’ve got this liquid that simulates the body mass & tissue within our head. This probe is going in at different parts of our head … & measuring radio frequency energy coming out of the mobile phone & how much of that is being absorbed by our body tissue.
SEAN NICHOLLS: And why do you need to do this test?
SHABBIR AHMED, TECHNICAL DIRECTOR, EMC TECHNOLOGIES: This test is the test that mobile phone manufacturers need to do to make sure that mobile phones are meeting the human exposure limits set by the Australian government.
SEAN NICHOLLS: In other words, to make sure that the phones are safe?
SHABBIR AHMED: Absolutely, to make sure that the phones are safe to be used by the general population.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Humans are commonly exposed to two types of radiation -- ionising radiation, which includes x-rays, & non-ionising radiation, which includes the radiofrequency emissions from mobile phones or the 5G network.
PROFESSOR MALCOLM SIM, DIRECTOR, MONASH CENTRE FOR OCCUPATIONAL & ENVIRONMENTAL HEALTH: We know that ionising radiation causes a lot of health effects, not just cancer, but other effects as well. So, that's clearly something that people would be concerned about. Radiofrequency is in what's called the non-ionising wavelengths of radiation, so it doesn't cause DNA damage to genetic material & so on. But I think people hear “radiation” & they think that it's something that could potentially be harmful.
SEAN NICHOLLS: The science of radiofrequency radiation is highly contentious. Much of the concern stems from a landmark 2011 review by the World Health Organization looking at previous studies of the effects of mobile phone radiation. Malcolm Sim was one of the authors.
PROFESSOR MALCOLM SIM: We were invited from all different parts of the world to come together to review all of the scientific evidence in our particular area of expertise. My area was primarily the human studies that had been performed.
SEAN NICHOLLS: The WHO routinely evaluates & classifies substances that can cause cancer. A Group 1 classification means carcinogenic to humans. It includes alcohol & tobacco. Group 2A means probably carcinogenic – & includes red meat & very hot drinks. Group 2B is possibly carcinogenic. It includes things like car exhaust, but also some contraceptive pills & pickled vegetables. The expert panel decided to classify radiofrequency radiation in group 2B.
PROFESSOR MALCOLM SIM: Our group concluded that taking the human evidence & the animal evidence together, there was limited evidence of radiofrequency causing cancer in humans. I mean, you've got a whole lot of scientists from around the world, each with their own perspective on the data, and often they'll have their own interpretation. And so there was not universal agreement about it being classified as group 2B. There was some members of the group who thought it should be a lower classification than that, but the majority view was that they should be a group 2B carcinogen. So it was picked up by a lot of media outlets at the time. And there was a strong sense that yes, this meeting had shown that yes, it was a cause of cancer in humans.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: But that wasn’t justified?
PROFESSOR MALCOLM SIM: Well, I think you need to understand the way that these things are classified. This is from our point of view, the people reviewing the evidence, it was very limited evidence. We’ve looked at other compounds where the evidence is incredibly strong & consistent and there you’re very worried about them as a cause of cancer.
SEAN NICHOLLS: The WHO later issued information about managing the potential risk of mobile phone radiation.
PROFESSOR MALCOLM SIM: And so the approach at that time was for WHO to recommend a precautionary approach to take steps to reduce exposure. The main exposure is when it's very close to your head, so use a hands-free device, use speaker phone, that sort of thing, when using the phone.
PROFESSOR RODNEY CROFT, CHAIR, INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON NON-IONIZING RADIATION PROTECTION: I don't think the classification was very significant. It's certainly been significant in terms of people's concern. To obtain that classification, they don't require any research to demonstrate that mobile phones actually cause cancer. What's required is that there is an association identified between cancer & mobile phone usage epidemiologically. That could mean one of two things. It could mean that there is an association related to mobile phone use, or it could just mean that there is a spurious association. And the subsequent research just hasn't shown that there is any relationship.
SEAN NICHOLLS: The COVID-19 pandemic has supercharged the activism around the 5G rollout. In the centre of Sydney, anti-vaxxers, anti-lockdown activists, far right conspiracy theorists & anti-5G campaigners have united under the catch cry of “freedom of choice”.
NAOMI COOK, AUSTRALIANS FOR SAFE TECHNOLOGY: COVID-19 has caused an explosion in public awareness. Rather than meekly hunkering down under house arrest, men & women have taken to their computers & begun to ask questions, many of them for the first time.
SEAN NICHOLLS: A registered nurse, Naomi Cook helps run Australia’s largest anti-5G Facebook group … called Australians for Safe Technology.
NAOMI COOK: If you are not currently working to stop 5G, this means you don’t understand it. Nothing else matters anymore!
PROTESTERS: Stop 5G! Stop 5G!
NAOMI COOK: We saw in the first two weeks of lockdown an explosion in group members, & I guess the most obvious reason for that is that people were at home & they had time to think, & they had time ask questions that perhaps they didn't have the head space to do before that. And then through asking their own questions & doing their own research, perhaps some of them had the same concerns that we have about 5G & so they joined our groups.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: And what sorts of numbers did you see?
NAOMI COOK, AUSTRALIANS FOR SAFE TECHNOLOGY: We went up from probably around 8,000 members, to 40,000 in the first couple of weeks of lockdown.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Naomi Cook’s group is one of about 80 across Australia. It now has more than 48,000 members & is one of the world’s largest anti-5G Facebook groups.
NAOMI COOK: It's amazing, it's all been completely spontaneous, self-organised and grassroots. And so, there's no rule book that we go by, but what we do, works. We all respect each other, there is no one single leader of this movement. We're all leaders, everyone is. So quite often someone will share something in one group, then it gets re-shared in another group & awareness spreads.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Recent posts include a strategy kit for how to lobby your doctor & local council over 5G. But members of the group also regularly share some of the most extreme conspiracy theories about 5G on the internet.
CONSPIRACY VIDEO: This technology cooked your eyes like eggs in World War 2. We all need to understand these are military weapons, these are assault frequencies.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Naomi Cook was invited to speak about 5G at the Sydney rally, which was organised by an anti-vaccination group.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Was the joint rally a deliberate strategy to make it look like far more people were interested in each of the issues than they actually were?
NAOMI COOK, AUSTRALIANS FOR SAFE TECHNOLOGY: No. That's so sad. No, these were separate groups, each with very important issues that they were passionate about, uniting on one day. Yeah, no, I don't think so. I mean, certainly, in our groups, for example, we never said this was a 5G rally. No, I don't think so, you'd have to be pretty dishonest to do something like that.
SEAN NICHOLLS: So you don't think it was a strategy?
NAOMI COOK: No, I don't think there's any strategy. I didn't sniff out anything like that.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Naomi Cook is now on the committee of a political party opposed to mandatory vaccination, and she’s backing plans for a new anti-5G party.
NAOMI COOK: Our movement is growing all the time. So as our movement grows, having a political party almost creates a platform that may be conducive to bringing about change. So from that perspective, I think it's a very valid way to tackle the 5G problem.
PROFESSOR AXEL BRUNS, DIGITAL MEDIA RESEARCH CENTRE, QLD UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY: I think for the anti 5G groups, but also many other conspiracy theorists a pandemic like this, a crisis like this is very useful to draw attention to their causes because they can link the pandemic in this case with whatever their cause is. Whether it's 5G, whether it's anti-vaccination, whether it's other typical conspiracy stories. So, they can connect this crisis with whatever it is that they're focusing on & say, "Aha, we knew it all along. Something was coming. Here it is now. And so, now you must listen to us because we've been correct all along."
SEAN NICHOLLS: The coincidental arrival of COVID-19 & the rollout of 5G networks sparked one of the wildest conspiracy theories of all -- that coronavirus was caused by 5G. Four Corners has tracked how the theory went viral around the world. The first known appearance of the conspiracy theory online was on January 19 when this was posted on Twitter.
TWEET (READ ALOUD): Disease in Wuhan City of 8.5 million people… Wuhan has 5,000+ 5G base stations now & 50,000 by 2021… is it a disease or is it 5G?
SEAN NICHOLLS: When it was picked up just over a week later by the notorious far right conspiracy theory website Infowars, it made the jump to a larger audience.
INFOWARS VIDEO: Scientists warn that 5G causes flu-like symptoms... Interesting?
SEAN NICHOLLS: By February the torrent of misinformation about coronavirus was so great, the United Nations branded it an “infodemic”.
TEDROS ADHANOM GHEBREYESUS, DIRECTOR-GENERAL, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION: Fake news spreads faster & more easily than this virus and is just as dangerous.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Within weeks, the 5G conspiracy theory gathered more steam when it was raised by controversial US doctor Thomas Cowan at an anti-vaccination conference.
THOMAS COWAN: There has been a dramatic & quantum leap in the last six months with the electrification of the earth. And I’m sure a lot of you know what that is, it’s called 5G.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Cowan was on probation after being found guilty in 2017 of unprofessional conduct by the Californian Medical Board.
THOMAS COWAN: Anybody want to make one guess as to where the first completely blanketed 5G city in the world was?
AUDIENCE: Wuhan!
THOMAS COWAN: Exactly. So when you start thinking about this, we are in an existential crisis here folks.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Days later, this video of the lecture was promoted by US pop singer Keri Hilson to her 4.2 million followers on Twitter. Then rapper Wiz Khalifa fuelled the conspiracy theory with a tweet to his 36 million followers. Other celebrities shared the theory too, including Woody Harrelson, John Cusack & M.I.A.
PROFESSOR AXEL BRUNS, DIGITAL MEDIA RESEARCH CENTRE, QLD UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY: Celebrities really become super spreaders in all of this. They have millions, if not tens of millions of followers via their various social media accounts. And so, once they start posting about these conspiracy theories, even critically, that makes them much more visible & reaches a much larger & more diverse audience.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Soon the conspiracy theory made the leap from online to the real world. 5G technicians in the UK reported being abused & threatened with violence.
WOMAN: Do you know what you’re doing there? You’re laying 5G. You know that kills people.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Next, anti-5G activists began burning phone towers.
ONLOOKER: It’s gonna fall eh? 5G burnin’ bro.
SEAN NICHOLLS: By early May more than 70 mobile phone towers had been attacked in the UK & more than a dozen more across Europe, North America, New Zealand and Australia.
ARSONIST: Gonna send the message out. F*** 5G. F*** you, government. F*** you, new world order.
7 NEWS REPORT, MELBOURNE: Counter-terrorism police have been brought in following international attacks on phone towers linked to conspiracy theories that the 5G network spreads coronavirus.
ABC NEWS REPORT: Another fire has caused extensive damage to a phone tower equipment in Adelaide’s south...
SEAN NICHOLLS: At an anti-lockdown rally in Melbourne, 5G was again linked to coronavirus. It prompted a sharp response from Australia’s then chief medical officer Brendan Murphy.
BRENDAN MURPHY: There is, unfortunately, a lot of very silly misinformation out there. There is absolutely no evidence about 5G doing anything in the coronavirus space. I have unfortunately received a lot of communication from these conspiracy theorists myself. It is complete nonsense - 5G has got nothing at all to do with coronavirus.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Four Corners’ investigations show the global spread of misinformation about 5G is no accident... there’s growing concern more sinister players may be involved. And that hostile governments may have exploited the movement for their own interests.
PAUL FLETCHER, MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS & CYBER SAFETY: There is misinformation circulating about 5G, including the entirely fallacious claim that it has adverse health impacts. More recently, the claim that it's linked in any way to COVID-19 or the coronavirus. I'm making the related point, that it is well accepted by commentators & experts in the subject of misinformation & disinformation that there are known State actors involved in circulating & generating disinformation.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: And what sort of interests would that serve, do you think?
PROFESSOR AXEL BRUNS, DIGITAL MEDIA RESEARCH CENTRE, QLD UNIVERSITY OF TECHNOLOGY: It creates division. It creates disruptions. It creates protests. It creates possibly more people disobeying any lockdown orders, any social distancing orders. And of course that then further damages the economy, damages the population in the first place by spreading the virus further. So, it weakens ultimately the countries that they're addressing.
SEAN NICHOLLS: The original tweet linking 5G to coronavirus came from an anonymous account that regularly posts pro-Russian government content. That tweet linked to an article by the Russian state-owned news outlet, RT, formerly known as Russia Today.
RT PRESENTER: Is there a catch? There is. Just a small one. It might kill you.
RT PRESENTER 2: Ha! Good to know.
SEAN NICHOLLS: RT America has enthusiastically broadcast widely discredited health fears about 5G.
RT PRESENTER: It’s just really sold to us as being awesome. But the downside is with this rollout it will be impossible to exist in a city or walk outside without being exposed.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Another source of anti-5G misinformation is conspiracy website Global Research... which takes a relentlessly pro-Kremlin line. Australia’s largest anti-5G Facebook group has shared articles published by Global Research, including one that claims 5G is a “weapons system disguised as a consumer convenience” & might be “killing all the insects”.
PAUL FLETCHER, MINISTER FOR COMMUNICATIONS & CYBER SAFETY: I think we'd be naive if we did not recognise the possibility that some of these claims are being generated by hostile governments or by others who have a motive to try & create instability & disorder in democracies like Australia. We know that disinformation & misinformation has been an issue in elections in other countries. That cannot be ruled out in my view as a possible driver of some of this.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: In particular, people in relation to this issue have talked about Russia potentially being interested in doing that. Would you agree that that's a possibility?
PAUL FLETCHER: Look, I'm not going to be commenting on any individual nation. I simply make the general point that it is pretty well accepted in the commentary & analysis on this issue that there's a high likelihood that the State actors are involved. When you look at something which is entirely without any scientific basis, & where there appears to be a systematic effort to try & raise concerns that are, in fact, without substance, this appears to be what is occurring. Or at least, one of the factors in relation to misinformation & disinformation in relation to 5G.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, RUSSIAN PRESIDENT: The task for the next few years is to provide universal access to high-speed internet, & to start using fifth generation communications networks - 5G.
SEAN NICHOLLS: For the world’s superpowers 5G is developing into a critical technology arms race.
DONALD TRUMP, US PRESIDENT: The race to 5G is a race America must win, and it’s a race frankly that our great companies are involved in & we’ve given them the incentive they need. It’s a race that we will win. Because as you know some people got ahead of us. We should have been doing this a long time ago.
SEAN NICHOLLS: In the race for technology dominance, a new leader is emerging. China is on the rise.
DR HUONG LE THU, SENIOR ANALYST, AUSTRALIAN STRATEGIC POLICY INSTITUTE: If we think about technological innovation, we think about US, Silicon Valley. And yet there seems to be a sense that US is not as competitive at the moment. There are communities in the US thinking that China is eating US, America's lunch. It is losing technological advantage, it is losing markets. It is losing also influence.
SEAN NICHOLLS: A 5G world dominated by China raises the terrifying prospect of it shutting down entire countries in times of conflict. What are the potential vulnerabilities for a country with 5G?
ALASTAIR MACGIBBON, FORMER NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY ADVISOR: Everything in our society relies upon connected technologies. From our supermarkets to our electricity generation & distribution, to our hospitals, our traffic lights, our banking and finance. It means if those technologies fail or are turned off, that would have catastrophic consequences. You would lose lives, there is no doubt, in the most extreme end of the scenario.
SEAN NICHOLLS: The US’s great rival, Russia, has chosen its side. Last year, Vladimir Putin announced a major deal with the Chinese tech giant Huawei to supply 5G equipment.
VLADIMIR PUTIN: There are unceremonious attempts to push Huawei from the global market. Some call it the first technological war of the new digital era.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Huawei was founded by Chinese billionaire Ren Zhengfei, a former civil engineer with the People’s Liberation Army. The company has grown to become a global leader in 5G technology … even showing off its prowess by rolling out 5G on Mount Everest.
JEREMY MITCHELL, CHIEF CORPORATE AFFAIRS OFFICER, HUAWEI AUSTRALIA: Whatever you say about Huawei, everyone knows that we are the world leader when it comes to 5G. We spent billions of dollars in research & development. And by the time 5G came around, we were a clear leader.
SEAN NICHOLLS: But Huawei’s attempts to break into the Australian 5G market were spectacularly dashed by the Turnbull government in August 2018.
ABC NEWS REPORT: Chinese tech giant Huawei has been effectively banned from building Australia’s 5G network, because of security concerns...
ALASTAIR MACGIBBON, FORMER NATIONAL CYBER SECURITY ADVISOR: Australia banned high risk vendors. Vendors that are domiciled in high risk countries, of which clearly China is one because of its national security laws that compel organisations domiciled there to cooperate with & assist their intelligence agencies.
MALCOLM TURNBULL, PRIME MINISTER 2015-2018: The reality is that if we were to have high-risk vendors from China, in this context, who provided our 5G technology, the technology that underpins the network & effect builds the network, that would give them the capability, if they chose, to very seriously & gravely disrupt our economy, & infrastructure, industrial activities, economic activities, financial activities. It's a very, very profound capability.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Central to the Australian government’s concerns was a 2017 Chinese law that compels companies to “support, provide assistance, & cooperate in national intelligence work.”
MALCOLM TURNBULL: If you believe that there is a risk that you could get into a conflict at time of tension, at time of conflict, where pressure may be sought to be upon you, then you've got to say, well, we'll just hedge there, & we won't have those high-risk vendors providing 5G in Australia. So, it's not identifying a smoking gun, it's identifying a loaded gun.
JEREMY MITCHELL, CHIEF CORPORATE AFFAIRS OFFICER, HUAWEI AUSTRALIA: We've had legal advice inside China & outside China that says that law doesn't pertain to us. It's directed at operators rather than vendors. But even if it was and we were asked by the Chinese government to do something, to go against our customers, Ren, our founder, he would say no. He would rather see the company fold overnight than actually do anything to risk the trust that we have by our customers.
MALCOLM TURNBULL: No matter what Huawei thinks, no matter what the management think, no matter what the spokesperson that they send to talk to Four Corners thinks, they will not be making the decision. Ultimately, if the Communist Party leadership in Beijing decide they want Huawei or want to use Huawei's capabilities in a manner that is adverse to Australia, it will happen.
SEAN NICHOLLS: Australia was the first country in the world to ban Huawei from its 5G network. Huawei has blamed pressure from the United States.
JEREMY MITCHELL: The United States have been very public about their call for countries to ban Huawei. We know when Prime Minister Malcolm Turnbull went to Washington in February of 2018, that's six months before the Huawei ban, the US advised him that they did not Huawei in Australia's 5G. I mean, they were so adamant in that it was leaked to the media at the time.
SEAN NICHOLLS, REPORTER: So essentially, they’re saying you bowed to US pressure. Did you?
MALCOLM TURNBULL: That is completely untrue. In fact, the 5G issue was raised by me with the Americans. That is, that assertion by Huawei is utterly false. It was raised by me when I was in discussions with the administration. And it was something that we made a point about. It was a matter of very keen interest to us. But I want to say the proposition that we were directed or advised to keep Huawei out of our network by the US is simply not true.
SEAN NICHOLLS: The US & the UK have now both banned Huawei from their 5G networks. And Donald Trump is urging others to follow.
DONALD TRUMP: It’s an unsafe security risk...
JEREMY MITCHELL, CHIEF CORPORATE AFFAIRS OFFICER, HUAWEI AUSTRALIA: There's no US company that does wireless. So what we're seeing is the US asking countries to essentially pause & wait for a catch up because there's a gap between the US ability to do wireless technology & companies like Huawei.
MALCOLM TURNBULL: I mean, the West in really, in an absence of mind, allowed its leadership in wireless technology to be lost. And that was a massive failure of the West and, particularly, obviously, in Washington, where they were, excuse the pun, asleep at the switch.
SEAN NICHOLLS: The promise of 5G was to create a more connected world. Instead, one of the biggest technology revolutions in a century could leave the world even more divided.
DR HUONG LE THU, SENIOR ANALYST, AUSTRALIAN STRATEGIC POLICY INSTITUTE: At the extreme, the concern is that this technological competition or tech war, can result in so-called technological iron curtain, where we have a divided world, a technologically divided world where certain countries will use Chinese provided technology & others won't. So, there will be a lot of disconnect. Pushing that Huawei ban is seen as, in many countries is seen as asking to choose sides. Do you want to be with team US or you want to be with team China?
SEAN NICHOLLS: These concerns are a long way from the frontline of the other 5G war. Activists in Mullumbimby are still determined to keep 5G out of their town. And at the Telstra tower, the vigil goes on.
SHERRIE YEOMANS: We’re not putting a time limit on this. Ideally, we would like something concrete from Telstra saying there won’t be any works happening. That’s basically what we’re waiting for at this point in time.
SEAN NICHOLLS: So, you're willing to wait as long as it takes?
SHERRIE YEOMANS: Absolutely. We're not going anywhere. We're here & we're not going anywhere.
Word count: 6101
