And now secondary school leaders from 34 state and independent schools across southeast Queensland have opened up about their jobs.
The prinicpals featured reveal what inspires them about staff and students, their goals and what makes their schools shine.
See what they had to say below.
All Hallows’ School – Catherine O’Kane
Mrs O’Kane, who has more than 35 years’ experience in education at secondary and tertiary levels in Queensland and China, in 2015 became only the second lay principal of AHS.
She is passionate about girls’ education and providing the programs and initiatives to
support a holistic, faith-based approach to the wellbeing and learning of young people.
“Academic research tells us that well students learn well, so for us wellbeing is a significant focus,” Mrs O’Kane said.
“This year, we launched a redefined Student Care structure. It encompasses student wellbeing,
pastoral care and academic care, under the expert leadership of our newly appointed Dean of
Student Wellbeing and our continuing Dean of Student Learning and Data.”
Mrs O’Kane said as teenagers everywhere had been affected by the global pandemic, creating a place of belonging for All Hallows’ students continued to be vital.
“We’ve fully resumed our holistic programs, giving students opportunities to learn through service, via our Mercy Action initiatives, plus engagement in a wide range of culture and sporting activities,’’ she said.
“Exploring different interests while also engaging with others across the year levels via our House system ensures our students develop a strong school spirit, which we refer to as the AHSisterhood.
“I feel blessed to work alongside so many talented, innovative staff, who are so invested in enabling every student to be her best and do her best.
“My role as Principal is also enhanced by the supportive partnership the school shares with parents and caregivers, along with the spirit of Mercy that exists within our wider AHS school community.”
Bray Park State High School – Peter Turner
Mr Turner is approaching 13 years of being a principal and deputy principal – the past three of which have been at Bray Park.
He is in his 30th year as a proud educator.
“I have a deep passion for State Education and the impact that teachers can have on young people,” he said.
“I was a state school student myself and my two children go to our local state high school.” “State schools provide opportunities for all students to achieve their dreams, regardless of their backgrounds”.
“My staff have a strong desire to see our students achieve excellence across the academic, sporting and arts pursuits.”
“We love seeing students enjoying school and we highly value great teaching and a quality learning environment and culture.”
“We are proud of our great community engagement and development of high quality young citizens through our focus on our school values of trust, respect, integrity, commitment and compassion.”
“Recently we have developed very strong links with local universities, industries and businesses to provide innovative and exciting pathways and learnings for our students.”
Mr Turner and his team are currently working on the school’s next four year strategic plan. This will reflect the school’s vision to create an innovative, supportive and engaged community of learners.
“To compliment this direction the school is currently in the process of building a new Braymazing $15 million design, robotics and student wellbeing centre,” he said.
“The school has grown from around 800 students in 2017 to over 1450 students this year.’’
Brisbane Adventist College, Mansfield – Peter Charleson
Mr Charleson took over at the school this year after 32 years’ experience in the school system.
He previously spent 10 years as principal at Prescott College in Adelaide.
“My focus at BAC is on enhancing relationships and values and continuing the school’s strong tradition of a robust, holistic education,’’ he said.
“We know from experience that when a child’s spiritual, social, emotional, and physical needs are met, they feel safe, joyful, and engaged.
“Imagination is one of the most powerful, and sometimes underutilised, tools in education and it’s an honour to experience a student’s what if, how can that be, and what can I do with what I’ve just learnt moments as our teachers and educators open their minds to new possibilities.
“By the time our students graduate, they’re not just ready to launch into tertiary education or a career; most importantly, they know they are valuable to God, and us.
“They’ve become people of character: educated, loving, open, and engaged in life and society. “I know this because I see it in our alumni who continue to contribute to the BAC community, and who bring their children back to receive their own BAC experience.
“I believe that the world is a better place because our students are in it.”
Bracken Ridge State High School – Michelle Lyons
Ms Lyons was appointed to Bracken Ridge State High School and was previously a principal for three and a half years.
She has worked across the state and is a strong advocate for state education and the benefits of this for students in Queensland.
Mrs Lyons said her priority was to continue the Bracken Ridge Way of Working by ensuring students were global citizens who strived to accomplish and are active in our community.
“My staff are passionate about the students and are committed to ensuring they accomplish their goals,’’ she said.
“Education is a rewarding career. Building relationships with the students, families and community members ensures we see the impact of our teaching and the successful pathways our students achieve.’’
Brisbane Boys’ College – Andre Casson
Recently returned to Australia from Singapore where he was Head of the Australian International School, Mr Casson began as the 10th Headmaster of Brisbane Boys' College in January this year.
He has more than 25 years’ experience in leadership positions in independent schools in Perth and Brisbane, along with international experience in Shanghai and Singapore.
“Education is a gift; we can touch the future through our interactions with the wonderful students in our care,’’ he said.
“Being the Headmaster of a school is an immense privilege – I really do have the best job in the world.
“While it cannot be denied that the essential skills of learning form the central focus of our endeavours, and that the traditional three ‘R’s’ (Reading, writing and arithmetic”) are an important part of any educational system, there is a growing trend to consider three new ‘R’s’:
Reflection, Relationships and Resilience.
“By providing students with opportunities to develop mindfulness and resilience, or a growth mindset, by seizing potential setbacks as an opportunity to teach and to grow in grit, we actually ‘re-wire’ students’ young brains and cultivate skills that will support them through life”.
Mr Casson said his aim as Headmaster was always to listen, learn and be visible.
A priority was to see every young man at BBC excel, not only academically, but from the sports field to the Robotics lab, and from the Chess board to the stage.
His ambition was for the college to be an educational institution in which every student found their passion and, in so doing, had the chance to see that zeal thrive.
Brisbane Girls Grammar School – Jacinda Euler
Currently in her 10th year as principal of BGGS, Ms Euler is a strong advocate for a broad liberal education that instils in students a sense of hope and optimism and inspires them to use their education to challenge the status quo.
“We know that Generation Z are optimistic, just as they are, generally, compassionate, determined and imbued with a sense of purpose,’’ she said.
“As educators, we teach students how to use these qualities to drive societal change, lay the groundwork for innovation, solve current and predict future challenges, and in doing so, contribute to a more just world.
“The importance of curiosity in learning, of understanding the everyday requirements of teaching and learning, and both the challenges and opportunities our teachers and students face, cannot be underestimated.
“Ultimately, the role of any principal is one of stewardship, to provide an environment that immerses students in deep learning, gives them the space to discover where their innate interests lie and discover new ones, and that prepares them for full and rewarding lives beyond school.’’
Brisbane Grammar School – Anthony Micallef
Anthony Micallef is the 12th Headmaster of Brisbane Grammar School and is currently in his ninth year in the role.
Mr Micallef combines a strong academic, pastoral and sporting background with a collaborative leadership style.
“Brisbane Grammar School’s culture celebrates effort and teachers encourage each student to achieve his personal best. As a result of this culture, BGS has consistently maintained its position as the leading academic school for boys in Queensland,” Mr Micallef said.
“Our ambition to be the best school for boys in Australia inspires us to create an environment where boys pursue their talents and realise their potential. We are committed to developing thoughtful and confident young men of character who contribute to their communities.
“The current and next generation of BGS boys will benefit from some of the most exciting innovations and developments in our history.”
“The new STEAM (Science, Technology, Engineering, Art, Mathematics) Precinct, open next year, will enable our graduates to adapt to the changing professional landscape and prepare them for jobs that do not yet exist.”
Mr Micallef said Brisbane Grammar School graduates attend the world’s leading universities, lead their chosen careers and professions, and make a difference in their communities.
Brisbane State High School – Wade Haynes
Mr Haynes has been a secondary school principal for 25 years, with 12 of those spent as executive principal at State High.
With over 3400 students, a 100-year history and a thriving community, he said State High was an amazing place to work.
“While it sounds a little bit obvious, our focus is on learning and this is what makes everything we do interesting,’’ he said.
“Whether it is in the classroom, on the sporting field, on the stage or in our community we are all about getting better, becoming stronger and making progress.
“If we can end up with graduates who know how to learn, have already achieved and are good humans, we think we are doing really well.
“This year, our new work is focused on pathways programs: Medicus for aspiring doctors and dentists, Ingeniator for budding engineers and a program for aspiring teachers.’’
Cannon Hill Anglican College – Gary O’Brien
Mr O’Brien started in 2019 as only the fifth principal at CHAC.
A much-loved, familiar face prior to his appointment, he served the College for more than 24 years in a variety of roles including as a mathematics teacher and deputy principal.
Now in its 34th year, CHAC is a leading co-educational independent school with a firm focus on developing world and work-ready individuals.
Mr O’Brien said the college cultivated a sense of belonging in which students were supported to develop to their full potential.
“We focus on growing our students’ intellectual capacity, nurturing dispositions, developing faith and building character,” Mr O’Brien said.
“CHAC’s students are global-minded, critical thinkers and the college strives to provide them with opportunities to flourish and explore their individual gifts.
“We are committed to producing graduates who are equipped with the necessary skills to make a real, lasting contribution to our world – across all fields and sectors of society.”
Through an innovative curriculum and a focus on holistic development through vast cultural
opportunities, CHAC strives to remain flexible and dynamic in order to meet the changing needs of students in an evolving society.
“The college has earnt a reputation for excellence in a culture of kindness and compassion.
“I am constantly encouraged by the optimism and gratitude of our students, and watching them grow in character and develop their unique strengths is one of my great delights as a principal.”
“I am proud to lead this community, and I look forward to seeing CHAC grow and strengthen as we move into the future and celebrate our 35th year in 2023.”
Clairvaux Mackillop College, Upper Mount Gravatt – Christine Clarke
“I have been principal for nearly two years and during my time at the college I have seen generous hospitality and welcome as hallmarks of our thriving learning community,’’ Ms Clarke said.
“Ours is a friendly place built on a deep respect for each person – their innate goodness, their learning potential, their unique capacity to be good for the world.
“At Clairvaux Mackillop College we value their diversity – their stories, their hopes and dreams, their interests and aspirations.
“We seek to open their minds and hearts to new horizons, new perspectives, new possibilities, embraced with determination and focus, imagination and purpose.
“The educational mission of Clairvaux MacKillop College is borne of rich traditions.
“We are a Catholic school founded by the Sisters of St Joseph and the Christian Brothers.
“We take our inspiration and example from Jesus – source of life and light for all – and from St Mary of the Cross MacKillop and the Blessed Edmund Rice – who welcome everyone, and who show us how to turn our dreams for justice into practical reality.
“We love our students and seek to know them and educate them toward fullness of being.”
Corinda State High School – Helen Jamieson
“I am an educational leader with over 25 years’ experience as a principal and subsequently served in schools across the state,’’ Ms Jamieson said.
“I have received a National Quality Schooling Award for my work in improving student outcomes and also won several state and national awards.
“I was endorsed as the first Queensland principal to be awarded Certified Practicing Principal and was recently awarded a fellowship by the Australian Council for Educational Leadership Queensland Chapter in recognition of leadership and commitment to continuous improvement in Education.
“I have been principal at Corinda State High School for the past 17 years.
“Corinda has been recognised as Corinda one of the top 10 most innovative schools in Queensland and the most improved school in the state for senior schooling performance across the decade, and most recently in the top 35 schools for improvements in NAPLAN achievements.
“I am committed and invested in Corinda through our strategic agenda – Future You.
“Our agricultural farm is a unique smart farm which provides an outdoor laboratory for problem based learning, preparing students for the unique global challenges that lie ahead. “Innovation and technology are at the forefront of our work across all faculty areas in our school as we respond to the needs of this generation of learners.
“This year we have developed some unique partnerships with universities and industries such as Micromelon Robotics, enabling our students to engage in some unique innovative projects, which we are eagerly looking forward to seeing their completed prototypes.’’
Everton Park State High School – Mick Leigh
“Throughout my time here at the school I have been wholly focused on elevating our student
outcomes in all aspects of their schooling life,’’ Mr Leigh said.
“Our motto ‘where every student is known’ is one that is dear to my heart and an incredibly important one as our school grows.
“Everton Park State High School is one of the fastest growing schools in southeast Queensland.
“My experience in large schools has allowed me to bring this lens to Everton Park State High School so that we can continue to tailor individual educational experiences for students, and to know every student in relation to their strengths, aspirations and areas for development.
“This is a source of pride for our school, and with our dedicated staff my focus throughout 2022 has been to continue strengthening the ways in which we can understand each student in a holistic manner, and develop them academically whilst maintaining a strong wellbeing focus.
“Our mission as a school is to create dynamic, contemporary and futures-oriented students and I’m excited to lead the school as we grow to shape what opportunities we are able to offer students that are cutting edge, and provide authentic experiences for real life learning.
“Our facilities are cutting-edge and I am proud to have joined the school at a time when our
Performing Arts Centre has become fully operational having opened in 2021.
“Throughout this year I have begun work on looking at renewal of further facilities to provide students state-of-the-art environments in which to enjoy, create and develop.
“My goal to lead the school through high expectations for all our community will be a sustained agenda for me in 2022.
“As we grow as a school it is vital that our disciplined approach to schooling continues to be a core part of our business in providing the best opportunities for student learning.’’
Hills International College, Jimboomba – Kevin Lynch
Mr Lynch has worked in education for more than 40 years and was appointed as the College Principal in 2010.
He completed a science degree and a Diploma of Education at Macquarie University in Sydney after graduating from Paramatta High School.
He spent nine years working as an educator in Sydney and 30 more in southeast
Queensland, specialising in mathematics, academic excellence and student wellbeing.
Mr Lynch said one of his favourite things about being the principal at Hills International College was having the autonomy to make big decisions when helping students to achieve their best in a supportive environment.
“Having that vision to have a Master Plan including future building projects … also
looking at what programs we can introduce to benefit our families, students and
staff … that’s the most satisfying part of the job for me,” he said.
He enjoyed mentoring students who required extra support in mathematics or who wished to accelerate their maths skills.
Hills’ Master Plan includes upgrades to sports facilities, a music excellence space, a covered court and stage facility, and overall beautification of the campus.
The College also introduced trained therapy dogs to the community at the beginning Term 3 this year.
“May and Barney have been wonderful additions to Hills College life,” Mr Lynch said.
“The College also has a growing Volleyball Excellence program, with purpose-built beach volleyball court facilities scheduled to be built later in 2022.
He said students, staff and parents at Hills exemplified the college motto ‘Live with compassion, Act with integrity, Work with diligence, and Strive for success’.
Holy Spirit College, Fitzgibbon – Stephan Le Roux
Stephan Le Roux started his first principalship in 2018 at St Mary’s College, Maryborough and was last year appointed as Foundation Principal of Holy Spirit College, Fitzgibbon.
Holy Spirit College first opened its gates to a cohort of almost 100 Year 7 students in February this year, with students already enjoying state-of-the-art technology within futuristic learning environments.
“As Foundation Principal, I’m part of a community and working with teams of people where multiple aspects of diversity are welcomed and celebrated,” he said.
“We are building a school that will be the shining beacon of hope, service, and wisdom in an era of new educational strategies.
“My focus remains on driving the consistent implementation of pedagogical practices across the college by all staff.
“We strive to create an environment that puts the student at the centre and where that student is supported by dedicated teaching staff and tremendous community spirit.
“We aim to instil a can-do attitude in all our students and work with them all to engender high aspirations and a range of personal skills and qualities including self-confidence and leadership ability.”
Kimberley College – Glenn Johnson
Mr Johnson has been the principal at Kimberley College for just under four years and has 35 years’ teaching experience.
During that time, he has been working hard with the support and commitment of the board and senior leadership team to create a whole of school culture that provides opportunities for students to become engaged, to find their purpose and passion, think of others and live the change they want to see.
“Our students and teachers are our greatest asset and are at the heart of all that we do here at Kimberley College,’’ he said.
“We are a school that is passionate about values driven education and innovative approaches to engaging and developing students.
“It is an exciting time here at the college as we collaborate with our community to write the next chapter in the development of Kimberley College.”
With a new five-year strategic plan to shortly be implemented and a strong focus this year on one of its core values of health and wellbeing, he said the Kimberley College community looked forward to preparing graduates who were equipped with a range of skills, real-world experiences and future studies to be well placed to face the challenges and opportunities of the 21st century.
Loreto College, Coorparoo – Kim Wickham
Kim Wickham has led Loreto College, Coorparoo since 2018.
She said her priority was to ensure Loreto students were prepared to thrive in a world of opportunity and challenge.
She said the school offered comprehensive educational, co-curricular and wellbeing programs which empowered students.
She said she was committed to ensuring each student who passed through Loreto was known and valued.
Loreto Coorparoo is one of seven Loreto schools across Australia and more than 150 worldwide with a rich tradition of educating young women.
“Leading Loreto College is an absolute privilege; I am so proud of the work of our inspiring staff who educate and empower our students,” Mrs Wickham said.
“Our students are our best advocates for the college through the pursuit of personal excellence, their lively spirit and their commitment to the common good.”
Mrs Wickham has a comprehensive background in curriculum and leading improved academic performance.
With a passion for evidence-based practice, she was also a finalist for Excellent Leadership in Teaching and Learning through the Queensland College of Teaching and Learning.
Loganlea State High School – Brenton Farleigh
Brenton Farleigh has been principal of Loganlea State High School for the past three years.
He said Loganlea SHS was a hidden gem, nestled on 56ha of riverfront land with an
outstanding learning culture, great facilities, a huge range of opportunities, and a school population of just 742 students.
“Our vision is to provide outstanding opportunities that cater for the interests of all students,’’ he said.
“Our Star Programs include Signature Academic Excellence, Agribusiness, Digital Innovations, Hospitality, Dance, Music, Surf Lifesaving, and a range of sporting programs.
“We are proud of our high expectations and supportive learning culture at Loganlea SHS that allows all students the opportunity to reach their potential and be prepared for a successful life beyond school.’’
Mr Farleigh said he was proud of the progress made at the school since he started three years ago and looked forward to continuing to lead the school into further success for many years to come.
Mabel Park State High School – Aimee Argiro
Ms Argiro joined Mabel Park State High School in 2018 and was regarded by her staff as the quiet powerhouse behind progressive and sustainable change.
“I am fortunate to work with such dedicated staff who are all committed to providing an exceptional education for almost 1700 students,’’ she said.
“I believe they are part of the ‘education evolution’ that is happening across Logan.”
Her proudest achievement was the introduction of Queensland’s first GP In Schools Clinic at Mabel Park SHS, which reflected her determination to remove barriers to education.
“I could see students with health issues were struggling to engage in their learning and I wanted to remove that barrier for them,” she said.
This highly successful initiative culminated in the Queensland Government delivering funding to replicate the program across 50 schools in Queensland.
She said she was committed to the school’s core value of “Students First”, which has seen the implementation of a range of improvements throughout the school including Vocational and Educational Training.
Ms Argiro said the introduction of the school’s Hair and Beauty Salon was a creative and critically important decision providing students, previously at risk of leaving before graduating, with new education and employment pathways.
Recruiting industry specialists was pivotal to making the salon a success for students.
“It is rewarding to see students engaging in their Cert II and Cert III qualifications, knowing they will have employment, traineeships, or scholarship opportunities when they graduate,” she said.
She has also developed partnerships with universities, industry-based organisations and local businesses including Munster Services Group to provide ATAR and non-ATAR pathways.
“It is a priority here at Mabel to provide students with practical insights into existing and emerging careers,’’ she said.
Our Lady’s College, Annerley – Andree Rice
Ms Rice is in her first year as principal at Our Lady’s College Annerley and said she believed when young women felt comfortable and supported, they were able to be extended and challenged.
“Our Lady’s College is a community that authentically lives its legacy as a school founded by St Mary MacKillop’s sisters in 1964,” she said.
“In keeping with its Josephite tradition, Our Lady’s College empowers our girls to be active and informed citizens, inspired to shape a more just and equitable world for all.
“Our college motto, Ad Altiora, Ever Higher sums up this reaching to be our best selves.
“It inspires and uplifts every member of our students, staff and the wider Our Lady’s College community.”
Her vision for 2022 continued the college’s focus on “contemporary, evidence-informed approach to teaching and learning focuses on developing the skills of critical thinking, communication, collaboration and creativity – alongside spirituality, self-awareness and wellbeing.”
“We have a highly dedicated and expert teaching and support staff who deliver a wide range of subjects and a diverse co-curricular program,” she said.
“Our students often comment frequently on the inclusiveness at Our Lady’s College, a school known for its cultural richness and diversity.
“This sense of inclusion is extended to many community members through an extensive social justice program that sees students assisting at local homework clubs, working with homeless organisations and supporting residents in aged care homes.
“We are a college that works in partnership with our parents and families, understanding that it takes a village to raise a child, and all members of the Our Lady’s College community have opportunities to become involved at the school.
“Our community is an authentic reflection of St Mary MacKillop’s values in action today, and we are very proud of our students’ integrity and values.”
Parklands Christian College, Park Ridge – Gary Cully
Mr Cully is started his leadership of Parklands in 2020 amid the onset and impacts of Covid-19.
Parklands is a P-12 co-educational independent Christian College of 760 students.
Mr Cully first joined the team at Parklands in 2003 and helped start the secondary school, graduating the first cohort of senior students in 2007.
In 2016, Mr Cully and his family left Parklands to serve as missionaries in the Philippines, working to give vocational education and training to young women from tragic backgrounds.
He is committed to leading the college through a season of improvement over the next few years, including the building of a new primary School precinct and kindergarten, curriculum reform and secondary subject expansion, the upgrade of sporting facilities and the return to overseas and local missions.
“I am passionate about teaching our students to value service, and using our God given gifts and talents wherever the need is greatest,” he said.
“It is my privilege to serve as the third principal of Parklands and connect with and minister to our amazing community”.
Mt Maria College, Petrie – Wayne Chapman
Mr Chapman is in his fourth year as principal of Mt Maria College.
He has more than 20 years in senior leadership in Catholic education.
In 2019, Mt Maria College educated 400 students and has grown to include 530 students and 108 staff members in 2022.
“It is a privilege to lead this community and to be entrusted with the care of these wonderful
young people,” Mr Chapman said.
“My vision is that each and every one of the students in our care can stretch and grow into productive and dynamic members of the community, able to contribute positively to their world.”
Mr Chapman broadly networks with other educational leaders as president of the Association of Catholic Secondary Schools, Queensland.
He said that rich and authentic relationships are the key to success with young people.
“The college has undergone significant growth in the past years and we are now large enough to offer a rich breadth of learning opportunities, yet small enough to know the story of each member of our community,’’ he said.
“We have focused on developing multiple pathways for students including ATAR and vocational opportunities.
“We offer a great range of senior subjects including all senior sciences and even have students engaged in university studies each week.
“Our learning spaces are new or just renovated and provide a wonderful context for the great work undertaken by our staff every day”.
Mr Chapman said he looked forward to the completion of the next phase of its Master Plan in Term 3 this year with an extended sports centre, new classroom and amenities block and new sporting oval opening soon.
Queensland Academies Creative Industries Campus, Kelvin Grove – Gavin Bryce
Mr Bryce joined QACI in January, 2016, following 14 years of service within Queensland Education.
He believed QACI, a selective entry state high school for highly capable senior students, was a compliment to the Queensland educational system.
“QACI is a creative, living, breathing ecosystem, providing a foundation that creates the best learning environment to educate our young people to prepare them as critical and creative thinkers for the society ahead,” he said
“What our school offers is a really inclusive environment that nurtures high achieving creative thinkers, making sure our students are really seen as individual learners.”
Mr Bryce said the school’s curriculum, the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme, offered students a unique learning opportunity.
“We offer an international curriculum, so we’re really passionate about our diverse, collaborative learning environment as it allows students to be global citizens, learning from each other and engaging with different world perspectives,” he said.
A key focus for Mr Bryce was nurturing the school’s collaborative environment which he said was the key to successful and positive outcomes for students.
“QACI culture is all about building strong relationships with our diverse and vibrant community to enrich and support each young person’s educational journey with us,” he said.
Redcliffe State High School – Shona McKinlay
Ms McKinlay has worked as a principal for 23 years, firstly in Mareeba and for the last 20 years at Redcliffe State High School.
She said she enjoyed building relationships with students, staff and parents across the school and enjoyed interacting with students at school activities, in the playground and on classroom visits.
Her priority was to enable every student and staff member to ‘Soar Above and Beyond’ where they could be successful and have the skills to be learners throughout their lives.
Redcliffe SHS is introducing the concepts of Reddi, Responsible and Respectful: ensuring that students were clear on what was important in the classroom, playground and at school activities.
This year the school has introduced ‘parent forums’ to provide parents with opportunities to engage with the school to share ideas and learn from each other.
As a result of these forums the school was introducing new initiatives and activities for the benefit of students and parents.
Ms McKinlay said the school was also working to create plans for the future to beautify the school and enhance learning spaces in order to provide a more vibrant learning environment.
Redlands College – Andrew Johnson
Mr Johnson has been the principal of Redlands College for six years and has 17 years experience in educational leadership.
He enjoyed working with an outstanding team of 200 staff who collaborate together to ensure the 1400 students at Redlands College experienced an education grounded in the guiding principles of Curious Minds, Loving Hearts and Serving Hands, leading to Purposeful Lives.
He believed school communities held a privileged position with respect to their capacity to influence the development of students, and acknowledges the centrality of formation to the process of education.
Mr Johnson’s vision for schooling was to ensure it served a far greater purpose than simply preparation for work – he believed it fulfils the formational role of developing character, values, ethics and attitudes, alongside the educational role of developing creative, purposeful and competent skills and knowledge.
He said Redlands College had been educating students for 35 years, and recognised knowledge on its own was no longer the currency of learning.
Rather, the capacity to analyse, interpret and apply knowledge and thinking processes to changing contexts, was the key to an effective learning journey.
He valued the Christian culture at Redlands College and was excited to work in a learning community that sought to ensure that every student flourishes for the good of the broader community.
Somerville House – Kim Kiepe
Mrs Kiepe is an accomplished leader whose extensive background in both primary and secondary education includes senior leadership and Principal roles in several of Australia’s leading girls’ schools.
She is passionate about girls’ education and feels that the vision, purpose and values of
Somerville House align closely with her personal philosophy and ambition for girls’ education.
“Ours is a school that encourages individuals to be confident, to have courage and work hard, and to believe they will create their own positive story in life,” she said.
Under her leadership, each Somerville House student was encouraged to develop confidence and connection to their individual purpose.
“We help our students learn to trust their voices, as sources of power and encouragement to self and others, and to have a fulfilling life that makes a meaningful contribution to society,” she said.
Mrs Kiepe is the twelfth Principal of Somerville House, commencing in 2019.
She is proud to work alongside caring teachers who deliver a quality, balanced education that creates bold, connected, change-makers.
“It is a privilege to bear witness to what these fearless girls become – artists, scientists, educators, philanthropists, entrepreneurs, musicians, doctors, lawyers, writers, Olympians and more – testimony to just some of Somerville’s bold, connected, change-makers,” she said.
St Laurence’s College, South Brisbane – Chris Leadbetter
Mr Leadbetter has been a principal of three Catholic schools over the past 14 years.
This year marks his sixth year as principal of St Laurence’s College.
“When students enrol at the College, they begin their Lauries Journey,’’ he said.
“This Journey is for students and their families, and we pride ourselves on developing respectful, caring, and courageous young men,” he said.
In recent years, his focus has been to develop a staff culture marked by collaboration, mutual
support, and a focus on the growth of the young men at the College.
With an inclusive enrolment policy, the college offers multiple academic pathways for the students.
“As staff, our greatest sense of satisfaction comes from hearing about the growth and service of our young men,” he said.
Currently, the college is focused on building further community partnerships to improve learning, co-curricular offerings, and student wellbeing.
St Patrick’s College, Shorncliffe – Chris Mayes
Mr Mayes has been College Principal at St Patrick’s College for seven years.
He started teaching at Ignatius Park College, Townsville in 1986 and has been in senior leadership roles in EREA schools across Queensland including St Patrick’s College, Ignatius Park College, and St Joseph’s College Gregory Terrace.
“I believe good schools are a result of the people within them. Every person who has attended St Patrick’s College has made it a better place because of who they were and the gifts they brought and shared with each other, he said.
He also strongly believed investment in resources to develop the capacity of teaching staff and students and the contemporary spaces within which they teach and learn was an imperative.
He promotes a culture of student engagement, where teachers believe each student can be encouraged to commit to their learning journey.
This requires an understanding that each student’s educational journey will be different, will extend across a number of years and cannot be considered as a set of singular yearly experiences.
“Therefore, staff professional development and empowerment to affect change and impact positively on student learning are key to my vision for the college,’’ he said.
“I am blessed to have educators who are committed to collaborating with me to develop this culture and continue to look for ways to improve their own practices to ensure we provide rewarding and contemporary learning experiences for our students.”
“There is nothing more rewarding than watching staff grow and develop in their roles or move into more senior positions.
“Likewise, I love to see students work to be the best they can be, and I get great enjoyment in watching them achieve at their highest levels in whatever they undertake.”
His main priorities for 2022 were to complete the next stage of the College Master Plan (Morven Building) and redevelop the O’Connor Building into a more contemporary learning hub.
The College is also exploring further curriculum pathway choices for students with a greater connection to industry groups.
St Paul’s School, Bald Hills – Paul Browning
“At St Paul’s School’s, we seek to prepare resilient, global citizens, who are innovative thinkers with a heart for servant leadership,’’ Mr Browning said.
“We’re focused on providing a truly holistic education, ensuring young people are equipped with everything they need to flourish in life.
“After two very disruptive years, which has provided an invaluable opportunity to build resilience and reflect on what truly matters, we were excited to welcome 112 students from Argentina, Indonesia, Hong Kong, Japan, China and Germany at the start of this semester. “Global friendships are being rekindled after a long time apart.
“Our School has been recognised nationally and internationally for its innovation in learning and we’re in the middle of a very exciting partnership with Melbourne University to reimagine what an education worth having really looks like.
“We’re also looking forward to the opening of our new Innovation Precinct at the start of 2023.’’
St Thomas More College, Sunnybank – Les Conroy
Mr Conroy is an experienced principal who steers St Thomas More College, a secondary college located in bustling Sunnybank boasting 1100 students from around 86 local and international families.
Mr Conroy said he had a strong vision for the school, and his role in it.
“I see my role shaping citizens of the future through Catholic education, servant leadership, academic excellence, and community advocacy,” he said.
“In 2022, and indeed, every year, we are educating the leaders of tomorrow, for a future not yet imagined, for careers not yet created, and for a world of work where being entrepreneurial and adaptable in the freelance economy is just as important as traditional career pathways.”
Mr Conroy said the Brisbane Catholic Education college had a skilled leadership team of 130 teachers and support staff are teaching students to be highly literate – and future-focused.
“We are educating students in digital skills, problem-solving, creativity, critical thinking, communication, innovation, and collaboration – the essential skills of a 21st-century workplace and a 21st-century life,’’ he said.
“Students are cared for and nurtured academically, spiritually, emotionally, and socially.
Our vision is to continue to be an education hub for the local community for not only education, but for sport, the arts, and local community events.
“It is a community where a strong connection between staff, students, and families is lived every day.”
Sunnybank State High School – Leah Fountaine
Ms Fountaine was appointed Principal at Sunnybank State High School in 2019 after working in multiple educational leadership positions over the past 20 years.
“Our school vision ‘A community where we aspire, grow and achieve’ truly represents the work that we undertake every day,’’ she said.
“Our focus is to provide every student with a first-class education that allows students to achieve and access their desired future pathway.
“As Principal I am committed to working with my team to provide students with a challenging, supportive and safe learning environment where our students will not only achieve success but will also build their character as considerate community members.
“Our core values of Respect, Responsibility and Readiness promote a positive learning culture which enables our students to develop a strong sense of belonging, which our team is extremely proud of.
“Building trust with our community is important to all of our parents, staff and students.
“The school’s strategic plan is built around ‘Building Excellence’ through Culture, Teaching and Learning and Individualised case management.
“It is my privilege to work with a team that is driven by ensuring all students, no matter their ability or background, reach their true potential.’’
Ms Fountaine said the school was excited by the numerous planned constructions and refurbishments that are occurring within the school including a new Design Technology Building, Student Amenities and Performing Arts.
“With the school about to celebrate its 60th year of operation in 2023 it will be wonderful to be able to welcome our community into the school to see the new state of the art facilities in 2023,’’ she said.
The Gap State High School – Anne McLauchlan
“I have had the privilege of being a lead learner in many schools in Queensland and overseas over my 35-year career,’’ she said.
“This is my 10th year as a school principal any my fifth year at The Gap State High School.
“I am grateful to be a principal and work beside inspirational staff and students.
“I describe myself as “grateful number-eight principal” and the first female principal in the school’s 62-year history.
“I believe that teaching is a vocation and the most noble, although challenging, profession one can choose.
“It is the vocation that supports all future careers, and leading a secondary school ensures that every day is filled with excitement, change and challenge as we work hard to help all our learners achieve their potential.
“At The Gap SHS learners encompass our students, our staff, our families and community.
“We believe in: Learners Who Flourish.
“My vision is for every student to be empowered in their learning and that as educators we explicitly develop this empowerment through teaching methods that are highly engaging and extend and grow every young person.
“This means ensuring every young person has a strong sense of belonging and purpose when they attend each day.
“With our school teams, I am very excited to implement our latest four-year strategic plan that has our students at the centre of all of our work.
“The driver of this plan is to grow our students in every aspect of their lives — socially, emotionally and academically— whilst providing extensive opportunities for engagement in formal and informal learning inside and outside of the classroom.
“Without a doubt the best thing about working at The Gap SHS is our students.
“They are inspirational in so many ways. I am always truly amazed at how they continuously demonstrate what we value as a school and a community.
“The arts, on the sporting fields, academically, paying it forward, and most importantly by being kind to themselves, each other, their families and the world.
“The Gap SHS is a great place to make a difference every day.’’
Wavell State High School – Liz Foster
Ms Foster is Executive Principal of Wavell State High School and has served in leadership positions across five state high schools in the Metropolitan Region over the past 18 years.
“At Wavell State High School, we respect the past, are responsive to our current context and lead to promote future opportunity for all,’’ she said.
“With our School Motto, Esse Quam Videri, ‘To Be Rather Than To Seem’, and our vision in which we are Empowering Learners, Empowering Futures, we will live through enacting our values of Integrity, Inclusion and Innovation.’
Ms Foster believed the strength of Wavell State High School was its students, staff, parents, caregivers and supporters.
“Our school enjoys a reputation for excellence in scholarship in which learning is aspirational, challenging and rewarding,’’ she said.
“With a dedicated staff and an innovative curriculum, which draws on both past tradition and contemporary practice, we will be relentless in ensuring our graduates have the skills needed to succeed in a highly complex world of accelerating change,’’ she said.
“What I am excited about at Wavell is that we are a school for the future.
“Our curriculum is evolving to ensure our students are well prepared for any future that they choose, but we are also incredibly aware of what that world of work looks like.
“With globalisation, automation and understanding the skill sets and capabilities our students will need, we respect the past and look to adapt their learning for the future,’ she said.
Ms Foster holds positions with the Australian Council for Educational Leaders, Independent Public Schools Executive and Metropolitan Leaders Program.
As a member of the Queensland ACEL Executive she advocates for the opportunities and importance of professional organisations which enable educators to stretch boundaries in thinking through conversations, research and practice.
Woodridge State High School – Kathleen Janecek
Ms Janecek was appointed principal of Woodridge State High School in October 2018.
She has previously worked as principal of Birkdale South State School and of Flagstone State Community College, as well as deputy principal at multiple schools across South East Queensland, and Director of Senior School at Southport State High School.
Her focus was on building strong ties with the local community was recently recognised with a Queensland Day Award.
“I’m humbled by this award. I believe this is recognition for the whole school and that it shows that the community sees us as present and that we care, that our hearts are in it,” she said.
“It shows our belief that it takes a village to raise a child, and that we are stronger together.”
She said the school had worked hard over the years to increase the number of Woodridge State High School students who attended the Anzac Day Parade and other community events, to not only to educate them around the importance of these occasions, but to demonstrate faith in people and our community.
The school had a vibrant culture, she said, with over 1200 students identifying from 41 different countries, and 56 languages spoken.
“The school is committed to ensuring that all students become empowered learners, and staff are united in the belief that all students can achieve high standards given the right time and the right support,’’ she said.
Ms Janecek grew up in Logan and said she had the privilege of teaching at a number of state schools across Queensland.
She started her teaching career in Charters Towers.
“Our students are resilient. They are true global citizens. They are blessed to be exposed to incredibly broad perspectives through their development, as a result of growing up in such a diverse community, which is really exciting,’’ she said.
Yeronga State High School – Timothy Barraud
“As an experienced school leader and newly appointed principal, I have come to appreciate Yeronga’s proud history of cultural inclusion as well as diverse academic and vocational pathways,’’ Mr Barraud said.
“As principal, I lead with a commitment to foster improved student agency and voice across all aspects of the school strategic and operational plans.
“It’s rewarding to support staff to advance in a range of new strategic partnerships with tertiary institutions and industry to afford exciting new opportunities for my students.
“I prioritise wellbeing and social inclusion to ensure every learner will succeed in an environment aligned to the vision of ‘education for all’.
“As Principal, I actively promote opportunities for students to discover their full potential through an improved sense of wellbeing, self-worth and understanding as a globally competent citizen ready for a dynamic future.
“It’s a privilege to inspire our learning community in the pursuit of our school values of Quality, Harmony and Sustainability and encourage all teachers to tailor educational pathways to support individual students.’’
Word count: 7654
