Director of research at analysis firm The Demographics Group Simon Kuestenmacher told the Murray Darling Basin Authority annual conference yesterday modelling showed “bad news” for businesses looking to hire young professionals.
Over the next decade, growth in Australia’s 25 to 30-year-old age bracket would be “stagnant” and “will even see negative population growth”, he said.
“If you run any kind of sizeable business that has an annual graduate intake, good luck. This will be incredibly difficult,” he said.
Businesses in rural areas of far west NSW would be particularly hard hit, he said.
Southern Cross Farms executive director Peter O’Donnell said his business had been struggling to find skilled workers.
SCF manages citrus, grape, almond and avocado properties across NSW’s Riverina, Victoria’s Sunraysia and South Australia’s Riverland regions, and employs between 150 and 200 people at any one time.
During the pandemic, it became increasingly difficult for the company to fill gaps in its 40 on-farm and 16 off-farm permanent skilled positions, and it hasn’t gotten easier, Mr O’Donnell said.
“We’re searching far and wide, and we have been trying to train from within and promote people earlier than they otherwise would have been,” he said.
“There are some people in the young 20s who can be accelerated with some support.”
The company has been able to fill between 100 and 150 unskilled roles on its farms with workers through the Pacific Australia Labour Mobility scheme, but it had been more difficult to find workers for its more remote properties, Mr O’Donnell said.
“When people look at job opportunities, they look at what a town has to offer outside of work. And if it’s a smaller town, rightly or wrongly, it is perceived as not as attractive,” he said.
Mr O’Donnell said Southern Cross Farms was looking seriously at robotics and automation to replace unskilled labour in coming years.
“I think we need to recognise that this will be an ongoing challenge, and I think we’ll see an acceleration of robotics automation that will start to solve these problems,” he said.
“Winter pruning (in the dried fruit industry) has been one of the great costs and it is very labour intensive. There is now mechanisation that is about to be commercialised that will solve that problem.”
More housing vital
Mr Kuestenmacher said a shortage of housing was a barrier to workforce growth across the Murray Darling Basin.
Across the Basin house prices rose sharply during the pandemic.
In the past 12 months, house prices increased by 33 per cent in Albury-Wodonga, 30 per cent in Orange, 24 per cent in Wagga Wagga, 23 per cent in Dubbo, 14 per cent in Mildura, and nine per cent in Toowoomba, Realestate.com.au data shows.
“How can Basin businesses looking to fill low-income jobs attract workers when there is no affordable housing available?” Mr Kuestenmacher said.
“The only thing to fix the housing crisis is to increase housing supply.
“There is no decent (federal or state) policy in sight to make housing more affordable. It will only become more expensive.
“You want to work together as a region and as a town to make sure that you provide the infrastructure and the amenities and just the housing stock to allow for growth because that’s absolutely crucial,” he said.
NED-4522-The-Weekly-Times-app-banner
Word count: 523
