The Miyawaki Miniforest movement connects biodiversity and community, and it will be the focus of a two-day symposium in Adelaide, that will bring together experts from across the world.
The Japanese concept known as the Miyawaki Method of forestry, or Miyawaki Miniforests, encourages the planting of small community forest patches in cities and post-industrial and regional landscapes around the world to address the global biodiversity and climate crises.
The symposium is taking place during Adelaide National Park City Month.
The movement also seeks to bring people together to foster and celebrate connections between humans and nature.
The University of Adelaide Landscape Architecture director Scott Hawken and symposium convenor said urban forests were important for community cohesion and wellbeing.
"It can assist with urban biodiversity, and liveability, as well as cleaner agricultural and industrial production, climate mitigation and cooling."
Recent research from the University of Adelaide and University of NSW has shown how important it is to include more green space in cities.
The symposium will also examine smart cities, biodiversity and green infrastructure to support the publication of a special issue in the journal, Sustainability.
"While emerging digital technologies can address sustainability challenges, there are both opportunities and risks in technologies like AI and robotics supporting urban biodiversity," Dr Hawken said.
The collaborative symposium will feature presentations from experts from universities around Australia, as well as Japan, Belgium, India, Ireland, and Chile.
"Adelaide is one of the most liveable cities in the world, but it can still improve. COVID has seen people drawn to green spaces more than ever. The National Park City initiative will help Adelaide provide more space for nature in amongst our everyday lives," Dr Hawken said.
"The goals of the National Park City movement also include diverse employment opportunities; healthier plants and animals; support for health and wellbeing; and improved air and water quality."
The symposium involves the documentation of best practice miniforest and biodiversity initiatives in both Japan and Australia.
Hosted by the University of Adelaide and Kyushu University in Japan, the two-day online symposium will take place across June 6-7 June.
The event is funded by the Department of Foreign Affairs, Australia Japan Foundation.
Further details including registration can be found on Eventbrite. There is no charge to attend.
RELATED: GenAngus future leadership program kicks off in Adelaide
CREDIT:
Word count: 385
