TECHNOLOGY TOYS, FEEDERS, A FANCY TOILET … THIS TREND COULD BE YOUR BEST FRIEND
From robotic companions and remotely controlled lasers to dog treat launchers and self-cleaning litter boxes, pet technology is evolving at a rapid rate.
And experts say the quirky category is also soaring in popularity after two years in which pet ownership skyrocketed.
The trend has seen the popularity of some additions double – like cat drinking fountains – while others are expected to rise as many human companions return to workplaces.
Telsyte managing director Foad Fadaghi says more than half of Australian households had a pet by the end of 2021, according to the company’s IoT@Home Market Study, and 7 per cent of those households employed smart technologies to help care for them.
For many new pet owners, he says, adding connected, pet-friendly gadgets would be second nature.
“We have had a lot more dog owners, cat owners, and many homes already have cameras and smart home setups so having pet tech is just an extension of that,” Fadaghi says.
“Many first-time pet owners might also need technological assistance, especially if they have to turn to the office for a couple of days a week.” Pet Circle head vet Dr Teagan Lever says the retail chain saw pet technology sales rise by 53 per cent between 2020 and 2021, and by a further 63 per cent between February and March this year alone.
And while pet tech used to include products like automatic pet doors, it now extends to remotely controlled toys, feeders that weigh portion sizes, and connected toys.
“We’re seeing a lot more smart toys – things like robotic balls and automatic lasers – so you can play a game of laser tag with your cat even when you’re not home, or robotic balls that move in response to your pet,” Lever says.
“People are really mindful, having spent a lot of time at home during the pandemic, about what their pets are doing during the day and there’s a lot of concern about loneliness.” Lever says many smart pet gadgets have been created to “solve a specific problem”. There are connected cameras, for example, to monitor pets and feed them treats, or automatic feeders that could be useful if a pet needs to be fed separately from another animal. Pet beds can also monitor an animal’s vital signs, Lever says, while GPS trackers can alert owners if their pets have strayed.
But her top recommendation? Self-cleaning litter boxes.
“They’re pretty cool,” she says.
“I was dubious at first because I thought what cat would want to go in there but they’re quiet and you can even monitor the frequency of their use.”
12 smart gadgets for pets FEEDERS Dogness Smart Camera Treater ($199): This device will let you check on your dog from afar with its high-definition camera, speak to them through its speaker, and throw them treats from an app.
Tech 4 Pets Feeder ($300): Cats or dogs with a precise food schedule should appreciate this device that stores up to seven litres of dry food and can deliver a precise portion by time or command. It also features a camera.
Pixi Fountain ($63): This next-level water bowl for cats not only keeps the water running but uses filters to ensure it’s free from debris.
TOYS iFetch Too ($399): Even if your puppy is particularly active, this ball launcher will tire him or her out. The device can be set to throw balls 2m, 3m or 7m away, and comes with three balls to reload it.
Petcube Play 2 ($299): This device is part smart home gadget, part pet plaything. It connects to the internet, works with Amazon Alexa to respond to commands, and features a camera with 180-degree angle. But it also features a laser toy and can host a game of chase for your cat remotely.
Cheerble Ice Cream Ball ($54): This toy holds a cat’s attention by moving around automatically. The rechargeable ball (above) has play and rest cycles and a silicon exterior to withstand teeth.
WEARABLES Tractive GPS Dog 4 ($80): This device, which fits over a dog’s collar, can be used to track their activity on a walk or track them down if they’re a wanderer.
Olixar Collar for AirTag ($25): Apple did not design its AirTags to be used on pets but this leather collar will secure the tracking device to a dog and let you track them in the Find My app.
Petkit Fit P2 ($50): This coin-shaped gadget connects to your dog’s collar, tracks their daily activity and how many calories they burn, and suggests a feeding and exercise program via an app.
WACKY Enabot Ebo Air ($369): This home-roaming robot (above) is designed to be a companion to your pet but, in reality, it could be more of a dibber-dobber. The Enabot can recognise and follows pets around the home or be controlled remotely. It will also record photos and videos and return to a charging station.
Smarty Pear Leo’s Loo ($798): This futuristic contraption is a self-cleaning litter box that detects when your cat has visited it and uses a filter to remove the soiled litter into a tray beneath it. The device can even report the number of uses. Petkit Cool Smart Pet House ($255): This pet furniture is designed to cool or warm cats using air ducts. The Petkit device also features an infra-red sensor to detect when they use it and how long they use it for, and its temperature can be set in an app.
CREDIT: Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson
Word count: 930
