The Goulburn High School Robotics team has celebrated some amazing results at the recent VEX Robotics World Championship.
They came 63rd in their division and in the top 650 overall at the World Championship in Dallas.
The team's design book and interview had the team advance to the second round of judging, where they ended up in the top five per cent of their division and among the top one per cent in the world.
Goulburn High School Robotics teacher Katherine Hyland said the team was also interviewed by the judges again after they made it to "such a high level in the design award" at the National competition earlier this year.
The team met some of the other competitors while setting up on day one and also had some practice matches and were able to recalibrate the robot and take part in skills challenges.
The next day they began their qualifying matches where teams work in conjunction to score points.
"In VEX IQ it's about teamwork, so it's collaboration and communication skills that they're working on," Mrs Hyland said.
"They actually work with the other team and they get a combined score. For every single game our team played, we gave the people we played a little koala as a thank you for being there.
"We also took over 600 single serve Tim Tams and around 400 clip on koalas."
Their average score improved by 10 points from Nationals and their top score was 152 out of 162.
"It was the highest score they achieved throughout the entire season, they did really well," Mrs Hyland said.
Goulburn High School was one of just two Australian teams, with the second from Adelaide and Mrs Hyland said they watched each other's games "and supported each other as a nation".
Goulburn missed out on the finals, but Mrs Hyland said it was a fantastic effort from the team and thanked its supporters.
"It was absolutely amazing, the support Goulburn High received from all levels of the education system and the community. We couldn't have done it without them."
Goulburn High School Principal Yogesh Mani congratulated the team on its achievements.
"These results are amazing and I am so proud," he said.
CREDIT: Lauren Strode
Word count: 372
