MDBA CONFERENCE POPULATION modelling shows there is no end in sight for labour shortages across the Murray Darling Basin, and skilled workers will be particularly hard to find over the next decade.
Director of research at analysis firm The Demographics Group Simon Kuestenmacher told the Murray Darling Basin Authority ­annual conference modelling showed “bad news” for businesses looking to hire young professionals.
Over the next decade, growth in Australia’s 25 to 30-year-old age bracket would be “stagnant” and “will even see negative population growth”, Mr Kuestenmacher said.
“If you run any kind of sizeable business that has an ­annual graduate intake, good luck. This will be incredibly ­difficult.” Businesses in rural areas of far west NSW would be particularly hard hit, he said.
Southern Cross Farms executive director Peter O’Donnell said his business had been struggling to find skilled workers.
SCF manages citrus, grape, almond and avocado properties across NSW’s Riverina, Victoria’s Sunraysia and South Australia’s Riverland regions, and employs between 150 and 200 people at any one time.
In the pandemic, it became harder for it to fill gaps in its 40 on-farm and 16 off-farm permanent skilled ­positions, and it had not become easier, Mr O’Donnell said.
“We’re searching far and wide, and we have been trying to train from within and promote people earlier,” he said.
“There are people in the young 20s who can be accelerated with some support.” The company has been able to fill between 100 and 150 ­unskilled roles with workers through the Pacific Australia Labour Mobility scheme, but it had been harder to find workers for its more remote properties, Mr O’Donnell said.
“When people look at job opportunities, they look at what a town has to offer outside of work. And if it’s a ­smaller town, rightly or ­wrongly, it is perceived as not as attractive,” he said.
He said SCF was looking at robotics and automation to ­replace unskilled labour. “I think we need to recognise this will be an ongoing challenge, and I think we’ll see an acceleration of robotics automation,” Mr O’Donnell said.
Mr Kuestenmacher said a shortage of housing was a barrier to workforce growth. “How can Basin businesses looking to fill low-income jobs attract workers when there is no affordable housing available?” he said.
CREDIT: ELSE KENNEDY
Word count: 381
