South Australia’s defence industry represents 4.5 per cent of the gross state product, according to Defence SA’s Defence State Strategy 2030 report.
Growing this number is important to growing a world-leading, sustainable advanced-manufacturing sector in SA.
Manufacturing in our state has experienced ups and downs across the years, and the closure of car factories had a shock impact on employment.
At the time concerns were raised about the future of manufacturing, with many businesses shifting overseas to take advantage of lower costs.
Since then, Australian industry has shown a niche ability to be innovative. Its smaller scale, compared to overseas markets, has allowed Australian businesses to excel at research, development and prototyping. Our high cost of labour and overheads has prompted industry to invest in robotics and advanced manufacturing techniques, and to be flexible and agile.
This trait is rarely understood by overseas business leaders. I often hear the comment made that Australian businesses aren’t clear on their capabilities. This is not true.
Australian industry is known for its “can do” attitude to deliver to the customer. I am learning this is something unique to Australia.
Australians will take the time to explore and solve problems for their customers and these are the very traits needed by defence. Gross state product is driven by agriculture and mining, both influenced by foreign exchange and global issues. Our state and businesses need to be diverse to soften the blows of currency fluctuations, rising oil prices and global market crashes.
While defence isn’t immune to these, it provides some cushioning during market troughs.
For these reasons, SA businesses need to increase participation in defence projects. For advanced manufacturers, adding defence as a market creates diversification, contributing to resiliency for the business and the state.
We are seeing our state become more culturally diverse at the highly skilled end of the market, where the sharing of knowledge and experience is in many cases fast-tracking the evolution of our research and development programs.
Under the recent AUKUS announcement we expect to see the cultural diversity and mobility of our highly skilled labour increase, contributing to a more globally astute state. Audra McCarthy is Defence Teaming Centre chief executive
CREDIT: AUDRA McCARTHY
Word count: 366
