SOUTH Australia is facing an unprecedented skills shortage across many industries, with its multibillion-dollar mining sector the worst hit.
A new report has found 8000 workers are needed in the state’s resources sector immediately, with a peak shortage of 5100 expected by the middle of next year. The mining industry is working to address shortages across various areas, particularly engineers, geologists, geoscientists, automotive electricians, mechanics and diesel fitters.
It also is experiencing serious problems finding people with skills in robotics, mathematics, data analysis, automation and digital technology. Similar shortfalls are being experienced in civil construction and defence, while not enough young people are acquiring skills for the developing space industry.
The crisis is being blamed on the pandemic and a huge pipeline of infrastructure projects in WA, NSW, Queensland and Victoria, which have resulted in national labour shortages.
SA Chamber of Mining and Energy chief executive Rebecca Knol said her organisation had commissioned a report into workforce requirements at the request of its member companies. They included BHP, OZ Minerals, Beach Energy, Cooper Energy, Heathgate Resources, Iluka Resources, Nyrstar, Senex and SIMEC Mining. All had reported increasing difficulties recruiting skilled workers and qualified specialists.
Ms Knol said the report confirmed a suitably skilled workforce was “critical to the growth of the resources sector and broader SA economy”.
“While the pandemic has catalysed the skills shortage problem, it’s also highlighted the urgent need for strategic planning if we are to avoid similar problems in the future,” she said.
“While it is unlikely the current shortfall can be met, we can work to triage the worst of the skills-shortage impacts and develop a long-term strategy to address underlying issues.” Ms Knol said this included the development of a future workforce framework to be developed for key industry sectors.
“As a state, we need to proactively plan for our future workforce needs to ensure we build labour market resilience, align training and education to career pathways and continue to create jobs for years to come,” she said.
“Long-term strategic planning is essential if we are to build labour market resilience across the SA economy.” Ms Knol said a campaign had been launched to promote the variety of career opportunities in the resources sector. It was targeting school leavers, apprentices and university graduates and those in other industries with transferable skills.
BHP Olympic Dam asset president Jenny Purdie said the skills and labour shortage was hitting the company’s operations in the state’s Far North.
Ms Purdie said BHP, which had 8000 employees and contractors in SA, was investing heavily in skills and training for its huge copper and uranium mine at Olympic Dam.
“We are focused on identifying future needs and building up the skills we need to keep our business in SA moving forward,” she said.
Ms Purdie said a mining school of excellence operated by BHP at Olympic Dam was creating new job opportunities for South Australians “to forge a career in mining”.
Ms Purdie said about one-third of Olympic Dam employees were women, while 6 per cent were Indigenous. PAGE 16: EDITORIAL
CREDIT: SPECIAL REPORT COLIN JAMES
Word count: 516
