ELDERS has renewed its commitment to Australian agrifood innovation by returning as the official Platinum Partner of the 2023 AgriFutures evokeAG event in Adelaide next year.
Asia Pacific's premier agrifood tech event, evokeAG aims to bring together farmers, innovators, researchers, universities, corporates, government and investors to drive impact for farmers and the supply-chain.
The event will be held at the Adelaide Convention Centre from February 22-22, with the theme of 'Down to Earth'.
Elders managing director Mark Allison said the company was "particularly excited to bring evokeAG 2023 to Elders' birthplace of SA".
"SA has a real and vital part to play in helping our sectors' growth ambitions through the development, commercialisation and adoption of agrifood tech innovation supporting farmers to be more productive, efficient and sustainable," he said.
"We're proud to once again be partnering with AgriFutures evoke AG. to deliver an international event to a domestic and international audience to catalyse the next generation of innovations that will continue to spur Australian agriculture into the future.
RELATED READING: evokeAG event to return in February 2023
RELATED READING: Agrifood Innovation Forum panel delves into the future of robotics and autonomy
AgriFutures managing director John Harvey welcomed the partnership with Elders.
"Elders has a 183-year legacy in enhancing on-farm innovation and supporting the growth of Australian agriculture," he said.
"evokeAG 2023 Down to Earth will bring together the agrifood tech community to discuss how global agrifood innovation and tech collide, intersect, connect, translate, complement, and challenge our most important assets - our People, our farms, our soil, our water and our Earth."
Mr Harvey said given current global forces, next year's event will play an even more crucial role in powering globally relevant conversations within the agrifood tech ecosystem.
"These challenges have highlighted serious shortfalls in our food security systems," he said.
"There is an increasing sense of urgency around how we engage in global conversations, mitigate risk to our supply chain and challenge the conventions of what we grow, how we grow it and what we eat.
"Balance this with an extremely productive Australian agricultural landscape including big yields, and all-time high prices, evokeAG 2023 will bring together local and global minds from across the ecosystem to address these opportunities and challenges."
CREDIT:
Word count: 374
