Automation, robotics, AI and VR are already changing how students learn, and so equipping them for a job that may not exist yet is the challenge facing schools worldwide.
How schools approach this challenge can determine a student’s readiness for new careers in a world that is racing to automate.
Some jobs young students aspire to will have changed over their time in school, with a recent report by the Foundation for Young Australians suggesting 60 per cent of students are training for jobs that will not exist in the near future.
The report also states 44 per cent of jobs will be automated in the next 10 years and nearly 70 per cent of TAFE and university students are studying for jobs that will become automated.
Preparing students for their future is what sets Southern Vales apart. Its approach is to give students a strong foundation by teaching Understanding by Design methodology, which helps students develop an ability to transfer their skills and knowledge to achieve outcomes, preparing them for the jobs of tomorrow.
Employers today are increasingly looking for people with transferable skill sets as many jobs today are broader than those of 20 years ago.
For example, it’s now pretty rare that a graphic design role would be as straightforward as using software to design print work.
Today it’s far more common for a designer to have a broad set of skills like video editing, audio recording and editing, content creation, digital design and other skills. In the near future, these skills are likely to expand to include AI, VR, AR and other technologies needed to communicate.
It’s that kind of base for cross-skill development that Southern Vales prides itself on instilling in its students.
The school also has a serious focus on student wellbeing; it believes that students who feel safe and cared for are more attentive and engaged in the classroom.
They also experience fewer symptoms of depression and unhappiness, according to studies by Concordia University.
Southern Vales Christian College (08) 8488 0000 svcc.sa.edu.au
Word count: 339
