Trinity College’s SPARK initiative, a future-orientated STEM and digital technology program, has again seen the innovative school pick up a trophy at the prestigious Australian Education Awards.
The fantastic program involves seven specialist STEM educators facilitating a specific session; each implements pedagogical strategies to promote student agency and problem-solving, and showcase how digital technologies can enrich learning.
One component of SPARK is a thrilling five-day immersive experience where Year 7 and Year 8 students engage in interdisciplinary and technological-themed learning experiences that develop inquiry skills, computational thinking and creativity.
The SPARK program’s immersive experiences included: Doctor drones: Using the engineering design process, students collaboratively build a drone attachment to successfully fly medical supplies to the remote areas of Nepal. Designs, routes and written programs were evaluated for efficiency to encourage refinement.
Robotic engineering: Students got the opportunity to become robotics engineers needing to solve the technological challenges associated with autonomous cars. The robotic vehicles were coded to move at various angles and use advanced sensors to measure distances and aspects of tilting.
Technology in sport: To understand the role of data in society, students wore GPS trackers to monitor physical performance. Students applied scientific inquiry skills to inform goal-setting, data capturing and team tactics.
Mathematics of 3D printing: By applying mathematical concepts such as measurement and geometry, students were challenged to remodel the generic “spinning top”. 3D models were programmed using TinkerCAD and, once 3D printed, were tested and evaluated.
Do your bit: Using the design thinking process, students prototyped a device that would promote positive mental health. To establish empathy, students brainstormed the local and global social challenges faced by children, adults and the elderly. Once a target audience was selected, students created sketches and programmed the BBC Micro:Bit to sense environmental stimuli and incorporate user inputs.
SPARK is just the latest evolution of Trinity’s dedication to building science, engineering and technology skills that inspire innovation and foster well-rounded life capabilities in students. Aside from inviting students to work as part of a dynamic team to design, build and program robots, Trinity also prides itself on providing science and engineering opportunities for the broader community. To find out more go to trinity.sa.edu.au or phone (08) 8522 0666
Word count: 368
