AUSTRALIANS LOVE A SNIFF TEST ... APPARENTLY A survey of some 1000 Australians has found that the trusted ‘sniff test’ is still popular when it comes to determining if an item of clothing needs washing or can be worn again. Roughly one in three of those surveyed have admitted to employing the method.
But this isn’t the only shortcut that we’re regularly using when doing a wash, with results of the study, commissioned by Westinghouse, showing that two in five have tried a laundry shortcut or three.
The most popular hacks include adding vinegar instead of fabric softener to the wash and bi-carbonate soda to whites in a bid to ease yellowing.
Respondents also revealed they regularly add eucalyptus oil in a bid to eliminate odours and three in 10 confessed to using body or hand wash when they’ve run out of washing detergent.
Surprisingly, more than two in five of those surveyed still incorrectly believe hot water is more effective than cold water when washing, and that the care of ‘dry-clean only’ garments must be outsourced with more than half choosing to do so.
The truth is modern technology means that almost everything can now be cared for at home if using a recent model washing machine and dryer.
LAUNDRY FACTS AND FIGURES The study also shows 66 per cent of women have significant responsibility regarding household laundry when compared to men. More than half of Australians use hot water when washing and don’t separate whites from colours. Three in 10 of us admit that we overload the machine on a regular basis. We also let our washing sit for so long we have to do it again. Younger Australians are more likely to opt for hot water when washing than older folk.
THE FUTURE IS HERE ROBOTIC VACUUMS ALL THE RAGE Once the realm of The Jetsons only, robotic vacuum cleaners have gone mainstream and are now more desireable than a new TV, coffee machine or air purifier, shows local market research shared by the brand ECOVACS Robotics.
ECOVACS entered the Australian market just five years back but is already celebrating major milestones across innovation, design and customer satisfaction. Among the latest awards, ECOVACS has been named the winner of Canstar Blue’s inaugural Most Satisfied Customers survey for Robot Vacuums, while also being recognised with a prestigious Australian Design Award for its flagship DEEBOT X1 OMNI. Visit ecovacs.com
KITCHEN CHIC Every fashionista worth her salt knows that black never goes out of style. And now that’s the case for kitchens too with AEG releasing an entire matte black collection that’s impressing cooks of all levels. The entire range is impossibly chic but our two favourite items are the 60cm SteamPro Multifunction 25 Oven with Steamify (pictured below) and the 9000 SensePro 80cms Cooktop. Both look amazing (obviously) but they also offer a superior cooking experience with innovative features such as steaming, assisted cooking via in-built menus and wireless food sensors. More at AEGAustralia.com.au
Word count: 495
