ROBOTICS firm Automated Solutions Australia is looking to play a key role in the possible local production of hypersonic missiles after striking a partnership with US partner Aerobotix.
ASA specialises in the precise application of paints and performance coatings, and has installed more than 100 FANUC painting robots across Australia to date.
ASA general manager Nathan Jones said the Elizabeth South-based company had done defence work in the past, but it had been at a step removed to working directly with the major primes.
“We’ve done painting of components with ceramic coatings and those sort of things for radar components et cetera,’’ he said.
“But what this partnership with Aerobotix is going to enable us to do is expand our expertise in the painting industry.
“We’re robotic painting specialists – we’re the biggest in this part of the world for that specialist area.’’ Mr Jones said the company had been active in the automotive sector for about 20 years, which was where the FANUC expertise came in. “If you include our overseas business – we primarily work out of the US – we’re up close to 1000 robots installed globally,’’ Mr Jones said.
“We’ve dabbled in defence but this specialist area of coating, in which Aerobotix really are the pioneers, is going to allow us to deliver that capability within Australia for the defence sector.
“The coatings are very specialised – high temperature, high performance coatings.’’ Mr Jones said the expertise was needed for applications such as the ongoing maintenance of fighter aircraft and would be relevant for the nation’s recently-announced expansion of the AUKUS agreement to collaborate on the development of hypersonic weapons.
With hypersonic weapons travelling at more than Mach 5 (about 3300km/h), the coatings used on them need to be perfectly uniform and also able to withstand extremes of temperature.
“It takes a very careful application of the material to get the maximum performance. We’re controlling the thickness of the material down to the micron level,’’ Mr Jones said.
“We’ve got the capability with this partnership with Aerobotix to create this perfectly-shaped component with the maximum performance from the thermal side of things.’’ Aerobotix business development manager Josh Tuttle said they would work with the US State Department for approval of any technology transfer for ASA. “We’ll also help ASA in other ways. For example, we can save them years of costly development work by sharing how to robotically spray FIRE RX-2390 Thermal Protection System coatings for missile manufacturing.”
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 415
