Quality parenting can sometimes be as simple as hanging out in the right places, writes (a very relieved) Dilvin Yasa
It’s a rare mum or dad who hasn’t wished someone else could take over the parenting for a little while. Sure, while museums can’t force your little one to eat her greens or convince your teen to tidy his room, they do something far more powerful than what we’re capable of at home: they encourage our kids to take ownership of their learning and foster curiosities about the world in which they live.
Of course, one doesn’t have to take a family visit to the Beijing Museum of Tap Water (yep, it’s a thing) to know that all museums aren’t created equal. Here are 10 of the best family-friendly numbers to get young minds racing.
1 AMERICAN MUSEUM OF NATURAL HISTORY, NEW YORK CITY Casually call it “that dinosaur museum” and watch the kids scream with excitement. Of course, the American Museum of Natural History, in the heart of Manhattan, is not only famous for its gargantuan reptile displays; it also runs the A to Z of things little ones are obsessed with: space, mammals, and currently, a special sharks exhibition (running until August 14). Add to the program a series of classes, online experiences and even a space camp, and you’ve got the perfect museum for kids of all ages. amnh.org
2 CITÉ DES SCIENCES ET DE L’INDUSTRIE, PARIS In a city home to the likes of the Louvre and Centre Pompidou (both perfectly child-friendly), why single out what Aussies prefer to call the CSI? Bringing the colourful world of science to life in two exhibitions (two to seven years and five to 12 years), kids can do everything from take part in a simulated building site, learn to become television presenters or simply hang out in the on-site planetarium, geodesic dome or Argonaut, a submarine-themed exhibition. It’s set within a complex that has plenty of other family activities and attractions – expect a full day of fun. cite-sciences.fr
3 PAPALOTE MUSEO DEL NIÑO, MEXICO CITY If you’re constantly telling your kids to stop touching in museums (and aren’t we all?) there could be some difficult conversations attached to visiting this children’s museum in Mexico City. It’s constructed to look like a massive Lego build, and curators are desperate for little ones to get hands-on with the 300-plus interactive displays on-site. Five major exhibition halls allow kids to do every kind of activity they’ve ever dreamed of, from devising a radio program to shopping in a kid-sized supermarket. papalote.org.mx
4 THE CHILDREN’S MUSEUM OF INDIANAPOLIS, INDIANA Remember the days when you could jump on bouncy castles and ride carousels without ageist security escorting you off the premises? It’s every kid (and kidult) for themselves at this, the world’s largest children’s museum, where indoor and outdoor exhibitions are as varied as they are innovative. Sure, there’s the ScienceWorks and Dinosphere, but you can also check out Art of Protest, Take Me There: Greece, American Pop and even an exhibition showcasing Malala Yousafzai. It’s worth heading to Indiana just for this museum alone. childrensmuseum.org
5 MIRAIKAN, TOKYO Dedicated to the best of Japanese technology and cutting-edge robotics research, the National Museum of Emerging Science and Innovation (more commonly known as Miraikan) is the perfect place for teenage exploration. It’s set on an artificial island in Tokyo Bay, and visitors can expect to spend the day exploring space, environmental issues, neutrino (subatomic particle) observation instruments, as well as those robots, through a range of interactive displays. Little ones don’t miss out either – Curiosity Field uses a combination of science and handicraft to get the wheels turning about big-picture stuff. www.miraikan.jst.go.jp
6 RIJKSMUSEUM,AMSTERDAM Admittedly, it’s a rare child who will get excited about spending a whole day gazing at the works of van Gogh and Rembrandt. The good news for those determined to take in the 8000-plus pieces housed in this Dutch national institution is that the team has made looking at art so fun that the Rijksmuseum is likely to become a firm favourite. Book in a kids’ guided tour, lock in a Family Game (essentially a scavenger hunt with audio) or visit during a sensory-friendly evening. rijksmuseum.nl
7 JUNIBACKEN, STOCKHOLM Robots and Rembrandt have their place but science, exploration and impressionism aren’t for everyone. Enter Junibacken, a museum dedicated to awakening a child’s desire to read and disappear into worlds of fantasy. This isn’t a library scenario, of course; expect lively sets and interactive theatre performances, as well as a host of exhibitions based on famous scenes and characters from well-regarded children’s books. The clear highlight? Story Train, a 15-minute journey through a world of dolls, lights, sounds and settings. junibacken.se
8 COSMOCAIXA, BARCELONA “Two birds, one stone” has got nothing on what was formerly known as the Science Museum of Barcelona. Here, eight permanent spaces allow you to take your kids to Antarctica, travel around our solar system and journey through time, all by simply visiting this impressive space geared towards teaching young minds the importance of sustainability and education. Although better suited to older kids, there are plenty of activities on offer for all age groups, from creativity workshops to projections at the planetarium. cosmocaixa.org
9 COMPUTER GAMES MUSEUM, BERLIN Unleash your inner Pac-Man enthusiast and run, don’t walk, to the world’s largest (and Europe’s first) museum for video and computer games. A dream for modern-day teens and teens at heart, the Computerspielemuseum – aka Computer Games Museum – offers visitors insight into more than 300 objects, including many rare originals such as arcade favourite the Pong machine, the Nimrod and the Giant Joystick. computerspielemuseum.de
10 LE MUSÉE DES ENFANTS, BRUSSELS Right at the other end of the scale is what’s commonly known as the Children’s Museum. Here, exhibits and activities are based on the philosophy of learning and play through tactile experiences and encouraging dialogue between children and adults. Wooden toys and creative backdrops set the scene, while animators assist kids with workshops (everything from cooking and theatre to construction), classes and exhibitions which demand interaction and participation. Best suited to those aged six to 12. childrenmuseum.be Scan the code for the best museums for the big kids to check out.
CREDIT: Dilvin Yasa
Word count: 1047
