Pop star Troye Sivan wanted his new home to be like a warm hug, filled with glowing lamps, comfy couches, fluffy chairs and a big bath.
His designers delivered. The winners of this year's Australian Interior Design Awards announced at a Sydney gala on Friday night included Flack Studio, which decorated Sivan's Melbourne home.
The winners of this year's awards reveal that opulence and gimmicky design is out, and livability and "hugability" are in. The year's highest accolade, the Premier Award, went to Stable and Cart House by Clare Cousins Architects. Other designers won for designs of a robotics lab, an Adelaide open flame restaurant Arkhe, and the interior of a rare and limited edition sneaker store.
The winner across all categories, Cousins' creative adaptation of a Melbourne stable and cart store designed by Harry A. Norris 100 years ago, was the "standout" entry this year, said jury member and Sydney architect Madeleine Blanchfield.
And the decision to award Cousins the top prize was unanimous, she said. Cousins also won the prize for residential design.
The jurors said, "What resonates most is the authenticity of the design, and the way it has been conceived to be lived in, not just looked at."
They said the conversion of the old warehouse to a home was sublime, particularly how it had "brought light into a void, and had created a sense of naturalness and comfort".
Flack Studio won the award for residential decoration for Sivan's award-winning home. Built in 1869 as handball court, the property has been reinvented about as many times as Sivan, who has matured from YouTuber to actor and singer-songwriter. The old handball court was turned into a home in 1970 by Australian architect John Mockridge in what was the first adaptive reuse project of its kind in Melbourne.
Sivan and Flack Studios kept the quirky cork ceiling added by Mockridge. He told Architectural Digest he could imagine the architect Mockridge drinking at home with his friends.
"I wanted to preserve that bohemian spirit and honour the original architecture while creating something that feels like me," said Sivan.
In a video tour, Sivan showed off his reading nook, saying he hoped everyone could have a similar space: "A place to meditate, or just kind of kick back and relax and enjoy your life."
He pointed to lamps he liked. "I didn't want hard overhead lighting because no one looks good in that."
Blanchfield said the Sivan home bucked the trend where the designer puts their stamp on a design.
"It is very much [Sivan] the person. It doesn't feel like it was done by a designer, it was done to reflect the owners' character," she said.
CREDIT: Julie Power
Word count: 450
