From organising youth eisteddfods to keeping immigrants out of a cycle of crime, Logan and Redland community leaders have been well represented in this year’s honours.
Here is our list of 14 Queenslanders who were recognised for their work this year.
DET SEN SERGEANT GRANT RALSTON
Detective Senior Sergeant Grant Ralston and Sergeant Megan Ward, have both worked out of the Logan Central police station and both have changed the lives of thousands of youths and vulnerable people.
In their day-to-day jobs, they get to see some of the worst and best aspects of humanity and for their dedication, both were awarded Australia Police Medals.
As a detective senior sergeant at Logan Child Protection and Investigation Unit, Grant Ralston helps look out for some of the community’s most vulnerable.
He joined the Queensland Police Service in 1988 and has served for more than 20 years in an investigative role in the Criminal Investigation Branch and Child Protection and Investigation Unit.
He works closely with the Department of Children, Youth Justice and Multicultural Affairs and recently he has concentrated on managing youth in residential care, which is a key part of the state’s Five Point Youth Justice Action Plan.
Sen Sgt Ralston was behind the push for inclusive youth bail co-ordination programs, and a youth co-responder strike team, which is an on-road response unit.
The statewide strike teams were awarded for their success in the 2020 Child Protection Week awards.
In 2019, the South East Queensland Cross Agency Senior Leadership group was formed to give life to the priorities of the Advancing Queensland Priority, Keeping Communities Safe. As the core QPS representative, he worked with a range of government agencies to help more than 100 vulnerable youth offenders in Logan and South Brisbane areas.
SERGEANT MEGAN WARD
Sgt Ward became a police officer in 1997 and since then had stood out for her work helping offenders with mental health issues in Logan.
When police are notified about a person trying to commit suicide Sgt Ward, is the one people turn to as the Police Negotiator and District Negotiator Coordinator, a role she helped create.
Her colleagues know her for being “a little bit zany, very much her own person and may occasionally feature multi-coloured hair”.
Acting Chief Superintendent of Logan District Mel Adams said Sgt Ward was one of the most compassionate people she had met and was a mentor and sounding board to many staff.
Acting Chief superintendent Adams said Sen Sgt Ralston had inspired her to become a police officer while she was working as a journalist on the Beaudesert Times.
“When I first met Grant, he was a relatively newly minted constable,” she said.
“He didn’t know it then, but he influenced me to join the QPS nearly 30 years ago.
“Grant is totally committed to child welfare in this district and achieves amazing things but is one of the most humble officers I have ever met and never has a bad word to say about anyone.”
Assistant Commissioner Brian Swan, who has served as Chief Superintendent of Logan District, said Sen Sgt Ralston was “a great bloke and a good fellow” who was loyal and “genuinely wants to help people”.
He fondly remembers working with Sen Sgt Ralston in the 1990s when he headed up the CIB at Logan.
“We worked on a number of murder cases together,” Assistant Commissioner Swan said.
“These awards for Grant and Meg are not just for one-off acts. They both deserve the recognition because they have been dedicated to their roles for many years.”
The two police officers were two out of 11 from Logan and Redland to receive recognition this year.
HEATHER CHRISTENSEN
Another well-known Logan identity, Heather Christensen was also recognised for her role in helping youths tap their potential and also for playing a huge part in driving a local chamber of commerce.
Mrs Christensen is known for her work with Quota Beenleigh, a non-profit community organisation which has helped many disadvantaged and at-risk children, youth and families.
Her long service with the organisation has helped hundreds of youth and her work has helped to shape Beenleigh, a fast-growing southside suburb.
Mrs Christensen said she was humbled to be awarded a medal of the Order of Australia.
“It was not something I expected but it was a nice surprise,” she said.
For more than 13 years she has spent hundreds of hours organising the Quota International of Beenleigh Eisteddfod.
She joined Quota more than 29 years ago and was president for six years, playing a leading role in setting up the Junior Quota Clubs.
She has also played a major role in the Beenleigh-Yatala Chamber of Commerce and the Junior Chamber since 2009.
It is not the first time her dedication and hard work in the community has been recognised. In 2016, she was Logan City Council Citizen of the Year.
Logan City councillor Karen Murphy said Mrs Christensen was unselfish and had changed the lives of many youths in Beenleigh.
“She is a very special lady — I definitely would not be in the position I am today without her,” Cr Murphy said.
“She played a huge role in getting the Quote youth to the US. She is also responsible for the Tree of Life mural in Beenleigh and really got the community behind the event to raise money for youth in the area.”
ANNETTE MUNDT
When people think of Annette Mundt, images of art, flowers, and colourful quilts come to mind.
The Beenleigh stalwart has many strings to her bow and received an Order of Australia medal for service to Beenleigh.
As Beenleigh Showgrounds chief executive Mrs Mundt has played a crucial role in ensuring the annual show plays a defining part of life in the southside community.
Her long-time friend and Logan artist Don Waters joined the Beenleigh Show Society chief executive at this year’s Flower Festival in February.
He was painting florals at show where a commissioned two-panel mural was on display as part of the celebrations for the show’s long history.
Since 1971, she has been on the Beenleigh Show Society committee and has played a leading role in making the showgrounds attractive to new ventures to the region.
However, her interests and community commitments extend further and she has also been the Senior vice-president of the South East Queensland Sub Chamber of the Queensland Chamber of Agricultural Societies.
She is also on the Beenleigh-Yatala Chamber of Commerce, where she was treasurer for three years and is a longstanding member of the Beenleigh Quilters Association and has also been treasurer of the Embroiderers’ Guild after joining in 1985.
And as if that is not enough to keep her busy, she is also secretary, treasurer and newsletter editor for the Floral Art Society of Queensland.
She nurtured her love of flowers when she served as treasurer of the Beenleigh Garden Club.
Her role in the community has been recognised in the past and she was granted the Outstanding Individual Achievement Award, Queensland Chamber of Agricultural Societies in 2017.
MEDY HASSAN
Another prominent leader in Logan, Medy Hassan was awarded the Medal of the Order of Australia in the general division for service to the building and construction industry.
Mr Hassan is a prominent figure in the Australian Institute of Building and served as vice-president in Queensland and was also a committee member in New South Wales.
He has also played leading roles in the Property Council of Australia and has been a judge of the prestigious National Innovation and Excellence Awards, since 2013.
In Logan, his skills were sought out and he was named investLogan chief executive in February.
He took on the role after five months acting in the post and more than two years as a board director.
He has worked for more than 25 years in private equity, property and construction industries and as investLogan’s new CEO, will oversee a tower block being built in Beenleigh to house the city’s water business.
His community involvement stems from his role as an Adjunct Professor at RMIT University and his roles with the University of Queensland.
He is also an Advisory board member, with the Queensland Brain Institute.
He takes seriously his role as chair of the Australian Performing Arts Conservatory in Brisbane and his diverse interests have extended to being the chair of Brisbane’s Jazz Music Institute and chair of Southern Cross Certified.
BENY ATERDIT BOL
Communities south of Brisbane would not be the same without the gentle skills of Beny Bol, who received the Medal of the Order of Australia in the general division for his work in youth justice.
Mr Bol, a Sudanese-born orphan is president of the Queensland African Communities’ Council and works closely with police and the youth justice system to help immigrant youth avoid lives of crime.
He has been on the African Strategic Working Group which liaises with Queensland Police since 2019.
Mr Bol’s work in Logan started when he moved into the area and was disappointed to see some young immigrants falling foul of the law.
His work takes him onto the streets where the youths hang out to talk to them directly.
His team identifies “anti-social hot spots” and where crimes are taking place and go there at night to offer a new way of approaching life.
“We provide them with free food, run social and sporting activities to build some relationships and get to understand what the challenges are, then connect them with youth workers and support teams.”
His empathy comes from when he was a child and endured famine, the loss of his parents and siblings, and a lack of education in Africa before he was granted a humanitarian visa in 2007.
He worked in abattoirs and farms to support his family and jumped at the chance of an education and now has undergraduate and masters degrees from Griffith University.
Breaking the crime cycle for immigrant youths is part of his Youth Off The Streets program he runs at the Brisbane Youth Detention Centre.
Last year, he founded the COVID-19 Community Response Strategy Coordination Committee, which produced and distributed COVID-19 materials in many African languages.
MIC NOBLE
Logan Museum historian Mic Noble received recognition for his hard work documenting the city’s colourful past and vivid military history.
Mr Noble was recognised with a Woodridge Queensland Day Award at a special ceremony in Logan on Saturday.
Mr Noble tirelessly worked to keep Anzac Day services going at Logan Central even when battling a debilitating cancer and after the local sub-branch closed.
He has played a crucial role in curating artefacts at the Logan Museum.
TIMOTHY KEELER
Looking for better ways to prevent and assist the victim’s domestic violence has been one of the many roles Tim Keeler has taken on over the past decade.
Mr Keeler was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia for significant service to both the Logan and Redland communities through a range of roles and service to education.
He has been a member of the Domestic and Family Violence Taskforce in Logan since 2015 and was a former board member of YFS (Youth and Family Services).
Mr Keeler was also the chairman of the Logan Uniting Counselling Centre at Springwood but is probably more widely known for his role as Deputy Head at Faith Lutheran College, Junior School at Victoria Point and for being the Rotary Club of Logan president in 2010-11 and 2012-13.
While he was Rotary president, he was awarded Rotarian of the Year in 2012-and under his leadership, Logan won the Rotary Club of the Year in 2013. In the same year he received a United Nations award for community service.
Tim was appointed Logan Goodwill Ambassador in 2014 and is currently a board member of Alive, a youth suicide prevention community organisation, based in Queensland.
In 2022, Tim will be inducted as the Rotary International District Governor with responsibility for Rotary in Southern Queensland, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands and Nauru.
Another role he cherished was as board member and acting chair of the Logan and Redlands, Regional Development Australia fund.
CHARLES STEADMAN
Dr Charles Steadman was appointed a Member of the Order of Australia for his significant service to tertiary medical education, and to gastroenterology.
He was one of the founding specialists of Queensland Gastroenterology, based at Greenslopes Private Hospital, and retired last year after a career spanning more than 40 years.
Associate Professor Steadman’s reputation as a well-known gastroenterologist and hepatologist after he took up practice at Greenslopes, where he was based for more than 26 years.
He had a long association with the hospital and had been based there in the 1970s as a medical student.
He received the Queen’s Birthday Honour after holding the position of Associate Professor of Medicine at the University of Queensland Medical School from 2001-2020 and as a Clinical Associate Professor of Medicine from 1995-2001.
He also was a lecturer and clinical teacher at the university.
Dr Steadman was well known at Princess Alexandra Hospital, where he was a visiting medical officer with the Department of Gastroenterology from 1997to 2008.
He was also the hospital’s Director of the Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology from 1990-1994.
He was respected throughout the medical fraternity and was also president of the Senior Medical Staff Association from 1992-1993.
He has held eminent positions with the Royal Australasian College of Physicians and within Queensland Gastroenterology, where he was chairman from 2013 to 2014.
Dr Steadman also mentored many young doctors and was also on the Senior Examining Panel from 2011-2012 and was a Fellow since 1988.
However, his love of the arts and history gave him opportunities to help others and he is a current Member of the Queensland Art Gallery Foundation.
He is also a philanthropic supporter of the Queensland Women’s Historical Association.
“It’s been wonderful working with my colleagues and building Queensland Gastroenterology into the biggest gastro clinic in Queensland. Our group developed it with the support of Ramsay Health Care and that’s been a great thing.”
Dr Steadman also served with the Australian Army in Tarin Kowt, Afghanistan as an Army Medical Officer at the end of 2008 and into 2009.
He has always appreciated Greenslopes’ military links, as his grandfather, who was also a veteran, was a patient there in the 1960s.
In 2014, he was able to identify his grandfather, private Charles Ernest Steadman, in a historic photo taken on the steps of the great Cheops pyramid.
The picture shows 703 Australian soldiers posing on the steps of the huge Egyptian pyramid, shortly before they were shipped off to the battlegrounds of Gallipoli in 1915
DEBOROUGH MACBETH
Assistant Director of Nursing in infection control at Gold Coast Health Dr Deborough Macbeth was leading the infectious diseases field well before COVID-19 hit.
Dr Macbeth was awarded an Order of Australia Public Service Medal for her work with controlling diseases and their spread.
The doctor, who lives at Mount Tamborine, was responsible for setting up Queensland’s first fever clinic in the grounds of the Gold Coast Hospital in response to the Swine Flu (H1N1) pandemic in 2009.
Her role was crucial to the growth and development of the tertiary-level Infection Control, Infectious Diseases and Rheumatology departments at Gold Coast Health, which ultimately positioned the health service to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Dr Macbeth joined Gold Coast Health in 1991 and since 1993 has been an infection control professional.
In addition to making an ongoing contribution to the profession through research and publication, she has developed clinical capacity through mentoring and training and also served on the Australasian College of Infection Prevention and Control’s Credentialing and Professional Standards Committee and as a board director.
She is responsible for growing and developing the Infection Control department at the Gold Coast Hospital and Health Service.
In 2003, she took the initiative to establish the infection control protocols and practices required to manage the SARS pandemic.
The Public Service Medal is a civil decoration awarded to Australian public servants at all levels and was introduced in 1989, replacing the Imperial awards discontinued in 1975.
KEN DICKSON
Cleveland’s Ken Dickson has dedicated a large part of his life to helping out at Cleveland police station, where he was a volunteer for more than a decade.
For his role co-ordinating volunteers across the Wynnum, Cleveland, Redland Bay and Capalaba police stations, he was awarded an Order of Australia medal.
It is recognition for the service he has given to his community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Dickson was a foundation member of the Bayside Crime Stoppers Area Committee from 2000 to 2008.
He worked for the District Crime Prevention Coordination Unit, South Brisbane District, from 2008-2020.
He was Assistant Volunteer Coordinator, dedicating more than 10,000 hours of his time for free.
In his role, he assisted in investigations, crime alerts, helped with victims of crime engagement, public events and crime prevention presentations.
He worked for the Commonwealth Bank, Suncorp Metway and the QIDC before he joined the police volunteer ranks.
After retiring, he had been looking for a way to give back to the community.
Volunteers are expected to work a minimum of four hours a week and Mr Dickson oversees a crew of 15.
“The police train us to do our job and we’re not put into situations that would be dangerous,” he said.
The medal is not Mr Dickson’s first acknowledgment of community service.
He has been awarded a Commonwealth Games Citation from Queensland Police and a District Officer’s Certificate in 2016.
He was also the recipient of an Australia Day Local Hero Award for outstanding dedication and contribution to Redland City in 2015.
SANDRA COWLEY
Sandra Cowley has been awarded an Ambulance Service Medal for her dedicated service over a long and distinguished career.
Police, ambulance and community volunteers have been named in this year's Queen's Birthday Honours List.
As a member of the Queensland Ambulance Service, Ms Cowley has worked across roles including area manager, officer-in-charge, area director, clinical support officer and critical care paramedic.
She started with the QAS in 1991 as an Ambulance Officer at Cleveland Ambulance Station and is currently employed at Capalaba Ambulance Station as a critical care paramedic.
She is highly respected by her peers and her Critical Care Paramedic qualification assists her to provide invaluable frontline clinical patient care, as well as education and leadership to her team.
Ms Cowley has consistently demonstrated her continued dedication and commitment to the QAS and to the community of Queensland for more than 30 years.
OTHERS RECOGNISED
From police officers and youth advocates to charity workers and volunteers, people from all walks of life in southeast Queensland were represented.
Across the country there were more than 1000 people acknowledged in this year’s awards.
Some of the well-known Queensland recipients included seniors advocate Everald Compton who was made an Officer of the order of Australia in the general division.
Mr Compton received the accolade for distinguished service to the aged welfare sector through advocacy and advisory roles and to the Uniting Church and the community.
Queensland Art dealer and gallery owner Philip Bacon was made an officer in the general division of the Order of Australia for his contributions to the arts, social and cultural organisations, and support for young artists.
Word count: 3075
