The compulsory research project also is being restructured to make it “more connected” to students’ learning direction, SACE Board chief executive Martin Westwell said.
“With the changes that are occurring in the world, we think a dedicated cyber subject will be attractive to students,” he said.
The board, which runs the SA Certificate of Education, is working with teachers, students and industry on the cyber course, and intends to run pilot trials in 2022.
Currently, there is no subject specifically on coding and cyber security although students can study related VET subjects.
Some courses do have computing components including: digital technologies, focusing on data crunching; design, technology and engineering, involving robotics and electronics; and information, processing and publishing.
St Peter’s College has been involved in early design of a cyber studies course.
St Peter’s headmaster, Tim Browning, is one of five new members of the 12-seat SACE Board appointed from July 1.
Mr Browning, who has had more than 20 years experience in education, said he was looking forward to the role.
“Having recently led a team of St Peter’s College teachers and learners to develop a cyber studies curriculum, in close consultation with industry, I understand the importance of assessing and addressing gaps between industry and secondary education,” he said.
“It is an exciting time to be involved in the development of curricula that will equip our students with the skills, knowledge, and personal proficiencies to successfully contribute to our fast-paced global society.”
The research project, which a 2018 independent review of SACE recommended should undergo a major overhaul, was still being redesigned, Prof Westwell said.
“Globally, there has been more of a shift toward extended assessments like the research project and we’re on track to trial changes with some schools next year,” he said.
“We’re really rethinking the research project. There will be options within it – much more like an entrepreneurial option, or an option more connected to a student’s vocational pathway.”
Also joining the SACE Board is Salisbury East High principal Kristen Masters, who has previously worked in Kapunda, Peterborough and Kingston SE.
She aims to bring an “equity lens” to the role.
“There is a strong body of evidence indicating postcode does matter when it comes to achievement,” she said.
“I want to ensure the curriculum and assessment works for the broadest range of students.”
SA state director for Austrade Eliza Chui also joins the board.
She was Austrade’s inaugural education commissioner for North Asia and worked at Adelaide Uni in international education.
The SACE International program is offered at select schools in China, Malaysia, Vietnam, New Caledonia and Vanuatu, with 904 students enrolled this year.
In 2020-21, this brought in $1.2 million revenue to SA and Prof Westwell expects Ms Chui to help grow this opportunity.
The other new members of the SACE Board are Heathfield High principal Roy Page and Flinders Uni geography professor Iain Hay.
Government school principals are not paid to sit on the board. Other members receive $12,383 and the presiding member $18,574.
IT consultant and former chief information officer at Flinders and Adelaide universities Kerrie Campbell has been promoted to deputy presiding member.
Prof Westwell said her expertise would assist SACE move further into the electronic sphere with exams, communication with teachers and data analysis.
Board presiding member Jane Danvers was reappointed but will depart at the end of the year when she moves from being principal of Wilderness School in Adelaide to principal of Kambala in Rose Bay.
A new presiding member will be appointed by the Education Minister.
Unley High to offer IB diploma
Unley High has become the third government school authorised to offer the International Baccalaureate diploma.
An alternative to the SA Certificate of Education, Unley will start teaching the diploma program next year.
“We expect about 20 of our students will start the IB in year 11 next year,” principal Greg Rolton said.
The school also will accommodate some out-of-zone students who want to take the IB.
Unley joins Glenunga International High and Roma Mitchell Secondary College as government schools in the diploma program for school leavers.
Education Minister John Gardner said the government supported the move as part of a policy promoting languages, with the IB requiring study of a second language.
“Adelaide was the first place in Australia to embrace state school support for IB and I look forward to further SA schools being able to offer this opportunity,” he said.
Nine private schools in SA offer the IB diploma.
Aberfoyle Park and Norwood Morialta are candidates to join the global program.
The diploma curriculum consists of six subject groups, an extended essay, as well as lessons on the theory of knowledge and demonstration of creativity, activity and service.
Several public and private schools offer middle year and primary level IB programs.
Word count: 762
