A multi-million dollar venture at a Mount Jagged family dairy farm will allow cows to be milked whenever they want by robotic machinery.
Nangkita Dairies at Minbee, Mount Jagged, has seen multiple changes as it has passed through the five generations - but none like this.
Cutting-edge technology will see a robotic dairy set up to automatically milk cows whenever they walk in.
Farm manager Jake Connor said the bold move should result in a more efficient milking process.
"The new robotic dairy which will be fully operational on Monday, contains six robots, and will have capacity to milk 360 cows," he said.
The innovative technology is the first of its kind on the Fleurieu Peninsula and Adelaide Hills, and is set to revolutionise the dairy industry.
Mr Connor said the unveiling of the machinery, which took place in front of South Australian Premier Steven Marshall and Member for Finniss David Basham at the weekend, was a year in the making.
"We've had the property here at Mimbee for more than a decade and it originally started out as a smaller herringbone dairy," he said.
"The capacity of the farm outstripped the capacity of the existing dairy, so approximately 12 months ago, we looked at the feasibility of installing a robotic dairy on a greenfield site on the property."
Mr Basham, a former dairy farmer at nearby Mount Compass, said the project was "truly exciting".
"This state-of-the-art technology is the first of its kind in the region and one of the first few in the state and hopefully this paves the way for others to take it up," he said.
"The robotic dairy will change the milking system and farming practices on the property.
"The robotic dairy will be operational 24/7 and cows will be able to enter on demand when they are ready to be milked."
He said robotic dairy technology would increase production at farms around South Australia and was "the way of the future".
"South Australia's dairy industry is a key driver for our state economy. Technology such as this will help it grow even further," he said.
South Australian Dairy Association chief executive officer Andrew Curtis congratulated the Connor family on its innovative thinking.
"This technology will help increase productivity and traceability, which will lead to better outcomes for the entire supply chain from the farm to the consumer. It also has terrific welfare outcomes for the cows and the workforce as the cows can be milked whenever they like," Mr Curtis said.
CREDIT: Dani Brown
Word count: 420
