The $16m Inquiry and Innovation Hub Centre includes robotics and engineering equipment, an industry-standard laser cutter/printer, a specialised fashion design space with 25 industrial sewing machines and sophisticated physics, chemistry, psychology and biology spaces.
“In a state committed to the evolution of new technology and industry, it is vital that students are ready to make a meaningful contribution in South Australia and be positioned to extend this across the nation and globe,” principal Simon Shepherd said.
“We’re focused on preparing kids for life beyond school, developing the whole person as well as their cognitive capacity.
“We are giving them better facilities and more opportunities. We will have flexibility to teach existing subjects in different ways and offer new subjects as interest increases.”
Industry experts across sectors – such as fashion, food, engineering and science – will host learning sessions at the Hub to share insights from their experiences and describe different career pathways.
The Hub is one of four components in a $38m first stage of a masterplan to redevelop the school’s Marion campus.
Also recently completed is a sports pavilion which overlooks the expansive playing fields.
Work is now under way on a new wing called the Carter Studios which will house creative arts and digital media studios and a three-storey cultural hub with extended drama and music facilities.
The fourth major construction element will be a 250-seat dining space for both boarders and day students, and a cafe facing the playing fields.
Mr Shepherd said day boarders could have their evening meal on campus and begin homework before being picked up in the evening.
Westminster council chair Phillip Styles said key academic staff had been identified areas of growth which then shaped the investment decisions.
“We want students to achieve more than they thought possible,” he said.
The school has raised about a third of the funds needed and will take on debt but Mr Shepherd said the capital investment would not directly flow onto a fee increase.
“Next year we are minimising a fee rise but we have awarded staff a pay rise,” he said.
Simultaneously with the major capital works, there have been upgrades to the preparatory school and dance studios.
The next stages in the campus masterplan will look at improving outdoor education and the school farm.
Mr Shepherd said the new facilities would help current students “and if it draws more families to enrol, that would be amazing”.
“But they should also come here because of the quality of teaching, the relationships we develop and the community we create,” he said.
Mr Shepherd said families selected a school based on many factors and individual choices.
A survey of nearly 4000 parents in Queensland found 70 per cent said facilities were a significant factor – although overall preparation for life and teaching quality were the most important.
“Culture always trumps facilities,” Mr Shepherd said.
“But if you’ve got a great student-focused culture and great facilities, that’s got to lead to a great education.”
Year 12 student Amy was particularly excited by the fashion workshop.
“The new fashion area is so pretty and inspirational, plus it’s good to have the open space and be able to spread out when you are working,” she said.
Year 8 science student Sophie said it was “great to be able to do even more experiments” while fellow Year 8 Angus said the laboratory was flooded with natural light.
In hospitality, Year 8 Tami said “the Food Tech room is spacious, modern and pretty cool. The facilities are really good to cook in – it’s like an actual kitchen.”
With high standards and a multi-billion dollar capital investment program across public and non-government schools and universities, Mr Shepherd said the education sector was a big contributor to attracting people to South Australia.
“If you took a school like Westminster and put it in the middle of Sydney or Melbourne, you’d add probably a third to the fees – and then you’d add the travel time too,” he said.
“In that regard SA independent education is outstanding.
“If anyone is looking at SA and the value proposition of living in this state, education has to be right up there.”
AA News Feed Playlist
Word count: 671
