“Financially, it’s a multi-billion opportunity,” said IP Group’s Australian managing director, Mike Molinari.
Since announcing its arrival in 2017, IP Group has put about $15m into 12 new companies based on research carried out at Australia’s Group of Eight universities and New Zealand’s University of Auckland.
Mr Molinari said IP was on track to invest its promised $200m over a decade. It was likely to put capital into three to six new companies a year based on research discoveries at the nine universities. And the pace of investment was expected to pick up in the next year or so as the companies required more capital to grow.
IP Group, which was founded in the UK two decades ago, partners with more than 30 universities in the UK, the US, Australia and New Zealand to found new companies from university intellectual property.
Mr Molinari backed federal Education Minister Alan Tudge’s recent call for Australia to do better in supporting start-ups through the early stage of research commercialisation — the so-called “valley of death” in which new companies often fail.
Typically, IP Group invests in new research at an earlier stage than venture capital funds are usually willing to do so.
“We are reaching across the valley of death. We would love there to be more people in Australia doing what we do,” Mr Molinari said.
“We see a lot of early-stage research which does not have access to the funding it needs to get to the point where it could be spun out into a company.
“We are prepared to invest earlier than most, if not all, other ­investors because of the understanding of the technology, and the experience, that we have.
“I’m more convinced than ever that there’s a huge opportunity for Australia to benefit from the ­research that is done at our universities, to create more impact from that.”
IP Group’s first investment in 2006 was in DNA sequencing technology invented at the University of Oxford. The resulting company, Oxford Nanopore Technologies, is about to float with an expected value of more than $5bn.
“It started out with an investment from us and a clunky piece of equipment on an Oxford lab bench 16 years ago,” Mr Molinari said.
IP Group’s early-stage investments in Australia include: Kira Biotech, which is developing an antibody to fight auto-immune disease; AMSL Aero, which is building a passenger-carrying, electric-powered aircraft; Rage Biotech, which is developing new drugs for inflammatory lung diseases such as cystic fibrosis and emphysema; CyAmast, which builds cybersecurity for the Internet of Things; and Growave, which reduces herbicide use by using microwaves to kill weeds.
IP Group has also invested in a University of Auckland company, PowerON, that is developing “soft robotics”, including a sensory skin for robotics using stretchy conductive polymers.
IP Group’s overseas university partners include Oxford, Cambridge, Princeton, Yale and ­Columbia.
“We’re seeing from our partners in the Group of Eight a lot of interesting research which compares favourably to what we see around the world,” Mr Molinari said.
He said that early-stage research in Australia needed more support and that universities needed more “proof of concept” funding to demonstrate the ­potential of new IP to investors.
“We see a lot of early-stage research which does not have access to the funding it needs to get to the point where it could be spun out into a company,” he said.
Mr Molinari said it was important to have incentives to make investment in early-stage research more attractive for superannuation funds and private investors.
He said TelstraSuper was an IP Group shareholder and Hostplus was an investor.
“The opportunity is there for support from more superannuation funds. That would make a huge difference,” Mr Molinari said.
IP Group has just announced two new members for its Australian steering group — Genevieve Gregor, a founding partner of ­Colinton Capital Partners and former deputy chancellor of Western Sydney University, and Peter Hoj, vice-chancellor of the University of Adelaide.
Professor Hoj said Australia needed to unlock more of the research potential of universities and to build companies that could successfully grow.
He said, when speaking of new small and medium enterprises, the nation needed to focus on building more “medium” companies with 500 to 1500 employees.
“In order to get there we need to send more boats out. We have the IP to do it,” Professor Hoj said.
Word count: 703
