HUMANS could be launched into space from Australia within a decade, the head of Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency says.
In a wide-ranging interview in today’s SA Weekend, Enrico Palermo describes a grand future for Australia in a global space industry that is predicted to be worth between $1 trillion and $3 trillion by 2030.
“Here in Australia, there’s a real potential for us to be a regional hub in the Indo-­Pacific for human spaceflight activity,” Mr Palermo said.
“We’ve got work to do on the regulations to support that but once you can safely and reliably launch payloads or satellites and other things into space … the short answer is yes.
“It’s not going to be ­tomorrow (but) I think that is something that is an opportunity for the nation.” Mr Palermo said it was ­realistic to expect humans could be launched into space from Australia by 2030.
Last week, the federal ­ government announced a $65m package to hasten the nation’s access to space.
Part of the announcement included building a “framework for human spaceflight in Australia’’.
The government will spend $32.5m to co-invest in spaceports and launch sites across Australia.
Next year, NASA will launch a rocket from a site near the Northern Territory town of Nhulunbuy, the first of what is expected to be three launches.
Federal Finance Minister Simon Birmingham backed South Australia to be at the heart of any launch program, earmarking Woomera as a possible spot.
The small town in the state’s Far North was at the heart of Australia’s space ­activities in the 1960s.
“Woomera is one of the most strategic assets Australia has, enabling us to play a big role wherever space and defence science takes us into the future,’’ Senator Birmingham said.
In South Australia, aerospace company Southern Launch wants a time extension to carry out test rocket launches from its site near Port Lincoln.
Southern Launch had approval for three test launches by the end of last year, but its first attempt in September failed when the rocket caught fire.
The plans also sparked a backlash among local environmentalists. Mr Palermo is also passionate about Australian companies being heavily ­involved in the broader industry, saying Australian companies should supply components, launching satellites, operating spaceports, communications or even space medicine.
This is where the predicted $12bn revenue and an additional 20,000 jobs will be created, he said.
“I think we’re going to hit it. I think we could even do bigger than that.” In 2019, the federal government announced a $150m program to help Australian businesses build capabilities to join NASA’s Artemis lunar program and its Moon to Mars ambition.
At the time, ASA and NASA signed a letter of intent confirming potential Australian involvement in “areas of mutual interest such as robotics, automation, and remote asset management – similar to that currently used by Australia in mining operations”. SAWEEKEND: ENRICO PALERMO, BOSS IN SPACE
CREDIT: MICHAEL McGUIRE
Word count: 488
