Apprenticeships and traineeships are building a strong workforce embedded in future industries – today
WITH the Fourth Industrial Revolution firmly established in South Australian industry, gaining a trade qualification is one of the best ways to build a career for life, a leading training expert says.
“I think there’s a recognition that Industry 4.0 isn’t necessarily all about university-qualified people – there’s a significant part of exciting challenges with automation and artificial intelligence that require tradespeople to build, service and maintain equipment that provides automation and advances in robotics,” said Peter Nolan, CEO of PEER.
The South Australian award-winning trade training organisation has a proud history of helping to build South Australia’s skilled workforce, having delivered nationally-accredited training packages to more than 55,000 students across electrical, plumbing, engineering, data communications, and refrigeration and air-conditioning.
“PEER has a 94 per cent successful completion rate,” Mr Nolan said. “Apprentices are successful before they have finished their apprenticeship because they already have pathways into earning good money and setting themselves up for life.” Mr Nolan, pictured left, welcomes recent government policy which has introduced Vocational Education and Training (VET) into schools to encourage more young people to consider traineeships and apprenticeships. “South Australia has been leading the nation with the new VET in Schools Policy,” he said.
“You can’t have advanced manufacturing industries in Australia if you’re not investing early in schools. All government schools are now required to introduce career education in Years 7-9 to make young students aware of career options and the need to make the correct subject selections to be able to get into trades.
“It’s striking a nice balance between university and VET, helping people make an informed decision on what is the best pathway for them.” In partnership with employers and industry, Year 10 students complete the 100-hour World of Work (WOW) Challenge to help them discover different careers, with a focus on trades.
“That hopefully will show astute students that if they work hard they can do VET in Years 11 and 12, gain an apprenticeship and have a fantastic career going forward,” Mr Nolan said.
“A trade can lead to anything: there are a lot of options after you complete your training. It opens doors nationally and internationally
ADL FUITURE ADELAIDE SPECIAL REPORT PART TWO: APPRENTICESHIPS & TRAINEESHIPS
Word count: 384
