THE climate war that has gripped Australian politics since the Howard era has become destructive and debilitating.
Business has been unsettled by trying to adapt to various positions from government spearheaded by a parade of prime ministers in the most unstable period in some years.
These different stopgap measures and plans have included a carbon tax, a national energy guarantee, a carbon pollution reduction scheme, an emissions reductions fund and a clean energy target.
The Greens have been the militia who have launched guerilla warfare on every government that has tried to come to a position of certainty. Political positioning has been put ahead of positive outcomes.
Instead, business shirtfronted by activist shareholders have had to adopt their own action plans, and others have moved in response to customer preferences.
The political paralysis during the climate wars has been economically destructive. It’s time to forge a sensible and sustainable solution that brings certainty.
The debilitating climate wars have preoccupied Australia for too long. As a nation, we need to move on.
But the Greens and their zealotry must be disarmed on this issue forever. Only the centre of the political spectrum can enact a plan that gives business certainty, does not cripple households via higher energy bills and addresses the needs of the environment.
We must recognise the need to grow jobs and the economy as the centrepiece for climate action.
The opportunities of tackling climate change can be seen in South Australia, which has a growing and innovative renewable energy industry. This state is well-placed to capture a significant slice of the rapidly developing hydrogen production and generation field.
The final chapter in the climate war will likely include Liberals crossing the floor to vote with Labor, rendering the Greens irrelevant.
That will be at least one win in a 15-year battle. Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Gemma Jones, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 321
