The Boston-based company, which began life as a spin-out of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, has now rolled out its LINK e-scooter sharing program to 30 cities globally and is zooming into Australia next. Its scooters, accessed through a smartphone app, will be racing across numerous local cities and regional towns before the end of the year.
“Demand for transportation is exploding worldwide,” Mr Biderman said in an interview. “Vehicles are going to have to shrink, because there is limited space on our roads and demand is only going up. Our vehicles today are 80 per cent empty space, and we need to make them smaller so we can move more people.”
Superpedestrian has spent eight years on research and development, building what its CEO described as the first and only comprehensive software operating system for a vehicle. That‘s its “special sauce” according to Mr Biderman, with the software performing 1,000 health checks every second during the electric scooter’s rides.
The company’s LINK scooters last about 100 kilometres between charges.
“We control every line of code, which allows us to build basically an immunity from failure on the vehicle. Our vehicles in real-time can detect when they’re about to fail and avert failure, which means we can transform the level of safety of scooter operations, and completely change the level of reliability of our service,” Mr Biderman said.
“We’ve spent years investing in this technology and now it’s ready, and we’re already operating in 30 cities throughout the world.”
Superpedestrian’s e-scooter brand, LINK, will be applying to launch across Melbourne and regional Victoria, Rockhampton, Adelaide, the Gold Coast, Launceston and Hobart, with more cities to come.
The company is adamant it won’t suffer the same fate as the likes of oBike and ReddyGo, whose bikes were strewn in rivers and in trees, before their parent companies were forced to exit the Australian market.
Victoria has announced an upcoming e-scooter trial, while the recently re-elected Tasmanian government gave an election commitment to changing scooter regulations to allow for a trial.
“We think we can really help alleviate some of the bigger challenges of transportation in Australia,” Mr Biderman said. ”I‘m convinced that Australia’s great weather, its vibrant communities and the fact you like to be outside make it an ideal market for us.
“If you look at Melbourne for example, it needs an ability to provide more mobility options without adding cars to the streets. The solution we offer today is just head and shoulders above what else has been offered in the city.
“We do pride ourselves on our partnerships with cities, and we want cities to think of us as engineering partners and solutions partners, we’re not here to disrupt anything or break anything then fix it later. We’re taking a different approach that we think Australian cities will appreciate, and that’s not just lip service.”
Superpedestrian raised a $US60m ($78m) funding round in December 2020 from Citi Impact Fund, OurCrowd, Winthrop Square Capital and others, and Mr Biderman said the company’s business model is significantly different to the likes of Uber, which subsidised its rides to gain market share. The company also does not hire gig workers, instead promising permanent jobs for Australia.
“There are quite a number of companies subsidising their rides, and these companies are used to losing money,” he said. ”There’s been a race to capture market share, and the incumbents declared nothing was off the table in order to capture market share.
“To me, that‘s a huge problem. You can’t approach safety as an afterthought, and that’s the direct consequence of that attitude or approach. We have spent years developing our vehicles and we’re not losing money like the others, we don’t have to subsidise as much, and we can operate across lower-income neighbourhoods in a city.
“We are first and foremost a technology company, so we will be developing new types of vehicles as we grow our offering in Australia. Our technology has applications across the board, and we will be hiring significant numbers of employees in Australia.”
Word count: 660
