Theatre performance
THIRD-YEAR USQ theatre students will put on their final performance of The Lieutenant of Inishmore in the A Block Theatre at the University.
The play tells the tale of a mad, violent Irish rebel who flies off the handle when he suspects his beloved cat has been killed.
It is as funny as it is violent.
Entry is free and the show starts at 7pm on Saturday.
Science expo
HEAD along to the Cobb and Co Museum on Sunday, when it will host a huge day of science talk, exhibits and demonstrations, designed to inspire young minds.
It included presentations on 3D printing, game programing, robotics, museum taxidermy and dinosaur hunting.
It starts at 9.30am and entry is free.
Smell the Roses
CARNIVAL of Flowers may be over, but Spring has only just begun in Toowoomba.
On Saturday, the Annual Spring Championship Rose Show will be open to the public from 10.30am-4pm, giving growers a chance to display their prize blooms.
It will be held at the Rose Cottage, State Rose Garden in Newtown Park and costs a gold coin donation to enter.
Anyone who loves roses is encouraged to attend.
Makers Markets
THOUSANDS of bespoke trinkets, handmade gowns and one-off creations will be on sale at the annual Makers Markets, held at the Mill Precinct, at 251-291 Ruthven St, on Saturday.
The market runs from 8am-1pm and promises something interesting for everyone.
Entry is free.
Roaring good time
BRING your kids or grandkids along to Walton Stores at 10am on Saturday for the launch of local author Rory H. Mather’s new book – Roary The Lion.
The event features activities, book readings and signings and the opportunity to purchase a copy of all the author’s books.
It runs until 11.15am at 476/482 Ruthven Street and entry is free.
Ride the Range
CYCLISTS will take to Toowoomba’s Picnic Point on Sunday, to participate in an epic six category ride challenge.
The festival-style event which has been running for more than a decade, is all for a good cause and raises money for charity.
Hosted by the Rotary Club of Toowoomba, there will be food and live entertainment for spectators to enjoy.
Times and registration prices vary per category, but start from $80.
To purchase visit registernow.io.
Americana and Folk Festival
SIT back and enjoy a stellar line-up of Queensland musicians when they head to Bar Wunder on Sunday, for the On Higher Ground Festival.
Proceeds go to Vietnam charity Help the Hungry.
Tickets are $25 via Eventbrite.
Giant Fun Fair
TAKE a ride on a rollercoaster or dodgem car on Saturday, when the Giant Fun Fair comes to the Oakey Showgrounds.
From 10am to 4pm, there will be lots of rides, food and games for the whole family to take part in.
The event is hosted by the Oakey Agricultural Pastoral and Rodeo Society.
Entry is free and each activity ranges from $5 to $10.
Cyber resilience clinic
LEARN how to protect yourself and how to identify threat scams at a Cyber Resilience Outreach Clinic on Saturday, at the Laidley Pioneer Village and Museum, from 11am to 2pm.
Hosted by registered charity IDCARE, the organisation is a national community support service for victims of cybercrimes, scams and identity theft.
Entry is a gold coin donation for the Pioneer Village.
Calipalooza music festival
DANCE your Saturday night away at the Toowoomba Powerhouse when an infusion of festival vibes, live music and DJs come to town.
Calipalooza will run from 7pm to 11pm.
Entry is free but registrations are essential and can be made online at kingsofcalibaby.com.
Word count: 554
