The controlled study has been designed to improve quality of life and reduce health care costs for endometriosis, which impacts about 700,000 Australians.
Barwon Health, in partnership with Deakin University, Monash Health and the University of South Australia, has received $893,981 from the Medical Research Future Fund to conduct the randomised trial over five years.
Secondary outcomes include improvement in pain, mental health, fatigue and sleep; along with improved cost-effectiveness to the health system — such as fewer hospital presentations — and within society, including fewer sick days.
Endometriosis has no cure, and causes pain and fertility difficulties. The condition means uterine tissue grows on the ovaries, fallopian tubes or tissue lining the pelvis or other body parts.
Barwon Health obstetrician gynaecologist Marilla Druitt said the study aimed to reduce the pelvic pain caused by ­endometriosis, which affects one in nine women aged between 18 and 44 in Australia.
“We already have good evidence that cognitive behavioural therapy is a great treatment for pain, and there is some early research that yoga can also decrease pain associated with endometriosis,” Dr Druitt said.
“Our healthcare system was not designed with an interdisciplinary approach in mind, and we have known for decades that a biopsychosocial approach works much better for most health conditions than a purely medical focus.
“We are seeking to address this with research, which can determine if adding a mind-based intervention, such as group psychology treatment, or adding a mind/body intervention, such as group yoga, improves quality of life for people with endometriosis and pain.
“Our control group will be those having usual ­gynaecology care, which can involve treatment with hormones and surgery, along with education about endometriosis,” she said.
There will be 258 participants recruited from Barwon Health, Monash Health and endometriosis support groups.
Participants will complete online questionnaires to measure a variety of health aspects before and after the eight-week intervention.
The study is open for participants who have a diagnosis of endometriosis and have had pain for at least six months, are at least 18 years of age, not currently pregnant, with no major physical issues/injuries, and have not recently completed a course of therapist led yoga or cognitive behaviour therapy.
To become a participant, people who qualify for the study can contact thehappistudy@deakin.edu.au
Deakin to increase support for India-based students, staff
Deakin University is anticipating a rise in support requests from its students as the COVID-19 crisis worsens in India.
The expected plea for help comes as the country recorded its highest daily death toll on Wednesday since the start of the coronavirus pandemic, with 3780 people dying in 24 hours.
Deakin’s international pro vice-chancellor John Malony said prioritising support for Indian students, and all student cohorts remains a primary focus for Deakin.
“As we continue to work through our academic year, it is pleasing to see a reduction in requests for support from students as they move back into the workforce and re-establish income security, although we anticipate another rise in requests as the situation develops in India,” Mr Malony said.
“Deakin is closely monitoring service requests and continues to liaise with the community to understand the needs of students and is ready to consider new interventions as required.”
Deakin provided $20.9 million in critical emergency grants to students experiencing hardship as a result of COVID-19 last year.
The fund received 33,420 applications – including 23,212 from international students – with Indian students representing the largest cohort of students to receive support.
The majority of the university’s Indian students who were located in Australia at the beginning of the pandemic have since remained in the country.
But the university said many suffered serious mental health issues as they struggled with losing their income, being separated from family and managing online study.
In an email to staff earlier this week, vice-chancellor professor Iain Martin said many of its students, staff and alumni would be impacted by family issues in India arising from the pandemic.
“Deakin University’s relationship with India has been a key part of who we are for more than 26 years,” Prof Martin said.
“Our Indian students and staff are an integral part of the Deakin community and we have been shocked and saddened seeing the COVID-19 crisis unfold.
“For me personally, seeing this tragedy take place in a country I feel real affinity for, and have regularly visited since spending three months in Uttar Pradesh as a medical student in the 1980s, has been so sad.”
Prof Martin said the university would be reaching out via email to all its Indian students, both onshore and offshore, to ensure they can access the university’s support.
“To our Indian community, please know that our hearts are with you,” he said.
“Deakin is extremely proud of our diverse and vibrant staff and student community – diversity being one of our core values and biggest strengths.
“You are part of our University family, and all our thoughts are with you.”
Deakin has implemented a range of welfare plans to support students overseas and in Australia.
Life made easier thanks to revolutionary device
A robotic feeding device has transformed meal times for a Highton resident after he was diagnosed with Motor Neurone Disease.
Lance Collins, 74, was diagnosed with the condition, which has no known cure, last year.
He is unable to use his arms or hands, which made him reliant on his wife Cecile, who has congenital blindness, and healthcare workers for support in everyday tasks.
Mr Collins, a retired bank clerk, taxi driver and remedial masseur, was referred to Barwon Health’s Motor Neurone Disease (MND) Clinic in March 2020, requiring assisted-living equipment and help with dressing, showering, cooking and eating.
Dining experiences for Mr Collins had become increasingly difficult, until receiving an Obi Feeding Device fromMND Victoria this year.
The breakthrough technology combines cutting-edge robotics and intuitive feet controls to give independence during meals at home and in public.
Mr Collins said learning how to use the device had been simple, with a robotic arm selecting food from one of four compartments and delivering it to him on a spoon.
“I can control it with two foot pads and it’s actually pretty easy to use,” he said.
“It’s good to pack up and take away, so we can go out for meals with a bit of planning ahead.
“It’s a good experience and a bit of an eye-opener for everyone else to see that somebody with a constraint like I have can find this technical equipment to solve a problem.”
Mr Collins said his wife had been feeding him first while dining, but the robot had brought back the simple joy of sharing a meal together.
“If you’re going out and sitting down for a meal, you don’t want to watch someone else eat first, so it’s given us back part of normal life to be able to sit down as a family, eat together, and talk about our day,” he said.
He said his occupational therapy at Barwon Health had helped determine the Obi Robotic Feeder was the most suitable device for his needs, along with other home-assistance items.
“There are so many technical advantages for people these days,” he said.
“The saying is ‘there’s no cure, but there’s care’, and I flip it around to say that I’m going to die from this, but there’s so much care available that the care I’m receiving is almost a cure.”
Mr Collins was the face of MND Victoria’s Christmas Appeal last year, with the fundraising contributing towards the purchase of the Obi Robotic Device.
MND Awareness Week will run from May 3 to 9, raising awareness and funds towards the provision of effective treatments.
Learn more at www.mnd.org.au.
Aged care provider completes Geelong jab rollout
TLC Healthcare, which has facilities in Geelong, has announced it is set to become the first residential aged care provider of its size to complete the vaccination of their 1500 residents and 2000 staff and contractors against COVID-19.
TLC said it was the only aged care provider in Australia approved by the Department of Health to directly administer the Pfizer COVID-19 vaccine to their residents, staff and contractors, as part of the Phase 1A rollout of the national vaccination program.
Across Warralily Gardens in Armstrong Creek, The Belmont in Belmont and Wallington’s Homestead Estate, about 940 residents, staff and contractors were vaccinated.
TLC said it would be administering their final 587 vaccination doses at Marina, their aged care home in Altona North, on May 3 and 4; completing their five-week program on time with no vaccine wastage.
TLC anticipated delays in the government vaccination rollout across residential aged care as early as February.
It acted quickly, providing the Department of Health with a formal proposal to administer Phase 1A of the program itself.
TLC Healthcare’s CEO, Lou Pascuzzi, said he didn’t want staff and residents to endure another winter of nervousness and trepidation regarding this virus.
“I am also proud that we were able to reach out to almost 500 high-acuity members of the local communities around our aged care homes with surplus doses,” he said.
Pascuzzi said he was proud of the 91.25 per cent uptake of the vaccine by his 3500 residents, staff and contractors.
New funding improves aged care welfare
A new injection of funding is set to help improve the mental health and wellbeing of aged care residents.
The federal government has allocated $670,000 to extend Psychological Therapy Services (PTS) into Geelong-Otway region residential aged care facilities (RACFs), such as Hesse Rural Health’s Hesse Lodge in Winchelsea.
Western Victoria Primary Health Network (WVPHN) has engaged Better Place Australia
and APMHA Healthcare Limited to deliver this service enabling greater access to mental health clinicians in the region until June 2022.
This new mental health support service will provide short-term focused (12 month) psychological therapy to residents with a diagnosable mental illness or who had attempted, or are at risk of, suicide or self-harm.
WVPHN chief executive Rowena Clift said the extension of the PTS into RACFs recognised the significant needs of older people residing in the facilities.
“To have a mental health clinician be able to visit an aged care resident makes accessing this support easier for the patients and complements the care already delivered by the aged care workforce,” she said.
Geelong Addy’s newsletters
Requests for the service can come from the resident, family and friends, aged care assessment team or RACF staff. A GP, registered nurse, psychiatrist or psychologist can then refer the resident into the program.
The PTS program is a treatment service designed to provide better access to mental health support, particularly for people who face barriers using mainstream treatment due to low income, living in a rural or remote location, or are hard to reach, such as residents in aged care.
Better Place Australia chief executive Serge Sardo said from its work in other regions, the organisation was finding that the impact of social isolation caused by COVID-19 restrictions has been very distressing for residents.
“Symptoms of anxiety and depression are increasingly being seen,” he said.
“We would urge facility managers or GPs to contact Rhonda Withers of Better Place Australia on 03 9556 5333 or via email rhonda.withers@betterplace.com.au if they are aware of
residents who would benefit from this invaluable program.”
Hesse Rural Health director of clinical services Margie McLeod said the service was very excited to be able to offer psychological services through Better Place Australia to its aged care residents.
“This is an important and much needed referral pathway,” she said.
OVER-50s LINE UP FOR JABS
Barwon Health’s community vaccination hub at the former Ford site in Norlane has opened its doors to everyone over 50, with more than 800 people immunised against coronavirus on Monday.
Rippleside couple Andrew and Sharon Caddy attended the hub together to get vaccinated.
Mr Caddy, 55, said he and his wife, 50, were motivated to get jabbed by the prospect of keeping their family and other people safe.
“I’d encourage others to go and have it done,” he said.
“It was really good, it was very well streamlined, the whole process worked really well.”
Managed and operated by Barwon Health, Geelong’s community vaccination hub has the
capacity to provide vaccines to more than 10,000 people a week.
Barwon Health chief executive Frances Diver urged the community to book an appointment, with some walk-in appointments also available.
“The COVID-19 vaccines are safe, effective and free and Barwon Health is encouraging
everyone to take the opportunity to protect yourself, your loved ones and the community,”
she said.
“The global pandemic is far from over, but we are very fortunate in Australia and Victoria
that things are under control and well managed.
“We have great freedoms that we want to protect which means we all need to take steps to stay healthy.”
Vaccination bookings are now available at the hub for people aged over 50.
To book call 1800 675 398 or go to barwonhealth.org.au/coronavirus/covid19-vaccine
On the Surf Coast, Great Ocean Road Health is taking bookings for people over 50 at its Lorne and Apollo Bay vaccination centres.
People can call Lorne on 5289 4333 or Apollo Bay on 5237 8595.
GPs across the region are also playing an important role in the rollout process.
Stay Informed Geelong Advertiser
Word count: 2115
