Independent school Westminster recognises the importance of empowering students to lead their own learning journey which connects with real-world experiences.
It builds a foundation, backed by exceptional teachers, a strong inclusive community and impressive state-of-the-art facilities.
Principal Simon Shepherd says: “We’re so much more than a school, and you can see that in the meaningful connections and lifelong networks established.” Strong academic performances are also supported by Westminster’s breadth and depth of subject choices and extra-curricular activities, as well as investment in quality pedagogy.
The school’s commitment to innovative teaching practices is evidenced in the significant number of academic staff on the path to becoming accredited Highly Accomplished and Lead Teachers (HALT).
“Our teachers are dedicated to being the best they can be and have the added support of lead pedagogy coach Angela Phillips,” he says.
Phillips feels ongoing professional development is important for teachers, especially with rapidly developing technologies.
“Teachers need to be ahead of the curve in terms of how students are interacting, learning or evolving in line with the technology at their fingertips,” she says.
Innovation is at the heart of Westminster’s co-education curriculum. The school’s world class Inquiry and Innovation Hub, which this month celebrates its first anniversary, provides a state-of-the-art STEM facility for all students.
The Inquiry and Innovation Hub Centre includes robotics and engineering equipment, an industry-standard laser cutter/printer, a specialised fashion design space with 25 industrial sewing machines and sophisticated physics, chemistry, psychology and biology spaces.
“In a state committed to the evolution of new technology and industry, it is vital that students are ready to make a meaningful contribution in South Australia and be positioned to extend this across the nation and globe,” Shepherd says.
“We’re focused on preparing students for life beyond school, developing the whole person as well as their cognitive capacity.” “The Hub has been game-changing for what we can offer students at Westminster; it has driven students’ creativity and passion,” Coding and Robotics teacher Ross Willoughby says.
“The space is inspiring and makes you excited to come to school every day, you can just see it in the students’ enthusiasm.” Westminster also recently opened a new Creative Arts and Digital Media Centre, adjacent to the Inquiry and Innovation Hub, which now completes the STEAM precinct at the school.
The next stage of Westminster’s visionary campus master plan includes a new cultural precinct, on track for completion in early 2022.
This new precinct will include new spaces for performing arts; music and drama studios; library with collaboration spaces; community cafe; 200-seat dining hall open to students and families, and an outdoor amphitheatre.
Westminster School Phone: (08) 8276 0276 Website: www.westminster.sa.edu.au
Word count: 442
