We’ve compiled a list of our best and brightest from primary schools across the Clarence Valley.
Have a look at what is being achieved by our local students – and future leaders:
Copmanhurst Public School
Eligh Reid
Year 5
Eligh is a very enthusiastic and talented sportsman. In 2021 he progressed to state level in cross country and was to compete at Homebush until Covid-19 put a stop to that. Eligh was named 11 years boys champion and champion athlete at the Clarence District Athletics Carnival this year and was to attend the Mid North Coast Athletics carnival until it too was cancelled. Eligh is in training and looking forward to resuming his athletic achievements next year.
Eligh is also a talented rugby league player who would one day like to play in the NRL – unfortunately, for Manly.
In 2021 Eligh’s short story was short-listed and published as part of the Clarence Valley Long Way Home writing competition.
Cowper Public School
Emily Rootsey
Year 6
Emily is a very creative student who especially enjoys creating artworks and singing. This year Emily’s artwork was selected in the Nagoya Sister City Art Exchange. There were more than 100 entries submitted and Emily’s artwork was 1 of 50 selected to be sent overseas as part of the exchange. Her artwork titled “Old Shack” was a watercolour painting of an old building situated not far from Cowper Public School. In exchange for Emily’s artwork we have received two beautiful artworks created by other students in Japan to display in our school.
Emily is very proud of her Indigenous background and is a valued participant in our annual NAIDOC Week activities. Emily’s goals for the future are to learn more about Indigenous languages and to create traditional artworks for others to enjoy. During her time at Cowper, Emily has been a role model for our younger students and has shown an interest in pursuing a career in early childhood teaching.
Jimmy Barnier
Year 5
Jimmy lives locally in Brushgrove and is a keen gardener. In his veggie patch at home, he grows many vegetables including shallots, carrots, onions and cucumber. He sells his fresh produce to the local community and at the Twilight Farmers Market in Grafton. Half of his earnings is invested back into his garden and the rest is split equally between himself and his mother Amber.
Jimmy has also displayed a talent for visual arts. Earlier this year Jimmy was deemed a finalist in the University of New England Acquisitive Art Prize for his artwork titled “Mystical Sunset”. His artwork was created using a pallet of warm watercolours and a silhouette of a sailboat.
Jimmy’s future goals are to become a farmer in the local area. His favourite animals are chickens and has at least 30 of them at home. Jimmy hopes to breed beef cattle and grow crops such as blueberries. He one day hopes to attend a high school that offers a comprehensive agriculture class equipped with only the best quality tractors and of course, a multitude of chickens.
Glenreagh Public School
Isaac Mayled
Year 6
Isaac has been at Glenreagh Public School since Kindergarten. He has always been a dedicated student and has many achievements as a result. Isaac is responsible and reliable and always respectful to others. Isaac has a particular interest in engineering and robotics and deserves acknowledgement as a high achieving student in STEM. Isaac has participated enthusiastically in Glenreagh’s highly successful First Lego League team since it was started four years ago. Since this time, Isaac has represented the school in four regional events and three national championships.
He has been an influential team member and in 2021 was the last remaining original team member at the school. Isaac has been a fantastic mentor and leader at our school, supporting younger students in developing their computational thinking, research and design skills as well as perseverance. Isaac’s advice to other students is to take every opportunity school gives you, because you never know where it could lead eg Lego League, dance and choir eisteddfods and after school soccer. In the future I Isaac would like to go on a fishing show adventure and travel around Australia.
Harrietta Peeka
Year 2
Harrietta is a high achieving student in all areas. She is committed to always doing her best and enthusiastic about learning. Harrietta is an absolute joy to have in the classroom. She is kind to her peers and happily mentors and supports other students. Harrietta has been the well-deserved recipient of many “Responsible Learner,” “Citizenship” and “Progress” awards. Her commitment to learning never waivers. Throughout all home learning periods Harrietta attends and actively participates in all online lesson and submits not only the assigned home learning work but additional work! Her incredible efforts to learning are worthy of recognition. Harrietta’s advice to others is to always be ready for learning and trying new things. Be joyful in other people’s achievements. Be always caring, sharing, compassionate, always focused and have good manners. In the future she is thinking of being a doctor, a vet or an artist. She hasn’t decided yet!
Iluka Public School
Emma Kerr
Year 6
Emma has been an outstanding citizen and student throughout her seven years at Iluka Public School. She has achieved numerous accolades academically however her real passion lies in the sporting arena. Emma enjoys numerous sports. Her achievements recently have included:
Selected in the NSW Country Basketball u13’s Talented Athletes Program in Sydney. Has just been selected in the U14’s NSW Country Team to Play in Bankstown in January 2022.
Played in the NSW All Schools AFL Championships in Sydney for North Coast.
Represented Lower Clarence Little Athletics in the NSW State Championships in Shot Put, Discus, Triple Jump and High Jump.
Selected in the North Coast Teams to represent at the NSW State PSSA Championships in Basketball, Cricket, Netball and Softball.
Selected in the 12 years Representative Netball Team at the NSW State Age Championships. Junior netballer of the year for L.C.N.A.
Selected in the Girls North Coastal Regional Academy of Cricket.
Emma is also a talented visual artist and is currently building a dune buggy with her dad.
“I’ve learned through sport that nothing comes easy in life,” Emma said.
“You have to really work for everything you get. Train hard, practice often and learn from as many people around you as possible. Every knock back only drives me harder, as I believe, failure is one step closer to success. Never ever give up. As long as you do the very best you can, you are already a winner.”
Jade Simon
Year 6
Jade has been an outstanding leader and role model at Iluka Public School. She is a highly motivated person and strives to improve and achieve in everything she does. Jade is an outstanding academic student and also participates at an elite level in sports. Some of Jade’s recent achievements include:
School Captain and member of the school debating team
Recipient of the Academic Excellence Award
Studying Piano Grade 4. Passed theory exam with Honours.
Athletics 2nd State High Jump, 1st Regionals High Jump and Triple Jump, 2nd Regionals Long Jump. 1st Regionals Cross Country.
Represented at Regional Level school sports in touch football, cross country, basketball and netball.
Basketball – Participated in the NSW Country Basketball u13’s Talented Athletes Program in Sydney. Played for the North Coast Academy Basketball in the Academy Games in Newcastle.
Netball – Selected in L.C.N.A Regional Team to compete at State Titles
Jade is a very well-rounded young person. She really enjoys visual arts and also loves going to the beautiful beaches in Iluka with her family.
Nymboida Public School
Thomas Bolch
Year 6
Thomas has had an amazing finish to his seven years of schooling at Nymboida Public School. This year he was elected school vice-captain and took on the extra responsibility of this role by leading in a respectful, responsible and safe manner.
He enjoys all aspects of schooling especially spelling and this is reflected in his weekly results. Thomas has a passion for helping and assisting others especially the younger students. He is a great friend to everyone, and his personality provides unique experiences each day in everyone’s lives that he encounters.
Thomas has a long and promising future ahead of him and has chosen to complete his high school years at South Grafton High School in the self-select green class.
Ahlia Hartley
Year 6
Ahlia has finished her primary school years off at Nymboida Public School with an impressive portfolio. She was elected school captain by her classmates and lead to school in a respectful, responsible and safe manner making her the perfect role model for her peers.
Ahlia has won multiple awards, trophies and had poems and stories chosen to be published. She finished the year off with the school academic excellence award for her strong academic results and commitment to her learning. Ahlia’s short story was published this year in the Long Way Home writing competition and well as he poem Rain Dance in the Write for Fun competitions. Ahlia enjoys all aspects of English and has a strong passion for art and sport.
Ahlia is a bright and committed students who has a promising future ahead of her. She has chosen to complete high school at South Grafton High School in the platinum class.
Joe Hartley
Year 5
Joe has just completed Year 5 at Nymboida Public School and is heading into Year 6 as a part of the leadership team. Joe is a consistent high achiever who gained selection into the Aurora Opportunity Class earlier this year. He has a strong passion for maths and science-based subjects and enjoys drawing, especially anime cartoons.
Joe enters year 6 next year with a promising year ahead for him. He seeks out opportunities to lead the school and represents the school and his classmates at numerous sporting and spelling events across the Clarence Valley. This bright young boy is someone to keep an eye out for as he can achieve anything he sets his mind to.
Zendrik Coffison
Year 5
Zen is a strong and determined young boy who overcomes all obstacles to achieve. He is a kind, supportive and funny students who is well liked by all. Zen is and has been a role model to the students at school for many years as he always follows the school values.
Zendrik gives everything a go and is rewarded for his commitment and effort resulting in him winning numerous sportsmanship awards. His ability to create and produce quality and engaging stories with descriptive wording, engages and captivates anyone who reads one of Zendrik’s pieces. Zendrik can and will achieve anything he sets his mind to and has been selected by his school mates to lead the school next year as their 2022 school captain.
Zarley Lubis
Year 5
Zarley started at Nymboida Public School halfway through this year and has thrived in his new school setting. He has made great friends and connections and is commended on his progress and meaningful friendships he has made.
He is gaining self-confidence when it comes to his learning and development. Zarley is displaying the school’s core values of being respectful, responsible and safe. He is a master of the Rubik’s cube and has a talent for problem solving. Zarley is off to South Australia to complete his primary schooling next year and we wish him all the best.
Ben Rutten
Year 5
Ben moved to Nymboida Public School in 2019 and has never looked back. He is a high achiever and commits to all areas of learning. He takes on extra responsibility with ease and displays the school values with pride and respect.
Ben has won many sporting awards across all areas of sport and represented our school in the soccer rep team. Ben has made it to the zone competition level for swimming and athletics. Ben continues to show this dedication in the classroom where he thrives in maths, English and creative arts. Ben is an inspiration to the younger students starting their schooling years at Nymboida and because of this, he was voted the 2022 vice school captain by his peers.
Palmers Island Public School
Keegan Bylos
Year 2
Keegan Bylos is a Year 2 student who says his determination to try his best comes from his dad’s encouragement.
Keegan is often found completing his times tables all the way down the page.
Keegan is proud of his achievements on the field too and plays basketball and soccer.
“I like the running around and dribbling the ball … and scoring,” he said.
He is encouraged by his dad who used to play basketball and soccer too.
“He wants me to stay fit and healthy... and eat my vegetables,” Keegan said.
Keegan was proud when he went to represent Palmers Island Public School in swimming at small schools, and in zone level athletics for 50 metre sprints.
He liked it because “you go really fast”.
His biggest challenge however was the cross country.
“Dad said I needed to train for it so he put me on the treadmill everyday,” he said.
“I was only 7 but I was going against 10 year olds.”
Keegan puts his success down to training and gives this simple advice. “Just train! Practice!”
Reef Wilson
Year 2
Reef has seen a lot of achievement this year. Each day he asks his teachers with a cheeky grin ‘Excuse me. Who’s the best runner in the school?” All the while knowing the answer.
Reef has improved by 10 reading levels over the course of the year which has made his teachers very proud.
Maths is also a fun topic for Reef. Currently he is learning his times tables.
Who is the best runner in the school? It is of course Reef Wilson.
He ran his heart out at cross country at school, went to small schools at Iluka to do some more running and then went to Corndale where he came 3rd in his division at Zone.
Reef said he had to “run very fast and couldn’t stop”.
As a special reward for his efforts Reef enjoyed “two fries and 10 chicken nuggets”.
When Reef grows up he will make sure he’s working on a farm somewhere on Palmers Island. He dreams of ploughing fields in a tractor, sowing seeds and then hopping in a harvester to collect his produce.
Isla Old
Year 5
Isla says she’s had a great year and is looking forward to being a school leader next year at Palmers Island Public School.
Isla enjoys piano so much that she hopes that one day she will be a piano teacher and teach students.
Recently she was awarded two firsts and a second at the eisteddfod in which she played her favourite song A Rainy Saturday.
Representing her school, she achieved a second place award for her cherry blossom painting at the Maclean Show.
She said there were “so many different ways you can use paint and materials”.
Her favourite activity at the moment is the letter writing to Caroona in Yamba. She is writing letters to her pen pal Sandra and is “very happy to get to know her”.
In the recent athletics carnival she “came 1st in a lot of events”, including high-jump.
In the cross country she came first in small schools, she made it to zone and says that she was very proud of herself.
Isla’s motto for anything is always “try your hardest”.
Notwithstanding her many talents, Isla’s dream is to become a pastry chef as she loves baking and decorating cakes. Her hot tip: “don’t melt the icing”.
St. Andrews Christian School
Joshua Eleveld
Year 2
Eight-year-old Joshua is our budding photographer. In this year’s Grafton Show, Joshua was awarded first place for a Pirate Ship with Rainbow in under 18 years category; second prize for the Boats at a Jetty; Highly Commend for Cicada Shell in Ash, and most Outstanding Exhibit.
This culminated in the receipt of Grand Champion for under 18s. Joshua has an interest in any of God’s creation and many photographs are of this. In the past, his mother and older brother have entered and succeeded in photography at the show too.
Westlawn Public School
Aliya Eastment
Year 3
Aliya is a Westlawn Public School prefect for 2021 who has demonstrated outstanding leadership qualities.
She excels academically in her cohort for English, maths, science and art.
In 2020, Aliya was invited to participate in the Clarence Science Initiative for gifted and talented students in science, mathematics and technology.
She also received the Rotary Club of Grafton: Year 5 Literacy and Numeracy Award last year.
Aliya’s interests include basketball.
In the future, she hopes to be a neurosurgeon or cardiac surgeon.
Aliya’s advice to other students is “You will achieve it if you always make sure you try your best”.
Aliya is bound for great things and we wish her all the best in her next adventure in high school.
Crystal Emerton and Matias Hinestroza
Both these students were new to our school this year, having moved to Grafton from other countries.
Crystal and Matias have successfully and diligently worked in mainstream Year 3 classes this year, achieving sound results across all key learning areas.
The impressive fact which stands these students apart for their peers, is that they are both working with English as an additional language.
Having come to Australian for Indonesia, Crystal’s first language is Indonesian.
While Matias came to Australia from Colombia and speaks Spanish as his first language.
During the Covid-19 restrictions earlier this year, Crystal featured in a film production, which promoted Covid safe messages in both languages. This was a wonderful example of her caring and thoughtful nature.
Congratulations to both students on a most successful 2021!
Neave Gorring
Year 2
Neave has been a most reliable and conscientious Year 2 student. She has achieved pleasing results across all learning areas and achieved the academic excellence award for her class this year.
Neave exemplifies our school expectations and has been a diligent mentor to her peers.
Although Neave enjoys all her subjects at school, she says she especially likes reading books in the library.
“It is relaxing and it helps me to learn new things and I enjoy writing imaginative texts, like stories,” she said.
Neave would like to study environmental science at university.
Her career ambition is to be a Park Ranger for the National Parks and Wildlife Service, like her mum because she likes animals and exploring in the forests and bush.
Neave has been learning the violin for two years at the Clarence Valley Conservatorium and performs at concerts.
She plays soccer in a team with her school friends and participates in other sports, such as swimming and gymnastics.
Yamba Public School
Joshua Carige
Year 6
As well as being vice-captain at Yamba Public School, Josh has many sporting talents.
In 2021 Josh was selected to play AFL for Mid North Coast, North Coast and NSW before finally being selected in Australian under 13 National team to play in Fiji in December 2022.
Josh is also a talented at high jumper and all-round sportsperson. He has broken multiple high jump records and has been a member many school sporting teams.
As well as being an excellent sport person Josh is exemplary student and has been a great role model for his peers always displaying the school’s core values.
Mia Turner
Year 6
Mia is one of two school captains at Yamba Public School and has fulfilled the role admirably throughout 2021.
Mia possesses admirable personal qualities that have helped to make her an exceptional leader and role model of the school's core values.
During the 2021 lockdown, Mia participated in online learning and never missed a Teams conference during the five-week lockdown period.
Throughout 2021 as school leader, Mia has continually encouraged her classmates to strive to achieve the goals they have set for themselves.
It has been a very difficult year for all students and throughout these challenges Mia has demonstrated a commitment to her leadership position and to her learning, setting a great example for others to follow.
Grace Jeffery
Year 6
Grace has always been a prolific writer who is able to paint pictures with her words.
In 2021 Grace entered the Clarence Valley’s, ‘Long Way Home’, writing competition.
Grace used the theme “look up” to write her story Look Up Little Magpie, which selected to be published in 2021 edition of Long Way Home.
Banjo Ridgway
Year 6
Banjo is one of two school captains at Yamba Public School and has fulfilled this role admirably throughout 2021 by continually demonstrating the school’s core values.
Banjo has represented the school in multiple sporting teams during his time at Yamba Public School.
Although 2021 has been a disrupted year, Banjo has still fulfilled leadership role with pride and distinction, he has led the school’s virtual assemblies and has been responsible for helping to ensure that other whole school events ran efficiently.
As well as being an exemplary student and excellent role model, Banjo enjoys developing his skills on the unicycle combining this with his juggling prowess with the ambition of perhaps joining Cirque Du Soleil.
Please note: Each school was contacted and invited to participate in this special feature with some declining the offer.
Word count: 3405
