THE battle for control of energy storage technology company 1414 Degrees is heating up, with statements in a letter sent to shareholders by former chairman Kevin Moriarty characterised as “misleading or at worst defamatory’’ by the current chairman.
Dr Moriarty is attempting to roll the board for a second time in under 12 months, with companies associated with him calling for an extraordinary general meeting to turf Dana Larson, Peter Gan and chairman Tony Sacre from the board, and replace them with himself and Ian Burdon.
Dr Moriarty said on Friday that shareholders had expressed “dismay” at the decline in the company’s value and said the sale of half of the company’s Aurora renewable energy project in South Australia to Vast Solar “virtually at cost” was a “kick in the solar plexus to our shareholders’’.
Mr Sacre, in a letter lodged with the ASX, said he wanted to address some “factual errors” Dr Moriarty was asserting. Mr Sacre says Dr Moriarty’s claims that “most of the key agreements, project activity and outcomes were initiated and negotiated under my leadership”, and that “I put the company on track to earn substantial cash flows from Aurora” were not correct.
Mr Sacre says key negotiations with Woodside were managed by himself, a former interim chief executive and former chief executive Matthew Squire, while Dr Moriarty had “no relevant involvement’’ in subsequent partner investments in the Aurora project. In relation to cash flows from the Aurora project – a large-scale hybrid solar and long-duration energy storage project near Port Augusta – while the outlook was positive, further work was required to get it to the final investment decision stage.
“The statement ‘I am concerned at the timing and motivation of the directors’ in relation to the Vast Solar transaction is misleading or at worst defamatory,’’ Mr Sacre writes.
“The company’s strategy regarding securing a partner for Aurora was communicated to the market as far back as the 2021 annual general meeting held on 25 November 2021.’’ Vast Solar acquired a half stake in the Aurora project for $2.5m in a deal announced on June 15. Mr Sacre says Dr Moriarty’s actions “appear to have been designed to disrupt and destabilise the board’’ and says key staff might leave the company if his board push succeeded. Dr Moriarty said he maintained that the Aurora deal was “a very bad deal” for shareholders, and he wouldn’t resile from his criticism. The meeting will be held on July 28.
CREDIT: TECHNOLOGY CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 416
