Local trio with vital vision for our fighters of the future THE science fiction soldiers of the future – kitted out with personal exoskeletons, electronic translators and supported by drones and robots – are about to become a reality for Australia’s armed forces.
It’s a vision that Team Sabre – a tripartite collaboration between Adelaide’s Nova Systems, BAE Systems Australia and Safran – wants to bring to life as part of its bid for the federal government’s Land 125 phase 4 Integrated Soldier System.
Sabre – the “Soldier Augmentations and Battlefield Robotic Enablers” – draws on skills honed on the ground in Afghanistan and Iraq across all three companies, and aims to ensure that the solution proposed will equip Australian soldiers with everything from body armour to batteries to ensure they are fighting fit for the 21st century.
Nova Systems capture manager Kyle Stockman, who graduated from the Australian Defence Force Academy a decade ago and served for 10 years in the ADF, said technology played an increasingly vital part on the battlefield.
The next generation of soldiers will be accompanied by robots to carry equipment, personal and platoon drones that can be deployed for ­reconnaissance and will at times be equipped with ­personal exoskeletons conferring superhuman lifting power and the ability to carry heavier loads for longer.
And with modern soldiers operating as part of a networked whole, lightweight, high-powered batteries are a necessity.
BAE business development manager John Shipp, who helped trained Iraqi security forces and served in the army’s 7th Battalion, said with technology demands adding to other vital equipment and supplies including water, food, sleeping gear and ammunition, the individual load was becoming too heavy.
“Our platoons need to be able to patrol and fight for ­extended periods without ­depending on vulnerable supply lines or carrying more weight than the human body should,” he said.
“A big part of the Integrated Soldier System is lightening this load – giving our soldiers more endurance and mobility, and hopefully a few less injuries, too.
“It’s also about making sure people with different body types can serve effectively on our front lines without breaking themselves.’’ Mr Stockman said Sabre had recently been shortlisted for the Land 125 tender. The tender is expected to be worth more than $1bn over its eight to 10-year lifetime, and is designed to supply ­soldiers with everything they need to be deployed for 72 hours without fresh supplies.
Mr Stockman said the three companies involved in Sabre had the complementary skills, and veterans with battlefield experience, to be able to supply the complex needs of the tender.
“The commonwealth is looking for an industry partner to provide really two ­aspects: you’re looking at the soldier as a platform, and everything on him, and you’re looking at the RAP, or robotic autonomous platforms,” he said.
Mr Stockman said soldiers needed protective equipment as well as systems to manage power and data, and reducing the heat that all produced was a major challenge.
The ADF had also specified particular kit such as electronic translators that could be used in the field to communicate with local residents.
On the robotic front, Mr Stockman said BAE had a lot of experience in this field, and its Loyal Wingman stealth uncrewed aircraft was a good ­example.
“(There will be) small drones that can go out ahead of the soldier and be able to identify what’s ahead of them, and in real time provide that information back to the soldier and the team … so they have a great idea what’s ahead of them, where the opposition and the friendlies are,” Mr Stockman said.
“The more information you have at hand, the greater advantage you have.’’ Unmanned ground vehicles are designed to provide rations or take injured soldiers off the field.
He said the ­operational ­experience of the participants in the Sabre team was contributing to their bid.
“We understand what the soldier cares about,” Mr Stockman said. “Anything that can reduce your physical or cognitive burden makes you able to make decisions quicker and have a competitive edge.” The request for tender for Land 425 is expected to close towards the end of this year.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 700
