SEVERAL Gold Coast schools boast students who are science and maths superstars, combining to be the best student robotics teams in Australia.
Students from Merrimac State High School and Worongary State School have qualified for the 2022 VEX World Robotics Championship to be held in Dallas, Texas, in May.
The wins are on the back of a review three years ago which recommended the state government invest in more technology for both primary and high school teachers overseeing maths, science and engineering classes.
Teams from both schools competed across two days last weekend at the 2022 Australian national finals staged at the Adelaide Convention Centre.
Merrimac High senior team retained the senior excellence award division title, and its Year 9 teams also added the middle years excellence division title to its collection.
Principal Rachel Cutajar said students and teachers were celebrating after the school was Australia’s best for both the middle and senior year divisions in STEM (technology, engineering and mathematics).
“The students are very keen to get to Dallas and we have a short time to raise funds and generate support,” Ms Cutajar said. “It’s an amazing achievement.
Merrimac State High School’s Dan Riccardo was recognised as teacher of the year for his contribution in supporting STEM education and robotics.
“It was exciting to celebrate with our partner primary schools, who work side-by-side with the high school supporting a collegial approach to STEM education,” Mr Riccardo said.
Curran Gibbes won the excellence award and tournament teamwork champions middle year division with teammate Ethan Skipsey.
“This was such an incredible experience participating at this level amongst the best students in our nation,” he said.
“I can’t wait to get to Dallas and compete.” Students from Worongary State School were announced national champions in their design award and will join their high school colleagues in the US later this year.
Principal Adam Brandt said: “We are very proud of our students and (our teacher) Mrs ­Michele Pikunic in this mom­entous achievement.
“STEM has been a focus of the school for the last five years. We have an amazing teacher and students very eager to learn.” Worongary State School is benefiting from a $350,000 STEM facilities upgrade. The facility boasts two classrooms including a makers space and robotics room to support both lego and vex robotics kits. Biggera Waters State School had earlier qualified for the world championships, securing its spot via a live remote tournament win, battling it out with teams from Western Australia.
CREDIT: PAUL WESTON
Word count: 417
