It’s not the academic outcomes of the students who take on the robotics challenges at Barker College that surprise their parents the most – it’s the soft skills they develop.
Barker College robotics co-ordinator Lael Grant says the program, which has produced world-leading results, demonstrates that robotics competitions require more than just cutting-edge science, technology, engineering and maths skills.
“Parents don’t talk about how their students have increased academically or how they’re really thriving because of the depth of knowledge,” Grant says.
“They’re always amazed by the ability of their students to prioritise, to meet their responsibilities, to ensure they accomplish outcomes they’re after.
“They’re willing to take risks because they’ve learned that you’ve built something and maybe it fails but you have the capacity to then get up and try again.” Barker’s globally significant robotics program is one of the high-profile examples of independent schools furthering their commitment to STEM. From Year 3, students can visit the dedicated Robotics Centre, as well as the dedicated science classes.
In the Senior School, students can elect to take on a specific self-directed research project. Previous projects have included controllable logic circuits, self-sustaining greenhouses and researching the pollution in tidal areas after flooding. Then there are the global competitions. The teams take part in the international FIRST Robotics Competition (FRC) and, this year, ranked sixth globally on raw scores from 4000 teams in a Covid-19 “home challenge”.
“Being able to compete on an international level, against teams that are sponsored by NASA, it’s a great achievement,” Grant says.
And they struggle to keep up with the demand, with each new year’s additional classes filling up.
In South Australia, the Association of Independent Schools worked with Swinburne University, the University of Queensland and the Queensland University of Technology to assess and integrate the use of humanoid robots in the classroom.
Across the 12 schools they found a high level of engagement with the program, with students from their first year of schooling to 15 years old, sparking interest in programming and coding.
Girls schools are also highlighting their STEM programs to buck the trend of reduced female participation.
At the Brisbane Girls Grammar School the newly opened seven-storey Science Learning Centre has boosted the capacity for STEM learning with laboratories and specialised equipment.
And at St Margaret’s Anglican Girls School, also in Brisbane, a Science Week with rocket launches, dissections, titration competitions and crossover activities with other areas such as art is aimed at adding fun and generating interest.
Since the girls school introduced a STEM elective for Years 9 and 10 in 2016, the number of students in the course has almost tripled.
Since 2018, 26 per cent more St Margaret’s students chose senior biology, there was a 15 per cent increase in chemistry, physics student numbers more than doubled, and there has been an increase of 223 per cent in the number of girls taking digital solutions.
Acting principal Karen Gorrie says STEM subjects focus on critical skills and thinking, which was an interest for many students.
“We’re in the business of producing confident and capable women and they’re looking at those sorts of careers and areas where they can really make a contribution,” she says. “It’s very future focused.”
CREDIT: Rosanne Barrett
Word count: 543
