Garry Stewart is leaving Australian Dance Theatre after 22 years of shaking up contemporary choreography, writes Jane Albert
It was with conflicting emotions that a young Sydney choreographer named Garry Stewart put himself forward to run the nation’s oldest contemporary dance company, Australian Dance Theatre. On the one hand he felt convinced that no part of him fitted the mould of those who had gone before: he didn’t behave like them, sound like them and he certainly didn’t devise dance the way they did.
On the other hand, he knew with no shred of uncertainty that he would land the job.
He was right, and in 1999 Stewart, then 37, was named the fifth artistic director of ADT, the reputable, Adelaide-based international dance company that had controversially seen various directors appointed and dismissed before him. They included Leigh Warren and Meryl Tankard, and before them Elizabeth Dalman, who suddenly found the company put into recess a decade after she had successfully founded it in 1965.
What Stewart could never have predicted at the time was that he would go on to become one of Australia’s longest-serving artistic directors; in the dance world, second only to Graeme Murphy who notched up 31 years running Sydney Dance Company.
But now, after 22 years directing a company that has become known for its innovation and constant evolution, Stewart will in December hand over the reins to young Wiradjuri dancer-choreographer Daniel Riley.
“It’s great to be leaving on my terms,” says Stewart. “You certainly don’t want to bore people and be occupying a space you don’t deserve.” Nobody could accuse him of that. Stewart has had audiences sitting up and taking notice since he took up the position. At the time he was a relatively unknown quantity, having discovered dance at age 20, after studying social work at university. He was addicted from the get-go. After being accepted into the Australian Ballet School he began dancing with companies including Expressions Dance Company (now Australasian Dance Collective) and the Queensland Ballet. In the late 90s he shifted into choreography, working with small groups in Madrid, New York and at home with SDC and Melbourne’s Chunky Move, before founding his own company Thwack! in 1998, when he began developing his individualised, high energy, super-athletic style.
When the position with ADT came up he’d eyed it with scepticism. “There was a sense of a set of rules we had to work by, particularly in dance. I felt there was a degree of conservatism or parameters that have since become much more freed up.” Stewart says his appointment, alongside that of fellow ABS graduate Gideon Obarzanek as director of Chunky Move, signalled a marked shift in the direction of Australian contemporary dance. “That was a real break with the kind of work being made at the time, which was more modernist. Gideon and I were mostly postmodernist. We laid the grounds for the type of work in existence now in Australia, along with Lucy Guerin and Phillip Adams who had just come back from New York.” Stewart arrived at ADT with an unwavering sense of self-belief that has not abated. “I’ve always had quite a conviction (about) my artistic vision … a really strong conviction about dance, and I don’t know where that came from because it didn’t necessarily exist in other areas of my life,” Stewart says.
His early work ruffled feathers with its rigorous approach to choreography that took in various forms of breaking, gymnastics, high-level yoga and contortionism – a near-defiance of gravity counterposed with dropping and rolling at high velocity.
“It hadn’t been seen in Australia before … I sought out techniques that permitted me to work with dancers in that vocabulary. We were just stumbling through and making mistakes really, it was all very exciting but there was this sense among dance educators that it was unsafe and somehow I’d kidnapped and drugged dancers and forced them to do my choreography,” Stewart chuckles.
His first ADT work, Housedance, saw his dancers abseiling down the sails of the Sydney Opera House, part of a celebration to welcome in the new millennium. An audacious concept, it was televised to a billion people worldwide. Things ramped up from there. Birdbrain (2000) was his answer to his detractors. A deconstructionist approach to the classic Swan Lake propelled by a score reflecting Stewart’s interest in beats-driven electronica, it was a resounding success, becoming the most performed contemporary dance work at the time (250 performances) during its tour of Australia, the US, Britain, Europe and Asia.
A cerebral, insatiably curious and socially and politically-driven choreographer, Stewart would go on to create 19 works of dance and six short films and video works across the next two decades, devising works not only for ADT but also for Ballet Rambert, Birmingham Royal Ballet, the Australian Ballet, Royal Flanders Ballet and SDC.
His large body of work for ADT can be loosely grouped into themes, all of them referencing diverse, often contemporary, issues.
“I’ve always been drawn to a sense of what matters in the world,” Stewart explains. The earlier works reflect his interest in the “virtuosic body”, with their highly energetic, forceful and explosive style – Birdbrain; the Helpmann award-winning The Age of Unbeauty (2002), created after September 11 as a dark meditation on the history of man’s inhumanity to man, from torture to the treatment of refugees; and Honour Bound, Stewart’s 2008 collaboration with British theatre director Nigel Jamieson that brought attention to the detention of Australian David Hicks in Guantanamo Bay. Produced by the Sydney Opera House , Honour Bound also toured internationally and was recognised as an outstanding achievement in choreography at the Australian Dance Awards.
His 2016 work, Objekt, blurs the lines between dance and visual art and explores the objectification of the human body. It has its mainstage premiere at the Adelaide Festival Centre this month.
Stewart thrives on collaborations and these partnerships have enabled him to explore new and existing technologies, works that span diverse areas of thought including robotics (Devolution, made in partnership with French Canadian roboticist Louis-Philippe Demers in 2006), neuroscience (Be Your Self, 2010, in collaboration with neurobiology consultant Professor Ian Gibbins) and architecture (Monument, a 2013 production with the Australian Ballet in consultation with Parliament House’s Italian architect, Aldo Giurgola).
Held (2005) saw him collaborate with New York dance photographer Lois Greenfield who used cutting-edge photographic and video technology to capture the dancers mid-air, the images beamed live onto a screen behind them in an exploration of the power and allure of the still image.
“I was terrified the first time we performed at Theatre de la Ville in Paris, with Held,” Stewart says. “I’d been told audiences will buy a ticket just for the opportunity to boo or walk out mid-performance, yelling at the performers.” Audiences leapt to their feet, shouting and applauding. “I think Held captured something of the zeitgeist at the time in terms of … the powerful female body. I’ve always worked with incredibly powerful women who have often defied conventional notions of women in dance.” Stewart’s latest body of work incorporates his preoccupation with nature. In Devolution, along with his collaboration with Demers, he worked with a biologist advising him on ecosystem processes, pitting the systems of the body against robotic systems. His Nature Series explores nature from various perspectives and philosophical points of view. It includes South (2019), inspired by Mawson’s journey to Antarctica, a human allegory about our current relationship to the South Pole, Antarctica and climate change; and The Beginning of Nature (2018), analysing the forces that nature asserts over humankind despite our continued efforts to see ourselves as separate from it.
His final new work for ADT, Supernature, had its world premiere at the Adelaide Festival and was, Stewart says, a shift into the area of design and choreography. He worked with a team from RMIT industrial design who created large, dominating set pieces using inflatable technology and 3D printing. With this month’s ­extended season of Objekt (making up for the theatre being only 50 per cent capacity) and a final Stewart celebration with the ­restaging of his lauded contemporary riff on Giselle, G, the second half of the year is shaping up to be busy. And that’s just how Stewart likes it.
He proudly cites a number of hallmarks during his time running the company. In 2018 he established the local International Centre for Choreography to foster and support local choreographers and dancers. His tenure also saw him create the associate artist position, held this year by Indigenous choreographer Adrianne Semmens and in 2020 by Matt Shilcock, a dance-theatre artist with brittle bone disorder.
He emphasises the extraordinary way his dancers enliven his choreography. “It’s amazing to watch dancers of this calibre take your work and utterly transform it, I’ve been gobsmacked and moved on so many occasions,” he says.
Regrets? He’s had a few, chief among them the stripping of ADT’s status as a major performing arts company, not long after he was appointed – the funding ramifications hampered ADT’s ability to tour nationally, bring in outside choreographers and expand. Despite years of negotiations and discussions with the federal government and the Australia Council, ADT was never reclassified as a major company, to Stewart’s ongoing chagrin.
“There was a perception I was new and untested, we were in Adelaide, could we adhere to the KPIs that had been set by the majors,” Stewart recalls. “It was unfortunate the board at the time didn’t fight that decision. ADT should be a major, it’s completely outrageous and a tragedy it’s not and I’ve had numerous conversations with the Australia Council over the years.” It is an issue the board plans to continue fighting under new artistic director Riley.
The negotiations are one aspect of the job Stewart won’t miss. He leaves a close-knit family of nine dancers, his long-time composer collaborator of 11 years, Brendan Woithe, and his artistic and executive team.
“It’s like finishing a relationship – there’s an emotional component but it’s been germinating for several years now and at some point I needed to make that decision,” he says.
He is gratified by Riley’s appointment as his successor. “At this juncture it’s incredibly appropriate that a First Nations artist is at the helm of ADT. Like many, I am excited to witness the impacts this development will have on our national dance landscape.” Stewart is clearly excited about his future, which includes two commissioned dance works next year, one in Europe and another in Australia, in addition to his position at Flinders University as the director of a new creative arts research centre.
“I have no desire to retire or stop,” he says. “I’m only 58 and have lots of energy and ideas. It’d be wonderful to live ­somewhere between Adelaide, Sydney and Berlin, which is the centre of contemporary dance. A fluid 21st-century approach to a career and life.” Objekt runs from September 13-19 at the Adelaide Festival Centre.
CREDIT: Jane Albert
Word count: 1835
