AUSTRALIA will take part in international space missions, make more of its own satellites and become globally recognised for its rocket launch pads by 2030, according to a plan being unveiled today.
The roadmap sets two, five and 10-year goals to grow space manufacturing. It is part of the Federal Government’s plan to modernise a range of manufacturing sectors as Australia emerges from the COVID-19 pandemic.
The plan includes $1.3bn of business grants.
CONTINUED PAGE 10 Plan to put a rocket under space sector FROM PAGE 1 The first grants under the plan, called the Modern Manufacturing Initiative, open today for the space sector.
Businesses can apply for funds to help them turn research into commercial products or to integrate into global space supply chains.
The roadmap says by 2030 Australian companies will be “able to manufacture and then launch small satellites to space, with an initial focus on low earth orbit, medium Earth orbit, geostationary equatorial orbit and beyond, using launches from Australian territory”.
Australia will be “recognised for launch infrastructure and capabilities leveraging its unique location in the southern hemisphere”, it says.
Australian-made equipment will also be used as “mission-critical subsystems in national and international missions” within 10 years, while Australian companies will be working in lucrative sectors such as robotics and automation in space, and advanced communications.
South Australia is increasingly seen as the space jobs hub of the nation, with the Australian Space Agency based at Lot Fourteen.
Adelaide companies have already manufactured satellites and start-up Southern Launch has established a rocket launch site at Koonibba, near Ceduna, and is planning another at Whalers Way on the tip of the Eyre Peninsula.
The company successfully launched two rockets last year. Queensland and the Northern Territory are also looking to establish rocket launch sites.
Federal Industry Minister Karen Andrews, pictured, said the roadmap complemented the Australian Space Agency’s efforts to grow the economy and create jobs. The government’s aim is to triple the size of Australia’s space sector to $12bn a year and create up to 20,000 extra jobs by 2030.
“From products launched into space like nano and small satellites, through to space components like sensors and communication arrays, Australia has a number of unique opportunities,” Ms Andrews said. The grants are under a co-contribution scheme. The government will pay up to half the cost of projects businesses put forward.
CREDIT: CLAIRE BICKERS
Word count: 398
