THE federal government’s shipbuilding program provides a “once in a generation” opportunity to regenerate the state and the nation’s manufacturing capacity, but we need to put aside state-based rivalries and focus on the big picture, the Fearless Conversations forum on manufacturing heard.
Flinders University pro-vice chancellor for research impact John Spoehr said the Adelaide-based submarine and frigate programs had the “scale and duration” to build a long-term strategy of industry development around.
“Shipbuilding is the driver of industrial transformation here in South Australia for the 21st century,’’ he said.
“It’s the scale and the duration of the project that makes it a game changer. “It’s of sufficient scale to be a magnet for confidence and we’re already seeing that.’’ Dr Spoehr said the challenge, for both the nation and the state, was to maximise that opportunity. “I think we’ve got a once-in- a-generation opportunity,’’ he said.
Dr Spoehr said countries around the world were trying to emulate the success of the network of more than 70 Fraunhofer institutes across Germany, which have been vital to the ongoing industrial strength of that country.
The UK’s Catapult Network, established by Innovate UK and dedicated to commercialising research, was also proving to be successful and Dr Spoehr said the Tonsley Innovation District and Lot Fourteen in SA were local models which had good momentum.
“There’s now consensus in SA, and I think nationally, that advanced manufacturing is central to the core of an economy,’’ he said. “In the 21st century, it continues to be a driver of knowledge-intensive economic growth and employment.
“What we know ... is that manufacturing is the foundation of higher living standards. What I hope we’re on the cusp of is a renaissance of manufacturing in Australia.’’ Redarc managing director Anthony Kittel said the jobs on offer in the manufacturing sector now and in the future included data science, aug­mented and virtual reality, and robotics.
“It’s a really exciting time to be joining manufacturing,’’ he said, adding part of the role of industry was to communicate the careers on offer and work with educational organisations to train the right people.
“Three years ago there was the creation of a digital apprenticeship ... That’s about connected products, connected machines ... and we need people that are interested to further their careers.
“It’s no longer do a trade and stop .... you can really build a long-term career in this industry. If you’re prepared to undergo continuous learning and develop your career, then the sky’s the limit.’’ BAE Systems maritime Australia continuous naval shipbuilding strategy director Sharon Wilson said the company had developed, with Flinders University, a Diploma in Digital Technologies.
On the broader notion of the promise of the shipbuilding sector, Ms Wilson said the federal government’s $1.3bn Modern Manufacturing Initiative was great, but attention needed to be paid to maintaining a collaborative, national vision.
“What we’d really like to see, as part of that process ... is to say that what we develop in Australia is complementary state by state, not competing state by state,” she said.
“Australia is not big enough to have competing efforts.’’ Ms Wilson said rather than arguing about who gets what slice of the pie, the conversation should be about “how do we make the pie bigger’’.
The Advertiser #FEARLESS CONVERSATIONS Flinders University SEE THE FORUM: bit.ly/fearlessmanufacturing
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 557
