Last week I was scouring through the classified ads in the North West Star when my attention was drawn to a sad "in memorium" message placed by the family of John Charles Barber.
There was an accompanying photo of the man who looked youthful, an impression confirmed in the text which showed the well-loved man died just short of his 40th birthday in 1997.
Curious to know more about the circumstances I did some research and found a mining department report which detailed how he tragically died in a Mount Isa Mines accident.
Mr Barber was operating a load haul dump in an open stope of the deep copper mine. His job was to clean up access and on a final drive he reversed the LHD into the unguarded stope. The unit fell about 125 metres to the bottom of the stope. Mr Barber died instantly.
I can't begin to comprehend his family's sorrow after he failed to come home that night. I hope it might be a small crumb of comfort that Mr Barber's name would be on the proposed Miners Memorial in the the list of the 150 or so who died while working at Mount Isa Mines over the years.
I was still thinking about the horrific circumstances of his death when I was at MineX last week listening to a Sandvik presentation on their fleet of autonomous mining vehicles.
The presenter made a valid point that humans and machines were not a good mix.
He said automation was not only safer but increased productivity and digital technology could be implemented across the entire value chain.
He showed a photo of a mining truck in northern South Australia operated by a human in a room in Adelaide over 500km away.
I thought such automation might have saved John Barber's life had it been available in 1997 but I also wondered if humans were no longer needed for mining at all.
Not a bit of it, said next speaker, Dr Sharna Glover, CEO of Imvelo Ltd, an environmental consultancy and training provider.
Contrary to the belief robotics replace jobs, Dr Glover said automation would increase jobs in Australia.
"Robots are driving an increase in demand for workers at higher-skilled end of the spectrum, with a positive impact on wages," she said.
So if automation was leading to more not less jobs, then why would any mining company do it?
"We all know we should automation purely from the safety perspective because people and machinery don't mix," she said.
Beyond that, she said automation was really good at transactional processing where as humans were not.
"We tend to throw in things to make it more interesting, so variability is the biggest problem in the industry and we have to bring it under control to improve performance," she said.
Let's hope that is true for the next generation following in the footsteps of John Charles Barber and others who paid the ultimate price for their time in the industry.
CREDIT: Derek Barry
Word count: 502
