Electric vehicles are revving up in Australia, with start-ups helping drive the local industry, which is now hitting a point of maturation.
Once considered niche and out of reach for most Aussies, electric vehicles are now becoming truly mainstream and a viable option for most buyers, while autonomous technologies are promising a whole new level of safety and reliability.
Airspeeder/Alauda Flying cars are a reality in Adelaide, where Matt Pearson, also a co-founder of nanosatellite company Fleet Space, is on a mission to create the world’s first racing series for a manned flying electric car as a catalyst for innovation, on the basis that competition accelerates progress. Pearson is the founder of Alauda, a manufacturing business set up to build the EVTOL (electric vertical takeoff and landing) vehicles, as well as Airspeeder, the racing series. Excitingly, the AlaudaMk3 – which looks like a futuristic super-sized drone – recently completed unmanned test flights in South Australia, bringing Pearson’s vision to life.
Applied EV This Melbourne firm is making a quick name for itself in autonomous electric vehicles. Established in 2015 by former General Motors and Telstra executives, Applied EV’s latest concept – the Blanc Robot – provides flexible and energy-efficient transport that is safe, low cost and has zero emissions. The robot is designed to service goods delivery, agriculture, mining, industrial and waste management, as well as passenger transport, and will be trialled by major international industry players this year. Applied EV linked in March with the Japanese advanced materials firm Teijin to develop prototype vehicles, and recently built a $2m facility in the Melbourne suburb of Bayswater North to house research and development as well as early vehicle production.
Baraja A key component of self-driving cars is LiDAR – light detection and ranging – a remote sensing method that uses laser to measure range. Sydney-based Baraja was founded by Federico Collarte and Cibby Pulikkaseril, and has now expanded to China and the US. Its innovative LiDAR product addresses the scalability and reliability issues of competing methods. In March, it announced it had raised $40m in strategic investment from Hitachi Construction Machinery, allowing it to test products in real-life scenarios. The company recently announced a partnership with leading automotive supplier Veoneer, which chose Baraja’s technology from a large field.
Chargefox Another start-up to receive backing from the Australian Renewable Energy Agency, Chargefox’s ambition is to allow modern electric vehicle drivers to confidently drive between Australia’s major cities. The company is planning to secure 21 locations for its network on major driving routes across the nation. The Australian EV charging network is still in its infancy, and companies like Chargefox will be crucial in giving the public easy access to fast-charging stations to help build widespread confidence in EVs. The company has already managed more than 290,000 EV charging sessions and someone plugs into the Chargefox network every five minutes.
Cohda Wireless Cohda Wireless – founded by Paul Alexander, Alex Grant and Lars Rasmussen – has developed connected autonomous vehicle (CAV) technology that allows vehicles to communicate with each other and with fixed roadside infrastructure, as well as vulnerable road users such as pedestrians and cyclists. Around the world, governments are recognising that autonomy requires co-operation – CAVs will need to communicate with each other and with smart city infrastructure. Led by chief executive Paul Gray and CTO Alexander, Cohda is helping to cement Australia’s position as an autonomous vehicle leader.
EVUP A Victorian EV charging start-up, EVUp was established in early 2020 and hosts a growing network of public EV charging stations across Australia and New Zealand. It tackled global projects for multinational companies in a bid to support EV uptake, which is growing rapidly. Part of parent company EVolution Group, EVUp’s team includes electrical engineers, project managers, electricians, industrial designers, data analysts and software developers who offer EV charging consultancy, design and planning.
HYPR Previously the co-founder of autonomous mobility company Zoox, which was acquired by Amazon for more than $1.6bn, Tim Kentley Klay has a new project – HYPR, an AI robotics company developing mobility systems that improve as they move.
Kentley Klay sat on the US Department of Transportation’s Advisory Committee on Automation in Transportation, and has testified before the US Senate’s Commerce Committee on the topic of innovation in automated vehicles. At the 2020 Advance Awards, he was recognised by Prime Minister Scott Morrison with the Advance Global Australian and the Advance Commercial Creative Awards.
HYPR has the backing of billionaire Andrew “Twiggy” Forrest, and Kentley Klay says his new autonomous vehicles are based on more sophisticated artificial intelligence than anything else on the market. He is also the founder of commercial animation outfit XYZ Studio and post-production studio Crayon.
Tritium One of Australia’s pioneering electric vehicle infrastructure providers, Tritium recently landed a deal with Evie Networks to install hundreds of fast chargers across the nation. The company has received federal government backing for its 50kW fast chargers, which can add 50km of range to an EV in just 10 minutes. The manufacturer has also rolled its tech out across the US and Europe. “It’s fantastic to see this scale of charging infrastructure being deployed in Australia. It will help reduce range anxiety and encourage EV uptake, which is lagging behind other developed countries,” Tritium chief executive Jane Hunter says. “We’re very pleased to see federal government support for the rollout of electric vehicle charging infrastructure.” For more innovators, see The Australian’s Innovators 100 List.
CREDIT: DAVID SWAN; TECHNOLOGY EDITOR
Word count: 914
