Construction of the new Thomas Foods International meat processing plant near Murray Bridge has reach a milestone with the first above-ground building works under way.
Measuring 10-storeys high, the automated packaging building is being erected as part of more than 1700 tonnes of steelworks earmarked for the development.
As the highest structure to be located on site, the packaging building will have capacity to store 40,000 cartons of frozen and chilled meat products within the storage and retrieval system, and will feature the latest in automation and robotics technology.
Stage one of the development will include beef processing and animal handling facilities, a beef boning room with automated packaging technology, stockyards, employee amenities and administration facilities, a wastewater treatment plant and a fully-automated carton chilling, freezing and storage systems.
Subsequent stages of the development will include the addition of sheep and lamb processing facilities and further expansion of the beef facilities.
The new facility replaces the company's original plant, destroyed by fire in January, 2018, and has been designed to service the global operations of TFI.
Thomas Foods International Group engineering manager Nekta Nicolaou said the level of visible construction activity on site would rise markedly during the coming months.
"Up until now, much of the activity on site has been focused on initial earthworks and the pouring of concrete footings and foundation," he said.
"Two large lagoons have also been excavated for our wastewater treatment plant.
"In total 180,000 cubic metres of soil is being moved around within the site as part of levelling earthworks, avoiding the need to import or export additional amounts.
RELATED:
Thomas Foods boss reflects on abattoir fire Thomas Foods marks fire anniversary "Approximately 13,500 cubic metres of concrete is being laid and from this solid base the plant is beginning to emerge from the ground up.
"This site will become a hive of activity over the months ahead as the build continues to progress as planned."
Construction and commissioning of Stage One is expected to be a 24-month process with the build expected to be finished late 2022.
Thomas Foods International has already begun recruitment of the first management positions for the Murray Bridge operations, with more jobs to be announced in the coming months with processing positions expected to open in 2022.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 400
