Preserving family harmony through succession, making wise investment decisions, and imagining a future with farm automation are just some of the topics to be explored at next month's DairySA Central Conference in Murray Bridge.
Titled 'Leading the Field' the conference continues to build on its strong reputation and success over the past seven years and will see up to 150 dairyfarmers and service providers from across the Fleurieu, Barossa, Mid-North, River & Lakes and the South-East converge for the popular day.
The event will be a welcome start to the year with farmers feeling positive about the state of the industry and looking forward to an opportunity to meet face to face.
Farmers and Service Providers are urged to book their tickets early to allow plenty of planning time.
Tickets are available directly through bit.ly/DSA_22Central_Rego.
Designed by the Central Conference Committee comprising local dairyfarmers', the program features topics including:
How to capitalise on your investments to future proof your business A 'warts and all' dive into succession challenges Building capacity of your farm business workforce, with renowned Workplace Psychologist, Ireland based Nollaig Heffernan Diversifying the farm - benefits and challenges of agritourism Industry Outlook presented by Industry Insights Analysis Manager John Droppert RELATED:
Saputo to 'streamline' Aussie operations Beston's Murraylands expansion creates regional jobs
A new addition to the program line-up will be a dedicated 'Tech Time' session delving into activity meters, robotics and autonomous tractors.
The conference will be held across two venues - with the conference at the Bridges Event Centre at the Murray Bridge Racing Club, and the post conference event 'Gather & Graze' followed by dinner to be held at the newly redeveloped Bridgeport Hotel.
During the conference breaks there are also plenty of opportunities to network with other farmers, service providers and industry members, which is a highly valued element to the day.
The DairySA Central Conference is the result of a collaborative approach between DairySA and Central region South Australian dairyfarmers' and will be held on Wednesday March 16, 9.30am at the Bridges Event Centre, Murray Bridge Racing Club and the Bridgeport Hotel Murray Bridge for dinner.
Registrations for both the conference and dinner are now open through Eventbrite at https://bit.ly/DSA_22Central_Rego
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT:
Word count: 388
