Late last year Beston Global Food Company held its inaugural supplier awards events at Hahndorf and Mount Gambier where they celebrated their best performing dairyfarmers'.
Beston's general manager Hamish Browning said the awards were an important moment for Beston in their stage of evolution.
RELATED: Robotics change the dairy game
Mr Browning said Beston's are forecasted to process 155 million litres and as they have developed, felt it was the right time to capture and demonstrate their culture through the awards.
"This was the inaugural but it was a planned series of events," he said.
"We will do this every year and lift the profile of the awards.
"The farmers took them seriously and they seemed genuinely appreciative of them.
Mr Browning said there has been a fair bit of talk amongst the dairy community since the awards and is pleased with how they were received.
"It is very much a partnership, we don't see it as a processor/buyer and farmer/supplier relationship we do really see it that we are in this together," he said.
The dairies were judged on milk quality - 50 per cent - performance - 25pc - and culture 25pc.
The diary winner of the Central Area Beston Supplier of the Year Trophy was Martin Dairies, Wall Flat while the Southern Area Beston Supplier of the year was Donnybrook Dairies, Tantanoola.
The Glen Aldridge Perpetual Trophy representing the Champion Beston Supplier Year Trophy went to to Boldview Dairies, Mt McIntyre.
RELATED: Milk pool to continue its lift in 2022
Family farm Boldview Dairies milks 450 cows, owner/operator Cheryl Liebich said it was pretty awesome to win the award.
"It was a bit of a shock but it means a lot because it means we are on the right track, she said.
"We are pretty happy with the way things are working, we have only been on this farm for just over three years, so everything is a steep learning curve for us.
"Winning that award shows we made the right move and that we are actually doing things right down here."
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: Kiara Stacey
Word count: 368
