REMO CARBONE MEQ Probe chief executive officer AGRICULTURE is one of Australia's most prominent and lucrative sectors, renowned for its top-quality produce. But climate change, the COVID-19 pandemic and digitisation is fuelling global demand for better sustainability, transparency and cost-efficiency. It is forcing Australia to follow suit if it wants to maintain its reputation as a premium produce provider.
These challenges have brought forth the rise of Agricultural technology or Agtech - using advanced technologies to drive efficiencies in agricultural production. As we move into 2022, here are five of the key trends we expect for the sector.
1. Uptick in the adoption of technology
AI, machine learning and the Internet of Things are big investments for Agtech. The new solution includes autonomous agricultural machinery, dietary supplements for animals like Asparagopsis (edible red algae), and vertical farming. The arrival of 5G is also enabling new technologies such as drones to transmit high-definition images of agricultural land, track livestock, weeds and pests. There have been trials using nanosatellites and smart sensors to monitor water tanks and wind turbines. HD videos and images track and identify objects like livestock, weeds and pests using AI, and act on commands seamlessly controlled from kilometres away.
2. Acceleration of automation
Many production plants are struggling with employment issues, unable to hire enough skilled workers. While the talent crunch may ease as borders eventually reopen, the pain point will remain. This is driving a shift towards automation and robotics, to reduce the number of people needed, particularly for manual and repetitive tasks, and gain efficiencies. Robots are already being used to milk cows as well as help with harvesting.
3. Continued diversification of markets
Almost three-quarters of what Australia produces is exported, so we have a vested interest in ensuring strong global relationships that increase awareness about the premium products we produce. Recent political tensions between China and Australia have forced the agricultural sector to focus on other markets, and they have done so successfully with risk being spread across several markets. This trend is set to continue.
4. Increased investment and funding
A good nucleus of agtech companies have set a solid foundation of innovation and profitability in Australia. Loam Bio, Agriwebb, and DAS all enjoyed successful, multimillion-dollar raisings in the past couple of years and this should serve as a boost of confidence. AgFunder, which invests in ventures transforming Australia's food and agriculture systems, estimates the global agrifood tech sector raised more than $30 billion in 2020, up 34.5 per cent on 2019.
5. Transparency and premium products
Australia's agriculture industry is also moving from simple products being exported to value-added bespoke offerings. Given processing costs are comparatively higher in Australia, our export product is held to a considerable standard that justifies our premium pricing. This trend is also being driven by increased consumer focus on quality and sustainability. Supply Chain Traceability is also key to helping prevent food fraud. Spectral analysis grading technology can also determine the quality and nutritional component of red meat such as its intramuscular fat percentage trait. It will arm retailers and consumers with more information than ever before.
Viewpoint
CREDIT: Remo Carbone
Word count: 524
