WHEN the costs of the necessities of life, like food and clothing, grow faster than pay packets of South Australians, there is something wrong with our nation.
Australians work hard. We look after each other, a feature of our national character that has come to the fore during the Covid pandemic. Yet our federal government boasts that a key feature of its economic plan is low wage growth. It is led by a Prime Minister in Scott Morrison who does not believe that even workers on the minimum wage of $20.33 an hour deserve a pay rise that would allow them to keep up with inflation.
He can’t even agree with the concept that all workers are entitled to at least the minimum wage. Today, South Australians have a chance to vote for a better future.
The choice is between a tired Liberal government that is out of puff and out of ideas, or a Labor government with a clear plan for a better future for our nation.
Labor’s plan is about a stronger economy, more jobs, greater security of work and higher wages so Australian families can get ahead.
We’ll tackle Mr Morrison’s cost-of-living crisis with cheaper child care, cheaper electricity and cheaper medicines. We have a plan to boost economic productivity, thereby assisting employers and workers while putting downward pressure on inflation.
We will end the climate wars and seize the great job-creation opportunities that will come with greater use of renewable energy.
Labor’s Powering Australia Plan, fully modelled by RepuTex and backed by business and farmers, will cut household power bills by $275 a year by 2025 and create 604,000 new jobs, five out of six of which will be in regional Australia.
We will create 20,000 new university places and 465,000 fee-free TAFE places in areas like advanced manufacturing and the care industries like nursing and aged care.
The royal commission into aged care described the care of our oldest Australians as a national disgrace. Labor has a comprehensive plan to improve care standards and ensure every nursing home in the country has a registered nurse on duty 24/7.
We’ll strengthen Medicare, making it easier to see a doctor, including by creating 50 new Medicare Urgent Care Clinics. Five of those centres will be in SA. We will also cut the maximum cost of medicines under the Pharmaceutical Benefits Scheme.
A Labor government will also fix the National Broadband Network. We’ll boost teaching standards in schools and fix Mr Morrison’s National Disability Insurance Scheme mess.
An Albanese Labor government will partner with SA Premier Peter Malinauskas and the state Labor government to deliver a major expansion of Flinders Medical Centre.
And only an Albanese Labor government will protect South Australia’s most precious water resource and deliver the 450 gigalitres of water promised to SA.
Labor will strike the right balance between the needs of local communities, farmers and the environment while upholding the letter and the spirit of the Murray Darling Basin Plan.
As we move away from the pandemic, we have a fantastic opportunity to build back stronger and to create a better future for ourselves and future generations.
Labor stands ready to lead that journey.
The choice today is between more of the same or a better future for all Australians.
LABOR LEADER ANTHONY ALBANESE
CREDIT: LABOR LEADER ANTHONY ALBANESE
Word count: 556
