INDEPENDENT schools are netting up to $7000 a student each year more than public schools from fundraising and investments alone, data reveals.
That’s without accounting for the tuition fees that hugely increase what private schools have to spend per child.
Analysis of federal MySchool figures for the biggest 25 South Australian schools in each of the public, independent and Catholic sectors shows stark differences in revenue from sources other than government funding or tuition fees.
Public Mark Oliphant College managed to raise just $24 a student in 2019, the most recent data available, in addition to $151 in fees. In the same year, independent Westminster School reported revenue of $7161 a student from “other private sources” on top of $17,094 in fees.
While Westminster said the figure was an anomaly, after a years-long fundraising drive for major building works, other independent schools also recorded significant non-conventional revenue streams.
Wilderness School raked in $4322 a student from fundraising and investments, plus $21,484 in fees, and St Peter’s College $3684, plus $23,786 in fees.
Among the 75 schools analysed, public schools received an average $208 in “other” revenue and $1117 in fees and charges from families, including charges for sports and other activities and fees from international students.
Catholic schools averaged $513 and $6295, and independents $1222 and $11,748. The state government is deep into a $1.4bn capital upgrade of public schools, mostly to accommodate moving year 7 into high schools. But independent schools have kept pace or done better, with many major capital works projects in progress or recently completed.
These include Scotch College’s $27m wellbeing and sports centre, Prince Alfred College’s $22m boarding house which opened in 2019 and Mercedes College’s $20m arts and sports precinct.
Westminster, which receives little government funding compared to other SA schools, relied on an engaged community of parents and alumni for extra funds, principal Simon Shepherd said.
Usually this amounted to less than $400 a student on top of fees, but a current $38m redevelopment had inflated this in the MySchool data. “We’ve had a huge fundraising campaign. We’ve had about a decade of squirrelling away money because we wanted to achieve something meaningful,” Mr Shepherd said. “We’ve accumulated and been able to build amazing new resources.” “Part of our strategic plan is to foster and build (alumni) relationships. The measure of the success of a school is not just how a student does in their ATAR, it’s how they’re going seven or eight years after school.” The school has a foundation to raise and manage funds. Its redevelopment includes a $16m innovation hub a commercial kitchen and fashion and robotics spaces.
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 442
