LEARNING is hitching a ride on the back of a skateboard at Adelaide’s school for vulnerable and disengaged young people.
The Specialised Assistance School for Youth (SASY) on Chesser Street is experimenting with project-based learning, as chief executive David Wild explains.
“We don’t have classrooms and we don’t have lessons, per se, we have open learning spaces where students can come in and follow their own interests,” he said.
“We build and scaffold their learning around a chosen interest area, be it skateboarding, or environmental change, or science and CSI (crime scene investigation) or even computer gaming.
“So the young person feels like that they’re engaging in the project, primarily, but it’s actually subject-based learning that underpins it.” Mr Wild said the skateboard project could easily incorporate learning in as many as six subjects, from the mathematics of budgeting to buy the skateboard, through to the technology behind building it, the laws of physics that come into play when skating it, as well as the PE or fitness that comes with that type of physical activity. And then there’s the option of exploring photography, filming and painting (multimedia, art and design), plus English to write up a report.
Student Angelina Barrage, 19, is proud of her completed original skateboard design and has positive feelings about the school’s influence on her life.
“I like SASY because the world is black and white and SASY brings colour and character,” she said.
A new $1.1m centre launched on Thursday, housing equipment such as 3D printers, hi-tech robotics and videography gear, will support the school’s transition to project-based learning.
The fee-free, independent, not-for-profit, alternative secondary education space for vulnerable and disengaged young people is the only SA school in the New Tech Network, which was originally conceived in the US.
New Tech Network Australia director Brad Scanlon says he wants to change the way students see school, so they see learning as a useful tool rather than simply something that they have to do.
“Where teachers can integrate their subjects, make them streamlined and make them more realistic, that’s how the world operates and that’s what we really aim for,” he said. “But schools still do teach the curriculum. They still do teach the fundamentals of mathematics and English and all of the other subjects.”
CREDIT: CLARE PEDDIE
Word count: 385
