Cutting-edge facilities and learning spaces at Westminster School are opening up vibrant educational opportunities for students at the exceptional Early Learning to Year 12 campus.
“In a state committed to the evolution of new technology and creativity, it is vital students are ready to make a meaningful contribution in SA and beyond,” says principal Simon Shepherd. “Our visionary learning facilities offer students the edge to make a successful transition into life beyond school.” Students and teachers this term are settling into two new precincts at the Marion campus: the three-storey Inquiry and Innovation Hub – complete with its hi-tech science and engineering laboratories and design and technology suites – and the Carter Wing, hosting arts and digital media studios with editing and creative spaces for film, radio and digital projects, as well as being home to STRETCH, the school’s academic support and learning extension program.
Darren McLachlan, Curriculum Leader of Technologies, says both new facilities house the latest technology but are also designed to be open, airy spaces where students can socialise and study together, to encourage collaboration and learning across science, technology, engineering, the arts and maths.
“We have a very integrated curriculum that helps students think creatively and develop new problem-solving skills through collaboration across subjects,” Mr McLachlan says. “With these resources, staff and facilities, it means we can create a more authentic and connected learning experience.” The students are making the most of the bright new buildings. Year 12 student, Ryan Braitling works in the digital communications suite, where he can interact with others on different projects. “The space and equipment we have to experiment and problem solve is such a blessing,” he says.
For Jack Grundy, also in Year 12, the facilities have opened up new areas of technical creativity. “I am doing entrepreneurial engineering and I am making a three-part cable management system for a desk,” Jack says. “I’m designing them in CAD-based software at the moment. I ran a test and was able to 3D-print three things at the same time and collect it two hours later.” Other students have access to food science and fashion design technology, robotics and engineering equipment, performance spaces and media labs on the site.
The school’s planned cultural centre, scheduled for completion in early 2022, will only add to that breadth of facilities, with a safe study space for students after school hours and a 250-seat dining room to allow families to share a meal. A new library, support and teaching spaces are also planned.
“We are preparing our students for the real world so we have to give them authentic, real-world experiences in an environment that’s open to change,” Mr McLachlan says. “These facilities and our educators teach students the skills to problem-solve in a critical and creative way, to test their ideas and themselves and arrive at unique solutions for the future.” Contact Westminster School 1-23 Alison Ave, Marion, (08) 8276 0276 westminster.school
Word count: 488
