Automation, robotics, AI and VR will no doubt change how students learn. Equipping kids today for a job that may not exist yet is the challenge facing schools globally.
How schools approach this challenge can determine students’ readiness for new careers in a world racing to automate and reduce costs – something that weighs heavily on the minds of the educators at Southern Vales Christian College.
Some jobs that young students aspire to will have changed over their time in school. The Foundation for Young Australians’ recent report suggests that 60 per cent of Australian students are currently training for jobs that will no longer be needed in the near future. The report uncovered that approximately 44 per cent of jobs will be automated in the next 10 years and nearly 70 per cent of TAFE and university students were studying for jobs that would be automated.
Preparing students for this future is what sets Southern Vales Christian College apart. Their approach gives students a firm foundation by focusing on essential questions through the UbD (Understanding by Design) methodology.
UbD is an educational planning approach based on backward design, the practice of looking at the outcomes in order to design curriculum units, performance assessments, and classroom instruction. UbD focuses on teaching to achieve understanding. Students at Southern Vales Christian College develop a deeper understanding of concepts and skill sets, and hone the ability to transfer their skills and knowledge in new contexts – culminating in the ability to achieve outcomes, preparing them for the jobs of tomorrow.
The school believes learning is an event to celebrate rather than simply the passing of a unit. Student-led conferences and learning showcases bring family and friends together to celebrate progress and new ideas.
“The implementation of Understanding by Design has been instrumental in transforming the culture of Southern Vales Christian College into a rigorous, academic school that is driven by students’ conceptual understanding and ability to think critically,” principal Jenny Nelson says.
“This has enabled us to harness innovative practices such as Student Agency, philosophy, Visible Thinking, and Design Thinking among many others, which have inspired teachers to deeply understand their own practice.” The school also has a strong focus on student wellbeing. Students who feel cared for are more engaged in the classroom. Future careers built on solid foundations are key to successful and happy students.
Southern Vales Christian College Phone: (08) 8488 0000 Website: svcc.sa.edu.au
Word count: 405
