3 Rs are old school, as kids study aquaculture, wine and drones
FROM beekeeping to blacksmithing, cyber security to sheep shearing, South Australian school students are being exposed to an array of subjects like never before.
This weekend the Sunday Mail explores some of the coolest, most unusual as well as weird, wonderful and wacky subjects on offer for the state’s primary and secondary school students. Across the private, public and Catholic sectors there are chances to study winemaking, astronomy, aquaculture, agribusiness, equine therapy, women’s AFL, Lego robotics, cosplay, chickens, archery, karate, sailing, surfing, golf and even drone flying.
At all-girls’ Walford Anglican School, students have the opportunity to attain qualifications that will gain them access to French universities.
“Unique to Walford is the Diplome d’Etudes en Langue Francaise (DELF) and Diplome d’Approfondi de Langue Francaise (DALF) … official qualifications awarded by the French Ministry of Education to certify the competency of candidates from outside France in the French Language – magnifique,” the school’s director of development, Karin Dunsford, said.
At coeducational Catholic school Saint Ignatius’ College one of the oldest classical languages is being taught.
“We believe Saint Ignatius’ College is now the only school in SA running Latin,” senior years prefect of studies Eloise Sheridan said.
Increasingly, schools across the public and private sectors are looking to partner with businesses and not-for-profit organisations to expose students to real-life working scenarios, problem-solving and opportunities.
Heathfield High School is one of five state government “entrepreneurial schools” – the others are Seaton, Murray Brid­ge, Mt Gambier and Banksia Park – established since 2019.
“Students use problem, project and inquiry-based learning to explore and understand what it means to be entrepreneurial and the mindsets required to be successful,” Heathfield assistant principal Luke Northcote said.
“We also collaborate with businesses … such as Jurlique, Pink Sun Productions and Aus­Ocean. With AusOcean we are building and launching an ocean rig to monitor our local oceans (while) with Pink Sun productions we are working on a cinematic project to take Heathfield to a wider audience,” he said.
There were more than 2000 enrolments in entrepreneurial subjects and programs across the five schools in 2020, according to the Education Department. Education Minister John Gardner said the goal was “to promote entrepreneurial mind­sets in students” who may want to start their own businesses.
“We are fostering the next generation of innovators and job creators. Our children and young people are our future business leaders and we must ensure they have the education, training and skills to turn their aspirations into reality right here in SA,” he said. EDITORIAL PAGE 61
CREDIT: REBECCA BAKER
Word count: 437
