Friends think outside box and reap rewards
A FORMER florist and a once hairdresser – who decided on a major career changes – have now helped hundreds of vulnerable young people finish their high school education.
Maria La Pietra and Rosie Stavrou, who have been friends since primary school, helped found the Specialised Assistance School for Youth (SASY), with Nic Pellegrini, in 2016.
Success for the little-known independent school on Chesser Street, in the CBD, has been rapid.
It grew from 18 to 130 students in its first three years and, next year, will have 160 students.
This week, the school has opened a $1.1m state-of-the-art centre for science, technology, engineering, art and maths (STEAM) centre.
The three-storey centre, in a converted heritage building, houses leading-edge equipment, including 3D printers, drones and hi-tech robotics tools.
The school, which does not charge fees, is the first of its type in SA. It supports students in Years 8 to 12 who have trauma and mental-health issues, aiming to reignite their interest in education through holistic learning practices that focus on wellbeing.
“Every student deserves an education, people they feel safe with and a place where they feel they belong,” Ms La Pietra said. “To see the students come in quite anxious and then, by the time they leave, they are like different people and they are really proud of themselves.” Ms La Pietra never finished high school herself, choosing instead to take up a career in hairdressing.
“But I always wanted to help young people,” she said.
After having her children, she completed a Bachelor of Social Science. It was while working in a private practice as a counsellor for young people that she noticed a gap in their support, and decided to start a registered training organisation.
She roped in her long-time friend, Mrs Stavrou, a former florist, as well as Mr Pellegrini.
At the suggestion of the Education Department, the RTO morphed into SASY. The founders are proud of their achievements.
“I feel very proud; it’s good to be a part of these students’ lives,” Mrs Stavrou said.
The trio all still work at the school.
Jai Chapman, who has just finished Year 12, said the school “saved my life”. “I don’t know where I would be without the place – it’s given me purpose,” Mr Chapman said.
Mr Chapman, 26, will next year be employed by the school as a youth worker. SASY chief executive David Wild said the school was funded solely from state and federal government money.
“Unfortunately, research reveals disengagement from school often turns into an intergenerational pattern, which is why it’s important to provide a place to re-engage these students,” Mr Wild said. “Our new STEAM building will not only enhance students’ ability to learn but, importantly, help reignite their interest in education.”
CREDIT: RACHEL MOORE
Word count: 472
