#FEARLESS CONVERSATIONS STUDENTS are being forced to choose specialised courses and subjects too early, robbing multibillion-dollar projects of graduates matching their needs, a defence forum has heard.
The Fearless Conversations forum, run by The Advertiser and Flinders University, yesterday heard Australia needed a more activist defence industry policy to match graduates to projects, rather than relying on the market.
BAE Systems maritime Australia managing director Craig Lockhart, who is leading the Adelaide-based design and construction of nine frigates for the navy, said industry and academic institutions needed to collaborate, rather than compete, in a national framework.
“Then we can get bigger bang for buck. We can get more students with greater focus that serves the needs and the demand profile of our program over the next 30 years,” Mr Lockhart said.
“At the moment, we’re being robbed of that because there is too much competition and choice. We are diluting the portfolio, which denies us the right people at the right time.” Defence SA chief executive Richard Price said: “I do worry that we are actually narrowing people too early in our education system at the moment.” He suggested this was throughout the education process, saying: “The number of courses is confusing – it confuses me the number of choices people have.” A former Saab executive, Mr Price said the most valuable engineers had a broad spectrum of skills and “could turn their minds to lots of different things and weren’t frightened to take up new challenges”.
Nova Systems group chief executive officer Jim McDowell – previously head of Premier Steven Marshall’s department – said Defence needed to exert its market power as the only Australian buyer of defence equipment.
“This is a national security question as well. It’s not just an economic or an industry efficiency, it’s a national security question, because that’s the role of Defence, to provide national security,” he said.
“We in Australia need to get our minds around a much more activist industrial policy, as opposed to the market all sorting it out.” Mr McDowell, who was BAE Systems Australia’s CEO from 2001-2011, said closed international borders stopping the importation of skilled workers meant the existing workforce’s productivity needed to be improved.
Mr Lockhart said a challenge was influencing teachers and parents in the new generation of technologies presented by advanced manufacturing in shipbuilding, space, cyber and other sectors.
“It’s the ability to change attitudes at the early phases that says: ‘You don’t have to make those choices now’. But making a choice in science and technology and engineering, and maths is a good foundation discipline,” he said.
Flinders University Professor in Innovation Giselle Giselle Rampersad said skills development was a national pipeline, involving a partnership with industry, schools and universities.Professor Rampersad said equipping schools and teachers with technology built confidence to give young people opportunities. Schools offering computer-aided design had tended to generate more students coming to Flinders to study engineering, she said.
“Yes, we need more engineers nationally, for defence and for other sectors, engineering, IT, cyber security, but also in the social sciences, for project management and so forth,” she said. “So by equipping teachers with CAD electronics, robotics, then they could understand what engineering may be about and actually, at least open that option to students that may not be exposed before,” Professor Rampersad said.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 558
