Slow-move subs A lot has been said about the French submarine contract, its cancellation and the subsequent AUKUS announcement.
Many have said it’s time to move on and so we are.
It is worth remembering, however, the deal was signed six years ago and with eighteen months of nuclear sub planning we are in fact seven and a half years behind in our defence capability.
Can we really afford another eight years of this Government’s poor decision making?
I know, you don’t have to remind me “it’s the Australian way”, TONY CURTIS, Prospect Eradicating virus IN regard to a supposed medical experiment (Covid-19 injection) some people will not have. I, with other young children at school, must have been guinea pigs about 80 years ago when we were given a cocktail of drugs against all of the nasties around at that time.
I am glad we were given it. Because it has been proven by the fact a lot of those nasties have, over time, been ­eradicated.
I would suggest people have more chance of being hit while driving a car than being affected by any repercussions from the vaccination.
I have had two of them and am looking forward to when I can get the booster shot.
Because, after the injections that I had, plus the three Covid tests that came back negative, I wish to stay that way.
So I say to the selfish ones around: remember, it is not only your own life that you are taking a chance with.
If you get vaccinated, then the inconvenience to our lives that we are putting up with at present can probably come to an end sooner.
RAY HUMPHREY, Golden Grove Tawdry TV SO Senator Alex Antic has had a go at the ABC for its “tawdry” coverage of Australians’ sex lives, including glorification of polyamory and “open relationships” (“Aunty is getting in the swing”, The Advertiser, Wednesday).
Maybe the Senator should look more closely at the commercial channels, where there seems to be a proliferation of soft-porn programs filled with bare-chested, muscled up males and women with implants and Botox.
Program titles I am referring to include The Bachelor, The Bachelorette, Love Island, Married At First Sight, Big Brother, Desperate Housewives, etc.
It’s a voyeur’s paradise.
ROB ROYAL, Clare Helping Afghans WHAT a harrowing sight watching Afghan families selling their daughters to survive.
The UN and international community should hang their collective heads in shame. Although it’s hard to trust the Taliban, we must release funds to its new government so this barbaric practice can be stopped.
DAVID BISHOP, South Plympton Education gap WHAT a contrast in two articles published in The Advertiser on Wednesday. In Niger, Africa, at least 26 little children died when the only affordable shelter, straw classrooms, burnt down (“Children burnt alive in straw classrooms”).
In April, 20 more died in a similar incident.
Meanwhile, we continue to report on our independent schools netting up to $7000 a student each year more than public schools without accounting for tuition fees, (“Schools’ recipe for raising revenue”).
No child should have to give up their life, or fight for it in such an agonising way, trying to acquire an education while we read of a $16m educational “innovations hub” for one school in SA.
I don’t dispute that we have overseas-aid programs on both political and educational ­levels.
But try explaining to any of these children the success of your school commercial kitchen, fashion-innovation program, or robotics space.
A robot can never hold and comfort a dying child.
It takes little children to show us where our true priorities should be. And its not in the grandiose. PAMELA TYLER, Northgate
Word count: 615
