HIDDEN TALENTS LACKING WORK EXPERIENCE DOES NOT MEAN YOU’RE WITHOUT TRANSFERABLE ABILITIES ABOUT half of Aussie jobseekers feel uncomfortable talking about their skills – but they may have more than they realise, and be gaining them in ways they least expect.
New research from employment marketplace SEEK reveals 47 per cent of the workforce lack confidence when promoting their skill set to a potential employer, and this is particularly common (58 per cent) among Australians aged 18 to 24.
The main reason (37 per cent of all workers) is a worry that highlighting their expertise is “showing off” but SEEK head of customer insights and strategy Elyssia Clark says people should not stress about appearing overconfident or arrogant.
“Employers will be impressed by calm confidence and are eager to hear about your transferable skills,” she says. “By identifying specific examples that demonstrate how you’ve developed and honed each skill, as well as noting how each skill would benefit the new organisation, you will be able to sell these skills as positive and relevant experiences and impress potential employers.” Even jobseekers with little work experience can point to skills they have gained in everyday activities that can be applied in the workplace.
Clark and human skills organisation Maxme’s founder and chief executive, Renata Sguario, offer their advice: PLAYING SPORTS Being part of a team can teach invaluable life lessons and skills that apply to almost any job, Clark says.
“Demonstrating the ability to work well with others is one of the most important transferable skills to have at your disposal, showcasing a combination of communication, leadership, diversity, tolerance, support and goal setting,” she says.
“All things that will give you a competitive edge when job hunting.” CREATING TIKTOK VIDEOS Clark says creating social media content that captures the attention of followers takes skill and showcasing content to prospective employers not only helps a jobseeker’s personality shine through but allows them to sell their skills in a more “out of the box” way. “Producing TikTok videos, for example, offers a great avenue for connection and self-expression, and is the ultimate way to demonstrate your skills in creativity,” she says.
“It’s also a great way to show what you can bring to the table in a visual way and can help you stand out from the competition.” Gen Z media brand Centennial Beauty recently hired two employees who chose to submit TikTok videos along with their job application.
Co-founder Lauren Meisner says this influenced their choice as the organisation values workers who are open to trying new things and who take initiative. “Quite a few applicants decided to do it. They took it upon themselves but we have decided we are going to ask people to make TikToks from now on,” she says.
Co-founder Jordyn Christensen says the approach proved that the applicants did not just have the technical ability to create videos but were also comfortable talking on camera and sharing their opinion.
PLAYING VIDEO GAMES Sguario says a healthy amount of gaming can hone positive skills, such as empathy, communication, strategic thinking and the ability to work in teams to achieve outcomes and support others.
“For young people that get involved in designing and coding games or even robotics, it teaches important technical and digital skills and concepts like delivering small increments of value quickly and failing fast,” she says. “All of these … are definitely transferable and valuable in the workplace.” VOLUNTEERING Volunteer work can broaden a jobseeker’s experience and exposure to life, as well as “supercharge” existing talents, according to Clark.
“There are a huge range of skills you can acquire through volunteering (including) leadership, communication, problem solving and adaptability and time management, which are highly regarded by employers and will give you a competitive edge.” STUDYING Education helps jobseekers gain technical, industry-specific skills but it also hones general skills that are in demand across roles.
“Whatever you choose to study, you’ll also gain a wealth of transferable skills, which will not only make you a better student but also equip you for work in almost any industry or profession,” Clark says.
“These include critical thinking, time management and organisation, to name a few, so don’t undersell them on your CV or in an interview.”
Transferable skills checklist Organisational and execution skills Time management Research and analytics Administration and clerical Financial management Sales and marketing Planning Technology or digital literacy Communication skills Listening Writing Speaking face to face People skills Co-operation Empathy Patience Flexibility Leadership skills Prioritisation and delegation Critical thinking and problem solving Coaching, mentoring and feedback Source: Seek career advice
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 767
