Children got up close and personal with snakes and lizards, looked on in awe at fire displays and had fun with slime at the Ceduna Science Fair on Sunday.
The Science Collective brought a mixture of engaging demonstrations, workshops and hands-on activities to the Ceduna Memorial Hall, with about 500 people in attendance.
Attendees were able to witness and engage with a number of different aspects of science, from wildlife to robotics, chemistry and natural resources, as well as talk about careers in science.
The Science Collective then visited Ceduna Area School on Monday and Crossways Lutheran School on Tuesday, plus the Ceduna Youth Hub.
The event was inspired by the Aboriginal Drug and Alcohol Council's AOD Youth and Wellbeing coordinator Michelle Cholodniuk and she said it was fantastic.
"We had a great turnout on Sunday and we had kids that stayed all day - that was amazing on its own.
"They kept asking questions and we had young girls talking to Nitro Nat and Trinity from Animals Anonymous asking how they get involved in doing what they do.
"They can read books, but there is not usually anybody to ask questions to about the gateway to university."
She said the feedback received from the fair was overwhelmingly positive.
"The kids loved it and people want it again," Ms Cholodniuk said.
"People have rang me and thanked me for bringing it here, they said it was amazing to have in such a small town and are hoping to do it again next year."
The Science Collective director Brian Haddy was impressed with the response from the community.
"We reckon we got about 30 per cent of Ceduna there on the day - we think that is a record, we've never got that sort of number in the 60 shows I've run," he said.
"We were very pleased to bring it to Ceduna and share what we have shared to other towns.
"With the strength of the response, we want to come back every year."
Mr Haddy said events like the fair do not replace teaching of science, but can be the "spike of enthusiasm and interest" and expose students to something they may not have seen previously.
"It is not just about having fun, it was also hoping to get that light bulb moment that 'this is science and it is not what I thought it was', and that science is all around us and about asking questions.
"We are very pleased with how it all went, a lot of the kids stayed the whole day doing everything we offered.
"We are grateful to Michelle as without her help it would have been hard to make the connection to this area from Adelaide, and now we can come back bigger and better next year."
Ms Cholodniuk said the event ticked all the boxes she hoped for and more.
"The kids are getting exposure of something they may never have had before, and it was an opportunity to look at different areas."
CREDIT: Luca Cetta
Word count: 504
