Telstra, TPG and Optus have splurged more than $600m on valuable millimetre wave spectrum, after a month-long auction process held by the government’s Australian Communications and Media Authority came to an end on Friday.
The country’s biggest telco Telstra secured 1000MHz in the 26GHz spectrum auction, paying $277m for capacity it says will reinforce its 5G leadership and support its rollout across larger capital cities and regional areas.
Chief executive Andrew Penn said the mmWave spectrum would dramatically increase capacity and speeds for customers.
Telstra paid the most for its spectrum and will pay the government in five equal annual instalments.
“First and foremost, getting the quantum of the spectrum is the most important bit. And we got a full gigahertz,” Mr Penn said.
“[The government] put competition limits on how much you could get. We were limited to getting a gigahertz, and that’s fine, because that’s just what we needed.
“Our competitors … got less than that, so it immediately puts you at a spectrum advantage.” Optus picked up 800MHz of 26GHz spectrum in Sydney, Melbourne, Brisbane, Perth, Adelaide, Canberra and a range of regional areas, and 600MHz in Hobart and Margaret River in Western Australia, for $226.2m.
TPG secured holdings in all available licence areas in the 26GHz band auction for $108.2m, acquiring 400MHz millimetre wave 5G spectrum licences for Sydney, Melbourne and Perth, and 600MHz licenses for Brisbane and all other metropolitan and regional areas.
Millimetre wave 5G is short-range, high-frequency 5G that is faster than current technologies.
The licences won at auction will come into force later this year for a 15-year term ending in 2036.
The iPhone 12 in Australia doesn’t support mmWave spectrum, but future models are likely to.
“For enterprise, this spectrum could support remote-controlled automation — for example, robotics in a warehouse or factory — or the creation of a secured private network at a university campus to support thousands of students and academics,” Optus Networks managing director Lambo Kanagaratnam said.
“In short, we are armed with the ability to build and expand our 5G network and deliver on the future of 5G in the home, office or on-the-go.” TPG CEO Inaki Berroeta said the auction result was a good outcome for shareholders. “Millimetre wave spectrum is one of the final pieces of our 5G network and will take 5G services to the next level in terms of speeds, performance and capability.
“The spectrum will enable us to deliver 5G fixed wireless services as a compelling NBN alternative, and it will also benefit mobile services in high foot-traffic areas such as CBDs.” Mr Penn said Telstra would have a 5G advantage in high-density areas including stadiums, CBDs and enterprises. “It’s an interesting concept that the government raises money through spectrum licences,” he said. “It could have been more, so I guess it’s good in that sense.
“But I think what’s important is that spectrum pricing has been driven higher, and what that does is it sucks capital out of the industry, which is not able to be invested in the capital equipment that you need. We’ve got to get that balance right, but I don’t have a particular complaint here.” Smaller telcos Dense Air Australia and Pentanet also bought spectrum. “This outcome represents another significant milestone for 5G in Australia. The successful allocation of this spectrum will support high-speed communications services in metropolitan cities and major regional centres throughout Australia,” ACMA chair Nerida O’Loughlin said.
“This auction is one among a suite of licensing approaches that the ACMA has introduced in the 26GHz and 28GHz bands to encourage a wide range of innovative communications uses.“ Telstra shares were flat at $3.41, while shares in TPG were up 0.86 per cent to $5.84 at the close of trade on Friday.
CREDIT: David Swan
Word count: 631
