The Hamilton and Alexandra College is extremely proud of its strong history and the traditional values it holds.
In 2022 the school will celebrate 150 years of providing a quality, independent education to thousands of well-rounded, successful and confident individuals.
The school draws students from Victoria, South Australia, NSW, Tasmania, and overseas.
Students at The Hamilton and Alexandra College follow their passions while excelling in their studies.
The small student cohort is a distinct advantage at The Hamilton and Alexandra College.
With small class sizes, every student receives individual support and attention.
Students are known by their name and their interests; from aviation to equestrian, music, performance, robotics, visual art, outdoor education and sport.
Year 11 student Micaela Meyer and her parents moved from South Africa to Australia. She started at the college as a boarder in 2019, and is a keen sportswoman, plays hockey, basketball, football and cricket and is interested in pursuing a career in psychiatry.
The Hamilton and Alexandra College principal Andrew Hirst said Micaela was a great example of students taking hold of the opportunities available at the school and excelling in all areas that build life skills.
"The Hamilton and Alexandra College prides itself on being a school where students 'learn life'," Dr Hirst said.
"We recognise the value of exploring a range of interests, from sport to performance, music to visual design, equestrian to aviation.
"We are a small school, with 500 students split across the junior and senior schools and a vibrant boarding house community.
"I see our size as our greatest strength."
Dr Hirst said every student was known by their interests, character strengths and was able to receive individual support in their areas of growth.
"Education is about developing self-esteem, and to do that you need to step out of your comfort zone," Dr Hirst said.
"We seek the best for and from every student and support them to follow their passions.
"The staff at the college are continually impressed by the students and how they throw themselves into new opportunities to challenge themselves and build towards their confident futures."
The Hamilton and Alexandra College open morning is being held on Thursday, March 11, at 9:30am.
Families are welcome to tour the senior school, junior school, boarding house and equestrian centre.
The Hamilton and Alexandra College is currently offering Year 7 and 8 boarding students a 100 per cent reduction off boarding fees for one year for 2021, 2022 and 2023.
Conditions apply.
Visit www.hamiltoncollege.vic.edu.au
CREDIT:
Word count: 415
