EDs in crisis LIKE many I’m sure, I was appalled by the photo of a seriously ill woman needing surgery lying on the cold waiting room floor of the Flinders Medical Centre emergency department.
Our health system was once something I would talk about with pride to people when I was overseas. Not any more.
Premier Peter Malinauskas promised to fix the ramping crisis before the election.
About three months in, we have had our worst week ever in the hospital emergency departments.
Over to you, Premier.
DAVID HALL, Tranmere Bigger hospital IT seems to me the new RAH should have been 50 per cent bigger to accommodate the growth in necessary aged care and emergency situations.
It has been a drastic planning mistake and will live with us for many years to come.
Ambulance ramping may not have occurred and we may have avoided the traumas experienced by the patients in need of emergency treatment.
JOHN LLOYD, Kensington Park Top education I AM not sure in which decades Jim Wilson got his education, but I was educated in the ’70s and ’80s (Battle for minds”, The Advertiser, Thursday).
My high school years were in a Catholic college. I can tell you now, Jim, that students of all ages are much better educated today. They have better access to information thanks to various online services.
They make better judgments today than we did in the past.
Also, the educators of today aren’t the horrible, screaming, violent teachers I had.
Jim, you should try listening to what today’s educators and students have to say. You might be pleasantly surprised by what you hear.
This is the 21st century. Students need more than just the “three Rs”. They need an environment to learn and develop their minds that is safe from racism, bigotry and bullying.
They are the future of our nation.
DAVID KLEMENT, Christie Downs Petrol panels WITH all the hype about renewables, and the state government still offering rebates to install solar panels, there is one perfect spot for panels being completely ignored.
Every service station in South Australia has a massive flat roof going to waste. Why does every servo not have its roof covered in solar panels? Surely they would save money on high running costs.
Why is it not mandatory for businesses with ideal locations for solar panels to be fitted? Is it too much like common sense?
MICHAEL PRUS, Fairview Park Climate cult I WAS interested to read Michael McGuire’s article regarding the problems facing the state’s power generation (“Private power struggle has turned into public concern”, The Advertiser, Tuesday).
It is interesting to note that, should anyone suggest using South Australian coal to provide energy for us, as Sir Thomas Playford did, there would be a major outcry.
Climate change cultists would be chaining themselves to power station gates and blockading mines.
I still have vivid memories of former premier Jay Weatherill standing in his hard hat welcoming the end of the Port Augusta power station. He was saying how much better off we’d be without it.
Then came Elon Musk’s big battery. We are told renewables are the cheapest form of energy, but there have been massive taxpayer subsidies.
Perhaps it’s time our leaders concentrated on providing cheap, reliable baseload power for residents and businesses. Get back to grassroots concerns instead of virtue signalling to the rest of the world.
CRAIG HARTLAND, Valley View Air dispersed SO far the Australian energy debate has produced enough hot air to keep us all warm for this winter, at least.
D. G. PITT, Plympton Essential services I CAN see no good reason to privatise any essential services. Electricity, water and public transport are surely basic essentials for human life. Nobody should have their power cut off because they don’t have enough money to pay for it.
It is criminal that electricity can be denied because the owners won’t make enough profit. I know we are a capitalist society, but a line has to be drawn to enable decent lives for the population.
MAUREEN GOLDIE, Blackwood Joining forces RATHER than blaming renewable energy for exorbitant costs, people should be urging political co-operation to fix the inherited energy policy mess perpetuated by climate wars under past Coalition leadership.
Sun, wind and hydro power are not subject to international price volatility, as fossil fuels are.
The election of an Albanese government is a golden opportunity to heed the advice of experts and work together on short- and long-term solutions.
JIM ALLEN, Adelaide Justice wisdom HOW unfortunate that journalist Lisa Wilkinson did not take the advice of Chief Justice Lucy McCallum regarding the trial of former Liberal staffer Bruce Lehrmann, who is charged with sexually assaulting Brittany Higgins.
Chief Justice McCallum said: “Statements made before a criminal trial that might interfere with the administration of justice and, in particular, the ability of an accused man to have a fair trial risk falling in the classification of contempt.” All people deserve the presumption of innocence. MARY-ANNE HIGGINS, Rose Park
Word count: 837
