THE FUTURE OF EVERYTHING - PART TWO: AUTONOMOUS CARS DRIVERLESS CARS GAINING SPEED
WEAVING through Tokyo streets with no driver, screeching around race tracks with no one inside, and replacing seats with beds and dashboards with screens – self-driving cars are promising a transport revolution.
And that is in addition to augmented reality windscreens, virtual in-car concierges, and options to add autonomous driving to existing cars with cameras and a subscription.
While the technology might seem ripped from science fiction, experts say self-driving cars are becoming more practical, with options coming to market this year.
And they argue Australian roads and regulations will not only be ready for these futuristic vehicles but Australian innovation will power many of their features.
News Corp investigated this emerging technology as part of a six-part series on our tech-fuelled future, The Future of Everything, that will look at innovations from flying cars to business meetings using holograms. Autonomous vehicles first captured the attention of Australians a decade ago, iMove Cooperative Research Centre managing director Ian Christensen said, and inspired self-driving experiments across Australia. Autonomous and connected cars have since driven through every state and territory, in trials including a 3000km journey through regional Victoria, a trial of 350 connected cars in Queensland, and self-driving shuttle buses in New South Wales, South Australia, Tasmania and Western Australia.
Mr Christensen said the public’s reaction to driverless buses had been overwhelming.
“Most of the responses have been, ‘can’t they go a bit faster?’ The community is now pushing for better performance which is a good mindset to bring to the introduction of autonomous vehicles,” he said.
But ensuring self-driving cars are as safe – if not safer – than human drivers has been a harder task than many researchers and companies expected. Despite huge investments, no company has mastered level five autonomy in which human drivers are no longer required to touch the steering wheel. Efforts to test the technology in the US have shown huge potential but one by Uber also resulted in the death of a pedestrian.
“Self-driving vehicles can operate but how do you make sure that they operate in 100 per cent of situations; that they respond to kids kicking footballs or don’t get confused between a wombat and a log?” Mr Christensen asked. “That’s a hard task and that’s delayed their wider rollout.” Intel’s automated driving firm MobileEye revealed at January’s Consumer Electronics Show that its technology allowed self-driving cars to navigate busy Tokyo streets and drive on German roads with no lane markings. South Australian firm Cohda Wireless has also been tapped to take part in a German autonomous car trial, while Canberra-based Seeing Machines has started recruiting families to test “seat occupancy detection” technology.
QUT’s Centre for Robotics also signed a two-year, $271,000 deal with Ford to investigate how to improve self-driving car cameras and LIDAR to recognise their environment.
>> The Future of Everything will continue next Friday, revealing what happened to the promise of flying taxis THE FUTURE OF EVERYTHING - NEXT WEEK: AIR TRAVEL
CREDIT: Jennifer Dudley-Nicholson National Technology Editor
Word count: 514
