A shortage of motor mechanics and forecasts of rising demand make the field more enticing Now is an ideal time to become a motor mechanic or technician, as employers struggle to find enough skilled workers to keep up with demand.
The National Skills Commission’s Skill Priority List for 2021 reveals a national shortage of general motor mechanics, diesel motor mechanics and motorcycle mechanics, and forecasts “moderate” future growth for each.
Meanwhile, the Commission’s Vacancy Report shows about 3400 positions for motor mechanics were being advertised in August, up from about 2500 two years earlier.
Drake International Australia Victorian trades manager Matt Vido says skilled diesel mechanics and mechanical technicians can expect strong career growth opportunities, and earning potential now and in the future. “Covid has caused major supply chain issues and the need and reliance on freight services has never been as critical,” he says.
“There is pressure on logistics and distribution chains to ensure their trucks and equipment are maintained and fit for duty.
“At Drake Trades & Technical, our recruitment teams have seen a spike in demand specifically for heavy diesel mechanics over the last 18 months. Further, with immigration at an all-time low, Australia’s talent pool is struggling to meet job demand and is now facing skill shortages for mechanically trained professionals.” Vido says truck, bus and heavy vehicle technicians in particular have a solid career path ahead of them.
“Whilst many industries have been taken over by robotics or automation, this is not the case for heavy diesel mechanics and mechanical technicians,” he says.
“Trucks one day may be able to drive themselves but they most certainly cannot fix themselves.” To help secure a future pipeline of talent, truck and bus company Scania is currently looking for 20 new apprentices to become qualified heavy truck and bus technicians.
Scania regional executive manager for NSW and Victoria Sean Corby says the company is “leading the shift towards sustainable transport solutions” so there is also the opportunity to work on heavy-duty hybrid-electric vehicles. “The shift toward e-mobility and digitalisation of systems means our apprentices and technicians will be at the cutting edge of heavy-duty transport technology,” he says.
“The transport industry is in transition and is looking for smart candidates who are keen to learn a trade that will stand them in good stead throughout their working lives.” Each year, Scania takes on about 20 first-year apprentices at its company-owned capital city branches.
These are in Pinkenba and Richlands in Queensland; Campbelfield, Laverton and Dandenong in Victoria; Wingfield in South Australia; Kewdale in Western Australia; and Prestons in NSW – and a new location is opening soon in Eastern Creek, NSW.
In 2022, Scania is also looking for apprentices to join its parts interpreter teams. The Skills Priority List predicts “strong” future growth in this line of work, although there is not currently a shortage of candidates.
“This is ideal for someone who wants to work in a workshop environment but may not want to be on the tools,” Corby says.
Scania Australia people and culture director Michele Gellatly says the company has 59 apprentices across its network, as well as 14 that have qualified early. “Australia is still suffering a skills shortage, which is good news for ­apprentices, as it means there will be plenty of opportunities for them to find work throughout their careers,” she says.
Word count: 561
