Penola Catholic College Emu Plains offers a quality education for students of the Greater Penrith and Blue Mountains area in Years 7-12.
The newly transformed college is named in the spirit of Australia's first saint - Mary Mackillop - and her first school in Penola, South Australia.
Learning and wellbeing programs focus on building the key values of courage, compassion, integrity and hope in all aspects of school life.
The college is also part of the prestigious P-TECH program that allows students to work in close partnership with Price Waterhouse Coopers (PwC), Telstra and IBM.
Students are given the opportunity to develop skills in design thinking, problem solving and critical thinking in application to cyber security, robotics, artificial intelligence and communication capabilities.
Principal Leader Tania Cairns said students have developed strong employment capabilities and credentials that will assist their resume and post-school options.
"Learning at Penola is dynamic and aims to build student confidence to learn through inquiry developing skills to be both an independent and collaborative learner," Ms Cairns said.
"Our staff are highly professional and experienced in the most effective ways to engage and empower students to learn and develop their capabilities. The contemporary Learning Spaces are open, light filled and inspire innovative and creative learning experiences."
The college's Learning Framework, starting in Year 7, enables students to work in close partnership with teachers and build their learning capabilities and self-confidence.
Stage 5 and 6 students learn to be independent and self-motivated in their learning achieving success.
Ms Cairns said the college's 2020 HSC results were "absolutely outstanding", making Penola the premier college for HSC success in the Greater Penrith and Blue Mountains region.
"The college supports students in their HSC learning pathway by ensuring each student has a HSC Learning Coach to guide and mentor them throughout the challenging HSC journey," she said.
"At Penola we have high expectations, believe in our students and support each student with a HSC Learning Coach to achieve their absolute best enabling them to flourish in the career choices post-school.
"As Principal Leader of this fine college, I am extremely proud of the high quality learning environment that is delivered, along with the focus of building positive relationships and wellbeing and the development of core values that empower students to be responsible and respectful global citizens," Ms Cairns said.
CREDIT:
Word count: 389
