Building a future: $30 million for chickpea research facility The announcement for Tamworth yesterday of $30 million for chickpea research comes on the back of hundreds of millions of dollars in federal investment for agriculture and agriculture related infrastructure in the New England.
Chickpeas are a crucial protein source for vegetarian diets. India is a huge buyer because of the vegetarian requirements of the Hindu religion and its 830 million adherents.
Hummus in your kebab is made from chickpeas. Chickpeas are also unfortunately responsible for burning down numerous headers in a hot, dry harvest.
Tamworth has been successful in becoming the national site for chickpea research with the announcement on Friday of a five-year collaboration between the Australian Government-supported, Grains Research and Development Corporation (GRDC) and the NSW DPI.
This partnership will maintain and drive expansion in new chickpea growing regions across Australia. It will complement the BASF agricultural research station which was opened near Dungowan in 2015.
Of course, there is the massive investment in water infrastructure. From Chaffey Dam to the recent quarter of a billion-dollar grant for Dungowan Dam and let's not forget the massive win to bring the APVMA to Armidale.
What you may not have seen is the $2.85 million Australian Government grant that we achieved and I announced for agricultural robotics in weed control in farming.
This is at UNE, which itself receives about a quarter of a billion dollars a year in federal funding.
A large sector of the university is dedicated to agriculture and agriculture related studies.
Other areas we're delivering investment in this sector include saleyard upgrades across the New England, water infrastructure subsidies for on-farm dams, the wild dog control program, drought support such as farm household allowance, grants for community groups including Tamworth Regional Landcare Association and Oz Fish Limited to control weeds and improve fish stocks in the Peel and Macdonald catchments, as well as 45 new and upgrade mobile phone towers in places such as Spring Ridge, Walcha Road or Moonan Flat, all in the more remote agricultural areas of the New England.
Our nation should build the Bradfield Scheme.
I am fighting for this. Bringing water from North Queensland to the west of Queensland and on to NSW and South Australia will grow chickpeas and other agricultural exports to help feed the world's near eight billion population.
Agriculture is a noble profession.
It does not take advantage of addictions or weaknesses. It does not fill the house with pointless chattels.
It does not charge for flash offices housing an atmosphere that seeks to justify excessive fees for what are often pretty standard services.
Agriculture feeds and clothes people. It stops people from starving and I am proud of the role that we in the New England play in this noble task.
Member for New England Barnaby Joyce
CREDIT:
Word count: 472
