Sarah Moran and her colleagues run Girl Geek Academy, which teaches women and girls how to use tech, develop games and become expert at 3D printing and robotics.
So when these "tech-loving geeks" needed to buy a company car for school visits and workshops they opted for an electric Nissan Leaf, which cost $50,000 plus GST.
"We're all for the transition [away from fossil fuels], it makes technology and economic sense," said Ms Moran. But when Victoria announced a tax of 2.5 cents per kilometre on electric cars in the lead-up to the state budget, after a similar announcement by South Australia, they were confused: "There's some great stuff in the budget but this gave me whiplash," said Ms Moran.
"There are more EVs on the market, the price is coming down, why would you want to stop that momentum?' Electric vehicle owners such as those at Girl Geek Academy could be charged more in tax than for some high-end hybrid vehicles, according to the Electric Vehicle Council, the national body that represents the electric vehicle industry.
For example, a $108,000 Lexus RX450H hybrid would attract a fee of $2.41 for every 100 kilometres travelled. In comparison, Ms Moran's Nissan Leaf would be charged $2.50 per 100 kilometres.
New research from the University of Queensland surveyed 500 households about their attitudes towards road user charges and found that if a 2.5 cent per kilometre EV tax was introduced, consumers saw this as being equivalent to a $4500 increase in the vehicle's purchase price.
This acts as a disincentive, research author Dr Jake Whitehead said. "You get less uptake because there's a decrease in their willingness to pay this higher price."
Introducing EV taxes risked pushing Australia "even further into the wilderness" in terms of uptake, and was incompatible with mid-century net zero emission targets, he said. Mr Whitehead made it clear his preliminary findings had not been peer-reviewed, but he had released them given public interest on the topic this week. Behyad Jafari, the chief executive of the Electric Vehicle Council, said Australia would be the only country to tax EV users, while comparable countries offered generous incentives.
The tax announcement was already having an impact on the market, he said, with the council hearing from dealerships that EV orders had been cancelled.
VicRoads estimates the average distance travelled by light passenger vehicles is 13,100 kilometres a year, meaning that on average EV owners would pay an additional $330 a year, and plug-in hybrid electric vehicle owners would pay $260 a year. A Victorian government spokesperson said the tax would ensure all motorists paid a fair share for record investments in the roads network.
CREDIT: Miki Perkins | Environment reporter
Word count: 450
