Victor Harbor will be abuzz with science-based fun, when the Victor Harbor Science Fair rolls into town on Sunday, June 27.
Appealing particularly to families with primary school aged children, the event will bring together more than 15 scientific organisations to delight and ignite young minds.
The event is being run by 'the science collective', who specialise in organising science fairs in regional South Australia. This is the first time they have held a fair in Victor Harbor and science collective director Brian Haddy said "we're pretty excited about it".
"We'll have about 15 to 20 organisations coming to town for the day and they range from organisations involved in robotics to native animals to natural sciences."
The fair will be held at the Victor Harbor Recreation Centre in two sessions between 9am - 12.30pm and 1pm - 4.30pm. Tickets are available via: thesciencecollective.com at a cost of $6 for kids, $12 for adults or $29 for a family of four.
"We have been lucky to receive the support of the City of Victor Harbor and also Inspiring SA and can't wait to delight the region," Mr Haddy said.
"During each session we will also run four unique science shows. These include The Singing Paleontologist, Dr Quark's Scientific Circus Show, Nitro Nat's Chemistry Spectacular and Animals Anonymous with their native animal show.
"We think kids don't get enough exposure to science and sometimes they think science is this really hard subject only done by old men in white coats.
"What we do with these science fairs is show kids that science is just understanding the world around us... it's just a way of asking questions."
Mr Haddy said he hoped the fair would attract families from near and far and become an annual event in Victor Harbor.
"Apart from many locals, we are also hoping that people from out of town will come for a half day science fair and then spend the other half of the day enjoying the sights and experiences of Victor Harbor."
City of Victor Harbor Mayor Moira Jenkins was treated to an advance look at Nitro Nat's Chemistry Spectacular this week and said she was excited to host the event.
"Science is part of our everyday life, it's fun and it's something that we all should be learning more about," Dr Jenkins said.
"This is a great way of young people learning more about science in a fun and safe environment.
"Young people want more things to do and this event as an ongoing thing in Victor Harbor is both fun for young people and also provides learning opportunities."
Nitro Nat said it was important kids were encouraged to pursue science.
"I fell in love with science as a five-year-old. I was obsessed with dinosaurs and I never grew out of it," she said.
"At university I studied geology... and while I was at uni I had the opportunity to work with different museums in Queensland and dig up dinosaurs and mega fauna which was my childhood dream.
"I absolutely love inspiring young minds into science. I'm dyslexic and while I sometimes struggled with uni, I think of it as a superpower because of my unique way of explaining science.
"I know the concepts, but I use different words to explain things, which is perfect for not just children, but adults as well to understand difficult scientific concepts.
"My goal is to spread the seeds of the scientists of our future and get people interested and asking questions and discovering why things happen."
CREDIT: Jack Manning
Word count: 591
