Its boss Heather Campbell works from a simple base: “The earth is getting warmer. It’s never too late to stop it. Everyone just has to act and get on and do things.”
Like many in the carbon club Campbell’s focus is a long way from Canberra “unless it does something which intimidates our work”.
Big business, she said, “understands the world is changing and sees both risks and opportunities — some politicians see fear of change”.
Even in states which are seen at the front of the debate, Bush Heritage is fighting proposed legislation that limits conservation on pastoral land.
The organisation was started 31 years ago by Bob Brown, who acquired land in Tasmania to stop it being used for wood chipping.
Its land under management has since grown to 1.3 million hectares in 36 reserves throughout Australia, including desert and rainforest areas.
The fund has a full-time staff of 140 people, 1000 volunteers and 35,000 donors and supporters.
One of Campbell’s jobs is to raise $23m each year. This comes from a diverse group of donors including Leonardo DiCaprio’s Earth Alliance, the Macquarie Foundation, the Myer family and VW.
Last year $28m was raised and $24.6m spent on projects.
Carbon revenue is small right now but Campbell figures it will help Bush Heritage manage the land.
Campbell was born and bred on the South Island of New Zealand. Her family were bush battlers who came to Australia in 1981 when she was 14. “I grew up on the land and saw glaciers and the extremes of nature and I want my own children to see the wonders of the big landscape,” she says.
Her family settled first in the south of WA, farming dairy, beef and pigs, but she moved around, attending five different high schools.
A self-confessed maths nerd, she studied what was then called agricultural engineering, which she loved because you got to do the ag courses as well as the problem-solving engineering ones.
Her mum Helen’s dad was an aeronautical engineer with Air New Zealand and her father Jim’s dad was a blacksmith, so it was an eclectic background.
Campbell’s first job in the late 1980s was with Amcor. She stayed for 17 years doing a variety of jobs on the packaging and paper side of the business.
When Don Macfarlane became boss he backed her push into environmental engineering, which became her life’s focus.
But it wasn’t all about the environment, and under then divisional manager (now CEO) Ron Delia she also worked on corporate restructuring jobs to learn the business.
In 2006 she moved to Ridley where she ended up being an operating boss of its salt operations outside Adelaide.
Both jobs needed some internal reconciliation, the latter because it took up so much land. But salt is a natural result of evaporating sea water and the early ponds are host to abundant bird life.
Campbell said “every time I changed jobs I wanted to go somewhere to make a difference”. Another move was to Stephen Sewell at Federation Centres to head his community and corporate sustainability function.
In between she ran Landcare in Sydney which had a small head office with 24 staff but managed 6000 community groups around the country.
The move to Federation was in part because she was wanting to spend more time with her family in Melbourne. The next move was to the CSIRO to work on safety for scientists.
“CSIRO was full of exceedingly bright people working on cool science which can change the world but they don’t always think about their own safety, ”she said.
Bush Heritage presented a chance to put a lot of her past into one organisation.
The not-for-profit manages land around the country. By way of example in a property in the Nardoo Hills outside Bendigo it is working with CSIRO on crops with seeds coming from warmer climates in northern NSW, to see how they fare in cooler climates.
The logic being the earth is getting warmer, so why not get vegetation that can cope.
On Hamelin Station outside Shark Bay in WA it is working with Climate Friendly on a regeneration carbon project.
The work is as simple as better fences to keep the sheep and goats out to let the vegetation regrow.
Further south, Bush Heritage is planting a million seeds and seedlings to revegetate land on the fringe of the wheat belt.
It supports the Southwest Botanical Province which is one of only 34 biodiversity hot spots recognised globally, making up just 0.23 per cent of the Earth’s land surface and supporting 12.6 per cent of its rare and threatened flora.
Bush Heritage researchers are working with the CSIRO to look at rules for carbon farming projects where, for example, credits are given for trees two metres high.
All landowners can benefit.
Campbell delighted in recounting tales of visiting a nest box in a Bush Heritage regeneration project where she found a pygmy possum the size of her hand with two babies.
“Our world is precious and I want all generations to be able to engage, learn and be enriched by Australia’s amazing landscapes with their unique flora, fauna and cultural significance, ”she said.
Spectrum bonanza
Treasurer John Frydenberg would be pleased with the $647.6m he’ll collect thanks to ACMA’s millimetre wave spectrum auction unveiled on Friday.
The spectrum is absolute beachfront property at the forefront of 5G technology and allows for functions for which devices are yet to be made.
The spectrum is low latency and high capacity, which to the layman means signals travel short distances.
It is aimed more at the commercial market than homes.
Telstra spent the most at $276.6m but Optus, which spent $226.2m, arguably got the top property known as the golden gigahertz.
TPG paid $108.2m but the surprise was Britain’s Dense Air which paid $28.7m for spectrum that many thought would end up with TPG.
The spectrum is for mobile digital communication in applications like autonomous cars and robotics.
Singapore, by way of example, is using the spectrum for port logistics to manage land transport meeting ship arrivals and speed up turnaround times.
Word count: 980
