After decades in the doldrums, Australia's space industry is taking off
SOME TIME IN THE NEXT FEW DAYS – the vagaries of Florida weather permitting – SpaceX rocket CRS-23 will launch from Cape Canaveral bound for the International Space Station. Among the cargo on board will be a small black cube, roughly the size of half a loaf of bread. That cube, the Binar-1 satellite, is the inaugural iteration of what in just a few short years could be the first Australian spacecraft to orbit the moon.
“The first one will be a great first step… to get on the map in terms of putting stuff into orbit, but it’s what happens in the next 18 months that will mark it out as different,” says Phil Bland, the director of Curtin University’s Space Science and Technology Centre in WA and the head of the team behind Binar-1.
After arriving at the ISS, Binar-1 will be shot from an airlock out into an orbit around Earth. Its mission is a humble one – to test whether the locally designed and built satellite’s systems work as they are supposed to. Tweaks from Binar-1 will be incorporated into six more Binar satellites due for launch over the next 18 months. They will be tossed out of the ISS in batches of three, representing the first ever “constellation” of Australian satellites in space, as the Curtin team continues to refine and improve Binar’s performance. If it all goes to plan, in just a few years’ time, all those tests will culminate in a future Binar satellite going into orbit around the moon, where it will scan the surface for ice deposits and other resources that could one day help support the development of a permanent base station.
Binar – the Noongar word for “Fireball” – is one of a host of space-bound efforts underway across Australia amid a worldwide resurgence in space research and exploration. The same Curtin University team behind Binar-1 is also involved in AROSE (Australian Remote Operations for Space and Earth), a consortium formed earlier this year that has received a government grant to work on the design of a lunar rover that could be on the moon later this decade. Adelaide-based Fleet Space Technologies earlier this year launched its sixth nanosatellite aboard SpaceX’s Falcon 9 rocket as part of its efforts to build a satellite communications network. On June 30 Sydney start-up Spiral Blue launched one of its prototype computers into orbit on board Virgin’s LauncherOne rocket. Also in June, Queensland’s Gilmour Space Technologies announced it had raised $61m from global investors to progress its plans to build and launch low-cost rockets and satellites. The CSIRO is investigating how to create water and fuel on the moon and is developing “spider robots” for doing maintenance on space vehicles. And Australian researchers are running experiments on the International Space Station on anti-cancer drugs to see how they react in different environments.
James Brown is chief executive of the Space Industry Association of Australia, the industry body that lobbied for decades for the creation of a dedicated Australian Space Agency.
It got its wish three years ago, and Brown says space activity in Australia has taken off since then. To date, Australia has flown 15 spacecraft in history. The Binar project alone will add another seven in the next 18 months. “The number of Australian satellites that have gone into orbit in the last six months alone is leaps and bounds from where we’ve been in the last few decades,” he says. “It’s now to the point where you can have a university team put a formation of satellites into space and fly them and start to train the people we’re going to need to run this industry. These guys are building the workforce that we’ll need in the next decade or so.” The Binar program will show that Australia is capable of designing and building its own satellites, and there’s more than patriotism at stake. Project manager Ben Hartig believes his team will be able to build 10 of its satellites for the price of one bought from an international company. “There’s a lot of activity in Australia right now and everyone’s very excited, but a large amount of that is still heavily dependent on foreign companies. That means we are sending money out of the country when we could be building jobs here,” he says. “With each launch we will be trying to build up more capability and more reliability, and we’re manufactured locally wherever possible so that we maintain the ability to keep making more of them.” While NASA’s plan to once again send astronauts to the moon (and ultimately on to Mars) is attracting attention, the new era of space is primarily a function of the incredible improvements in the capacity and cost of technology. Computing power today is far greater, and its cost much cheaper, than that which underpinned the Apollo missions of the ’60s and early ’70s. On top of that, the rise of commercial rocket companies such as Elon Musk’s SpaceX and Jeff Bezos’ Blue Origin have helped bring down the cost of getting into space. Combined, those factors mean space is no longer just for deep-pocketed superpowers; it is now within reach of much smaller nations.
While Australia played a key supporting role in the Apollo missions – the Woomera missile range regularly hosted rocket launches throughout that era, and in 1967 Australia launched its first homegrown satellite from Woomera using a leftover American rocket – the space industry here subsequently fell quiet. “We had this amazing heritage, mostly based around Woomera, and then we deliberately decided for the better part of three decades not to invest in space,” Brown says.
Despite that neglect, Australia – through good fortune as much as design – is still well-placed to be part of the New Space era.
The geography and climate of the Outback make it a good analog for developing the systems that will need to endure similar challenges on Mars. The Curtin team behind Binar also developed the Desert Fireball Network, a series of 50-odd autonomous cameras stretching from Perth to Broken Hill that scan the sky for fireballs – incoming meteorites – and track their trajectory, allowing researchers to both recover the fallen space rocks and then (using Perth’s Pawsey Supercomputing Centre) work out just where in the solar system they originated.
The Desert Fireball Network’s systems will also be used in Binar-1, giving the Curtin team confidence it will be able to endure the stresses of space. An important objective of the first satellite is to see how it withstands the extreme vibrations of launch. Hartig is confident Binar-1 will be up to the task, given the systems have already endured the rigours of corrugated outback roads.
Beyond the dedicated research within universities, Australia has also quietly become one of the most active places in the world for the mass deployment of autonomous vehicles. If you want to play with enormous robots, the Pilbara is the place to do it. Huge fleets of automated mine trucks are in action at the region’s iron ore mines. Remote-controlled drill rigs make their way across mines, carrying out the repetitive work of drilling into ore bodies, while even some of the huge ore trains that snake across the Pilbara have automated. And in the deep waters off the Pilbara coast, remote-operated submersibles carry out complex work on underwater oil and gas infrastructure while receiving commands over satellite.
We’ve all seen images of NASA control rooms packed with scientists overseeing a single rocket or rover. In the Perth headquarters of mining and oil and gas companies, it’s common to see a single operator overseeing dozens of pieces of equipment in action more than 1500km away in the Pilbara. It’s something, Hartig says, that has caught the eye of NASA and every other serious space organisation on the planet. “We’ve got all this experience and expertise around how to do big things remotely,” he says. “Just the amount of data that flows across the country from the Pilbara is incredible. It’s something that everyone’s looking into.” Those technologies and systems with potential crossover into the space industry have already helped Australia attract interest from international groups with an eye on space. Dutch multinational Fugro is one of the world’s biggest geo-data consultants, and also operates those unmanned submersibles working in WA’s oil and gas sector. The company chose Perth as the site of its SpAARC (Space Automation, Artificial Intelligence and Robotics Control) facility, which will spearhead its efforts in testing and controlling remote and autonomous operations in space and other harsh environments. Fugro, along with oil and gas producer Woodside Petroleum, was among the founding partners in the AROSE consortium now designing the lunar rover.
SpAARC director Samuel Forbes says the “amazing” tailwind behind space globally makes it an ideal time to develop space capabilities in WA. “As a business that’s had its history in Australia focused on deploying robotic systems in the subsea environment, we built a unique capability to backhaul a lot of data from remote assets in an oil and gas context to a central location, and monitor and manage those assets over a satellite link,” he says, adding that there are obvious parallels in the commercial space sector.
Australia’s space potential was also reinforced when aerospace giant Lockheed Martin chose Melbourne as the site for STELaRLab (Science, Technology, Engineering, Leadership & Research Laboratory) – its first multi-disciplinary research and development facility outside the US – and appointed an Australian to oversee all of the company’s space operations outside America. That man, Rod Drury, says Australia is already home to some “world class” space capabilities at a time when demand is growing “exponentially”.
Lockheed Martin has already partnered with Curtin on the Desert Fireball Network, after it realised that its meteorite tracking system was also ideal for tracking satellites. Of the roughly 3500 active satellites currently in orbit, about a third were launched in the past year. That number could climb to as many as 100,000 within a decade.
As the number of satellites in orbit around the Earth increases, so too does the risk of those satellites smashing into each other. Lockheed Martin expects the adapted Desert Fireball Network will make a massive improvement to space situational awareness, and its versions of the network are planned for rollout across the world.
While there’s always plenty of excitement and romance around space exploration, hard conversations about funding are never far away. Despite the corporate sector coming to the table, and despite initial commitments from the Australian Space Agency, all researchers want to see more government funding committed to the cause. Attracting more government support relies on highlighting how initial research can evolve into large-scale commercial applications. But Curtin’s Phil Bland says the real value of that research lies in putting bright young talent in a room together.
“Something people tend to forget with spaceflight is that countries fly science missions partly for inspiration, but mostly because it just makes awesome business sense,” he says. “You get a team of young people who are inspired and passionate about an idea, about exploration, about a concept, and they dive in... and you always find a pile of stuff along the way that turns out to be vital or of great innovation for industry. “I think we can get in that zone. We can be doing that, we can be doing small missions that are very affordable and achievable but which get young scientists and engineers working together. And that will be a key element of how our space industry in Australia can progress quickly.”
CREDIT: Paul Garvey
Word count: 1952
