A less punitive approach aims to help disengaged students stay in school The first time Linda Graham was suspended from school, a teacher had sniffed her hand and smelled smoke. By the age of 16, the rebellious teenager was asked to leave her Sydney high school for using lemon juice to lighten her hair to an “unnatural colour”.
“I hated school,” she says. “I was constantly on suspension or in detention and I was kicked out in 1988.” Now a professor and director of the Centre for Inclusive Education at the Queensland University of Technology, Graham has made it her mission to help disengaged students stay at school.
Warning of a “school to prison pipeline” when troubled kids are suspended or expelled, Graham has discovered in new research that Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students are three times more likely than their classmates to be suspended or expelled, often for truancy or mucking up in class.
“If you have schools that are authoritarian, where the relationships are not based on trust and respect, you will get an awful lot of that behaviour,” she says. “Students don’t want to feel, as one Aboriginal child expressed it to me, ‘like shit on a teacher’s shoe’.” Graham counsels teachers with defiant students to “pick their battles”. “It’s not about teachers getting along with the ‘good students’ at school, it’s about getting along with the students they might find difficult,” she says.
Some troublesome students, Graham’s research shows, may have undiagnosed attention deficit hyperactivity disorder or autism, or problems comprehending English. “They fall through the cracks because they’re not getting support, and they’re often perceived as rude and recalcitrant, not listening to instructions,” she says.
“These kids have got great talent, they’re often really smart, but in a way that’s not recognised in the school system. They can be very wily thinkers and they’ve got a fantastic bullshit radar. But don’t pick a fight with them, because they feel like they’ve got nothing to lose.” As students start heading back to school on Monday, apart from in Queensland and South Australia, teachers are bound to be challenged by the behaviour of students whose learning, friendships, as well as physical and mental health have been hijacked by two years of pandemic lockdowns, restrictions and disruptions.
Violence is a growing threat to teachers and principals, who are bitten, kicked, punched or stabbed by students or attacked by angry parents. In Queensland alone, 2029 students were expelled with 66,445 suspensions handed out, sometimes numerous times for the same child, in 2020. Physical and verbal misconduct was the reason for more than half the suspensions, but nearly 10,000 suspensions and expulsions were for truancy or “refusal to participate in the program of instruction”.
Another 4500 involved “persistently disruptive behaviour adversely affecting others”.
Australian teachers must cope with some of the rowdiest classrooms in the developed world. One in three Australian principals dealt with acts of student intimidation or bullying at least weekly, an OECD survey of 260,000 teachers in 48 industrialised nations revealed in 2018.
The latest Australian Teacher Workforce Data report, by the Australian Institute for Teaching and School Leadership, has identified challenges with student behaviour as the reason one in four teachers plans to resign.
An astounding 37 per cent of school principals were physically attacked at work in 2020 – a rate nine times higher than the general population – while 43 per cent were threatened with violence, the most recent principals’ health and wellbeing report by Deakin University and the Australian Catholic University has revealed. Schoolyard bullying, too, is rife, with 1565 children assaulted in schools in 2020, NSW Bureau of Crime Statistics and Research data shows. Australian Secondary Principals’ Association president Andrew Pierpoint says teachers and principals are copping more violence than ever. “Principals have been pushed, punched and shoved by men, women and kids – it’s a bit of a free-for-all,” he says. “It is community violence that comes into school. I think it’s increasing because violence in our society is increasing.” Pierpoint defends the right of school leaders to discipline students who are violent or disruptive but wants parents to do more to encourage respect for teachers.
“Principals take the view that school is about learning and teaching, and anything that prevents that will need to be addressed,” he says. “Having a disciplined learning environment is not just about students, it’s about mum and dad and carers who are part of the solution.” Despite rising rates of bullying and violence at school, evidence shows that Indigenous students as well as those with a disability or from migrant backgrounds are the most likely to be suspended or expelled from school.
NSW is reviewing its school disciplinary policy after last year’s royal commission into disability disclosed that students with a disability – including learning disorders such as ADHD or dyslexia – are four times more likely than their classmates to be suspended. Aboriginal children with a disability were twice as likely as other disabled kids to be kicked out of school in 2020. And 7.7 per cent of children from a migrant background were suspended.
National Mental Health Commissioner Christine Morgan fears that children with mental health issues, including anxiety and depression, are being punished for wagging school, failing to finish assignments or zoning out in class.
She wants more focus on early intervention instead of “waiting until the kid is highly distressed”.
“(Disruptive behaviour) could be the result of a social interaction in the playground or something on the home front,” she says. “If you feel highly distressed and anxious, or victimised by others, you can’t possibly do your best academic work. Rather than punish (the behaviour) out of existence, which rarely works, let’s remove the root cause of what’s causing the behaviour. It’s a case of how will I help this child, rather than how am I going to punish that behaviour?” Morgan supports a Productivity Commission call for schools to measure students’ mental and emotional wellbeing, as well as their academic results, noting that happy kids are more likely to do well at school.
“Academic achievement is really important but education is also about social connection and routine,” she says. “If we can link the education system to the mental health and wellbeing system, that would be of benefit to everyone.” Some mainstream schools are starting to take a less punitive approach to student discipline, including Mabel Park High School in the low socio-economic city of Logan, south of Brisbane. Principal Michael Hornby imposes community service orders instead of suspensions whenever he can. School bullies may be required to serve classmates at the breakfast club set up to lure students to school on time each morning.
Boys who defaced toilet doors with graffiti were ordered to repaint them with artwork. “We didn’t see the toilet doors graffitied again,” Hornby says. “We had a young First Nations man who made a really poor decision, he got into a fight, so we did a deal where he would lead other boys in a First Nations dance. He had to give up his afternoons and lunchtimes to mentor the younger students.” Hornby says suspensions can be necessary to give some students a “release valve when they need time off”. But his strategy is to keep kids in school.
“Connection is key,” he says. “I don’t care if it’s sport, art, dance or robotics, if we can connect a kid into a group that plays netball together, that will connect them to school and we can work from there. It’s about making sure they know that success is not just an A in English and maths, it can be on the sporting field or in the arts.” Brett Wood is principal of Music Industry College, a Brisbane-based school with 90 students, including some who were kicked out of mainstream schools. The college does not have a uniform, but it has a dress code drawn up by the students – no exposed underwear, buttocks or breasts, no offensive slogans and enclosed shoes for safety – with a code of behaviour built on the pillars of trust, respect, participation and community. “We have a restorative rather than punitive approach,’’ Wood says. “We don’t have a big rule book.’’ If a student misbehaves, Wood looks for the reason. “If someone is truanting, why are they wagging school?” he asks. “It could be they’re being bullied at school or having issues at home. Rather than meting out punishment, we ask students how we can help address problems so they want to come to school. We’ve had some students who the school hasn’t suited, but rather than kicking them out and saying, ‘You’re on your own’, we find them another school.” National Children’s Commissioner Anne Hollonds – a former director of the Australian Institute of Family Studies – is concerned that too many children are falling through the gaps of the education system, especially since Covid-19 pushed many into learning from home. She notes that many of the students who cause trouble for teachers “come from families with a constellation of difficult issues for which they are not able to get the help they need quickly enough”.
“We tend to punish rather than get in early to prevent (problems),” she says. “We need to be investing upstream instead of waiting for a crisis.” Hollonds wants more help for teachers to deal with student behaviour and problems. “Teachers are at the frontline of dealing with kids who have difficult behaviours,” she says. “It’s terribly difficult for teachers and they need support.” Hollonds, who is part of the Australian Human Rights Commission, travelled extensively last year to speak to children and teenagers about what they want to see in the next national framework for protecting children.
“Everywhere I went across the country, education kept coming up as a system that was not fit for purpose,” she says. “Kids with disability feel excluded from school – our education system is quite often rigid and if they don’t fit in the system their needs don’t get met.
“For kids who aren’t your average white middle-class students, if you don’t fit the mould, there is a risk of not fitting in and becoming disengaged. That’s what truancy is often about.” Hollonds says she is “not expecting teachers to fix the world on their own”.
“We’re putting huge amounts of money into health, mental health, family and social support services, and education,” she says. “How can we prioritise spending so that kids can be helped much earlier, rather than be punished down the track when they are unable or unwilling to go to school?” Graham is living proof that troublesome teens can flourish if given a chance. After dropping out of school at the end of year 10 she worked as a secretary before returning to TAFE to finish her Higher School Certificate, then gaining a bachelor of arts and a PhD in education.
She says suspension needs to “stay in the toolbox” for schools to deal with violence or drug use. But she is annoyed that too many public schools are mimicking private schools with detentions for minor infractions such as jewellery and makeup, hairstyles or wearing the wrong socks. “Their real purpose is to educate public students, but they are sifting and sorting between kids who are good for their image or not,” she says. “Public schools are for everyone – they should be more inclusive and not get so uptight.”
CREDIT: NATASHA BITA; EDUCATION EDITOR
Word count: 1914
