THOMAS ORITI: It's unlikely you'll be on Mars any time soon, but the nearest thing could be the red, rocky soils of the arid Australian outback.
Mars Society Australia is pushing for the creation of a Mars research station simulation to be built in the Arkaroola Wilderness Sanctuary, in outback South Australia.
Marty McCarthy has this report.
MARTY MCCARTHY: Imagine you're walking through the dusty Australian outback, when you come across a simulated Martian community.
There's a fake rocket ship; laboratories; automated rovers zipping around, probing the soil with robotic arms & drills. There are even scientists in spacesuits doing field experiments in the rocky outcrops & bubbling hot springs.
JONATHAN CLARKE: It will allow us to do a wide range of activities that support the vision of human presence on Mars.
MARTY MCCARTHY: Jonathan Clarke, the president of Mars Society Australia:
JONATHAN CLARKE: We can train people in terms of field science, space operations; test medical procedures, medical monitoring in that environment.
We can also test & develop technology like hand tools for astronauts, field robotics to support astronauts.
MARTY MCCARTHY: The society has been pushing for a Mars analogue research station for 18 years, but now it has a reason.
JONATHAN CLARKE: Australia has been lagging behind for many decades in the space sector. Establishing an Australian space agency 18 months ago is a gamechanger.
This makes it possible for us to look at actual funding from government or commercial sections.
MARTY MCCARTHY: In September the Australian Government announced it would invest $150 million for Australian businesses & researchers to join America's Moon to Mars exploration.
JONATHAN CLARKE: We have had this wonderful announcement that Australia is going to play a partnership role in the Lunar Gateway & going onto Mars. And it is important that we are part of this, because this is one of the big visionary projects of the 21st century.
MARTY MCCARTHY: Saber Astronautics is a space-tech company, with offices in Sydney & around Colorado in the US, that makes mission control software.
It has used Arkaroola before to trial its programs, but the site was only temporary. The mission control team monitored the fake Mars team from their office in Sydney.
JASON HELD: Well, Australia has really good geography; really, Mars-like terrain that people walking on the ground can kind of feel like they're on Mars.
MARTY MCCARTHY: The company's CEO, Jason Held, says having a permanent facility at Arkaroola, equipped with laboratories, communication services & living quarters, would better help companies prepare for work & life on Mars.
JASON HELD: It is a critical component because you want to know what it's like: not just when people are out on Mars, but how do you communicate with them? How do you work with them when you are here on Earth?
MARTY MCCARTHY: Mars research stations already exist: in Utah in the United States; & another in the arctic region of Canada.
MARTY MCCARTHY: While the idea of having one in South Australia seems farfetched, it is actually a good money maker for the state's economy, especially as the private space sector continues to grow.
Jonathan Clarke again:
JONATHAN CLARKE: If you look at the Utah station, that takes about 10 to 15 teams going through there every year. It is booked up two years in advance & even so, there is a two-year waiting list to get on, & they knock back two-thirds of the applications.
So there is a huge demand & global interest in this sort of facility.
MARTY MCCARTHY: But one big difference, I suppose: Arkaroola gets pretty hot. Isn't Mars freezing?
JONATHAN CLARKE: Well, that's a mere detail.
The thing is: we are doing a simulation & we can't simulate everything. So what you do is: what do you want to test here? And one of it is operations. How long does it take to do a task using a robotic rover or an astronaut in a simulated space suit?
The other aspects, like temperature management, you can't do. And that's alright.
THOMAS ORITI: Mars Society Australia president Jonathan Clarke; & Marty McCarthy with that report.
Word count: 688
