ARTIFICIAL intelligence, robotics and other forms of smart automation have potential to deliver great economic benefits but also displace workers in jobs vulnerable to technological change.
Analysis of more than 200,000 jobs in 29 countries by leading professional services firm PwC forecasts these developing fields can deliver a more than $20 trillion boost to global GDP by 2030.
But three per cent of jobs are at potential risk of automation by the early 2020s.
New modelling shows Australia is losing the global AI race, prompting Adelaide University to argue that Adelaide needs to be home to a national centre.
The university is urging a funding contribution of $130 million to make the Centre for Machine Learning a national research facility, helping develop skills for space, defence, driverless cars and other industries.
It is important to have major ambitions in this sector, particularly for a state such as South Australia, which is undergoing industrial transformation. The benefits of significant goals can be seen with the news that a rebooted Mortal Kombat movie – the largest film in SA’s production history – will inject more than $70 million into the state’s economy.
The US-based New Line Cinema – a subsidiary of Warner Bros – will use the state’s crews and acting talent, with post-production in SA’s internationally acclaimed visual effects and post-production facilities.
In the years after World War II, SA reaped the benefits of a successful transformation into the-then burgeoning manufacturing sector.
Spearheaded by Premier Sir Tom Playford, the manufacturing drive modernised the economy and infrastructure. AI and other forms of smart automation comprise the next wave of industrial change sweeping the globe.
Our state and nation cannot afford to be left behind.
We must invest now to be able to capitalise on the benefits, rather than be buffeted by the winds of change and left languishing.Responsibility for all editorial comment is taken by The Editor, Matt Deighton, 31 Waymouth St, Adelaide, SA ,5000
Word count: 324
