Small player A GREAT letter, Peter Laffrey (The Advertiser, Thursday). Not only do you understand that Australia cannot make any real difference to the climate but you have taken note of just how irresponsible leaders of other countries have been to jump in head-first to appease the Left and elite.
The result is chaos for ordinary people and, sadly, our country is about to do the same.
I presume contributors C. Faulkner and Jock Churchman would have read Peter’s letter – but do they understand and accept it?
A recent survey indicates that a great number of Australians believe that our nation emits up to 25 per cent of all carbon emissions when, in fact, it is about 1.03 per cent.
No wonder the climate brigade is so difficult to educate.
IAN COLBEY, Mt Gambier
Energy storage MARY-ANNE Higgins’ congratulatory support (The Advertiser, Friday) for Peter Laffrey’s stance that we will always need the back-up of fossil fuels ignores one key point.
Coal, gas and oil are finite resources and, at some time, will no longer exist. What we don’t know is the timeline for this to happen. Unless we go nuclear – also a finite resource – we will eventually depend on renewable energy.
What we need are better methods for storing energy. This technology is essentially in its embryonic phase and will no doubt improve markedly.
Peter is quite right to point to some of the current failures that have often been driven by decisions based on ideology rather than science.
Energy independence could add significantly to Australia’s economic wellbeing and security.
RICHARD BRUGGEMANN, Kensington Park
Global issue REMEMBER when you were a child at the beach in summer, digging a hole in the sand?
At some point, water would begin to seep into the hole. No matter how fast you dug, the water just kept coming.
That’s what climate change is. China’s dirty air doesn’t stay in China, and Australia’s air, regardless of how clean we keep it, doesn’t stay in Australia.
The essential fight to reduce global emissions requires a global response. So, what difference do Labor, the Greens and the “not a party” teal candidates hope to make in the face of self interest from other nations?
Could it be that their concern has more to do with changing our government than changing our climate?
BERNIE COATES, Modbury North
Species loss BRIAN Measday (“Vote to save”, The Advertiser, Saturday) rightly points to the worrying projected loss of native species due to environmental degradation and climate change.
It is serious, with weak policies such as those of the Coalition being just scorched-earth policies. In the long run, much of the continent is in danger of resembling an open-cut coalmine.
JOCK CHURCHMAN, Firle
Big Brother HOW do you prove you are you? Most times, it is pretty simple: You have an ID, a driver’s licence, a passport etc.
What happens when there is a major catastrophe such as floods, bushfires and the like and you lose all your possessions? Maybe we need to look at other forms of identification such as fingerprints, facial recognition or even DNA.
Establish a registry for everyone using one, two or all three types mentioned. We could also look at starting a DNA registry from birth, as part of the birth certificate process.
This would assist in paternity cases and help to ID people without licences and passports.
BRUCE HAMILTON, Valley View
Power up FRIDAY’S Advertiser warns of electricity for homeowners increasing by $100 from July 1.
Two pages further on, an article suggests we could save $4000 by going all-electric, including vehicles.
Pardon my confusion but if power prices rise it will also cost more to charge the electric vehicle.
Why are we to suffer such power costs when we repeatedly read that South Australia enjoys practically all of our power sourced from renewables – you know, that almost-free stuff!
There must be something wrong here.
KEN GRUNDY, Naracoorte
Shocking WHY should homeowners shop around to find affordable electricity (“Shop or cop a bill hike”, The Advertiser, Friday).
It was a politician who caused and created the fiasco that is our electricity market, so how about they come up with a watchdog to stop the power companies ripping the consumer off.
Oh, for the days when we had an affordable, reliable power supply. Have you tried looking for an electricity provider in those poor excuses for a phone book that we are provided with?
GARRY TURNER, Port Pirie
Cold shoulder SO, here in SA, we have developed a possible cure for the common cold at probably great expense in research and development, but it will apparently be produced in Victoria. JEAN HARNEY, Dernancourt
Word count: 782
