THE newly opened, Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency will play an integral role in enabling Australian children to grow up to see men and women land on Mars, United States Consul-General Michael Kleine says.
Hailing the depth of South Australian-based space expertise, Mr Kleine said the mission to turn the industry’s potential into reality was starting “right now” at Adelaide’s Lot Fourteen.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison yesterday opened the Space Agency on the former Royal Adelaide Hospital site.
CONTINUED PAGE 4 Adelaide scientists key to NASA’s Mars mission FROM PAGE 1 Mr Morrison vowed to plough $150 million into business and technology when he last September inked a deal with US President Donald Trump to back NASA’s Moon to Mars Mission.
“I think the reality is starting right now. I am, I’d say, 100 per cent confident that children in Australia today are going to grow up to see American flags fly on Mars,” Mr Kleine, pictured, said.
“The first step was today, opening up the Australian Space Agency. There are serious scientists who are figuring out how to get this done and they figure it out very logically, that a lot of the skills, a lot of the expertise that’s needed to pull off an achievement like this, can be found right here in South Australia.” He said SA’s space industry expertise had been recognised by NASA Goddard Space Flight Centre deputy director for technology and research investments Christyl Johnson, who had already visited the state five times.
Mr Kleine, who made his 15th visit to SA in little more than a year for the opening ceremony, said world-leading technology, such as that used for mining remotely in extreme conditions, would be invaluable for the Mars mission.
“What that’s going to look like, as we’re seeing today with the opening of the Australian Space Agency, is Americans and Australians working shoulder-to-shoulder on robotics and automation of remote medicine, remote asset management, machine learning – all the stuff that’s going to be happening at Lot Fourteen.
“That’s what you need to put a man and a woman on the moon by 2024 and move them on to Mars.” Mr Kleine said visiting Lot Fourteen for yesterday’s opening had dramatically increased his confidence in the Mars mission’s timeline.
“I had a discussion with my (10-year-old) son before coming to Adelaide and I was telling him why I’m out here. He asked me whether he’s going to see a man and a woman on Mars,” Mr Kleine, 50, said.
“And I said: ‘Yes, I don’t know if I’ll see it’ but I said, ‘You’ll see it’. I’m going to go home and tell him I’m going to see it, because I think it’s going to happen.
“So, it’s a really great example of the US-Australia partnership. This is digging deep to our roots of the Apollo mission (which landed the first people on the moon in 1969) and harnessing that going into the future, so that’s why we’re excited to be here (for the Space Agency opening).” Australia’s $3.9 billion space industry employs about 10,000 people but the Federal Government plans to triple that to $12 billion and create an extra 20,000 jobs within a decade.
Mr Morrison said the Space Agency, which was creating an innovation hub to take the sector forward, was part of a $600 million investment in space industry development.Adelaide’s Mission Control and Space Discovery Centre will launch at Lot Fourteen within a year, The Advertiser revealed yesterday, giving visitors live contact with the International Space Station.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 592
