GALIPO Foods has grown from a one-man enterprise to employing world-first robotics technology in its Dry Creek warehouse.
While the use of robotics is growing in eCommerce and high density warehouses, Galipo Foods is believed to be the first food service distributor in the world to introduce it.
Robots are programmed to move shelves automatically, bringing goods to an employee at a work station, ready for picking.
Despite the automation, Galipo Foods has committed to keep all of its 170 staff as employees are still required in the picking process.
But, having the robotics technology moving the products to the staff helps with both accuracy and speed.
Galipo general manager Nathan Narayanan said the company underwent due diligence on the technology for close to 10 months before using it in the warehouse.
“The first phase involves 12 robots and two work stations in the cool room,” he said.
“The next phase is 20 robots and three work stations in our new dry storage area.
“The technology will allow us to pick products quicker and get our trucks out quicker.” Galipo has 48 delivery trucks operating out of its Dry Creek base, plus another four out of Kadina.
Galipo Foods business and marketing manager Darren Grosser said the technology would enable the business to keep growing into the future.
“The business has been based at Dry Creek since 2003 and there’s been three expansions since that time,” he said.  The most recent expansion included a new loading dock, dry goods storage section and freezer area.
Mr Grosser said the company had experienced good growth in regional areas, with the company servicing areas from as far afield as Port Augusta and Kangaroo Island.
Galipo Foods was recently named the best food service supplier in Australia at the Foodservice Suppliers Association National Awards of Excellence. It is the fourth time in six years the company has won this award – a particular honour considering no other company has won it more than twice.The company was also named best food service distributor in South Australia for the sixth year in a row at the awards.
CREDIT: PAULA THOMPSON
Word count: 355
