The transition from Olympic highs to ‘normal’ life is one many elite athletes struggle with, but these Games veterans are fully focused on success in their new challenges, writes Selina Steele What happens when an athlete draws the curtain on the Five-Ring Circus for the final time?
When the Games are over but life isn’t?
After decades of competition, many Olympic athletes admit the transition to “normal” life sees blood, sweat and tears, replaced with blood, sweat and fears.
While some athletes lose their way with drugs, weight battles and feeling lost, others are filling the void by becoming lawyers, coaches and designing satellites.
In a bid to help athletes transition into retirement, the Australian Institute of Sport (AIS) provides more than $14.6m each year in grants.
Transition grants can range up to a maximum of $17,500 and more than 40 Olympic and Paralympic athletes have received these grants since last year’s Tokyo Olympics.
In return, the likes of rower Luke Letcher is using the funds to ensure there is never another “MH370” while kayaker Jo Brigden-Jones is training to become an intensive care paramedic.
The Advertiser caught up with six Olympians post Tokyo with all of them answering the question of: “What the heck do I do now?”
BRON KNOX FOUR-TIME OLYMPIAN, TWO-TIME BRONZE MEDALLIST, WATER POLO: WHILE the delayed Tokyo Games gave Stevens an extra year to recover from injury, for Knox it completely changed her living arrangements.
The pandemic forced her to move into, and live out of her car. “Gosh, looking back it seems so surreal,” says Knox, who turns 36 today. “I spent 17 years in the high-performance program attempting to balance full-time study and full-time training all while trying to support myself.
“The 12-month delay saw me living the last six months out of my car and moving around every two weeks because of Covid.
“The AIS grants have been a lifeline, a way to keep your head above the water when you are surrounded by competing interests and unable to support yourself financially.
“It gave me some breathing space to explore my next career move and now I am working as an associate lawyer for the Administrative Appeals Tribunal.” It was only fair that Lady Justice tipped her scales toward Tokyo and delivered Australia’s most-capped water polo player a fourth Olympics and redemption.
Knox stood a shattered figure on the pool deck at the Rio Olympics as one by one, teammates silently hugged their captain and in that hug absolved Knox of any blame after her missed penalty saw the Stingers knocked out of the medals.
The miss cut deep and some thought the anguish might prompt retirement. It was the first time Australia had missed the semi-finals since women’s water polo was admitted to the Olympics in 2000.
At 182cm and 85kg, Knox has the physique and skills of several players, packaged in a prototype capable of dominating at centre forward, centre back or even outside shooter.
But after Tokyo, Knox said she knew it was time to retire.
“But I will always be involved in sport and I will continue to be engaged in the world of sport with some coaching and I’ll continue to advocate for athlete rights,” she said.
“And I am excited about the opportunities ahead of the 2032 Olympic Games in Brisbane.”
JO BRIGDEN-JONES TWO-TIME OLYMPIAN, CANOE SPRINT: OLYMPIAN/baker/registered nurse/paramedic ... one of the nation’s top kayakers, Jo Brigden-Jones holds many titles and is set to add yet another.
The dual Olympian retired after the Tokyo Games and promptly started training to upgrade from paramedic to intensive care paramedic.
Brigden-Jones, who turns 34 this month, also has her side hustle after spending her spare time during Covid lockdown developing her skills as a cake baker and decorator and so Elite Cake Co. was born.
“In the past, as soon as you retired you were instantly disconnected from your sport,” she said.
“My transition out of sport has been pretty smooth. I put a lot of effort into setting myself up with a career outside of my sport.
“I always studied or worked alongside my training so I felt very prepared once I retired.
“I work as a paramedic, so since I got back home from Tokyo, I’ve been pretty busy at work being back full-time and working during the Covid-19 pandemic.
“I start training to become an intensive care paramedic soon which is a huge step forward in my career.
DANI STEVENS WORLD CHAMPION, COMMONWEALTH GAMES GOLD MEDALLIST, DISCUS THROWER: THERE was a time when the 33-year-old did not know whether she would be able to use her right arm again after a training incident at the gym.
Stevens, one of few athletes to win a world championship at youth, junior and senior level, used the year of the postponed Tokyo Games to rehab her body and qualify for her fourth Olympics.
To even make the start line in Tokyo was miracle but there is another miracle post-career that Stevens is now preparing for.
“The transition out of sport can be uncertain at times as you enter the ‘real world’ and figure out what path to head down next,” she said.
“But I’m 27 weeks pregnant. It’s something my husband Joe and I have looked forward to for such a long time.
“I spent 18-plus years being an elite athlete where you have blinkers on and you let nothing get in the way of your career.
“It’s an active choice and this may sound odd but I am so excited to be concentrating on something where it’s not completely about me.
“As athletes we are so selfish about our sleep and hydration but now I am l learning what it means to be a good mum, a good parent, a good partner.” And a good teacher.
Because Stevens, who has just moved back to Sydney’s eastern suburbs for her husband’s career (he is a former shot-putter turned orthopaedic surgeon), is also doing her Masters with the help of an Australian Institute of Sport grant.
“The assistance the AIS has provided came as a welcome surprise, as I personally had a lot of big changes on the cards post retirement,” Stevens said.
“And I am commencing my Masters of Secondary Teaching for PE this month at Griffith University so that will also be a focus for the next couple of years.”
LUKE FLETCHER 2020 OLYMPIC BRONZE MEDALLIST, ROWING: WHAT does one do after they’ve won bronze in the men’s quad sculls at the Tokyo Olympics?
Design cutting-edge satellites to ensure there is never another missing civilian passenger flight like MH370.
Speaking from a bubble barrier to prevent satellite contamination, Luke Fletcher, 27, said he had scooped the coolest internship in aerospace engineering with Skykraft, an Australian space services company.
“I am finishing off my systems engineering degree and this is just the dream internship, it is such a cool project to be working on,” he said.
“Our main client is an air traffic management system to create a global network of over 200 satellites to track all civilian aircraft.
“This system would ensure there was never another MH370.
“The business case has never stacked up before but SpaceX rockets have made the proposition economically viable to make and sell the satellites.
“There is a lot of uncertainty in the time immediately after moving away from something as all-encompassing as high performance sport.
“But I feel like I have found my feet.
“The internship is part of completing my undergraduate engineering degree but I’m also giving back to my sport and coaching a local rowing club.
“I’m not sure what life will look like in a year’s time, but I’m excited to see what opportunities I can get stuck into.”
EMILEE CHERRY EMILEE CHERRY, 2016 OLYMPIC GOLD MEDALLIST, RUGBY SEVENS: AUSTRALIAN women’s sevens rugby star Cherry – dubbed “GOAT” by her teammates – dropped a bombshell by calling time on her career just before the Tokyo Games.
The 29-year-old had intended to go out on top in Tokyo but said her body post-pregnancy and the uncertainty of Covid had convinced her to retire.
Cherry, renowned for her cool head and on-field vision, had forced her way back into the national side after the birth of daughter Alice in June 2019 with husband Dan.
The delayed Games was too much of a juggle but Cherry, who is also now mum to Lily, four months, has been reunited with her teammates but this time as assistant to national coach Tim Walsh. “Hopefully this shows that a pathway does exist for the next generation of female coaches,” she said.
CREDIT: Selina Steele
Word count: 1440
