Finding the right school for your child can seem like a daunting task. But over the next 10 pages you will find the most comprehensive guide to Catholic schools across the state to help you form an opinion. This directory shows the breadth of what is on offer in the Catholic education system: regional, metropolitan, co-educational, single-sex, R-12, early learning centres, boarding schools: there is information on all of them. Use these icons to identify each school’s year levels (for 2020) and whether they cater for boys, girls or both genders ELC = Early Learning Centre. P = Preschool. R = Reception. B = Birth. T = Tertiary Residential College.
CITY ELC-12 Christian Brothers College ADELAIDE Christian Brothers College is a Birth-Year 12 city boys school providing a quality education based on academic excellence, community spirit and lifelong learning. Focusing on innovative enquiry-based learning and problem solving in world-class environments, including our new Centre of Innovation and Learning, suited to STEAM-based education.
Senior Campus: 214 Wakefield St, Adelaide 8400 4200 Junior Campus: 324 Wakefield St, Adelaide 8400 4222 Community Children’s Centre: 178 East Tce, Adelaide 8223 5469 cbc.sa.edu.au enquiries@cbc.sa.edu.au
ELC-12 St Aloysius College ADELAIDE St Aloysius College educates young women who are confident, capable and willing to act for change in our world. Students experience dynamic approaches to learning and enjoy access to the vast resources of the city centre.
A broad curriculum, combined with diverse curriculum extension opportunities, enables every student to find and pursue her passions.
53 Wakefield St, Adelaide 8217 3200 sac.sa.edu.au registrar@sac.sa.edu.au
R-12 St Mary’s College ADELAIDE St Mary’s College has been empowering young women through education since 1869.
We offer big school opportunities with a small school feeling. Our restorative justice culture is at the heart of everything. Through our programs, we support the growth of strong female leaders equipped to find their place in the world.
253 Franklin St, Adelaide 8216 5700 stmaryscollege.catholic.edu.au enquiries@stmaryscollege.catholic.edu.au
EAST ELC-12 Loreto College MARRYATVILLE A leading Catholic day and boarding school for girls from Early Learning to Year 12, we inspire and empower through education with a focus on student voice and independence.
We equip our girls with the skills required for their post-school lives in an environment that balances academic rigour with a wide range of co-curricular opportunities.
316 Portrush Rd, Marryatville 8334 4200 loreto.sa.edu.au info@loreto.sa.edu.au
7-12 Mary MacKillop College KENSINGTON Mary MacKillop College is a Catholic secondary school for girls owned and governed by the Sisters of St Joseph of the Sacred Heart. The College is known for its excellent academic results and developing self-assured young women with strong leadership skills.
10 -14 High St, Kensington 8333 6300 marymackillop.sa.edu.au admin@marymackillop.sa.edu.au
R-12 Mercedes College SPRINGFIELD Mercedes College understands the importance of nurturing and inspiring students to become lifelong learners to meet the demands of the 21st century. We are a co-educational Catholic school incorporating the globally renowned International Baccalaureate (IB) framework with the Australian curriculum to provide students with a world class education and subjects most relevant to young Australians.
540 Fullarton Rd, Springfield 8372 3200 mercedes.catholic.edu.au mercedes@mercedes.catholic.edu.au
ELC-12 Rostrevor College WOODFORDE Rostrevor College offers a seamless education for boys from Reception to Year 12 on one spacious campus. As a Catholic day and boarding college in the Edmund Rice tradition, we encourage our boys to strive to achieve their personal best, while aspiring to make a positive difference to the world.
67-91 Glen Stuart Rd, Woodforde 8364 8200 rostrevor.sa.edu.au roscoll@rostrevor.sa.edu.au
R-6 St Francis of Assisi School NEWTON We are a faith-filled community, grounded in relationships and quality teaching programs. Our students are encouraged to embrace learning, build strong connections and be positive in life choices. We recognise every child as unique and special with many gifts to celebrate and invite you to share in our journey.
57 Newton Rd, Newton 8337 4022 sfoa.catholic.edu.au info@sfoa.catholic.edu.au
ELC-12 Saint Ignatius’ College ATHELSTONE/NORWOOD Saint Ignatius’ College, South Australia’s only Jesuit school, strives to form well-rounded men and women of competence, conscience, compassion and commitment who will be of service in the world. This is achieved by providing an education which continues to embrace innovative educational methodologies yet remains firmly founded in the spirit of the Jesuit tradition.
Early Years: 58 Queen St, Norwood.
8130 7180 Junior School: 62 Queen St, Norwood.
8130 7100 Senior School: 2 Manresa Ct, Athelstone, 8334 9300 ignatius.sa.edu.au admin@ignatius.sa.edu.au
P-6 St Joseph’s Memorial School KENSINGTON/NORWOOD Located in the heart of the Eastern suburbs, our school embraces and recognises the potential of each child, guided by the principles of the Reggio Emilia approach.
Our community has a rigorous approach to achieving student outcomes, small group explicit literacy and numeracy teaching, strong parent partnerships and a pathway from preschool to Year 6.
Preschool to Year 1: 46 Bridge St, Kensington 8364 1164 Years 2-7: 139 William St, Norwood.
8331 7279 sjms.catholic.edu.au info@sjms.catholic.edu.au
P-6 St Joseph’s School HECTORVILLE St Joseph’s offers contemporary, innovative and engaging learning spaces promoting and fostering creativity, problem solving, collaboration and communication, helping students to develop skills and confidence to meet the challenges of the future. Our programs include robotics, Wakakirri, Children’s University and specialist sports programs which promote excellence in our teaching and learning.
30 Montacute Rd, Hectorville 8115 7700 sjh.catholic.edu.au info@sjh.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Joseph’s School KINGSWOOD Small school, big impact. Our students enjoy a contemporary curriculum and a broad range of specialist and co-curricular opportunities in a nurturing environment that allows for each child’s voice to be heard and needs to be met. With passionate teachers to inspire and a welcoming community, our students flourish.
33 Cambridge Tce, Kingswood 8271 6553 stjk.catholic.edu.au info@stjk.catholic.edu.au
P-6 St Joseph’s School PAYNEHAM Our school has a nurturing environment, encouraging happy and successful learners.
We focus on the critical skills of numeracy and literacy within an inquiry curriculum that encourages engagement of the learner and leads to understanding through creativity. Our goal is to equip each student with the skills to enjoy a lifetime of discovery and learning.
78 Portrush Rd, Payneham 8362 2153 stjopayn.catholic.edu.au info@stjopayn.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Joseph’s School TRANMERE As a small school, we have the advantage of knowing every child and family in our values rich environment where everyone is respected and valued. We have a strong focus on working restoratively, providing students with the skills to build strong relationships. We help children to connect with the environment, building knowledge and passion for sustainable practices.
1 Birkinshaw Ave, Tranmere 8431 2834 stjotran.catholic.edu.au info@stjotran.catholic.edu.au
R-12 St Patrick’s Special School DULWICH St Patrick’s Special School is a specialist educational facility that teaches students with an intellectual disability. We are inspired by the belief that our young people have a fundamental right to a quality education that is meaningful, purposeful and hope-filled.
Our students have unique abilities that are celebrated through a developmentally individualised and appropriate curriculum.
13 Warwick Ave, Dulwich 8332 1555 stpats.catholic.edu.au info@stpats.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Raphael’s School PARKSIDE Our close knit inclusive school community allows us to know every child and their family.
We live our values of Learning, Belonging and Respect and we deliver an individualised excellent education enabling students to thrive as successful learners. Extra-curricular opportunities include performing arts, visual arts, music tuition and team sports.
114 Glen Osmond Rd, Parkside 8272 2368 raph.catholic.edu.au info@raph.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Therese School COLONEL LIGHT GARDENS Our school values of Community, Respect, Grace and Courage form the basis of our interactions within our school, and help our students to be confident and compassionate. Enhanced learning support is offered in both literacy and numeracy with our multi-sensory structured learning approach. We encourage inquisitive minds, and help to broaden knowledge through exploration and adventure.
7 Oxford Circus, Colonel Light Gardens 8276 5528 sts.catholic.edu.au info@sts.catholic.edu.au
P-6 St Thomas School and Preschool GOODWOOD As an Apple Distinguished School with a focus on Mercy Values and Positive Education, we equip our students with the tools to be resilient, optimistic members of their community, engaged in their world. Rated as Exceeding by the Education Standards Board, our preschool is a National Junior STEM award winner and a Little Scientists House.
10 Rushton St, Goodwood 8177 8100 stg.catholic.edu.au info@stg.catholic.edu.au
NORTH & NORTH EAST Blackfriars Priory School PROSPECT Blackfriars is committed to providing a well-rounded education – academically, socially, emotionally, physically and spiritually – that caters specifically to the needs of boys.
We develop young men who seek truth in life, walk with confidence and purpose and are inspired by the four pillars of Dominican life – Prayer, Study, Community and Service.
ELC (Co-Ed): 26 Highbury Street, Prospect R-12 Campus: 17 Prospect Rd, Prospect 8169 3900 bps.sa.edu.au registrar@bps.sa.edu.au
R-7 Catherine McAuley School CRAIGMORE Catherine McAuley offers evidence-based, contemporary teaching and learning.
Alongside our families, we ensure all children meet their full potential as confident, capable learners. Defence Schools Mentor (DSM) supports defence families. We also offer a variety of preschool programs as well as OSHC and vacation care.
210 Adams Rd, Craigmore 8284 1666 cms.catholic.edu.au info@cms.catholic.edu.au
7-12 Gleeson College GOLDEN GROVE An expectation of personal excellence for all is highly valued and underpinned by a focus on outstanding teaching, learning and educational relationships. Complemented by a strength in community, individual pathways to university, training or the workplace are nurtured. Graduates attain capabilities, knowledge and values to prepare them for our world.
40-60 Surrey Farm Drive, Golden Grove 8282 6600 gleeson.sa.edu.au info@gleeson.catholic.edu.au
ELC-6 Holy Family Catholic School PARAFIELD GARDENS Relationships are established at playgroup and our early learning centre. The children display their character strengths and learning powers at school. Our Fish Farm and Aquaponic Centre manifests our beliefs about learning. We build on children’s curiosity and draw on their creativity, collaboration and sense of belonging.
71 Shepherdson Rd, Parafield Gardens 8250 6616 holyfamily.catholic.edu.au info@holyfamily.catholic.edu.au
7-12 Kildare College HOLDEN HILL Kildare College is a student-centred Secondary College for Girls in Year 7-12.
We pride ourselves on developing strong, independent young women with strength and gentleness of character. Our academic results continue a proud tradition of consistent high achievement at SACE level, and are a reflection of our students’ abilities, and the quality educational environment provided.
96 Valiant Rd, Holden Hill 8369 9999 kildare.catholic.edu.au info@kildare.catholic.edu.au
R-7 Our Lady of Hope School GREENWITH At Our Lady of Hope, our goal is to provide a welcoming and family-friendly community that fosters positive relationships, allows active participation and is inclusive of all people. We are committed to providing a contemporary and child-centred approach to teaching and learning that focuses on developing the whole child, enabling them to reach their full potential.
Corner of the Golden Way and Golden Grove Rd, Greenwith 8289 8344 oloh.catholic.edu.au info@oloh.catholic.edu.au
7-12 Our Lady of the Sacred Heart College ENFIELD OLSH College provides an extensive curriculum, diverse learning opportunities beyond the classroom and a range of facilities reflecting the ways girls learn best. OLSH girls thrive in a supportive environment where they are challenged to question, seek answers, grow in confidence as young women, and pursue excellence in all pathways.
496 Regency Rd, Enfield 8269 8800 olsh.catholic.edu.au olsh@olsh.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Rosary School PROSPECT Rosary School flourishes in providing a contemporary education enabling students to become confident, lifelong learners. We were winners of the 2018 & 2017 Numerical Acumen awards, as well as the 2018 Primary Maths Association Award. Our growing arts program has seen the addition of drama and ukulele instruction in 2019.
15 Gladstone Rd Prospect 8343 5700 rosary.catholic.edu.au rosary.school@rosary.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Augustine’s Parish School SALISBURY Located on beautiful grounds in the heart of Salisbury, St Augustine’s Parish School is a welcoming community, united in faith, who values and nurtures the dignity of each individual. A place to learn, play and grow.
An education through our school will prepare your child to walk confidently into the future.
25 Commercial Rd, Salisbury 8182 7900 saps.catholic.edu.au info@saps.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Brigid’s Catholic School EVANSTON At St Brigid’s Catholic School, our staff have worked diligently to establish a learning framework which enables children to be creative, collaborative and connected learners, inspired by a love of God and each other. Most importantly, our children discover a love of learning and a deep love of self.
Para Rd, Evanston 8522 2099 stbrigids.catholic.edu.au info@stbrigids.catholic.edu.au
St Brigid’s School KILBURN St Brigid’s School is a place of love, peace and learning. Our school community is focussed on building positive identities in all our learners, embracing and celebrating diversity. This is achieved through our relationships with others in a safe, supportive and challenging environment with high quality teaching and learning embedded across the school.
45 Way St, Kilburn 8262 3812 stb.catholic.edu.au info@stb.catholic.edu.au
R-12 St Columba College ANDREWS FARM As an Anglican and Catholic R-12 school, our approach to education fosters each individual’s academic strengths, spirituality, social, emotional and physical needs. We are committed to supporting every child to be their best self through our Christian ethos, positive education and wellbeing programs that help young people build lives that have meaning and purpose.
President Ave, Andrews Farm 8254 0600 stcolumba.sa.edu.au admin@stcolumba.sa.edu.au
R-6 Saint David’s Parish School TEA TREE GULLY With a strong focus on innovation, technology and student wellbeing, Saint David’s Parish School offers a competitive local option for families in the northern suburbs. The expansion of our STEM program, new early years building (due for completion in late 2019) and outstanding achievements in literacy teaching, makes this school one to keep your eye on!
40 Elizabeth St, Tea Tree Gully 8360 6300 stdavids.catholic.edu.au info@stdavids.catholic.edu.au
R-12 St Dominic’s Priory College NORTH ADELAIDE Catering to 670 students across Reception to Year 12, the college nurtures the character and confidence of each student. St Dominic’s offers an International Baccalaureate MYP educational framework and has an outstanding reputation. The College provides a balanced education where physical, spiritual, intellectual and emotional growth are seen as complementary.
139 Molesworth St, North Adelaide 8267 3818 stdominics.sa.edu.au admin@stdominics.sa.edu.au
R-6 St Francis Xavier’s Regional Catholic School WYNN VALE Located in the leafy suburb of Wynn Vale, we are Inspiring a Community of Innovators with our approach to learning and the wellbeing of every child. We embrace outdoor learning in our unique environment, and are compassionate and understanding of all circumstances families face within today’s world.
4 Carignane St, Wynn Vale 8251 9500 sfx.catholic.edu.au office@sfx.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Gabriel’s School ENFIELD St Gabriel’s welcomes students from over 30 different cultural backgrounds. Rich learning opportunities are provided in all curriculum areas to ensure students experience enjoyment, engagement, growth and success. A variety of sporting and performing arts opportunities exist for students including instrumental tuition, school band and after-school sports.
17 Whittington St, Enfield 8344 0000 sgs.catholic.edu.au info@sgs.catholic.edu.au
10-12 St Joseph’s Education Centre ENFIELD St Joseph’s Education Centre is an innovative school catering for young women who are pregnant or mothers wanting to complete their senior secondary certificate. With an on-site crèche, mothers’ study with the comfort of their children nearby and accessible for feeding during breaks. We provide pathways leading to SACE completion, further study or employment.
496 Regency Rd, Enfield 8269 8826 stjosephseducationctr@olsh.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Martin’s Catholic Primary School GREENACRES In an inclusive and vibrant environment, we are committed to providing a holistic approach to teaching and learning that enables students to become confident, successful life-long learners. Our strong connection with sustainability is nurtured through involvement in garden initiatives and has been incorporated in our new Reception – Year 4 precinct.
62 -80 Princes Rd, Greenacres 8211 2400 smg.catholic.edu.au info@smg.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Mary Magdalene’s School ELIZABETH GROVE Catholic identity, high quality teaching and learning, and orderly and safe learning environments are the focus at our small school. Students and families from all faiths and backgrounds are warmly welcomed into our community. We provide before and after school care as well as Little Maggie’s Playgroup. Family volunteers provide Breakfast Club and SecondBite services.
82 Fairfield Rd, Elizabeth Grove 8255 6144 smm.catholic.edu.au info@smm.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Monica’s Parish School WALKERVILLE At St Monica’s we work in partnership with children and their families to offer a safe, inclusive and positive learning environment for all. We believe student wellbeing is fundamental to each child’s engagement and learning and provide a broad curriculum focussed on positive partnerships, personalised and purposeful learning.
92 North East Rd, Walkerville 8344 2384 stmonica.catholic.edu.au info@stmonica.catholic.edu.au
11-12 St Patrick’s Technical College EDINBURGH NORTH StPatsTech is the state’s only stand-alone senior trade and technical school. We provide Year 11 and 12 students with vocational education and training (VET) courses and apprenticeship/traineeship pathways that are integrated with the South Australian Certificate of Education (SACE). Our courses include automotive, construction, electrotechnology, food & hospitality, hair & beauty, engineering and information technology.
2-6 Hooke Rd, Edinburgh North 8209 3700 stpatstech.sa.edu.au info@stpatstech.sa.edu.au
R-12 St Pauls College GILLES PLAINS In the tradition of Edmund Rice, we respect all cultures and faith traditions by providing high-quality education that is inclusive and affordable. At St Paul’s our curriculum is engaging, relevant, innovative, creative and authentic. We provide learning opportunities such as camps, retreats, community service learning and co-curricular activities that complement the academic curriculum.
792 Grand Junction Rd, Gilles Plains 8266 0622 stpauls.sa.edu.au email@stpauls.sa.edu.au
St Pius X School WINDSOR GARDENS We provide quality learning opportunities for all students including specific support through structured phonics (Reading) programs and our SHIP (Gifted) program. St Pius X received six State mathematics awards at the 2018 Primary Mathematics Challenge. Our innovative music, sport and languages programs nurture each student’s spiritual, social, emotional and physical development.
8 Windsor Grove, Windsor Gardens 8261 4466 stpiusx.catholic.edu.au info@stpiusx.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Thomas More School ELIZABETH PARK At St Thomas More, literacy, mathematics, the arts, physical education and student wellbeing are key focus areas. School features include a gymnasium, new classrooms and extensive play areas. Additional school services include playgroup, an early learning program, and an out of school hours care service including Vacation Care.
50 Yorktown Rd, Elizabeth Park 8255 1699 sttmore.catholic.edu.au info@sttmore.catholic.edu.au
7-12 Thomas More College SALISBURY DOWNS Thomas More College prides itself on providing students with a comprehensive and diverse curriculum where students of a wide range of abilities are given opportunities to achieve their full potential. Thomas More College, where everyone has the opportunity to Learn More, Live More and Be More.
23 Amsterdam Crescent, Salisbury Downs 8182 2600 tmc.catholic.edu.au tmc@tmc.catholic.edu.au
7-12 Xavier College GAWLER BELT Xavier College is located north of the metropolitan area of Adelaide, just outside the regional town of Gawler. We offer a quality and innovative curriculum which caters to the needs of our students who choose academic or vocational pathways, and exceptional facilities including double court gymnasium, students services hub, trade training centre and agricultural precinct.
1 Kentish Rd, Gawler Belt 8523 0088 xavier.catholic.edu.au office@xavier.catholic.edu.au
SOUTH & HILLS R-6 All Saints Catholic Primary School SEAFORD Our school enjoys vast grounds and quality facilities, which support our vision to deliver high quality and rich curriculum offerings underpinned by a proud Catholic culture and identity. We engage children with learning using their natural environments. Our specialty programs include the Stephanie Alexander Kitchen Garden Foundation program that includes working with gardens and chickens.
621 Grand Boulevard, Seaford 8327 0020 allsaints.catholic.edu.au info@allsaints.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Antonio Catholic School MORPHETT VALE At Antonio, we share high expectations of ourselves and for your child’s learning and progress. Our educators collaborate professionally to continuously evaluate learning and facilitate programs empowering students to thrive. Our close relationship with Cardijn College and Marcellin Technical Campus provides a wonderfully rich R – 12 learning pathway for students.
8 Bains Rd, Morphett Vale 8325 4500 antonio.catholic.edu.au info@antonio.catholic.edu.au
7-12 Cabra Dominican College CUMBERLAND PARK We nurture the unique gifts of each individual, to liberate them in the search for truth and empower them to create a better world.
Our expansive campus, easily accessible via public transport, provides a wealth of opportunities. Cabra’s welcoming, inclusive environment is the ideal setting for students to grow and flourish.
225 Cross Rd, Cumberland Park 8179 2400 cabra.catholic.edu.au cabra@cabra.catholic.edu.au
7-12 Cardijn College NOARLUNGA DOWNS Cardijn College is a co-educational secondary school offering an extensive academic curriculum with vocational/trade pathways through its second campus at Marcellin.
Cardijn students are inspired to be capable learners who become influential and impactful leaders who make a difference on a local and global level.
Honeypot Rd, Noarlunga Downs 8392 9500 cardijn.catholic.edu.au admin@cardijn.catholic.edu.au
10-12 Cardijn College Marcellin Campus CHRISTIE DOWNS Marcellin offers flexible programs for students who wish to complete their SACE while working toward an Australian School-based Apprenticeship/Traineeship (ASbA/SBAT) and completion of their apprenticeship/ traineeship post school. Students have access to onsite Registered Training Organisations providing outstanding training options including engineering, automotive, electrotechnology, construction, hair and beauty, aged care and early childhood education.
Cnr Mander & Beach Roads, Christie Downs 8392 9500 cardijn.catholic.edu.au admin@cardijn.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Christ the King School WARRADALE The wellbeing, learning and faith development of your child is the central focus of Christ the King School with pathways to Sacred Heart College and Cabra Dominican College. We foster the development of confident students who relish challenges and grow in understanding of their place in the world. We offer OSHC and our community Playgroup, CTK Kids is open to all every Monday morning.
126 Dunrobin Rd, Warradale 8296 1635 christking.catholic.edu.au info@christking.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Emmaus Catholic School WOODCROFT With outstanding teachers and a strong sense of community, everyone is welcome and everyone matters at Emmaus Catholic School.
Everything at Emmaus is personal - let us show you what a big difference our small school can make for you and your child.
2 Todd St, Woodcroft 8322 7211 emmaus.catholic.edu.au information@emmaus.catholic.edu.au
R-7 Galilee Catholic School ALDINGA Learning at Galilee is guided by our vision Together We Grow. We value being curious, reaching beyond and learning together.
Inspired by the Reggio Emilia approach, we provide learning in both inside and outside environments that are inviting, intriguing and flexible in design, leading to deep learning, active participation, play and supporting student wellbeing.
Corner Quinliven and How Rds, Aldinga 8557 9000 galilee.catholic.edu.au info@galilee.catholic.edu.au
ELC-6 McAuley Community School HOVE (OPENING JANUARY 2020) As a Catholic school in the Mercy Tradition, we support children to realise their potential and imagine new possibilities. Together with our co-located early learning centre, we are a place children can grow in faith and connect with community. A place to discover and have an impact in the world we live. McAuley Community School is a place to thrive.
King George Avenue, Hove 8397 6450 mcs.catholic.edu.au info@mcs.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Our Lady of Grace School GLENGOWRIE Our Lady of Grace School is a Catholic coeducational Reception – Year 6 school located within the Glenelg Parish. We build learners who work together in Christ-like ways with the purpose to ignite the whole person, wonder what is possible and to grow and make a difference in our world. We offer on-site OSHC.
38 Beadnall Tce, Glengowrie 8177 9100 olog.catholic.edu.au olog@olog.catholic.edu.au
7-12 Sacred Heart College MITCHELL PARK/SOMERTON PARK Sacred Heart College is a Catholic CoEducational School for Years 7 – 12 across two campuses that promotes a love of learning and fosters Courageous Hearts. We empower our young people to be excellent human beings to remain true to their Marist values as they bravely and compassionately respond to the world around them.
Champagnat Campus: (Years 7 – 9) 28 Percy Ave, Mitchell Park Marcellin Campus: (Years 10 – 12) 195 Brighton Road, Somerton Park 8350 2500 shc.sa.edu.au enquiries@shc.sa.edu.au
R-6 St Anthony’s School EDWARDSTOWN At St Anthony’s, our students Learn, Love, Laugh Listen and Lead. We are a welcoming and caring place where students engage in stimulating and creative learning experiences in all subjects including STEM, music and sport. Our students grow in our learner qualities of Courage, Wonder, Collaboration, Connection, Exploration and Reflection.
1 Castle St, Edwardstown 8115 7500 stantedw.catholic.edu.au info@stantedw.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Bernadette’s School ST MARYS We work in partnership with families to provide a rich and personalised learning environment for students. The diversity within our community is embraced and celebrated and, as part of the Southwest Adelaide Cluster of Catholic schools, a pathway from Reception through to Year 12 exists in partnership with Cabra College and Sacred Heart College.
54 Ragless St, St Marys 8299 2900 stberna.catholic.edu.au info@stberna.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Catherine’s School STIRLING We develop rich, contemporary learning environments that are personalised and challenging. The environment and sustainability are focus areas and we have a three pond wetland system, which the students manage, as well as a permaculture garden, bokashi composting bins, chickens, worm farms and an aquaponics system. We live by our values: Respect, Commitment, Sustainability, Honesty and Compassion.
22 Ayers Hills Rd, Stirling 8339 2222 stcaths.catholic.edu.au info@stcaths.catholic.edu.au
R-12 St Francis de Sales College MOUNT BARKER Offering a R-12 co-education, St Francis de Sales’ current facility redevelopment will cater for our growing population with plans for an Early Learning Centre and new R-6 Junior School, to complement the Community Sports Centre opened in 2018.
Reception students commence in Terms 1 and 3, whilst secondary education begins in our Middle School in Year 7.
8 Dutton Rd, Mount Barker 8393 1000 stfrancis.catholic.edu.au info@stfrancis.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St John the Apostle Parish School CHRISTIES BEACH Choosing the right school for your child is an important decision. We invite you to explore our website to discover all that St Johns has to offer. We provide high quality teaching and offer a streamlined pathway to Cardijn College.
We also offer a transition program for children entering Reception, a supported playgroup and OSHC.
14 Winnerah Rd, Christies Beach 8382 2064 stjohns.catholic.edu.au info@stjohns.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St John the Baptist Catholic School PLYMPTON We endeavour to work together as partners in your child’s educational and spiritual development. Students are nurtured to develop and demonstrate mutual respect in behaviour, dress and manner. Underpinning this, the highly professional staff provide students with individual attention. We welcome you to see our community in action.
342 Anzac Highway, Plympton 8293 6280 stjohnpl.catholic.edu.au info@stjohnpl.catholic.edu.au
St Joseph’s School MURRAY BRIDGE We are a Josephite school on the traditional lands of the Ngarrindjeri people. We believe the personal learning and development of every child matters. Our curriculum is contemporary and accommodates the needs of our multicultural community. Our new Joey’s Program, aimed at our 2020 reception children, will allow transition to school to be seamless.
1 Florence St, Murray Bridge 8532 3734 stjomb.catholic.edu.au info@stjomb.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Martin de Porres School SHEIDOW PARK We have a strong academic record, an extensive co-curricular program, and a commitment to Positive Education that ensures all students are supported and valued. Enrolling at St Martin de Porres enters your child into an educational pathway through to Sacred Heart College or Cabra College. Our students take pride in being members of such a vibrant school.
1 Berrima Rd, Sheidow Park 8321 8300 smdps.catholic.edu.au info@smdps.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Mary’s Memorial School GLENELG We provide a supportive and positive learning environment in which every child’s individual needs, skills and talents can be identified and nurtured so that they have a sense of belonging, a love of learning, and respect for each other. We believe that the wellbeing of each student is vital for their personal and academic success.
16 Milton St, Glenelg 8294 4580 stmarmem.catholic.edu.au info@stmarmem.catholic.edu.au
R-7 School of the Nativity ABERFOYLE PARK Our motto ‘Families ,Living, Loving, Learning’ reflects our vision to offer a primary faith based education in the Catholic tradition. Our school has a strong focus on literacy, numeracy, digital technologies and well being and offers excellent facilities that we share in a Campus arrangement with Thiele Primary School and Pilgrim Primary.
Campus Drive, Aberfoyle Park 8270 3177 nativity.catholic.edu.au info@nativity.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Stella Maris Parish School SEACOMBE GARDENS At our school, each student is nurtured, valued and respected. We offer an extensive curriculum, complemented by a variety of engaging and educational extra-curricular activities. The re-introduction of year 6 students in 2019 has been the catalyst for an exciting building project that will allow for further curriculum diversification, focussing on STEM and student collaboration.
1 Syme Ave, Seacombe Gardens 8306 4888 smps.catholic.edu.au contact@smps.catholic.edu.au
WEST & NORTHWEST R-6 Dominican School SEMAPHORE At Dominican School, we embrace the values and traditions of the Catholic Church and the Dominican charism. With the support of outstanding staff, students experience a broad and diverse curriculum.
A wide range of extra-curricular programs are available including playgroup, sports, music, Children’s University, breakfast club and our own radio station.
237 Military Rd, Semaphore 8449 6300 dominican.catholic.edu.au info@dominican.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Immaculate Heart of Mary School BROMPTON We are a small, welcoming and vibrant school situated in the heart of Bowden/Brompton, 3.8 kms from the City. High quality education is provided in a personalised learning environment where inclusivity and creativity are embraced. At IHM, every child is well known, supported and challenged to flourish.
95 East St, Brompton 8115 7600 ihm.catholic.edu.au info@ihm.catholic.edu.au
7-12 Mount Carmel College ROSEWATER Mount Carmel College is an affordable, contemporary, flexible school for excellence in education, where students are known and valued as individuals. Our close ties with universities and TAFE provide smooth pathways to tertiary study. Our Rosewater Trade Training Centre provides unique industry standard training and facilities.
33 Newcastle St, Rosewater 8447 0500 mcc.catholic.edu.au mcc@mcc.catholic.edu.au
B-12 Nazareth Catholic College FINDON/FLINDERS PARK Success at Nazareth goes further than excellent academic outcomes – our community is a place of welcome, connecting faith, family and education across the lifespan. Our approach to education and commitment to nourishing family life means our students graduate knowing they have been encouraged to develop to their full potential, making the world a better place.
Findon Campus: R-6 College, Early Childhood Centre, Community Services, 176 Crittenden Rd, Findon Flinders Park Campus: 7-12 College, Community Services, 1 Hartley Rd, Flinders Park 8406 5000 nazareth.org.au info@nazareth.org.au
Our Lady of La Vang FLINDERS PARK We are a purpose-built Catholic specialist educational facility for children and young people with intellectual disability. We offer learning and teaching grounded in contemporary evidence-based practices. We have an artist-in-residence program which enables students to be spontaneous, joyful and free to enjoy the ability to express their learning journey in the moment.
11 Malcolm St, Flinders Park 8159 2500 lavang.catholic.edu.au info@lavang.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Our Lady of Mt Carmel Parish School PENNINGTON We are committed to connecting with all families and making a difference to the lives of those in our community. Living out our vision, Empowering hearts and minds to flourish, calls us to work with families to foster children’s spiritual, social and emotional, and academic growth.
17 Pennington Tce, Pennington 8447 1405 mcps.catholic.edu.au info@mcps.catholic.edu.au
P-6 Our Lady of the Visitation School TAPEROO Our school enables students to develop in a creative, dynamic and progressive environment. Academic development is assisted by setting individual learning goals.
We have a strong emphasis on literacy and numeracy and learning needs are identified and responded to through the use of data and using a range of research-informed practices.
433 Victoria Rd, Taperoo 8248 2480 olv.catholic.edu.au info@olv.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Our Lady Queen of Peace School ALBERT PARK Our Lady of Queen of Peace School has a strong commitment to work in partnership with families. Students are educated in an environment which encourages them to be critical thinkers, to be innovative, challenged and inspired in their learning experiences, and to think and act on the basis of personal reflection.
106 Botting St, Albert Park 8345 4036 olqp.catholic.edu.au info@olqp.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St Francis School LOCKLEYS Inspired by our faith and tradition, St Francis School is dedicated to growing together in faith, peace and wisdom. We celebrate an inclusive environment where right relationships and students’ intellectual, spiritual, social and physical wellbeing are paramount. We believe that successful learners are reflective, engaged, creative and connected.
458 Henley Beach Rd, Lockleys 8356 6404 sflockleys.catholic.edu.au info@sflockleys.catholic.edu.au
R-6 St John Bosco School BROOKLYN PARK We nurture future citizens with a love for lifelong learning to make a difference in our world. Our school has contemporary learning facilities and a positive learning culture. We offer a range of specialist learning areas including ICT, Japanese, instrumental tuition, and a learning support program. We also offer reception transition, OSHC and Vacation care.
19 Lipsett Tce, Brooklyn Park 8352 7073 sjb.catholic.edu.au info@sjb.catholic.edu.au
P-6 St Joseph’s Catholic School WEST HINDMARSH We are a small community with a big vision leading the way to excellence. Inspired by the Principles of Reggio Emilia all children are provided with the opportunities to imagine, discover, create and ACHIEVE. We deliver a seamless pathway to school by offering a supported Playgroup and a Preschool that exceeds National Quality Standards.
56 Albemarle St, West Hindmarsh 8346 6569 sjsh.catholic.edu.au info@sjsh.catholic.edu.au
P-6 St Joseph’s School OTTOWAY Our school community includes preschool, playgroup and Out of School Hours Care. We provide a safe, welcoming environment that stimulates our students to learn and discover their place in our world. Our staff are exceptionally professional, passionate and enthusiastic. They give their time and expertise generously to ensure all students experience success.
10 Ina Ave, Ottoway 8447 4969 stjotto.catholic.edu.au info@stjotto.catholic.edu.au
P-6 St Margaret Mary’s School CROYDON PARK We understand all children as capable, creative and curious with a strong desire to be successful learners. Working with parents and the community, we share our common vision to foster a love of learning and service to others. Our vibrant early learning program includes playgroup, occasional care, preschool and OSHC.
5 Eldon St, Croydon Park 8245 5800 smms.catholic.edu.au info@smms.catholic.edu.au
R-12 St Michael’s College BEVERLEY/HENLEY BEACH St Michael’s College is a Catholic school in the Lasallian tradition. We are an inclusive and respectful community where each individual is known, valued and cared for, enabling them to feel confident to explore their curiosities, flourish and fully realise their potential.
Primary Campus: 78 East Ave, Beverley, 8346 6548 Secondary Campus: 15 Mitton Ave, Henley Beach, 8356 5966 smc.sa.edu.au smc@smc.sa.edu.au
R-6 St Patrick’s School MANSFIELD PARK We are a vibrant and welcoming community with a diversity of cultures and religions. We have a strong literacy focus and children from non-English backgrounds are well supported.
Our special education unit enables students to learn both in a specialised class and the mainstream. Student wellbeing is a high priority alongside quality teaching and learning.
33a Dudley St, Mansfield Park 8303 4500 stpatsmp.catholic.edu.au info@stpatsmp.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Star of the Sea School HENLEY BEACH We work in partnership with families to develop each student’s full potential. We value relationships that are based on respect, honesty, compassion, inclusivity and collaboration. Our Marine Discovery Centre enables students take part in marine studies as a part of the curriculum. Our playgroup operates on Tuesday mornings at 9.30am.
333 Military Rd, Henley Beach 8115 7400 star.catholic.edu.au info@star.catholic.edu.au
Tenison Woods Catholic Primary School RICHMOND Emulating our Josephite tradition, we work closely as a community to nurture each student and instil an understanding of social justice, including appreciation of, and care for, our environment. Our curriculum and pedagogical practices are contemporary and child-centred. We focus on supporting students to grow spiritually, emotionally and academically.
68 Brooker Tce, Richmond 8352 2706 twcs.catholic.edu.au info@twcs.catholic.edu.au
R-6 Whitefriars Catholic School WOODVILE PARK Our school, in the tradition of the Sisters of St Joseph, offers a caring, multicultural community environment for your child to grow and learn. Literacy, numeracy, flexible technology and STEM are key features with specialist areas in science, performing arts, physical education and Italian. We offer an extended transition program, playgroup, OSHC and vacation care.
45 Beaufort St, Woodville Park 8445 1895 whitefriars.catholic.edu.au info@whitefriars.catholic.edu.au
REGIONAL R-12 Caritas College PORT AUGUSTA WEST Our school is a place of welcome, honouring an ethos where compassion, dignity and respect are evident within our strong learning environment.
There is rich collaboration among staff and students across year levels and learning areas. We foster and enjoy an environment where everyone experiences joy in belonging, pride in achieving and hope in serving.
Woodforde St, Port Augusta 8648 9700 cc.catholic.edu.au info@cc.catholic.edu.au
R-7 Mary MacKillop Memorial School PENOLA Our school is dynamic and vibrant with a commitment to excellence where all children are encouraged to be capable, thriving people who will learn, lead and flourish through purposeful and exciting learning experiences. We are proud of our unique history in the establishment of Catholic Education South Australia.
5 Portland St, Penola 8737 2902 mmms.catholic.edu.au info@mmms.catholic.edu.au
R-7 Our Lady of the River School BERRI OLOR delivers a quality, Catholic education that is inclusive of families from different cultures and faiths. Our welcoming, community encourages students to learn and grow together, embracing life, being confident and happy. Teachers support all students in achieving personal success in flexible, modern learning spaces. We support all children to be strong and confident readers.
Vernan Tce, Berri 8582 1128 olor.catholic.edu.au roates@olor.catholic.edu.au
R-7 St Albert’s Catholic School LOXTON St Albert’s Catholic School is a great place for learning. We are proud of the environment we enjoy, the high standards we set and the opportunities we provide for our young learners. Our ability to tailor our programs ensures that each student can confidently explore their interests, fully supported and encouraged at every turn.
13 Geraldton St, Loxton 8584 5110 stalbert.catholic.edu.au info@stalbert.catholic.edu.au
R-7 St Anthony’s Catholic Primary School MILLICENT Our school encourages students to achieve their potential in an environment where words teach and actions speak. We see every child as capable and competent and as an active, self-motivating learner who feels safe and empowered to wonder and seek meaning about the world in which they live.
37 Mt Gambier Rd, Millicent 8733 3479 sta.catholic.edu.au info@sta.catholic.edu.au
R-9 St Barbara’s Parish School ROXBY DOWNS Energised by the challenges of remoteness, St Barbara’s provides stimulating experiences within a happy, secure environment giving students every opportunity to shine. Our contemporary curriculum, with a strong focus on literacy and numeracy, is supported by complementary programs such as Cracking the ABC code, Quicksmart Numeracy and Levelled Literacy Intervention.
78 Pioneer Drive, Roxby Downs 8671 3207 stbarbs.catholic.edu.au info@stbarbs.catholic.edu.au
R-7 St Columba’s Memorial School YORKETOWN Using a blend of traditional teaching and modern technology, we focus on sustainability and care for the environment, including aquaponics, worm farms, gardens and chickens. Sessions for preschool children called Ready, Set, Go are Wednesdays at 10.00am. Our two commuter vans transport students from surrounding towns each day and for class excursions.
55 Warooka Rd, Yorketown 8852 1461 scms.catholic.edu.au info@scms.catholic.edu.au
R-7 St James School JAMESTOWN St James Catholic School, in the Josephite tradition, provides students with a broad range of experiences that enable them to be engaged, capable, successful learners and citizens. We are committed to caring for and knowing our students, and working in partnership with our families and the wider community.
1-3 King Edward Tce, Jamestown 8664 1120 stjames.catholic.edu.au info@stjames.catholic.edu.au
R-7 St Joseph’s Parish School GLADSTONE Our school provides the families of Gladstone and surrounding townships, the option of a faith-filled Catholic education for their children. We provide a modern, safe and welcoming environment. We have priority use of the Southern Flinders Sports Stadium, including two indoor courts and industrial kitchen, which enhance the way our students engage with the curriculum.
1 West Tce, Gladstone 8662 2016 stjoglad.catholic.edu.au.
info@stjoglad.catholic.edu.au
R-7 St Joseph’s School BARMERA Robotics and STEM-based learning are features in our school. To balance the technology, we have a shaded jumping pillow and hammock station that are integrated into each child’s learning. Students love outdoor learning opportunities and participate in a Bush Kinder program, mud obstacle course, Learning at the Lake, gardening, incubating chickens and Youth Environmental Leader days.
8 Joyce St, Barmera 8588 6100 stjobarmera.catholic.edu.au info@stjobarmera.catholic.edu.au
St Joseph’s School CLARE We cater for students and families from the Clare and Gilbert valleys. Faithful to the example of Jesus and our Josephite heritage, we focus on developing a welcoming, supportive community. We are committed to nurturing resilient, confident and educated young people who develop openness to faith, a commitment to lifelong learning and service to the community.
29 Victoria Rd, Clare 8842 3830 stjoclar.catholic.edu.au info@stjoclar.catholic.edu.au
R-7 St Joseph’s School PETERBOROUGH St Joseph’s School promotes a deep understanding of and commitment to Gospel values. We seek to provide an opportunity for every student to develop to their full potential. The diverse range of learning activities offered acknowledges the different learning styles and experiences of each child.
2 Bourke St, Peterborough 8651 2449 stjopet.catholic.edu.au info@stjopet.catholic.edu.au
R-12 St Joseph’s School PORT LINCOLN From the first moment a student becomes part of our school family, we believe hopes and dreams can happen. With diverse classroom learning, and a wide range of extra-curricular activities, students have every opportunity to flourish. Our boarding students have the unique opportunity of being close enough to home to maintain strong community connections.
14 Mortlock Tce, Port Lincoln 8683 2400 sjspl.catholic.edu.au enrolments@sjspl.catholic.edu.au
R-7 St Joseph’s School RENMARK St Joseph’s School Renmark is a Reception to Year 7 rural school providing academic and spiritual learning based on gospel values.
This includes contemporary explicit learning as well as inquiry-based learning opportunities and the Beyond Blue’s Be you social and emotional wellbeing program. Our school motto is In All Things Love.
36 Twelfth St, Renmark 8586 5055 sjsr.catholic.edu.au info@sjsr.catholic.edu.au
R-12 St Mark’s College PORT PIRIE There is great opportunity at St Mark’s.
Investigate in our modern learning spaces; Gain industry skills at McNally Farm; Study in our university-style Year 12 Centre; Experiment in the new Science and STEM Centre; Work as a team in our new Sports Centre. Take a tour to find out more.
Benedict Campus: Primary, Wandearah Rd, Port Pirie Bosco Campus: Secondary 455 The Tce, Port Pirie Salesian House: Boarding 455 The Tce, Port Pirie.
8633 8800 smc.catholic.edu.au info@smc.catholic.edu.au
R-7 St Mary MacKillop School WALLAROO As we celebrate our 150th consecutive year of offering a Catholic Education to families on the Copper Coast, we have much to celebrate.
Growing enrolments, strong academic results and innovative and contemporary learning spaces make our school a school of choice for all families in the Copper Coast.
10 Bagot St, Wallaroo 8823 2549 stmm.catholic.edu.au info@stmm.catholic.edu.au
R-12 Samaritan College WHYALLA We educate boys and girls from Reception to Year 12 on three sites (two primary and one secondary). Year 7 has been part of the secondary setting since 2017 and a second Reception intake mid-year has been reintroduced to provide primary parents with more choice regarding school start dates.
Saint Teresa’s Campus: Darling Tce, Whyalla. 8645 8381 Our Lady Help of Christians Campus: 10 Toal St, Whyalla Stuart. 8649 2077 Saint John’s Campus: 70 Gowrie Ave, Whyalla Playford 8645 8568 samaritan.catholic.edu.au info@samaritan.catholic.edu.au
ELC-12 Tenison Woods College MT GAMBIER Our college offers regional and international students access to an exciting array of educational and vocational programs, enabling everyone to develop an individual pathway and life journey. Our music program offers the largest range of ensembles in the region and a specialised High Performance Sports Program prepares student athletes for their future sporting endeavours.
Shepherdson Rd, Mount Gambier 8725 5455 tenison.catholic.edu.au info@tenison.catholic.edu.au
TERTIARY T Aquinas College NORTH ADELAIDE Aquinas College, under the care of the Marists, is South Australia’s Catholic tertiary residential college. Our students love our unique blend of an achievement-oriented culture and a spirit marked by mutual respect, compassion, inclusion, and a good dose of fun. It’s a special place. Just ask any of the 200 students who call it home.
1 Palmer Place, North Adelaide 8334 5000 aquinas.edu.au admin@aquinas.edu.au
BOOK A TOUR Once you have found a school that you think might be right for your child, you can visit the school either through an Open Day, Principal’s Tour or personal appointment. Please contact the school directly to find out more.
For more information about every school in this directory visitcesa.catholic.edu.au
Word count: 7171
