THE dairy industry has faced a range of challenges in the past few years, including low farmgate prices and skyrocketing costs, so making a decision on any major investment in a business is a tough one for any farming family.
But for South-East farmer Natalie Clark, who works alongside her sons Josh and Sam in their 370 cow dairy near Mount Gambier, completing a strategic business review through Rural Business Support helped her family make a leap into the future through the use of robotics.
Robotic dairies offer an incredible system where the cows themselves decide when it’s time to be milked.
Cows are initially trained to enter the milking area using as food enticement, where a robotic arm then milks them. After becoming accustomed to the process, they can enter the milking area at will.
If a cow happens to enter the unit before it’s ready to be milked, an automatic drafter will send the animal in a different direction.
Mrs Clark said the state-of-the-art robotic facility, which was only put in 12 months ago, has halved the time the family needs to spend in the milking shed, freeing up time for them to spend on other farming and family activities.
It has also helped with herd management, as the robotic system also creates a massive amount of data on the animals, which can help with breeding decisions.
But, she said her family only gained the confidence to go down the robotic path after completing a business review, which used on-farm support to assist them to consider fundamental questions around where their business was at, to clarify where it was going and commit with confidence to where the family ideally wanted it to be.
“The main thing was, we wanted to work out whether it would be really feasible to put in a new dairy,” Mrs Clark said.
“We needed to update the dairy, but we also wanted to make sure we could afford a new one.”Rural Business Support chief executive Brett Smith says the review helps with the adoption of financial literacy and best practice by farming families. “The Farm Business Strategic Review helps them to put their figures into perspective – to clearly identify how their business is going, relative to industry benchmarks and what their opportunities are,” he said.
CREDIT: PAULA THOMPSON
Word count: 387
