ENERGY MACQUARIE boss Shemara Wikramanayake expects energy market volatility to remain “for some years” and anticipates a bigger lift in fossil fuel use in the near term amid ongoing geopolitical tensions.
But the high-flying executive, who has led the ASX-listed Macquarie since 2018, still sees a corresponding greater push toward renewables as she cautioned against industry moving too quickly.
Speaking at an Association of Superannuation Funds of Australia event on Wednesday, Ms Wikramanayake warned on the risks of “blowing up the mandate” for the transition away from traditional energy sources. “We have to think about how we do this balanced transition. People need energy and if we end up creating energy scarcity, we could lose the mandate for the transition,” she said.
“The coal industry is very profitable but it is going to run off. The people of Newcastle, the people of Australia need new industries, we need new reskilling for jobs. Let’s not go so fast that we blow up the mandate to do this, because without the solutions we can’t switch. We can’t just shut off all the energy and go back to living like cave people.” Macquarie, now with $750bn in assets under management, has spent two decades investing in renewable energy, taking what Ms Wikramanayake termed a strategy of “patient-adjacent growth” to find assets that would deliver on both the renewable energy side as well as on the investment return side.
“We put small bets on and learn a little bit about each new technology, bring in people in related expert areas with us, and then where things are going well and we’re building expertise, we double down.” Macquarie has made a net zero 2025 commitment for its scope one and two emissions and has committed to 2050 for net zero scope 3 emissions. It is expected to put out a detailed plan on its 2030 ambitions this year. It has committed to run off its lending and equity investments to coal by 2024.
Europe’s move to reduce its dependence on Russia as an energy source will help drive fossil fuel use higher in the near term, Ms Wikramanayake predicted. “I think (volatility in energy markets) will be with us for some years because Western Europe has basically decided they can’t be dependent on Russia for energy. We’ve seen not just places like China and Poland, say they’re going to lift their coal investment and production but even Germany. “But at the same time they’re doing that, they are all making bigger commitments to things that help on the climate journey. So I think that’s what’s playing out in energy now.”
Word count: 435
