Predictions about the impact of artificial intelligence and ­advanced automation on society and the economy alternate ­between the euphoric and the cataclysmic. But there are few areas where the impact of robotics will be more profound than healthcare, medicine and surgery.
There is nothing futuristic about medical robotics. They are here and helping the medical fraternity with your diagnosis, surgery, care, recovery and redesigned healthy lifestyles. It’s only a matter of time before they become as ubiquitous in your GP clinic as the stethoscope and blood pressure monitor.
Machine learning algorithms are already part of our daily healthcare routines: they send us reminders to schedule an appointment; they track our exercise, sleep and eating habits; they can accurately identify suspect melanomas; monitor energy levels; map fertility statistics; and collate other diagnostic data.
One recent British industry ­estimate indicates AI health technologies will be worth £5 billion globally by 2021, which represents a 40 per cent growth on current AI healthcare markets. A US report at the end of January says the global medical robotics market will be worth $US18.5bn by 2040.
One of the most stunning technological developments concerns the possibility of automated healthcare and especially the ­future of surgical robotics. Consider abdominal surgical robotics, which has been the fastest growing segment of the hi-tech medical device industry. Research predicts worldwide growth from $2.7bn in 2016 to $15.8bn by 2023.
There are several major technologies for robotic surgery applications and one of the most noteworthy is the da Vinci Surgical System, manufactured by Intuitive Surgical in California. Capable of undertaking complex, minimally invasive procedures controlled by a surgeon from a console, da Vinci is increasingly used for prostrate removals, cardiac valve repairs and gynaecological procedures, including hysterectomies. It’s been described as resembling not so much a computer as a video game.
Da Vinci is no newcomer. The robot was approved for use by the US Food and Drug Administration nearly 20 years ago.
Each da Vinci robot costs in ­excess of $US2 million ($2.82m), and there are about 5000 of these surgical robots installed in hospitals worldwide.
However, it is not without its critics. Some deaths have been linked with it and it is expensive compared to traditional surgery. Some estimates say it is about 10 times the traditional cost of some procedures, such as laparoscopies.
The question is do robots provide greater accuracy and precision than surgeons in the theatre? In corrective eye surgery, automated systems make tiny incisions into the patient’s cornea that a clumsy human hand would find impossible.
In knee replacement surgery, semi-autonomous robots cut through bone with the kind of precision that many leading specialists are unable to attain. In hair transplant surgery, robotic systems are used for identifying healthy hair follicles, harvesting them, and making minuscule incisions in the scalp of the patient in preparation for transplantation.
Transitioning to autonomous robotic surgery involves very significant changes to healthcare and medical systems, and there are a host of complex issues and ethical problems arising that require informed public policy responses now and in the future.
But the shift from automated to autonomous robotic surgeries is taking place much faster than many experts anticipated. Indeed, what we witness today is a growing divide between the “technological” and “traditional” surgeon.
Let’s just look at smart or implantable drug delivery technologies that have been under development for some time. The arrival of miniaturised robotic surgical devices and edible robots has taken the AI revolution in healthcare to a new level.
A few examples illustrate the point. Rani Therapeutics has ­developed an ingestible robot, designed with a carbohydrate-based syringe, which can deliver medicines to designated locations of the body, such as the intestinal tract.
Researchers at the Max Planck Institute in Germany have pioneered an ingestible endoscope, a kind of micro-bot which medics can operate from outside the ­patient’s body. It can pass through the human gut and deliver a fine-needle biopsy.
And researchers at the Swiss Federal Polytechnic School in Lausanne have tested concepts in soft robotics, designing soft-bots made of edible gelatine and glycerine materials.
These soft-bots are biodegradable, and will break down and be digested by the patient’s body. One possible use of this research is that of food transportation, where the micro-bot effectively functions as food.
There are upsides and downsides to robots in healthcare. ­Robots are mathematically ­constructed and therefore are ­engineered to not only follow the evidence but to analyse all available data, while human doctors tend to discriminate between available information and have in-built biases that favour some pieces of information over others. They may not also see the links between sometimes disparate ­pieces of information.
At the same time they don’t offer intangible benefits such as the humanistic hand-holding care that a doctor, nurse or other healthcare worker can offer.
The overall level of scientific and technological innovation here is stunning. Yet we have no easy way to determine whether edible bots are set to transform people into cyborgs and revolutionise healthcare, or whether many of these innovations in robotic medicine and automated drug delivery are simply the latest form of society’s hankering for technological utopia. What does appear plain is that many of these shifts in healthcare and medical technologies have no precedent in history, and consequently present society, culture, politics and law with fresh opportunities and risks in equal measure.Professor Anthony Elliott is dean of external engagement and executive director of the Hawke EU Jean Monnet Centre of Excellence at the University of South Australia. Julie Hare is honorary fellow of the Graduate School of Education at the University of Melbourne
CREDIT: ANTHONY ELLIOT; JULIE HARE; COMMENT
Word count: 939
