GARRY Stewart has been at the helm of Australian Dance Theatre for the past 20 years. The ADT is presenting Anthology to honour his contribution to the company. He shares his story.
Twenty years is both a long, long time, but also barely anything at all. This dichotomy in the perception of time seems most apparent as I reflect on two decades at the helm of Australian Dance Theatre.
Over this period I feel like I have seen it all – incalculable moments of glory as well as our fair share of nailbiting challenges.
Mostly though, I place my focus on recalling extraordinary and uplifting performances by our phenomenal dancers seen across the globe.
Over the past 20 years, ADT has toured more internationally than any other Australian contemporary dance company.
That is certainly something we can all be proud of.
To wave the cultural flag for South Australia in Paris, London, New York, Barcelona, Seville, Luxembourg, Mumbai, Bogota, Singapore, Jakarta, Sydney and Melbourne, among many other cities on multiple occasions, is more than any dance company or choreographer can hope to achieve.
The expanse of our work across the diverse fields of robotics, architecture, virtual reality, video installation, 3D technology, philosophy, science and academia has enthralled many.
Like my predecessors, I remain committed to pushing the boundaries of the art form, while steadfastly creating dance that is intentionally geared toward the audience.
Of the disappointments, there have been a few, of course, as is the nature of life and the unfolding of all things that matter to us.
Predominantly though, it was the Australia Council’s early decision to shift ADT out of the Australian Major Performing Arts Group (AMPAG) category – a group of 28 major companies blessed with special funding status - to the Dance Board.
This move has had the most amplified negative impact on the DNA of the company. This decision occurred within the first few weeks of my appointment when the managers of AMPAG declared they “were not sure where the company would now head”.
However, within three years, we had become the most internationally renowned contemporary dance company this country has produced.
Recently, ADT has undergone the most significant and fundamental changes to its structure in its 54-year history.
Two years ago, we founded an International Centre for Choreography and last year the inaugural, biennial Adelaide Dance Festival.
Beyond making outstanding stage performances, ADT is now poised for a whole new journey. We seek to uplift the local dance sector and connect South Australian and Australian dance artists with others artists around the world.
We wish to offer supportive pathways for the development of new dance by a new generation of dance makers via our choreographic centre, while simultaneously attracting an audience for these artists through evolving a major new festival. At this juncture, these are only nascent programs that will require time and resources to grow and evolve, but we are excited by the impending sense of possibility.
Perhaps this is similar to how our founding artistic director Elizabeth Cameron Dalman may have felt back in 1965 when she took the first intrepid steps in creating her dance company, the Australian Dance Theatre.It was in a small studio in the Adelaide Arcade, unaware of what would unfold over the ensuing decades.
CREDIT: GARRY STEWART
Word count: 552
