A ROBOT that can detect paper and plastic bottles and a machine to vacuum and re-use broken glass are among nine recycling projects to receive State Government grants.
Totalling $2.7 million, the second round of Greens Industries SA’s infrastructure investment is a key plank of the Government’s $12.4 million China Sword response.
Boosting the local recycling industry became a key priority after China imposed a ban on the importation of certain waste products, affecting about 1.3 million tonnes of Australian material.
Environment Minister David Speirs said yesterday the latest round of funding would create more than 50 jobs across the waste-management, recycling and resource-recovery sector.
The Northern Adelaide Waste Management Authority (NAWMA) netted three separate grants totalling $1.5 million, including a facility upgrade, an investment in autonomous robotics, and a “glass fines” recovery system to recycle small pieces of glass.
NAWMA chief executive Adam Faulkner said the organisation had already moved to other interstate and overseas markets when the Chinese ban was imposed and had invested aggressively to capitalise on the opportunities it presented.
Mr Faulkner said he expected NAWMA would tip about $4 million into the three projects itself, bringing the total value of the latest round of investment to $5.5 million.
He was particularly excited about the glass fines recovery, although he said a robot able to sniff out paper and plastics was “pretty cool”. NAWMA currently recovers most of the glass people put in their recyclable bins but normally misses chunks smaller than the size of an adult’s palm.
“By the time the bin gets collected and dumped in our factory a lot of it breaks up into small pieces,” Mr Faulkner said.
“A machine will pick up smaller bits of glass and return it back into glass bottles and the really small stuff into roads and footpaths instead of using virgin sand.” He said existing technology would be used for the paper and plastic-detecting robot to combat a similar problem.
“To put it simply, we miss stuff,” Mr Faulkner said.
“We take about 60,000 tonnes a year of recycling but we reckon we miss a couple of thousand tonnes a year.” With recycling worth about $100 a tonne, Mr Faulkner said the potential revenue boost was “not insignificant” but would also reduce the amount of waste going to landfill.
Other grants handed out include laser sorting for compost, a PVC separation and recycling plant and a new vehicle for the Salvation Army to stop unused goods going to landfill. Mr Speirs said the latest investment would help SA maintain its “world-leading di­version results”, where 83.4 per cent of all waste is diverted from landfill.
“China’s National Sword policy was a catalyst to increase the quality of our recycled materials and develop local markets as a priority,” he said.“This funding supports a range of projects in both the private sector and local government, and across metropolitan and regional South Australia to do just that.”
CREDIT: ADAM LANGENBERG POLITICAL REPORTER
Word count: 493
