ADELAIDE scientists are using insect brains to make sensors that could spot an ISIS drone trying to drop a bomb on troops in the Middle East.
The University of South Australia team has been studying dragonflies’ ability to hover, flit and fly, all while keeping an eye on a target.
They expect to finish their drone detection project by the end of next year. Neuroscientist, mechatronic engineer and robotics expert Russell Brinkworth modelled hoverflies and dragonflies to improve detection systems, which could improve bionic eyes, driverless cars, facial recog-nition and wildlife monitoring.
Dr Brinkworth said dragonflies could adjust to dark and light surroundings and have superior tracking and detection skills. “All these visual processes can be mapped to help us build systems that can operate in complex environments,” he said.
“Biologically, the human eye structure bears little comparison to insect eyes and the two species perceive things very differently. However, the way that insects process visual information is remarkably like humans.
“We take the algorithms that insects use, and we modify them to suit our purposes, whether it’s to improve security camera footage or to improve facial recognition.” It could also help with spotting drones, which are increasingly being weaponised to carry bombs or improvised explosive devices (IEDs).
This has been a particular issue in the Middle East, where armoured cars are traditionally made with thick protective metal on the bottom to protect against road IEDs. However, they are vulnerable to explosives being dropped through the thinner metals on the top of the vehicles. ISIS has been using cheap commercial drones to carry out hundreds of attacks in Iraq and Syria.
Dr Brinkworth has been working with Professor Anthony Finn, Defence and Systems Institute director, on using algorithms to spot drones. The project is one of 14 to win funding from the Federal Government’s $7360 million Next Generation Tech-nologies fund. That fund is being used to improve Australia’s space, defence, and intelligence capabilities.
Prof Finn said they were using the dragonfly model on small, portable computers to process data and identify targets in complex environments, “even when they occupy less than one image pixel or are practically inaudible”.
As well as war settings, that could help with other drone incidents. “If somebody wants to stop a major airport from operating, all they have to do is fly a small drone in the vicinity,” he said.“We saw this in December 2018 when hundreds of flights were cancelled at Gatwick Airport near London following drone sightings close to one of the runways.”
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD STATE EDITOR
Word count: 426
