The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the important role of industry associations as a connector, a provider of information and a united voice for advocacy.
In 2020 the SA Chamber of Mines & Energy (SACOME) marks a major milestone, celebrating its 40th Anniversary.
Our sector was born in 1840 when silver and copper were discovered in South Australia.
From the bronze age, through industrialisation and into the technology revolution, our sector has both underpinned and fuelled innovation. The resources sector provides the materials that enable the world to push the boundaries of science.
Today, the resources sector earns more export income for Australia than all other industries combined and generates more than half of our country’s total exports. In South Australia the resources sector underpins the State’s economy and contributes to 50 percent of the State’s exports, helping to fund our schools, hospitals and roads.
The discovery of the giant Olympic Dam copper-gold-uranium deposit was pivotal to the development of the mineral resources sector in South Australia, and was a key issue for the Chamber in its formative years. With this development complementing the existing Moomba gas fields SA became recognised as a significant resources jurisdiction in Australia.
Land access and native title frameworks, exploration incentives and strategic infrastructure planning have remained at the forefront of the Chambers advocacy over its 40 year history.
The Chamber has also been actively involved in important and contentious issues such as the nuclear fuel cycle Royal Commission, the review of the States Mining Act and recent proposals for drilling in the Great Australian Bight Here the Chamber’s advocacy providing fact-based information to the people of South Australians.
Our sector is no longer the stereotypical male orientated, dirty, dangerous, ‘high vis’ industry so often portrayed. We are future focussed, and technology driven. We are at the forefront of automation, robotics and AI. Lowering carbon emissions and renewable energy are all part of our growing sector.
Equality and diversity are driving our sector forward and ensuring that we employ the brightest minds to solve complex global issues. Core to the sector is our vibrant industry association.
CREDIT: REBECCA KNOL CEO SACOME
Word count: 356
