A UNIVERSITY degree is an important building block to a successful career, opening a wealth of opportunities for a bright future.
Studying science, medicine, nursing, law, creative arts, teaching, archaeology, engineering – or any of the other courses at Flinders University – also can help other people looking to widen and diversify their knowledge and skills.
For example, Anika Talukder, a Flinders engineering PhD, has just been recruited as a graduate electronic hardware engineer by global advanced tech defence, aerospace and security solutions company BAE Systems Australia in Adelaide.
“I am very excited to begin my professional career with a company leading in the defence and manufacturing field and I hope to work in the advancement of space technologies and capabilities in SA,” she says.
She studied for five years to complete honours and a master of biomedical engineering.
Flinders University has been instrumental in her career headstart, with practical projects, as well as study and research collaborations in Malaysia and Singapore universities.
Third-year engineering students Anthony Eldridge, Paula Ostendorf and Michael Campbell have become firm friends during their time at Flinders, adding to their uni experience by reviving the collegial Flinders University Society of Engineering (FUSE).
“In addition to FUSE, I work as a STEM Ambassador at Flinders,” Campbell says. His community engagement also involves volunteering with conservation efforts to save threatened shorebirds such as the hooded plover. “During my degree I have been able to use robots used in industry, and apply by degree focus (Robotic Engineering Honours) in the recent national Weir Warman design and build competition in Sydney,” he says.
Electronic Engineering Honours student Anthony, who also works in SA schools as a Flinders STEM Ambassador, is hoping to work in the emerging field of wearable electronics, such as smart watches.
Among the array of 2020 course options at Flinders University are:
CYBERSECURITY From the cybersecurity course in Law, and computer science specialisations, this is a major new area of future employment.
DEFENCE Learn from the experts in advanced manufacturing, automation, Industry 4.0, robotics and other skills, and Flinders also has course endorsement from the Naval Shipbuilding College.
CREATIVE WRITING Learn skills taught by award-winning authors such as New York Times bestseller Sean Williams, romance writer Amy Matthews (as Tess LeSue) or look at options in scriptwriting or other creative arts.
DIGITAL ARTS Flinders graduates are at the forefront of visual effects and entertainment design, filmmaking and other creative industries booming both in Australia and overseas.
SPORT SCIENCE Study Sport, Health and Physical Activity with lecturers such as Shane Pill, author of six books on sports leadership, or apply for one of a range of Elite Athlete scholarships.
NUTRITION Address the future health needs of Australia and gain skills and knowledge in demand around the world. Graduate from South Australia’s number one university in undergraduate Health Services & Support for full-time employment, as reported by The Good Universities Guide.
SOCIAL WORK Speak out for those who cannot speak for themselves. Study at South Australia’s number one university in undergraduate Social Work for overall quality of educational experience.
School leavers, parents, friends and members of the community can find out more at the Flinders University Information Night at Bedford Park on December 4. The university will be open for tours and questions from 5.30pm to 8pm.VISIT EVENTS.FLINDERS.EDU.AU/EVENTS/STUDY-IN-2020
Word count: 551
