This was the consensus of five Yass and 12 Murrumbateman Scouts who recently returned from the Australian Scouts Jamboree at the Bend Motorsport Park in Tailem Bend, South Australia.
Held once every three years, the jamboree site became a temporary home to young people from Australia and over 18 other countries.
The Scouts had an entirely international experience, hosting 18 Scouts from Bangladesh as part of their troop.
Local Scouts were treated to a range of amazing opportunities and many notched up first-time experiences.
Where else could you experience the adrenaline-pumping fun of ice skating (in an almost desert-like location), rifle shooting, rock climbing and BMX biking, but in the Scouts?
A lap of the Bend Motorsport Track or the chance to take control of a glider over the jamboree site was also on offer.
On-site bases were loaded with fun things for the Scouts to do - smashing old cars, giant water slides, mud obstacles and crate stacking.
Scouts were also treated to off-site adventures including a day exploring the city of Adelaide and high rope courses, archery tag and the challenge hill obstacle course at the Woodhouse Activity Centre.
Sailing and dragon boating were all part of the fun and adventures at the appropriately named Wet 'n' Windy.
The Scouts' practical skills development was fostered at the trades base, where Scouts were able to try their hand at automotive wiring, plumbing, woodwork, sewing, cooking, beauty and constructing solar buddy lights for children in developing countries.
Flying drones, metal detecting and robotics were on offer for the hi-tech Scouts, while others enjoyed challenging themselves inside escape rooms or chilling out at the mall or movie theatre.
A highlight of every jamboree is the nighttime entertainment and this jamboree did not disappoint. The Scouts rocked to concerts by Justice Crew and Ricki Lee and were entertained by a top Australian aerial acrobatics pilot, sword swallower and firework displays.
A jamboree is the ultimate test of resilience, time management and teamwork, and helps young people to foster independence.
The Scouts are woken most mornings around 5am for either breakfast duty or to pack for off-site activities. Each patrol is rostered on for a day to prepare food for the troop, collect the supply of food from the distribution centre and dispose of rubbish. Individual Scouts are responsible for their own washing, done by hand.
Yass and Murrumbateman Jamboree troop leader Andrew Wyman described it as a life-changing experience.
"At a jamboree, Scouts have the opportunity to do so many new, fun and action-packed activities. They make new friends, learn responsibility for themselves, work as a team and face new challenges," he said.
The local Scouts were accompanied by seven adult leaders and four older venturer and rover scouts from Yass and Murrumbateman, making it a total of 28 local residents who attended.
While the jamboree is for Scouts aged 11-14, people aged six to 24 can join Scouts as joeys and rovers.
CREDIT: Kylie Brettschneider
Word count: 494
