DEFENCE RESEARCH - SPECIAL REPORT A ‘defence state’ researcher turns fiction into fact
Autonomous marine vehicles are emerging as a disruptive technology with the potential to transform the future operational use and protection of naval fleets.
And Flinders University engineering researcher Karl Sammut is at the forefront of their development, taking what just a few short years ago sounded like science fiction and turning it into science fact.
Professor Sammut is a leading expert in maritime robotics with a particular research interest in surface and underwater vehicles that are capable of completely independent operation.
“From small agile vehicles, to large units that can really multi-task, the more autonomous functionality we can pack into these marine vehicles, the greater the applications for this most exciting of technology — principally in defence, but in other sectors too,” Professor Sammut says.
“We’re not talking remote-controlled units; these are devices that are programmed to work independently and be capable of sensing their environment, analysing a situation, making a decision and embarking on action without any human input.
“So they can be dispatched to survey marine areas that are too dangerous for personnel, or could undertake vital maintenance inspection tasks faster, more safely and with greater technical precision than people.
“In perfecting this underwater technology for defence, it opens up other spillover possibilities too — for example, we’re adapting an autonomous underwater vehicle to support aquaculture, capable of inspecting fish farm cages for breaches, doing maintenance tasks and monitoring fish populations. We also work closely with our marine ecologist and biologist colleagues on how autonomous marine vehicles can be harnessed to monitor the health of our oceans and help sustain the biodiversity within.” Professor Sammut’s maritime engineering work is one example of Flinders University research that is making a difference in defence.
With South Australia known as the defence state, and billions of dollars in defence projects ramping up, the national and international opportunities are significant.
From researching concept technologies in support of both the Collins Class and Future Submarine programs, to developing health diagnostic systems for defence platforms, Flinders University researchers are creating novel technologies that are advancing the sector and keeping defence personnel out of harm’s way.
Nanotechnologists, under the leadership of Professor David Lewis, are investigating new ways to fabricate propellers to increase blade strength, reduce corrosion and enhance performance while reducing manufacturing costs.
New materials and processes are advancing additive manufacturing, improving properties and predictability, which will also have significant flow-on benefits to other manufacturing industries.
Instrumentation systems on naval vessels are being revolutionised by employing cutting edge fibre optic technologies. Biomechanics are enhancing body resilience to ensure our military personnel are at peak performance levels. Groundbreaking work on the stability and safety of energetic materials promises widespread benefits, from safer munitions for troops, to safer charges for the mining industry.
The challenge to develop such new and improved technology and back it up with transformative manufacturing requires a strong evidence base informed by world-leading research and international know-how.
Flinders University has developed a national and international reputation as a defence industry partner of choice. It was recently selected by Lockheed Martin Australia — the combat systems integrator for Australia’s Future Submarine program — as a research partner on the use of uninhabited vehicles and autonomous systems by a submarine.
Flinders also recently entered into a research and education agreement with Naval Group and a leading French graduate school of engineering in the area of autonomous maritime vehicle research.
With collaborations spanning major defence firms such as ASC, BAE Systems, Lockheed Martin Australia, Naval Group, Northrop Grumman Australia, Thales, and leading research institutions in France and the UK, Flinders University is driving research and training initiatives that are supporting Australia’s advanced manufacturing industry, furthering research and contributing to employment and economic growth.
This level of collaboration will grow a talent pool of defence researchers and support innovation, thereby enhancing sovereign industry capability for the major defence projects in Australia. Exciting student exchanges between Flinders University and France are further strengthening international relations and sharing skills and knowledge.
Flinders’ Tonsley Manufacturing Innovation Hub, under the leadership of Professor John Spoehr, is driving a new generation of Industry 4.0 manufacturing that’s smarter, faster, more versatile and more precise than ever before. It has placed Adelaide on the global stage and has been a factor in Flinders University’s increasing industry and institutional connections.
With its strong track record, growing investment in research, international outlook and bold ambitions, Flinders is solving real world defence challenges and delivering the technologies, skills and jobs for the future.Tony Kyriacou is defence partnerships director at Flinders University.
CREDIT: Tony Kyriacou
Word count: 772
