A COLLAPSE in the number of students studying mining and petroleum has become so concerning the University of Adelaide has turned to space for inspiration.
Enrolments at the state’s top ranked uni have plunged from more than 100 to fewer than 10 in key mining courses.
Nationally, only 34 first-year students enrolled in mining engineering last year, down from 267 students in 2012, the Minerals Tertiary Education Council says.
The downturn, which risks a skills gap in an industry that underpins Australia’s economy, must be addressed, claims the South Australian Chamber of Mines.
“The resources sector is currently not the first career choice for many young people, despite it being one of the most innovative, progressive and well-paid industries to work in,” chief executive Rebeca Knol said.
“Admissions to SA’s world-leading university courses in mining and petroleum have dwindled and a worrying skills gap is growing.” Professor Michael Goodsite, from the University of Adelaide, wants to ignite young people’s interest by evoking the romance of space.
“The sky is no longer the limit,” he said.
“We’re taking our terrestrial expertise and getting students excited, reinvigorating these areas so we can get hundreds of students interested in a hi-tech field that’s important to us all.” Teaching students how to mine in space would provide them with extremely sellable skills.
“To do anything in space it has to be so efficient to make the business case,” he said.
“Efficiency means you’re being more sustainable because you’re using less energy, you’re using less water. These are concepts that if you apply them back on Earth, you’ll help all of us and nature.” Prof Goodsite, who emigrated here last year from the US to head the School of Civil, Environmental and Mining Engineering and be interim head of the School of Petroleum, said there was a genuine prospect of space mining.
Establishing a permanent moon station and going to Mars requires skills for sustainability beyond rocket and astronautical sciences.
“Some of our students will be so talented they will be able to fill a gap in NASA or the European Space Agency,” he said.
Ms Knol said there were several factors behind the student decline, from perception about the industry, falls in commodity prices, cyclical change from construction to production, changes to skilled migrant visas and job market uncertainty.
“Too often, we’re regarded as an old and dirty industry,” she said. “Anti-mining activism has fuelled mistrust in what we do.
“We have been much maligned over environmental impact when really the minerals and energy we produce are essential to all our lives and at the forefront of adapting to climate change.” In a submission to the federal review of vocational education, the Minerals Council of Australia said robotics, automation and remote operations were changing the skills required and allowing mining to support “a more diverse and inclusive workforce”.
Mining jobs are expected to grow by 2.4 per cent to 240,000 positions nationally by 2030, according to the Federal Jobs and Small Business Department.
The industry is well paid, with average earnings for jobs in resources about $2659 a week, 65 per cent higher than the national average.
Former head of BHP’s Olympic Dam, Jacqui McGill, backs the university’s strategy.
“Once you hook kids into the excitement of STEM (science, technology, engineering and maths) courses, then you have an opportunity to get them to continue in resources,” she said.“In SA, there’s potentially a unique ecosystem to make the connection between potential mining in space and underground mining.”
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 586
