LOT 14 PLAN
A NEW centre at Lot Fourteen that would create hundreds of jobs for world-leading scientists in the increasingly important area of information protection is planned by Adelaide University.
Business and government agencies back the plan, which would deliver a big boost to the South Australian economy, the university said.
It would include constructing a new tower building on the prestigious North Tce site.
“Society is now more digital than ever, and our dependence on the virtual is growing in all sectors,” deputy vice-chancellor in charge of research Anton Middelberg said.
Mastering “‘information capability” was the next great security challenge, he said.
The university now has 180 people in different but related areas – such as computer science, machine learning, robotics and mathematics – who would become attached to the new venture.
“We’d probably also get some IT systems people from the business school and some psychologists and social scientists,” Prof Middelberg said. “So we would draw from across the university for that initial core and then new ongoing jobs would be between 300 and 400 scientists.” In addition, work on the building – preliminarily estimated at about $150 million – would support hundreds of construction jobs.
“The beauty of this is that it’s not something a bunch of academics have dreamt up – it’s come out of our industry advisory boards,” Prof Middelberg said.
The boards include senior figures from major companies such as BAE, Boeing, Lockheed Martin and SAAB. Several big companies had provided formal letters of support.
“Now we’ll start the conversations about building a consortium,” Prof Middelberg said.
A State Government spokesman said Adelaide University already had a significant presence on Lot Fourteen.
“Universities feature prominently in our plans for Lot Fourteen,” he said. The university runs the Australian Institute for Machine Learning, on the corner of North Tce and Frome Rd. It is involved in the Australian Space Agency, the Cyber Collaboration Centre and the planned Innovation Hub.
It is a founding partner in the Living Lab, which was formed with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, BankSA, Optus, DSpark and the State Government.
MIT Professor Alex “Sandy” Pentland told the Sunday Mail it was exciting to see the commitment to innovation and jobs development at the Living Lab, founded a year ago.
Adelaide University also has a $100 million vision for its Waite campus involving three new builds – an agricultural technology research hub, a collaboration centre for working with industry and government agencies, and a research and teaching winery. However, the projects would require government funding.
“The market failure is at the infrastructure level,” Prof Middelberg said. “Once the infrastructure is there, it opens up a huge amount of activity.”
CREDIT: CHRIS RUSSELL
Word count: 452
