IT’S a story of fairytale proportions: a young Kenyan refugee crafting robots out of recycled materials thrown on the village scrap heap – completely self-taught – will address some of the world’s brightest tech entrepreneurs in Adelaide.
Zillah Munene says he keeps pinching himself.
“I can’t believe it,” he says. “Sometimes I think I am in a dream and I will be in Kenya when I wake up.” The 22-year-old will showcase his latest invention, Robot Amo, handmade from e-waste, during a keynote address on Thursday. He will close the week-long SouthStart festival, attracting more than 1000 entrepreneurs, investors, technologists and creatives in Adelaide to explore the human interface of technology.
By six, Zillah, who was born in Nyeri, a town in the central highlands of Kenya, says – to his mother’s horror – he began disassembling radios in order “to understand where the voice was coming from”.
By 13, he was skipping school to create robots from plastic milk bottles and old mobile phone parts in a makeshift workshop set up in his bedroom – even running away to the forest to avoid being sent back to class. At 14, he established a repair shop in his parents’ grocery shop and recycled rubbish from a local dump to build windmills to power his family’s home.
By the end of high school and without any access to a physics teacher, Zillah’s robots had attracted national media attention. He sought help from the country’s political leaders because he could not afford fees to study robotics overseas. He was told his dreams were foolish. “I felt discouraged,” he says.
His eldest sister had emigrated to Adelaide four years earlier and he began to research the possibility of studying in Australia under her sponsorship. His first visa application was denied. “So I prayed and prayed and believed,” he says.
Zillah was granted a second chance and arrived in Adelaide in June. He is living in Dover Gardens and studying counselling and psychology at the Ikon Institute but his dream of working with robots remains.
A few months ago, Zillah somehow found his way to the Grenfell St, city, office of SouthStart event director Craig Swann after a Google search for technology workshops. “It was a fascinating and serendipitous meeting,” Mr Swann says. “He just sort of poked in the room and asked if there was any robotics here. A bizarre request. However, I had butcher-papered the entire room and had mind-mapped ideas for our event and right on the wall in big letters was the word ‘Robotics’.
“I felt he probably walked into the most ideal room in the city in terms of the ability to connect him with community.”He says Zillah’s tale of determination will inspire the conference audience, and hopefully shine a light on his talent so that he can continue his journey in robotics.
CREDIT: REBECCA DIGIROLAMO
Word count: 478
