THE Mike Cannon-Brookes backed bitcoin miner Iris Energy is on the hunt for renewable energy-powered data centres in Australia as it targets adding one gigawatt of electricity capacity across its global operations.
Iris, which listed on the Nasdaq in November 2021, was founded by two ex-Macquarie bankers, brothers Will and Dan Roberts.
The Sydney-based company owns and operates bitcoin mining data centre infrastructure powered by renewable energy in Texas and Canada’s British Columbia, with those bitcoins then turned into cash. The company is now considering Australian locations as it looks to expand internationally.
“We’ve got a development pipeline in excess of another gigawatt globally and Australia is a part of that,” Iris chief executive Dan Roberts said.
The Roberts brothers attracted several high-profile pre-IPO backers, including billionaire investor Alex Waislitz and Wilson Asset Management. Mr Cannon-Brookes’ private investment vehicle, Grok Ventures, revealed it was a shareholder in Iris as part of its $8bn takeover bid for AGL.
Iris has endured a rough ride since its sharemarket float, falling 46 per cent since listing, a slump which Mr Roberts partly blames on a broader sell-off in US tech stocks.
“I think the equity investors are still trying to work out what the optimal business model is in this sector and how to understand the long-term prospects.” Iris booked $US20m in revenue in its first-quarter results and adjusted earnings of $US14.3m, with a record 364 bitcoins mined. Bitcoin is currently trading around $53,000, but Iris sells into the market daily rather than focusing on trading opportunities.
“We’re not in the business of speculating on the price of bitcoin. We’re in the business of building real assets and an infrastructure business supporting the energy markets.” The polluting impact of bitcoin mining has sparked plenty of criticism, and Iris hopes its focus on sustainable production will mark it out for a premium from investors. “Over the last two to three months, the level of inbound interest from people wanting to buy green bitcoin has gone up significantly — we’re talking large organisations and sovereign wealth fund type investors.”
CREDIT: PERRY WILLIAMS
Word count: 347
