Banking challenger ING has reported a spike in profit largely driven by a growing customer base and diversification of product offerings.
ING reported a 9.7 per cent increase in statutory net profit after tax at its annual results yesterday, in part driven by a 30 per cent growth in customers using ING as their main banking service.
More than 423,000 people signed up to use ING as their primary banking service last year, taking the total to more than 2 million customers. While savings remains the primary business at ING, the bank has also been working to diversify its product offerings and reported a 6.3 per cent growth in retail mortgages, a 9.2 per cent lift in business loans and 13.3 per cent expansion in wholesale banking activities across the year.
ING chief Uday Sareen said ING would consider extending its services to wealth management, but that it was a medium - to long-term priority.
"That would definitely be an opportunity going forward. If there are over 250,000 customers with over $250,000 with us and they have this need ... it is an opportunity for us to consider," he said.
"But right now, clearly our focus is to further consolidate as we complete our product suite."
Australians were introduced to ING when they travelled, Mr Sareen said, and would get lured in by the low rates and digital focus. "You can travel all over the world and you don't have to pay any sort of international fees ... you come and test, experience and sign up."
Over the year, ING invested $125 million in a "technology transformation", including enhancements to the mobile app and the use of robotics and artificial intelligence to speed up processing and approvals times for mortgage and consumer lending applications. Mr Sareen said the bank's digital focus was at the core of what differentiates it from the big four.
ING has about 5 per cent of the market share and Mr Sareen acknowledged the bank had "a long way to go" as it battles the big four.
"I think we're definitely the lead challenger in Australia and we are an alternative to the big banks."
In September, ING pledged to stop all lending to thermal coal companies by 2025. The annual results reveal the bank invested $800 million in renewable energy projects, including a solar farm in NSW's Wellington and a wind farm in South Australia.
CREDIT: Charlotte Grieve
Word count: 403
