Advertising feature Science Alive puts the awesome back into science by teaching the next generation in an exciting, hands-on way.
This free interactive family expo is coming back to the Central Oval Sporting Complex, Port Augusta on Sunday, October 20 from 10am-3pm.
With opportunities to program a robot, take a virtual tour of the universe, interact with native animals and bugs n' slugs, or you can make some slime before getting up close to a Dalek, Science Alive has a broad appeal for all ages.
Event director, Brian Haddy, said the event aimed to present science and technology in a more friendly way.
"While there is much emphasis on fun and entertainment, we also show how important science is in our everyday world - we all depend on it," he said.
A huge highlight this year is the Scientific Circus Show presented by Dr Quark.
In this high energy show, Dr Quark explores the science and forces behind the circus tricks we all love.
Named after an elementary particle of matter, Dr Quark is a quirky scientist who can't help but have a bit of fun.
He rides a unicycle, juggles and balances things; tricks that are sure to delight the audiences.
Dr Quark (aka Graeme Denton) said that the show came about because of his interest in science, the circus, and working with kids. He also loves the unicycle, having learnt to ride it one weekend back in 1991.
Balance, movement, Newton's Laws of Motion, spinning, momentum and energy are all concepts covered by Dr Quark in his highly entertaining way of teaching kids.
His goal is to inspire children to learn more about the science that surrounds them every day.
Other highlights this year include engaging shows and displays by Animals Anonymous and bugs n slugs; an array of droids and Daleks built by local enthusiasts; SciWorld's huge Starlab inflatable planetarium for journeys through the night sky; robotics workshops for older children; Questacon exhibits; slime-making; a hands-on display by the Environment Protection Agency; study info from UniSA; and rocket making and launching!
Families are advised to allow at least two to three hours for their Science Alive experience.......and it's all free!
Science Alive is designed for all ages - kids can immerse themselves in the fun and excitement of learning about the world, discovering why things work and what they do.
This event has been made possible thanks generous sponsorship from the Port Augusta Council, Santos, OZ Minerals and Inspiring South Australia.
For more information see: sciencealive.org.au.
Word count: 419
