What do you get when you combine 10,000 scouts and leaders, ten days of action-packed activities, and plenty of dirt? An adventure of a lifetime!
That's the consensus of the Junee Scouts who have just returned from the Australian Scouts Jamboree held at the Bend Motorsport Park at Tailem Bend in South Australia. Held only once every three years, the jamboree site became a temporary home to young people from across Australia and over 18 countries from around the world.
Scouts from Junee were treated to a range of amazing opportunities and many notched up first-time experiences - ice skating, rifle shooting, abseiling, rock climbing, land yachting, and BMX biking to name but a few.
The scouts' practical skills development was fostered at the Trades base, where scouts were able to try their hand at a range of trades including bike maintenance, automotive wiring, plumbing, woodwork, sewing and crochet, cooking, hair and beauty, and constructing solar buddy lights for children in developing countries.
Flying drones, programming, metal detecting and robotics were on offer for the hi-tech scouts, while others enjoyed challenging themselves with escape rooms or chilling out at the mall or movie theatre.
A highlight of every Jamboree is the night-time entertainment, and this Jamboree did not disappoint. The Scouts rocked to concerts by Justice Crew and Ricki Lee, and were entertained by a top Australian aerial acrobatics pilot, sword swallower, strong men and women, fireworks displays and international performances.
A jamboree is the ultimate test of resilience, time management and teamwork, and helps foster independence in young people. The scouts are woken most mornings around 5am for either breakfast duty or to pack for offsite activities. Each patrol is rostered on for a day to prepare food for the troop, collect the day's supply of food from the distribution centre, and dispose of rubbish.
Riverina Scouts Commissioner and Leader of the NSW Jamboree Contingent, Ian Petty, describes jamboree as one of the most life-changing adventures a young person can have.
"The Scouts are challenged, they meet thousands of people from around Australia and the world, and they make new friends - all while having loads of fun. Each Scout becomes so much more grown up, independent and confident in just 10 days."
Word count: 374
