A MAJOR Disney-owned visual­ effects film company will set up new Australian headquarters in Sydney, creating­ 500 local jobs.
The Berejiklian government offered a 10 per cent tax break to help convince Industrial­ Light and Magic — founded by Star Wars creator George Lucas and responsible for 350 feature films — to set up at the Entertainment Quarter in Moore Park.
The deal is a coup for the state, with Queensland also trying to lure the film house which created digital effects on major motion pictures including Pirates Of The Caribbean, Aladdin, The Avengers, and the Star Wars movies.
The state government last week quietly announced a plan to offer a 10 per cent tax subsidy for post-production, digital and visual effects­ companies which invest more than $500,000, to match similar incentives in Queensland and South Australia. ILM will start local recruitment immediately to complete the post production, digital and visual effects for the next Star Wars feature film, The Rise Of Skywalker, out of the new Sydney headquarters. It is understood it will set up within the next month, using Fox Studios as its initial home while it scouts for a permanent site.
The coup is expected to deliver­ $333 million in post-production­ business in the first five years and $100 million each year after that. It includes a skills training investment in NSW, with the state government providing $6 million which will be matched by ILM to create a specialist learning program for post production and digital effects workers.
Premier Gladys Berejiklian will announce the deal with ILM creative director Rob Bredow and executive Luke Hetherington today.
“Having the world’s leading visual effects company agreeing to set up here permanently and commit to teaching invaluable skills to hundreds of people in NSW is a big coup for our state,” Ms Berejiklian said.“The digital skills taught by the best in the world will also benefit many other industries in NSW including software development, robotics, engineering and defence.”
CREDIT: ANNA CALDWELL; EXCLUSIVE
Word count: 333
