High school students in Port Augusta are preparing for jobs of the future inside a new state-of-the-art STEM Centre at Port Augusta Secondary School (PASS).
PASS has transformed a tired old building into a $2.5 million STEM mecca equipped with ultra modern technology, including robotics and laser printers.
The new learning epicentre also boasts a brand new $1 million visual arts pod, both of which were officially opened by the Member for Stuart Dan van Holst Pellekaan at a special ceremony today.
"This (STEM centre) is incredibly important at two levels. We know that 75 per cent of all future jobs will include science, technology, engineering and maths, but we also know a lot of those jobs are in our region," he said.
"We are not training students here at PASS to go and get jobs at other places, we are actually training people for jobs that will be in the north of South Australia for decades to come and that's a very very positive factor."
The students welcomed guest with name badges printed in the centre using a laser cutter to make the wooden name plate, and the 3D printer to create the back clasp.
Encouraging the students to think about creating ethically, the 3D printed clasp was made from biodegradable plastic derived from plant mass.
The centre has been unofficially open for students for a little over a term and Senior Leader of STEM Programs Shane Loader said it has been a game changer for engaging kids in their learning.
"Kids are bringing a really high level of enthusiasm around what they are doing," he said.
"We have tried to build the centre around making sure kids ideas have a really strong part in all of their learning.
"Quite often with a task I have got an idea in my head about what they might design and then they come up with something completely out of left field. Most of the time it's a solution that's way better than what I was thinking, so often when you give them that freedom they just run with it."
The centre is open during lunch and recess hours and many kids who aren't enrolled in STEM classes are using this time to engage with the technology and equipment.
Andrew Hill is one of those students who often finds himself passing time in the STEM centre.
"I love tinkering with any little object I can and 3D printers are just amazing to me," he said.
"Playing with the 3D printers and creating anything from whistles to brackets, to any little thing you could think possible is really exciting when looking at different solutions for situations."
CREDIT: Amy Green
Word count: 446
