Along with health, walkers can find community and support, writes Vanessa Croll
Stand close enough to Rachel Teariki and you will literally hear what makes her tick.
The 42-year-old robotics programmer has two mechanical heart valves working in conjunction with one of her own and a transplanted cow valve keeping her alive.
She said while it can be funny watching people in her presence looking for the ticking clock, her rheumatic heart disease diagnosis was a serious wake-up call.
“I think over the past eight years I’ve been going through symptoms related to the disease but just thought they were normal,” the Carlton resident said.
“At work, my colleagues were climbing stairs and they were puffed, just as I was puffed.
“I’d been walking in high heels so that’s why I thought my feet were sore and my calves a bit tight.
“I had headaches and thought ‘you have these because you haven’t been out of the office to enjoy the sunshine’.
“When I got home I’d just have to get my bra off because of the chest compression. In hindsight, it must have been fluid retention.
“I thought I had commonality with all women.” After the surgery in September last year, Mrs Teariki was told she had lost 9kg of water from around her heart — a result of inefficient heart valves.
As part of her recovery, Mrs Teariki started walking and it’s now become a mandatory part of her life.
“I do 30 minutes to one hour in the morning, my goal is 10km each day, that’s good maintenance,” she said.
While her daily walks are done alone, Mrs Teariki created a fortnightly walking group with the Heart Foundation and cherishes the social connections it provides.
“We need an avenue, especially if you are someone who has had heart disease,” she said.
Steps to good health “We’re able to support each other, it goes beyond walking, it’s about encouragement.
“Walking creates good, healthy exercise but it also creates good conversation and support and encouragement for other survivors of heart disease.” Heart disease kills 48 Australians each day — that’s a loved one dying every 30 minutes — making it the nation’s number one killer.
An inactive lifestyle increases your risk of heart disease by 25-30 per cent and cuts two to five years from your life.
Most of us can change this simply by adding activity in every day, in fact, 15 minutes a day will reduce the risk for nine out of 10 Australians.
Walking for 30 minutes each day can lower your risk of stroke, diabetes and heart disease by a third.
According to University of South Australia research fellow Dr Dorothea Dumuid, incorporating these 30 minutes into each day requires planning.
The mum of four’s research on building your best day for cardiovascular health looks at the healthiest way to spend time across daily activities such as sleeping, screen time and exercise.
“A 2018 national survey (by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare) found four in 10 Australians said the reason they didn’t do sport of recreational physical activities was because they didn’t have enough time and too many commitments as an adult,” Dr Dumuid said.
“It’s quite easy to get motivated to change but it’s hard to maintain that lifestyle change. It’s hard to make the changes part of a routine, so it’s really important to build routine into the day.
“Not having enough activity is modifiable and something people can work on. You have to make that conscious decision, kind of like doing a budget or making a plan. You only have a finite amount in the day so making a plan around how to use that time will help.
Do what you can “Just start with what you can manage. Even small amounts make a difference. Just going from none to 10 minutes is huge, that is 10 minutes at moderate intensity where you’re exercising so you’re puffing a little and can still talk.” She said it’s important to remember you don’t need to clock up your 30 minutes in one go.
“Walking fast, doing stairs, you don’t have to get your activity all in one big output,” Dr Dumuid said.
“Evidence is that if you accumulate activity in smaller bouts, it’s going to benefit you. A little bit is better than nothing. Things like running to the letterbox instead of walking, just getting your heart rate up even if it seems like a small amount.” Throughout November, the Heart Foundation is calling on all Australians to #showsometicker and walk their way to better health.
The Foundation has operated Australia’s largest free walking program for more than 23 years and it continues to grow in popularity as more people realise the benefits of joining.With more than 1100 free walking groups nationwide happening at various times, days and durations and with more groups starting every month, it’s easy to stay active and be part of your local community.
CREDIT: Vanessa Croll
Word count: 830
