A down-to-earth approach to vegie growing pays dividends, writes JAMES WAGSTAFF THERE aren’t many jobs Catherine Velisha hasn’t been tasked with during her 15-year involvement with her family vegetable and salad farming business.
From overseeing crop production to working the packing line, and from training staff to manning a stand at the wholesale fruit and vegetable markets, she’s pretty much done it all — and some.
“I know which ones are the good jobs and which ones to avoid,” jokes the now chief executive of the third-generation Werribee South business that grows about 202ha of crops and turns over about $30 million a year.
But the hard work is paying dividends for Catherine, one of nine finalists — and the only female — in the prestigious AUSVEG Grower of the Year awards, announced in Melbourne last week.
Not that she’s in the industry for the accolades.
Keen to become more involved with advocacy, she sees benefits from “the rise of veganism” and is particularly excited about the role vegetable growers may play in developing “healthier” meat substitutes in the future.
In addition, she says horticulture is well poised to better capitalise on “time-poor consumers” looking for healthy, convenient food options.
“We’re almost at the point where we want our food chewed for us,” Catherine said.
“The convenience side of things is great for us for us as an industry. You’ve got a lot of brands like Youfoodz and Marley Spoon that have set recipes with meals … if they’ve got to do 27 million Cajun chickens with cauliflower, and cauliflower prices are high, they are not switching to other vegetables such as broccoli, which consumers would in the past.
“It cleans up the market a lot more and helps even out the peaks and troughs for us as farmers.” HEALTHY HABITS VELISHA Farms can trace its origins back to Catherine’s grandfather Abas Velisha, who switched from dairy farming to growing vegetables with his brothers in 1949.
In the 1960s, the family was one of the first to direct-seed plants and, two decades later, was among the first to export cauliflower and broccoli.
Today, the home farm, business headquarters and packing facilities are at Werribee South, with further production at Caldermeade in South Gippsland and Tatura in northern Victoria.
In total, Velisha Farms operates about 202ha with partner growers at Virginia in South Australia, Gatton and Bundaberg in Queensland and Hay in the NSW Riverina.
At Werribee South, broccoli, cauliflower and iceberg lettuce are the main staples with kale, silverbeet, spring onions and herb lines grown at Caldermeade and zucchini, broccoli and cauliflower the crops of choice at Tatura.
Caldermeade is run in conjunction with a business partner while Tatura was bought in more recent years, as a “risk-mitigation” plan and with growing zucchini in mind.
Broccoli, cauliflower, kale, silverbeet and spring onions are grown year round. with zucchini grown over summer and into early autumn until frosts set in. Most crops are planted by machine as seedlings, while yields are very weather dependent.
Broccoli takes 12-14 weeks to grow and up to 20 weeks in winter. While broccoli and cauliflower yields are pretty consistent Catherine said lettuce was “a whole difference beast”.
“If the weather is bad, you can go in there and get 40 per cent,” she said. WEALTH IN SOILS CATHERINE described the soils at Werribee South as exceptional, with some paddocks producing crops every year for the past century.
“The ability to be able to just plant and pull out and plant and pull out is phenomenal,” she said.
She said with farming land at Werribee now worth “about $120,000 a farming acre” — or $296,500 a hectare — they had to look elsewhere to expand.
She said even at Caldermeade land prices had risen from about $12,350/ha to almost $50,000 in the two decades since they bought their land.
Catherine said the business’ expansion at Tatura was aimed at capitalising on cheap land, quality soils and, from a logistics perspective, good access to major roads and freeways.
While developing the country early last year they trialled growing some broccoli there “as a bit of fun”. Catherine said the results were “mind-blowing”.
“We planted in Tatura, we planted in Caldermeade and we planted in Werribee in the same week and the same plants, and the results at Tatura were so superior to the other two,” she said.
“It is really quite different weather. Once you cross that Great Dividing Range, it’s 5C warmer, the sun is always a little brighter. So we worked out we could get the size and weight, so the next step was what we could do with some water.” Catherine approached Goulburn-Murray Water and was granted out-of-season irrigation supply to be able to grow crops over winter, when poor weather generally affects growing conditions at Werribee. “It really has helped us with our risk mitigation,” she said.
LABOUR DAY VELISHA Farms employs about 35-40 workers at Werribee, mostly in the packing shed, with a further 40 staff at Caldermeade and five currently at Tatura.
They avoid using contract labour and employ all workers direct. Despite the rise of robotics and advancements in technology in recent decades, Catherine said it was “amazing, on so many lines, how much is still unable to be done by machinery”.
“We’ve seen some advancements in the packing shed, but out in the paddock, you still need those people cutting,” she said.
About half the salad and vegetables sold by Velisha Farms each year is grown by third-party suppliers.
Aldi is Velisha Farms’ biggest customer with the business one of the German retail chain’s first suppliers when it launched in Australia in the early 2000s.
The Velishas also have a stand at the Melbourne Wholesale Markets, where they market other brands as well as its own. About three to four trucks of produce goes out to market every day, with a significant volume of product pre-packaged.
Exports to South East Asia also play an important role for the business and Catherine sees this as a key growth area.
But a challenge for the sector, like most others, is rising costs of production. “The cost of everything is going up — fertiliser, water, our electricity bill is phenomenal, rental on CHEP crates and pallets, all the audits we have go through, the quality assurance, all these costs are being constantly put on to our businesses and the produce prices haven’t reflected that,” she said.
“There will have to come a point.”
CATHERINE VELISHA WERRIBEE SOUTH RUNS her family’s Velisha Farms horticulture business GROWS broccoli, cauliflower, kale, lettuce, silverbeet, spring onion and zucchini on 202ha ALSO works with third-party growersSUPPLIES wholesale markets and supermarkets including Aldi
CREDIT: JAMES WAGSTAFF
Word count: 1119
