The state's livestock sector has heralded Thomas Foods International's commitment to build a state-of-the-art abattoir as a game-changer.
Livestock SA president Joe Keynes said the fire was a "devastating blow" to the industry, but the rebuild would have enormous benefits across the whole supply chain, including production efficiencies and enhanced animal welfare.
"Having TFI invest in a new plant will provide surety, particularly as many producers look to rebuild numbers after drought and difficult times," he said.
"It's also in a location which is very well positioned to service the whole of the state."
SA Sheep Industry Blueprint chairman Allan Piggott is excited the abattoir will include the latest technologies, such as robotics, hook tracking and objective carcase measurement.
"These technologies can provide more detailed feedback for SA producers, which will encourage continual improvement of the livestock supplied and enhance the consistent quality of the product on the supermarket shelf," he said.
Landmark Murray Bridge-based agent Kev Keller said the company had always been competitive in the market and was certain it would emerge even stronger.
"The sheep and lamb job has gone along the way it was before with the Lobethal plant stepping up, it is a credit to TFI the way they have handled it," he said.
"Cattle have suffered a bit but we have been fortunate with the timing (of the fire) with low numbers (in the market)."
Elders SA livestock sales manager Damien Webb also welcomed TFI's plans.
"This will help to support SA and interstate graziers and agencies as well as the economy of Murray Bridge and SA," he said.
Australian Meat Industry Council executive officer Patrick Hutchinson congratulated TFI on its bold investment.
"More and more in processing we are looking to attract engineers and other young skilled workers into the regions to operate robotics and automation - the Murray Bridge plant will be a great example to others of what can be done," he said.
Mr Hutchinson said there was an "appetite for growth" across the processing sector, especially on the short, medium and long-term demand into China, but the right government support was needed to attract labour, and address energy costs and regulatory reform.
"We all know producers are receiving record prices, beef has been up and down but it is still strong and goats are in front of that again, but beef processing margins are only at the 10-year average of about $25 a head," he said
"In 2018 it was -$14 so processors as a group are suffering at the moment."
CREDIT: CATHERINE MILLER
Word count: 424
