The futuristic talents of several Southern Highlands students is set to be tested on a national stage.
Student teams from St Pauls Catholic Primary School and St Paul's International College, both in Moss Vale, have impressed at the regional Illawarra VEX Robotics Competition achieving national qualifications.
Of the 12 teams that competed on the day, two teams from St Paul's Primary and one team from St Paul's International College were successful in qualifying for the Nationals in Adelaide in December. The latest success is more of the same for the teams which proved a force to be reckoned with when they competed in a robotics scrimmage against students from Canberra to Kiama in August.
A Year 8 student from St Paul's International College Jack Speerin was also awarded the "Volunteer of the Year" award for his outstanding efforts in helping to facilitate this and other recent events.
The VEX Robotics Competition is the largest competition in the World and entails two separate competitions - VEX IQ (Year 3 - 8) and VEX EDR (Yr 9 - Tertiary). The awarded teams members are:
2577A - Gon Robo (St Paul's Primary)
Excellence Award, 2nd place Teamwork Champion alliance to Lucia Iliani, Rachael Grosvenor, Spencer Edmends, Jarvis Cape and Harrison Bailey.
2577Z - Blueberries (St Paul's Primary)
1st place Teamwork Champion alliance, 1st place driver skills to Lillian Ragan, Jessica Wray, Shan Cecilio, Caspian Adams and Finley Cape.
64834A - SPIC IQ A (St Paul's International)
1st place Teamwork Champion alliance to Henry Corro, Aayush Panta, Heyden Bailey, Brihat Dhital and Jack Speerin.
Key criteria for the award includes:
Robot design is consistently high scoring Robot demonstrates a solid mechanical design and is robustly constructed to fulfill its designed task Robot programming is consistently effective and successful Students understand and explain how they worked together to develop their robot The teams have extended thanks to Ben Woods for organising the event, St Peter's and Paul's in Kiama for hosting and to the teachers Ms Smith, Ms Iliani, Ms Fittler and Mr Planting from these schools for facilitating the Robotics Teams.
The Robotics competition culminates in the National Finals, which will be held in Adelaide in December, with a chance to qualify for the World Championships to be held in Texas in the USA in April 2020.
Do you have a story you would like to share? Please send details through the website portal at southernhighlandnews.com.au, click on the community tab, then send us you news.
Word count: 412
