DEEP inside NASA’s robotics division, where some of the most vital components for a new generation of moon missions are being developed, there’s a strong 1970s vibe.
While the men and women building robots inside the sprawling Houston campus are working at the forefront of technology, many of them are also, perhaps not surprisingly, huge Star Wars fans.
“We had the Star Wars research guys come in for their last film and they said ‘We copy all your stuff’,” one staffer said. “And it was funny, because we said, ‘We copy all your stuff’.” Robotics engineer Jonathan Rogers agrees. “A lot of people will ask us what our inspiration was,” he said. “Some of them see the Master Chief character from Halo. Some of them see Star Wars.” When NASA returns to the moon in just over four years, some of the most important work won’t be done by humans but rather robots such as the strapping Robonaut.
Technological leaps have driven a new approach to developing robotics in conjunction with upcoming explor­ation, making them vital to the success of the new missions.
Their main focus will be filling in for astronauts, who are comparatively fragile in a high-radiation space environment and need food, water and waste facilities at a minimum.
“Astronauts are very busy,” Mr Rogers said. “We want robots and people to work side-by-side, whether it’s in space or on assembly lines, to complement each other.
“In neither case do we want to replace people with robots, but we think that there are synergies that will work.” A regular workday aboard the International Space Station is an 11-hour shift “of which 8½ is operations” – that generally means science experiments and space station maintenance. The other 2½ hours are for exercise.
As the ISS ages, maintenance is taking a greater chunk of astronaut mission time. Experts from the US space agency are aiming to prevent this from happening by increasingly turning to robots.
“The pay-off for robotics, at least inside the vehicle, is taking care of these tasks that need to be done, but don’t necessarily require the full intellect of a human,” Mr Rogers said.
“So let’s have our crew members do the things that they’re good at, and let the robots do the boring things.
“If you look to traditional robotics, the three things that we always say they do are the three Ds – dull, dirty or dangerous tasks. And that translates perfectly to space flight.” Mr Rogers said having a hard date for “boots on the moon in 2024” had sparked a huge surge in activity at the space agency. “People are incredibly excited. People feel motivated,” he said.
“There’s a lot of work towards common goals.
“It’s not that we haven’t had that before. The space station is a momentous accomplishment, and we’ve done many, many great things.
“But I think we are all very excited to get to go take the next step and stay on the moon.” The robots on the next moon project won’t necessarily look like Robonaut, with its biceps modelled on Arnold Schwarzenegger at his peak or have a wingspan like a basketballer, or like its less masculine counterpart, Valkyrie.
Designed for on-ship activity, the hulking Robonaut is too heavy carry its own weight on its foldable legs unless in a zero-gravity environment. Valkyrie is focused on working off-vessel on a planet surface.
Mr Rogers said the Robonaut and Valkyrie technology was “robot agnostic” but that while the new models wouldn’t necessarily look the same, they would likely have some “humanoid” characteristics.
“The humanoid aspect really resonates with people, and that’s important because we want to keep this interesting, and to keep encouraging as many young people as we can into this field,” he said.ONE GIANT LEAP SOUVENIR MAGAZINE JUST $4.95 WITH TOKEN ON PAGE 2
CREDIT: SARAH BLAKE HOUSTON
Word count: 643
