ASX-listed 3D metal printing company AML3D has entered a new partnership to develop new Internet of Things industrial technology.
The memorandum of understanding with the Advanced Manufacturing Growth Centre and Dematec Automation is aimed at enabling AML3D to produce “machine dashboards” capable of analysing greater volumes of real-time data from its robotic production process.
AML3D’s innovative manufacturing process combines welding, robotics, metallurgy and 3D computer-aided drawings to produce metal components and structures for the defence, maritime, aerospace and resources sectors.
The company’s managing director Andrew Sales said the project would improve the efficiency of production.
“The enhanced capabilities of the proposed platform will provide us with complete oversight of all production units globally,” he said.
“A greater level of insight is key to driving efficiencies, both internally and externally.
“Once integrated, the platform will only further embed our technologies within our clients’ operations, solidifying AML3D as a core advanced manufacturing partner.” Shares in the company have more than doubled since it listed on the Australian Securities Exchange in April, rising from an IPO price of 20c to 51.5c yesterday.
The company recently relocated to an expanded facility at Edinburgh Parks, where it shares a 15,000sq m centre with fellow advanced manufacturers Brabham Automotive and Precision Buses.
Seven automated robotic welders are currently installed at the plant, with eight more due to arrive by the end of the year.
Unaudited financial results point to a $3.1m loss in the 12 months to June as the company continues to commercialise its production process.
Mr Sales said the company remained focused on growing its three main revenue streams – contract manufacturing, sales of its 3D printing Arcemy module and software licensing.
“We are already seeing good momentum growing these revenue streams as we raise our profile here and abroad,” he said. “To this end, we continue to invest in sales and marketing initiatives, as well as in research and development focused on the application of new alloys and exotic metals in the WAM (wire arc additive manufacturing) process.” Last week the company entered a contract with shipbuilder Austal to co-develop light and ergonomically friendly lifting devices for installation on-board naval vessels. Dematec Automation is based in Melrose Park and specialises in advanced engineering systems including industrial automation and robotics. Chief executive David Hart said AML3D was “a great example of Australian ingenuity, and we’re excited to embark on a co-development program that will only further enhance their offering”.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 409
