Thursday Creative Kids Creative Kids is for young people who like to make, move, shake and sing. Beginning with story time, a central theme will then inspire young people across the afternoon with their work through craft, movement, music and drama games. Northern Sound System, 73 Elizabeth Way, Elizabeth, 1pm-4pm. Free. Suitable for children ages eight to 12. Details: playford.sa.gov.au Friday Meadows Easter Fair Explore 100 stalls inside and outside with craft, collectables, produce plants, bulbs and much more. Meadows Memorial Hall, Mawson Rd, Meadows, 9am-4pm. Until Monday, April 22. Free. Details: adelaidehills.org.au
Melba’s Easter Weekend Come along to Melba’s factory for a day of family fun. Pull up a spot for lunch on the lawns and enjoy food, drinks and entertainment including face painting and a sculpturer working on a giant chocolate. Melba’s Woodside Factory, 22 Henry St, Woodside, 9am-4.30pm. Free. Details: melbaschocolates.com.au Saturday Easter Saturday Family Fun Day Come down for a family fun day of crafts and activities, giveaways, a meet and greet with a princess and superhero and a giant slide. Gepps X Home HQ, 750 Main North Rd, Gepps Cross, 11am-2pm. Free. Details: geppsxhome hq.com.au Sunday Easter Sunday Family Fun Day Glen Ewin Estate is hosting a family day with Easter egg hunts, along with a jumping castle, face painting, food trucks and cocktails to indulge in. Glen Ewin Estate, 43 Lower Hermitage Rd, Houghton, 10am-4pm. Cost: $15 per car. Details: adelaidehills.org.au Monday Oakbank Easter Racing Carnival A family-oriented event, the Easter Racing Carnival has plenty of activities and entertainment for kids, including rides and amusements, an animal petting zoo, face painting, and roving entertainers. Oakbank Racecrouse, 46 Oakwood Rd, Oakbank, 7am-5pm. Cost: adults $30, children $10. Details: oakbankracingclub.com.au Tuesday Movies at Mawson: Smallfoot Join others for the second instalment of Wreck It Ralph. The Mawson Centre, 2-8 Main St, Mawson Lakes, 10am-noon. Cost: $5, under two free. Details: Search ‘Movies at Mawson: Smallfoot’ on Facebook
Anzac Day Workshop Learn about Anzac Day and why it is so important for Australians and New Zealanders. Make poppies and candle holders to commemorate those who have served. Playford Civic Centre Library, 10 Playford Blvd, Elizabeth, 1.30pm-3.30pm. Cost: $2. Suitable ages seven and above. Details: playford.sa.gov.au Steam — Where arts and Robotics Meet Use robots to create a painting. Draw your name with a 3D printer pen. A great way to get creative kids using robotics, or allowing coder kids to unleash their creative side. Suitable for children aged 10 to 17. Stretton Centre Library, 307 Peachey Rd, Munno Para, 1.30pm-3.30pm. Cost: $2. Details: playford.sa.gov.auBookings may be required for events. Please check all details before attending.
Word count: 439
