WAYNE Walker, the father of Crows’ star Taylor, or “Tex”, will undergo surgery for prostate cancer today.
And he has two messages for men – get your prostate checked and examine the fine print of your health fund.
Mr Walker, 61, was shocked to learn that after being a Medibank Private member for 35 years, paying for top cover plus extras, he was not covered for robotic surgery.
His annual blood check raised a flag, and a physical check, MRI and finally a biopsy confirmed cancer last month. The cancer was described as “not aggressive but active”. Mr Walker said he had the choice of radiotherapy, conventional surgery or a robotic procedure.
“Conventional surgery cuts through the stomach muscles and needs about a week in hospital then a couple of months recovery,” he said. “Robotic surgery is an overnight stay and, as it is keyhole surgery, has a much shorter recovery time. To me it is a no-brainer.” Mr Walker argued with his health fund officials that his long membership, combined with the benefits for the patient, was reason enough to cover the additional $3540 cost of the robotic surgery plus $630 for a specialist nurse. When Medibank Private refused to budge, he checked other health funds. He found the not-for-profit HCF would give him a transfer, which included continuity of membership and cover for the robotic surgery. He booked in at St Andrew’s Hospital, where the procedure will be done today.
“With a grandchild on the way (Taylor and wife Ellie are expecting their first child), I want to be around for a while yet, so want to get it done quickly,” he said. “I’ll spend a week at Flinders Lodge recuperating before heading home to Broken Hill.
“It’s a bit taboo for men, but my strong message is to get your PSA checked – it is a simple blood test – and follow up if it signals there could be a problem. It’s simple, easy and could save your life.
“My other message is to check the fine print of your health fund to see exactly what you are covered for. I have paid over $140,000 for my Medibank Private membership, with only three hospital claims for myself and some glasses and dental work. They’ve now lost my $5250 yearly subscription.” A Medibank Private spokeswoman queried the value of robotic surgery.“We know affordability is a concern, and paying for the additional costs of robotic-assisted prostatectomy, which has limited evidence of better results … would add to premiums of all customers,” the spokeswoman said.
CREDIT: BRAD CROUCH HEALTH REPORTER
Word count: 431
