THE Adelaide Christmas pageant has been and gone and it’s officially starting to look a lot like Christmas.
As our pets become more and more a part of the household, I’m also seeing a huge trend towards presents for pets.
Today’s column is a suggestion of things that will keep your pet on the nice list and a reminder of others that will land them on the naughty (or unwell list).
I predict this year is going to be huge for robotic enrichment toys. If you walk the aisles of your local JBs, Harvey Normans or Good Guys, you will find an entire row full of robots or electronic gadgets for our pets.
These start as simple GPS locator tags for dogs and cats and extend all the way to extremely fancy robotic companions ... think video-enabled toys that can play with your pet with a laser pointer or can shoot out dog biscuits on your command while you’re not at home.
The downside to these toys is that they should be used as bonus enrichment for your pet and not instead of.
I can already see a gig-economy job of time-poor pet owners outsourcing the robotic control of their enrichment toys.
The best present for your pet – and the one I always recommend – is more of your time with your pet. Walk them, train them and play with them.
Nothing will make them happier.
Another popular present for pets is new treats. Now, these can be a naughty or nice decision, depending on how you use them.
Good treats reward positive behaviour they are fun and they are healthy. How do you give a healthy treat you ask?
Not many dogs are lining up for a stick of celery. Healthy treats are those that are given in low volume – think of them as a sometimes food, not an everyday food.
There are also lots of unhealthy treats or downright dangerous ones on the market. Look for reputable brands with a clear ingredient list.
The worst present you can get for your pet is a Christmas emergency. Keep a close eye on your chocolate and biscuits. Chocolate is extremely toxic to dogs, it is dose-dependent but I always say there is no safe amount.
You don’t want your dog deciding they like chocolate and starting to search it out.
Be careful while you are baking – dogs will eat Christmas pudding mix and get really sick. Even rising dough can be a big issue for a dog if they try it for a snack.
Cats also love tinsel and hiding in trees. But each year I see cats with gut blockages from tinsel and others that have been injured after falling from Christmas trees.
So keep an eye on your faithful companions this Christmas.
READERS’ PET PICS “This little cutie is Lollipop, a 15 month old Shih Tzu,” writes Sandy McLellan, of Flagstaff Hill. “Could you trust that face? I do.”Send your favourite photos to advertiserpics@news.com.au
CREDIT: PET ADVICE DR MARK REEVE
Word count: 506
