ARALUEN Christian College Middle School will have a new teacher and a familiar face returning next year.
Mr Clark Middle School Coordinator Mr Clark is coming to us from Dubbo with his wife Stacey and four children - Naomi (Year 10), Johanna (Year 8), Ben (Year 6) and Lucy (Year 4). He studied teaching at Charles Sturt University in Bathurst and has taught in Sydney, Kempsey and Port Macquarie.
He has been teaching in Christian Education for over 25 years and enjoys bringing the Good News, the Gospel to light through what he teaches.
He has toured the college and met some of the fantastic staff, he is looking forward to meeting the Araluen Christian College parent community when he commences his role in 2020.
Mr Daly Mr Daly joined the Middle School Team in 2019, teaching Science and Maths. He moved up from Adelaide with his wife, where he had been teaching at Temple Christian College.
Mr Daly has a love for teaching both Science and Maths. He uses a well balanced approach between theory and practical lessons to deliver curriculum content. He has added to the College with his knowledge of Robotics and has used this in the electives that have been held on Friday afternoons this year. We look forward to the area of Robotics being further developed within the Middle School.
Mr Harder Mr Harder has been at the College since 2012. He has had a number of different teaching roles. Over the last term Mr Harder has been on leave from the College. He is looking forward to returning to the College in 2020 and to Alice Springs with his wife and four sons. Mr Harder brings many skills to his role as a teacher, both inside and outside of the classroom.
He is an artist in another life and brings these skills into his teaching as well as his love for the environment and horticulture.
We will look forward to having these skills used with students in our new garden beds which should be constructed before the beginning of 2020.
WHAT MAKES ARALUEN CHRISTIAN COLLEGE STAND OUT Reasons to choose Araluen Christian College Middle School for your child: ■ A new team of teachers who are looking forward to working together; ■ Teachers who know your child and are passionate about their individual educational journey; ■ A safe, supportive and streamlined schooling structure at a vulnerable stage of your child’s development; ■ Opportunity for student and parent voice in shaping a shared vision of our College; ■ Leadership and personal development opportunities ■ Cross grade mentoring with younger students in the Junior School; ■ Being part of a special family where students are shaped into who God has called them to be; ■ A Christ-centered College that provides excellent pastoral care for your child;■ Academically rigorous programs that set your child up for success in Senior School and beyond.
Word count: 486
