The future was now at a competition held in Moss Vale in late August. And Southern Highlands students proved they were a force to be reckoned with in the futuristic competition.
School students from Canberra to Kiama gathered at St Paul's Internbational College on August 31 to take part in a regional VEX IQ Robotics Scrimmage. Seven teams competed in the competition including four local teams from St Paul's International College and St Paul's Primary School.
The VEX Robotics Competition is the largest competition in the World and entails two separate competitions - VEX IQ (Year 3 - 8) and VEX EDR (Yr 9 - Tertiary). Key criteria for the award includes:
Robot design is consistently high scoring Robot demonstrates a solid mechanical design and is robustly constructed to fulfill its designed task Robot programming is consistently effective and successful Students understand and explain how they worked together to develop their robot Several IQ awards were presented on the day including:
Sportsmanship Award - St Peter and Paul's Kiama (Team 30309B) Design Awards - St Paul's Primary School (SPPS1) Competition Champion Award - St Paul's International (64843A and 64843B) Excellence Award - St Claire's College, Canberra (8673C) The Robotics competition culminates in the National Finals, which will be held in Adelaide in December, with a chance to qualify for the World Championships to be held in Texas in the USA in April 2020.
St Paul's IQ team 64834A are looking forward to another successful season after winning the Amaze Award at Nationals in 2018 in Melbourne.
The school extends a special thank-you to Jack Speerin from Year 8 at St Paul's International for scoring and co-ordinating the field matchplay, Ms Juliette Major from St Claire's for adjudication, St Paul's International teacher Anton Planting for organising the day and Sr Angelina Fong for hosting the scrimmage at her school.
Do you have a great story you'd like to share? Send it to us through our portal at southernhighlandnews.com.au. Go to the community section and click on the tab 'Send us your news'.
Word count: 341
