The future of the popular Bushmaster combat vehicle in Bendigo could be secure after the Australian Army unveiled its prototype of an electric Bushmaster variant in Adelaide this week.
The electric Protected Mobility Vehicle, or ePMV, is quieter than its combustion engine counterparts & it is hoped it can drive for 1000 kilometres before needing to be recharged.
Colonel Robin Smith is the director of the Army's RICO team. RICO stands for robotic & autonomous systems implementation & coordination office & is part of the future land warfare branch within army headquarters.
He said the electric version can accelerate faster, generate more torque, is simpler to maintain because it has fewer mechanical moving parts & can export power so the army can run a headquarters or a workshop from the vehicle on the battlefield.
"Electric vehicles tend to have a different heat signature on the battlefield so they wouldn't be quite so hot, because you don't have an engine creating a thermal signature," Colonel Smith said.
"They're quieter, & therefore have a lower acoustic signature."
But one problem remains – how does the army charge the vehicles on the battlefield?
"That's part of the journey already," Colonel Smith said.
"We will need to charge the vehicle in the field. Hence, phase two takes us to a self-charging electric vehicle, which gets us around having to provide the electric charging point in the field."
Around 60 Bushmasters have been sent by Australia to Ukraine to help in its war against Russia after Ukraine's president, Volodymyr Zelenskyy, made a personal plea to Parliament in March.
The Bushmaster is made by Thales in Bendigo & already comes in 12 different versions, such as an ambulance & mine detector.
The defence manufacturer also designs, builds, & exports the Hawkei defence vehicle from its Holdsworth Road complex, accounting for around 317 of its 3,800 Australian employees.
Colonel Smith said while Thales was not involved in the RICO version of the Bushmaster, the defence manufacturing industry will become involved once the army identifies its needs to turn the electric version into production & goes through a procurement process.
"We write that requirement into a future program or project & that would then go out to industry for their response for the needs that we have, in accordance with the way that we do other procurement processes," he said.
"At that point, we will have articulated our needs & industry will be able to respond accordingly."
In 2020, the New Zealand Army also put in an order for 43 of the Bushmasters to be delivered by the end of this year in a deal worth $75 million.
In the past 10 years, the Bushmaster has also been sold by Thales to six other countries including, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, Japan, & Jamaica.
Last month, the Ukrainian ambassador Vasyl Myroshnychenko visited the Thales site in the regional Victorian city.
Federal member for Bendigo Lisa Chesters said the development of a new electric Bushmaster was an exciting development.
"It's very early days in the design of the prototype & field trials still need to be completed," she said.
"I'm looking forward to seeing where this project may lead & the opportunities that arise from the design."
Assistant Minister for Defence Matt Thistlethwaite says the electric Bushmaster is part of building a "future ready" Army.
"As we are seeing around the world today, modern military personnel are joined on their missions by machines," he said.
Word count: 576
