The Honourable Dr Annabelle Claire Bennett AO SC, Woollahra NSW For eminent service to the law, and to the judiciary, particularly in the field of intellectual property, to higher education, and to sports arbitration.
Professor Ruth Frances Bishop AO, Vic For eminent service to global child health through the development of improved vaccines for paediatric gastroenteritis, and to medical research.
Professor David James Burke AO, Castlecrag NSW For eminent service to neurophysiology, to innovative treatments for spinal cord and brain trauma injuries, and to professional medical organisations.
Ms Sharan Leslie Burrow Belgium For eminent service to industrial relations at the national and international level, to social equity, and as a champion of human rights in developing countries.
Ms Ita Clare Buttrose AO OBE, NSW For eminent service to the community through leadership in the media, the arts, and the health sector, and as a role model.
Professor Alan Frederick Cowman North Melbourne Vic For eminent service to the biological sciences, notably to molecular parasitology, to medical research and scientific education, and as a mentor.
Emeritus Professor John Mitchell Finnis SA For eminent service to the law, and to education, to legal theory and philosophical enquiry, and as a leading jurist, academic and author.
Mr Hugh Michael Jackman North Bondi NSW For eminent service to the performing arts as an acclaimed actor and performer, and to the global community, particularly as an advocate for poverty eradication.
Emeritus Professor Leo Radom Bellevue Hill NSW For eminent service to science, particularly to computational chemistry, as an academic, author and mentor, and to international scientific bodies.
Mr Dennis James Richardson AO, Griffith ACT For eminent service to public administration through leadership roles in the national security, defence and foreign policy arenas, and to workplace cultural reform.
The Honourable Kevin Michael Rudd Brisbane Qld For eminent service to the Parliament of Australia, particularly as Prime Minister, to Indigenous reconciliation, innovative economic initiatives and major policy reform, and through senior advisory roles with international organisations.
Emeritus Professor Maree Therese Smith Bardon Qld For eminent service to science through pioneering research and innovation in the treatment of neuropathic pain, to gender equity, and as a role model.
Officer (AO), General Division
Ms Elizabeth Anne Alexander AM, East Melbourne Vic For distinguished service to higher education administration, to accounting and corporate governance, and as a role model.
The Honourable Reginald Ian Barrett Mosman NSW For distinguished service to the law, and to the judiciary, particularly in the area of corporations law and legislation.
Ms Rosemary Anne Batty Vic For distinguished service to the community as a campaigner and advocate for the prevention of family violence.
Professor Katherine Belov Denistone West NSW For distinguished service to higher education, particularly to comparative genomics, as an academic and researcher.
Professor Andrew Victor Biankin For distinguished service to medical research, and to the treatment of pancreatic cancer, as a clinician-scientist.
Mr Martin Gerard Bowles PSM, Canberra City ACT For distinguished service to public administration at the senior level, and to policy development and program implementation.
Emeritus Professor Scott Bowman Cairns Qld For distinguished service to higher education, notably in rural and regional areas, and to social outreach initiatives.
Mr Richard Philip Broinowski Paddington NSW For distinguished service to international relations through the advancement of Australia's diplomatic, trade and cultural relationships.
Dr Derek Byerlee Orroroo SA For distinguished service to agricultural economics, particularly to sustainable development, poverty reduction and food security.
Ms Penelope June Clive Hobart Tas For distinguished service to the visual arts through philanthropic support for cultural institutions, and to the community of Tasmania.
The Honourable Justice Paul Anthony Coghlan Hawthorn Vic For distinguished service to the law, and to the judiciary, and to the administration and review of criminal justice.
Professor Rachel Claire Cooper Darlington NSW For distinguished service to higher education, particularly in the field of employment relations, and workplace policy and practice.
Mr Nicholas Richard Cowdery AM, QC, Northwood Vic For distinguished service to the law, to the protection of human rights, to professional legal bodies, and to the community.
The Honourable Dennis Antill Cowdroy OAM QC, Sydney NSW For distinguished service to the law, and to the judiciary in the civilian and military spheres, through a range of senior roles.
Mr Michael Edward Davis North Adelaide SA For distinguished service to the space industry as an advocate, and to science education.
Professor Lex William Doyle North Carlton Vic For distinguished service to medicine, and to medical education, as a neonatal paediatrician, academic, author and researcher.
Professor Calum John Drummond Elwood Vic For distinguished service to chemistry and materials science research, to commercialisation initiatives, and as a mentor.
Dr Alan Anthony Dupont Paddington NSW For distinguished service to the international community through security analysis and strategic policy development.
Mr Dale Brendon Elphinstone Burnie Tas For distinguished service to business, particularly to the resources and manufacturing sectors, and to the community of Tasmania.
Ms Kathryn Joy Fagg Vic For distinguished service to business and finance, to the central banking, logistics and manufacturing sectors, and to women.
Associate Professor Alexander Stewart Forrest Cleveland Qld For distinguished service to dentistry, particularly to forensic odontology, and to education in the field of head and neck anatomy.
Mrs Nicola Margaret Forrest Dalkeith WA For distinguished service to the community through philanthropic support for education and the arts, to business, and to the community.
Mrs Pamela Galli Toorak Vic For distinguished service to community health and medical research as a supporter and benefactor, and to children with a disability.
Mrs Alison Grant Harcourt Kew Vic For distinguished service to mathematics and computer science through pioneering research and development of integer linear programming.
Emeritus Professor Andrew Peter Hopkins ACT For distinguished service to higher education, particularly to industrial safety and accident analysis.
Professor Debra Elizabeth Jackson Dulwich Hill NSW For distinguished service to medical education in the field of nursing practice and research as an academic and author.
Dr Ian Hugh Johnston AM, QC, Bruny Island Tas For distinguished service to classical literature through the translation and interpretation of ancient Greek and Chinese texts.
Dr Megan-Jane Johnstone Thornbury Vic For distinguished service to medical education in the field of nursing and health care ethics, to patients' rights, and to professional standards.
Professor Fiona Kathleen Judd Sandford Tas For distinguished service to medicine, and to medical education, as a clinical psychiatrist and academic, and to professional bodies.
Professor Karim M Khan Vancouver, Canada For distinguished service to sport and exercise medicine, and to the promotion of physical activity for community health.
Professor Christine Julie Kilpatrick Parkville Vic For distinguished service to medicine through senior administrative roles, to the promotion of quality in health care, and to neurology.
Emeritus Professor Susan Caroline Kippax Redfern NSW For distinguished service to higher education, and to community health, particularly through research into HIV prevention and treatment.
Dr Rachael Linda Kohn Mosman NSW For distinguished service to the broadcast media, particularly radio, as a creator, producer and presenter, and to Jewish studies.
Emeritus Professor Edward William Kraegen Queens Park NSW For distinguished service to medicine, and to medical education, in the areas of diabetes, obesity and glucose metabolism research.
Dr Robert Ian Larbalestier Cottesloe WA For distinguished service to medicine, particularly to cardiothoracic surgery and transplantation, and to professional medical societies.
Mr Simon Joseph Lewis PSM, Sutton NSW For distinguished service to public administration in a range of portfolio areas, and to transformational change and organisational design.
Mr Cunxin Li Hamilton Qld For distinguished service to the performing arts, particularly to ballet, as a dancer and artistic director.
Professor David Anthony Mackey WA For distinguished service to medicine, and to medical education, in the field of ophthalmology, as a clinician-scientist and academic.
The Honourable Clare Majella Martin NT For distinguished service to the people and Legislative Assembly of the Northern Territory, and as a community advocate.
Professor Fjelda Elizabeth Martin Oatlands NSW For distinguished service to dental education as an academic and researcher, and to professional organisations.
The Honourable Nicholas Hugh Minchin Melbourne Vic For distinguished service to the Parliament of Australia, particularly in the industry and finance portfolios, and to the people of South Australia.
Professor Christina Anne Mitchell Clayton Vic For distinguished service to medicine in the field of haematology, to medical education and research, and to academic leadership.
The Honourable Justice Debra Ann Mullins Greenslopes Qld For distinguished service to the law, and to the judiciary, to professional development and legal education, and to women.
Ms Susan Lee Murphy Nedlands WA For distinguished service to the natural resources sector in Western Australia, and to engineering.
Her Honour the Honourable Vicki Susan O'Halloran AM, Darwin NT For distinguished service to the people of the Northern Territory, and to the disability sector through a range of executive roles.
Ms Peggy Yvonne O'Neal Richmond Vic For distinguished service to Australian rules football, to superannuation and finance law, and to the advancement of women in leadership roles.
The Honourable Neville John Owen Nedlands WA For distinguished service to the law, and to the judiciary, to legal education, and to the community of Western Australia.
Dr Edward Anthony Parkes Bangalow NSW For distinguished service to conservation and the environment through the restoration of subtropical rainforest in northern New South Wales.
Professor Richard George Pestell United States of America For distinguished service to medicine, and to medical education, as a researcher and physician in the fields of endocrinology and oncology.
Dr Gregory Myles Powell Zimbabwe For distinguished service to the international community of Zimbabwe in the field of paediatrics as a clinician and mentor.
Dr Geoffrey William Raby Darlinghurst NSW For distinguished service to Australia-China relations through senior diplomatic roles, and to multilateral trade policy development.
Professor Peter David Rathjen Unley Park SA For distinguished service to higher education through senior administrative roles, and as a scientist and medical researcher.
Professor Linda Jane Richards St Lucia Qld For distinguished service to medical research and education in the field of developmental neurobiology, and to community engagement in science.
Dr Tilman Alfred Ruff AM, Brighton Vic For distinguished service to the global community as an advocate for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, and to medicine.
Mr John Erik Scanlon AM, Vaude, Switzerland For distinguished service to wildlife and flora conservation and protection through roles with international organisations.
Ms Carol Judith Schwartz AM, Melbourne Vic For distinguished service to the community as a supporter of women in leadership roles, to social justice advocacy, and to business.
Mr Francis Arthur Sedgman AM, Sandringham Vic For distinguished service to tennis as a player at the national and international level, and as a role model for young sportspersons.
Professor Frances Separovic Melbourne Vic For distinguished service to science education, particularly to biophysical chemistry, as an academic, and to young women scientists.
Professor Michelle Yvonne Simmons Woollahra NSW For distinguished service to science education as a leader in quantum and atomic electronics, and as a role model.
The Honourable Carolyn Chalmers Simpson Potts Point NSW For distinguished service to the law, and to the judiciary, particularly in the areas of criminal, defamation, administrative and industrial law.
Ms Diane Lee Smith-Gander East Fremantle WA For distinguished service to business, to women's engagement in executive roles, to gender equality, and to the community.
Ms Natasha Jessica Stott Despoja AM, Henley Beach SA For distinguished service to the global community as an advocate for gender equality, and through roles in a range of organisations.
Ms Meryl Tankard Bondi NSW For distinguished service to the performing arts as a dancer, actor, producer, innovative choreographer and theatre director.
Ms Sigrid Madeline Thornton NSW For distinguished service to the performing arts as a film, television and stage actor, and to professional arts organisations.
Emeritus Professor Graeme Turner Paddington Qld For distinguished service to higher education through pioneering work in the field of cultural studies and the humanities.
Mrs Kay Ellen Van Norton Poche Manly NSW For distinguished service to the community as a benefactor and supporter of Indigenous health and medical research initiatives.
Professor Mark von Itzstein Qld For distinguished service to medical research and education in the field of structural biology and glycochemistry, and as a mentor.
Emeritus Professor Murray Charles Wells Lindfield NSW For distinguished service to higher education, particularly to accountancy, and to business administration.
Mr Neil Malcolm Westaway AM, Melbourne Vic For distinguished service to youth through Scouts at the national and international level, and to the community of Victoria.
Member (AM) in the General Division
Professor Margaret Anne Abernethy Carlton Vic For significant service to higher education, accounting research, and to student access and equity.
Mr Arun Kumar Abey Dawes Point NSW For significant service to the financial planning sector, and to the community.
Mr Ronald John Adams Applecross WA For significant service to the forest and wood products industry.
Mr Ronald James Alexander Perth WA For significant service to sport and recreation, and to public administration.
Mr Matthew Allen Darling Point NSW For significant service to sailing, particularly through executive roles.
Mr David Murray Anderson Chiswick NSW For significant service to the maritime and road transport industries.
Mr Eric Russell Anderson Flaxton Qld For significant service to conservation and the environment.
Mr William Nixon Apple Alphington Vic For significant service to the superannuation sector, and to trade unions.
Mr Raymond (Ray) Charles Argall Five Dock NSW For significant service to film and television as a director and cinematographer.
Ms Lesley Mary Arrowsmith Shelley WA For significant service to swimming as a technical official.
Mrs Eliza Jane Ault-Connell Albury NSW For significant service to community health, and as a Paralympic athlete.
Mr Robert John Badenach Hobart Tas For significant service to yachting, and to Australian rules football.
Ms Suzanne Dale Baker Pyrmont NSW For significant service to the film industry as a producer.
Dr Christine Mary Ball Vic For significant service to anaesthesiology, and to medical education.
Mr Eric Bana Vic For significant service to the performing arts, and to charitable organisations.
Mr Peter Christopher Banki Potts Point NSW For significant service to the legal profession, and to the community.
The Right Reverend Dr Paul William Barnett Epping NSW For significant service to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Mr Robert Anthony Barwell NSW For significant service to the beef cattle industry, and to food biosecurity.
The Honourable Graham Rodney Bell Anstead Qld For significant service to family law, and to the judiciary.
Ms Delys Margaret Bird WA For significant service to higher education, and to gender studies and literature.
Professor Bruce Black Qld For significant service to otolaryngology, and to medical education.
Mr José Blanco St Ives NSW For significant service to Australia-Latin America business relations.
Mr Bruce William Bland Rose Bay NSW For significant service to Australia-France cultural relations, and to the community.
Mr Clive Ranger Blazey Vic For significant service to horticulture, to conservation, and to the community.
Mr Joseph Borensztajn Toorak Vic For significant service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Nancy Deloi Bosler OAM, Collaroy Plateau NSW For significant service to seniors, and to the community.
Associate Professor John Sydney Boucher Ivanhoe East Vic For significant service to dentistry, and to professional standards.
Ajahn Bhikkhu Brahmavamso Serpentine WA For significant service to Buddhism, and to gender equality.
Mrs Susan Maree Bridge Ermington NSW For significant service to secondary education in New South Wales.
Ms Carolyn Maria Briggs St Kilda Vic For significant service to the Indigenous community.
Mrs Lucinda Brogden Bilgola Plateau NSW For significant service to workplace mental health and wellbeing.
Mr Alan Francis Brown Bellevue Hill NSW For significant service to the thoroughbred racing industry.
Mr Bryan Eric Brown Moggill Qld For significant service to youth through Scouts, and to the community.
Mr Gavin Law Bunning Peppermint Grove WA For significant service to the hardware retail industry, and to charitable organisations.
Mr David Causebrook Buttner Doreen Vic For significant service to the automotive manufacturing sector.
Associate Professor Anthony John Buzzard Melbourne Vic For significant service to the international education sector, and to medical science.
Clinical Professor Peter Thomas Bye NSW For significant service to medicine, particularly to cystic fibrosis, and to medical education.
Professor Victor James Callan Indooroopilly Qld For significant service to higher education in the field of management.
Mrs Krystyna Linda Campbell-Pretty East Melbourne Vic For significant service to the community through a range of charitable initiatives.
Mrs Alisa Peta Camplin-Warner OAM, Kew Vic For significant service to the community through support for paediatric health care.
Ms Lindsay Cane Pyrmont NSW For significant service to community health, particularly in regional areas.
Ms Catherine Jane Caro Artarmon NSW For significant service to the broadcast media as a journalist, social commentator and author.
Dr William MacEwan Carroll Nedlands WA For significant service to neurological medicine, and to people with multiple sclerosis.
Ms Veronica Mary Casey Qld For significant service to nursing, to medical education, and to community health.
Mr Victor George Chapman PSM, Woonona NSW For significant service to the Indigenous community, to tertiary education, and to the visual arts.
Ms Marita Cheng Richmond Vic For significant service to science and technology, particularly to robotics.
Professor Adrian David Cheok Medindie SA For significant service to international education.
Professor Elizabeth Mary Chiarella Mosman NSW For significant service to nurse and midwifery education, and to health care standards.
Mrs Elizabeth Chong Richmond Vic For significant service to the hospitality sector, and to the promotion of Chinese cuisine.
Ms Amanda Julie Christensen Avalon Beach NSW For significant service to community health, particularly to respiratory diseases.
Dr Jonathan Robert Clark Camperdown NSW For significant service to medicine as a head and neck surgeon.
Mrs Lorraine Gaye Clark Narrabeen NSW For significant service to sport, particularly to the Special Olympics.
Associate Professor Stella Clark Mont Albert North Vic For significant service to medical research as an advocate for improved standards.
Ms Sarah-Jane Clarke Vaucluse NSW For significant service to the fashion industry, and to charitable organisations.
Mr Paul John Clauson Cleveland Qld For significant service to the law, and to the people and Parliament of Queensland.
Mr Trevor Sydney Cohen Toorak Vic For significant service to the Jewish community, and to heritage preservation.
Dr Steven Andrew Cohn Castlecrag NSW For significant service to dentistry, particularly to endodontology.
Dr Matthew John Collins QC, Vic For significant service to the law, to legal standards, and to education.
Mrs Vicki Anne Condon Mosman NSW For significant service to youth through mentoring and support roles.
Mr Crispin John Conroy Avalon NSW For significant service to international relations and trade.
Mr Stephen William Conry Ashgrove Qld For significant service to the commercial property sector, and to the community.
The Honourable Dr Elizabeth Constable Mosman Park WA For significant service to the people and Parliament of Western Australia, and to education.
Dr Ian James Cook Northbridge NSW For significant service to gastroenterology, and to medical research.
Mr Ian Leonard Cook Neutral Bay NSW For significant service to conservation and heritage preservation.
Professor Alan James Cooper OAM, Neutral Bay NSW For significant service to medicine as a dermatologist and researcher.
Emeritus Professor Leslie Joshua Copeland NSW For significant service to agricultural science as an academic and researcher.
Mr Peter Daniel Corcoran OAM, NSW For significant service to rugby league, and to sport in New South Wales.
Mr Peter William Cousens Greenwich NSW For significant service to the performing arts, and to the community.
Ms Sandra Jan Creamer Rockhampton Qld For significant service to Indigenous women, and to human rights.
Mr John Andrew Croll Ryde NSW For significant service to people with a disability, and to Paralympic and sporting organisations.
Mrs Elizabeth Anne Crouch NSW For significant service to higher education, and to the rail transport industry.
Mr John William Cunningham Bellevue Hill NSW For significant service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Ross Cunningham Coledale NSW For significant service to arts administration, and to industry recognition.
Ms Sophie Alice Cunningham Fitzroy Vic For significant service to literature as an author, editor and role model.
Professor Hannah Grace Dahlen NSW For significant service to midwifery, nursing and to medical education.
Mr Robert Rae Dalziel Vic For significant service to the community, to rugby union, and to business.
Mr Andrew Laurence Davies Rose Park SA For significant service to architecture, and to the community.
Dr Penelope Kay Davies Bendigo Vic For significant service to higher education, and to community health.
Professor Kevin Thomas Davis Brunswick Vic For significant service to higher education, particularly in financial systems.
Mr Nigel Howard Davis West Beach SA For significant service to the manufacturing and supply of dental products.
Professor Phillip Roy Della Carine WA For significant service to nursing, midwifery, and to health care education.
Ms Noeleen Dix Elwood Vic For significant service to netball at the state and national level.
Distinguished Professor Shi Xue Dou Balgownie NSW For significant service to science education in the field of superconducting and electronic materials.
Professor Ross Kingston Dowling OAM, Karrinyup WA For significant service to higher education, and to tourism and conservation.
Dr Peter Ronald Dry Belair SA For significant service to viticulture, particularly to wine-grape research.
Mr Peter Brian Duncan Dural NSW For significant service to business and manufacturing, to medical research, and to sport.
Mr John Francis Eades Griffith NSW For significant service to the law, to professional standards, and to the community.
Mr Gregory Lance Early APM, Bridgeman Downs Qld For significant service to the community, particularly to former law enforcement officers.
Mr Gregory Deane Edgecombe Aldgate SA For significant service to Australia-Indonesia relations, and to the community.
Dr John Patrick Edmonds Pymble NSW For significant service to rheumatology, and to medical research.
Dr Alan Eggleston Como WA For significant service to the Parliament of Australia, and to the community of Western Australia.
Dr Jonathan James Ell Hunters Hill NSW For significant service to medicine, and to medical education and research.
Mr John Etherington Hawthorn Vic For significant service to the community, and to the Uniting Church in Australia.
Dr Marguerite Virginia Evans-Galea Melbourne Vic For significant service to women in STEMM as an advocate and role model.
Emeritus Professor Neville Frank Exon Chapman ACT For significant service to marine geology, and to higher education.
Mr Bradley Paul Farmer Horrocks Beach WA For significant service to surfing, to conservation, and to the community.
Ms Anna Fienberg North Balgowlah NSW For significant service to literature as an author.
Ms Lisa Kim Filipetto ACT For significant service to bilateral relations, and to international humanitarian initiatives.
Ms Margaret Charlotte Fischer Hahndorf SA For significant service to the festival sector, and to the LGBTIQ community.
Mr David John Flegg Murrumbeena Vic For significant service to Australian rules football as an umpire.
Dr Josephine Mary Flood Chiswick NSW For significant service to archaeology, and to the study of Indigenous culture.
Ms Sarah Margaret Follent Teneriffe Qld For significant service to the visual arts, and to the print and broadcast media.
Professor George James Foster California, USA For significant service to education, particularly to management accounting.
Emeritus Professor Richard Allen Fotheringham Peregian Beach Qld For significant service to higher education, and to the performing arts.
Reverend Dr Thomas Robert Frame Tarago NSW For significant service to higher education, to the Anglican Church of Australia, and to the community.
Ms Kathleen Clare Freedman NSW For significant service to the visual arts as a benefactor and supporter of emerging artists.
Dr Michael Atticus Fullilove Randwick NSW For significant service to international relations.
Mr Sealin Roger Garlett Coolbellup WA For significant service to the Uniting Church in Australia.
Mr Lionel Gell Mont Albert Vic For significant service to the community through philanthropy.
Ms Frances Gerard SA For significant service to the hospitality industry, and to the arts.
Professor Lynn Gillam Vic For significant service to medical education in the field of bioethics.
Mr James Lindsay Glissan ESM QC, Oyster Bay NSW For significant service to the law in New South Wales.
Mrs Lilliane Gomatos Darwin NT For significant service to the Greek community of the Northern Territory.
Mr Ricky Grace West Perth WA For significant service to the Indigenous community of Western Australia.
Professor Michael Lindsay Grayson Kew Vic For significant service to medicine in the field of infectious disease.
Mrs Margaret Anne Green NSW For significant service to veterans and their families, and to nursing.
Professor Michael John Grigg Balwyn Vic For significant service to medicine as a vascular surgeon.
Professor David Ian Guest Camperdown NSW For significant service to horticultural science, particularly to plant pathology.
Distinguished Professor James Ernest Guthrie NSW For significant service to higher education in the field of accounting.
Mr Nigel Clive Hadgkiss APM, Surrey Hills Vic For significant service to the building and construction sector, to public administration, and to law enforcement.
Mr James Robert Hall Darkan WA For significant service to the wool industry, and to the agricultural sector.
Emeritus Professor Ralph Frederick Hall Balmain NSW For significant service to higher education as an academic, and to the community.
Ms Susan Maria Halliday Vic For significant service to social welfare, particularly through gender equality and human rights advocacy.
Mr Craig James Hamilton Monash ACT For significant service to public administration in defence policy.
Dr Lorraine Sarah Hammond Mount Pleasant WA For significant service to higher education, and to the community.
Professor Winita Hardikar Vic For significant service to medicine, particularly to paediatric liver disease and transplantation.
Mr Geoffrey Leonard Harris Vic For significant service to the community through a range of organisations.
Ms Christine Hazel Hawkins Bowral NSW For significant service to business and commerce, and to primary industry.
Ms Dimity Jane Hawkins Preston Vic For significant service to the global community as an advocate for nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament.
Mr Kent Heazlett Newport NSW For significant service to business and international trade.
Professor Andrew Alistair Heggie Camberwell Vic For significant service to medicine and dentistry in the field of oral and maxillofacial surgery.
Professor Paul Hamilton Hemsworth North Melbourne Vic For significant service to agricultural science, and to animal welfare.
Mrs Margery Heather Henderson Yarralumla ACT For significant service to the community through the preservation of political history.
Mr Robert Bruce Hershan Toorak Vic For significant service to the textile industry, and to the Jewish community.
Ms Helen Claire Hewett Glebe NSW For significant service to the superannuation industry, to mental health, and to women.
Mrs Kerry Margaret Heysen-Hicks Unley Park SA For significant service to the film industry as a producer.
Mr Grant Edward Hill Vic For significant service to the community through social welfare initiatives.
Ms Majell Maree Hind Qld For significant service to Australia-Indonesia relations through diplomatic roles.
Ms Katherine Anne Hirschfeld Hamilton Qld For significant service to engineering, to women, and to business.
Mr Harry Hoffman OAM, WA For significant service to the community through charitable organisations.
Professor Raymond Warren Holden United Kingdom For significant service to the performing arts through music.
Dr Michael John Hollands Castlecrag NSW For significant service to medical education and professional standards, and as a surgeon.
Professor Stuart Brian Hooper Black Rock Vic For significant service to medical research in the field of foetal lung and cardiorespiratory development.
Lieutenant Colonel Geoffrey Hourn (Retd), Shenton Park WA For significant service to veterans and their families, and to international relations.
Professor Geoffrey Isbister Carrington NSW For significant service to medical research in the field of toxicology.
Ms Margaret Jack Sydney NSW For significant service to the resources sector, and to Australia-China relations.
Emeritus Professor Jeffrey Bruce Jacobs Lower Plenty Vic For significant service to higher education, particularly in the field of Asian studies.
Dr Jeremy William Johnson Ballarat Vic For significant service to tourism, and to the community of Ballarat.
Professor Rosemary Ross Johnston Newport NSW For significant service to higher education, and to children's literature.
Associate Professor Brigid Jordan Collingwood Vic For significant service to medicine in the field of paediatrics and infant mental health.
Mr Elias Jreissati Southbank Vic For significant service to the community through charitable organisations.
Ms Athena (Tina) Karanastasis Hawthorndene SA For significant service to the multicultural community of South Australia.
Ms Daryl Ann Karp Turner ACT For significant service to the arts, particularly to the museum and galleries sector.
Professor Constance Helen Katelaris Epping NSW For significant service to medicine in the field of immunology and allergy.
Dr Catherine Ann Keenan NSW For significant service to children as an advocate for improving literacy, and to the community of Redfern.
Ms Cassandra Leigh Kelly New York, USA For significant service to business through executive roles, and as an advocate for gender equity.
Dr Jennifer Helen Kendrick NSW For significant service to medicine, and to medical education and standards.
Emeritus Professor Ivan Robert Kennedy North Ryde NSW For significant service to higher education, particularly to agriculture.
Mr Robert Kennedy Fordwich NSW For significant service to business, and to the community of the Hunter.
Mr Charles Peter Kiefel OAM, East Melbourne Vic For significant service to Australia-United States relations, and to philanthropy.
Mr Anthony William Kiernan Dalkeith WA For significant service to business, and to the community.
Mr Warren Leslie King Barton ACT For significant service to business, particularly in the area of defence industry capability.
Ms Mary Anne Kirk Bruce ACT For significant service to midwifery and nursing, and to professional standards.
Ms Kim Joanne Koop Rosanna Vic For significant service to social welfare, particularly through disability and mental health advocacy.
Mr David Milton Krasnostein South Yarra Vic For significant service to the law through equitable access to justice.
Professor Steven Anthony Krilis Hunters Hill NSW For significant service to medical research in the areas of inflammation, thrombosis and allergic disease.
Professor Jayashri Kulkarni Beaumaris Vic For significant service to medicine in the field of psychiatry.
Mr Marcus Dallas La Vincente Stirling SA For significant service to the not-for-profit sector, particularly through legal support.
Ms Deborah Jane Lawrie Monterey NSW For significant service to aviation as a commercial pilot, and to women in the profession.
Dr Lenore Layman Mount Lawley WA For significant service to higher education, particularly in the fields of Australian and public history.
Professor Gilah Chaja Leder Malvern Vic For significant service to higher education, and to the Jewish community of Victoria.
Dr Richard Priestley Lee Castlecrag NSW For significant service to intensive care medicine.
Dr Andrew Grant Lemon Eltham Vic For significant service to community history, and to the racing industry.
Mr Andrew Robert Leventhal Wahroonga NSW For significant service to geotechnical engineering, and to the community.
Mr Rodney David Levis Surry Hills NSW For significant service to the fashion retail and manufacturing industry, and to the community.
Mr David Chong Li Toorak Vic For significant service to the community through support for the performing arts.
Dr Peter Edgeworth Lillie Eastwood SA For significant service to medicine in the field of anaesthesia.
Dr Douglas Allister Lingard Mona Vale NSW For significant service to medicine as a radiologist, and to community health.
Dr John Charles Litt Aldgate SA For significant service to preventative medicine as an influenza specialist, and as a general practitioner.
Mr Harvey Warren Lockwood Miranda NSW For significant service to rugby league as an administrator, and to the community.
Mr Lucien James Longley Denmark WA For significant service to basketball as a player, coach and administrator.
Dr James Ormonde Lucas Mount Eliza Vic For significant service to paediatric dentistry, and to professional organisations.
Mr Michael John Lynskey Ainslie ACT For significant service to international eye health programs, and to the community
Dr Ian Donald MacLeod Como WA For significant service to the museum and galleries sector.
Mr Angus Alan Macneil Rand NSW For significant service to primary industry, and to the community.
Dr Prudence Joan Manners Nedlands WA For significant service to medicine as a paediatric rheumatologist.
Mr Peter Ross Martin ACT For significant service to multi platform and print media as an economics journalist.
Mrs Joan Helen Masterman Woollahra NSW For significant service to tourism in Tasmania, and to conservation and the environment.
Ms Louise Mary Mayo O'Connor ACT For significant service to vocational education and training, and to the community.
Mr John Maurice McClelland Boronia Heights Qld For significant service to the community through the Royal Life Saving Society in Queensland.
Dr David Alexander McCredie Kew Vic For significant service to medicine in the field of paediatric nephrology.
Dr Mary (Tein) Christine McDonald Woodburn NSW For significant service to conservation and the environment.
Emeritus Professor Alasdair William McDowall California, USA For significant service to science, particularly in the field of electron microscopy.
Mr Alastair James McEwin Potts Point NSW For significant service to people with a disability, and as a human rights advocate.
Mr Simon Roger McGrath Sydney NSW For significant service to the tourism and hospitality sector.
Mr Richard Brian McGruther OBE, Chermside West Qld For significant service to rugby union, and to the community.
Mr Bruce Douglas McIver Maroochydore Qld For significant service to politics, and to the road transport industry.
Dr Rosalind McMillan Kew Vic For significant service to music education in Victoria.
Associate Professor Ruth Patricia McNair Fitzroy North Vic For significant service to medicine, and as an advocate for the LGBTIQ community.
Mr Dennis Meredith Clearview SA For significant service to hockey at the local, state, national and international level.
Dr Colin George Merridew Launceston Tas For significant service to surgical and obstetric anaesthesia.
Ms Heidi Belinda Middleton Palm Beach NSW For significant service to the fashion industry, and to charitable organisations.
Emeritus Professor Gabriel Adelin Moens Kenmore Hills Qld For significant service to the law, and to higher education.
Dr Helen Margaret Moore Cook ACT For significant service to English language education, and to community music.
Mr Stephen Thomas Moore Qld For significant service to rugby union, and to charitable organisations.
Mr Alan Keith Morris Laurieton NSW For significant service to wildlife conservation, particularly native bird life.
Ms Helen Penelope Morris Brunswick West Vic For significant service to the philanthropic sector, and to community health.
Ms Di Grace Morrissey Mondrook NSW For significant service to literature as a novelist, and to conservation and the environment.
Associate Professor Michael John Murray Vic For significant service to geriatric medicine as a clinician and educator.
Mrs Margaret Cecile Niall St Kilda Vic For significant service to public health as a dietician and nutritionist, and to the community.
Mr David Wayne Nilsson Bridgeman Downs Qld For significant service to baseball as a player, coach and mentor.
Dr Brad Norman WA For significant service to science as a marine biologist.
Dr Clare Nourse New Farm Qld For significant service to medicine in the field of paediatric infectious diseases.
His Honour Judge Christopher Gerard O'Brien Cronulla NSW For significant service to the law, and to the judiciary.
Dr Clare Cecilia O'Callaghan Kew Vic For significant service to community health.
Ms Susan Mary Oliver East Melbourne Vic For significant service to business, and to women.
Mr Kevin O'Shea Cronulla NSW For significant service to the refrigeration and air conditioning industry.
Mrs Beverley Maeling Overton Kingscote SA For significant service to conservation and the environment.
Mrs Ingrid Veronika Ozols Balwyn North Vic For significant service to mental health and suicide prevention in the workplace.
Ms Kathryn Palmer Kingston ACT For significant service to sports administration.
Professor Barbara Ann Pamphilon Duffy ACT For significant service to higher education, and to the community.
Mr David John Papps Tathra NSW For significant service to public administration.
Mrs Adell Elaine Parkyn Buderim Qld For significant service to hockey.
Ms Susan Jane Peden Malvern Vic For significant service to the community.
Mr Salvatore Perna Melbourne Vic For significant service to racing integrity, and to the community.
Miss Dorothy Betsy Peters Healesville Vic For significant service to the Indigenous community of Victoria.
Mr James William Peters Kew Vic For significant service to the legal profession, and to rowing.
Mr Andrew Michael Phelan Campbell ACT For significant service to judicial administration.
Mr Douglas Purdom Phillips Larrakeyah NT For significant service to business in the Northern Territory.
Associate Professor Leo Arieh Pinczewski Centennial Park NSW For significant service to medicine, particularly to the advancement of knee surgery.
Mr Warwick John Plunkett Manly NSW For significant service to pharmacy, and to professional organisations.
Dr Emmanuel Clive Pohl Benowa Qld For significant service to the finance sector, and to the community.
Emeritus Professor John Hurlstone Pollard West Pymble NSW For significant service to community music events, and to education.
Emeritus Professor Anthony James Radford SA For significant service to medicine, to medical education, and to global health.
Dr Helen Patricia Ramsay NSW For significant service to plant science.
Mr John Alexander Ramsay Sandy Bay Tas For significant service to public administration in Tasmania.
Mr Peter James Raven Sanctuary Cove Qld For significant service to aviation safety.
Dr Peter John Read Turner ACT For significant service to Indigenous history.
Dr Joseph Abraham Reich Toorak Vic For significant service to ophthalmology.
Mr Campbell Hamilton Reid Balmain NSW For significant service to the print media.
Ms Catherine Gay Reid Indooroopilly Qld For significant service to healthcare delivery, and to philanthropy.
Professor Kerry Anne Reid-Searl Farnborough Qld For significant service to nurse education.
Professor Gregory John Reinhardt South Yarra Vic For significant service to judicial administration, and to education.
Ms Crocifissa Fifa Riccobono Kogarah NSW For significant service to the music industry.
Mr Peter Arthur Rix Elizabeth Bay NSW For significant service to the music and events industries, and to philanthropy.
Mr Geoffrey Craig Roberts Bondi NSW For significant service to urban planning and development.
Dr Lindy Jane Roberts Subiaco WA For significant service to medicine, and to professional organisations.
Mr Andrew Charles Ross Glendalough WA For significant service to the performing arts.
Mr Leigh Anthony Royans Seacliff SA For significant service to social welfare in South Australia.
Ms Leigh Peta Sales Ultimo NSW For significant service to the broadcast media.
Dr Nicholas Saltos NSW For significant service to medicine, and to education.
Mrs Margaret Ann Sansom Narre Warren North Vic For significant service to the community.
Mr Anthony Michael Schembri Redfern NSW For significant service to hospital administration, and to medical research.
Mr Bruce Alan Schumacher Berowra Heights NSW For significant service to the recreational fishing industry.
Mr Guy Theodore Sebastian Rosebery NSW For significant service to the music recording industry, and to charitable initiatives.
Mr Garry James Sebo Beaumaris Vic For significant service to the community, and to aged care.
Ms Jeanette (Jenni) Alison Seton Balmain NSW For significant service to young people with cancer and their families.
Mr Michael Warner Shand QC, Melbourne Vic For significant service to the Anglican Church of Australia, and to the legal profession.
Professor Arun Kumar Sharma Teneriffe Qld For significant service to computer science and information technology.
Distinguished Professor Dharmendra Prakash Sharma McKellar ACT For significant service to higher education, and to computer science.
Mr Anthony Alexander Shaw Qld For significant service to rugby union.
Mr Stephen Wayne Sheaffe Annerley Qld For significant service to community history preservation.
Professor Malcolm Ross Sim Travancore Vic For significant service to occupational and environmental medicine.
Dr Leon Abraham Simons Bellevue Hill NSW For significant service to cardiovascular medicine, and to education.
Mr Mahalingam Sinnathamby Qld For significant service to the building and construction sector, and to the community.
Professor Robert Clive Skinner Northcote Vic For significant service to environmental water management.
Dr David Richard Smart Hobart Tas For significant service to hyperbaric medicine, and to professional organisations.
The Late Mr Peter John Smedley Melbourne Vic For significant service to the community.
Mr Cameron Wayne Smith Parramatta NSW For significant service to rugby league.
Mrs Carlene Dorothy Smith NSW For significant service to pharmacy, and to professional organisations.
Mr Bruce Raymond Spangler Toorak Gardens SA For significant service to basketball, and to the community.
Mr Andrew Philip Spate Kingston Tas For significant service to conservation, particularly to caves and karsts.
Mr Edward Douglas Spooner Forestville NSW For significant service to the renewable energy sector.
Dr Richard James Stark Toorak Vic For significant service to neurological medicine, and to professional associations.
Dr Paul Steinfort Glen Waverley Vic For significant service to the construction sector, and to the community.
Mr Kevin Philip Stone Fitzroy Vic For significant service to people with a disability.
Professor Carolyn Mary Sue NSW For significant service to medicine, particularly to mitochondrial disease.
Dr William Francis Sultmann Noosa Heads Qld For significant service to education, and to the community.
Dr Keith Douglas Suter Potts Point NSW For significant service to international relations, and to the Uniting Church in Australia.
Dr Rodney Robin Syme Yandoit Hills Vic For significant service to social welfare initiatives, and to law reform.
Mr Alf Alexander Taylor Lugarno NSW For significant service to the community through philanthropic initiatives.
Mrs Nadia Josephine Taylor Lugarno NSW For significant service to the community through philanthropic initiatives.
Mrs Jennifer Irene Teasdale Pelican Lagoon SA For significant service to education, and to international relations.
Mrs Faith Thomas Port Augusta SA For significant service to cricket, and to the Indigenous community.
Ms Gabrielle Catherine Thompson Rose Bay NSW For significant service to the performing arts, particularly to music.
Dr David Mark Thurin Toorak Vic For significant service to sporting organisations, and to community health.
Mr Johnathan Dean Thurston Qld For significant service to rugby league, and as a role model.
Dr John William Tierney OAM, Newcastle NSW For significant service to people with polio.
Dr Mark Toner Brighton Vic For significant service to engineering and the technological sciences.
Dr Lizabeth Tong Bellevue Hill NSW For significant service to medicine, particularly to child mental health.
Mr Melvyn James Tozer Balwyn North Vic For significant service to the insurance sector, and to charitable groups.
Mr Glenn Thurston Turner Newcastle NSW For significant service to the community of the Hunter.
Ms Margaret Eileen Twomey Forrest ACT For significant service to international relations.
Dr Peter Lyndon Tyree Bayview NSW For significant service to engineering, and to education.
Ms Janine Mary Walker Paddington Qld For significant service to education, to community health, and to the media.
Mr Gregory Joseph Wall Peppermint Grove WA For significant service to business, and to the community.
Mr Graeme Duncan Wallis Sorrento WA For significant service to the mining sector.
Ms Theanne Rae Walters ACT For significant service to medical education and accreditation.
The Reverend Dr Ann Patricia Wansbrough Clovelly NSW For significant service to the Uniting Church in Australia.
Mr Sean Patrick Wareing Mosman NSW For significant service to children who are deaf or blind.
Mr William Bressan Watson Pallara Qld For significant service to the plumbing industry.
Mr Jonathan James Webster Kew Vic For significant service to the law, to education, and to the community.
Dr Gary Hilton Weiss Point Piper NSW For significant service to business, and to the community.
Mr Peter James White Brisbane Qld For significant service to the finance sector, and to the community.
Dr Susan White Glen Iris Vic For significant service to sports medicine.
Mr Michael Roy Whitney Maroubra NSW For significant service to cricket, and to the broadcast media.
Professor James Leonard Wilkinson Vic For significant service to medicine, particularly paediatric cardiology.
Dr James Roland Williams CBE, Hawthorn Vic For significant service to the energy and resources sectors, and to business.
Mr Peter John Williams Carlton Vic For significant service to architecture.
Associate Professor Peter Milward Williams Hawthorn Vic For significant service to higher education, particularly to architecture, property and construction.
Professor Brenda Wilson Hyde Park SA For significant service to community health, and to the people of South Australia through a range of roles.
Dr Dianne Fay Winkler Blackburn Vic For significant service to people with a disability.
Dr Charlotte Ann Wood Marrickville NSW For significant service to literature.
The Honourable Terence Anthony Worthington QC, Crafers SA For significant service to the law, and to the judiciary.
Professor Yi-Min Xie Mill Park Vic For significant service to higher education, and to civil engineering.
Professor Dao-Yi Yu City Beach WA For significant service to ophthalmology, and to education.
Professor Hala Zreiqat NSW For significant service to biomedical engineering, and to research councils.
Medal (OAM), Genaral Division
Dr Bahia Abou-Hamad Menai NSW For service to multicultural affairs, and to the arts.
Ms Carol Elizabeth Adams Wellard WA For service to local government, and to the community of Perth.
Mrs Christine Margaret Agius Wheeler Heights NSW For service to people with a disability.
Mrs Margaret Anne Allen Springwood NSW For service to the community of the Blue Mountains.
Mr Paul Allison Artarmon NSW For service to the insurance sector, and to the community.
Mr Derek Godfrey Amos Bairnsdale Vic For service to community mental health.
Mr Alexander Irvine Anderson Mount Martha Vic For service to the community of the Mornington Peninsula.
Mrs Katherine Frances Anderson Centennial Park NSW For service to the visual arts, particularly as an illustrator.
Mr James Kenneth Arbuckle Bentleigh Vic For service to community health.
The Late Dr Trevor James Arbuckle Carine WA For service to the community, and to youth.
Professor Peta Ashworth Taringa Qld For service to science in the field of sustainable energy.
Major Michael Wells Askey RFD ED (Retd), Turramurra NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Peter Astridge Ryde NSW For service to local government, and to the community of Hunter's Hill.
Mr Damien Leigh Atkinson West End Qld For service to youth.
Ms Margaret Colville Attley Tolmie Vic For service to local government, and to the community of Mansfield.
Mr Alwyn Robert Backwell Highton Vic For service to youth through Scouts.
The Reverend Barbara Boyd Bailey Caloundra Qld For service to the Uniting Church in Australia.
Sister Patricia Caroline Bailey Belfield NSW For service to education, particularly for deaf and hearing-impaired children.
Mr Douglas Lindsay Baird Burleigh Waters Qld For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Ronald George Baker Coorparoo Qld For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Margaret Joyce Baker-Dawber Shepparton Vic For service to the performing arts.
Mrs Nancy Vanette Baldock Marden SA For service to community history.
Ms Frayn Barker Brewarrina NSW For service to early childhood education.
Ms Leanne Barnes Merimbula NSW For service to water polo.
Mr Michael Edgar Bartlett Hallidays Point NSW For service to surf lifesaving.
Mr Henry Vivian Bath Greens Creek Qld For service to the community of Cedar Pocket.
Mr Michael Robert Beatty The Gap Qld For service to animal welfare.
Mr Rodney Graham Benness Gwelup WA For service to the community, particularly through social welfare initiatives.
Mr David Leslie Bennett OAM, Caboolture Qld For service to rugby league.
Mrs Violet Merle Bennett Hopetoun WA For service to conservation and the environment.
Ms Vivienne Bensky Dianella WA For service to the Jewish community of Perth.
Mr Ernest Lionel Bentley Prospect SA For service to the communities of Millicent and Beachport.
The Honourable Archibald Ronald Bevis The Gap Qld For service to the Parliament of Australia.
Mrs Judith Maree Bibby Drouin Vic For service to the community of Drouin.
Mr Vincent Michael Bibby Drouin Vic For service to the community of Drouin.
Ms Carrie Bickmore Armadale Vic For service to the broadcast media, and to brain cancer awareness.
Mr Zygmunt Henryk Bielinski Frankston Vic For service to the Polish community of Victoria.
Dr Michael Thomas Biggs Milsons Point NSW For service to medicine as a neurosurgeon.
Mr John Black Carindale Qld For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Mary Catherine Blackford Birmingham Gardens NSW For service to aged welfare.
Mrs Christine Angela Bloomer WA For service to the community of Roleystone.
Ms Nicole Maree Bolger Harden NSW For service to nursing.
Ms Brenda Lesley Booth Woy Woy NSW For service to community health.
Mr David Lawrence Borger North Parramatta NSW For service to the Parliament of New South Wales, and to local government.
The Late Mr Guy Stuart Bowering Lenswood SA For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Pamela Bowmaker Dapto NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Shelley June Boyce Mittagong NSW For service to the community of the Southern Highlands.
Mrs Carmela Bozzi Chermside Qld For service to the Italian community of Brisbane.
Mr Kenneth Bradley Dural NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Mark John Brandon-Baker Goulburn NSW For service to the community of Canberra.
Mrs Vivien Margaret Brass Toorak Vic For service to the Jewish community.
Ms Ann Craig Brown Palmerston NT For service to the community of Palmerston.
Ms Anna Shelley Brown Vic For service to human rights, and to the LGBTIQ community.
Mrs Carolyn Diane Brown Black Rock Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Professor Christine Ann Brown Brunswick Vic For service to education.
Mrs Geraldine Mary Brown Hillwood Tas For service to badminton.
Mr Phillip John Brown Milton NSW For service to the community of Milton-Ulladulla.
Mrs Kim Frances Brundle-Lawrence Carrick Tas For service to the community of Northern Tasmania.
Mrs Doreen Edna Bryars Wollongong NSW For service to the performing arts, particularly as a musical director.
Mr Robert Buchanan West Lakes SA For service to the maritime transport industry.
Mr Graeme Lambden Budd Benalla Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Ms Marie Josephine Burley Qld For service to the communities of the Hunter and the Gold Coast.
Dr Leonard John Burtenshaw Neutral Bay NSW For service to music education.
Ms Adrienne Margaret Cahalan Longueville NSW For service to sailing.
Mrs Helen Joy Cahill Stanmore NSW For service to the community of Inner West Sydney.
The Late Mrs Janice Gabrielle Cameron Maroochydore Qld For service to swimming, particularly as a coach.
Mr David Joseph Campbell Cremorne NSW For service to entertainment and the arts.
Mr Robert Baylis Campbell RFD ED, Kiara WA For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Barbara Jayne Campbell-Allen Wollstonecraft NSW For service to the creative arts as a potter and ceramicist.
Mr Bruce Cant Wauchope NSW For service to the community of Wauchope.
Mrs Margot Capp Gresford NSW For service to the community of Gresford.
Ms Lella Cariddi Ivanhoe Vic For service to community history.
Mr Bernard James Carney Carlisle WA For service to music.
Mr John Carrangis Beaumont SA For service to the community of Rosefield.
Mr John Angus Carroll Maiden Gully Vic For service to sailing.
Mrs Patricia Mary Carroll Jannali NSW For service to education, and to people with a disability.
Dr Joan Patricia Castle Collaroy Plateau NSW For service to medicine.
Mr Constantino Aka-Tino Ceberano Qld For service to karate.
Dr Richard Wainin Chan Northbridge NSW For service to dentistry.
Mr John Nicholas Chant Merrigum Vic For service to the community of the Goulburn Valley.
The Reverend Linda Jane Chapman Mossy Point NSW For service to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Mr Phillip John Chapman Ballina NSW For service to the community of Ballina.
Mr Antonios (Tony) Charbel Vic For service to the Lebanese community of Victoria.
Mrs Gloria Jean Chay Maryborough Qld For service to the community of Maryborough.
Mr Vincent Harold Chay Maryborough Qld For service to the community of Maryborough.
Mrs June Alison Cherrey Vic For service to the community.
Mrs Carolyn Jane Clark Armadale Vic For service to women, and to the community.
Mr Peter John Clews WA For service to the community of Cowaramup.
Dr Fiona Maragaret Cochrane St Kilda Vic For service to the visual arts as an independent film producer.
Mrs Lorraine Ann Cochrane Penrith NSW For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Major Anthony Cockburn Goulburn NSW For service to youth.
Mr Wayne Maxwell Cole Cleveland Qld For service to surf lifesaving.
Mr Norman Richard Coleman Vale Park SA For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Gavan David Collery Carnegie Vic For service to the mining industry.
Mr Alan Charles Collier Dandenong Vic For service to the community of Dandenong.
Mrs Eileen Collins Chiltern Vic For service to conservation and the environment.
Ms Anne Margaret Conway Long Gully Vic For service to the community of Bendigo.
Mrs Robyn Coombes Beechwood NSW For service to horse sports, and to people with a disability.
Mr Arthur John Coorey Mossy Point NSW For service to rugby league, and to the community.
Mr Trevor John Corbell Mount Barker SA For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Robert Donald Corbett Normanhurst NSW For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr John Cyril Corby Waitara NSW For service to the aviation industry.
The Late The Honourable Dr John Robert Cornwall NSW For service to the Parliament of South Australia, and to the community.
Mr William Martin Corten Ormiston Qld For service to the maritime recreation industry.
Mrs Margot Joy Cory-Wall Kew East Vic For service to the performing arts, particularly to opera.
Ms Maureen Costello Cooloola Cove Qld For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Mackay James Cott Mittagong NSW For service to the print media as an editor and journalist.
Mrs Jennifer Zoe Cowley Dubbo NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Dr Raymond Maxwell Cowling Hawthorn Vic For service to community health.
Ms Suzan Cox QC, Darwin NT For service to the law.
Ms Marilyn Barbara Crabtree Norwood SA For service to aged welfare.
Mrs Lorraine Margaret Crawford Albury NSW For service to basketball.
The Honourable Murray John Criddle Horrocks WA For service to the Parliament of Western Australia.
Dr Michelle Ann Crockett Riverstone NSW For service to medicine.
Mrs Gwenyth Mary Crombie Blyth SA For service to the Indigenous community of South Australia.
Mr Jack Crombie Blyth SA For service to the Indigenous community of South Australia.
Mr Andrew John Cross Walcha NSW For service to the community of Walcha.
Mr Peter Leslie Cullerne Wamboin NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Valda Merle Cuming Brighton Vic For service to the visual arts.
Dr Christopher James Cunneen Manly West Qld For service to medicine as an occupational and environmental physician.
Mrs Janice Margaret Currie-Henderson NSW For service to Irish dancing.
Professor Jane Esther Dahlstrom Deakin ACT For service to medical education, and to pathology.
Dr Janice Davies North Warrandyte Vic For service to community health.
Ms Shirley Alice Davies Hastings Vic For service to the community through a range of roles.
Ms Suzanne Davies NSW For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Ernest Frederick Dawes OBE, East Melbourne Vic For service to the community.
Mr John Charles De Cean Caringbah NSW For service to surf lifesaving.
Mr Frank De Rosso Geelong Vic For service to music.
Ms Robyn de Szoeke Neutral Bay NSW For service to women through charitable initiatives.
Mr Gerard De Vries Wauchope NSW For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Ms Regula (Ria) Deamer NSW For service to medical education administration.
Mr Leslie Charles Dempsey Willmot NSW For service to entertainment and the arts.
Mr Christopher John Denny Morley WA For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Associate Professor Michael Joseph Denton Kew Vic For service to medicine as a vascular surgeon.
Dr George Peter Deutsch Kew Vic For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr David John Devers Sunshine Coast Qld For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Peter John Devoy NSW For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Tony Antoun Dib Croydon Vic For service to local government, and to the community of Maroondah.
Mrs Maureen Joy Dillon Manly NSW For service to the community of the Northern Beaches of Sydney.
Dr Malcolm Douglas Dobbin North Carlton Vic For service to medicine.
Mr Ross Peter Doddridge Lenah Valley Tas For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Ms Anita Dodds Croydon Vic For service to international law enforcement education.
Mr Roger James Donsworth Northmead NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Lindsay William Drake NSW For service to aged welfare.
Mrs Audrey Drechsler Sedgewick Vic For service to agriculture, and to the community.
Mr Gregory John Drew Belair SA For service to mining as an historian.
Dr Geraldine Frances Duncan Wagga Wagga NSW For service to rural medicine.
Mrs Faye Edith Dunn North Parramatta NSW For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Stanley John Dunstan Yarrawonga Vic For service to the community of Yarrawonga Mulwala.
Mr Rodney Victor Dux Nerang Qld For service to the community of the Gold Coast.
Ms Kim Louise Eckert Kalgoorlie WA For service to the community of Kalgoorlie-Boulder.
Mr Leon George Eddy Charleston SA For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Brian Lawrance Edwards Strathalbyn SA For service to surf lifesaving.
Mrs Patsy Loretto Edwards Gosford NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Ms Jennifer Elizabeth Ejlak Vic For service to the community through women's health initiatives.
Mrs Jeanette Mary Elliott Mount Gambier SA For service to the community of Mount Gambier.
The Reverend Kevin Francis Engel Caringbah NSW For service to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Dr John Dacre England Katoomba NSW For service to medicine as a cardiologist.
Ms Katharine Elizabeth England South Plympton SA For service to literature.
Mr John Evans Blackwood SA For service to the tourism industry, and to rail history, in South Australia.
Ms Joyce Olga Evans Toorak Vic For service to photography.
Mrs June Lorraine Evans Oberon NSW For service to the community of Oberon.
Mr Laurence Evans Sandringham Vic For service to local government, and to the community of Sandringham.
Ms Louise Margaret Evans Sydney NSW For service to the media, particularly sports reporting.
Ms Patricia Evans Middle Cove NSW For service to women through charitable initiatives.
Dr David Everett Urrbrae SA For service to medicine as a paediatrician.
Mr Kenneth Charles Eynon Latham ACT For service to athletics.
Mrs Margaret Sydney Ezzy Mondrook NSW For service to the community of Taree.
Mr Robert Leo Fahey Mt Stuart Tas For service to Real Tennis.
The Late Mr John Thomas Fahy Ngunnawal ACT For service to National Wattle Day celebrations.
Ms Anne Farah-Hill Earlwood NSW For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Raymond John Farrelly Mont Albert North Vic For service to civil engineering.
Dr Peter Hector Faulkner Denmark WA For service to medicine through a range of roles.
Mrs Joan Evelyn Fazackerley Nubeena Tas For service to the community of Nubeena.
The Honourable Laurie Donald Ferguson Granville NSW For service to parliament and politics, and to the community.
Mrs May Dorothy Ferrier Birchip Vic For service to the community of Birchip.
Dr Frank Fisher Mosman NSW For service to community health.
The Late Mr Moshe Majer Fiszman Caulfield South Vic For service to the Jewish community.
Mr John McKenzie Fleming Inverloch Vic For service to the community of Wonthaggi.
The Late Mr John Baden Fletcher Oak Flats NSW For service to horse racing.
Ms Caroline Patricia Flynn O'Malley ACT For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Robert Henry Flynn Grovedale Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Ms Kerith Ann Fowles Bundanoon NSW For service to music, and to the community of the Southern Highlands.
Mrs Antonia Frances Francis Peak Hill NSW For service to the community of Peak Hill.
Ms Sally Bronwyn Francis Tooradin Vic For service to horse sports, and to people with a disability.
Mr Robert Bruce Freeman Vic For service to the community through faith-based organisations.
Mr Peter Thomas Funnell Florey ACT For service to hockey.
Mr James Andrew Gable Capalaba Qld For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Shirley-Anne Gale SA For service to music.
Mr Robert Andrew Gallagher Chifley NSW For service to rail transport modelling.
Mr James Morison Gardiner Fitzroy Vic For service to the community through LGBTIQ and human rights organisations.
Dr Kirsty Gardner-Berry NSW For service to audiology.
Mr Alexander Gelman Rose Bay NSW For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
The Late Mr Joseph Eric Gelston West Launceston Tas For service to amateur radio.
Mrs Lydia Gentle Coomera Qld For service to engineering.
Mr Frederick Richard Gibbs Doncaster Vic For service to the community of Balwyn.
Mr James Stephen Gibson Prospect Tas For service to rowing.
Mrs Elizabeth Leigh Giffard Nathalia Vic For service to nursing.
Mrs Joan Edith Gilbert South Plympton SA For service to the community, and to the Anglican Church of Australia.
Dr Robert Gillies Prahran Vic For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr William Wordsworth Gilmour Sylvania NSW For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Robert Gary Giltinan Cromer Heights NSW For service to tennis, and to the community of the Northern Beaches.
Mr Kenneth James Gloster East Bendigo Vic For service to lawn bowls.
Mr Alfred Leslie Goldburg Dandenong Vic For service to veterans and their families, and to the community.
Mrs Theresa Christina Gomboc Middle Swan WA For service to the museums and galleries sector.
Mr Gary James Gooch Bulahdelah NSW For service to the agricultural show sector.
Mrs Eleanore Goodridge Darling Point NSW For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mrs Helen Gwendoline Gordon Mornington Vic For service to community health as a physiotherapist.
Mr Mervyn Clyde Gordon Rosny Tas For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Sean Patrick Gordon Redcliffe Qld For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Clare Norma Gray Bell Post Hill Vic For service to community health.
Dr Sylwia Malgorzata Greda-Bogusz Hampton East Vic For service to the Polish community of Victoria.
Mr Roger William Greene Lower Plenty Vic For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Margaret Fanny Greenwood Bruthen Vic For service to the community of East Gippsland.
Dr Wayne Gregson APM, Darlington WA For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Mark Lee Gribble Mudgeeraba Qld For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mr Roland Errol Gridiger Rose Bay NSW For service to the performing arts through administrative roles.
Mr Timothy John Grieger Renmark SA For service to the agricultural show sector.
Mr Douglas Howard Grigg Mudgee NSW For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Mrs Joan Isabel Grigg Southbank Vic For service to conservation and the environment.
Dr Terry Robert Grigg Camberwell Vic For service to community health.
Mr Alain Maurice Grossbard Caulfield Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Brian Robert Haddy Nairne SA For service to science education.
Mr Kenneth John Halstead Burradoo NSW For service to local government, and to engineering.
Miss Jade Elisabeth Hameister Hampton Vic For service to polar exploration.
Mr Paul Andrew Hameister Hampton Vic For service to exploration, and to business.
Mr Keith Lionel Hamilton Goonellabah NSW For service to the community of Lismore.
Mr Mervyn Arthur Hampson Mortlake Vic For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Robert John Handley Unley Park SA For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Ms Lorna Margaret Hannan North Melbourne Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Peter Barry Hardham Surrey Hills Vic For service to the law, and to the community.
Mr Colin Stuart Harding Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Michael John Harding Kawungan Qld For service to the construction industry.
Mr Peter Eric Harley Freshwater NSW For service to the community of Freshwater.
Mr Graeme Edward Harris Donald Vic For service to the community of Donald.
Ms Jennifer Leigh Harris Duffys Forest NSW For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr Tony Tasman Harrison Howrah Tas For service to cricket.
Mr Claude Lyle Harvey Varsity Lakes Qld For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Ms Pauline Lesley Harvey-Short Ashgrove Qld For service to sport, and to education.
Mr Darren Stanley Hayes For service to music as a songwriter and performer.
Ms Angela Rosemary Hazebroek Kensington SA For service to town planning.
Dr Samuel Russell Heard NT For service to medicine.
Mr Kevin George Hein Mount Gambier SA For service to the performing arts, and to the community of Mount Gambier.
Mr Ralph Edward Heness Peakhurst NSW For service to the community of Auburn.
Ms Gwenda Elaine Herbert South Yarra Vic For service to photography.
Mrs Elaine Jean Heskett Mossy Point NSW For service to the community through a range of roles.
Ms Sally Maree Hetherington Northmead NSW For service to the international community through charitable initiatives.
Mr Martin Blay Hewson Murringo NSW For service to the community of Murringo.
Mr Geoffrey Eric Hicks Glenreagh NSW For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
Ms Maria Lucile Hicks Brighton Vic For service to the international community through humanitarian aid.
Mr Stephen John Higgs She Oaks Vic For service to education.
Mr Ivan Hinton-Teoh Ainslie ACT For service to human rights, and to the LGBTIQ community.
Mrs Lynette Gail Hipwell Sorrento Vic For service to youth through Scouts.
Dr Quang Phu Ho Strathfield NSW For service to medicine in the field of obstetrics and gynaecology.
Ms Neroli Ann Hobbins NSW For service to the performing arts through administrative roles.
Ms Una Margaret Hobday Old Beach Tas For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Daryl Keith Hocking Frahns SA For service to diving.
Mrs Beverly Jean Hoffmann Dimboola Vic For service to sport, and to the community of Dimboola.
Mr Desmond John Hogan Bridgeman Downs Qld For service to rugby union.
Mr Gordon James Holland NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Christopher David Holstein Niagara Park NSW For service to local government, and to the community of Gosford.
Mr Roger William Hounslow Surry Hills NSW For service to the community through accessible legal services.
Mrs Barbara Lillian Hughes Ballarat Vic For service to the community of Ballarat.
Mrs Wendy Dorothy Hughes Barrington NSW For service to the community of Gloucester.
Mrs Joyce Irene Hyles Kingston ACT For service to the community of Bungendore and Queanbeyan.
Dr Samir Nicolas Ibrahim Sydenham Vic For service to psychiatry, and to the community.
Mr Warren Arthur Irwin Winmalee NSW For service to science education.
Dr Kimberley Alan Jaggar Bondi Junction NSW For service to secondary education.
Mr Ian John James Northcote Vic For service to music publishing and rights.
Mr Reginald Joseph Jamieson Moree NSW For service to the community of Moree.
Mr David Victor Jensz Templestowe Lower Vic For service to education, and to the community of Manningham.
Mr Paul Jevtovic APM, Hong Kong For service to financial crime enforcement and regulation.
Mr Greg John Jones Hughenden Qld For service to local government, and to the community of North Queensland.
Ms Margaret Ann Jopling Kempsey NSW For service to the community of Kempsey.
Mr Kevin Charles Kaeser Caboolture Qld For service to rugby union.
Mr William Ernest Kaine MBE, Ulverstone Tas For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Leslie Julius Kausman Hawthorn East Vic For service to sport, and to the community.
The Reverend Marjorie Kathleen Keeble Hamilton Vic For service to the community of Hamilton.
Mrs Patricia Ann Keith Prahran Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr David William Kelly Heathmont Vic For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Shirley Myra Kelynack Asquith NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Raymond John Kemp Osborne SA For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Anthony Gerard Kennedy Box Hill North Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Peter Richard Kenyon Kalamunda WA For service to community development initiatives.
Mr Antony William Keynes Glen Osmond SA For service to athletics.
Ms Christine Dawson Kibble Coogee NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr John Joseph King Ryde NSW For service to rugby league.
Mr Myles Graham King Middle Park Vic For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Suzanne Kingsford Fitzroy Falls NSW For service to horticulture.
Mr Peter Barton Kirkwood Warrawee NSW For service to the community of northern Sydney.
Mr Martin Henry Klumpp Picnic Point NSW For service to cricket.
Mrs Valda Marie Knott Trayning WA For service to the community of Trayning.
Mr Shashi Kant Kochhar Oakleigh Vic For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Ms Margaret Jan Koperberg Springwood NSW For service to community history.
Mr Raymond Arthur Koschel Finley NSW For service to the community of Finley.
Mrs Susan Penelope Labordus-Taylor St Ives NSW For service to Australia-Britain relations.
Ms Toni Louise Lalich Melbourne Vic For service to the performing arts, particularly music.
Mrs Edna Lillian Lamb Laurieton NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Margot Elizabeth Lampkin Mornington Tas For service to choral music.
Mrs Dierdre Elizabeth Landells Narooma NSW For service to the community of Narooma.
Mr Robert George Langbein Collaroy NSW For service to surf lifesaving.
Mr Regis Pierre Lansac Bondi NSW For service to photography and to visual design.
Mr Stephen Francis Larkins Tusmore SA For service to the community, and to veterans.
Mrs Denise Lawrence Central Coast NSW For service to music education.
Ms Mary Virginia Lawrey Eaglemont Vic For service to primary education.
Mrs Lynette Lorraine Leahey Craigmore SA For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Richard Alexander Leder Malvern Vic For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mr Anthony Reginald Lee Apsley Qld For service to youth.
Mr Clement Lee Vic For service to architecture, and to philanthropy.
Ms Joanne Frances Lee Dow Glen Iris Vic For service to education.
Mr James Andrew Lerk Bendigo Vic For service to history, and to the community of Bendigo.
Mr Bruce Levet Woollahra NSW For service to the law in New South Wales.
Mr Walter Lew Fatt Darwin NT For service to Australian rules football, and to the community of Darwin.
Ms Suzanne Ellen Lewis Mannum SA For service to diving.
Ms Zhaoran Li Hawthorn Vic For service to the Chinese community of Melbourne.
The Late Mrs Audrey Valerie Light Orbost Vic For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Geoffrey Frederick Limmer Vic For service to the communities of Whitehorse and Maroondah.
Dr James Macpherson Linklater St Leonards NSW For service to medicine, particulary as a radiologist.
Mr Sean William Linkson Coalcliff NSW For service to human rights, and to the LGBTIQ community.
The Late Ms Susan Catherine Lloyd Nedlands WA For service to public administration in Western Australia, and to the law.
Mr Roger William Lord Endeavour Hills Vic For service to people with a disability through sport, and to the community.
Mr Ian Norman Lunt Nedlands WA For service to the community of Albany.
Mr Graham Edwin Lupp Bathurst NSW For service to community history in Bathurst.
Ms Colette Elizabeth Mackay Braddon ACT For service to the community of the Australian Capital Territory.
Ms Maxine Joyce Mackay Bourke NSW For service to the Indigenous community of Bourke.
Mr Andrew D'Arcy Macqueen Wentworth Falls NSW For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr Paul Thomas Madden Barham NSW For service to primary industry, and to the community of the Riverina.
Mr Robert Magid NSW For service to business and commerce, and to the Jewish community.
Ms Marianne Mahony (Whittington) East Kew Vic For service to the community through social welfare programs.
Mr Peter Francis Maishman Point Lonsdale Vic For service to surf lifesaving.
Mr Alfio Manciagli Orange NSW For service to photography.
Ms Patti Manolis Geelong Vic For service to the library and information sciences sector.
Mrs Tasia Manos Vic For service to the Greek community of Victoria.
Mr David Paul Marshall Harvey WA For service to the community of Harvey.
Ms Amanda Martin Brunswick Vic For service to conservation and the environment.
Dr David Keith Martin Mitcham SA For service to medicine in the field of orthopaedics.
Mr Philip Michael Martin Dry Creek SA For service to Australian rules football, and to the community.
Mr Samuel Peter Mattey Terowie SA For service to local government, and to the community.
Mr Donald Alexander Mayes Pymble NSW For service to community music.
Mr Clement Paul McArdle SA For service to veterans and their families.
Mr David James McCann OAM, Coolamon NSW For service to the community of Coolamon.
Colonel Alan Martin McDonald (Retd), Mornington Vic For service to veterans and their families.
Dr David Thomas McDonald East Tamworth NSW For service to medicine as a paediatrician.
Mrs Eileen McDonald Vic For service to the community of Mount Alexander, and to apiculture.
Mr Keith Raymond McDonald Atherton Qld For service to conservation and the environment.
Mr William Alexander McDonald Brandy Hill NSW For service to the community, and to business.
Mrs Karin Therese McGann Central Coast NSW For service to the community through Lions Clubs Australia.
Mr William James McGill Russell Lea NSW For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Laurence Stuart McGinty Nowra NSW For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Alfred Charles McGrath PSM, Oatley NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Ms Karen McIntyre Lake Bolac Vic For service to the community of Lake Bolac.
Mrs Elizabeth Jean McKay Camberwell Vic For service to the community of Camberwell.
Mr James Ashley McKay Injune Qld For service to horse sports.
Ms Kristy Lee McKellar Melbourne Vic For service to the community through social welfare initiatives.
Mr Ian Maxwell McLeod Lockhart NSW For service to the community of Lockhart.
Ms Mary McLure Briar Hill Vic For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Ian Verco McMichael Ouse Tas For service to community health in rural areas.
Mr Clement Raymond McNamara Nowra NSW For service to the community through social welfare programs.
Mr Peter Anthony McNamara Rothwell Qld For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Jack McNaughton Marks Point NSW For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Mrs Judith Mary McNay Curtin ACT For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Kelvin McWhinnie Alexandria NSW For service to the live entertainment industry.
Mr Arthur John Medcalf Tottenham NSW For service to local government, and to the community of Tottenham.
Mr Ian Edwin Meek Belrose NSW For service to the community of Belrose.
Ms Sally Melhuish Hall ACT For service to baroque music.
Mr Anthony Gerrard Mellick Cheltenham Vic For service to cricket and rugby union.
Major Heather Dawn Merrick Belfield NSW For service to the community through the Salvation Army.
Miss Lisa Michl Ko-manggen Qld For service to Indigenous visual arts.
Ms Carol Ann Miell American River SA For service to the community through marine rescue organisations.
Mr Allan Miles Ryde NSW For service to military history.
Mrs Elaine Lucy Millar Gisborne Vic For service to the community of Gisborne.
Mr Ian Colwell Miller Beecroft NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Ms Margaret Mary (Megg) Miller Seymour Vic For service to the poultry industry.
Ms Kylie Shae Mines Aldinga SA For service to disabled people in the Asia-Pacific region.
Mr Eric Mitchell Taroona Tas For service to music education.
Mrs Parivash Mofid St Ives NSW For service to the Persian community of Sydney, and to education.
Mrs Helen Ann Montague Boisdale Vic For service to the community of Boisdale.
Ms Anna Moo St Kilda Vic For service to social welfare, particularly in migrant communities.
Mrs Wendy Moore Ainslie ACT For service to the international community of Nepal.
Dr Mary Moran Kangaroo Valley NSW For service to medical research, and to global health initiatives.
Mr David Scott Morgan Ivanhoe Vic For service to education, and to the community.
Mr Lindsay Keith Morgan Ulverstone Tas For service to the communities of Ulverstone and northwestern Tasmania.
Ms Elizabeth Sue Morley NSW For service to the law, and to the community.
Mr William John Mountford Croydon Vic For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Jenny Mulholland Ivanhoe Vic For service to local government, and to the community of Banyule.
Mr John Anthony Munckton Glenaroua Vic For service to the community of Seymour.
Mrs Janet Mackenzie Muspratt Rossmore NSW For service to horse sports.
Dr Krishna Dhana Nadimpalli Amaroo ACT For service to multiculturalism in the Australian Capital Territory.
Mr Nicholas Nadycz Harden NSW For service to the community of Harden-Murrumburrah.
Mr Noel Nannup WA For service to the Indigenous community of Western Australia.
Dr William Nardi Lismore NSW For service to medicine in the field of opthalmology.
Mrs Margaret Reece Nash Fulham SA For service to tennis.
Mr Kevin John Neilson Port Hacking NSW For service to surf lifesaving.
Mr Graeme McCann Nelson Rochester Vic For service to the community of Rochester.
Mr Peter Herbert Nettelbeck Willaston SA For service to the community of Gawler.
The Late Mr Michael Neuhauser Elsternwick Vic For service to the Jewish community of Melbourne.
Ms Anita Newman Gray NT For service to youth, and to the community of Darwin.
Mr Clement Arundel Newton-Brown Prahran Vic For service to the Parliament of Victoria, and to the community of Melbourne.
Ms Vasiliki Nihas-Bogiatzis Barton ACT For service to the arts and cultural heritage.
Dr Robert Stevenson (Steven) Nisbet Holland Park Qld For service to the community through music, and to education.
Mrs Lynette Mary Nitschke Waikerie SA For service to the community, particularly through victim support.
Mrs Kathryn Susan Nolan NSW For service to the international community through humanitarian aid.
Mr Charles Richard Norris Ivanhoe Vic For service to cricket, and to the community.
Mr David Ernest North Mount Pleasant NSW For service to the community of the Illawarra.
Mrs Dianne Edna North Mount Pleasant NSW For service to the community of the Illawarra.
Mrs Elizabeth North Torquay Vic For service to the communities of Torquay and Geelong.
Mrs Margaret Ann Nunn Hope Valley SA For service to the community through St John Ambulance.
Squadron Leader Gary William Oakley Bonner ACT For service to the Indigenous community through a range of organisations.
Mr James Andrew O'Brien Chippendale NSW For service to people with a disability through sport.
Mr Daniel Leonard O'Connor Ascot Qld For service to the law, and to the community.
Mrs Patricia Marjorie O'Hara Glen Iris Vic For service to nursing.
Mr Noel James Olive Little Bay NSW For service to the Indigenous community, to history, and to the arts.
Mr Kerry John Olsen Belmont Vic For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Ms Harriet Margaret O'Malley France For service to Australia-France relations.
Mr Gregory Kevin O'Neill East Melbourne Vic For service to business, and to basketball.
Mr Craig Andrew Opie Echuca Vic For service to the tourism industry in Victoria, and to the community.
Dr Gregory Francis O'Sullivan Clovelly NSW For service to medicine in the field of anaesthesiology.
Ms Laurelle Doris Pacey Narooma NSW For service to community history.
Mr Robert Pack Cungulla Qld For service to health, and to the community of Townsville.
Mr Stephen John Padgett Kurraba Point NSW For service to the aviation industry.
Mr John Edwin Paisley Tucki Tucki NSW For service to emergency response organisations, and to the community of Wyrallah.
Mr Colin Palmer South Hurstville NSW For service to youth.
Mrs Vivien Elma Palmer Isaacs ACT For service to education, and to the community.
Mr Eric Ernest Panther Forest Hill Vic For service to genealogy.
Mr Bill Papastergiadis Toorak Vic For service to the Greek Orthodox community of Victoria.
Mr Allan James Parker Tweed Heads South NSW For service to business, particularly to dispute resolution.
Mrs Jill Parker Vic For service to local government, and to the community of South West Victoria.
Mr Malcolm David Parks Sandringham Vic For service to the community of Bayside.
Mr Alan James Parr Rockyview Qld For service to veterans.
Mr Graeme Leslie Pascoe Vista SA For service to the community through Lions Clubs Australia.
Mr James Lawrence Pascoe Dubbo NSW For service to the community of Dubbo.
Pastor Margaret Ann Pashley Qld For service to the international community of the Philippines.
Mr Kevin Thomas Pattel Richmond Qld For service to the livestock transport industry.
Mr Kenneth James Paul Mosman NSW For service to architecture, and to the community.
Associate Professor Georgia Armat Paxton Brunswick Vic For service to community health, and to refugees.
Mrs Susanne Haydon Pearce Fullarton SA For service to children's charitable organisations, and to the community.
Mrs Joanne Lorraine Pearson Bowral NSW For service to nursing, and to the community.
Mr Robert Edward Peattie Cameron Park NSW For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr John Anthony Perry Bulimba Qld For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mrs Kathleen Joy Peters Southport Qld For service to the entertainment industry on the Gold Coast.
Dr Patricia Gloria Phair Brighton Vic For service to women, to medical research, and to the community.
Ms Michele Jan Phillips South Oakleigh Vic For service to wildlife conservation.
Mr Walter Leslie Pike Menora WA For service to the community of Bunbury.
Mr Stanley Robert Plath Wynnum West Qld For service to education, and to youth sporting initiatives.
Mr Warren Polglase Banora Point NSW For service to local government, and to the community of Tweed River.
Mrs Eleanor Mary Pollard Wycheproof Vic For service to the community of Wycheproof.
Mr Richard Poon Fairy Meadow NSW For service to the community through emergency response organisations.
The Late Mr Roy William Preece Tas For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Terry John Prosser Barrack Heights NSW For service to canoeing.
Mr Bernard James Pryor West Hobart Tas For service to horticulture, and to the community.
Mrs Kerry Pamela Pryor East Brunswick Vic For service to photography, and to international charitable initiatives.
Ms Marjorie Elizabeth Quinn Essendon Vic For service to the community, to social welfare organisations, and to education.
Major Francis Roy Radford CSM (Retd), Qld For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Jayshree Ramachandran Wantirna South Vic For service to the performing arts through Indian music and dance.
Mr George Lewis Raphael Keysborough Vic For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mrs Eva Rathner Caulfield North Vic For service to the Jewish community of Victoria.
Mr David Richard Reeves Sydney NSW For service to the performing arts, particularly through music composition.
Mrs Marlene Reid Mosman NSW For service to women, and to the community.
Ms Rhonda Marilyn Renwick Southbank Vic For service to the community through charitable organisations.
Ms Yvonne Repin Woonona NSW For service to music.
Mr Trevor Walter Richards Morpeth NSW For service to the tourism industry in Morpeth.
Mrs Kathleen May Rieth Roseville NSW For service to community history.
Mr Kenrick Riley Kojonup WA For service to the livestock industry.
Mrs Jennifer Elisabeth Roberts Cootamundra NSW For service to the community, particularly to youth.
Mrs Margaret Daphne Robinson Ballarat Vic For service to the community of Ballarat.
Mrs Cecily Enid Rogers Caringbah NSW For service to horticulture, and to floral art.
Mr John Lindsay Rogers The Ponds NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Ms Sally Rose Albany WA For service to community health.
Mr Jose Manuel Roses Monash ACT For service to karate.
Mr Kenneth James Rowe PSM, Mount Eliza Vic For service to the community of Frankston.
Mr Garry Alan Runge Beaconsfield Vic For service to local government, and to the community.
Ms Margaret Joan Russell Parkside SA For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mrs Judith Jocelyn Rutherford Bathurst NSW For service to the community of Bathurst.
Mrs Diana Geraldine Rynkiewicz NSW For service to people with Parkinson's disease.
Mr Khodr Saleh NSW For service to the community of Canterbury Bankstown.
Dr Milton Arthur Sales Lambton NSW For service to medicine, and to the community.
Miss Adele Saliba Westleigh NSW For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
Mrs Louise Janette Saunders Cleveland Qld For service to wildlife conservation, and to the visual arts.
Mrs Ruth Scheuer McKinnon Vic For service to the Jewish community of Victoria.
Dr Michael Andrew Scobie Avoca Beach NSW For service to ophthalmology, and to the community.
Mr Eric Raymond Scoble Kyneton Vic For service to the community of Kyneton.
The Late Mr Alfred Harry Scott Moree NSW For service to the community of Moree.
Ms Peta Searle Yarraville Vic For service to Australian rules football.
Ms Juliet Seifert Mosman NSW For service to the pharmaceutical and therapeutic goods sectors.
Mr Douglas Anthony Seymour Warrandyte Vic For service to the community of Warrandyte.
Sister Mary Margaret Shanahan Vaucluse NSW For service to tertiary education, and as a mentor of young students.
Mrs Barbara Clare Shepley For service to the community of Newcastle.
Mr Peter James Sheppard Brighton Vic For service to the retail footwear sector.
The Reverend Father Robert Joseph Sheridan Blackheath NSW For service to the Catholic Church of Australia.
The Late Mr John Stewart Shirley Lismore NSW For service to the community of Kyogle.
Mrs Gail Patricia Shorthouse Greenslopes Qld For service to the international community of Papua New Guinea.
Mr Kevin James Shorthouse Greenslopes Qld For service to the international community of Papua New Guinea.
Mrs Catharina Slot Qld For service to dog agility sports.
Mr Paul Barrie
Clifton Springs Vic For service to the community of Geelong.
Dr Ronald Edwin Smart PSM, Wollongong NSW For service to music, and to the international community of Sierra Leone.
Mr David Ross Smith Mount Warrigal NSW For service to skydiving.
Ms Jessica Tace Smith West Wyalong NSW For service to the community through a range of roles.
Mr Lynden James Smith Grovedale Vic For service to the communities of Geelong and Ararat.
Mr Stafford Robert Smith Tecoma Vic For service to surf lifesaving, and to education.
Ms Suzanne Lesley Solvyns Glenhaven NSW For service to community health.
Mrs Sheryl Joycelyn Southwood Burwood NSW For service to music through a range of organisations.
Mr Christopher Sparks Kalaru NSW For service to people with a disability.
Mr William Michael Sparks Braddon ACT For service to community health.
Mr Robin Roy Speed Pymble NSW For service to the law.
Mr Kelvin Laurence Spiller Montmorency Vic For service to local government.
Mrs Robyn Anne Spruce Casino NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Robert Eric Steel Vic For service to surveying.
Mrs Kaye Steer Largs North SA For service to the community through hospital auxiliaries.
Mr Samuel Steif NSW For service to the Jewish community.
Mrs Bronwyn Elizabeth Stephens Brighton Vic For service to the community of South Melbourne.
Mrs Jill Elizabeth Stevenson North Turramurra NSW For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Daniel Gargett Stewart Palm Beach Qld For service to surf lifesaving.
Dr Penelope Clare Stewart Alice Springs NT For service to medicine in the field of emergency and intensive care.
Mr Glen Reginald Stiles Springwood Qld For service to the community of Logan.
Mr Frank Anthony Stivala Albert Park Vic For service to the music industry.
Mr Richard Llewellyn Stone Fadden ACT For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Anthony George Strahan Torquay Vic For service to surf lifesaving.
Dr Robert John Stunden Devon Meadows Vic For service to medicine in the field of paediatric surgery.
Mr John McAdam Sullivan Roma Qld For service to the community through a range of organisations.
Mr Leslie Rupert Sumner Cobden Vic For service to the community of Cobden.
Mr Colin James Sutcliffe Birkdale Qld For service to the community of Capalaba, and to education.
Mr Kenneth Sutcliffe Mudgee NSW For service to the broadcast media, particularly to television.
The Honourable Michael William Sutherland WA For service to the Parliament of Western Australia, and to local government.
Mr William Barry Swan Balgownie NSW For service to the mining sector.
Mrs Kathleen Dawn Swansbra Parkes NSW For service to decorative food arts.
Ms Lisa Maria Sweeney St Ives NSW For service to the broadcast media, particularly to radio.
Mr Austin Robert Taylor Aldgate SA For service to education, and to community health.
Mrs Pauline Rochelle Tees Glenmore Park NSW For service to the community through charitable initiatives.
The Honourable Martin James Tenni Brinsmead Qld For service to the Parliament of Queensland, and to the community.
Mr Eric Serge Thauvette Gilmore ACT For service to people with a disability.
The Late Mr Keith George Thomas Warburton Vic For service to the community of Warburton.
Mr James Leslie Thompson Swan Hill Vic For service to the community of Swan Hill.
Dr Douglas Keith Thornton NSW For service to dentistry in the field of oral and maxillofacial surgery.
The Late Mr Robert Thurling Goulburn NSW For service to the community of Goulburn.
Mr Lester Wayne Thurston NSW For service to the community of Tooraweenah.
Ms Judy Tierney Sandy Bay Tas For service to the print and broadcast media as a journalist.
Mr Elliott William Titley Scarness Qld For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Beryl Bryant Tobin Newcastle NSW For service to golf.
Mrs Doreen Helen Todd Lane Cove North NSW For service to women.
Mr Edward Ernest Tonks Charlestown NSW For service to community history, and to education.
Dr Deborah Jane Towns Carnegie Vic For service to education, and to gender equity.
Dr Anatoly (Tony) Trachtenberg Potts Point NSW For service to medicine, particularly as a general practitioner.
Mr Donald Philip Tregonning Templestowe Vic For service to tennis.
Mr Jeremy Hugh Trevor-Jones Bathurst NSW For service to aviation.
Mr Michael Leslie Tuohy Mount Gambier SA For service to the community of Mount Gambier.
Mr Jeffrey Walter Turner SA For service to community history.
Mr Robert Alfred Uppill Salter Point WA For service to the community of Manning.
Mr Donald John van Keimpema Bateau Bay NSW For service to surf lifesaving.
Dr Vida Viliunas Deakin ACT For service to medicine in the field of anaesthesiology.
Ms Julia Helen Volkmar Edge Hill Qld For service to community history.
Mr David Maxwell Waddle Tas For service to veterans and their families.
Mrs Patricia May Walker Moore Park Beach Qld For service to the community of Moore Park Beach.
Mr Graeme Alexander Wall Kew East Vic For service to the performing arts, particularly to opera.
Mr John Richard Wall Black Rock Vic For service to horticulture.
Mrs Betty Jean Wallace Bargo NSW For service to people with a disability, and to the community.
Mrs Beverley Laura Walsh Elanora Qld For service to surf lifesaving.
Mrs Maureen Patricia Wandel Underbool Vic For service to the community of Underbool through sport.
Mr Mervyn Arnold Ward Albany Creek Qld For service to youth.
Mr Kerry Raymond Waters Corryong Vic For service to the community of Corryong.
Mr Leolyn Clem Watkins Vic For service to the community of Ararat.
Mr Christopher Alan Watson Cronulla NSW For service to engineering.
Dr Judyth Watson Palmyra WA For service to the community of Western Australia, and to social justice.
Mrs Bernadette Waugh Swan View WA For service to librarianship.
Ms Ellen Margaret Waugh South Coogee NSW For service to community history, and to arts education.
Dr Russell Frederick Waugh Swan View WA For service to the community of Perth.
Mrs Margaret Bell Wells Hazelbrook NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Ms Barbara Wertheim Brunswick Vic For service to women.
Mrs Mabel Anita West NSW For service to veterans and their families.
Mr Robert Ernest Wharton Biggera Waters Qld For service to the community, particularly through sport.
Mrs Diane Elizabeth White Red Hill South Vic For service to community history.
Mr George Henry White West End Qld For service to children.
Dr Gordon Eustace White Garran ACT For service to medicine, particularly sexual health.
Mr Hunter Baillieu White Mudgee NSW For service to the agricultural show sector, and to the community.
Mr John Ronald White APM, Tea Tree Gully SA For service to community history.
Mr David Symon Wilkins Pyrmont NSW For service to community history.
Mrs Ada Ellen Wilkinson Bundoora Vic For service to youth through Scouts.
Mrs Caroline Wilkinson Darling Point NSW For service to community history.
Dr George Louie Williams Menai NSW For service to medicine in the field of paediatrics and developmental disability.
Mr Reginald Williams Qld For service to the Indigenous community of Queensland.
Mr Roger Gilronan Williams Mosman NSW For service to the community through social welfare programs.
Mr Ross Francis Williams Kalaru NSW For service to the community through social welfare organisations.
Mr Arthur John Wilson Greensborough Vic For service to Australian rules football.
Mrs Doreen Margaret Wilson Forster NSW For service to gymnastics.
Mrs Lynette Faye Woodforde Brighton SA For service to community health.
Mrs Jill Florimel Worsley Coodanup WA For service to maritime history.
Mr Peter Thomas Worsley Coodanup WA For service to maritime history.
Mr Alan Wright Wanguri NT For service to the minerals and mining sector.
Dr Adam Mark Zagorski Tawonga Vic For service to medicine as a general practitioner.
Ms Petrina Zaphir Gold Coast Qld For service to the community of the Gold Coast.
Dr Edward Ye Zhang WA For service to the Chinese community of Western Australia.
Mr John William Zimmermann Mackay Qld For service to youth.
Officer (AO), Military Division
Royal Australian Navy
Rear Admiral Gregory John Sammut AM CSC RAN, NSW For distinguished service as the Head of Future Submarine Program, and the General Manager of Submarines.
Royal Australian Air Force
Air Vice-Marshal Tracy Lee Smart AM, ACT For distinguished service in responsible positions to the Australian Defence Force in the fields of medical and health services.
Member (AM), Military Division
Royal Australian Navy
Commodore Darron John Kavanagh CSC RAN, ACT For exceptional performance of duty in the field of Navy Capability Management.
Rear Admiral the Honourable Justice Michael John Slattery RAN, NSW For exceptional service in the field of military law, particularly as Judge Advocate General of the Australian Defence Force.
Warrant Officer Gary William Wight ACT For exceptional service to the Royal Australian Navy in the field of Navy People leadership and management.
Commodore Malcolm Kenneth Wise OAM RAN, NSW For exceptional service as the Commander Combined Task Force 150 while deployed on Operation MANITOU from November 2017 to May 2018.
Australian Army
Colonel James Bruce Brown ACT For exceptional service and leadership in the field of Rotary Wing operations and capability management.
Major General Justin Frederick Ellwood DSC, Qld For exceptional service as Deputy Chief of Army, Director General Career Management - Army and Chief of Staff Headquarters Forces Command, and for contributions to the management of Army's people capability.
Colonel Michael Robert Kennedy ACT For exceptional service as Deputy Chief of Staff Army Headquarters, Director of Personnel Policy, Director of Workforce Strategy and the Director of Career Management Integration.
Brigadier Michael Charles Reade Qld For exceptional performance of duty as the Director of Clinical SerVices of the 2nd General Health Battalion and Professor for Military Medicine and Surgery.
Colonel Paul Justin Rosenberger Vic For exceptional service in logistics reform and development for the Australian Defence Force.
Colonel Katherine Susan Sowry ACT For exceptional service to the Directorate of Personnel-Army, Project Suakin and as the Chief of Staff of Joint Health Command.
Brigadier V ACT For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in the field of Special Operations and Counter Terrorism.
Royal Australian Air Force
Air Vice-Marshal Robert Timothy Chipman CSC, Belgium For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in coalition air operations, air combat capability preparedness, and strategic capability development and sustainment.
Group Captain Patrick Joseph Cooper CSC, NSW For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in battlefield airspace control training, aviation coordination and operations, and air traffic control capability regeneration.
Wing Commander Scott Matthew Parry Qld For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in E-7A Wedgetail aircraft capability development; Aviation Safety Regulations implementation; and E/A-18G Growler and F/A-18F Super Hornet aircraft sustainment.
Wing Commander Brent Cameron Taylor Qld For exceptional service to the Australian Defence Force in air mobility capability development.
Medal (OAM), Military Division
Royal Australian Navy
Warrant Officer Dennis Bentley CSM, NSW For meritorious performance of duty in the field of personnel management in the Royal Australian Navy.
Warrant Officer James Retif Dew NSW For meritorious service to the Navy during the development and introduction into service of the Canberra Class Amphibious Ship capability.
Commander Robert Douglas Eames RAN, Qld For meritorious service in the fields of international engagement and capability management.
Warrant Officer Arthur Charles Mitcherson CSM, NT For meritorious performance of duty in the fields of Marine Engineering and technician training.
Australian Army
Member A For meritorious performance of duty as a Special Forces Officer in support of Australia's contribution to the Global War on Terror, from November 2010 to June 2018.
Warrant Officer Class One Jason Ross Burford For meritorious service as the Senior Instructor of the Australian Army's Warrant Officer Training Team and as a Regimental Sergeant Major.
Major C For meritorious service to the Australian Defence Force within Special Operations Command.
Major John Gordon Haley For meritorious performance of duty in the fields of employment category management, training management and logistics capability development.
Warrant Officer Class One J For meritorious service to Special Operations Command from 2012 to 2018.
Warrant Officer Class One Mark Retallick CSM, Qld For meritorious performance of duty to the Australian Army in regimental leadership roles.
Warrant Officer Class One Michael John Reyne NSW For meritorious service as Regimental Sergeant Major of the 1st Battalion, the Royal Australian Regiment; the 10th/27th Battalion, the Royal South Australian Regiment; and as Wing Sergeant Major of the Small Arms Policy Section, Combined Arms Training Centre.
Royal Australian Air Force
Warrant Officer Fiona Jane Grasby NSW For meritorious service in the development of leadership and workforce resilience for the Australian Defence Force as a Warrant Officer in Number 82 Wing, the Executive Warrant Officer of Number 95 Wing, and as the Executive Warrant Officer of Air Command.
Wing Commander Jeffrey Howard ACT For meritorious service in airfield engineering and air base recovery for the Australian Defence Force.
Member (Honorary AM), General Division
Professor Jacob George West Pennant Hills NSW For significant service to medicine as a gastroenterologist and hepatologist.
The Honourable Justice Monika Schmidt NSW For significant service to the law, to the judiciary, and to industrial relations.
Medal (Honorary OAM), General Division
Ms Pauline Elizabeth Davenport Tennant Creek NT For service to education.
Ms Fiona Christine Tonkin Southbank Vic For service to the performing arts, particularly to ballet.
Public Service Medal
Federal
Dr Roslyn Kay Baxter O'Connor ACT
Mr Robert John Bollard Hughes ACT
Mr Ryan Alexander Fernando Holder ACT
Mrs Sarah Jane Hitchcock Gordon ACT
Ms Michelle Anne Lauder Hawker ACT
Ms Hilary Margaret Manson Red Hill ACT
Ms Nerida O'Loughlin Melbourne Vic
Mrs Mary Beatrice O'Reeri Broome WA
Mr Matthew Ramage Wamboin NSW
Dr Olivia Samardzic Kensington Park SA
Mr Peter John Searston Gulliver Qld
Ms Beverley Maree Sims Nicholls ACT
Ms Jennifer Therese Taylor Southbank Vic
NSW
Mrs Cathie Therese AngelkoVic Elermore Vale
Ms Robyn Louise Auld Wentworth Falls
Mrs Lauri Jane Fettell Broken Hill
Ms Glennys Louise James Glenhaven
Dr Palitha Ranjith Kuruppuarachchi Pagewood
Ms Gail Marie Le Bransky Northwood
Mr Donald Cameron McLennan Bossley Park
Mr Craig Carlisle Moffitt Jerilderie
Ms Janet Kathryn Schorer
Mr Ronald David Wright Jannali
Victoria
Mr Ray Baird Lara
Ms Jacqueline Ann Kearney
Dr Rebecca Justine Kogios Wonga Park
Dr Lindy Lumsden North Warrandyte
Mr Peter Warwick Menkhorst Heidelberg Heights
Ms Alison Patricia O'Brien Fitzroy
Mr Wayne Ronald Tunnecliffe Greensborough
Queensland
Ms Kirstine Illene Harvie Carindale
Ms Rebecca Jane McGarrity Ashgrove
Mrs Kerry Louise Petersen Bardon
Mr Mark John Pitt Kingaroy
Western Australia
Mrs Angela Elder
Ms Gail McGowan Nedlands
Mr John Kenneth Tondut South Perth
South Australia
Mr Peter Bruce Copley Maylands
Ms Alexandra Mary-Ellen Reid Mylor
Mr Lachlan John Sutherland Eden Hills
Australian Police Medal
Australian Federal Police
Commander Amanda L Kates
Detective Sergeant Ronald Hubert Melis
Detective Superintendent Hilda Sirec
NSW Police Force
Detective Superintendent Jason William Box
Detective Superintendent Scott Anthony Cook
Superintendent Christopher John Craner
Detective Chief Inspector Jason Paul Dickinson
Detective Superintendent Linda Jane Howlett
Acting Assistant Commissioner Leanne Michelle McCusker
Detective Superintendent Greg Paul Moore
Chief Superintendent Rodney James Smith
Victorian Police Force
Commander Lauren Elizabeth Callaway
Superintendent David John Clayton
Detective Inspector Andrew Stephen Gustke
Detective Senior Sergeant Craig Robert Gye
Commander Andrea Leigh McAlpine
Inspector Kathryn Ann Rudkins
Sergeant Maha Sukkar
Queensland Police Force
Inspector Anthony David Graham
Sergeant Glen John Gunthorpe
Chief Superintendent Benjamin Roland Marcus
Sergeant Megan Elizabeth Owens
Inspector Stephen James Pyne Munruben Qld
Senior Sergeant Kate Maree Teasdale Qld
Senior Sergeant Melanie Ann Wilkins
Western Australia Police Force
Senior Sergeant Peter John Healy
Brevet Sergeant Wendy Constance Kelly
Superintendent Gregory Wallace Knott
Sergeant Ian Stewart
South Australia Police Force
Senior Constable First Class Michael Paul Klose
Senior Sergeant First Class Darren Mulders
Assistant Commissioner Philip Lachlan Newitt
Tasmania Police Force
Assistant Commissioner Jonathan Craig Higgins
Northern Territory Police Force
Senior Constable Keith Richards Currie
Australian Fire Service Medal
NSW
Mr Larry Bagnell Castlereagh
Mr Gavin John Bray Denman
Mr William Richard Eade
Mr Peter Geoffrey Evans Heathcote
Mr Robert John Field
Mr Walter Reginald Gately Coffs Harbour
Mr Philip John Lindsay Casula
Ms Bronnie Mackintosh Cromer
Mr Geoffrey John Selwood
Mr Robert Brian Thatcher Bega
Ms Velma Elaine Walker South Nowra
Ms Kerri Kathleen Wallace Uralla
Victoria
Mr Martin Stewart Braid Thornbury
Mr David Allan Bruce Northcote
Mr Patrick John McCarthy Heathcote
Mr Phillip James Murdoch Mildura
Queensland
Mr Darryl Leslie King
Western Australia
Mr Gregory George Broomhall Bibra Lake
Mr Frank James Rankin Byford
South Australia
Mr Shane Francis Naracoorte
Mr Allan Robert Marshall Naracoorte
Australian Capital Territory
Mr Stephen David Perry Wamboin
Mr Rohan Bernard Scott Macgregor
Northern Territory
Mr Wayne John Stubbs Katherine
Mr Jeffrey Whittaker McMinns Lagoon
Ambulance Service Medal
NSW
Mr Peter James Croft Kellyville
Ms Maxine Anne Puustinen Frenchs Forest
Mr Brett James Tinker Loftus
Queensland
Mrs Teresa Jane Powell Scarborough
Mr Brett Lenard Rogers Bongaree
South Australia
Mr Paul David Lemmer Surrey Downs
Australian Capital Territory
Ms Megan Emmeline Davis Gowrie
Emergency Services Medal
NSW
Mr Gregory John Cormack Holsworthy
Mr Glenn Norman Felkin Batemans Bay
Mr David Renwick Leigh Kiama
Victoria
Mr Michael Patrick D'Elia Shepparton
Ms Leanne Christine Klammer Kinglake
Queensland
Mr Louis James Spann Beerburrum
Mr Scott Lincoln Walsh Roma
Western Australia
Ms Sandra Irene Lymbery Coral Bay
Mr Phillip John Rance Meadow Springs
South Australia
Ms Susan Joyce Robinson Modbury Heights
ACT
Mr Andrew John Gradie Rivett
Northern Territory
Mr Ronald John Green BM, Katherine
Australian Corrections Medal
NSW
Ms Sheryl Stacey Cordeiro
Ms Emma Geesing
Mr Craig Darrell Osland
Victoria
Mr Shaun Edwin Braybrook
Mr Tracy Anne Jones
Queensland
Mr Peter John Henderson
Mr Daryl Arthur Richter
South Australia
Mr Owen Fredrick Brady
Distinguished Service Cross (DSC)
Australian Army
Colonel Robert Kent Calhoun ACT For distinguished command and leadership in warlike operations while deployed as the Commander of Task Group Taji VI in Iraq from December 2017 to June 2018.
Member P For distinguished command and leadership in warlike operations as the Commanding Officer of a deployed Task Group during Operation OKRA, from December 2017 to June 2018.
Royal Australian Air Force
Member J For distinguished command and leadership in warlike operations as Commander of a Strike Element on Operation OKRA between April and December 2017.
Distinguished Service Medal (DSM)
Australian Army
Member A For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as a sub-unit commander during Operation OKRA from December 2017 to June 2018.
Colonel Mark Christopher Ascough CSC, ACT For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as the Commander of the Kabul Garrison Command Advisory Team and Senior Mentor to the Kabul Garrison Commander, whilst deployed on Operation HIGHROAD in Afghanistan from June 2017 to February 2018.
Lieutenant Colonel Grant Arthur Chambers CSM and Bar, ACT For distinguished leadership in warlike operations as the Commanding Officer of the Training Task Unit as part of Task Group Taji in Iraq from November 2017 to May 2018.
Commendation for Distinguished Service
Australian Army
Member A For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as second-in-command of a deployed team during Operation OKRA from December 2017 to June 2018.
Corporal George Barsoum Qld For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as a Linguist on Task Group Taji IV and VI, Iraq in 2016-2017 and 2017-2018.
Major Timothy John Hurley ACT For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as a Squadron Commander in Task Group Taji VI supporting the Iraqi Army Non-Commissioned Officer Academy from November 2017 to May 2018.
Major David Phillips Qld For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Plans Fusion Officer for Information Operations within the Information Operations Directorate of Combined Joint Task Force - Operation Inherent Resolve in Kuwait from August 2017 to February 2018.
Lieutenant Colonel Simon Martin Vella Bonavita ACT For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Chief of Future Operations for Train Advise Assist Command - South, Kandahar, Afghanistan while force assigned to Operation HIGHROAD from July 2017 to May 2018.
Royal Australian Air Force
Squadron Leader Simon Frederick Longley ACT For distinguished performance of duties in warlike operations as the Senior Offensive Duty Officer of the 609th Air Operations Centre on Operation OKRA from October 2017 to April 2018.
Conspicuous Service Cross (CSC)
Royal Australian Navy
Commander Dugald Wallace Clelland RAN, USA For outstanding achievement, leadership and tactical employment while in Command of HMAS Warramunga supporting Operation MANITOU, during the period November 2017 to June 2018.
Commander Jason John Cupples RAN, USA For outstanding devotion to duty in the Royal Australian Navy Submarine Force.
Captain James Riley Lybrand RAN, ACT For outstanding achievement as Director Submarine Operations and Commander Task Group 627.0 in the planning and execution of submarine operations from December 2014 to August 2018.
Commander Viktor Pilicic RAN, ACT For outstanding achievement as Commanding Officer HMAS Coonawarra and Senior Australian Defence Force Officer Larrakeyah Defence Precinct.
Captain John Stavridis RAN, NSW For outstanding achievement as the Commanding Officer of HMAS Hobart.
Australian Army
Colonel Christopher Kenneth Alder ACT For outstanding devotion to duty as the Commanding Officer Defence Force School of Intelligence, Defence Command Support Training Centre.
Lieutenant Colonel Nicholas Brown ACT For outstanding devotion to duty as Staff Officer Grade One Strategic Engagements, Australian Army Research Centre.
Colonel Jennifer Lillian Cotton Qld For outstanding achievement as the Director Support within Headquarters Joint Task Force 633 on Operation ACCORDION from March 2017 to March 2018.
Colonel Kim Barbet Gilfillan NSW For outstanding achievement as the Commanding Officer of the 5th Aviation Regiment.
Lieutenant Colonel Kenneth Alex Golder NSW For outstanding achievement as a Joint Operations Command Counter-Terrorism planner from January 2017 to August 2018.
Lieutenant Colonel Trent Ashley Groves Qld For outstanding devotion to duty as Staff Officer Grade Two Postings within the Directorate of Officer Career Management - Army.
Colonel Andrew Mark Haebich NSW For outstanding devotion to duty in the establishment of the Joint Experimentation Directorate and Joint Experimentation Framework within Defence.
Colonel M For outstanding devotion to duty as the Commanding Officer 2nd Commando Regiment, 2016 to 2017.
Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Robson McDermott NSW For outstanding achievement in establishing The Cove - a professional development network and resource for the Australian Profession of Arms.
Lieutenant Colonel Edward Ronald Stokes ACT For outstanding achievement as the Staff Officer Grade Two Logistics, Headquarters 1st Brigade.
Royal Australian Air Force
Wing Commander Carlos Alfonso Almenara NSW For outstanding achievement in the development and implementation of the fighter aircrew muscular skeletal injury prevention and treatment program for the Australian Defence Force.
Group Captain Timothy Charles Churchill NSW For outstanding achievement in electronic warfare capability development and in the introduction of the EA-18G Growler airborne electronic attack aircraft for the Australian Defence Force.
Wing Commander Grant James Fifield Qld For outstanding achievement in the development of the EA-18G Growler airborne electronic attack capability for the Australian Defence Force as Commanding Officer of Number 6 Squadron.
Wing Commander Warren Andrew Haynes USA For outstanding achievement in development of the E-7A Wedgetail integrated security framework and the establishment of the Directorate of Advanced Capabilities - Air Force for the Australian Defence Force.
Group Captain Nicholas Alexander Hogan ACT For outstanding achievement in the delivery of operational and humanitarian support for the Australian Defence Force as the Director of Current Military Commitments.
Group Captain Kaarin Nina Kooij NSW For outstanding devotion to duty in military recruiting for the Australian Defence Force.
Conspicuous Service Medal (CSM)
Royal Australian Navy
Warrant Officer Johansel Avery ACT For meritorious devotion to duty as the Catering Manager and Logistics Departmental Regulator in HMAS Adelaide.
Lieutenant Lachlan James Blair RAN, ACT For meritorious devotion to duty as the Operational Intelligence Analyst whilst deployed in the Middle East for Combined Task Force 150 as part of Operation MANITOU from November 2017 to May 2018.
Petty Officer Lauren Rachel Carruthers NSW For meritorious achievement in the field of aviation technician training.
Lieutenant Commander Laurence Earl Choate RAN, NT For meritorious devotion to duty as the Regional Manager Fleet Support Unit - North East.
Commander Nicholas Robert Field RAN, NSW For meritorious achievement in the field of Navy Cyber.
Lieutenant Commander Belinda Ann Finlay RAN, NSW For meritorious devotion to duty as the First Lieutenant, HMAS Albatross.
Commander Steven James McCracken RAN, NSW For meritorious achievement as Deputy Director Maritime Commitments in Maritime Operations Branch.
Chief Petty Officer Lyndon Montgomery Quirke Qld For meritorious achievement as a senior technician and his efforts to prevent further significant damage to Australian Border Force Cutter Roebuck Bay in 2017.
Lieutenant Commander Sarah Susan Rhys-Jones RAN, NSW For meritorious achievement as a Principal Warfare Officer in HMAS Warramunga during Operation MANITOU Rotation 66 from October 2017 to July 2018.
Captain Damien Lyle Scully-O'Shea RAN, NSW For meritorious devotion to duty as Executive Officer of HMAS Canberra.
Chief Petty Officer Anthony John Sherburd NSW For meritorious devotion to duty in the field of Navy Information Warfare.
Commander Samuel Robert Woolrych RAN, ACT For meritorious achievement as Deputy Director Maritime Plans in Maritime Operations Branch.
Australian Army
Warrant Officer Class Two A For meritorious achievement in the intelligence field in the Australian Defence Force
Warrant Officer Class Two B For meritorious achievement in employment category management within Special Operations Command from 2011 to 2018.
Warrant Officer Class One Clifford Geoffrey Bell OAM, NSW For meritorious devotion to duty as the Regimental Sergeant Major of the Australian Contingent and Force Operations Warrant Officer whilst deployed to Multinational Force and Observers in Sinai, Egypt on Operation MAZURKA from February to August 2018.
Corporal Warwick James Benn Qld For meritorious achievement as a Battle Management System-Command and Control instructor and technical adviser in the Australian Army.
Warrant Officer Class Two Alan Edward Bungate ACT For meritorious devotion to duty as a Career Advisor, Royal Australian Infantry Corps, Directorate of Soldier Career Management - Army, Army Headquarters.
Warrant Officer Class Two D For meritorious achievement as the Training Warrant Officer, 6th Close Health Company, 4th Combat Service Support Battalion.
Major Samantha Alice Duffy Qld For meritorious devotion to duty as the Legal Officer for the 6th Combat Support Brigade
Warrant Officer Class One J For meritorious achievement as the Artificer Sergeant Major of the 2nd Commando Regiment.
Warrant Officer Class Two Dean Nathan King NSW For meritorious devotion to duty as the Warrant Officer Physical Training Instructor of the 1st Recruit Training Battalion, Kapooka.
Warrant Officer Class Two Adam John Lehane Qld For meritorious achievement as the Officer in Charge of the 7th Signal Regiment Cadre Cell.
Warrant Officer Class One Matthew Gibson Miller Vic For meritorious devotion to duty and innovation for developing networked joint digital systems for the Australian Army.
Sergeant Gayle Claire Walkom Qld For meritorious devotion to duty as the Unit Welfare Officer and Batugade Platoon Commander at the 3rd Combat Service Support Battalion.
Lieutenant Colonel Julian Mark Williams Qld For meritorious achievement as the Senior Medical Officer of the 2nd Health Support Company.
Royal Australian Air Force
Leading Aircraftman Paul Raymond Arele NSW For meritorious achievement in geospatial air intelligence analysis and product development for the Australian Defence Force.
Squadron Leader David Michael Burns OAM, Qld For meritorious achievement in KC-30A multi-role tanker transport aircraft maintenance reform for the Australian Defence Force as the Senior Engineering Officer at Number 33 Squadron.
Corporal Ashley Karl Fischer Qld For meritorious achievement in information technology development and sustainment for the Australian Defence Force.
Mr Patrick McMahon NSW For meritorious achievement as the senior loadmaster on a Blackhawk Helicopter during a rescue at sea on the 30 August 1991.
Squadron Leader Mathew Peter Michell Qld For meritorious achievement in air weapons project management for the Australian Defence Force.
Corporal Anthony Peter Sues NT For meritorious achievement in fuel installation operation and development at Royal Australian Air Force Base Darwin for the Australian Defence Force.
Group Captain David A C Titheridge UK For meritorious achievement in the introduction of the P-8A Poseidon maritime surveillance aircraft capability for the Australian Defence Force as Commanding Officer of Number 11 Squadron.
Word count: 18755
