As we get towards the end of the year plenty of students across the Gold Coast are eagerly looking forward to the next challenges they will face.
KIERAN HAMLEY WHETHER he was hitting the books, hitting them for six, or hitting high notes, former Gold Coast student, Kieran Hamley, always found himself at the top of the class.
The 19-year-old graduated from All Saints with an OP1 (ATAR 99.95) in 2017, setting him up for one of the country’s most prestigious university scholarships, the Tuckwell Scholarship at Australian National University in Canberra.
One of only 25 students to receive the scholarship annually, Kieran is currently in his second year studying a bachelor of engineering (honours) specialising in mechatronics, robotics and automation engineering.
In his final year of schooling, Kieran was top of the class for four of his six subjects, and won the All Saints McIntosh Cup for all-round excellence.
“After graduating from Australian National University, I hope to work at the cutting edge of mechatronic engineering with either Formula One or the Department of Defence,” he said.
“I already had an interview the other day for a dream job, so hopefully it went okay!”
RYO TAKAMIZAWA Year 11 student Ryo Takamizawa has competed in numerous Science Olympiads – and when he’s not in the science lab, takes time to hone his musical craft and delve further into his passion for all things music.
His ear for music stemmed from All Saints Anglican School’s Junior School strings and band programs – and since picking up his first instrument, he’s continued to learn percussion, piano and strings.
Thanks to his commitment to study and his widespread involvement in performing arts, the teen will step into a new role as the school’s music captain next year.
Ryo is also involved in science and recently competed in the Australian Science Olympiads – the most difficult science exam any student under the age of 18 sits in Australia.
He placed in the top 170 students in Australia, receiving high distinctions in physics and biology and placed in the top 200 students in the country receiving a high distinction in chemistry.
“It’s nice to also be part of such a supportive community and it’s fantastic that I’m able to pursue my passion for music but also my interest in science,” he said.
“All Saints truly caters for a range of student interests and puts a large focus on student wellbeing.”
ADELAIDE HOOPER At just 12 years of age Adelaide Hooper is already keen to “give it a go” with all facets of student life as she finishes her first year of high school.
From cross country and film productions to being awarded academic honours, the Year 7 student is also making her mark in the world of gymnastics.
Adelaide has developed an impressive portfolio of achievements including being part of Running Club in her earlier years, which laid the foundations for her to take out the title of cross country champion this year.
Adelaide also has a knack for academics and enjoys maths and history, and was recently awarded an academic honours prize at the Year 7 end-of-year celebrations.
Outside the classroom, Adelaide balances gymnastics commitments, which sees her train more than 20 hours a week and compete in multiple competitions each year.
The artistic gymnast has competed in regional, state and national competitions for events including floor, bars, beam and vault, and last year she was named under-12 Queensland champion.
Adelaide said she liked to make the most of all the opportunities that came her way.
“I really like that there’s lots of activities to get involved in and I’ve really enjoyed and look forward to continuing to be part of as many of those opportunities as I can,” she said.“My teachers are really helpful when it comes to balancing my gymnastics and schooling schedule, and they are very supportive of my passion and help me to make sure I stay on top of my studies if there are any lessons I need to catch up on.”
CREDIT: BRIANNA MORRIS-GRANT
Word count: 677
