POLITICAL activist group Climate 200 has donated $200,000 to Mayo MP Rebekha Sharkie’s campaign and another $20,000 to independent Boothby candidate Jo Dyer.
Backed by climate activist Simon Holmes a Court, the group is supporting independents in seats traditionally held by the Coalition, such as the two South Australian electorates.
The funding to Ms Sharkie is confirmed on her Centre Alliance party’s website, in a section listing donations for the 2021-22 financial year.
Asked about the Climate 200 funding, Ms Sharkie said it was a “one-off, no-strings-attached donation” that, in part, was put toward funding grants for the Mayo Community Renewables Fund she created.
“I work entirely for the people of Mayo, and the no-strings donation has no influence on my policymaking or political positions,” she said.
Federal Treasurer Josh Frydenberg on Wednesday branded MPs backed by Climate 200 as “fake independents”, saying the group was pulling their strings and accusing them of running on an ALP platform.
The Advertiser in March revealed Ms Sharkie had been added to the list of Climate 200-backed candidates, when she acknowledged a one-off $75,000 donation to set up the renewable energy grant fund in her electorate.
Ms Sharkie kicked in $25,000 of her own personal savings to launch the $100,000 grant round.
“Though I am independent of the expert judging panel, I am extremely excited that important renewable-energy projects across Mayo will soon receive funding under this scheme,” she said.
Ms Dyer on Friday said she had received a $20,000 Climate 200 donation after a recent approach.
Ms Dyer said she had been advised on Thursday that the funding would be provided.
“The amount of funding is small but welcome because our campaign is running on the smell of an oily rag and the passion of our volunteers,” she said.
“The Labor and Liberal parties have substantial resources to throw at this seat. “They use government funds or union support, neither of which we have.” Ms Dyer said Climate 200 provided the funding with “no strings attached”. “They are not like a political party, which can extract promises from their candidates on behalf of donors,” she said. “They have asked us for nothing and made no suggestions about our policy positions, or relationships with other parties.” Ms Dyer said she had donated $25,000 to her campaign, and a GoFundMe fundraiser had collected about $92,000.
Mr Holmes a Court, the son of billionaire businessman Robert Holmes a Court who died in 1990, has cashed up more than 15 other independents so far, and says he has plans to raise up to $20m to campaign against Coalition MPs. Addressing the National Press Club in Canberra in February, Mr Holmes a Court insisted he had no influence on who independents side with in the event of a hung parliament this year.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK KATHRYN BERMINGHAM
Word count: 470
