SOUTH Australia’s space industry has lauded a new agreement that will give it a key role helping NASA return to the moon by 2024.
White House officials are preparing a deal between NASA and the Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency.
Defence SA chief Richard Price, who is also the head of the SA Space Industry Centre, called the moon bid a “fabulous mission”.
“This is fantastic, because of the contribution that Australia can make,” he said.
CONTINUED PAGE 10 AUSTRALIA TO SUPPORT NASA MISSIONS IN COUP FOR SPACE AGENCY, AS MORRISON PRAISES TRUMP’S ‘GREAT’ AMERICA PM arrives in US to launch moon landing deal FROM PAGE 1 “Kids in this state are already putting their hands up for STEM,” he said. Mars Society of Australia president Jonathan Clarke said it was “a fantastic move”.
“I hope it’s going to be more than just communication support,” he said. “We can supply technological and scientific expertise. And Mars is the next logical step.” Premier Steven Marshall said it was a massive opportunity for the country, “and in particular, for our city and our state”, pointing to the Space Agency and the small satellite research centre also being set up at Lot Fourteen.
“I know that defence and space will be very very high on the agenda (for Prime Minister Scott Morrison in the US),” he said. The Australian Strategic Policy Institute this week had called for Mr Morrison to make the most of his trip to the US by pitching for Australia to be part of the 2024 mission – and beyond.
“Morrison is well placed to make the case to Trump that Australia should join the new US effort to ultimately have a permanent settlement on Mars,” chief executive officer Peter Jennings said. News of the deal emerged after Mr Morrison and wife Jenny arrived in Washington as guests of President Donald Trump and First Lady Melania Trump. As Mr Morrison was yesterday involved in a series of White House meetings, a US administration official said the memorandum of understanding between NASA and ASA would involve Australia’s assistance in a return to the moon by 2024.
“The Australian Space Agency and NASA have had ... an incredibly co-operative relationship going back to the Apollo program and the moon landing,” the official said.
“And what we’re trying to do in this visit is to expand that longstanding co-operation into the next frontiers – the moon and Mars.
“I think what you’ll see is we’re going to have some proposals on the table that will further integrate Australia and the US into conquering those new frontiers.” The agreement will include a joint plan on rare-earth materials and other critical minerals as well as explore new areas of mutual interest in automation and robotics.
Australian agencies, including the Parkes Observatory, already help with, and provide support for, international space missions. Details are expected to be released in coming days. Mr Morrison’s spokesman declined to comment yesterday. The Morrisons will embark on a frenetic week of events, in Washington, Chicago, Ohio and New York to promote Australian business, space, mining, farming and defence as well as celebrate “mateship”. The PM will today have a private, 30-minute meeting with Mr Trump, before bilateral talks with the President’s Cabinet, a lunch at the State Department as well as Pentagon defence and intelligence briefings.
Talks are expected to cover Australia’s plans to join the US and UK in freedom-of-navigation exercises in the Strait of Hormuz near Iran and ongoing trade tensions between the US and China. Also today, Australian time, the President and First Lady will host the Morrisons and more than 100 guests, including some of the world’s leading business and sporting figures, at a formal state dinner.
In a speech expected to be delivered on the White House south lawn, Mr Morrison was set to emphasise the personal rapport he and Mr Trump have built that underpins one of Australia’s “oldest and dearest friendships”. “Australians and Americans understand each other like few other peoples,” he was expected to say.
Mr Trump has been effusive in praise of Mr Morrison since his May election victory. At the G7 summit in France last month, the President singled out Mr Morrison to world leaders as “fantastic” and Australia as “one of our tremendous allies”.Mr Morrison will return the favour in his White House speech with an ode to Australia’s ally: “How great is America! The world is a better place because of this country living out its moral purpose.”
CREDIT: ANDREW HOUGH; TORY SHEPHERD
Word count: 755
