TOP tricks to manage agronomy and nutrition, as well as what technology is available, will be on the agenda at the 17th annual DairySA Innovation Day at Mount Gambier this month.
Delegates will hear how new findings on increasing pasture - while designed to ultimately increase profit - may also present potential challenges.
Keynote speaker, United States-based Santiago Utsumi, will examine how better-informed grazing management can ultimately increase profit for dairy businesses, citing leading edge precision dairy and grazing technologies including robotics, sensors and acoustics that can assist in making this happen.
A panel discussion will question the effect the 'new frontier' of an increased emphasis in pasture will have on milk quality, essential elements, grazing rotation and the environment.
Researcher Rodrigo Albornoz, now based at Ellinbank Dairy Research Institute, Vic, will expand on his recent study and efforts in the US and explain advances in nutrition that will get farmers thinking differently about diets of recently-calved cows.
This will include ways to get grazing cows to eat well, and quickly, to improve production post-calving.
Dairy Feedbase and DairyBio co-director Kevin Argyle will detail the research on dairy pasture and feed through extension projects being undertaken at Ellinbank, that are set to deliver improvements for dairyfarmers at the farmgate.
Delegates will also gain insights into how to prevent repetitive injuries occurring from the daily grind of dairyfarming and milking, with chiropractor David Beltakis detailing the workings of the human body, highlighting the importance of correct human 'body positioning' when milking cows.
Alongside all this will be the chance to hear a snapshot of the industry's situation with Dairy Australia managing director David Nation and DairySA chair Michael Connor.
The day will end with a conference dinner, with guest speaker, beef producer Noel Ogilvie from the Ogilvie Group.
The DairySA Innovation Day will be held on Wednesday, June 19 from 9.30am at The Barn, Mount Gambier.
Word count: 315
