A total of 39 emerging technologies and 24 new industries have been identified in a report looking at ways to move Australian agriculture forward towards the National Farmers' Federation $100 billion target.
The report, Horizon Scanning - Opportunities for New Technologies and Industries is the culmination of two years of work by the Queensland University of Technology, and has been funded by AgriFutures Australia.
AgriFutures Australia managing director, John Harvey said the use of new technologies was vital to ensure the industry was moving forward.
"Spotting emerging technologies early and identifying their role in helping grow new industries is exciting for the sector and key to maximising the Australian agricultural sector's competitive advantage," he said.
Many of the emerging technologies have been identified as having a significant commercial impact and transferability from overseas, or non-agricultural domains for use within Australian agriculture, with potential for a "game-changing" impact for the industry.
Some of the technologies include human-in-the-loop machine learning, computer vision, collaborative robots, human augmentation, and collaborative robots.
Identified emerging agricultural industries include insect farming, wild camel and goat harvesting, medicinal marijuana, hemp milk, and hydroponic berries.
QUT researcher Grant Hamilton used a world first approach to match futuristic technologies with new industry opportunities, with some having obvious application and others requiring a "leap of faith".
"It takes a highly innovative business or individual to realise those opportunities but the payoff can definitely be worth it," he said.
AgriFutures Australia senior manager business development Jenifer Medway said technologies previously unrelated to agriculture could open up new opportunities for the industry, having the ability to "completely transform the way we do things here in Australia", with some examples already apparent.
"We are already starting to see the benefits of autonomous robotics and human physical augmentation technologies in improving productivity and the safety of workers in repetitive and physically demanding tasks," she said.
"As the future of work takes shape over the coming decades, these technologies will be essential in driving on-farm transformation."
The full report can be viewed here.
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Click here to sign up to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
Word count: 359
