GFG Alliance executive chairman Sanjeev Gupta has launched a rallying cry for Australia to place itself “at the heart of a new industrial revolution’’, based around the use of renewable energy and hydrogen to produce steel, rather than simply shipping our vast reserves of iron ore offshore.
Mr Gupta has also announced an expansion of GFG’s magnetite iron ore concentrate production at its Whyalla operations. Magnetite iron ore can be processed in a more environmentally friendly way than hematite and iron ore.
Mr Gupta told an American Chamber of Commerce in Australia lunch in Adelaide on Thursday that GFG was aiming to increase magnetite production by more than 10 per cent to 2.5 million tonnes per year, which could lead to more exports to its European steelworks.
The expansion would also feed into GFG’s “Greensteel” ambition, which aims to produce carbon neutral steel by 2030 with the aid of renewable energy and potentially hydrogen.
“Our purpose is to create a sustainable future for industry and society and that starts right here with magnetite – a critical enabler of our global Greensteel strategy,’’ Mr Gupta said. “Thankfully it’s an iron ore we have in abundance right here in Whyalla.
“Combined with renewables, particularly solar from our Cultana Solar Farm, our port, a skilled workforce, and supportive community and government, we are in a unique and enviable position to create a world leading Greensteel hub and help fulfil our (carbon neutral) mission. That’s exciting.” Mr Gupta reiterated his call for Australia to ramp up its manufacturing capabilities, particularly in the steel sector, saying the events of the past couple of years had shown just how “flimsy and fragile our supply chains really are ... and that we’ve become too dependent on others’’.
He also said using hydrogen to make Greensteel could be a game-changer. “This could be at the heart of a new industrial revolution in Australia, offering this highly progressive nation the chance to be a world leader in a new, clean hydrogen economy.” He said Australia exported enough iron ore to produce 500 million tonnes of steel – over a quarter of the world’s annual needs – yet less than 1 per cent of that was processed into steel right here. “Home grown is once again about to become the new mantra,” Mr Gupta said.
CREDIT: CAMERON ENGLAND
Word count: 388
