WHILE much of the Drought Communities Programme funding doled out to councils impacted by drought has been directed toward infrastructure spending, some councils have made sure to include an agriculture-focused component in their spend.
District Council of Karoonda and East Murray have included a farmer and community wellbeing component under round two, announced earlier this year.
The council has developed the Drought Support and Resilience Program to be delivered to the region's farmers between now and March 2021.
The program will cover key focus areas including mental and physical health, business management, sustainable land and diversification.
Kicking off the program last week at Perponda was the first in a series of 'Farmers Breakfasts', events giving the districts farmers a chance to hear from industry speakers on relevant topics like genetically-modified crops, but also offering a setting to catch up with fellow farmers.
DCKEM, with the help of Rural Business Support, will deliver a Farm and Small Business Finances Event at the Karoonda Hotel tomorrow covering budgets, banking and accountancy and the difference between personal and business finances.
A Precision Ag Demo Day will be held for local farmers at Karoonda Oval next Friday, with presentations from a range of speakers on topics like robotics in agriculture, drones, electric tractors, data and telematics, deep ripping and nrmFARM.
DCKEM mayor Caroline Phillips said the past several seasons had brought mixed results for the region's farmers and the council were astutely aware of the impact low rainfall had on the entire community.
"If farmers, who make up the vast majority of our local businesses, aren't able to spend money it impacts on our whole community," she said.
"With round two of the Drought Communities funding, as well as further infrastructure upgrades to community owned buildings and reserves, we wanted to provide a program of events and activities that would make our farming sector more resilient in the future, as we know that dry times will come again."
Local farmer Tammy O'Malley was appointed to deliver DCKEM's drought program and said she wanted to assist farmers to not only recover from drought but to be better prepared for the next one.
'We've put together a program of events and activities to be delivered to farmers within our district aimed at providing the opportunity to upskill and expand their knowledge across a range of areas," she said.
As well as coordinating agricultural events, Mrs O'Malley will conduct visits and provide producers with information packs on drought assistance and other useful information, listen and let people know council is committed to agriculture in the district.
"The program is aimed to be engaging and informal and we'll be bringing people in for things like farmer's breakfasts where they can have a bite to eat, catch up with their fellow farmers but also here from industry speakers about a range of items," she said.
"Our local Fat Farmers group will receive a friendly boost with our Fat Farmers virtual challenge incentives. Farmers will have the chance to learn more about diversification by considering alternative farming options as well as participating in a day on Agri Tourism.
"There is an calendar of events that will be available on our website and at local businesses, and there will be events such as a Precision Ag Day, International Day of Rural Women and even a special Top Producers event delivered in partnership with the Farm Owners academy."
Another council to think outside the square and target some of their Drought Communities funding towards farmer wellbeing is District Council of Cleve, who employed Darke Peak farmer Angela Harris as a drought project officer and extended her role under round two.
"Last year, as part of my role, I researched what support was available for farmers whether that be financial, mental health support or other useful information," she said.
"I put all that information together in a pamphlet and visited farmers where we went through that information and discussed what they did and didn't know about accessing support."
"We went through that information, discussed what they did and didn't know about accessing that support.
"I was a point of contact after that for any questions they had, any support or direction they needed, or to provide help with accessing support.
"This year I've been touching base, making some phone calls and seeing where they're at. It'd about being that face, name that people can ring and find out information."
Mrs Harris said it was invaluable for farmers to have a point of contact for any questions about drought support and she was thankful the council had initiated the role.
Local Government Association of SA president Sam Telfer said recent drought and dry conditions had tested many rural communities across the state, with many benefiting from the Drought Communities Program.
"(The program) has allowed councils to progress almost 250 local projects, from large strategic infrastructure to small community-based facility upgrades," he said.
"The program's flexibility has meant that councils could tailor projects to meet the specific needs of their community. In addition to infrastructure, councils have delivered a broad range of projects including tourism, arts and events initiatives, and health and wellbeing programs.
"The funding criteria was particularly helpful for smaller regional councils, who often miss out on grant funding because they have difficulty finding the matching funds required by many grants programs.
"The sustainability of our communities is paramount, and this funding program has helped add to both social and infrastructure aspects."
Start the day with all the big news in agriculture. Sign up here to receive our daily Stock Journal newsletter.
CREDIT: Quinton McCallum
Word count: 932
