THE head of the Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency will step down after a two-year term, paving the way for a new leader to take the country to the moon, Mars and beyond.
Dr Megan Clark finishes her term around May next year. Whoever the new space boss is will be talking to NASA about their Moon to Mars missions, and to Australian businesses about how they can get involved in the space industry.
Dr Clark, pictured, always planned to go on to something else after a two-year term setting up the Adelaide-based Agency, which has the goal of tripling the size of the space sector in the next decade.
“It has been exciting to be involved in the early stages of such an important initiative and our success so far is testament to the support we have received from the community and space industry and the professionalism and commitment of our people,” she said.
The new head – an Australian – will lead co-operation with NASA on automation and robotics in space, will work with the states and territories, and focus on expanding Australia’s space industry. Space Minister Karen Andrews, who will appoint the new space chief, said Dr Clark had “helped show the world that Australia is a serious player in space technology and exploration”.
“The job of our next agency head will be to build on that foundation by helping Australian businesses secure a bigger share of the space race,” she said. “The next Agency head doesn’t just have big shoes to fill replacing Dr Clark, they will need the drive and vision to lead an Australian space sector that is moving fast.
“(They) will have at the top of their list helping (to) deliver on the Morrison Government’s plan to triple the size of our space sector by 2030, adding $12 billion to our economy and creating 20,000 new jobs.” The Agency will soon be based at Lot Fourteen, where it will eventually be accompanied by a Space Discovery Centre and Mission Control.
So far the agency has released new regulations for Australian spacefarers and overseen a range of agreements with international space agencies. Dr Clark has also had a strong focus on encouraging students, particularly girls, to study science, technology, engineering and maths subjects.Unlike NASA, it does not receive a large amount of Government funding but instead works to help private companies access the global industry.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD SPACE REPORTER
Word count: 406
