Criminal activity THERE are various definitions of “crime”. Among others are “a grave offence especially against morality” and “an act harmful not only to some individual but also to a community, society or the state”.
Damaging the future prospects of the world’s children by clinging on to fossil fuels when there are sustainable alternatives surely should be considered a crime under these definitions. This is what our Federal Government is doing, and they have been called out by hundreds of thousands of Australia’s schoolkids.
Climate change is happening, is caused by humanity and can still be limited. If “business as usual” continues, huge harm will be done to the planet’s weather and biological systems. The environment has long been thought by many to be just the concern of radical “greenies”, but with the changes that we are seeing it surely must become the concern of us all.
Those in government, the rich and powerful in the fossil fuel industries and media, and their lackeys, who lie to keep the greenhouse emissions flowing, are the worst criminals of all, if we are to judge them by the harm they are doing.
DAVE CLARKE, Armagh Three-step plan THE schoolkids’ climate strike is the first of a three-step plan. Step two will be to pledge to walk, bike, or take public transport to school instead of asking Mum to chauffeur kids to and from school, thereby causing less CO2 to be created.
Step three will be to shame parents and grandparents into abandoning overseas flights and cruises forever. Just think how much less CO2 would be created if the one billion people who take self-indulgent, unnecessary trips each and every day stopped? Overseas travel is so overrated!
Stay at home, read a book and learn to knit. That is how you save the planet! MICHAEL PRUS,Fairview Park Their world CHILDREN are far better informed about science than those sneering at them for their push to change society.
The children are the ones creating the future that they will live in; they are the ones learning robotics, programming and other future skills, while the sneerers cling to the ways that they know.
Whatever you might think about the climate strikers is irrelevant to how the world will be once you have gone.
NICK HASKELL, Athelstone More to be done I THINK it’s good to see young folk gathering together sharing their beliefs in a particular world wide situation. I just wonder how many would have turned up on a Saturday.
On a more positive note, perhaps our students should be made aware of those local issues that we as citizens could well change if we banned together as was done on Friday; ambulance ramping, homelessness, aged care, education, government spending, et al.
The list of issues that we might be able to help with goes on and on. COLIN GILES, Tonsley Not my mate YOU devalue the idea of mateship by referring to Trump’s mateship with ScoMo (Opinion, The Advertiser, 20/9/19).
Mr Trump’s approach to business, politics and life is built in the idea of transactional relationships with every deal to be won and every relationship valued in the basis of victory in the last deal.
He is no mate and it is delusional to frame him in that way. It is also a throwback to the most cringe-worthy understanding of our relationship to other nations. Will we ever grow up, or is China lined up to be our next mate?
STEWART SWEENEY, North Adelaide Yemen blind spot IT is amazing that President Trump can describe the attack on Saudi oilfields as an “act of war”, yet ignore Saudi Arabia’s murderous bombardment of Yemen.
D. WILLIAMS, Flagstaff Hill Roadworthy ANOTHER section of Magill Rd is being upgraded.
The new bitumen is down but the SA Water valve covers are still mostly raised and in one case at least still, below the new level.
Presumably SA Water will later dig up the new bitumen and realign the covers. More traffic restrictions and costs and more joins in the bitumen as starting points for potholes.
It’s the most inefficient and costly system one could devise. Surely roads and SA Water can co-operate and do it all at once … but I guess it is only taxpayers’ money!
TERRY HIGGINBOTTOM, Magill Prostitution Bill I URGE MPs to please very carefully consider the implications of the currently proposed prostitution bill.
Please consider the consequences, particularly the lack of shielding of children from these activities.
There is no mention of exit strategies for trapped and vulnerable women. Also, there has been mentioned recently in this newspaper, the potential for increase in bikie gang criminal activities in our state.
NEIL MILLS, Oaklands Park Fly-bys AS a resident in West Torrens I have no objections to these proposed flights from India. (“Adelaide needs direct flights from India”, The Advertiser, yesterday).
There is a current curfew and it must remain. Noise levels from late night flights are excessive and this issue has to be addressed.
The need to open up Richmond Rd at the rear of the airport is essential now. Traffic issues are at a premium – let’s address the issues in the airport’s masterplan and the federal government must assist financially.ARTHUR MANGOS JP, Netley
Word count: 875
