Australian astronaut Dr Andy Thomas says the search for extraterrestrial life could help bring humanity together, reports Tory Shepherd
A MISSION to the moon or Mars and the search for extraterrestrial life could help unite a divided Earth, former astronaut Andy Thomas says.
The upcoming anniversary of the 1969 moon landing has sparked new conversations about the opportunities in space.
Human space flight beyond the International Space Station is once again being seriously considered, while ever-improving technology is scouring planets for evidence of life.
Dr Thomas was born in Adelaide before becoming a NASA astronaut and remains one of the nation’s most passionate advocates for space-related adventures.
He spent a total of six months in space, on four missions over 12 years. These days he splits his time between Adelaide and his adopted hometown of Houston, Texas.
The Sunday Telegraph asked him why earthlings spend billions of dollars exploring the galaxy and beyond.
Finding signs of extraterrestrial life would be a “stunning pinnacle” of human achievement, he said, a way of working together on a visionary project.
“To me there has to be a fundamentally good reason to go out and do it — and that’s to acquire the knowledge of the unknown and seek new life, to discover whether life has formed on another planet,” he said.
“If there is life on Mars, for example … that would be a profoundly significant moment and achievement.” Last week NASA’s Mars Curiosity Rover detected high levels of methane, which could indicate some form of life. Evidence shows the Red ­Planet was probably habitable billions of years ago and astrobiologists believe there could be underground aquifers that might sustain life.
Dr Thomas said while the original moon mission was a decidedly American journey, future missions should be global collaborations that could unite people.
“If we stumble through this century divided, we can’t stand,” he said. “Everyone on the planet got behind the moon landing and cheered Neil (Armstrong) and Buzz (Aldrin) on. If we did this again as an international collaboration … what a positive thing for human society.” While NASA is ­expected to lead most missions, it works closely with other space agencies including Europe and Japan’s.
In the US there is some confusion over their next human moon mission. In early June, President Donald Trump criticised NASA for aiming to get astronauts there by 2024.
“They should be focused on the much bigger things we are doing, including Mars (of which the moon is a part), Defence and Science!” NASA interpreted his comments as being about a plan to use the moon as a jumping-off point for sending ­humans to Mars. It is planning to send the first woman and the next man to the moon by 2024, and to have an ongoing human presence there by 2028.
Private companies, including Blue Origin and Virgin Galactic, have their own plans for human spaceflight. Virgin’s Richard Branson is aiming to send tourists into near-Earth orbit. He reportedly wants to go up himself on Virgin ­Galactic’s SpaceShipTwo sometime around July 20 — the 50th anniversary of the moon landing. However, Virgin has been promising for years that it is on the brink of launching space tourism. Meanwhile, Blue Origin is also working towards tourism space tours.
On Friday NASA ann­ounced its latest mission — sending a nuclear-powered drone called Dragonfly to Titan, Saturn’s largest moon, to search for life.
NASA’s Jim Bridenstine said Titan was the “most comparable to early Earth”, raising hopes there will be ­microbial life there. The drone is set to arrive in 2034.
For decades, Earth-based technology has scoured the skies for signs of intelligent life to no avail.
Dr Thomas said space exploration was a chance to inspire children to study science, technology, engineering and maths, and to increase science literacy in the general populace.
Australia’s Chief Scientist Alan Finkel estimates three in four jobs of the future will demand STEM skills.
“The STEM argument is undeniable,” Dr Thomas said. “I think the culture of the US was forever changed (by the 1969 moon landing) because the nature of technical achievement was infused into society — a society that valued hi-tech ­enterprises and created the 21st-century culture we enjoy today.” A range of school programs and government grants have already begun to encourage students, postgraduates and women into STEM-based space study. The International Space Station, long a hub of scientific research, now lets students conduct experiments in orbit, and is even selling space to anyone who wants to study space’s effects.
The 1969 space mission led to many spin-off technologies, often used as arguments for the benefits of further missions. It’s not true that Teflon was one of these — it was ­invented before it was used on the Apollo missions — but the Apollo 11 mission did deliver technology that led to the Dustbuster, quartz timekeeping devices, solar panels, ­intruder detectors, heart monitors and better firefighter equipment.
Today’s space industry is furthering artificial intelligence, robotics, and autonomous systems, as well as high-end defence applications.
However, Dr Thomas and NASA say space exploration is not about spin-offs but discovering new worlds, pushing the boundaries of science, and addressing fundamental questions about our place in the universe and the history of our solar system — and its potential to bring the citizens of the world together.Celebrate the 50th anniversary of the moon landing with our souvenir glossy magazine One Giant Leap, available for $4.95 at participating newsagents with the token inside your Daily Telegraph this Saturday, July 6.
CREDIT: Tory Shepherd
Word count: 924
