SECONDARY students have many options to achieve their SACE in 2020, including a new program for some to fast-track their learning.
Marden Senior College is a specialist senior secondary college that not only provides a comprehensive SACE program to continuing students into Years 11 and 12, but those returning for Year 13.
People who wish to return to education also can enrol, as can students who want to remain at their current secondary school and complete select courses at Marden, either during the day or in the evening.
From 2020, the College is offering a new program for students who successfully complete Year 9 in 2019 and are SACE-ready to accelerate past Year 10 and start full-time SACE studies.
Principal Stephen Inglis says Marden is the perfect choice for young people who want to complete their secondary education in a purposeful, flexible learning environment.
He says not all students are suited to the Marden environment, however, they still can take advantage of what it offers.
“A large number of metropolitan secondary schools refer their students to Marden to access one or more subjects that are not available to them in their own schools,” he says.
The College offers a range of SACE Stage 1 and Stage 2 subjects, including Life Skills, Cybersecurity, Robotics, Fashion/Jewellery Design, and Medicine and Dentistry Preparation.
The College also is a registered training organisation, providing nationally accredited vocational education certificate courses at certificate II and III level, such as Certificate III in Screen and Media (including VFX), Certificate III in Micro Business, Certificate II in Construction, and Certificate III in Information, Digital Media and Technology (Cybersecurity).Inglis says the College is well established in the education community and enjoys a strong reputation for quality teaching and learning, with outstanding results each year. For example, 44 per cent of Stage 2 results in 2018 were an A grade, including 73 A+ achievements.
Word count: 315
