ACTOR 1 These workers are employed across stage, screen, radio and online, performing scripted work for entertainment, education and commercial purposes. The Good Universities Guide suggests the best actors have determination, self-confidence, good memory, stamina and the ability to cope with changing situations. Although a formal qualification is not always required, it is advisable for actors who want to set themselves apart in a competitive industry and hone their talents. Common degrees include a Bachelor of Fine Arts or a Bachelor of Contemporary Performance Practice. Vocational options are also available, such as a Diploma of Screen and Media or an Advanced Diploma of Acting. The Australian Bureau of Statistics’ latest Employment in Culture report reveals there were 1612 Australians employed as actors in 2011.
EVENTS CO-ORDINATOR 2 Parties, wedding receptions, product launches, conferences and trade shows often require a dedicated events co-ordinator to ensure they run smoothly. This person’s role involves organising and planning every detail and being ready to adapt plans for any issues that present during an event. They are also responsible for negotiating budgets and overseeing work by contractors. The Good Universities Guide recommends this career to people who have good organisational and time management skills, attention to detail, interpersonal and supervisory skills, communication skills, and the ability to negotiate, delegate and work under pressure. An event co-ordinator can be employed without formal qualifications, however courses are available, such as a Diploma of Event Management or a Bachelor of Business (Event Management).
ELECTRONICS ENGINEER 3 This role is different to electrical engineers, who mainly work with power stations and generators. Electronics engineers design and develop electronic parts used in computers, communications, navigation and entertainment.
For example, they create the televisions that screen favourite shows. The Good Universities Guide suggests this career choice to people with an aptitude for technical activities, good leadership skills, the ability to identify and solve problems, and good oral and written communication skills.
They also require a university degree, such as a Bachelor of Engineering (Electronics) or Bachelor of Engineering (Robotics).Postgraduate qualifications are also available for people with a technical background who want to specialise in electronics, such as a Master of Electronic and Computer Engineering.
Word count: 364
