THE BUSH
ALMOST $10 billion in emergency relief will be set aside for drought and flood-stricken farmers in assistance and concessional loans aimed at relieving the impact of natural disasters.
Treasurer Josh Frydenberg last night unveiled a $3.9 billion Emergency Response Fund, designed to ensure extra resources are available to support future recovery efforts.
“Agriculture, like the other primary industries that helped build this country, must be recognised and valued,” he said.
Farmers and industry hit by drought are allocated $6.3 billion in assistance and concessional loans, while those impacted by flood get $3.3 billion.
This includes $5 billion in a new Future Drought Fund and $300 million in grants to flood-affected farmers.
Those in north Queensland will be able to access $300 million in grants to rebuild infrastructure, replace livestock and replant crops.
Almost $30 million will target agricultural sectors with high export growth potential, which Agriculture Minister David Littleproud argued would get Australian food and fibre to more customers globally. He said this would include negotiating protocols with countries with which Australia had free trade deals to satisfy them that produce was pest and disease-free.
Regional access to technology and communication is targeted with $160 million to ease mobile phone black spots and $60 million to improve broadband connectivity.
This will cover projects such as developing business-grade networks to allow agricultural and horticultural precincts to use latest applications and technology, such as sensor networks, robotics and drone imagery.
Critical regional seats on the eastern seaboard are targeted in the election-eve Budget with a “long-term fast-rail vision”, which Mr Frydenberg said was central to the Government’s infrastructure plan. Victoria, where the Coalition concedes it is trailing Labor, is the chief target.
“To make this vision a reality, we are providing $2 billion in this Budget for fast rail between Melbourne and Geelong, slashing travel times in half,” Mr Frydenberg said.
Other areas earmarked for fast-rail corridors include a Melbourne-Shepparton link, Brisbane-Sunshine Coast and Sydney to Wollongong.Regional airports are targeted for a $100 million infrastructure upgrade.
CREDIT: PAUL STARICK
Word count: 340
