Work will start soon on a $10m hi-tech hub at Blackfriars Priory School in Prospect to prepare students for the jobs of the future.
The two-storey science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) centre – part of a broader masterplan to transition the school to a university campus model – has been approved by Prospect Council’s assessment panel.
Construction of the new building, the first phase of an ultra-modern transformation of the school, will begin in July and take a year to complete.
The centre will house two science laboratories, a project room, a think tank zone, eight flexible general learning areas, teacher preparation facilities, dedicated spaces for student collaboration, and breakout areas where they can work on projects.
Blackfriars principal Simon Cobiac said the development had been inspired by a style of teaching and learning that was “very much along collaborative and critical-thinking lines”.
“This facility is all about equipping young people with the sort of skills they need beyond pure academics — it’s about immersing them in more of a transitioning to tertiary-type study rather than the traditional secondary classroom-type experience,” he said.
Mr Cobiac’s vision for the school is to launch its graduates on “a journey to a broader education that not only prepares students for the jobs of the future but brings new life to the community”.
The ultra-flexible new building exemplified the school’s future focus. “There is no point building something that was contemporary some time ago,” Mr Cobiac said.
“You always try to anticipate building facilities that are going to remain cutting-edge for as long as possible.” Part of the Blackfriars transformation has involved purchasing, over time, several houses along its southern boundary on Highbury St.
Four of them will be demolished to make way for the current project. “The STEM centre is part of a broader masterplan with a number of other phases to it but these will always depend on financial capacity and how those buildings can be staggered into the future,” he said.Blackfriars board chairman David O’Loughlin said the school’s acclaimed science, robotics and award-winning drone programs were expected to soar in the new STEM centre.
CREDIT: Anthony Johnson
Word count: 358
