A GIFTED Australian schoolboy has died when he was buried under tonnes of snow as his horrified family watched on from just metres away during a devastating Swiss avalanche.
Max Meyer, 16, harboured dreams of being an astronaut after he graduated from the prestigious Sydney International Grammar School.
But his life was cut short during a family holiday at a ritzy ski resort in St Anton am Arlberg in Austria on Wednesday afternoon, local time.
After his school shared news of his death with classmates, he was yesterday remembered as a highly intelligent and talented teenager who was dux of the school in 2018.
Max was on a ski trip with his German-born father, 58, mother, 55, and brother, 14, when the group went off designated ski paths in the St Anton am Arlberg resort for their final run on Wednesday.
The St Anton am Arlberg mountain rescue service that went to save the family said the group – all experienced skiers – met steep, rough and untracked terrain in a narrow valley of area known as the Steissbach when they got into deadly danger.
The family issued an emergency call when they discovered they could not ski any further, but as they waited for help, an avalanche struck.
“Because of the terrain and the great snow depth, it was no longer possible to get ahead, which is why the family made an emergency call,” the rescue service said.
The avalanche swept Max to his death and covered him in 2m of snow for up to half an hour before his body was found.
The ski town had been contending with record snow falls that had already claimed more than a dozen lives in the surrounding area.
“This (snow) covered the mother and also the 16-year-old son,” the rescue service said in a statement. “The woman (55) was able to free herself from the snow and remained unhurt. The avalanche came to a standstill at the bottom of the valley and had a thickness of up to 4m.” At Max’s school in Sydney yesterday, he was remembered as a bright student with huge potential who had travelled to NASA in 2017 with the robotics club.
“I just want to get into space, it’s the dream,” he said.“I always knew I liked science but when I went to space camp last year, I thought, why can’t I do that? Even if I don’t get there, there are so many jobs where you can impact on an international level.”
CREDIT: NICK HANSEN; ELLEN WHINETT
Word count: 423
