Opportunities are increasing in ICT, writes Melanie Burgess
TECH-SAVVY Australians will have their pick of the jobs well into the future, as demand for ICT professionals continues to boom.
Federal Government modelling forecasts the number of information and communication technology (ICT) professionals will grow by more than 20 per cent in the five years to May, 2024, creating 63,200 extra roles.
That is more new jobs than is forecast for education professionals (57,900 more roles) or nursing and midwifery professionals (40,900).
The latest Hays Jobs Report reveals there is particular employment demand for cloud engineers, network engineers, security specialists, end user support professionals, full stack software engineers, data scientists and robotic process automation specialists.
A CSIRO report, Artificial Intelligence: Solving problems, growing the economy and improving our quality of life, finds the number of AI-related jobs in Australia has increased tenfold in the past five years and will need to at least quintuple again in the next decade. “Australia currently has 6600 AI specialist workers,” it states. “We estimate that by 2030 Australian industry will require a workforce of between 32,000 to 161,000 employees in computer vision, robotics, human language technologies, data science and other areas of AI expertise.
“There is a wide range of future possibilities due to uncertainty about the extent of scientific advances and the extent of technology adoption by industry.” CSIRO Data 61 machine learning group leader Dr Richard Nock says his field is rapidly expanding.
“What’s driving that is automation in the collection and storage of data and the fact we now have the computational power to analyse this data,” he says. “This increase in the job market for AI and machine learning is going to be very, very significant (and) it’s not just going to be about cars or planes … there is going to be (a lot of applications).
“One good example you wouldn’t expect is the diagnosis of mental health disorders.” Nock says although he was mathematically minded in high school, this is not necessarily a prerequisite for a career as an AI specialist.“I think there is a place and possibility for absolutely everybody who has some intuition about what we can do with data and good capabilities putting it to work,” he says.
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 376
