AN estimated two-thirds of Australia’s red meat processors are not running at capacity, because of issues sourcing appropriate labour.
There are a massive 3780 job vacancies in the industry nationwide. Even more concerning is research showing Australian workers stay less than six months in the job on average.
Australian Meat Industry Council chief executive Patrick Hutchinson, pictured, said the problem was affecting every part of the sector, from butchers and smallgoods man-ufacturers, to huge global companies such as Thomas Foods International.
“The red-meat supply chain is facing a drought of the most severe magnitude – a drought in local workers who are willing to be trained up in our industry,” he said. “What we need to see from both sides of politics is a vision for regional Australia, not just for farmers.” Mr Hutchinson said the cost to operate a business in the meat manufacturing industry in Australia was high and significantly greater than the nation’s main overseas competitors, the US and Brazil.
These high costs meant margins were slim.
To help overcome some of these competitive constraints, Mr Hutchinson said the council was looking for government support in four key areas – training, skilling the long-term unemployed, access to overseas workers with fit-for-purpose visas and permanent migration into regional areas.
He said this was particularly important considering the rising global demand for meat, especially from Asia.
“Processors are not able to take full advantage of a massive opportunity,” he said.
“The effect of not being able to fill jobs reverberates up and down the supply chain.” One policy that was particularly concerning the sector was Labor’s federal election pledge to increase the pay of overseas workers by $11,000 a year – a cost that would add tens of millions to the industry’s wage bill. But the council is also concerned by the Coalition’s announcement that it would cut the permanent migration program from 190,000 to 160,000 places – a move Mr Hutchinson said would be disastrous for the red-meat sector because it reduced the pool of low-skilled and unskilled labour positions, which make up the bulk of the industry’s workers.
Mr Hutchinson said a major issue was selling the sector to the younger generation and one possible way to do this was promoting how technologically progressive the industry was, with the growing use of automation and robotics.“There’s so many opportunities for jobseekers, from livestock management, through to food processing,” he said.
CREDIT: PAULA THOMPSON REGIONAL EDITOR
Word count: 408
