This evolving industry is looking to attract more women, Melanie Burgess reports
THERE is a wide variety of workers in the Australian meat industry, from livestock farmers and product quality controllers to boners and butchers, creating job options for almost anyone.
Innovative technology and a move toward bespoke butcher shops are also changing the scene, Australian Meat Industry Council (AMIC) chief executive Patrick Hutchinson says.
“At processing and abattoir level, there are great opportunities in the areas of automation and robotics,” he says. “The next generation has a great opportunity to start in not just cookie cutter positions but make a position their own and invent themselves into the future.” Hutchinson says butchers and smallgoods makers are differentiating themselves from supermarkets with quality over quantity.
“We find individuals coming through the system that are essentially MasterChefs, the only thing they don’t do is cook it,” he says.
He says workers can begin on the floor of a butcher shop or dealing with livestock and work their way up to executive roles, and the sector is trying to attract more women.
Meat processing apprentice Ashleigh McBean works at her father’s shop, Gary’s Quality Meats, with her father, grandfather, two brothers and a sister, but says it was not originally her plan to become a butcher.
“I wasn’t sure what I wanted to do coming out of school but had a part-time job with Dad and realised I really enjoyed it in the shop and loved the interaction with customers and learning about meats,” she says. “It’s long hours and quite a physically intense job so he originally wanted to push us into university, but too bad.” Before beginning her apprenticeship, McBean had played professional basketball in the US.
“Playing a team sport definitely helped with working as a team and dealing with adversity,” she says. “The fact I was pretty fit also helped with the physical side of butchery.” McBean – who was named AMIC Victorian Apprentice of the Year and will speak at a Meat Business Women networking event in April – says there are not a lot of women in her line of work and wonders why.“You are cutting up animals ... so you get bloody and messy, but you look at a nurse and what they do and it’s on the same level,” she says.
CREDIT: Melanie Burgess
Word count: 391
