ARTIFICIAL intelligence is evolving quite nicely.
Firstly, it hasn’t sent robots from the future to terminate us, or our parents. Secondly, machines haven’t yet taken over all of our jobs, with unemployment rates in many countries very low.
And thirdly, AI doesn’t appear to be nasty. Earlier this decade computer scientists created an artificial brain with a billion connections and let it loose on YouTube. The first thing it learned to recognise was human faces. After that, it kept looking at cat videos.
Perhaps more important than feline entertainment is modern machines’ ability to manage our money better than we can.
The key reason for this is emotion – or it’s AI’s lack of emotion. They don’t freak out and rush to hit the sell button when financial markets are falling. And they don’t suffer fear of missing out and pile in when markets are at record highs — usually the worst time to invest.
While humans have a herd mentality when it comes to investing, machines will only do what they’re programmed to do. Often they will invest right through the investment cycle — smoothing out returns — or could be set to invest more heavily when prices are cheap and most humans are running the other way.
Banks and financial services companies already use AI behind the scenes to do much of the work humans used to do. Robo-advisers invest clients’ money according to predetermined wisdom and planning, while other technology can detect fraud.
It’s hard to see machines replacing all types of financial advice, especially where specialists need to be creative about people’s goals, but it can make the nuts and bolts of investing much easier. AI also works well for younger generations who have a preference for screens over human contact.
Other ways machines might help manage our finances in the not-too-distant future include: ANALYSING our spending to see if there are ways to save money. TALKING to home appliances such as fridges and airconditioners to monitor usage and cut the bills.
HAVING intelligent human-like conversations about financial planning and investment goals.
A great example of automation in investing has been exchange traded funds (ETFs), which have exploded in popularity and now hold more than $42 billion of our money. ETFs traditionally tracked a particular index — such as the ASX 200 — by investing people’s money in every stock in the index in proportion to their size.
There are specific ETFs that invest in Aussie shares, global shares, emerging markets, currencies, commodities, and even — fittingly — robotics. But the principles remain the same: diversify money over many different assets.So forget about Terminators, fem-bots and those crazed cowboys from Westworld. Modern money machines are here to help.
CREDIT: Anthony Keane Personal Finance Writer
Word count: 459
