HUNDREDS more young South Australians would become army cadets, many in new school-based units, under Defence Department plans.
An Australian Army Cadets (AAC) presentation to parents at Tatachilla Lutheran College at McLaren Vale last month, seen by The Advertiser, reveals the aim to lift numbers from 680 to more than 1000 within three years. As of last year, Sacred Heart College hosted the only school-based unit of the 22 across SA.
The presentation says new units will open this year at Tatachilla Lutheran as well as at St Michael’s College at Henley Beach and Cardijn College at Noarlunga Downs. Pulteney Grammar in the CBD and “Golden Grove College” (likely Golden Grove High or one of the neighbouring private colleges) will follow next year.
Two more unnamed schools are “to be confirmed”.
Cadet activities include ceremonial drill, navigation and orienteering, radio communication, first aid, physical and weapons training, and team building exercises.
The regular commitment is a three-hour weekly training night, plus a weekend camp each term and an annual eight-day field exercise. There are also leadership courses. Students can gain up to 40 SACE credits in Year 11 and 20 in Year 12 through cadet training.
Defence declined an interview but in a statement said it was introducing “innovative subjects” into the cadet program including “robotics, advanced communications, cyber skills, field engineering and remotely piloted aerial systems”.
“The conduct of the AAC program is one way in which Army contributes to the betterment of Australian society by helping to create responsible, mature and self-confident young people and future leaders in defence, government and business,” it said.
“Advancement within the AAC provides cadets opportunities to put these skills into practice by leading and conducting unit, regional and even national-level activities, whilst under supervision of volunteer adult army cadet staff.” The presentation at Tatachilla Lutheran said there are plans for new community-based units in the Barossa this year and Port Adelaide next year, both “to be confirmed”.
The Defence statement said “current planning” sought to grow numbers from 674 to 865 with the Tatachilla, St Michael’s and Cardijn units. “Proposals for other unit locations are currently being assessed by AAC headquarters,” it said.
Nationally, Defence wants to raise army cadet numbers from 17,556 to 20,000 by 2024.PAGE 19: VALDMAN’S VIEW
CREDIT: TIM WILLIAMS EDUCATION REPORTER
Word count: 384
