Women count AS a proud mother, I am totally sickened by this decision to eliminate a mother’s importance in our procreation.
A woman nurtures and loves her offspring, helping them along the road to adulthood, and her abilities should not be just fobbed off as unimportant.
Many years ago a woman’s income could not be included in the family mortgage – (she would probably eventually stay at home and have children).
Also, during my employment years, a woman’s income was always less than a man doing a similar job.
And the list goes on and on.
Now, in 2022, the Labor Party has decided that a woman’s contribution to “life” is so minimal that they have deleted an entire section of the platform which is considered to be gender-biased.
I am very disillusioned with this crazy situation, so maybe we should refer to the old adage – if it ain’t broke, don’t fix it!
V. MCPHERSON, Largs Bay
Vote climate OUR Prime Minister, Scott Morrison, is constantly saying that the coming federal election is all about jobs and the economy, and yet the go-slow policies of the federal Coalition Government in relation to countering climate change and further developing the attributes of renewable energy, have been constant inhibitors to growth in jobs and the economy for many years.
Urgent action is required, and well overdue, in relation to countering climate change and further developing renewable energy.
The coming federal election provides an opportunity to make the required actions take place.
BRIAN MEASDAY, Myrtle Bank
Tax hikes THE State Labor Party have only been in power for a few weeks, and already our taxes are to be increased.
In the coming week, the first of the increases comes from car registrations and driver’s licences, and no doubt will be followed by others.
We all know that Labor is the taxing party, so be wary of the federal election. A. JONES, Payneham
Save lives THE accelerated unravelling of Covid safeguards since the election of the Malinauskas government should be urgently reviewed (The Advertiser, Friday).
In particular, the abandonment of the requirement to wear masks in all but a few locations and situations should be reversed.
The World Health Organisation has revealed that Covid cases, hospital admissions and deaths are grossly underreported. It is likely your public health official, politicians and others were not unaware of this in the case of SA.
The 300,000 and more South Australians in the vulnerable category are being exposed to unnecessary and unacceptable risks to satisfy the extreme demands of some business interests.
Mask wearing has many benefits for the many and few costs for individuals or businesses.
Restoring masks would have some political costs for Peter Malinauskas but could save the lives and protect the long-term health status of hundreds of South Australians.
Just do it, Peter.
STEWART SWEENEY, Adelaide
Cats not dogs THE letter opposing the push for cat confinement bylaws (The Advertiser, Monday), raises some issueswhich urgently need to be addressed, as some councils are recommending dangerous practices.
Including conditions that cats need to be walked on leashes or harnesses is encouraging extreme risk-taking, not only for the cats but the person holding the leash.
I quote from the RSPCA statement: “in general the RSPCA does not recommend it. When alarmed, cats typically attempt to hide somewhere or to escape by climbing whatever is available, such as a tree or even up on to their owner. Most cats like to be in control – therefore, new environments can cause stress and agitation.” Do we have to wait until a child is badly injured from this dangerous activity before we acknowledge that cats are not dogs and cannot be managed like dogs?
G. HANNAH, Kensington
Calling a spade MY hubby pointed out a comment in Michael Keelan’s In the Garden article (The Advertiser, Saturday).
It read that the garden tools “should be looked after well to ensure they provide long and useful service”.
He suggested that he was, in fact, my garden tool and that he too deserves to be looked after well in order to provide a long and useful service!
I concurred – so made him a cuppa to enjoy out in the fern pergola. Janice Haugen, Port Broughton
Fees revving WHY has the RAA car insurance increased by 20 per cent when the inflation rate is only 5.1 per cent? Someone needs a kick in the pants. CHRIS BURDEN, Encounter Bay
Word count: 739
