ADELAIDE’s own astronaut Andy Thomas is worried that the next mission to the moon could be dangerously rushed – but hasn’t mentioned that his wife might be on board.
Shannon Walker, a physicist and NASA astronaut, is on the short list for the 2024 Artemis mission. It’s called Artemis because NASA has already decided the first woman will walk on the moon and Artemis is a Greek goddess and sister to Apollo, after whom the first mission was named.
Twelve women fit the criteria to make the giant leap for womankind, including Dr Walker, who lives with Dr Thomas in Houston.
Dr Walker was in the audience at the National Wine Centre yesterday as Dr Thomas talked about his fears for the mission, which is being hurried along by US President Donald Trump. He told the Committee for Economic Development of Australia lunch that there were challenges in going back to the moon, particularly because of the short timeframe. The original plan was for a crewed mission in 2028, but Mr Trump brought the deadline forward by four years. Dr Thomas said that was “probably not realistic from an engineering point of view”.
He said it was incumbent on the engineers and contracts involved “to ensure they don’t succumb to the pressure”.
“We’ve seen in the past what happens when we do that – we have accidents and it kills astronauts,” Dr Thomas said.
NASA has confirmed there will be at least one woman on the mission, a move it hopes will inspire girls and young women. Only about one in seven of the Americans who have flown in space have been women, and only men have walked on the moon.
NASA administrator Jim Bridenstine has said that the first woman will be someone who is already in the astronaut corps.
“It will be somebody who has been proven, somebody who has flown, somebody who has been on the International Space Station already,” he said.
Dr Walker fits those criteria; 11 other women are in the astronaut corps, though not all of them have been to the ISS.
She worked as a robotics flight controller on the Space Shuttle program, and spent five months on the International Space Station.
According to her official NASA bio, she was the 35th person in the world to become both an astronaut and an aquanaut, because she spent more than 24 hours under water. Two top contenders are Christina Koch and Jessica Meir, who did the first all-woman space walk last week. Both have said it was a dream of theirs to go to the moon.NASA’s plan is to land humans on the moon and to set up a Lunar Gateway, which will be a jump-off point to send humans to Mars.
CREDIT: TORY SHEPHERD SPACE EDITOR
Word count: 464
