ROBOTS that just want to be hugged, pillows that train you to stop snoring, and hand-held printers to apply make-up were among the wacky, innovative gadgets shown off in Las Vegas yesterday.
Some of the tech world’s biggest brands revealed their latest creations before the start of the Consumer Electronics Show, alongside innovations from up-and-coming firms and established skincare, audio, and even toothbrush brands.
And consumers are likely to get access to many of the devices within months. Some of the more unusual applications focused on sleep, including the $605 Motion Pillow equipped with a microphone to detect snoring, and four airbags that inflate individually to move sleepers when they snored.
“The idea is to move the sleeper without ever actually disturbing them,” Tenminds spokesman Chad George said.
Other smart sleeping gadgets included a headband designed for bed called the Muse S, which helps the user calm down before resting, and a sleep time sensor-packed headband called UrgoNight, at a cost $720.
Procter and Gamble have developed what spokeswoman Lauren Thomas described as “an inkjet printer for your skin” – a handheld device that captures 200 photos a second to analyse skin and deliver small amounts of pigment and anti-ageing moisturisers.
The Opte is expected to launch in the Australian summer with a price guide of $864 with $144 refills.
And, of course, it wouldn’t be the Consumer Electronics Show without robots. Japanese creator Kaname Hayashi won hearts with his adorable Lovot robots, which feature large, animated eyes, a camera to recognise their human partners and a furry exterior designed for patting.
Groove X spokeswoman Nanako Aoki said the $5760 roaming androids were designed for “people who live by themselves or families with kids” who wanted playful company.
Yukai Engineering also showed off an early prototype of its “emotionally available” Bocco Emo robot, and Pollen Robotics demonstrated how its humanoid robot Reachy could play noughts and crosses.
The robot will be sold in parts, with a chest and one arm costing $12,961, while the whole thing would set you back $24,482.
CES Unveiled hosted unexpected gadgets for outside the bedroom, including the Mateo smart bathmat that secretly weighs you and checks your posture after a shower.
The $US205 gadget sends an alert to your smartphone if it notices anything awry. Danby also showed off a $A574 smart mailbox to register and protect parcels, while Japanese firm iKuddle showed off its “cat ecosystem” including a smart litter tray to analyse a kitty’s waste, and a connected water fountain and feeder. Other personalised skincare and make-up devices from L’Occitane and L’Oreal also featured at the show.
More than 170,000 people are expected to attend the show, with 4500 companies exhibiting across a sprawling set of hotels and convention centres, equivalent to more than 50 football fields.Speakers throughout the week include US President Donald Trump’s daughter Ivanka, Samsung’s head of consumer electronics Hyunsuk Kim as well as executives from TV networks NBC and CBS.
CREDIT: JENNIFER DUDLEY-NICHOLSON LAS VEGAS
Word count: 497
