THE job market has taken a hit since the COVID-19 outbreak but tens of thousands of roles are still available – and most do not require a university degree.
A short course, the right attitude or a few self-taught skills may be all that is needed to get a foot in the door of a new career.
Job site Adzuna revealed the industries currently advertising the most roles were health care and nursing (about 8830 job ads), trades and construction (5710) and information technology (3400).
Though nursing and other health-professional roles typically required a university qualification, Adzuna country manager for Australia and New Zealand, Tejas Deshpande, said many other available jobs did not.
“We have been heavily working with Defence Force recruitment and they are looking at aircraft technicians and marine technicians, who require just a basic Year 10 or 12 qualification (to begin an apprenticeship),” he said.
“There are a lot of home care workers that might only require a working with children check or basic qualification in that area.” Demand-driven training organisation Generation Australia runs short courses in just two areas – disability support (six weeks) and web development (12 weeks).
On completion, students are guaranteed a job interview with an employer in the field.
Generation Australia chief operating officer Malcolm Kinns said the company chose to develop these two particular programs as research with employers found workers would be in demand both now and after the pandemic had passed.
“They are recession-proof and not going to be affected by things like digital transformation and automation,” he said. “They are careers that will exist well into the future.
“Particularly in the current climate when people are reskilling, they should know they don’t need to spend four years or even one year reskilling.
“There are a number of roles where people can come in and build a career.” Recruitment firm Randstad have similarly partnered with education and employment organisation WithYouWithMe to help jobseekers hit by the COVID-19 economic downturn to kickstart a career in technology.
Previously only available to veterans, access to the digital training courses in IT, cyber, robotics and data analytics was now open to all jobseekers.
Randstad’s Kerry McQuillan said, at a national level, she had seen rising employment in government services, contact centres, construction, and transport and logistics – and she expected an increase in sales, business development, cyber security and data analytics soon.
“You don’t necessarily need to have a uni degree to move into (cyber security and data analytics) types of roles, even though sometimes the perception is you do,” she said.
THE ADVERTISER, IN PARTNERSHIP WITH RECRUITMENT TECHNOLOGY PROVIDER SHORTLYSTER, HAS LAUNCHED THE AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL TALENT REGISTRY TO CONNECT JOBSEEKERS WITH EMPLOYERS IN A NEW WAY THAT RECOGNISES THEIR SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE AND MATCHES THEM TO VACANCIES AS THEY ARE ADVERTISED. GO TO ADVERTISER.COM.AU/CAREERS
TOP 10 AVAILABILITIES ON SEEK Nursing: 2870 jobs currently available Aged and disability support: 1610 Software development: 1440 Mining, engineering and maintenance: 1180 Automotive trades: 1270 Physiotherapy, occupational therapy and rehabilitation: 1150 jobs available Warehousing, storage and distribution: 1200 Sales representation and consulting: 1190 Administrative assistance: 1020 Mining operations: 1010
CREDIT: MELANIE BURGESS CAREERS DEPUTY EDITOR
Word count: 529
