Pathology praise I COMMEND SA Pathology to the public for its commitment to world’s best-practice.
I was a medical scientist in infectious diseases at SA Pathology until I retired two years ago and know from the swine flu epidemic how the laboratory will be responding to the huge increase in demand for COVID-19 testing.
There are three reasons the laboratory will excel in the current crisis. There is a commitment to high-volume automated equipment and robotics to facilitate rapid surge capacity.
Secondly, and as a consequence, the COVID-19 testing will be simply added to existing respiratory testing, so all likely causes of infection will be tested on every respiratory sample, not just COVID-19.
This is important because while most samples will be negative, other causes for the symptoms can be detected and reported.
Lastly, the staff are committed to achieve the surge capacity required to handle the increased demand for testing and provide timely results, mostly within 24 hours.
During the swine flu epidemic, there were reports from other laboratories of reporting delays of multiple weeks.
SA Pathology has received bad press over recent years, including criticism of perceived poor performance.
Staff were outraged at the slight to our reputation but were denied access to what we believed was either erroneous workload data or ill-informed interpretation.
Yes, there are problems but these mostly relate to the limited laboratory space at the RAH and a new but clunky and slow computer reporting system. Staff commitment to world’s best practice and performance remains high.
Now, as a retiree, I thank them for their effort, and commend them to you. DR ROD RATCLIFF, Aldgate Fair cop on fines ON behalf of the many South Australians caught up in this messy South Eastern Freeway legislation, we are imploring Transport Minister Stephan Knoll and/or Police Commissioner Grant Stevens to exercise their discretion and make the newly amended and fairer penalties retrospective.
SA Best MLC Frank Pangallo said: “The laws introduced by the State Government were a shambles from day one – and it took amendments by SA Best to try to fix them last December.
It’s only fair and reasonable now that motorists who were unfairly impacted by them have their fines and automatic licence disqualifications withdrawn.” Mr Knoll has admitted they got these penalties very wrong and there is a huge argument that other parts of this legislation are flawed and, in fact, have made this section of road more dangerous.
All the serious and fatal accidents at the bottom of the freeway have been caused by vehicles eight tonnes and over.
Most of the people caught up in this flawed legislation don’t even have a licence to operate that size of vehicle.
Mr Knoll and Mr Stevens, please do the right thing.
While it might be a little inconvenient for you and your office to implement, failing to make these amended penalties retrospective will continue to hurt countless South Australians.
DALLAS COULL, Common Sense Legislation for the SE Freeway in Adelaide Naming accused I’LL tell you what is really horrific – the condemnation of an innocent. The original law, supposedly applicable to any person accused of a crime, was to keep their identity a secret from the public until a trial had concluded and the accused was actually found guilty of it.
Why? Because believe it or not, some are not guilty of the crime they are accused of. So dragging their name through the court of public opinion and ruining their life, their career for all time is hardly fair or right, is it?
This stupid removal of the suppression law (The Advertiser, 4/3/20) is a backward step; where do we go next as a society? Back to kangaroo courts and vigilante groups.
The public and media have no right to know the name of any accused person. Once that person is found guilty in a court of law then that is an entirely different matter and I would be the first to support the right of the public to then know.
Just because we were the only state out of step with the others is no reason to go ahead with a ridiculous reform, no matter how it seemed, superficially, like a good idea.
ART STONE, Magill Share greed WHAT gutless hypocrites shareholders are.
They expect their companies to pay them big dividends in good times, but at the first sign of trouble, they jump ship.
At such a crucial time, shareholders should have some intestinal fortitude and show support for the world. Buy back your shares.
ANDREW FITZGERALD, Mount Torrens In the dark I WONDER how many South Australian residents are in favour of daylight saving? Where SA is on the world map, it is totally unnecessary to use daylight saving. I would like see it abolished in this state.
Alternatively, adjust the time by half an hour all through the year, so we would have extra time during winter, which makes more sense.
On days when the temperature is 40C-plus, we are expected to endure additional heat during daylight saving before the sun sets.
Countries that experience minimal daylight are candidates for daylight saving but this hardly applies to Australia.
BOB SYKES, Payneham Long wait STONE the crows (one of my favourite hobbies, incidentally), Italy is in complete lockdown. What to do? This could mean an indefinite delay in delivery of my new Lamborghini.
Woe is me.PAUL BUXTON, Westbourne Park
Word count: 902
