From hi-tech robotic hands to voice-controlled showers and smart toilets, advances in technology mean there are now more options than ever for people with restricted mobility PQSA chief executive officer Peter Stewart describes the rate and quality of emerging assisted technology now available as “phenomenal”.
The head of the Adelaidebased not-for-profit group for people with paraplegia or quadriplegia says the devices allow people to remain living independently in their own homes and to continue to do the things most people take for granted.
“(It gives people) the ability to control all these very ordinary things around the house ... things like activating television, lights, airconditioning, even showers and bathroom accessories,” he says.
“If someone loses hand function, for instance, there are devices that can be voice-activated and linked in with mobile devices, such as smartphones and tablets.
“I love some of the automatic showers, even some of the toilet technology available these days that can make people’s lives so much easier, if they do have mobility impairments.” Stewart admits the high cost of some of the newest assisted technology can be prohibitive and recommends people investigating potential funding streams. “If people are under the age of 65 and have mobility issues the first port of call should be the NDIS (as) funding can certainly be built into plans to access assisted technology,” he says.
“It is really important at the point of assessment – and at subsequent reviews – to highlight any daily challenges with things like mobility and personal care … (it’s about) helping people lead the lives they want to.” Assisted technology covers everything from mobility equipment to home modifications and environmental adaptations and can help everywhere from the bathroom to the laundry, bedroom and kitchen, making outdoor tasks, housework, dressing and even taking medications easier.
For people aged over 65 without a prior disability, funding is primarily through the federal My Aged Care scheme.
However, regardless of eligibility to NDIS, Stewart, who believes the age threshold needs reviewing, says the agency is a good place to start for guidance on where to go for help and to get a list of providers – as is a local GP.
“(I think sometimes) people are embarrassed or don’t feel like they can ask for help but there are so many resources, agencies and organisations that can assist … it is really sad if people are struggling with day-to-day activities like walk ing and showering when they don’t need to,” he says. “Perseverance and persistence are important, not just in terms of getting information but in terms of accessing funding as well – I think people have to pursue every avenue they can.” PQSA senior occupational therapist David Coleopy agrees getting good advice and a comprehensive assessment is critical.
“There are literally thousands of pieces of equipment out there: the challenge for most people is matching that equipment to their needs, that is the tricky bit,” he says.
“As an OT, we look at the person themselves, what are their goals and interests, what are their abilities and limitations … what do they want to do – do they want to get out and play golf, do they want to be able to get in and out of their car, do they want to be able to go with their grandkids to the local park?
“It is about helping people to maintain their lifestyle and quality of life. It is in- credibly satisfying to take someone from thinking they can no longer do something, to finding them a solution and a way to do it – it might be a slightly modified version and it might be using technology they didn’t think they would need ... but seeing them getting out and living the life they enjoy, that is by far the most satisfying thing (about my job).” Coleopy says there have been huge advances in mobility devices in the past five years, so too “fantastic advances in prosthetics and robotics”. “From a prosthetic point of view, there are robotic hands that can directly interface with the nervous system so it is like moving your hand normally, you don’t have to contract muscles to operate switches ... that is pretty amazing.
“(There are) power system devices you can put on wheelchairs to enable them to go places they never used to be able to go, (and some of the) hand controls for vehicles are really amazing now … there are so many ways you can continue to drive.
Obviously you need to have the vision and the cognitive ability but, if your main problem is just physically being able to operate pedals and controls, there is so much technology out there to help.” Similarly, Claire Jessup, a prosthetist and orthotist at Adelaide service provider Prostek, says there are many options available to relieve pain and to help people maintain a good quality of life. “We do everything from simple things like foot orthotics and off-the-shelf knee braces, up to custom whole-leg braces ...
we also do prosthetics,” she says.
Advances in technology have also led to microprocessor prosthetic feet and knees, which can improve function and help users to walk more efficiently and comfortably. The feet work by responding to constant feedback from sensors to the onboard computer; while sensors in knees monitor and detect changes, such as the types of surface a person is walking on, whether they’re going up or down aslope, or walking at a different speed.
CREDIT: WORDS REBECCA BAKER
Word count: 915
