Hamish Blake is building on more fun in his new reality show, writes LISA WOOLFORD
FROM spending afternoons on radio with his best friend to gap years and pulling pranks with same friend. Then joining up with more friends to hear tall tales from across Australia, Hamish Blake’s had some dream jobs. His latest – hosting Nine’s Lego Masters – is the one his eight-year-old self would judge the most awesome.
It’s like being that proverbial kid in the candy store, only this time the candy store is The Brick Pit and it is jam-packed full of Lego, in every colour, shape and size. There’s 2.5 million bricks in this den of dreams. It’s hard for this journalist not to be overwhelmed at the sheer magnitude of choice.
Fortunately the eight teams of friends, relatives and workmates who are competing for the $100,000 prize money and the glory of being crowned Australia’s inaugural Lego Masters, are not so daunted, but rather are completely ready to pour their hearts and souls into Lego 24/7.
“My big fear going into this, and I openly talked about this before going into the show, was what if I get sick of Lego?,” Hamish says, as we chat on the purpose-built set, complete with Lego brick-looking lights, based at the Melbourne Showgrounds. “There was a real possibility. I like Lego, don’t get me wrong, I build it a few times a year and I play with kids, but there’s a difference between me as a casual dad consumer Lego fan vs every single day doing it 12-hours a day. I’ve got to say after the first few days that fear began to abate. I think I’ve gone deep, Lego’s got me. The more you get to know about the (Lego) world, the more detail you see, the more nuances you get your head around. I think it’s had the opposite effect – and I think it bodes well for the show.” Hamish was your typical ’80s kid, studying brochures for the latest Lego kits in the lead-up to Christmas, asking Santa for the best kit, “usually getting the third best kit, but was still pretty happy with it”.
“I’d build it, it would stay built for a few months, then it would break and you’d chuck it in the giant Ikea tub and then that became your Lego pile.” He packed it away for good as he became a teen, well, almost for good, until he and Andy Lee were on their first Gap Year in America. The pair visiting the iconic Lego Store in Times Square.
“I started buying the architectural Lego – I built my wife (Zoe Foster Blake) the White House as a joke, as a nod to the movie The Notebook,” Hamish says. “That guy builds his wife a house and I was like ‘this is my lame attempt to build you a house – I built you a White House out of Lego.” While wife Zoe may have been somewhat underwhelmed and 18 month-old daughter Rudy is a little young, five-year-old Sonny is right in the sweet spot.
“Plus, even before he was old enough to properly play with Lego instead of Duplo, I was buying him stuff that I wanted,” Hamish, says with a laugh. “Like, last Christmas, I bought the most elaborate Batmobile you could, but he conked out on the second page of the instructions. I probably didn’t even notice he’d left the table for about an hour.” So, he is completely qualified and totally in his element as host, and he has a new sidekick for this show, Ryan “Brickman” McNaught, the southern hemisphere’s only Lego-certified professional.
“He’s awesome,’ Hamish says. “You’ve got to understand – which I didn’t before this show – there’s only 14 of these people in the world. They’re like The Avengers ... a secret society of super-powered Lego builders.
“The only problem I have with Brickman is he doesn’t show off enough. “I do sometimes see him build a little thing – we might need a prop or at the start of a challenge, he might have to build a little element and I’ll see him put it together. It’s a weird thing to explain, but he can literally look at anything and make it. It’s no big deal to him.
“It’s a very big deal to me. I mean I stand in The Brick Pit among those millions of bricks and, even though there’s two million bricks in there, it doesn’t help. I still can’t build an AFL football, unless it’s like five red bricks put together and I’m doing heavy selling on how good it is.” Ryan laughs at Hamish’s suggestion he is Avenger-like, suggesting it’s just Hamish adding a “special sauce” to his title.
What he can clear up for all South Australians is we are most definitely pronouncing Lego wrong. It is absolutely not “Lay-go” as we are accustomed to saying. Our peculiar pronunciation might be shared by South Africans but not the Danes who invented the world’s favourite toy back in 1932.
He’s also quick to point out that he won’t be completely taking over from Andy as Hamish’s permanent offsider.
“No danger of that happening,” Ryan says. “I’m quite happy building Lego bricks and I’ll leave the fun and entertainment to them.” Ryan was a huge Lego fan as a child, winning awards when he was a mere five-years-old. He packed it all away when he was about 12, only returning to his childhood hobby when he became a dad himself and his mum handed back his carefully-preserved collection.
In 2006 when Lego Mindstorms – a software platform for programmable robots based on the famous bricks – was released, Ryan began to combine his IT know-how and Lego building skills.
“It was really hard to use – you almost had to be a Danish mathemetician to work out how to use it,” he says. “I wrote a piece of software that allowed kids to use the robotics with the iPad.” It went so well that it came to the Danish company’s attention, although with mixed results. One arm of Lego sending him a “cease and desist what he was doing immediately ” legal letter , another sending an email praising him and wanting to talk about a collaboration. Given he was made a Lego Certified Professional in 2009 – history shows which side of the company won.
So when Ryan says he’s been amazed at the level of talent this new reality show has unearthed, you know the creativity we are about to witness unfold will indeed be mind blowing. The Lego lovers come from all walks of life – mining workers, graphic designers, a radio DJ, a property valuer, students, a grandma, actors, a video game designer and a survey programmer – and are united by their passion for the humble LEGO brick and the playful possibilities it represents The challenge briefs vary, as does the time allowed to complete them. Some builds stretch up to a whopping 28 hours.
A dramatic “code red” lighting change will signal the final hour of each challenge as tensions rise and the clock ticks down.
“We all know that feeling when you see something built out of Lego and you go ‘oh, that’s really impressive’,’ Hamish says. “It’s not ‘til I’ve sat in the room and watched people build, that I’ve realised it’s really difficult to build with no instructions.
“At its heart, the show is pure creativity, they imagine something and then, a few hours later, it exists. Sometimes 13 hours, sometimes four, sometimes eight.
“The other thing people need to get their head around is that 12 or 13 or 10 hours is not a lot of time to build Lego. I thought it was way too much time. In the first challenge, it’s 15 hours and I thought people could go for a jog, tidy up, go home, put the dinner on, come back ... as it turns out, that’s not enough time, not really very much time at all.” It has been hard farewelling the talented pairs as they’ve been eliminated from the creative paradise, especially for Ryan.
“I’ve never in my Lego life had to say to someone before ‘unfortunately your build wasn’t successful today’, so that was a real challenge,” he says. “The thing that makes it hard is they are all such nice people. And it’s not like they’ve got to make a flambe or something like that or a souffle and if it sinks you know it hasn’t worked.
“The thing with Lego is, there’s no wrong way, you can’t stuff up your Lego. It’s just their build isn’t quite as good as someone else.” While there aren’t any sinking souffles, there have been some spectacular collapses. There’s even a whole challenge themed around creating a space model that will look awesome being blown up in super-slow motion.
There’s also a life-changing $100,000 up for grabs, but that’s not the reason contestants are sad about leaving the competition.
“They keep getting sad because they want to build, they’re going sure $100,000 is nice, it’s not like our contestants are anti-money,” Hamish says. “But the sad thing for the contestants is they want to keep playing – it’s a Lego builders’ paradise in there – the sadness of someone going is more that they are bummed they have to leave their ultimate theme park.” They’re not the only ones, Hamish too, you sense, is a little bummed to pack up his latest dream gig.LEGO MASTERS, SUNDAY, 7PM, MONDAY-TUESDAY, 7.30PM, NINE
CREDIT: LISA WOOLFORD
Word count: 1604
