A Southern Highlands teacher has taken out a coveted NGS award and scholarship for his work to encourage girls to broaden their career opportunities through science and technology based subjects.
Teacher at Frensham Andrew McMIllan was one of six winners of the award nation-wide.
READ ALSO: St Paul's Primary and St Paul's International College students shine in robotics competition
The NGS Super Scholarship Awards recognise teachers and staff members in education who actively work on their career development and contribute to the wider sector.
As a STEM coordinator and design technology teacher Mr McMillan is committed to getting more girls interested in science, technology, engineering and mathematics to broaden their career options.
The teacher said his aim was to the make the girls aware of what was possible in their futures.
Mr McMillan said he was honoured to receive the award.
"It's recognising the impact of girls education," he said.
"I regard myself as a staunch feminist."
CHECK OUT: From Perth to Bundanoon; One man's journey across Australia for PTSD
Mr McMillan said women were underrepresented in a lot of industries and that technology was an important part of global society.
The technology enthusiast plans to use the scholarship to travel to Adelaide to be a guest judge at the Re-engineering Australia (REA) competition.
REA was founded to inspire and educate a new generation of young people on the importance of engineering and other related subjects to their future. Mr McMillan said he looked forward to the exciting opportunity to witness first-hand the engineering projects students from around the country had worked on.
He said he wanted to "see what other students are producing and bring that inspiration back to the Southern Highlands."
Since the awards were established nine years ago, the fund has given more than $250,000 in scholarship funds.
READ MORE: Highlands Theatre Group to perform Anne of Green Gables
Love local news? Sign up to our weekly newsletter
CREDIT: Hannah Neale
Word count: 324
