International comedy star David Strassman will bring his brand-new show, The Chocolate Diet, to Cessnock Leagues Club on Sunday, November 10.
Strassman and his band of puppets - including Ted E Bare, Chuck Wood and Grandpa Fred - are no stranger to Cessnock audiences, having performed in the city five times in the past 15 years, and he says The Chocolate Diet is probably his funniest show yet.
Debuting at the Adelaide Fringe Festival in March with rave reviews, The Chocolate Diet is an hilarious look at society's obsession with sweets and lollies, a send-up of our failed diets, and Ted E. Bare's drama with his self-image and lifelong eating issues.
The problem is getting worse and Ted E. Bare can't get the support he needs, especially with the sneaky Chuck Wood leaving tempting donuts around.
Chuck has his own personal drama, a sneaking suspicion that he was carved into the wrong body.
Meanwhile, Grandpa Fred is now addicted to drugs - "when you're over 100, there's nothing else to do", he says; and Sid the Beaver can't stop telling the same jokes (he's possessed by Kevin Bloody Wilson, Strassman quips).
"I love making audiences laugh and this new show, The Chocolate Diet, is probably my funniest to date," Strassman said.
Regarded as one of the world's best ventriloquists, the LA-based performer has been embraced by Australian audiences since his early performances in the 1990s - in fact, he says Australia is like his second home.
"I love all aspects of it - I've travelled all around, from the bush to the Red Centre to the Great Barrier Reef - everywhere, I love it," he said.
Fans of his last tour, iTedE - which featured Strassman and all his puppets in a mind-blowing, six-way conversation - won't be disappointed.
"It's really fantastic - the production value, the special effects, the robotics - it's a full-on show, not just a guy standing there with a microphone," Strassman said.
The show will start at 6pm and is not suitable for children under 12. Tickets are selling fast at cessnockleagues.com.au.
CREDIT: Krystal Sellars
Word count: 350
