Washington DC AUSTRALIAN businesses will reap a multibillion-dollar windfall from their work on the landmark mission to the moon and Mars, NASA bosses say.
In an exclusive interview with News Corp Australia, the US space agency’s deputy administrator James W Morhard also said an Australian astronaut could fly to the moon within five years.
Mr Morhard said commerce and private industry help would be crucial to the project’s success and NASA’s deal with the Adelaide-based Australian Space Agency needed expertise in mining, including the finding of rare minerals, and proven cutting-edge technologies.
Speaking at the US space agency’s headquarters in Washington DC, Mr Morhard said international partners were critical to the success of President Donald Trump’s goal to get to the moon by 2024.
“It is our intent to create more commerce in space, which is going to provide great opportunities for the Australian Space Agency and the companies in Australia that are involved,” the NASA executive said.
“So that is where I see it expanding. For us we have the same challenges, a lot of it is funding challenges. How do you do that?
“Well, in [the] Apollo [moon missions] we owned and operated everything. “We are looking to work with industry so we are basically [having] industries providing services to NASA so we can leverage their assets for the future of our space programs, which will make it a lot more affordable.” Asked if that was worth “billions of dollars to local businesses”, he replied: “Absolutely, All over the country and all over the world. That is why we welcome international partnerships.” President Trump last week said he wanted to use the Australia-US agreement as a launch pad for the bold Mars mission.
Prime Minister Scott Morrison, who has repeatedly and enthusiastically talked up the deal’s economic possibilities, later announced a $150 million boost — the tripling of the agency’s budget — to help local businesses develop new technologies to support the “inspirational campaign”.
Officials said the Artemis program deal would share knowledge in areas such as astronomy, space life science, robotics, human health, automation, remote asset management and medicine.The five-year investment will help “foster the new ideas and hi-tech skilled jobs” and help guarantee Australian businesses are the “partner of choice” to fit out NASA missions, the Government said.
CREDIT: ANDREW HOUGH
Word count: 386
