MOSMAN A tank of a project to thrill visitors A DECOMMISSIONED military fuel tank hidden in Mosman will host the world premiere of one of the 2019 Sydney Festival’s most anticipated projects.
Built for the Australian Navy in 1942, the huge T5 Camouflage Tank in Georges Heights is a relic of WWII infrastructure.
Now restored, the secret tank provides a unique performance space for artists and features extraordinary acoustic qualities.
As part of this year’s Sydney Festival, Mosman Art Gallery is presenting the T5 Tank Sound Project, four site-specific artworks created by renowned sound artists Chris Caines and Gail Priest, and experimental artists David Haines and Joyce Hinterding. Using cutting-edge audio technology the artists have created surround soundscapes for an immersive and moving experience at this historical site.
Suitable for visitors aged 13 and above, the T5 Tank Sound Project launches with an already sold-out event on Sunday 20 January, then is open from 10am to 4pm, Wednesday 23 January to Sunday 27 January.
Located in Headland Park, Dominion Crescent (off Suakin Drive), Georges Heights. For more information visit www.sydneyfestival.org.au
Plenty of spirit In addition to the Destination Sydney: Re-imagined exhibition, new paintings by Mosman artist Paul Delprat are currently on show in Mosman Art Gallery’s In Profile exhibition space.
Titled Harbour Spirits the series of oil paintings were created en plein air by the artist working from Georges Heights overlooking the entrance to Sydney Harbour.
Delprat’s work has been exhibited in London, Melbourne, Perth and Adelaide, and been the subject of more than 20 solo exhibitions in Sydney.
He has previously been selected for the Archibald, Sulman and Wynne Prize exhibitions.
He is currently Principal of the Julian Ashton Art School.
Harbour Spirits will be on show right through until Sunday 10 February. Details at mosmanartgallery.org.au.
Keeping kids busy MOSMAN Council’s services have a range of activities to occupy kids of various ages during school holidays.
Mosman Youth Centre reopens on Monday, 14 January as a drop-in space for young people in years 6-12, and will be open from 12pm-5pm weekdays. The Centre has a schedule of free afternoon workshops on offer until Friday, 25 January, including cooking, mosaic design, flower preservation, and anime and manga drawing. Details at: youth.mosman.nsw.gov.au/holidays.Mosman Library Services is running a reading program with prizes for kids 5-12 years and another for 12-18 years. Holiday workshops for ages 5-8, 9-12 and 13-15 include programming, robotics, clay modelling and drawing. Mosman Art Gallery is also running its popular Art Attack program with workshops in cartooning, painting and wire sculpture, as well as NIDA practice audition and screen tests. For details: events.mosman.nsw.gov.au
Word count: 436
