Hervey Bay locals are now benefiting from the increased sub-specialisation of orthopaedic surgeons at Nautilus Orthopaedics Dr Elix launched his successful private practice, Nautilus Orthopaedics, in 2014.
He established his consulting rooms at Madsen Medical in Urraween and performs advanced orthopaedic surgery in state-of-the-art operating theatres at St Stephen’s Private Hospital.
The excellent reputation of Dr Elix is mainly due to his exceptional post-operative results and impressive recovery times.
Patients also appreciate his down-to-earth and friendly bedside manner. Dr Elix recently welcomed orthopaedic surgeon Dr Navi Bali to the Nautilus Orthopaedics team, whose sub-specialty is foot and ankle surgery.
After completing advanced orthopaedic training in both Australia and the United Kingdom, Dr Bali has enjoyed working at Hervey Bay and Maryborough Hospitals for the past two years.
He is also now consulting and operating privately at Nautilus Orthopaedics and St Stephen’s Hospital, Hervey Bay.
Dr Bali strongly believes in supporting his patients every step of the way and understands that every condition is unique.
“I treat all my patients with the same high-quality care that I would expect my own family to receive,” Dr Bali said.
Dr Bali was a dentist before becoming a doctor (qualifying in both fields with first class honours and distinctions).
He underwent subspecialist orthopaedic training in foot and ankle surgery, hip and knee replacements, complex trauma and deformity correction with circular frames. He is also able to perform minimally invasive and keyhole foot and ankle surgery to quicken recovery time and improve outcomes. He also performs ankle replacements.
Dr Bali was one of the first surgeons in the UK to use the new revision ankle system and has published articles in internationally recognised journals on ankle replacements, ankle fractures, and teaching articles on corrective foot and ankle surgery.
“I aim to clearly explain the conditions to my patients and give them all their options, with non-operative treatment and close liaison with physios and podiatrists being a key component,” Dr Bali said.
As local surgeons, Dr Elix and Dr Bali are committed to offering locals the safest and most advanced approach to their treatment.
They also offer effective non-surgical treatment options to ensure that if surgery is required, the patient has been exposed to different treatment modalities.
“I’m proud of the comprehensive service that Nautilus Orthopaedics provides to Hervey Bay,” Dr Elix said.
“We’re also very fortunate to have an experienced orthopaedic anaesthetist working with us. Dr Goran Bosnjak has been expertly trained in multimodal anaesthetics. With his help we’ve been able to develop a post-operative regime that allows patients to recover with minimal pain.” Dr Elix performs robotic-assisted joint replacements at St Stephen’s Hospital, which is an exciting step forward for his patients, who are seeing exceptional results.
“This modern technique combines specialised navigation technology with advanced robotics. This not only assists the surgeon in placing the implant in the right position to ensure long-term survivorship but it also accurately measures the patient’s ligament balance to allow fine tuning to maximise the functional outcomes,” Dr Elix said.
“It will provide more reliable results and help to improve patient satisfaction and function. It’s actually a game-changer in the speciality of orthopaedics,” he said.
Patients of Dr Elix who have undergone robotic-assisted joint replacements regularly express amazement at their recovery time and excellent outcome.
“I’m grateful to have the support not only of my patients, but also of the local GPs and medical fraternity,” Dr Elix said.
Dr Elix was recently invited to join a national design panel for a new artificial ligament system, soon to be released.
“This is an exciting opportunity to help orthopaedic patients,” he said. “I’m fortunate to have had advanced training in complex knee, shoulder and sports reconstructive techniques for younger and older athletes, as well as degenerative conditions. I’m honoured to be a part of the future developments in the field of orthopaedics.” Nautilus Orthopaedics features some of the latest orthopaedic technology, including shockwave lithotripsy treatment, which aids in the recovery of tendon problems.
Dr Elix completed his medical degree at Flinders University in Adelaide, followed by Advanced Orthopaedic training in Queensland.
During his time in major trauma and subspecialty centres from 2004-2008 he was fortunate to train with some of the best surgeons in Australia. He went on to complete his Orthopaedic Sports Fellowship training in Canada in 2009.
Dr Elix has a special interest in anatomic ACL reconstructions and multi-ligament knee surgery. He is highly experienced in complex arthroscopic shoulder surgery, including all arthroscopic rotator cuff repair and stabilisations.
He performs many shoulder, hip and knee joint replacement surgeries. Dr Elix and Dr Bali are Fellows of the Australian Orthopaedic Association and the Royal Australian College of Surgeons. Visit the Nautilus Orthopaedics website for further details at www.herveybayorthopaedics.com.au, phone the friendly staff at Nautilus Orthopaedics on 4124 8444 or visit the rooms at Madsen Medical, 1 Hershel Court, Urraween.
Word count: 811
