The Hamilton and Alexandra College is an independent, co-educational day and boarding school from Early Learning through to Year 12, located in Hamilton, south west Victoria. The College is committed to improving outcomes for all students - in their levels of achievement and wellbeing.
Micaela Meyer, Year 10 student, and her parents moved from South Africa to Apsley, western Victoria, in 2015. Micaela started as a boarder in 2019. She is a keen sportswoman, plays hockey, netball, basketball, football and cricket and is interested in pursuing psychiatry after school.
"Moving to a small community in a new country was challenging. Starting at College was a very positive experience for me, everyone is welcoming, and it has so many opportunities. No matter your interests, there are exciting ways for students to get involved and try new things," Miss Meyer said.
"The teachers get to know each student and help you to achieve your best. I am already working with the careers advisor to select my subject pathway to study psychiatry at university.
"I have also jumped at opportunities to take on leadership roles, with the Student Representative Council and coaching a basketball team. This is a great way for me to learn new skills.
"During the remote home-learning period in Term 2, I missed the Boarding House and everything that comes with it. The early mornings, the routine, seeing my friends and playing sport. It was a great feeling to get back to school."
Renowned for its academic excellence, world-class facilities and extensive co-curricular opportunities, principal Dr Andrew Hirst said students have a strong sense of community.
"We focus on helping students to build confident futures. This comes with teaching values of respect, gratitude, optimism, compassion and resilience," Dr Hirst said.
"You can always build on skills and teach knowledge; but character is what we're looking for. Our students excel in all aspects of school life and help make the school a better place to live and learn.
"Education is about developing self-esteem. We seek the best for and from every student and support them to follow their passions."
Drawing students from a local radius of more than 200 kilometres - from South Australia to New South Wales, Melbourne and overseas - the school caters for more than 500 students, including 140 boarders.
The small student cohort is a distinct advantage at The Hamilton and Alexandra College. With small class sizes, every student receives individual support and attention. Students are known by their name, their family and their interests; from aviation to equestrian, music, performance, robotics, visual art, outdoor education and sport.
The College is extremely proud of its strong history and traditional values. In 2022 the school will celebrate 150 years of providing a quality, independent education to thousands of well-rounded, confident individuals.
To learn more or to book a tour go to www.hamiltoncollege.vic.edu.au.
Word count: 474
