It’s time to drop the tired old image of quantity surveyors
It was never the most glamorous profession but quantity surveyors have been up against it since the Monty Python sketch in which John Cleese begins reading from the book, Ethel the Aardvark Goes Quantity Surveying.
Nick Deeks, who now heads WT Partnership, one of Australia’s biggest quantity surveying and construction cost management consultancies, laughs at the memory of that 1970s clip and acknowledges the challenges of attracting younger people to the sector.
“It is a very old staid profession,” he says. “So, we’re trying to reposition ourselves in a very different light. We’ve got a different way of dealing with clients … appearance, our value add, our office environments, being more proactive than reactive. We’ve got railways. We’ve got tunnels. We’ve got airports. We’ve got stadiums. Residential, anything and everything that’s coming up, we get to it before most people even know about it.” WT began in Adelaide 70 years ago and Deeks has worked with the company since he arrived here from the UK 25 years ago.
He started his career as an engineer before moving into quantity surveying. He has been the WT managing director (Australia) since 2013 and has seen the company’s revenues and headcount increase tenfold in the past 25 years.
“We’ve evolved from pure quantity surveying into cost management, engineering, infrastructure, facility management, sustainability, programming, claims, tech DD, tax depreciation, building condition, audit reporting,” he says.
“It’s anything to do with measurement, quantification and cost of projects. So, a client comes with a concept. Western Sydney Airport is one of our clients and they want to build an airport. Someone has to tell them how much it’s going to cost. And then as the design is developed, someone’s got to measure that design, quantify it and track it against the original budget.” Deeks loves the sense of helping to shape cities through his work: “I used to walk around the city with my daughter and say, ‘look this is what we’re involved in, we’ve done that’. Then over time you get to see the regeneration of some of those projects that you worked on the first time around (because) they’re starting to knock them down and rebuild them again.” In his time at WT, he has also seen a big change in the scale of projects. “Three years ago we might have had one project at a billion dollars,” he says. “Now we’ve got multiple projects in billions and tens of billions. They’re getting too big, they’re too big for Australian contractors and there are not enough contractors with the capacity of workforce, cashflow and management to run that size of project … so as soon as contractors are busy, prices start to go up and that ripples all the way through the supply chain.” Deeks says WT’s biggest challenge is around innovation, improvement in productivity and ­efficiency and “trying to shake up the industry”.
“I don’t think construction has really changed that much in the past 100/200 years,” he says. “We’re looking at AI, robotics, app development, machine learning, smart benchmarking, a better understanding around predictive analysis of incidents that may go wrong.” He says construction should make more use of prefabrication and sustainable materials and change the traditional way of delivery to sites. He notes the energy impacts from “the amount of energy that’s used in putting (buildings) together, then the energy that’s used in operating or running that facility and then towards the end of the life of that building, does it just get knocked over and all of that waste gets thrown into landfill? That’s a real wasted opportunity.
“We really need to be fast tracking more innovative transportation than what we’ve got. So, driving cars on roads, driving trucks on the roads, trains that run around on steel tracks, that’s all very antiquated old-fashioned stuff. Why aren’t we moving forward? Why haven’t we adopted electric vehicles? Why are we still allowing combustion engine cars to be manufactured and sent here … Australia’s like the dumping ground for everyone who’s still going to (produce) a petrol car.” Changes in building fabric could range from recycled concrete, to plastics to form roads, to glass facades with thermal and solar properties to manage energy consumption in a building.
These days, WT hires project managers, building and quantity surveyors, graduates with construction law degrees, sustainability professionals, engineers, architects and data scientists.
That last category is particularly important, Deeks says: “The evolution of a quantity surveyor is going to be a data scientist.” The company collects huge amounts of data from the thousands of projects it estimates and is now working on ways to access and manipulate the data to assist clients. It’s a far cry from the old days of quantity surveying and WT has worked hard to change perceptions of the industry in a bid to attract more young people.
“If we need to clinch a deal, we just get someone to come walk into our office,” says Deeks. “They’ll walk into our environment and say, ‘OK, that’s not what I was expecting. I thought you were going to be seated in the corner, wearing a cardigan, with a scale or drawings, covered in dust, not going out of the office’. But we are frontline, we’re consulting, we’re proactive, we’re innovative, we’re pushing the boundaries, we’re constantly changing.”Ethel would have been pleased.
CREDIT: Helen Trinca
Word count: 904
