Smarty-pants Harvard types can’t see the cleverness of our Australian economy
Australians are rich, dumb and getting dumber, says a team of know-it-all Nigels at Harvard University.
Our economy has crashed from 73rd to 93rd place on the Economic Complexity Index which, apparently, is a bad thing.
Digging stuff up and grazing cows is the path to penury. The government must complexify the economy by taking “a strategic bets approach” — or, as we used to say, “picking winners”.
How we miss Dougie Cameron in the Senate at times like this, the man who warned us in 2008 that we could not survive as a modern nation without a strong manufacturing sector, which naturally the government should subsidise. A decade later, welfare-dependant manufacturing has almost gone yet the nation is managing somehow to scrape by.
There have been few stronger advocates of the “got to make stuff” school of economics than the retired Glaswegian senator, a former national secretary of a union with the word manufacturing in the middle of its name.
Our future, he would frequently tell us, lay in “elaborately transformed manufacturing exports”, the holy grail in Labor’s industry policy 30 years ago.
Elaborate transformation would begin in 50 “co-operative centres of scientific excellence” Bob Hawke promised he would build with our money. “We’re not going to become the clever country by accident,” Hawke told radio listeners during the 1990 election campaign.
We might have hoped that our world-beating run of economic growth, 110 quarters and counting, would have killed this crazy idea of government-sponsored entrepreneurialism.
Yet we learn to our horror that it has been kept on life support in an economics laboratory in Massachusetts from whence it has escaped like the experimental pesticide that turned an entire French village mad in Jean Rollin’s movie Les Raisins de la Mort!
The economists at Harvard may not yet have resorted to tearing one another’s flesh like the grape-growing peasants, but their fixation with complexity as the single measure of economic strength does appear to be driving them slightly mad.
Australia has experienced a “troubling pattern of export growth”, they claim, since it relies on sub-complex products. The pattern of export growth in Venezuela presumably troubles them not all since exports have declined by an average of 18.3 per cent in the past five years, thanks to an overdose of socialism.
Trinidad and Tobago (GDP per capita $US16,076, or $23,770) sits higher on the complexity ladder than Australia (GDP per capita $US54,093). The comparison clearly makes no sense.
A long-term look at the Australian economy does indeed bolster the case that the export economy is less diverse than it was in the early 1980s. Those familiar with the economic reforms of that era will regard it, however, as a good thing. Gone are the days when tariffs and subsidies were employed to keep jobs in Australia and innovation out.
Normal people, that is to say those not afflicted with an intellectual fetish for complexity, are doing rather well from Australia’s simple business model. We ship ingredients to Asia that are elaborately transformed and sent back at crazy low prices.
In 1975 the average worker took 5½ hours to earn the money for a toaster. Today it would take 11 minutes, or 35 minutes for brushed stainless steel.
The intellectual’s eagerness to seize on one-dimensional analysis of our export economy betrays a deep-seated aversion to farms and quarries that predates present concerns about global warming.
Donald Horne warned in 1964 that Australia must become smarter and more technocratic if it wanted to survive, curiously singling out the Adelaide of his day as an example of the direction in which we should go.
Horne, like his intellectual counterparts today, fell into the trap of thinking that Australia just happened to be blessed with minerals, rolling pastures and good fortune easily converted to cash. This simple-minded prejudice blinds them to the true complexity of Australia. It may have golden soil but wealth requires toil.
The ingenuity required to scratch a living from this land predates European settlement by thousands of years. The knowledge and mindset of the European Enlightenment, imported to Australia from 1788, simply made it more efficient.
Australians practically invented the merino sheep, as Charles Massey explains in The Australian Merino: The Story of a Nation, elaborately transforming a scrawny, rough-coated beast into a fibre extrusion machine using selective breeding. It was achieved not by “co-operative centres of scientific excellence” but through competition and expediency.
Innovation, then as now, was accelerated by the shortage and expense of labour. It is why Australia developed mechanical shears 20 years before the Americans came up with a better alternative. Frederick Wolseley, their inventor, was motivated by frustration at recalcitrant shearers.
A similar challenge is driving innovation today. A Perth company, Fastbrick Robotics, is poised to do to for bricklayers what Wolseley did to the shearers with a robot that can lay the bricks for a three-bedroom, two-bathroom, 180sq m home in less than three days.
There is far more diversity in the Australian economy than the Harvard boffins can spot in the aggregates thrown up by their spreadsheets.
Little acknowledgment is given to the growth in Australia’s export services, such as education, telecommunications or professional and financial services, which have risen in value by more than half in five years, much of it stimulated by free-trade agreements.
The notion that governments should orchestrate the diversification of the economy, implicit in the Harvard analysis, is dangerous and dumb. The track record of intellectual economists who gaze dreamily into the future on a government wage to spot the next big thing is woeful.
At the height of the Labor-induced clever nation craze of the early 90s, chapters were written by notionally serious academics demanding that the government build domestic videotape machines to stem the influx of elaborately transformed goods from the north. Beta or VHS? Readers under 30 probably will have no idea what we are talking about. Suffice to say either decision would have been a disaster.Nick Cater is executive director of Menzies Research Centre.
CREDIT: Nick Cater
Word count: 1015
