A robotic dog called Spot will soon be used by South Australia's electricity distributor to inspect power poles.
SA Power Networks spokesman Paul Roberts said the robot would improve safety for asset inspectors and save them time.
"Spot is currently in training … he actually is learning a bit like a pet, in terms of teaching him to do things. We have been rewarding him with numbers," he said.
"We will probably have a bit of a mix of Spots on the ground & drones above helping our asset inspectors to inspect the various infrastructure we've got, like poles, the tops of poles, transformers et cetera, so we can speed up & improve safety for our asset inspectors."
The dog-like robot has been fitted with customised software & an additional camera so it can take multiple photos of poles, power lines & transformers.
It will also be able to navigate rough terrain & areas that might be dangerous for staff.
"Hopefully we can really demonstrate & prove how this technology can help us, & then we can roll it out further as drones become more able to be used to do over-the-horizon asset patrol," Mr Roberts said.
"We don't see it replacing jobs. We see it actually enhancing people's jobs because it means people like our highly trained asset inspectors can actually do the things they are trained to do. They won't have to take all of the pictures — Spot can do that."
Mr Roberts said SA Power Networks was the first utility in Australia to go down this path.
"It's the future & we are really trying to get in as early as we can to do the development of training that we need to do so we can use this advancing technology as soon as it's available," he said.
Earlier this year, the New York Police Department stopped using a similar robotic dog after a public backlash over its deployment.
The creator of the Dystopian television series Black Mirror has previously said the four-legged robots, developed by manufacturer Boston Dynamics, influenced a nightmarish episode where the characters were attacked by violent robotic canines.
Those who have watched the popular Netflix series will be relieved to hear there will not be multiple Spots roaming down metropolitan streets.
"I don't think there will be too many Spots in suburban streets," Mr Roberts said.
SA Power Networks is expecting to start trialling Spot at its Angle Park facility by November.
Word count: 410
