More than two years after shared e-scooters were first rolled out in Brisbane, some riders will now automatically be covered by third-party rider insurance.
E-scooter company Neuron Mobility, one of Brisbane's two shared e-scooter providers, announced on Friday that third-party rider insurance was now included in each trip.
Scooter companies are required to have public liability insurance, but if a rider has an accident they are personally liable for any third-party injuries or damage — a legal loophole experts have long warned needed to be resolved.
Neuron chief executive Zachary Wang said it was the first time a rental e-scooter company had offered third-party insurance in Australia.
"Although there are very few e-scooter incidents involving third parties, we want to give our riders, & the community as a whole, added peace of mind & security," he said.
Neuron's third-party insurance is underwritten by insurance provider Agile Underwriting Services Pty Ltd, & the cost absorbed into pay-as-you-ride or subscription pass prices.
Shared e-scooter programs operate in Brisbane, Adelaide, Darwin & Canberra. Sydney cancelled a planned trial earlier this year.
E-scooter numbers increase
The move comes as e-scooter patronage in Brisbane returns to pre-COVID levels of about 5,000 trips daily.
Private e-scooter use has also boomed, & some insurance companies now offer policies for personal injury or damage for private users.
Brisbane City Council is expected to announce the winners of a new tender to operate e-scooters in Brisbane in June, after extending its 2018 trial.
Neuron & Brisbane's other e-scooter provider, Lime, are expected to face competition for those contracts, with American company Superpedestrian confirming it is also eyeing Brisbane as a market.
Superpedestrian spokesman Mitchell Price told ABC Radio Brisbane the MIT-born robotics company's e-scooters were "a scooter with a brain", allowing the company to monitor every moment of its operation.
"Brisbane is a city we'd love to be in," Mr Price said.
"What we have seen is from the 800 people that we surveyed, that safety is the most important thing for them."
All-in-one transport app trial
Earlier this month, Brisbane City Council increased the cap on rental e-scooter numbers citywide from 1,000 total to 1,500, shared between Neuron & Lime.
The council's public & active transport committee chairman Ryan Murphy said 300 e-scooters would be in St Lucia & Toowong as part of a University of Queensland trial integrating all transport modes on a smartphone app.
"Students that take part in the study will be able to see all of their travel options in one place — bus, ferry, taxis, ride-sharing, campus shuttle and, of course, council's e-scooters," Cr Murphy said.
Word count: 433
