ON the eve of MyVenue’s pilot run at Adelaide Oval in 2020, the Covid-19 pandemic hit and the situation didn’t look good for the sports and entertainment sector.
Fast forward to the recent Miami Grand Prix, when 100,000 visitors purchased food and drinks through the company’s SA-designed point of sale system, and it’s back firing on all cylinders.
“It takes people with the right vision and constitution to get to this point,” MyVenue chief executive Tim Stollznow said.
The company, which has a 10-strong development team in Adelaide and 30 employees across the globe, is based at Stone & Chalk, which is part of Adelaide’s Lot Fourteen innovation district.
Mr Stollznow and his team have just returned from the Miami event, where they delivered on-the-ground support at the Hard Rock Stadium for May’s Grand Prix.
“You’re standing for their national anthem and they roll out an American flag the size of the average Australian housing block,” Mr Stollznow said.
“They’re eating food bought on a POS system that was designed in little old Adelaide ... it’s a pretty special feeling.” MyVenue prides itself on the resilience of its system, which can process orders even when offline. This saved the day at Miami when the stadium’s network connection failed. “Stadiums have about 90 minutes to make 80 per cent of their revenue,” Mr Stollznow explained. “If you’re in the middle of the Super Bowl and can’t take card payments, you can lose millions of dollars in a very short time.” Having broken into the US market with major NFL partnerships, Mr Stollznow said the company was now innovating in a space that hadn’t moved with the times.
He said relocating to Stone & Chalk in 2020 had allowed them to capitalise on its youth-driven start-up ecosystem, describing it as a high-energy place where people like coming to work. University student Angus Juers, 23, landed his first coding job at MyVenue.
“There are always people reaching out,” he said of Stone & Chalk’s work environment.
“The team here make the effort to know each person, so when you’re looking for a particular skillset, they know where to direct you.” Mr Stollznow wanted to see MyVenue’s POS system in widespread use in businesses as varied as airports, bars and clubs. To do this, he said the company needed both developers and those with industry experience in hospitality.
MyVenue was aiming to expand its phone app, which allows users to pay remotely and collect from the venue’s kiosk. “We’re in an incredibly agile industry, and we’re moving very quickly,” he said.
CREDIT: GEORGE JANKOVIC
Word count: 430
