Using a portion of their yearly barley crop rotation, Tom has started his own on-farm malting facility.
At its base level, Tom’s business is a general cropping enterprise growing wheat, barley, oats, canola, faba beans and lentils.
But Tom’s “side hustle”, as he phrased it, has grown rapidly from its humble beginnings just five years ago, with local demand outstripping supply for the last several growing seasons.
HUMBLE BEGINNINGS
For Tom malting has always been a hobby.
“I’d always dabbling with malting, even just in the kitchen when I was an engineer,” Tom said.
“I was working in Adelaide as an engineer and came home to the family farm to take over from my father and I wanted to do some value adding to the business,” he said.
Setting up a malting shed on the property and using a portion of the farm’s barley crop, Tom quickly established his own malting business, Barossa Valley Craft Malt, with the support and feedback of local breweries.
Western Ridge brewery at Nuriootpa were Tom’s first ever customer and worked extensively with him on product development of the malt before it was released as a product to market.
In 2017 Western Ridge released the ‘20k Beer’ which is produced from ingredients all within 20kms of the point of sale at Stien’s Taphouse in Nuriootpa.
This included 100 per cent of the malt coming from Tom’s Barossa Valley Craft Malt.
Since then, Tom has expanded his client list to supply Sunny Hill, Robbers Dog, Five Nines and SumPoynt distilleries.
“The first time you could buy a beer on tap in a pub that had my malt in it was 2018 and that was really exciting,” Tom said.
“It all flowed from that 20k beer.”
While Tom has the passion and a keen market, the initial teething period of the business was a steep learning curve for Tom to upscale his hobby.
Working off his own property, Tom has installed a 20-foot shipping container lined with stainless steel that functions as a single germinating kiln vessel for the growing and kilning process.
“To transition from growing the malt to kilning it, we change the air that blows through the container from cool, moist air to hot, to start drying out the grain.
“Once the grain has gotten down to below 10 per cent moisture we ramp that temperature up from 50C anywhere up to 90C which dries out the grain for storage and gives it a flavour and then you have malt,” Tom explained.
Within his production, Tom runs anything from a pilsner malt, which is the least kilned malt, through to a pale malt or pale ale and then a Munich which has a darker, richer flavour.
ON THE SIDE
Despite his savvy business start-up, Tom’s main business, the family farm, is still his central focus.
“In the busy times of seeding and harvest I don’t have time to be in the malting shed — because it is a side hustle, I can’t let it stop me from farming,” he said.
Located in Moppa, South Australia the family crops around 450ha of the land split between 90ha paddocks which practice five-year rotations of crops, normally consisting of wheat, barley, oats, canola, faba beans and lentils.
“When I first came back to the farm, at the time we were selling barley for $160 a tonne which is essentially below cost and farming was pretty financially tough,” Tom said.
Currently, malt barley at Port Adelaide in storage is selling for around $430 a tonne which puts it in the top 1 per cent of prices historically.
“I was originally selling the malted barley for $2/kg and now I’m selling for $1.60/kg which works out to $1600 a tonne and I believe that I’m the dearest malt producer in Australia,” Tom said.
However, even at $1.60/kg for malt, the additional cost to the customer only works out to an extra 10 cents for a schooner at tap room which Tom remarked “is not a massive impact per glass of beer”.
This year with prices for canola through the roof, Tom is doubling their canola crop to 180ha.
“Last year the canola yielded just under 3 tonnes/ha last year and paid $1000 a tonne and the forward contracts are showing similar values for next year so we decided to double down,” he said.
With the extra canola going in this year, Tom’s barley crop “took a hit” with only 12ha of barley going in purely for use in the malt house and none being sent to the silos this year.
“We’d normally grow maybe 45ha of barley and we only need 10ha for the malt house,” he said.
Over the years Tom’s barley yield has varied anywhere from 3 tonnes/ha during the drought in 2018-19 up to 6 tonnes/ha in a good year.
BIG DREAMS
Running at the scale he is currently, Tom malting business hasn’t been able to keep up with demand for the last couple of years.
Hoping to remedy this problem, Tom is looking to upscale his machinery to be able to process more barley in the coming years.
However, the huge financial outlay needed, combined with already limited time Tom has juggling his work between the malthouse and the farm, has put Tom’s plans into long-term goals for the moment.
“The brewers are great to work with and I’m still quite small,” he said.
“I haven’t spent the two million dollars to upscale yet but that’s the long-term vision to grow to a much larger size.
In the near future though, Tom would like to automate his steeping tanks and germinating kiln vessel.
Similarly, Tom hopes to continue malting more barley outside of his own farm production, which currently makes up a large percentage.
NED-4522-The-Weekly-Times-Newsletter-banner
Word count: 921
