MOTORISTS will soon be able to use Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies to pay for their fuel and in-store purchases, with petrol giant OTR finalising plans to become Australia’s largest crypto-accepting bricks-and-mortar retailer.
In a further sign of digital currencies entering the mainstream, more than 170 OTR outlets across South Australia, Victoria and WA will begin accepting crypto payments from July.
OTR’s parent company Peregrine Corporation, owned by the Adelaide-based Shahin family, will also accept crypto at its C Coffee, Subway, Oporto and Wokinabox outlets, and at its Smokemart and Giftbox stores.
Peregrine is working with Singapore company Crypto.com and merchant payments platform DataMesh to roll out new crypto-enabled point of sale terminals.
Peregrine executive chairman Yasser Shahin said his company was responding to the rapid growth of cryptocurrencies in recent years.
“The growth and mainstream acceptance of cryptocurrency adoption in Australia and the rest of the world has been phenomenal, and has offered us a clear ­opportunity to tap into the momentum of this fast-growing space for the benefit of our customers,” he said.
Crypto.com manages digital wallets and operates one of the world’s largest cryptocurrency exchanges.
The launch of the Crypto.com Pay Merchant service will allow OTR customers to pay with their cryptocurrency holdings via the Crypto.com app, with real-time conversion into Australian dollars.
A merchant fee of 0.5 per cent is charged to the vendor, while the fee paid by customers will depend on the exchange rate at the time.
According to IBISWorld, Peregrine is SA’s largest privately owned company, and eighth largest in Australia, with annual revenue nudging $3bn.
A recent Crypto.com survey found that 60 per cent of merchants had an interest in accepting crypto payments this year, much higher than the 4 per cent that currently had the capability.
According to the survey, 75 per cent of Crypto.com members wanted to use their digital currencies for day-to-day purchases.
Crypto.com Asia & Pacific general manager Karl Mohan said the company was in talks with several other “sizeable retailers and major institutions” who had also shown an interest in accepting cryptocurrencies via the platform.
“As the cryptocurrency sector continues to become mainstream – with about 23 per cent of Australians holding crypto today – creating avenues for people to spend their crypto in the real world are becoming increasingly important,” Mr Mohan said. Crypto.com this year announced major sponsorship deals with the AFL and Adelaide Crows. In November, it launched its first crypto-linked Visa card in Australia.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 413
