PIZZA lovers will be able to pick up a slice of Adelaide restaurant history this month with the contents of South Australia’s last remaining Pizza Hut dine-in eatery going under the hammer.
Franchise owner Bill Lianos served up the final pizzas at the distinctive red-roofed Marion eatery on the corner of Morphett and Sturt roads last month, closing the curtains on 44 years of family dining – and setting the scene for an auction with the lot.
Kilkenny auction house Mason Gray Strange is handling the July 25 sale, which ­offers a host of items sure to satisfy the appetite of people craving for either a lasting ­reminder of the restaurant or pizza-making equipment to set up their own business.
The Marion Pizza Hut opened its doors in 1978, eight years after businessman Bob Le Point brought the US brand to Australia, and for many years was a favourite destination for family feasts.
Mr Lianos told The Advertiser in June of the “great sadness” associated with the restaurant’s closure in the wake of Covid and a changing fast-food landscape.
News of the closure sparked a surge in bookings from people keen to have one last meal at the eatery.
“Covid had a big impact on us, but we have been open serving all you can eat since December and people haven’t been jumping out of trees to get in until now,” he said last month. “I think long-term the brand is moving towards being online and delivery-based – it is just really hard to build and maintain a restaurant like this nowadays.” Mason Gray Strange auctioneer and valuer Andrew Maros expected plenty of bidders to be keen for a piece of the action. Pizza Hut exterior building signage could be a perfect addition to the shed or man cave – or perhaps above an outdoor pizza oven, Mr Maros said. Other memorabilia on offer includes framed photographs, banners and a framed menu from the days when a small pepperoni pizza cost $1.90 and a draught beer was 30 cents.
Likewise the internal stock could prove useful for anyone looking to establish a cafe or pizza house, update their existing premises – or simply own their soft-serve machine.
Other speciality equipment includes a gas twin-deck Middleby Marshall pizza oven, two Hobart dough mixers, dish washer, glass washer, ice ­machine and pasta cooker. Mr Maros said the oven could fetch bids of “close to $10,000”.
“And the old menu and signage, who knows, but it never ceases to amaze me after 30 years what people will collect,” he said. There are also hundreds of assorted pizza pans and lids, various utensils, racking, restaurant tables, chairs, booth seating and point of sale registers.
Auction will be at the premises at 489 Morphett Rd, Oaklands Park, at the Westfield Marion corner, at 11am on Monday, July 25, and webcast live at interbid.com.au/mgs. Inspection is available on site from 9am on the morning of the sale. Details: mgs.net.au or call ­Andrew Maros on 0418 845 884.
CREDIT: Auctions with DAVID GOLDSMITH
Word count: 506
