JULY 2 Classic vehicles from around the globe will be in the spotlight today as Bennett Classic Auctions turns the key on its latest big sale. Kicking off from 1pm at 2 Taminga St, Regency Park, the US, Australia and UK Classics Auction features a “full house” of beautifully maintained vehicles. Highlights include a restored 1964 Ford Galaxie, a 1970 Ford Mustang, a 1962 Triumph Targa (pictured) and a 1970 BMW 2002 coupe, while a 1964 EH Holden Special is a standout of the sale’s Australian section. There is also a “nut and bolt restored” 1958 Triumph Thunderbird 650 vintage motorcycle going under the hammer. The sale will be live on interbid.com.au/bennetts. Details: bennettsclassicauctions.com.au
3 If you’re looking for a special something for that special someone, Kearns Auctions might have the ideal answer with its online jewellery sale. The sale – which closes at 7.30pm tomorrow – offers a wide selection of estate and liquidation jewellery, including gold and silver rings, bracelets, pendants and necklaces. One of the standout items is an 18ct gold emerald and diamond ring, valued at $3770, while there is also a wide selection of Pandora charms for sale. Details: kearnsauctions.com.au
6 Closure of a city sports bar could pave the way for anyone looking to upgrade their own eatery – or grab a slice of sporting memorabilia – to pick up a bargain. Stock included in the Wing It sports bar sale – held at 89 King William St at 11am Wednesday, July 6 and webcast at interbid.com.au/mgs – features kitchen and bar equipment, including deep fryers, an ice machine, a glass washer and a pizza preparation refrigerated bench. There is also point-of-sale equipment, bar stools and televisions, while the huge range of sporting memorabilia includes framed photographs honouring the life of Sir Donald Bradman, a portrait of F1 driver Ayrton Senna and a tribute to basketball star LeBron James. Details: mgs.net.au 11 Military enthusiasts are sure to find something of interest in Small and Whitfield’s single-vendor militaria auction. Bidding is already open for the online sale, which features a diverse range of pieces, mainly relating to Australian service in the World Wars. “This collection includes rare and highly sought-after medals and medallions, ephemera, postcards, war helmets and associated uniforms,” Small and Whitfield managing director David Kabbani said. The live auction begins at 5pm on July 11. Details: smallandwhitfield.com.au
CREDIT: Auctions with DAVID GOLDSMITH
Word count: 399
