We’re travelling to the US with our eight-month-old but I’m worried baby equipment is going to take up most of our baggage allowance. Any tips?
I have clear (and stressful) memories of lugging our baby’s capsule, stroller, play mat and almost every other piece of baby accoutrement you could think of through the world’s airports, so I can understand why you’d be keen to avoid it.
Happily, the baby equipment rental market is booming in the US but before you look into this option, check what your accommodation provides (some offer strollers, cots, high chairs and baby baths, for example).
BabyQuip (babyquip.com) is big business across North America with hundreds of providers keen to rent equipment (everything from strollers and car seats to baby toys) to travelling parents. You enter your destination and travel dates before searching for specific products and then your provider will work with you on delivery options. Logistics allowing, some can deliver items to the airport and others can even have everything set up for you at your accommodation before you arrive.
Rents4baby.com is another option and as with BabyQuip, all rental items undergo an intensive inspection on return with each part of the item receiving a thorough clean with disinfectant.
There’s no need to cart around all those nappies, wipes, baby food sachets and formula either; provided you speak with the hotels before you place an order, you can buy these items from the likes of Amazon and organise to have them shipped ahead of time. Most hotels are only too happy to put deliveries aside for you, although some may charge a handling fee. To avoid confusion, ensure that the name on the package matches the name of the registered guest.
Now you’ll have plenty of room for all of that shopping – even if it is predominantly kids’ clothes (we all do it).
Our family is travelling to Malaysia in October. Are we better off bringing extra cash on holiday, or can we rely on card transactions?
I can see why you have reservations about relying on card transactions. Data from the 2022 Global Payments Report highlights the dominance of cash, with Malaysian ringgits still used for 39 per cent of point-of-sale transactions. That said, card transactions and digital wallets are starting to grow in popularity, so where does that leave travellers?
If you’re in Malaysia’s main cities, ATMs are widespread. If you’re struggling to find one, you can search for your nearest ATM using ATM Locator Malaysia, a free iPhone and Android app. Cirrus/Maestro continue to be the most commonly accepted cards. Card transactions and phone payments become tricky once you head into regional and remote areas, so you’ll need to take a decent amount of cash with you. Before you leave the city, calculate your projected expenses and withdraw the sum, plus a little extra for good measure (you never know what you’re going to want or need).
Notify your bank of your travels before you leave Australia but hold off on withdrawing cash until you get to Malaysia. Ringgits aren’t as readily available on the international market as other major currencies, so you’ll receive a far better rate once you get your boots on the ground.
Islands’ testing ends Visitors to Fiji are no longer required to take a Covid-19 test on arrival or show test results (or proof of test bookings) to board flights to the country. Travellers will also no longer be required to produce a negative Covid-19 test before entering Vanuatu. fiji.travel; vanuatu.travel AirAsia X to Sydney Flying to Thailand will become easier (and cheaper) later this year with Thai AirAsia X announcing a new thrice-weekly service between Melbourne and Bangkok from December 1, and a fo ur-times-a-week service between Sydney and Bangkok from the following day. airasia.com
NEED HELP? Doc Holiday is on duty to answer your travel questions. Email docholiday@news.com.au or keep up with Doc at escape.com.au/doc-holiday Personal replies are unfortunately not possible
CREDIT: Dilvin Yasa; DOC HOLIDAY
Word count: 663
