Stamp duty adds an additional 1½ years to first homebuyer savings for an entry-level home in Sydney and Melbourne but one expert warns scrapping the transactional tax might have unintended consequences.
The pandemic property boom gave the state and territory governments a bumper stamp-duty collection of $23.97bn during the 2020-21 financial year, with the record-high haul representing a fifth of revenue, according to the Australian Bureau of Statistics.
It’s regarded by many economists as an inefficient and volatile tax due to its reliance on the market. NSW Premier Dominic Perrottet flagged last week reforms within the state’s final pre-election budget set to be handed down next Tuesday to introduce an alternative land tax.
New analysis from property researcher PropTrack has found stamp duty in its current form adds an additional 1.4 years to the 7.1 years it takes to save a 20 per cent deposit on an entry level home of $750,000 in Sydney. It is a similar story in Melbourne, where the transactional tariff adds 1.6 years to the 6.1 years on average to save for a home around $610,000.
PropTrack economist Angus Moore said there were several downsides to the tax, not only making it harder to enter the market but also putting pressure on affordability, as people could become reluctant to move due to costs and remain in homes too large for them.
“For most first home buyers, saving the deposit is the constraint of homeownership,” Mr Moore said.
“The last few years has obviously been unusual in how quickly prices have risen and many first time buyers, if they were close but not quite there to the deposit two years ago, would have found themselves much less close within the space of 18 months. Then there’s the added barrier of stamp duty which can be a real constraint.” While there are stamp duty concessions for first home buyers in all jurisdictions except South Australia and the Northern ­Territory, many of these were last updated prior to the peak of the 2017 boom.
Just 12 per cent of houses fall below the Sydney concession cap of $800,000 last updated in 2017, while 23 per cent of housing stock meets Brisbane’s $550,000 cap set in 2012.
But there are downsides to removing the tax at point of sale, warned the chief executive of independent mortgage firm Loan Market, Sam White, who said those first home buyers opting for a land tax may see the amount they can borrow reduce as banks factor in the ongoing commitment.
“The upfront impact will be positive but there is a price to be paid on the back-end,” Mr White said.
“One hundred per cent it will enable buyers to get in faster but they won’t be able to borrow as much because it is an ongoing commitment you can’t get rid of. Just how the banks look at everything you pay from the car repayments to Netflix, this will be factored in.” The ACT was the first territory to retire stamp duty and is a decade through its 20 year transition plan. However, the government’s gains from stamp duty are now higher than they were in 2012.
Mr Perrottet has gone on the record to say his government would likely need federal support in the transition to help with the shortfall in revenues. But federal Treasurer Tim Chalmers pushed back, saying “these matters are ultimately for the states”. Property Council of Australia chief executive Ken Morrison said some support may be necessary from national coffers to make the transition happen smoothly across the country, if state and territory governments move in that direction.
CREDIT: Mackenzie Scott
Word count: 604
