Those who drive petrol-fuelled cars are subsidising drivers of electric vehicles The South Australian government’s decision to introduce a road user charge for electric vehicles is an important first step in road transport reform in Australia. But claims by interest groups that this is “a big new tax on not polluting” threaten to derail this long-overdue reform.
Those able to afford to buy electric vehicles are using roads without paying fuel excise while other drivers pay 42.3c in excise per litre at the bowser. Based on an average 13.4 litres of fuel use per 100km, combustion-only vehicle users pay $5.67 per 100km, whereas electric vehicle users would pay $2.50 per 100km if the proposed rate of 2.5c a kilometre is applied.
Electric vehicles provide an important opportunity to make a transitional step towards road user charging as fuel excise revenues decline. The charges are due to start next year and, based on today’s figures, will affect about 2000 electric vehicle owners in SA.
As the price of electric vehicles comes down, the federal government will need to replace the revenue decline from fuel excise. While the fuel excise is a quasi-user charge for road use, it is not hypothecated. This means the excise goes to general revenue; it does not directly fund new roads or maintain others.
South Australia has taken a bold step that also will help address one of the most pressing economic issues facing Australia: crippling traffic congestion. Other jurisdictions are following with a road user charge for electric vehicles. A national road pricing and charging regime would prevent electric vehicle users from gaming the system, so South Australia’s plans present many challenges to be navigated.
Federal governments have tried to squeeze the last drop out of workers to increase productivity, but the lowest hanging fruit in the productivity mix is infrastructure, though state governments are now leading the long-overdue reform.
The Australian Bureau of Statistics says infrastructure is an important part of the productivity mix, but it is something that is not easily measured. A system of road pricing will provide a better measure of infrastructure productivity. However, aside from heavy vehicles, road pricing in Australia has been politically difficult to introduce.
Governments have routinely avoided road transport reform, not only because of the vested interests that emerged following the Privy Council’s 1956 decision to prevent the state-owned railroads from monopolising freight movement but also because many Australians are not aware of the myriad ways they pay for road use.
The NSW government has started tinkering with road transport reform by introducing reductions in registration fees for heavy toll road users and through toll cashback schemes. But these reforms have not considered the inequities that electric vehicles have thrown into the mix. Electric vehicle drivers do not pay fuel excise and hybrid users pay at a much lesser rate than those who own combustion-only vehicles. Those less well-off tend to drive older and less efficient vehicles and pay more than their fair share to the federal government.
To make matters worse, these same people tend to have longer commuting distances, often from areas with less easily accessible public transport. Mostly they have little choice but to drive their car to get to work.
The key issue is that roads for the most part are funded from general revenue at all levels of government. This means that anybody who pays any government tax, fee, rate, excise or levy that goes to general revenue, regardless of what it was for, is paying for use of roads. Roads have never been free.
The difference is the absence of point-of-sale pressure. Whenever your e-tag beeps, that is money noticeably going out of your grasp. But when you pay for fuel, there is no notice on the receipt that more than 42c per litre has gone to the government.
Many road users (and non-users) are unaware of how much they pay for road building and maintenance. It is only when we pay a toll that an identifiable point-of-sale pressure brings the cost of road use to mind.
Governments avoid broadbased road reform because paying more tolls is politically unpalatable. SA has taken the first brave step that other governments have avoided.
Some state governments are providing free recharging stations to encourage electric vehicle drivers to visit the regions. Clearly, incentivising electric vehicle use does not need to rely exclusively on a commensurate decline in fuel excise revenue. In the longer term, changing road use behaviours is the key to solving problems that go far beyond single-issue politics based on oversimplified ideas of supply and demand. Indeed, even with a road user charge, electric vehicles are still cheaper to run than combustion-only vehicles.
The transition from fuel excise to road user charges needs to start somewhere. Charging electric vehicles for road use in lieu of a fuel excise now rather than later will ensure that old road use behaviours do not remain embedded in electric vehicle technologies. And if SA’s political courage can withstand shortsighted scaremongering by interest groups, we may well be witnessing the first small steps towards real road transport reform in Australia. Michael de Percy is a senior lecturer in political science at the University of Canberra.
CREDIT: MICHAEL DE PERCY
Word count: 873
