A new-look ALDI store will re-open at the Hyperdome this weekend as the shopping centre gears up for the festive season.
The ALDI store closed on November 15 so the site could be fitted with energy efficient LED lights and wider aisles, which were two aspects shoppers said they wanted after trials in South Australia and Western Australia.
Shoppers will notice the larger ALDI in the Market Room precinct after the discount grocer expanded into an adjacent empty tenancy.
BIG PLANS FOR NEW-LOOK HYPERDOME
One of the more innovative changes will be improvements to the customer access with upgraded pedestrian crossings between the Market Room and the car parks.
Under the plans, a new external facade will feature the ALDI logo and there will be a landscaped area outside the shop front.
The battle for the retail dollar between Coles and Woolworths will kick up a notch when a refurbished wing opens at one of the largest single-level shopping centres in the country.
Works started mid-August, but the store was only shut for the final stage of the renovations.
Other innovations in time for the Christmas rush include redesigned shelves, expanded wooden produce bays, and energy efficient chillers.
There will also be improved point-of-sale displays and store signage.
Shoppers were told the revamp would not lead to higher prices and there would be 20 permanent staff employed.
The ALDI overhaul is just one of the many changes at the Hyperdome this year and in the lead-up to Christmas.
The centre underwent a major $60 million refurbishment of its northern wing in July and August, and last month, long-term restaurant chain Sizzler left the centre this month and its site is still vacant at the Piazza.
Centre management were not giving away details of the next tenant and would not say why there had been a delay in filling the site.
The centre’s newest cafe arrival, The Little Spoon Co, opened in October and is selling baked pizza for lunchtime treats.
However, shoppers have welcomed the return of variety and arts supplier Choice, which reopened in the same site on October 28, after it closed at the centre last year.
In the new North Mall, Rodney Clark opened on November 2 and Star Mobile opened on Saturday, November 21.
Woolworths moved from opposite the foodcourt into the new northern precinct in July.
OPENING HOURS
Monday to Wednesday, Friday: 8.30am – 8pm
Thursday: 8:30am – 9:00pm
Saturday: 8am – 7pm
Sunday: 9am – 6pm
HYPERDOME RESTAURANTS
Hogs Breath Cafe
The Little Spoon Co
Beach House Bar and Grill
Guzman Y Gomez
Nando’s
Asian Eatery
Wrap N Roll
The Coffee Club
Soul Origin
Yum Cha
iSushi
Haha Sushi
Max Brenner Chocolate Bar
Degani
Donut King
Word count: 416
