The national-first law passed in the lower house on Wednesday and was expected to do the same in the upper house on Thursday.
It was prompted by the accidental death of 16-year-old Port Lincoln student Paddy Ryan in February last year.
Paddy’s heart failed minutes after inhaling LPG from a 9kg BBQ gas cylinder at a house party surrounded by his mates.
Paddy’s Law will ban the sale of LPG bottles unless the cylinder in which the gas is sold or supplied – or to which the gas is transferred at the point of sale or supply – has an appropriate label warning inhaling gas may cause injury or death.
Paddy’s father Adrian Ryan, through tears, said the law was a bittersweet victory. “The only reason that we are here is our son is dead and nothing can change that,” he said.
“Hopefully this law will save some other family going through the same thing that we are still going though and saves lives.
“It’s now up to parents and kids to heed the warning and have that conversation – these labels are just one part of the education needed.
The Sunday Mail and the Advertiser have repeatedly reported on Paddy’s tragic death and his father’s year-long attempt for federal, state and industry support for urgent legal safeguards before another death occurred.
“These new laws will save lives – make no mistake about it,” said SA-Best MLC Connie Bonaros, who spearheaded Paddy’s Bill in the upper house last year.
“I don’t want any family to have to go through the same tragedy that Paddy Ryan’s family has – and continues – to go through each and every day,” she said.
She is urging others state and territories to now follow SA’s lead.
Labor MP Blair Boyer, who introduced the Bill in the lower house, said Paddy’s Law was a “victory for common sense”.
“Nothing will bring back Paddy Ryan but his father Adrian should be proud that his incredible advocacy on this issue has finally resulted in a practical measure that will hopefully prevent another death like Paddy’s,” he said.
Under the new law, the warning signs will generally be at least 10cm in length – except in the case of smaller gas bottles, where the minimum size of the warning sign will be 2cm in length. Fines of up to $50,000 will apply to those who contravene the law.
There are currently no laws in Australia mandating the warning of injury or death on LPG gas cylinders due to inhalation. They do carry “highly flammable” warning stickers under work safety rules. The industry was encouraging suppliers to voluntarily add warnings to their labels.
Word count: 430
