ONE of the state’s largest regional home builders has doubled its growth rate amid the HomeBuilder-fuelled construction boom, but its owner fears other builders could be left vulnerable once the sugar hit wears off.
Kookaburra Homes co-owner Steven Walker said his business alone had taken on 14 extra staff to manage the workload, while annual growth was tracking at 60 per cent, compared to 30 per cent before the grant’s introduction.
But with the cost of timber up 25 per cent, and suppliers putting up costs in response to heightened demand, margins are being eroded and Mr Walker said he believes many builders would struggle to survive once the stimulus ends.
“The challenge for a lot of builders, including ourselves, is that HomeBuilder has brought a lot of sales forward, so you would anticipate there’s a cliff of some sort that’s about to take place,” he said.
“What I’m concerned about the most is that by the time we actually get around to building these homes, the price rises builders have incurred might mean that they’re not actually making any money.
“Everyone’s busier than ever so they went and increased their overheads and wages, but people are going to make less money – it’s the perfect storm and a bit scary.
“When you talk about pressure points I think we’re here now – builders are really going to be up against it, having to pay for their staff and other overheads while dealing with significant delays with things like timber.” Mr Walker and business partner Wayne Goodwin bought out Kookaburra founder Keith Daniels in 2016, and have since grown the business from an annual turnover of about $6m to $44m.
The company employs 42 in offices in Murray Bridge, Adelaide and Mount Barker, and has sold $90m worth of homes in the past 18 months.
Mr Walker said the company would continue to focus its growth on the Adelaide Hills and regional areas, avoiding the intense competition found closer to the city.
“We build all over the state but our growth is really coming from the Murraylands and Adelaide Hills, in particular the Mount Barker area,” he said.
“The product we sell is larger product that suits larger blocks. Our customers are second or third home buyers – mum and dad with a couple of kids – we don’t really touch the first homebuyer market.
“Once you step into that Adelaide market there are too many competitors and it’s very price driven, you’re having to give everything away at the point of sale to convince the customer.
“I find with our customers, in regional areas, they still value service, they value quality first and foremost and that’s where our strength lies.” Mr Walker said Kookaburra had a longstanding relationship with supplier Keith Timber, ensuring a steady supply of timber. “We’re getting our timber even though there is a delay, and the delay is about three months,” he said. “In terms of prices we’re just having to absorb the margin loss unfortunately, and we have to be very strict with regards to our overheads.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 517
