SOUTH Australia was last night set to become the first jurisdiction in the nation to mandate fatal inhalation warning labels on all liquefied petroleum gas bottles.
The proposed law passed the Lower House yesterday and was expected to be rubber-stamped in the Upper House.
The legislative change was prompted by the accidental death of 16-year-old Port Lincoln student Paddy Ryan in February last year.
Paddy’s heart failed minutes after inhaling LPG from a 9kg barbecue cylinder at a house party, surrounded by his mates.
Other state and territory governments are now being urged to put in place similar safeguards by the authors of what will become Paddy’s Law – SA Best MP Connie Bonaros and Labor MP Blair Boyer.
Paddy’s father, Adrian Ryan, said through tears yesterday that the law was a bittersweet victory.
“The only reason that we are here is our son is dead and nothing can change that,” he said.
“Hopefully, this law will save some other family going through the same thing that we are still going through.
“It’s now up to parents and kids to heed the warning and have that conversation – these labels are just one part of the education needed.” Under Paddy’s Law, the sale of LPG bottles will be banned in SA unless the cylinder in which the gas is sold or supplied – or to which the gas is transferred at the point of sale or supply – has an appropriate label warning that inhaling the gas may cause injury or death. Fines of up to $50,000 will apply.
The Sunday Mail and The Advertiser have repeatedly reported on Paddy’s tragic death and his father’s year-long attempt for federal, state and industry support for urgent legal safeguards before another death occurred.
“These new laws will save lives – make no mistake about it,” Ms Bonaros said. “I don’t want any family to have to go through the same tragedy that Paddy Ryan’s family has – and continues – to go through each and every day,” she said.
Mr Boyer said Paddy’s Law was a “victory for common sense” and praised Mr Ryan for his advocacy. There are no laws in Australia mandating warning of injury or death on LPG gas cylinders due to inhalation.
CREDIT: REBECCA DIGIROLAMO
Word count: 378
