Federal Agriculture Minister David Littleproud has weighed into the debate about compulsory rollover devices on quad bikes, saying people should take responsibility for their own actions.
Save the Quad Bike in Australia director Craig Hartley recently briefed Mr Littleproud on his organisation's staunch opposition to the federal government decision to mandate the fitting of rollover protection devices on new and imported second-hand quad bikes from October next year.
In a brief written statement, Mr Littleproud agreed he didn't support the move to force manufacturers to fit rollover protection devices.
"While industry (headed by the National Farmers' Federation) and the Australian Competition & Consumer Commission are in agreement with this reform, my own view is that people should take personal responsibility for their own actions, rather than the government having to continually regulate," he said.
"Farm safety is something I take very seriously and the government has committed $3.5 million towards national safety programs since the election."
Some leading global manufacturers of quad bikes, including Honda and Yamaha, have announced they will withdraw from the Australian market rather than comply with the mandatory fitting of rollover protection devices.
Mr Hartley, who owns a motorcycle dealership at Dalby, Qld, said the disappearance of high-selling brands of quad bikes would be a disaster for businesses like his across regional Australia, estimating about $800m in revenue could be lost.
He was also worried about the fact that the quad bike legislation did not apply to the "500,000-plus quad bikes" already in the system.
He said senior politicians were now asking why alternative solutions were never entertained and why a national training and education campaign was not devised first, given that a large percentage of fatalities were young children riding powerful quad bikes against manufacturer recommendations.
The move to mandatory rollover protection was part of a two-part plan recommended by the ACCC to address high fatalities involving quad bikes on farms.
The first stage of the government's mandatory safety standard was introduced last month, which requires the testing of all new and imported second-hand quad bikes sold in Australia for lateral static stability, with the results displayed on a hang tag at the point of sale.
Quad bikes must also be fitted with a spark arrester that conforms to the Australian or United States standard and meet certain requirements of the United States or European quad bike safety standards.
"This first stage of the standard is a significant step in improving the safety of quad bikes in Australia, and addressing the extremely concerning rate of injuries and fatalities caused by quad bike accidents," ACCC deputy chairman Mick Keogh said.
He said Safework Australia data showed 152 people had died from incidents involving quad bikes since 2011, including 23 children.
"There have already been 16 fatalities this year - double last year's toll," he said.
"We know rollovers are one of the greatest risks to quad bike riders. The new hang tags will allow riders to quickly compare the stability of similar quad bikes when they are shopping around, and the warning label will remind quad bike users of the risks while riding."
The NFF had been contacted for comment.
CREDIT: Vernon Graham
Word count: 527
