People are fundamental to the success of agriculture. Access to labour and proximity to vibrant communities underpin the ongoing viability of farm businesses.
This year has reinforced how fragile the labour supply many farmers rely on is and underscores the need to provide reliable pathways for agricultural labour for Australian farmers.
As the COVID-19 pandemic shut borders and stopped the flow of seasonal workers and backpackers, traditional sources of farm labour quickly disappeared for many Australian producers.
Consultancy firm Ernst & Young estimates that in 2020 Australian horticulture alone faces a worker shortfall of 26,000, leading to higher prices for fruit and vegetables and risking produce rotting in paddocks across the country.
This shortfall highlights the perils of relying on transient labour and the desperate need for long-term, sustainable sources of workers for the agriculture sector.
In response to the worker shortfall this year, the Australian Government committed to a number of significant programs to attract new people to the agriculture sector and to ensure adequate labour supply this harvest.
The government's contribution of up to $6000 for relocation costs and changes to Youth Allowance eligibility for farm work offers an exciting pathway for young Australians to travel the country and experience the benefits of agriculture.
The government has introduced several measures to reduce barriers to training required for agricultural jobs. Its Job Ready Graduates package provided $400 million in support for regional students and regional universities, including reducing student co-contributions for agriculture-related degrees by almost 60 per cent. This has seen enrolments in agriculture-related studies rise by 10.8pc, the largest growth by any subject area. This increase in support for tertiary studies is further supported by the government's commitment to cover 50pc of the wage of any new apprentice or trainee to September 30, 2021. They're a positive step to attract new people into exciting careers in agriculture.
This year has also seen significant progress on ensuring the health and safety of those already a part of the sector. The government invested $1.9m to revitalise FarmSafe, a not-for-profit organisation dedicated to making farms safer places to work and live.
NFF CEO Tony Mahar said too many lives continued to be lost and life-changing injuries sustained, through preventable farm incidents.
"Farms are inherently dangerous places to live and work. The operation of machinery, exposure to chemicals and working with animals all carry a large degree of risk. When coupled with isolation and often limited access to reliable mobile phone services the consequences can be disastrous."
The NFF is committed to reducing on-farm injuries and has committed to zero farm fatalities by 2030.
"To ensure everyone working and living on farms returns home safely each night, it is vital we make farm safety a priority. To do this, our industry needs to foster a culture that embraces safety. Revitalising FarmSafe is the clearest signal that we're committed to the safety of each and every one of our people.
"Because of this commitment to a safer industry and because we recognise the valuable role quad bikes play on farm the NFF wants to try and maintain their presence in the market while helping to reduce injuries. The NFF welcomed the government's introduction of a new safety standard for quad bikes sold in Australia. Following a high-profile campaign led by the NFF, the government was compelled to accept recommendations from the ACCC to improve quad bike safety."
The new standard requires that within 12 months all new quad bikes display a label alerting riders to the risk of roll over; and within 24 months all new quad bikes must be fitted with an operator protection device (OPD) at the point of sale.
Quad bike accidents have claimed more than 156 lives since 2011, about half from roll overs. OPDs have been proven time and time again to shield riders in the event of a rollover preventing life-ending or life-altering injuries.
CREDIT:
Word count: 648
