SMARTdaily APPS TAKE THE PAIN OUT OF SPLITTING THE BILL
DINING out has been given a mass overhaul in 2020 and has significantly changed the way customers book, order and pay.
But one awkward part of a night out remains – who pays for what. Splitting the bill after an enjoyable night eating and drinking can be fraught and new research shows that nearly 40 per cent of us don’t like to go in a round with friends. And 65 per cent feel comforted by knowing someone in our night out group is keeping an eye on the bill as it grows.
Anya Beniac, 25, says many restaurant bookings she makes have set menus so it’s not as complex to divvy up the costs. “This means it’s easier when it comes to paying but it can be an awkward conversation to have,” she says. The answer can be using a bill splitting app which allows groups to share the cost.
It uses a prepaid Visa card that can be embedded in a smartphone to enable groups to split the charges among multiple users.
Bill split app Groupee’s Jarred Baker says talking to your fellow diners about the bill before your order can iron out any uncertainties.
The app works by creating a group and inviting friends, setting the amount everyone agrees to pay, grouping the funds and then paying using contactless or a card.
Baker says it gives everyone the ability to pay their own share. “Establish if there are non-drinkers or if someone is paying for a partner,” he says. The company researched attitudes to the awful realisation you have been left to foot the bill or more than your fair share.
It quizzed 1000 Millennials aged 23 to 38 and found the following: • 65 per cent like it when someone keeps a tab of the costs when sharing. • 39 per cent don’t like to go in a shout when out socialising. Other bill splitting and contactless payment apps include Beem It, Splitwise, Splitr, me & u and Mr Yum.
But be sure to check what charges apply when doing payments; some hit customers with a percentage-based fee each time a transaction is made.
Some eateries also use QR codes scanned by your smartphone, allowing the diner to order and pay using their own device.
Here are some of the big other changes to the dining industry. 1. BOOKING AHEAD Eateries suffered months of hibernation in 2020 which now means customers are being urged to make restaurant and cafe bookings in advance. Work out who you are dining with and make sure everyone is committed to a date and time, otherwise there could be a charge if your group does a no show.
Some restaurants require customers to put down their credit card details when making a booking to ensure they stick to their plans.
Many businesses have capacity limits so be organised to ensure you don’t miss out, says Restaurant and Catering Australia’s chief executive officer Wes Lambert. “Many restaurants require pre-bookings and they have fixed-price menus,” he says.
2. MINIMUM SPEND Lambert says it’s not uncommon to see restaurants require customers to spend over a certain amount.
“Hospitality wages are going up 1.75 per cent on February 1 and JobKeeper is tapering off, so ultimately our industry hasn’t had a major price increase in a decade.” He says the typical cost of a steak is about $28 and a cup of coffee $4, despite underlying cost rises and profit margins getting squeezed.
Make sure you are clear on any spending requirements before committing to a booking.
3. TIPPING COVID-19 has meant more diners shifting away from cash and instead tapping at the checkout to settle a bill.
Lambert says some eateries now only accept card-only payments but it’s still easy to tip the waiter. “Every POS (point of sale) has a tips screen.” “The average tip in Australia remains around 8 per cent across all food types, from your coffee shop to your restaurant.”
Dining out money tips • Plan ahead and pre-book.
• Check the venue’s menu online to gauge prices.
• Some restaurants require a minimum spend.
• You may be required to hand over card details when booking. • Charges may apply if you do a no show.
• If dining out with a group discuss bill splitting before ordering. • Consider using bill-splitting apps. • Having cash can be handy for those who prefer to pay their share in notes.
CREDIT: SOPHIE ELSWORTH
Word count: 753
