Child vaccines MANY Australian parents are concerned about the delay in vaccinating children under the age of 12 against coronavirus.
Even those children who manage to get their first Pfizer dose this week will not be eligible for their second dose until March, well after school goes back.
In The New England Journal of Medicine you can read the results of the successful US clinical trials of a paediatric dose. Vaccinations were given at one-third of the adult dose, 21 days apart. Why are we in Australia giving some doses to children eight weeks apart?
Is this from an abundance of caution or could it again be lack of supply? LESLEY BRETAG, Warradale School jabs WHY not open up the schools early and use the old system dating back to the ’60s when children in classrooms simply lined up and were given vaccinations?
Nurses could be assigned to particular schools instead of parents having to seek out places and appointments.
Children would then be ready to return at the beginning of the school year. Just a thought.
SHEILA PHILLIPS, Belair Long line-ups DID Premier Steven Marshall wait five hours to get his PCR test? How about fixing the problem of long queues instead of shutting down testing stations.
NEIL SMITH, North Haven RAT education THE use of rapid antigen tests at home requires a public education program about what is required.
The SA Health website advises that, even if you have received a negative RAT result and you have symptoms, you must get a standard PCR test and isolate until you get a negative result.
If this advice is to be followed there is a need for that statement to be on RAT packaging at point of sale, as well as a public education program.
RICHARD RUFFIN, Adelaide Strong borders I HAD a similar experience as Ruth Gates (“Border controls”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
In 2019 I travelled to South Africa on business. But, on arriving in Johannesburg, I was refused entry due to not having two empty pages in my passport.
I was not given any opportunity to appeal the refusal of entry. Instead I was marched fairly quickly by two large border control gentlemen out of the Customs hall and placed in a lounge to wait for a flight to England. This was my next destination.
I accept it is the responsibility of the passport owner to ensure that your passport is in order and suitable for travel. Qantas was also at fault for not checking that my passport was suitable. And for allowing me on the flight. For that mistake, Qantas received a hefty fine.
Based on this incident, I do not have any sympathy for Novak Djokovic. He should know the rules required to travel to another country, regardless of his status as an elite athlete.
ROD YATES, Hallett Cove Respecting fans I FIND it both astonishing and reprehensible that some sportspeople can treat the public, which has been responsible for their success, with utter contempt in regard to vaccination.
MALCOLM RAMSAY, Burnside Special case I GATHER Novak Djokovic travels with an entourage.
Everyone else was able to enter the country without medical exemptions. If it is good enough for them to be vaccinated, why isn’t Djokovic? Perhaps he thinks the crown on his head means he is the special one.
D. LESICAR, Joslin Entitled visitors AFTER the court ruling going in favour of Novak Djokovic, I ask where this leaves the ordinary, law-abiding Australian citizen in relation to the priorities of our elected officials.
Yes, costly mistakes were made, but this decision leaves some Australians feeling like we come second to rich, self-entitled international visitors.
If the same scenario was applied to an ordinary Australian citizen would the result be different?
How long do we have to put up with inequity? It seems there is one rule for the super-entitled, rich and famous, while the rest of us have to abide by something different.
We have become a laughing stock worldwide. The morale of those citizens who try to do the right thing would be at an all-time low.
Where is the encouragement going to come from now for people to do the right thing in these confusing and dangerous times? The political party that draws a line in the sand on this issue could quite possibly win the next election, such is the current sentiment.
JOHN HARVIE, Murray Bridge Expensive habit MICHAEL Prus seems to think only the wealthy can afford to smoke cigarettes (“Cost of smoking”, The Advertiser, Friday).
From my long-term observation, it is the other end of the social spectrum that mainly smokes.
How could you smoke if you knowingly and willingly pay exorbitant amounts of money to continuously poison yourself and others around you with a putrid, vile stench?
B. PAGE, Happy Valley Uplifting photo BRILLIANT photographer Robert Lang captures optimism, hope, joy and energy in his front-page photo of top SACE student Tayla Roberts from Streaky Bay (“Fields of dreams for SACE star”, The Advertiser, Saturday).
An uplifting boost for us in these challenging times. LILLIAN MATTNER, Loxton
Word count: 849
