A NEW campaign was launched this week by health groups targeting the excessive consumption of sugary drinks. It goes by the punchy title “Cut the Crap”, clearly intended in reference to the contents of soft drinks and energy drinks but, from what I have seen of it, aspects of the campaign itself could be more accurately described as “crap”.
I have no doubt about the sincerity of the people behind it. There is no problem with an advertising campaign targeting people who are stupid enough to drink nothing but soft drink.
The issue with the campaign is its sincerity drifts pretty quickly into zealotry.
It doesn’t limit itself to targeting excessive consumption of soft drink, but almost any consumption of soft drink, and even targets nutritional drinks made with no human intervention, such as freshly squeezed orange juice.
It also has the trademark nanny-state quality of framing collective behaviour around the actions of the few. And it doesn’t stop at an education campaign but also advocates advertising bans and limits on point-of-sale displays.
As well, it comes as some in the health lobby still believe the dead hand of the tax system should be used to punish people for choosing to consume pretty much anything containing sugar.
On radio this week, we interviewed a dentist who supports the campaign. She was nice and well-meaning but didn’t seem to have too good a handle on the findings that underpin the campaign. Maybe she was just nervous doing radio but the feedback from listeners was the interview was unconvincing and, at some points, laughable.
The dentist said young men were drinking 1.75 litres of soft drink a day. The rejoinder to that is: Which young men? How many? Who the hell drinks that much soft drink every day? She didn’t say, or couldn’t say, leaving us and the listeners to wonder just how widespread is this mind-blowing level of consumption.
The second apparently alarming point she made was that some women are drinking one soft drink a week. The rejoinder to which is: So what? If anyone can show me evidence that a woman having one soft drink a week is gambling with her life, then we are in all more trouble healthwise than originally feared.
I would even argue most women could safely consume one bottle of ice tea a day along with a balanced diet and the requisite brushing and flossing of teeth, and still live a long and fruitful existence.
We asked the dentist what we should drink if all these other beverages were to be avoided. Water, she replied.
Fair enough. There’s no problem with water. Water is great. It’s my drink of choice, when I’m not having an ice-cold Coca Cola, based on the unscientific but widely held conviction that things that are technically bad for you can also taste nice and make you feel good.
It’s an ethos which jars with the more abstemious members of the health lobby, who envisage a world devoid of any such pleasure, where a significant birthday or a football premiership is celebrated with a big night on the waters with a twist of lemon, and where the only thing we all risk dying of is boredom.
These days, the only people who smoke are idiots and the rate of alcohol consumption has been in decline since the 1970s and now stands at its lowest level in Australian history. Against that backdrop it is tempting to conclude campaigns such as this soft drink fatwa are a case of mission creep by various health bodies, given the extent to which the war is being won against tobacco and alcohol abuse.
The schoolmarmish tightening of the alcohol-drinking guidelines was a case in point, as they seemed less a proportionate response to a public health threat than a quest for ongoing relevance.
The crappiest part of this campaign is far and away its determination to treat orange juice as if it is Diet Coke and award both drinks a 2.5 rating out of a possible five, with water being ranked highest in terms of its health benefits.
Orange juice is being targeted on the basis of the natural sugars it contains. This ignores all the nutritional benefits of orange juice, which contains lots of healthy vitamins and minerals such as vitamin C and folate, and unfairly places it at the same rating as the sugarless chemical concoction that is Diet Coke.
Health experts argue they aren’t interested in the nutritional value of orange juice because Australia isn’t suffering from a crisis of nutrition but an apparent crisis of obesity.
Writing on the issue in The Australian this week, journalist Ticky Fullerton interviewed someone called Alexandra Jones from the ­George Institute for Global Health who said myths needed to be busted about the apparent healthiness of orange juice just because it was a natural product.
“Natural doesn’t mean healthy,” Ms Jones said. “Mercury is natural, asbestos is natural. They know that consumers think ‘natural’ means ‘healthy’, but it doesn’t.” The idea that you could elevate a humble glass of OJ to the same status as substances that cause brain failure and mesothelioma strikes me as somewhat over the top.
It is a real insult to our citrus farmers even to suggest they’re basically the fruit-peddling equivalent of James Hardies.
There is no doubt these idiotic health strictures if implemented will end up having repercussions for people’s livelihoods, people on the land who work so hard already against cheap imports, low fruit prices, growing a product which requires limited irrigation and is well suited to our climate.
You wonder where all this ends. In their dream scenario, possibly with a large photo of a morbidly obese corpse on the front of your fruit juice bottle bearing the warning: “Every orange is doing you damage.” david.penberthy@news.com.au Follow David @Penbo
CREDIT: David Penberthy
Word count: 976
