AUSTRALIA is technically out of recession after the strongest three months of economic growth since 1976.
But the dramatic recovery from the worst quarter on record was held back by Victoria’s devastating second wave, and experts have warned the economic pain is not over yet.
The Australian economy grew by 3.3 per cent in the September quarter, after it was smashed by 7 per cent in the previous three months.
Josh Frydenberg said the figures, released by the Australian Bureau of Statistics on Wednesday, “confirm Australia’s economy is fighting back”.
The growth rate would have been 5 per cent if Victoria bounced back in line with the rest of the country.
“Victoria, a quarter of the national economy, has only just begun its recovery,” the Treasurer said.
Household spending kickstarted the recovery, increasing by 7.9 per cent nationwide, including a massive 49.7 per cent leap in spending at hotels, cafes and restaurants.
But while spending was up overall by more than 10 per cent in NSW, Queensland, South Australia, Western Australia and Tasmania, it went backwards by 1.2 per cent in Victoria during lockdown.
AMP chief economist Shane Oliver warned gross domestic product was still down 3.8 per cent compared to a year ago — the worst since the end of World War II.
“GDP will only get back to its pre-COVID level in late 2021 in our view,” he said.
Opposition treasury spokesman Jim Chalmers welcomed the boost, but “what looks like a recovery on paper will still feel like a recession”.
Mr Frydenberg acknowledged “many Australians continue to do it very tough”, but said that 80 per cent of the 1.3 million Australians who lost their jobs or had their hours cut to zero were back at work.
“Technically, Australia’s recession may be over, but our economic recovery is not,” he said.
The federal government is hopeful Victoria’s reopening will deliver a further boost in the December quarter.
Data from point-of-sale-solutions firm Lightspeed showed more than 7000 Victorian hospitality venues had a 36.1 per cent jump in revenue in November.
Lightspeed marketing director Simon Le Grand said: “Melbourne’s hospitality scene is the life and soul of the city, and it’s really amazing to see many cafes and restaurants starting to recover from what can only be described as a challenging 2020.” Diego Reyes, owner of CBD cafe Cento Mani, said he was making 40 per cent of his pre-COVID revenue but needed office workers and tourists back in the city.
“We are again increasing bit by bit,” Mr Reyes said. “We’re still contending with some challenges like rent and no JobKeeper for many staff, but it’ll only get better from here.” tom.minear@news.com.au
GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT ■ QUARTERLY GROWTH: Australia’s economy had grown steadily each quarter until a record 7 per cent crash in the three months to June 30, before it rallied by 3.3 per cent in the September quarter. ––– THROUGH THE YEAR: Across the past 12 months, the national economy contracted by 3.8 per cent.
CREDIT: Tom Minear Olivia Jenkins
Word count: 505
