AUSSIES are being hit with a sneaky fee when they pay with Eftpos. The Sunday Mail can reveal shops are charging as much as 1.75 per cent extra on every transaction – the equivalent of 6c for a $3.50 cup of coffee or 43c for a $25 meal.
Customers often have no idea they’re being stung, with fees mounting as they increasingly favour cards over cash for everyday purchases.
The slug comes as shoppers already face surcharges for paying with a credit or debit card, including “Tap and go”.
It means there is now often no escape from fees if they’re paying by card. Consumer Action Law Centre chief executive officer Gerard Brody said while surcharges might seem small, they added up over the long term.
Australians make about two billion Eftpos transactions each year, worth more than a staggering $130 billion.
“I can certainly understand people feeling it’s unfair because they can’t avoid the charge,’’ Mr Brody said.
“Anyone who sees surcharges that are high should complain to the ACCC.” The Sunday Mail found multiple stores charging customers “payment-processing fees” when they hit the “Savings” or “Cheque” buttons on card terminals. One cafe charged 1.75 per cent and another 1.65 per cent. Each displayed a list of charges at the counter.
Choice spokeswoman Erin Turner said businesses were only allowed to on-charge what it cost them to accept credit and debit cards.
“The costs to businesses to accept Eftpos and debit payments are very low,’’ she said. “Businesses that charge high and unfair fees leave their customers paying hundreds of dollars a year more than they should.” Under the law, retailers can incorporate the cost of providing card payment into the price of products or charge a separate fee. Surcharges of no more than 1 per cent are typically regarded as fair, with big fines in place for shops that overcharge.
Eftpos spokesman Warwick Ponder said: “We encourage merchants not to surcharge for Eftpos transactions but, in the end, it’s a matter for the merchant and their customers.
“If customers are concerned that a merchant is surcharging more than it costs them to accept the transaction, they should report the merchant to the ACCC. Eftpos remains committed to be a lower-cost payments network and our wholesale rates reflect this.”PAGE 79: BAREFOOT INVESTOR
CREDIT: SOPHIE ELSWORTH
Word count: 387
