AUSTRALIAN health authorities have called for a crackdown on vaping as evidence mounts that the habit can lead to serious health problems and even death.
There have been six confirmed vaping deaths in the US and another 450 cases of serious lung illness potentially linked to e-cigarettes.
Australian Medical Association (AMA) vice-president Chris Zappala said the recent vaping deaths and illnesses in the US were “just the tip of the iceberg” and many more cases would follow.
“Our view is that e-cigarettes and vaping should be banned because there is a whole range of products being inhaled which are potentially dangerous,” Dr Zappala said.
“We know vaping has negative effects on airways’ function and people are having respiratory difficulties – even death-related, to vaping.” Vaping proponents say e-cigarettes are less dangerous to health than traditional cigarettes, and used successfully by many people to stop smoking.
But studies have shown a growing number of young people – some as young as 12 – who have never smoked are taking up vaping. Dr Zappala said there were other smoking cessation therapies available without the same health risks as e-cigarettes.
Quit Victoria director Sarah White said vaping was now the subject of intense scrutiny in the US.
“What these deaths and likely long-term health implications tell me is that heating and inhaling the ‘wrong’ chemical cocktail can be disastrous,” Dr White said.
“Even if the cocktail in an e-cigarette doesn’t contain something that causes an immediate health issue, our lungs are simply not designed to be bathed in an aerosol containing unknown chemicals,” Dr White said.
She said the Cancer Council wanted to see all e-cigarette devices and liquids approved by the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) before they were made available for sale, at the very least.
The TGA said it had never received an application to assess an e-cigarette product.
“The Australian Government Department of Health … is taking a precautionary approach to e-cigarettes and will continue to monitor evidence regarding their direct harms to human health, impact on smoking initiation and cessation, uptake among youth, and dual use with conventional tobacco products,” a spokesperson said.
In South Australia, new laws that came into effect earlier this year imposed a range of restrictions on e-cigarette retailers, including making it illegal to offer free samples, or sell or supply e-cigarette products to children.From next month, it will also be illegal to advertise or promote e-cigarette products, have them on display at point-of-sale or sell them on the internet. Vapers cannot use e-cigarettes in public places that are smoke-free, or in a car with children under 16 present.
CREDIT: MANDY SQUIRES
Word count: 438
