AN Adelaide software development start-up is on the hunt for a $2 million investment in a product it believes can compete with global giants including SAP, Oracle and Microsoft.
The Alpen platform is targeted at small and medium- size businesses, offering accounting, e-commerce, customer relationship management (CRM), point of sale (POS), inventory management and staff management modules — all in one online tool.
Having piloted the product and started a rollout to around 30 clients across the country, Alpen chief executive Glen Matulich said more funding was required to market the product more broadly and establish new sales channels across the country.
“We’ve built a large solution to compete with the SAPs, the Microsoft Dynamics, the Oracles etc but we’re finding a lot of the small and medium enterprises in Australia don’t have a $250,000, $1 million, $10 million budget to roll out a system, like the big global companies,” he said. “We’ve started rolling out to a range of customers in hospitality, we’re in retail, we’re in service centres, we’re in restaurants, we’re in bars. Where we’re looking for a cash injection is to build a team here in South Australia that is able to build channel partners around Australia who are equipped to sell our product.
“We are in a fortunate position in that we own every part of the business — we’re still working out of a shed in Norwood.
“We’re one of the good old start-up stories.” Alpen is a family affair, with Mr Matulich’s father, Steve, involved day-to-day as the software’s chief architect, while father-in-law Paul Wheeler is a director and shareholder. Mr Wheeler established the Cartridge World franchise in 1996, growing the network to more than 1500 stores across 48 countries in 10 years.
“My father has been absolutely integral in this,” Mr Matulich said. “He has always been in IT and hardware, he opened the first computer hardware store in South Australia, he built one of the first PCs when he was at uni and he was one of the pioneers of cloud software.” Mr Matulich said the inspiration behind Alpen came when he owned his own small business — the Trak Cycles store at Norwood, which he operated for 10 years before selling it in 2016.
“I have a background in retailing, wholesaling and hospitality, where the mum- and-dad shops, the bricks- and-mortar retail, are slowly being squeezed out by the Amazons, the Alibabas of the world,” he said. “When I exited the retail industry, I always wished there was a solution that was able to not just run my accounting, but to actually run my business.” While, in the short-term, Mr Matulich is focused on reaching new markets for the Alpen product, he has more ambitious plans.“Where I see this going in another couple of years is we become another marketplace similar to an Amazon or Alibaba, but it’s a marketplace that’s driven by all the bricks-and-mortar retailers that are running our system,” he said. “You’re on a marketplace supporting bricks-and-mortar Australian businesses with stock they actually have in their stores. Our hurdle with that is having someone that’s able to sink $20 million to $50 million into what it takes to promote a marketplace like that.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 540
