Is weaning worth the effort when selling cattle online?
Weaning calves from their mothers at the point of sale has had a long-standing industry perception that stock will be discounted.
In order to gain a true reflection of the accuracy and size of this discount, the AuctionsPlus Market Insight Team have completed a direct comparison on prices received during the past six months for weaned and unweaned cattle traded through the AuctionsPlus system.
Steers and heifers, weighing between 200 and 400 kilograms, from Queensland, NSW, Victoria and South Australia were included in the analysis.
Results of the analysis showed that 95 per cent of the time, the discount for unweaned cattle ranged between nine and 28 cents and kilogram (liveweight).
AuctionsPlus figures indicate the average price difference for the total listing was 13c/kg or $36 a head, for a 280kg (liveweight) beast.
When splitting this up further into sex, the analysis found the unweaned heifers traded 11c/kg lighter than their weaned equivalents, while for steers, this was 13c/kg lower.
From a lot feeders perspective, unweaned calves can be more difficult to manage when it comes to feedlot induction.
Volume AuctionsPlus buyer, Andrew Talbot, of Elders Killara feedlot has found that unweaned cattle entering into the feedlot system present a risk of increased likelihood of morbidity and mortality.
Buying for backgrounding was also troublesome, as unweaned calves would walk condition off and could lose as much as 20kg to 30kg after weaning.
"Weaned cattle with some maturity will adapt better to feedlot conditions as they have been handled, socialised and their rumen has been weaned off milk," Mr Talbot said.
The losses associated with purchasing unweaned calves for these systems significantly outweigh the benefit of a cheaper price.
For a restocker or breeder, the right set up for weaning is essential to ensure a smooth process. The tradition method of weaning calves onto a truck to sell in annual weaner sales can help to ensure heavier calves at time of sale.
However, the online sales of unweaned calves have trended down since 2016, with producers investing the time and infrastructure to facilitate smooth a weaning process.
Meanwhile, last week on AuctionsPlus steers weighing 280kg and under sold from 256c/kg to 350c/kg, averaging 291c/kg. Highlights included: Angus steers aged seven to 10 months and 207kg from Bingara sell for 318c/kg and travelling across the border to Barnawartha North, Vic. While from Elong Elong 41 Poll Hereford weaned steers, seven to eight months, weighing 220kg sold for 281c/kg to a buyer at Mount Compass, SA.
CREDIT: Tom Rookyard and Ed Murphy
Word count: 428
