VICTORIA'S chief health officer is urging Victorians to check their homes for eggs produced by Bridgewater Poultry following the detection of a particular strain of salmonella.
Dr Brett Sutton said the Department of Health and Human Services had identified five cases of illness which could be linked to this strain of salmonella - Salmonella Enteritidis.
Bridgewater Poultry is conducting a recall of their products which have been available at Woolworths and independent stores in New South Wales, Victoria and Tasmania, and Coles in Victoria and South Australia.
The eggs are packaged as Woolworths 12 Cage Free Eggs 700g, Victorian Fresh Barn Laid Eggs 600g, Victorian Fresh Barn Laid Eggs 700g, Victorian Fresh Barn Laid Eggs 800g, Loddon Valley Barn Laid 600g (Victoria and South Australia only).
The best before dates are: March 20, 23, 27, 30, April 3, 6, 10, 14, 19, 17, 20 , 24, 27, and 29.
Further information about the recall is available here.
Dr Brett Sutton said all other eggs are safe to eat, provided people follow the usual requirements to cook eggs thoroughly.
"People should avoid raw egg products, particularly if they are vulnerable such as those with compromised immune systems, under two or over 70 years of age or pregnant," Dr Sutton said.
"It is important to know that not all eggs are affected, but any eggs carrying the listed brands should return them to the point of sale for a full refund.
"Alternatively, they can be discarded by throwing them into the garbage, not the garden or compost.
"These eggs should not be given to pets or livestock."
Dr Sutton said salmonellosis symptoms include fever, headache, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting.
Symptoms usually start around six to 72 hours after the contaminated food is eaten and usually last for four to seven days but can continue for much longer.
If you have immediate health concerns, contact your medical professional.
Agriculture Victoria has placed controls on the business preventing them from selling eggs while the possibility of Salmonella contamination is being investigated.
"We'd just like people to check and if they do have any of these eggs they should return them or throw them out to avoid any risk of food poisoning," Dr Sutton said.
Further information about how to reduce your food safety risk when consuming eggs can be found on the Better Health Channel here.
While you're with us, you can now receive updates straight to your inbox each Friday morning from The Ararat Advertiser. To make sure you're up-to-date with all the news from across the Ararat shire, sign up here.
CREDIT: JessieAnne Gartlan
Word count: 434
