Find out where your festive fish swam, writes Callan Boys.
It seems the term "sustainably sourced" has become more common on menus in the past 10 years than "organic", "ethically raised" and "pork belly".
The push is particularly strong in seafood - environmentalists, celebrity chefs and television presenters (such as The Gourmet Farmer's Matthew Evans) have become increasingly vocal about the need to protect our marine ecosystems from overfishing and destruction.
We import nearly three-quarters of our seafood and two-thirds of our prawns. Even the quintessentially "Australian" barramundi can come from overseas sources. And Australian seafood comes from many different fisheries all around our continent.
How do you discern the provenance of a prawn? Which tuna is OK to buy and how would you know? How sustainable is seafood in Australia? And what does wild-caught actually mean?
what is 'sustainable' seafood?
Sustainable seafood can be caught in the wild. Here, the wild does not mean some kind of salty wilderness; it means in fisheries monitored for their fish stocks. Or sustainable seafood is farmed - crucially, in ways that consider the long-term vitality of the species and the environmental impact of the fishing, including its impact on fishing-reliant communities.
The sustainability factor is a concern for consumers who want to eat seafood but give a hoot about the environment, oceans and a continuous (but not rampant) supply of seafood.
Is seafood caught sustainably in Australia?
Largely, yes. "All fisheries in Australia are managed for sustainability," says Peter Horvat, communications manager at the Fisheries Research and Development Corporation.
"No one is managing a fishery to run it into the toilet."
A fishery is an area of sea where large amounts of seafood are harvested for commercial use and described as wild-caught. The FRDC, a partnership co-funded by the Australian government and the fishing and aquaculture sectors, collects data to determine the status of key wild-catch fish stocks.
Its 2018 Status of Australian Fish Stocks (SAFS) Report examined 120 species, representing 90 per cent of Australian species fished commercially. Stock is classified as sustainable (green), being depleted (yellow), recovering (orange) and depleted (red).
Nearly 85 per cent were classified as sustainable or recovering. Twenty-three stocks were classified as being depleted, including blacklip abalone in NSW, Tasmania's eastern zone fishery and Victoria's central zone fishery. Twenty-nine stocks were classified as depleted, including commercial scallops in Victoria and Tasmania, and snapper in the Northern Spencer Gulf fishery in South Australia.
According to the FRDC website, all depleted stocks have recovery management plans in place.
"The reports are a road map for fishery managers," says Horvat.
"The environment is an ever-changing and evolving place, and taking your hand off the wheel [of a fishery] is unacceptable. You need to be monitoring it all the time."
While the reports are carefully researched and data-driven, they focus only on the status of fish stocks; the classifications do not consider the broader ecosystem impacts of fishing.
As a result, independent environmental agencies may have a different stance about the sustainability of particular seafood stocks.
For instance, swordfish is classified as sustainable by the FRDC but coded amber for "eat less" in a sustainable seafood guide published by the Australian Marine Conservation Society.
According to the society's GoodFish website, the amber classification of Australian swordfish is partly due to the use of longlines (a big line dragged through the water from which many shorter ones are suspended) that may also catch "endangered wildlife such as turtles, seabirds, whales and dolphins".
Is imported seafood sustainable?
Australia imports more than 70 per cent of its seafood to meet consumer demand, so you might well be eating more fish out of international waters than you realise.
Although some imported products might not have the same degree of transparency and traceability as domestic seafood, there is still a large amount of sustainable, safe and delicious imported seafood on the Australian market.
It's a case-by-case situation that should not deter the Australian consumer from eating all imported seafood.
Prawns that are imported, usually from Asia, account for 64 per cent of the total prawn market. Asian prawn fisheries using bottom trawls (industrial fishing where a large net scoops up everything in its path from the ocean floor) have been associated with environmental risk due to a high bycatch rate.
In some parts of Asia, shrimp aquaculture has attracted criticism for issues including the destruction of mangrove swamps and poor labour practices.
A report released by the US non-profit group Sustainable Fisheries Partnership in December 2018 indicates there are still large sustainability concerns within the Asian shrimp and prawn industry; however, a small but growing number of farms are achieving certification.
People should feel free to ask sellers where their prawns are specifically from, and if not satisfied with the answer, take their shellfish money elsewhere.
How can I tell where the seafood I'm buying is from?
Australian law requires all raw seafood to be labelled with a country of origin at the point of sale. (The Northern Territory is the only jurisdiction where restaurants must also declare whether seafood is imported.)
Pre-packaged seafood may contain extra information about its source. However, when ordering seafood in a restaurant or buying it from a fishmonger, consumers may need to ask further questions about provenance if a fishery isn't identified.
Information about the sustainability of a wild-caught Australian species and its fishery can be found on the FDRC's Status of Australian Fish Stock website or its app. Consumers concerned about a specific seafood's wider environmental impact might also want to refer to other online seafood sustainability guides.
In the case of imported seafood, packages are often labelled with certification from international independent organisations such as the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC) and Friend of the Sea to let consumers know if an imported seafood product is sustainably sound.
"For emerging countries that don't have robust government management of commercial fisheries, organisations such as the MSC can step in and take an objective view of that seafood's level of sustainability," says John Susman, managing director of seafood consultancy business Fishtales.
"In Australia, we have some of the most robust fishery management laws in the world. When it comes to domestically produced seafood, we can be very proud that what is being done is not only to environmental and sustainable standards, but to human resource standards, too."
CREDIT: Callan Boys
Word count: 1060
