Egg farming experts are estimating Victoria's Bridgewater Poultry, the farm linked to the recent salmonella outbreak, could lose up to $10 million if forced to cull the several hundred thousand birds on the farm.
Victorian Farmers Federation eggs group vice-president Brian Ahmed said last week authorities had already culled flocks in the shed where they found the virus, but veterinarians could order all the birds be destroyed if the virus had spread.
While not sure of exact numbers, Mr Ahmed said there would be around 500,000 to 600,000 birds on the farm.
"If they cull the whole farm, supply will be affected," he said.
He said the four families who own the poultry farm have been devastated by the detection.
"It's just a horrific time for them," he said.
Victoria's chief veterinary officer Dr Charles Milne has confirmed that a potential link to a NSW outbreak of salmonella enteritidis was being investigated as the source of the infection.
The strain of salmonella, which is not endemic in Australia, has not been found on any other farm in Victoria.
Droppings from migratory wild birds may be responsible for spreading salmonella bacteria, according to some in the industry.
"It may have come from a migrating wild bird that can bring in this strain and infect the flock," Mr Ahmed said.
Agriculture Victoria has placed controls on the business preventing it from selling eggs while the possibility of salmonella contamination is being investigated.
"Agriculture Victoria has placed a quarantine order on the farm; eggs will only be permitted to move for processing by pulping and pasteurisation at an approved facility," Dr Milne said.
"The prompt reporting of this infection by the egg producer's veterinarian has facilitated a quick response by Agriculture Victoria."
He said while it was not a rapidly spreading disease, good farm biosecurity was essential for preventing introduction to other farms.
"This incident is a reminder to egg producers to ensure they are implementing best practice biosecurity measures on their property and complying with egg production requirements," he said.
A Loddon Valley Eggs spokesperson said as a precaution, the Bridgewater farm had been quarantined and strict measures put in place to protect neighbouring farms.
They said that it was important to work through how this incident had arisen.
Last Thursday, Loddon Valley Eggs recalled a number of its products including Woolworths 12 Cage Free Eggs and Loddon Valley Barn Laid due to potential contamination.
Affected products include Woolworths 12 Cage Free Eggs 700g (barcode 9300633636982), Victorian Fresh Barn Laid Eggs 600g, Victorian Fresh Barn Laid Eggs 700g, Victorian Fresh Barn Laid Eggs 800g and Loddon Valley Barn Laid 600g.
These products have 2019 best before dates of March 20, March 23, March 27, March 30, April 3, April 6, April 10, April 14, April 17, April 20, April 24, April 27 and April 29.
The Bridgewater products have been available for sale at Woolworths and independent stores in Victoria, ACT, NSW and Tasmania, and Coles in Victoria and South Australia.
Victoria's chief health officer Dr Brett Sutton said the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) had identified five cases of illness that could be linked to this strain of salmonella.
The five cases of illness related to the contamination affected people aged from 20 to 80.
Two people were hospitalised as a result but have since been released.
Dr Sutton said all other eggs were safe to eat, provided people followed the usual requirements to cook eggs thoroughly.
"It is important to know that not all eggs are affected, but any eggs carrying the listed brands should return them to the point of sale for a full refund," he said.
"Alternatively, they can be discarded by throwing them into the garbage, not the garden or compost.
"These eggs should not be given to pets or livestock."
Dr Sutton said symptoms included fever, headache, diarrhoea, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting.
He said symptoms usually started about six to 72 hours after eating the contaminated food.
CREDIT: Caroline Schelle
Word count: 667
