ADELAIDE’S independent retailers are bucking sluggish retail conditions nationally, according to new point-of-sale data, reporting strong growth in annual sales and average transaction values.
The latest figures from software company Vend reveal a 24 per cent increase in average transaction values across Adelaide’s independent retailers in the year to March, up from $46.32 to $57.70.
The local figures represent the fastest growing market nationally, with average transaction values increasing by just 11.2 per cent nationally over the same period.
Vend’s Retail Benchmarks report also reveals Adelaide retailers earn the second biggest margins (59 per cent) of any city in Australia, growing by 1 per cent in the year to March as margins in most other cities tightened.
Vend APAC managing director Dave Scheine said adoption by local retailers of new technology, as well as industry initiatives like Renew Adelaide, were creating a positive retail environment.
“Driven by a vibrant independent retail community, Adelaide is a city emerging from the shadow of Melbourne and Sydney – which are traditionally seen as shopping and tourist destinations - to reveal a city that is both innovating and thriving,” he said.
“Consumer shopping behaviour is changing, and we’re seeing independent retailers embrace cloud-based technology to run their businesses more profitably.
“Independent retailers - from homeware and floral, to fashion and confectionary - are winning. Our data shows their businesses are generating more revenue, earning considerably more per transaction, increasing their margins and satisfying the city’s strong appetite for shopping local.” The Vend data also reveals healthy growth in average basket sizes in Adelaide, with the city’s independent retailers selling an average 2.29 items per transaction, compared to the national average of 2.12.
Manager of Stepney interior decor store Asser & Co, Rachel Bartels, said technology helped her manage her retail studios as the Adelaide marketplace evolved.“Having spent some years working interstate, it’s great to see how Adelaide has matured over that period,” she said. “It’s now a place where people are enthusiastically purchasing locally-sourced, well-designed Australian products, and embracing international brands.”
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO BUSINESS REPORTER
Word count: 343
