ADELAIDE-BASED online lender OurMoneyMarket has launched a $10.5 million capital raise as part of the company’s plans to reach $135 million in loan originations by the end of the year.
The start-up, established in Sydney in 2017, is on track to reach $50 million in funded loans by the end of June, through its peer-to-peer business model.
Borrowers can apply for a personal loan on the OMM website and, based on their financial history and risk, can be offered an interest rate calculated by its algorithm.
Investors can browse approved loans, and are able to invest as little as $50 in loan units linked to any single loan.
OMM chief operating officer Crystal Anderson returned home to Adelaide this year, bringing the company she co-founded with Adam Sutherland with her.
This month, the company opened the doors to a new Hutt St head office, where it hopes to employ around 35 staff by the end of the year.
Ms Anderson said Adelaide was the ideal location to develop a fintech business, which was disrupting the traditional lending market.
“Adelaide provides us with an affordable, convenient base and access to good talent and networks as the company grows and scales up,” she said.
“Our success to date has come from identifying strategic opportunities in a crowded and highly competitive marketplace, and investing in the customer experience.
“We’re not seeking growth for growth’s sake, though, it must be sustainable and responsible growth.” OMM’s credit team in Adelaide verifies the company’s loans, which according to Ms Anderson, have maintained a low loss rate compared to other lenders.
“Our originations have been growing by 25 per cent month-on-month, whilst ensuring we maintain the highest standards of responsible lending practices,” she said.
“This has enabled us to achieve gross loss rates under 0.3 per cent, well below typical consumer lender gross losses of between 2.5 per cent and 5 per cent.” Funds from OMM’s current capital-raise, which is being managed by KPMG, will be used primarily to increase the company’s warehouse funding facilities, with the balance to be used on product development, marketing and recruitment.
The company is seeking investment partners “who not only just add capital, but also give us access to networks, expertise and new markets”.
In 2018, OMM raised $4 million from software company N2N Connect, which is backed by Japanese financial media giant Nikkei and Singapore tech company investor YK Capital.
Last year, on the back of the growing home-improvements market, OMM launched Handypay, a point-of-sale financing platform that provides loans to people making purchases for home renovations.Loans funded through more than 250 vendor partners – ranging from carpet and window-covering companies to roofing and solar firms, pool builders and kitchen installers – now account for about 50 per cent of OMM’s loan portfolio.
CREDIT: GIUSEPPE TAURIELLO
Word count: 467
