The federal government has responded to calls from the consumer watchdog, farmers and community groups, announcing roll-over protection would be mandatory on all new quad bikes within 24 months.
In February, the Australian Competition & Consumer Commission issued a report that recommended government mandate operator protection devices be fitted on all new quad bikes sold in Australia.
Since 2001, 230 people have been killed on quad bikes. About 60 per cent of quad bike accidents are caused by roll-overs.
Assistant Treasurer Michael Sukkar said quad bikes were the leading cause of fatalities in Australia caused by unregulated products.
"This safety standard aims to address the high risk of roll-overs, which is especially important for many of our farmers and their families who use these vehicles daily," Mr Sukkar said.
Along with the compulsory fitment of protection devices, the government accepted other ACCC recommendations, mandating that quad bikes must have a warning label alerting riders to the risk of roll-over, meet United States or European standards for components such as brakes, suspension, throttle and clutch, and display stability test results on a hang tag attached to the bike at point of sale.
Under the changes, within 24 months, all new general use model (utility) quad bikes must be fitted with an operator protection device, or have it integrated into the design in a way which will meet minimum stability requirements.
Rural Health Alliance chief executive Gabrielle O'Kane welcomed the decision.
"Every quad-bike related death is a tragedy, not least because so many are preventable," Ms O'Kane said.
"This is a positive step and will genuinely save lives in rural and remote Australia."
The Federal Chamber of Automotive Industries and its membership, including manufacturer Yamaha, have strongly lobbied against mandatory protection devices in favour of behavioural changes such as the compulsory use of helmets, online training and legislation banning the use of adult sized quad bikes by children.
While behavioural changes and other administrative controls were recommended in the ACCC report as a part of a holistic plan to reduce injuries and death, changes to legislation are outside the scope of the ACCC and Mr Sukkar, and would need to be legislated through state governments.
CREDIT: Mike Foley
Word count: 366
