A NEW campaign designed to showcase the versatility of beef by highlighting quick and easy beef recipes for mid-week meals, while reassuring consumers the beef they're buying is 100 per cent Australian, has been launched by Meat & Livestock Australia.
The six-week, pre-summer campaign builds on the successful 'Australian Beef. The Greatest' tagline featuring Brian the Butcher, with a strong focus on the path to purchase journey for the consumer to convert their intention to buy beef, especially during one of the busiest retail periods.
MLA chief marketing and communications officer Lisa Sharp said the campaign utilised path to purchase channels including outdoor advertising and shopping centre ad panels, showcasing quick and easy beef meals to appeal to shoppers as they entered retail outlets.
"Consumers have a vast array of choices when it comes to what to make for dinner. With increasingly busy lifestyles, quick and easy meals are more in demand," Ms Sharp said.
"Beef's brand positioning of 'Australian Beef. The Greatest.' has provided a platform to showcase beef as a high quality protein, and reassure consumers the greatest meat on earth is 100pc Australian.
"MLA consumer tracking shows beef has retained perceptions on 'trusted quality' and our campaign activity positively supports the consumer sentiment category of 'willing to pay more for beef'.
"While quality is crucial, many shoppers are influenced by more affordable or what are perceived to be easier-to-cook meal options, especially in the retail environment. The campaign addresses these insights to drive meal inspiration for 'easy everyday' whilst reinforcing beef's trusted quality."
The Australian domestic market remains the most valuable and largest market for Australian beef, consistently consuming almost 30pc of total beef production volume.
The integrated campaign will appear across national TV, online, social, radio, out of home, and butcher's point of sale materials, including a range of new beef recipes.
Word count: 306
