Basin rail flop will hamper Mildura freight MILDURA Rural City Council LGA has been crowned t agriculture capital of Australia per the recent 2020-21 Australian Bureau of Statistics report.
But the region also has some other high, yet disturbing, statistics on how much of its ag produce will go to port on road instead of rail. The predicament lands squarely on the half-completed, and soon to be abandoned, Murray Basin Rail Project.
Freight trains on the Mildura rail corridor no longer go direct to port via Ballarat as they did before the MBRP started, but now detour via Maroona, near the Grampians, adding 260km to the round trip. Here are some repercussions: THE four grain accumulation sites in the Mildura LGA that use rail, are now 73 per cent further from the nearest port on rail (Geelong), compared to a truck going to the nearest port on road (Adelaide).
BY 2023, Mildura LGA and Wentworth, Robinvale and Wemen, will generate one million tonnes of intermodal freight (shipping container) and 80 per cent will go by road, needing 19 million truck kilometres a year (and increasing) ON the Mildura line, in the Shire of Buloke, the Birchip Grainflow site was initially built on the premise of achieving the highly efficient 24-hour train cycle to Geelong via Ballarat, but now that is not possible The Sea Lake and Manangatang lines were to be converted to standard gauge, but remain on broad gauge as part of the revised MBRP. No other Australian state or territory uses broad gauge for freight.
This severely limits the usage of these trains, making them unsustainable. Only the standardisation of the whole MBRP network will achieve the long lasting and urgent environmental, social and economic benefits.
Michael P. O’Callaghan, Mildura
Rural rating is a feudal land tax RATES in Victoria are levied on the assessed value of the property. Naturally, the “valuation” of a 800sq m property in Stonnington will be assessed as being different to a 1000ha property at Horsham.
As such, the rates are no more nor less than a land tax, or more accurately a wealth tax. The “value” of a property is purely as a result of the assessed market value.
Rates are little if anything to do with what the local government does or provides.
This remnant of the feudal systems of taxing landowners is one of the “laziest” taxes of all. It is the local government form of “bracket creep” in the PAYG taxation system.
Until municipal rates are uncoupled from property values, and are related solely to the costs that local governments incur in providing roads, rubbish and community facilities, then the inequity will continue, and the disparity between urban and rural council’s will only ever widen.
John Gault, Maryborough
Focus story shows what drive can do IT MAKES a refreshing change to learn of success associated with The Weekly Times Coles 2021 Farmer of the Year Marc Greening, whose beef operation is based in southern NSW (TWT Aug 10). To illustrate scale, it is noted that the operation involves six properties encompassing more than 4000ha.
To place matters into context, Marc started his enterprise some 21 years ago on one property. Even then, Mr Greening possessed vision to the point that his bank manager acknowledges the fact that he nearly lost his job at the bank when he pleaded for the case associated with Marc’s vision.
Not only did the manager have confidence, both he and Mr Greening had the courage to strive for delivering results and achieving success.
As illustrated in the article “Beefy system fed by grand vision”, adopting simplicity underpins the operation. The key aspect with Mr Greening’s story is that those with drive can succeed in agriculture.
Paris Shacklock, Devonport, Tasmania
Now, what if the Coalition wins?
HOPEFULLY, Peter Hunt will follow up with what a Coalition win will mean (“What a Labor win will mean”, TWT Aug 11).
Given that a “Liberals and Nationals Government will legislate an emission reduction target of 50 per cent by 2030” and “unlock 1800 megawatts of renewable energy by upgrading transmission infrastructure in western Victoria”, it’s clear decarbonisation of the economy will be ongoing whoever is in power.
Furthermore, Renewable Energy Zones and the related infrastructure are defined not by the state governments but by the Australian Energy Market Operator.
Thirty-five zones have been identified across the five eastern states, six in Victoria.
But those who live in the regions must be treated fairly.
Ray Peck, Hawthorn
Word count: 748
